AN EXPOSITION UPON THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS.

Wherein, NOT ONLY THE TEXT IS Methodically Analyzed, and the sense of the
words, by the help of VVriters, both ancient and modern is explayned:

But also, By Doctrine and Use, the intent of the holy Ghost is in every place
more fully unfolded and urged.

And besides, The very marrow of most Common-places is aptly diffused
throughout the body of this EXPOSITION, as the nature of of this kind of
Teaching would bear.

And further, Many chief Cases of CONSCIENCE are here resolved.

ALL With convenient Variety and Brevity.

Being, The substance of near seven years VVeeke-dayes Sermons, of N.
BYFIELD, late one of the Preachers for the City of CHESTER.

1 PET. 5.10. The God of all grace, who has called you unto his eternal
glory, by CHRIST JESUS, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, and settle you.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for NATHANIEL BVTTER, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Pide-Bull in Paul's Churchyard, near to S. Austins Gate.
1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD LORD RVSSELL, Earl of Bedford, and the Lady
LVCIE Countess of Bedford; Grace and Peace be multiplied, with increase of all
honor and happiness for ever.
Most noble Lord, and my very honorable good Lady,
THIS Epistle to the Colossians contains an excellent Epitome of the doctrine
expressed in the rest of the books of the old and new Testament: as will
appear by a brief delineation or adumbration of the proportion and parts of
that sacred body of truth, paralelled with the several parts of this Epistle,
using the benefit of this Commentary upon it.

The whole word of God may be divided into two parts: The substance of all
Theology expressed briefly in this Epistle: as is manifested by instance.
the first concerns faith, or what we must believe; the second love, or what
we must do. So the Apostle divided it, as may appear by the pattern used in
their times, which stood of two parts, faith and love, 2. Tim. 1.13. And so is
this Epistle divided; for in the two first Chapters he tell^ them what they
must believe, and in the two last, what they must do.

Now faith looks either upon God, or upon the world. In God two things are to
be believed: 1. the attributes of the essence. 2. the trinity of the persons.
The attributes unfold the nature and proprieties of God; such as are, his
power, glory, knowledge, and the like; of the power of God, ye may read, Chap.
1.11. and 2.12. of the glory of God, Chap. 1.11. and 3.17. of the knowledge of
God, Chap. 3.10.

The Persons are three, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; of the Father, chap.
1.2.12. and 3.17. of the Son, chap. 1.2.13.15. etc. of the Holy Ghost, chap.
2.19. Thus of God.

In the consideration of the world, faith is taken up especially about the
creation of it, and the government of it. In the creation it viewes the mighty
workmanship of God, making all things of nothing, even the very Angels, as
well as men and other creatures. of the creation, chap. 1.16. of Angels also
chap. 1.16. both good, chap. 2.9. and evil, chap. 2.15.

The government of the world, is two ways to be considered: First, in the
general disposing and preservation of all things. Secondly, and principally,
faith is taken up about the consideration of the government of Men in the
world: of the general providence, chap. 1.16.17.

The providence of God over man, may be considered according to his fourefold
estate: 1. of Innocence. 2. of Corruption 3. of Grace. 4. of Glory.

In the estate of Innocence, faith chiefly beholds and wonders at the glorious
Image of God, in which man was created; of this Image you may read, chap. 3.10.
by analogy.

In the state of Corruption, two things do offer themselves to our doleful
contemplation: 1. sin. 2. the punishment of sin. Sin is both original and
actual: of original sin, chap. 2.13. of actual sins, chap.
2.11.13.3.5.6. of the punishment of sin, chap. 3.25. and 2.13. and 3.6.

In the state of Grace, faith viewes three things: 1. the means of grace. 2.
the subject. 3. the degrees. The means is either before time, or in time:
before time, it is the election of God; of which, chap. 3.12. in time, the means
chiefly is Christ, and the covenant in him. In Christ, two things are to be
considered, his person, and his office. The theorie concerning Christ's person,
is twofold: 1. concerning his two natures. 2. concerning his twofold estate in
those natures. The natures of Christ are two, humane and divine, joined in the
bond of personal union; of the humane nature, chap. 1.22. of his divine, chap.
1.15.16, etc. of the union of both, chap. 2.9 The state of the person of Christ
is twofold: 1. of humiliation. 2. of exaltation. His humiliation comprehends,
1. his incarnation, as the antecedent. 2. his obedience to the law of Moses. 3.
his passion: of his incarnation and obedience impliedly in diverse places; of
his passion, chap. 1.14.20 22.14.15. His exaltation comprehends his
resurrection, ascension, and session at the right hand of God: of his
resurrection, chap. 2.12: of his sitting at Gods right hand, chap. 3.1.

Thus of the person of Christ.

The office of Christ is to mediate between God and man. The parts are 1. his
prophetical office. 2. his priestly office. 3. his regal office. His
prophetical office stands in propounding of doctrine, and in making it
effectual by his spirit. His priestly office stands in two things: 1.
Expiation of sin. 2. Intercession for us to God. His regal office is partly
in the government of the Church, as the head thereof: and partly in the
subduing of the enemies of God and the Church; of the treasures of wisdom in
Christ as a Prophet, chap. 2.3. of the sacrifice of Christ as a Priest, chap.
2.14. of the headship of Christ over the Church, chap. 1.18. and 2.19.

Thus of Christ.

The covenant follows, which is considered both in it self, and in the
seals of it; though the covenant of works be accidentally a means to drive us
to Christ, yet the proper effectual means is the covenant of grace, which God
has made with the elect in Christ: this being recorded in the word of the
Gospel both in the old and new Testament, is the ordinary means, by the
power of Christ, to convert souls to God, by the preaching of it in the
ministry of his servants; of this chap. 1.6.

The seals of this covenant are the Sacraments, both of the old and new
Testament: of the old testament, was Circumcision, and the rest; of which chap.
2.11. of the new testament, are baptism and the Lords Supper; of baptism, chapter
2.12.

Thus of the means of grace. The subject of true grace is the Church, the
body of Christ united to him by mystical union. The Church consists of two
sorts of men, Ministers and people; of the Church in general with her union
with Christ, chap. 1.18, 19, 20. and 2.19. of Ministers and peopeople with
their duties, chap. 1.25, 28. and 2 1. and in diverse other places.

Thus of the subject also. The degrees of grace in the third estate, are 1.
vocation. 2. faith. 3. remission of sins 4. sanctification. of vocation,
chap. 3.15. of faith, chap. 1.4.23. and 2.12. of remission of sins, chap.
1.14. and 2.13. of sanctification, in both parts, both mortification, chap. 3
5.8. and vivification, chap. 2.13. and 3.10.

Thus of the estate of grace.

The fourth and last estate of man, is the estate of glory; which stands of
three degrees. 1. resurrection. 2. the last judgment. and 3. life eternal. of
resurrection, chap. 1.18. of the last judgment and eternal glory, chap. 3.4.
And thus of the first part of the pattern of wholesome words, and that is
faith: now follows the second, and that is love.

Love comprehends all the duty we owe to God or men, as being the bond of
perfection, which ties together all holy services. Love must be considered both
in the adjuncts, and in the sorts of it.

The adjuncts are constancy, wisdom, zeal, care to avoid offenses, and the
like* of love in general, chap. 1.4. and 2.2. and 3.14. of constancy, chapter
2.6. of zeal, chap. 4.13. of wisdom and care to avoid offenses, chapter 4.5. thus
of the adjuncts.

The sorts of works comprehended under love, are two chiefly: 1. works of
worship. 2. works of virtue. The works of worship are either internal only,
or external and internal also. The internal are, the acknowledging of God,
the love of God, the fear of God, the trust or hope in God, and which flows
from thence, patience* of the acknowledgment of God, chap. 1.9, 10. of the love
of God, chap. 1.8. of the fear of God, chap. 3.22. of the hope in God, chap.
1.5. of patience, chap. 1.11. The works of worship that are both external and
internal, are prayer and thanksgiving* of prayer, chap. 4.2, 3. of
thanksgiving, chap. 3.17.

Thus of works of worship. Works of virtue either concern our selves or
others: the works that concern our selves, are chiefly two: the study of
heavenly things, and temperance. Temperance concerns chastity and sobriety
in the use of all sorts of earthly things. of the study of heavenly things,
chap. 3.1, 2. of chastity, chapter 3, 5. of sobriety, chapter 3.2.

Thus of virtue that concerns our selves.

Works of virtue toward others* are chiefly nine. Mercy, courtesy, humility,
meekness, long-suffering, clemency, peaceablenes, thankfulness and justice: of
the first eight of these, chap. 3.12. to 16. Now Justice is either public or
private: public Justice is in Magistrates, of which, chap. 2.5. private
Justice, is either commutatiue, in bargaining, or distributive, in giving that
which is right to every one according to his degree: and so distributive
Justice is either civil or oeconomicall. Private Justice in civil
conversation with men abroad, is either to Magistrates, of which, chap. 2.5. or
to all men, and so consists of truth and faithfulness with sincerity and
observance. oeconomicall Justice is that which concerns the household; and so
contains the duty of husbands and wives, children and parents, servants and
masters; of which chap. 3.18. to the end, with the first verse of chap. 4.

And thus also of Love.

Thus I have showed the excellent compleatnes of this worthy scripture: it
remains that I declare some of the reasons that have emboldned me to make
choice of your Honors names for the dedication of my exposition upon this
scripture. Three things swaying godly men in like case, have compelled me,
protection, observance, and thankfulness* the preaching of this doctrine as
by the mercy of God it wrought abundant consolation and comfortable
reformation in many hearers, so did it seldom rest from the assaults and
calumnies, which one while profaneness, another while envy powered out upon
it: great cause there is therefore that it coming out now to a more public
view, should seek shelter: and of whom should I seek it or hope for it sooner
then of your Honors, who are pleased by your daily countenance to assure me a
just patronage? For the second, to omit the high reputation which the religious
eminency of both your ancestors has set your Honors in, and the praises of
many singular endowments and gifts, in which you do worthily excel, there are
two things wherein your Honors daily win a great increase of observance; the
one is piety toward God, the other mercy toward the poor: the loins of
the poor daily bless your Honors, and their mouths daily pray for you, your
piety is many ways expressed: to omit my undoubted proofs of it, your Lordship
has much confirmed the persuasion of your religious disposition by your daily
and affectionate respect of the word of God and prayer in private, since the
Lord has made you less able to resort more frequently to the public
assemblies. And Madam, what thanks can we ever sufficiently give unto God for
that rare and worthy example, with which your Ladyship does comfort and
encourage the hearts of many, in your care of Gods sabaoths, and in your
neuer-failing attendance upon the ordinances of God, with the congregation,
morning and evening, not only in your own person, but with your whole family.
For the third, I do ingenuouslie profess before God and men, that I hold my
obligation unto your Honors in the just debt of service and gratitude to be so
great, as the labor here employed is no way answerable to a meet discharge,
no though it had been taken only for your Honors use; for to omit the debt
which I am in for a great part of my maintenance, and that singular
encouragement I reap daily in your Honors respect of my ministry; what
thanks can ever be sufficient, or what service can ever be enough for that
incomparable benefit (which I have and shall ever esteem the greatest outward
blessing did ever befall me; and which (Madam) by your Honors singular care and
furtherance, after an admirable manner I obtained) I mean the clearing of my
reputation from the unjust aspersions of my adversaries, and that by the mouth
and pen of the Lords Anointed, my most dread Sovereign, whom the God of
heaven with all abundance of royal and divine blessings recompense in all
earthly felicity and eternal glory. And the same God of Peace and Father of
mercies, sanctify your Honors wholly, that your whole spirits and souls and
bodies may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ:
faithful is he that has called you, who also will do it. And I doubt not but
God that has enriched your Honors with the true grace that is in Jesus Christ,
will daily win unto you increase of honor from your perseverance in
well-doing: so as thanksgiving for your sakes shall be abundantly given unto
God by many. Thus in most humble manner craving your Honors acceptance and
patronage of this work, I end, and shall rejoice to remain

Your Honors Chaplain to be commanded in all service, NI. BYFIELD.

THE ARGUMENT OF this Epistle to the COLOSSIANS.
THere are four principal Parts of this Epistle: 1. the Proaeme: 2. Doctrine
of Faith: 3. Precepts of life. 4. the Epilogue, or Conclusion. The Proaeme is
expressed in the first eleven Verses of the first Chapter: The Doctrine of Faith
is expressed in the rest of the Verses of the first Chapter, and the whole second
Chapter: The Precepts of life are set down in the third Chapter, and in the
beginning of the fourth. And the Epilogue is in the rest of the verses of the
fourth Chapter.

The Proaeme contains two things: First, the Salutation, verse. 1, 2. and
secondly, a Preface, affectionately framed to win attention and respect:
wherein he assures them of his singular constancy in remembering them to God,
both in Thanksgiving for their worthy Graces and the means thereof, v. 3.4,
5, 6, 7, 8. and in earnest Prayer for their increase and comfortable
perseverance in knowledge and the eminency of sincerity in holy life, verse:
9.10, 11.

The Doctrine of Faith he expresses two ways: first, by Proposition:
secondly, by Exhortation. In the Proposition of Doctrine, he does with
singular force of words, and weight of matter set out both the work of our
Redemption, v. 12.13.14. and the person of our Redeemer: and that first in his
relation to God, verse 15. then in relation of the World, verse 15.16.17. and
thirdly, in relation to the Church, both the whole in general, verse 18.19.20.
and the Church of the Colossians in particular, verse. 21.22. And thus of the
Proposition. Now his Exhortation follows, from the 23. of Chap. 1. to the end
of Chap. 2. and therein he both persuades and disswades: he persuades by many
strong and moving Reasons, to an holy endeavor to continue and persevere with
all Christian firmness of resolution, both in the Faith and Hope, was already
begotten in them by the Gospel: and this is contained in the seven last
Verses of the first Chapter, and the seven first Verses of the second Chapter.
He disswades them from receiving the corrupt Doctrine of the false Apostles,
whether it were drawn from Philosophical Speculations, or from the Traditions
of men, or from the Ceremonial Law of Moses; and he proceeds in this order:
first, he lays down the matter of his Dehortation, Chap. 2. verse. 8. then
secondly, he confirms it by diverse Reasons, from verse. 9. to 16. and lastly,
he concludes, and that severally, as against Mosaicall Rites, verse. 16.17.
against Philosophy, verse. 18.19. and against Traditions, verse. 20. and so to
the end of that Chapter.

Thus of the second part.

Thirdly, The Precepts of life.
in giving Precepts of life the Apostle holds this order: first, he gives
general Rules, that concern all as they are Christians: then, he gives
special Rules, as they are men of this or that estate of life. The general
Rules are contained in the first seauenteene Verses of the third Chapter: and
the special Rules from the eighteenth Verse of the third Chapter to the second
Verse of the fourth. The general Rules he reduces into three heads: viz.
first, the Meditation of heavenly things, verse. 1.2.3.4. secondly, the
mortification of vices and injuries, verse. 5. to the 12. thirdly, the exercise
of holy Graces, a number of which he reckons, both in the kinds, means,
and ends of them, from verse. 12. to 18. The particular Rules concern
principally household government: for he sets down the duty of Wives, verse.
18. of Husbands, ver. 19. of Children, verse. 20. of Parents, v. 21. of
Servants, verse. 22.23.24.25. and of Masters, Chap. 4. verse. 1.

The Epilogue, The Epilogue.
or Conclusion, contaynes in it both matter of general Exhortation, as also
matters of Salutation. The general Exhortation concerns Prayer, verse. 2.3.4.
wise Conversation, verse. 5. and godly Communication, verse. 6. Now after the
Apostle has disburdened himself of those general cares, then he takes
liberty to refresh himself and them, by remembering certain that were dear
both to him and them. And first, he makes entrance by a narration of his care
to know their estate, and to inform them of his. To which purpose he sends
and prayseth Tichicus and Onesimus, verse. 7.8.9. The Salutations then follow;
and they are of two sorts: for some are signified to them, some are required in
them. Of the first sort, he signifies the Salutations of six men, three of
them Jews, and three Gentiles, verse. 10.11.12.13.14. The Salutations required,
concern either the Laodiceans, verse. 15.16. or one of the Colossaean
Preachers, who is not only saluted, but exhorted, verse. 17. And then follows
the Apostles general Salutations to all, in the last Verse.

THE PLAIN Logical Analasis of the first Chapter.
THis CHAPTER stands of three parts: a Proaeme, a Proposition of Doctrine, an
Exhortation to constancy and perseverance. The Proaeme is continued from verse.
1. to 12. the Proposition from verse. 12. to the 23. the Exhortation from ver.
23. to the end.

The Proaeme is intended to win attention and affection; and stands of two
parts, the Salutation and the Preface. The Salutation is contained in the two
first Verses, and the Preface in the third Verse, and those that follow to the
twelfth.

In the Salutation three things are to be observed: first, the Persons
saluting; secondly, the Persons saluted; thirdly, the Salutation it self.

The Persons saluting are two; Verse 1.2.
the Author of the Epistle, and an Evangelist, famous in the Churches, who is
named as one that did approve the Doctrine of the Epistle, and commend it to
the use of the Churches. The Author is described: first, by his Name, Paul:
secondly, by his Office, an Apostle; which is amplyfied by the principal
efficient, JESUS CHRIST, and by the impulsive cause, the Will of God. The
Evangelist is described: first by his Name, Timotheus: secondly, by his adiunct
Estate, a Brother. Thus of the Persons saluting.

The Persons saluted are discribed; first, by the place of their abode, and so
they are the Citizens and Inhabitants of Colosse: secondly, by their spiritual
estate, which is set out in four things: 1. They are Saints: 2. They are
faithful: 3. They are Brethren: 4. They are in CHRIST.

The Salutation expresses what he accounts to be the chief good on earth,
and that is, Grace and Peace, which are amplified by the Causes or Fountains
of them, from God our Father, and from our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Thus of the
Salutation.

In the Preface the Apostle demonstrateth his love to them by two things, Verse
3.
which he constantly did for them: he prayed for them, and he gave thanks
for them: and this he both propounds generally, verse. 3. and expounds
particularly in the Verses following.

In the general propounding, three things are evidently expressed: first, what
he did for them, he gave thanks, he prayed: secondly, to whom, even to God
the Father of our Lord Jesus: thirdly, how long, always, that is, constantly
from day to day.

Verse 4.5.
Now, in the Verses that follow he expounds and opens this: first, his
Thanksgiving, verse. 4.5.6.7.8. secondly, his Prayer, verse. 9.10.11. In the
Thanksgiving he shows for what he gave thanks; which he referres to two
heads, 1. their Graces: 2. secondly, the Means by which those Graces were
wrought and nourished.

The Graces are three, Faith, Love, Hope, verse. 4.5. Their Faith is amplified
by the Object, your Faith in Jesus Christ: and their Love, by the extent of it,
your Love to all the Saints: and their Hope, by the place, which is laid up for
you in heaven.

Verse 5.6.
The Means of Grace was either principal, verse. 5.6. or Isntrumental, verse.
7.8. The principal ordinary outward means was the Word; which is described
and set out six ways: 1. by the Ordinance in which it was most effectual,
viz. Hearing, whereof ye have heard. 2. By the property that was most eminent
in the working of it, viz. Truth, by the word of truth. 3. By the kind of
word, viz. the Gospel, which is the Gospel. 4. By the providence of God in
bringing the means, which is come unto you. 5. By the subject Persons upon
whom it wrought, viz. you and all the world. 6. By the efficacy of it, it is
fruitful and increases; which is amplified by the repetition of the persons
in whom, and the consideration both of the time, in those words, from the day
that you heard, etc. and also, of the adiuuant cause, viz. the hearing and the
true knowledge of the grace of God, from the day that you heard of it, and knew
the grace of God in truth.

Thus of the principal Means.

Verse 7.8.
The Ministry of the Word, the Isntrumental, or the Minister, follows, verse.
7.8. and he is described, 1. by his name, Epaphras: 2. by the adiunct love of
others to him, beloved: 3. by his Office, a Servant: 4. by his willingness to
join with others, a fellow-seruant: 5. by his faithfulness in the execution
of his Office, which is for you a faithful Minister of Christ: and lastly, by
his delight in his people, which he shows by the good report he chearefully
gives of them, viz. who also declares unto us your love in the spirit. Thus of
the Thanksgiving.

Verse 9.10.11.
Now in the opening or unfolding of his practice in paying for them, first, he
affirms that he did pray for them; and then, declares it by showing what he
prayed for. The Affirmation is in the beginning of the ninth Verse, and the
Declaration in the rest of the words to the end of the eleauenth Verse.

In the affirmation is three things: first, an Intimation of a reason, in those
words, for this cause: secondly, a consideration of the time, since the day we
heard of it: thirdly, the matter affirmed, we cease not to pray for you.

In the Declaration he instanceth in one thing he principally prayed about,
and that was their Knowledge; which he sets out, first, by the Object of it,
the will of God: secondly, by the Parts of it, Wisdom and Understanding:
thirdly, by the End, viz. that they might walk worthy, etc. fourthly, by the
cause, his glorious power: and fifthly, by the Effects, Patience,
Long-suffering, and Ioyfulnesse.

In setting down the Object, he expresses also the measure he desired; he
would have them filled with the knowledge of Gods will, and that he adds in
the second part, when he says, all Wisdom and understanding. The end of all
their knowledge he expresses more largely, verse. 10. which in general is the
eminence of holy life, which he expresses in three several forms of speech,
viz. 1. to walk worthy of the Lord: 2. to walk in all pleasing: and 3. to be
fruitful in all good works: unto the fuller attainment of which he notes the
means to be, an increase in the knowledge of God.

Hitherto of the Proaeme.

The Proposition of Doctrine contains excellent matter concerning our
Redemption: Verse 12.13.14
where he proceeds in this order: first, he considers the work of our
Redemption; and secondly, then the person of our Redeemer. The work of our
Redemption, verse. 12.13.14. the person of our Redeemer, verse. 15. and those
that follow to the 23. and all this he expresses in form of Thanksgiving.

The work of our Redemption he describes two ways, after he has touched the
first efficient cause of it, viz. God the Father: for in the twelfth Verse he
seems to show, that in respect of Inchoation, it is a making of us fit; and in
respect of Consummation, it is a causing of us to enjoy an immortal happiness
in heaven, better then that Adam had in Paradise, or the Jews in Canaan. And
therein he expresses, first the manner of tenure or title, in the word
Inheritance: secondly, the adiunct praise of the company, viz. the Saints: and
thirdly, the perfection of it, it is in light.

Now, in the end of the thirteenth Verse he seems to show that our Redemption
stands of two parts: first, deliverance from the power of darkness: secondly,
translating into the Kingdom of the Son of his love, one of the many
excellent privileges of which estate, is noted in the foureteenth Verse, to be
remission of sins, through the blood of Christ. And thus of the work of our
Redemption.

The person of our Redeemer is described three ways: Verse 15 16.17
first, in relation to GOD; secondly, in relation to the whole World; thirdly,
in relation to the Church.

First, in relation to God, he is described in the beginning of the fifteenth
Verse; and so he is said to be the Image of the invisible God.

Secondly, in relation to the whole World, five things are to be said of
CHRIST* first, he is the first begotten of every Creature, in the end of the
fifteenth Verse: secondly, he is the Creator of all things, verse. 16. Where
note the distinctions of Creatures: 1. they are distinguished by their place;
some, in Heaven; some, in Earth: 2. they are distinguished by their quality;
some are visible, some invisible: 3. the invisible are again distinguished, by
either Titles or Offices, some are Thrones, some are Principalities, etc.
thirdly, all things are for him, this is in the end of the sixteenth Verse:
fourthly, he is before all things, in the beginning of verse. 17. lastly, all
things in him consist* verse. 17. the end of it. Thus the Redeemer is described
in relation to the whole World.

Verse 18.19.20
Thirdly, he is described as he stands in relation to the Church: and so
either to the whole Church, verse. 18.19.20. or to the Church of the Colossians,
verse. 21.22.

As he stands in relation to the whole Church, he is said to be the head of
the Church, in the beginning of the eighteenth Verse, and this he proves, by
showing that he is a head in three respects.

First, in respect of the dignity of order toward his Members, and so in the
state of Grace he is their beginning, and in the state of glory he is the
first begotten of the dead; that both among the living and the dead he might
have the pre-eminence.

Secondly, in respect of perfection in himself, in that all fullness dwells in
him; which is amplified by the cause, viz. the good pleasure of the Father, who
made him head of the Church, verse. 19.

Thirdly, in respect of efficacy or influence through the whole body: for from
him flows Peace and Reconciliation, verse. 20. concerning which Reconciliation
there are eight things to be noted: 1. the moving cause, which is to be
supplied out of the former Verse, as the Conjunction [ and] imports, viz. it
pleased the Father: 2. the Instrument, by him, viz. CHRIST the head: 3. the
Benefit it self, viz. to reconcile: 4. the subject Persons in general, all
things: 5. the End, to himself: 6. the Effect, making peace: 7. the Means,
through the blood of his Cross: 8. the Distribution of the Persons who, in
those words, things in earth and things in heaven. Thus of his relation to the
whole Church.

Verse 21.22.
In the description of his relation to the Church of the Colossians, he urges
them with two things: first, their misery without CHRIST: 2. the remedy of
their misery by CHRIST.

Their Misery stands in two things: first, they are Strangers: secondly, they
are Ene^ies, and both are amplified: 1. by the subject wherein, viz. not
outwardly only, but in their minds: 2. by the Cause, viz. wicked works,
verse. 22.

In setting down their Remedy he notes: 1. the Means: 2. the End of the
means is the death of the body of Christ's flesh: The end is, that he might
present them holy and unblameable, and without fault in Gods sight, verse. 22.

Thus of his relation to the Church of the Colossians: and thus also of the
second part of this Chapter, viz. the Proposition of Doctrine.

Verse 23.
The Exhortation follows: where is to be considered; first, the Exhortation it
self; and then the Reasons. The Exhortation is to perseverance, both in Faith
and Hope.

In the Exhortation to perseverance in faith, there is worthy to be noted:
first, the manner of propounding it, which is with an If: secondly, the duty
required, Continue: thirdly, the manner of the duty, grounded and stablished:
fourthly the object, Grace, in Faith.

In the Exhortation to perseverance in Hope, two things are to be observed:
first, he sets down the evil to be avoided, viz. unsettledness or reuolting,
in the words, Be not moved away: secondly, he quickens them by remembering the
cause and fountain of their hope: viz. The hearing of the Gospel preached.

Thus of the Exhortation, the Reasons follow.

There are seven Reasons to enforce this Exhortation to perseverance. The
first is taken from the Consent of Gods Elect, Which are through the world, who
have in the preaching of the Gospel received Faith and Hope, as their common
portion.

The second Reason is taken from the testimony of PAVL himself: and that is
twofold; the first is the testimony of his Ministry; This is it he
preaches, and therefore it should be it they should keep fast: the second is
the testimony of his Sufferings; he has endured much for the Doctrine of
Faith and Hope; and therefore they should continue in it: and to stir them
the more concerning his sufferings, he shows that he suffered with great
Joy: which he confirms by expressing the reasons of his joy; first, because
they were the afflictions of Christ; secondly, because he had his part
allotted him by the decree of God: and it was his joy that he had almost
finished what was left for him to suffer; there was but a little remaining:
thirdly, because they were but in his flesh: fourthly, because they were for
them, and the good of the Church, Verse 24.

The third Reason is taken from the testimony of God, who enjoined unto PAVL
and other Ministers this dispensation of the Doctrine of Faith and Hope, with a
charge that they should see his Word fulfilled herein, Verse 25.

The fourth Reason is taken from the excellency of the Gospel: which is set
out; first, by the nature of it, it is a mystery: secondly, by the antiquity
of it, it was* and was hid since the world began, from Ages and Generations:
thirdly, by the time of the revelation of it, now, in the new world: fourthly,
by the persons to whom it is revealed, viz. only the Saints, all which should
move to care and constancy in keeping of it. Verse 26.

The fifth Reason is taken from the excellency of the Subject of the Gospel,
which is no less nor worse then Christ revealed by the preaching of the
Gospel. In this revelation of Christ in the Gospel, consider, first, who
reueales him, God: secondly, the cause of his revelation, the will of God, he
would: thirdly, the manner, viz. in a rich and glorious mystery: fourthly, the
persons to whom, viz. the miserable Gentiles: fifthly, the effects or fruits of
it, which are, first, the inhabitation of Christ: secondly, the hope of glory,
Verse 27.

Verse 28.
The sixth Reason is taken from the end, which is the presenting of them perfect
in Jesus Christ* which is amplified by the means to bring to this end, which
is preaching: and that is amplified, first, by the parts of it, which are
teaching and admonishing: and secondly, by the manner, in all Wisdom, Verse
28.

Verse 29.
The seventh Reason is taken from the holy strife of the Apostle, to bring men
to this: which is amplified by the great success which the LORD had given.
Verse vlt.

A METAPHRASE upon the first Chapter of the Epistle to the COLOSSIANS.
PAVL, Verse 1 PAVL, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and
Tim^theus our Brother.
the Messenger or Embassadour-generall for all the Churches of the Gentiles, by
Commission from the promised MESSIAH, now come in the Flesh, the Lord
anointed, separated hereunto, not for his own worthiness, or by any private
motion of his own, or by commandment of any man, but by the express will of
God, according to his everlasting counsel; as also Timotheus, a reverend
Brother, an Evangelist of Christ, with full and free testimony approves this
Epistle written

To the Citizens and Inhabitants of the City of Colosse, Verse 2. To them
which are at Colosse, Saints and faithful brethren in Christ: Grace be with
you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord JESUS CHRIST.
that are separate from the world, and sanctified with true Grace, and
faithfully walk in that holy Calling, in brotherly communion one with another,
and indissoluable union with CHRIST your Savior: Grace be with you, and Peace,
even the free favor of GOD, with all internal, eternal, and needful
external blessings, from him that both will and can, even God our Father,
through the merits of the Lord our anointed Savior.

We give thanks unto God, Verse 3. We give thanks to God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, always praying for you.
even that God that by an eternal and inexpressible generation is the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, remembering you earnestly and constantly in our daily
Prayers, being exceedingly fired and inflamed, since we heard by continual
and true report of your precious Faith; by which you have with firmness and
steadfastness of assurance laid hold upon JESUS CHRIST, Verse 4. Since we
heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of your love toward all Saints.
for life and righteousness: and the rather, because we likewise heard of
your holy affection to such as have separated themselves from the profaneness
of the world, to the service of God, especially considering that you have not
the glorious Faith of Christ in respect of persons, but love all the Saints as
well as any.

And (as a People not destitute of any saving Grace, Verse 5. For the hopes
sake which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye have heard before by the
word of truth, which is the Gospel.
) we rejoice to hear of that lively hope, by which you have laid hold on the
Promise of eternal glory, which God the Father has prepared and laid up in
Heaven. And the more are we confirmed in this resolution, constantly, to
praise GOD for these excellent Graces, because they are not sudden Fancies, or
presumptuous Conceits, raised out of the Forge of your own brain, or
conceived for some corrupt or carnal ends, but were indeed begotten in you by
the mighty working of the most sweet Doctrine of Reconciliation, proved in it
self, and by effect, to be a Word of Truth: even that word of the LORD, long
foretold, now truly revealed and accomplished also, begetting the true form
of piety in you, with constancy and true uprightness, both of heart and life.

Verse 6. Which is come unto you, even as it is unto all the world, and is
fruitful, as it is also among you, from the day that ye heard and t^uely knew
the grace of God.
This is the word of Reconciliation which is come unto you, as by incredible
power and swiftness, it is now to the greatest part of the world, even to
people of all sorts and Nations, causing them to show the soundness of their
Conversion, by the daily fru^^s of amen^ment of life: and this increases
continually in all places, as it does, and has done with you, since the very
first day that you truly heard and effectually believed this rich Doctrine of
the grace of GOD.

Verse 7. As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servant, which is
for you a faithful Minister of Christ.
And this very Doctrine, which you have heard of Epaphras, is the self same
divine truth that is gone all abroad the world: of Epaphras I say, whom we all
reverence as our dear fellow-Seruant, being assured that he is for your best
good, a faithful and most humble Minister of Jesus Christ.

Verse 8. Who has also declared unto us your love, which ye have by the
Spirit.
He has with great contentment boasted of you, in reporting to us your
spiritual and heavenly affection to God, and godliness, and one toward
another: and for the same cause since the first time we heard of your praises
in the Gospel, Verse 9. For this cause we also, since the day we heard of
it, cease not to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfi^led with
knowledge of his wi^^ in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.
we have been importunate without ceasing, praying for you, and beseeching
God to increase in you, and make complete your knowledge of his revealed will,
not only for contemplation, but for practice also, with a gracious experience
of the working of the Spirit.

That ye might carry your selves in a holy eminency of godly conversation,
striving to proportion your Obedience in a greater degree then ordinary, as
might become the great measure of Gods Mercies of all sorts toward you, Verse
10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please hi^ in all things,
being fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God.
expressing a lively kind of pleasingnesse, both in carriage toward God and
man, being refreshed with the sweetness of acceptance in your services, and
that you might extend your carfulness to bear fruit, not in one kind or
some few, but in all kinds and sorts of good works, daily increasing in a
holy acquaintance with the sacred nature of God, which is both the effect and
cause of all comfortable progress in holy life.

Verse 11. Strengthened with all might through his glorious power unto all
patience, and long suffering with ioyfulnesse.
That so growing up to a ripe age in CHRIST, in the sanctification both of soul
and body and spirit, in all the Graces and Duties of CHRIST and Christian life,
through the assis^ance of the glorious power of GOD, in the use of all means
and helps appointed of GOD, ye might accomplish your most holy profession,
with singular comfort and contentment, being able chearefully and with all
patience and Long-suffering to bear the Crosses, Tentations, Infirmities,
Persecutions, and whatsoever Wrongs or Indignities might befall you waiting for
the Promise of GOD, being never weary of well-doing.

And as we have thought good thus to let you understand our love toward you,
Verse 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.
and our rejoicing for the prosperity of your souls; so we thought good to
write unto you, both to put you in mind of the most holy Doctrine of CHRIST,
as also to exhort and beseech you to be constant in the Faith and Hope you have
received, without listening to the entising speeches of false Teachers, which
as wicked Seducers would beguile your souls of that high prise of your most
holy Calling.

What thanks can we ever sufficiently give unto GOD the Father of CHRIST and
Christians, that of his mere Grace and free Love, has by a holy Calling, made
us, in his account, meet to have a Lot in that heavenly Canaan, in that sweet
and eternal fellowship with the Spirits of the just, not only revealed unto
us in this light of the Gospel, but to be inioyed by us in the light of Heaven?

And has also already delivered us from that woeful estate, Verse 13. Who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
Kingdom of his dear Son.
in which the darkness of Gentilisme, and Sin, and Ignorance, and
Adversity, and Death, and Damnation, had power over us, and has translated us
into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the Son of his love, inrolling our names
among the living, and accounting us as Subjects of this Kingdom of Grace, and
Heirs, even Coheyres with Christ, of the glory to be revealed.

And howsoever our Sanctification be as yet imperfect, Verse 14. In whom we
have redemption through his blood, that is, the forgiveness of sins.
yet are we not only bought with a price, but effectually and truly
redeemed, and in some sort fully to: for in our Justification we are perfectly
reconciled, and all our sins absolutely forgiven us, as if they had never
been committed, through his merits that shed his blood for us.

Who is a most lively and perfect Image of the invisible God, Verse 15. Who is
the Image of the invisible God, the first borne of every creature.
not only as he works Gods Image in man, or because he appeared for God the
Father, to the Fathers in the old Law; or because as man he had in him the
likeness of God in perfect holiness and righteousness; or because he did by
his Miracles, as it were, make God visible in his flesh; but as he was from
everlasting the very essential natural Image of God, most absolutely in his
divine person resembling infinitely the whole nature of his Father: and
therefore is to be acknowledged as the begotten of God by an eternal
generation: so the first begotten of every Creature, as he was before them; so
is he therefore the principal heir of all things, by whom, and in whose
right, all the Saints do inherit what they have or look for. Verse 16. For
by him were all things created, which are in heaven, and which are in earth,
things visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him and for him.


For by him all things in heaven or earth, whether visible or invisible were
created; yea, the very Angels themselves, of what Order or Office soever,
whether Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers, were all made by him of
nothing; and therefore he, and not they, are to be worshipped: in short, all
things were created by him; yea, and for him to.

Verse 17. And he is before all things, and in him all things consist.
And he was from everlasting with GOD the Father, before all Angels or other
Creature was made, and still all things are preserved and continued as
consisting in him; yea, the very Angels have their confirmation from him.

Verse 18. And he is the head of the body of the Church: he is the beginning,
and the first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have the
preeminence.
And he is that glorious and alone Mystical head of the Church, which in an
holy order and relation, by the admirable work of the Spirit, as a bond
uniting together, is a true body unto CHRIST: and worthily is he to be
acknowledged a head unto the Church, for three great Reasons: first, in respect
of Dignity: for he alone has the primacy: and ought to be acknowledged to
have pre-eminence in all things: for if we respect the estate of Grace, he is
the beginning of all goodness, and if we respect the estate of Glory, he is
the first borne of the dead; not only because he is risen himself in his
body, from the grave, but also because by his only power all his members shall
rise at the last day: and also, because that in the death of all the righteous,
he does still continue to, and in, the very last gasp, his assistance and
holy presence,

Verse 19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulness dwell.
Secondly, he is fittest; yea, only fit, to be the head of the Church, because
it has pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness only dwell, so
that he is a head in respect of pl^nitude, for the behoof of the members.

Verse 20. And by him to reconcile all things unto himself, and to set at
peace through the blood of his Cross both the things in earth, and the things
in heaven.
And thirdly, he is a head in respect of influence; for from him only comes
down to the members, all peace with God, and all the fruits of that
reconciliation: for it is he that made peace, by the blood of his Cross, and
that has estated happiness upon all the Saints, reconciling them to God: I
say, all the Saints, both those that are in heaven already, and those that
being yet on earth, hope for that glory in heaven hereafter. Verse 21. And you
which were in times past strangers and enemies, because your minds were set in
evil works, has he now also reconciled.
And that this is so, you are able out of your own experience to avouch: for
whereas by nature you were strangers from GOD and the life of God, you were
very enemies to God and all goodness: and this alienation and enmity was
apparently seated in your very minds, through the evil works of all sorts
which abounded in your lives; yet you know that CHRIST taking our Nature upon
him, and in that nature suffering death for you, Verse 22. In the body of his
flesh, through death, to make you holy, and unblameable, and without fault in
his sight.
has reconciled you to GOD, and by thee Gospel anew created you, that he
might present you to God, as holy and unblameable, and without fault in his
sight, covering your wants and hiding the evil of your works, through his
own Intercession, and allowing you the benefit of the Covenant of Grace,
through which uprightness will be in him accepted in stead of perfection.

Verse 23. If ye continue, grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not
moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof ye have heard, and which has
bin preached unto every creature which is under heaven, whereof I Paul am a
M^nister.
Now what remains, but that seeing we have such precious Doctrine, you should
be exhorted to hold out with all Christian perseverance* settling and
establishing your hearts in the belief of the truth, suffering your selves not
to be carried away with any contrary wind of Doctrine, from the confidence of
that hope of your reconciliation with GOD, which has been propounded and
wrought in you, by the preaching of the Gospel; and the rather, because
unless you do so persevere, you cannot have sound comfort in your right to
the benefits before named. Besides, there are many reasons may induce you to
the resolutenesse of perseverance in the Doctrine you have already believed and
hoped in. First, it is the Doctrine which all God^ Elect, with one consent,
have received, throughout the world; and upon it have founded their Faith and
Hope. Secondly, the consideration of what ye see in me may somewhat move you,
and that, if you either consider my Ministry or Sufferings: for my Ministry,
I have so thoroughly informed my self concerning the Doctrine which Epaphras
has taught you, that I see it in all things, for the substance of it, to be
the same which I my self have taught in every place.

Now for my Sufferings, Verse 24. Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and
fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my ^lesh, for his bodies sake
which is the Church.
it is apparent to all sorts of men, that I have endured my part of all kinds
of Troubles for the Gospel, which I would not have done, if I had not had full
assurance of the truth of it, neither do I repent me of my afflictions, but
rejoice in them rather, and that for diverse Reasons. First, because they are
the Afflictions of CHRIST, that is, such as he accounts to be his. Secondly,
because I know that in Gods Decree I have my part of troubles assigned me; and
it is my joy, to think that in so good a cause I have almost fulfilled them.
Thirdly, because these Afflictions extend but to my flesh and outward man. And
lastly, because it is for your good I suffer, even for the confirmation of your
Faith, and for the good of the whole body of Christ, which is the Church.

Thirdly, Verse 25. Whereof I am a Minister, according to the dispensation of
God, which is given me unto you ward, to fulfill the word of God.
I have received this Commission concerning the Gospel immediately from GOD
himself, with strict charge, that for your good I should pursue the execution
of it, till not only Faith and Hope were wrought, but till we saw the work
and word of God, even accomplished and fulfilled.

Fourthly, Verse 26. Which is the mystery hid since the world began, and from
all ages, but now is made manifest to his Saints.
what can there be more excellent and worthy to be believed and trusted in,
then this Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, and our reconciliation in him, seeing it is
that dreadful Mystery, which worlds of men have wanted, as being hid from
whole Ages and Generations hitherto, and now by the unspeakable mercy of GOD
is revealed by preaching unto the Saints, as a peculiar treasure entrusted to
them.

And fifthly, Verse 27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of this
glorious mystery among the Gentiles, which riches is Christ in you, the hope of
glory.
the rather should you hereupon settle, considering the admirable subject of
the Gospel: for it is the good pleasure of GOD in this rich and glorious
Mystery of the Gospel, to make known to the poor Gentiles, Christ Jesus
himself, and that by giving him therein to dwell in your hearts by Faith, and
as your assured and only hope of immortal glory.

Sixthly, Verse 28. Whom we preach, admonishing every man, and teaching every
man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
neither should you ever cast away the confidence of your assurance and hope,
or grow weary herein, seeing it is the drift and end of all our preaching,
wherein we either admonish or instruct you, leading you through all sorts of
wisdom in the word of GOD. I say, the end of all is to present you, at the
length, perfect and complete every one of you, in CHRIST JESUS, in some
acceptable measure of Sincerity and Knowledge in him.

Verse 29. Whereunto I also labor and strive, according to his working which
works in me mightily.
And seauenthly, being encouraged with that success which the LORD has given
to my ministry, I will labor, as I have labored, and still strive with all
possible diligence and endeavor in this glorious work: hoping that this also
may prove a motive, among the rest, to persuade with you, to keep Faith and
Hope to the end, with all Constancy and holy Perseverance.

CERTAIN OF THE Chiefest things observed in the Notes upon this first CHAPTER.
WHat rules we must observe in alleging the examples of godly men sinning.
fol. 4 The assurance of a lawful Calling serves for many uses. fol. 5 Gods
Children called Saints in this life, in four respects. fol. 7 Comforts for the
despised Saints, with answer of some Objections. fol. 7.8 How Saints may be
known. 9 Christian faithfulness is to be showed in five things in spiritual
things, and in three things in temporal things. 10.11 Idleness in Professors,
taxed. 11 Several Uses arising out of the consideration of this, that we are
Brethren. 13 How we may get into Christ, and how we may know whether we be in
Christ. 13.14 Spiritual things are the best things for nine reasons. 15 The
Motive and the manner of Thanksgiving to God. 20 Four Rules of trial in our
Thankegiuing to God for others. 21 A Child of God never gives thanks but he
has cause to pray; and contrariwise. 21 Four sorts of prayers for others. 21.
and 68 Five reasons to warrant praying every day. 22 The Sorts, Objects, Parts,
Degrees, Benefits, Lets, Signs of Faith, with the misery of the want of Faith,
the encouragements to believe, and the defects of the common Protestants Faith.
23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.32 Indiscretion is not the cause of the reproaches
and troubles of Christians. 33 The surest way to get Credit is to get Grace. 34
Four Signs of Vainglory. 34 Seven Observations about Love. 35 Seven
things to be showed in Christian Love. 36 Four things in the manner of our
love, 37 Motives to persuade to the exercise of mutual love. 38.39.40 Eight
helps of Love. 41.42 The defects of the common Protestants Charity or Love.
42.43 Eight Differences between true Hope, and common Hope: and seven means
to breed true Hope. 45.46 What we must do if we would have heaven when we
dye. 46 What profit good men get by hearing Sermons. 49.50 The sorts of evil
hearers, with their misery. 50.51 How the Word is said to be a word of truth:
and that it works truth in us six ways. 52 Concerning the Gospel, what it
contaynes, who may, and who do receive it: and the effects of it. fol. 53.54
Motives to fruitfulness, what fruit we should bear, and the means to make
us more fruitful. 55.56 There is a season for fruit. 58 Seven things to be
done, that we may hear the Word in truth. 59 The causes of fruitless hearing.
60 The great commodities of assurance. ibid. Who love not God, and who love not
men. 64 To love as Christ loved us, has four things in it. ibid.
Encouragements to prayer. 66.67 Why many pray and speed not. 67 What we
should seek to know. Motives to knowledge, and rules for attayning knowledge.
70.71 Signs of a natural man. 73 Who make Schism in the Church. 73 Rules for
Contemplation. 75 Ten Objections against Knowledge answered out of Prou. 8.
75.76 Wherein Wisdom consists: Wisdoms order in seven things: Wisdoms
specialties in the behavior; first, of the Heart in five things; secondly, of
the Tongue in seven things; thirdly, of the Conversation in eight things.
76.77.78 Motives to holy life: the causes of prophanenes: rules for holiness,
and the gain of holiness. 78.79.80 Nine Reasons against merit. 81 What it is
to walk worthy of the Lord: it has six things in it. 82 Eight rules to be
observed if we would please God: and six rules if we would please men. 83.84
How Governors in families may walk pleasingly: and how inferiors in the
family may please their superiors: and the like of Ministers and the people,
and Magistrates and their Subjects. 84.85 Seven things to be observed if we
would walk in all pleasing toward our own consciences. 85 What works are
not good works: and what rules must be observed to make our works good: and
what works in particular are good works: and seven ends of good works.
86.87 What are the lets of increase of Knowledge: and how we may know when we
increase in knowledge: and what we must do that we may increase. 88 How God
is made known, and who are charged not to know God: and how it comes to pass
that man knows not his God: and what we must do that we may know God. 88.89
Signs of weak a Christian or an infant in Grace. 89 What is in the work
Christian, notwithstanding his wants. 90 Comforts for a weak Christian, and
helps for his strengthening. 90.91 Signs of a strong Christian. 91 The extent
of the power of God: and what God cannot do. 92 Of the glory of God, and how
many ways it is revealed. 92.93 About falling from Grace and Perseverance. 93
Motives to Patience: and what we must do that we may be patient: and seven
things wherein we should show patience. 94.95 Of Long-suffering, and how to
prevent anger and desire of revenge. 95 What we must do that we might get
constant Ioyfulnesse of heart. 96 How the Father may be said to redeem us. 97
Marks of a Child of God. 98 How Christ dyed for all men. 98.99 Five sorts of
men in the Church not made fit for heaven. 99 The division of Canaan by Lot,
shadows out many things in the kingdom of heaven. 100 Our inheritance is in
light in six respects. 101 A threefold light. ibid. A sixe-fold darkness in
every unregenerate man. 102 Nine things in every one that is delivered from
darkness. 103 The excellency of Christ's Kingdom, and the privileges of his
Subjects. 105 Four ways of Redemption. 108 The comforts of the Doctrine of
remission of sins. ibid. The terror of the Doctrine of remission of sins.
109 What a man should do to get his sins forgiven him. ibid. Christ more
excellent then all Monarchs in diverse respects. 110 Difference between Image
and Similitude: Gods Image is in man three ways: the difference between the
Image of God in man and in Christ: Christ is the Image of God three ways: he
is the Image of God as God: and as man three ways. 110.111 How many ways
Christ is said to be first begotten. 113 Four words confute four errors
about the Creation. 115 Diverse opinions about the meaning of the words,
Thrones, Dominions, etc. ibid. All things are for Christ in diverse respects.
117 The eternity of Christ described and explained. 118 How all things consist
in Christ. ibid. Many Objections about the preservation of the righteous
answered out of the 37. Psalm, fol. 102. But if we would be thus preserved,
we must look to nine things, noted out of that Psalm. 121 The benefits that
slow from Christ as Head of the Church. 121 Of the Church. 122.123 How Christ
is the beginning. 124 A threefold primogeniture in Christ. 124 Christ was
first begotten among the dead in three respects. 125 Christ is first in diverse
respects. ibid. What it is to yield Christ the pre-eminence. 126 All fullness
is in Christ in five respects. 127 Ten fruits of the blood of Christ. 132 How
many ways men sin against Christ's blood. ibid. Whether Angels be reconciled
to Christ or no. 133 Wicked men are strangers in five respects. 136 Wicked men
are enemies both actiuely and passiuely: and how. 137 The reasons why most men
mind not their misery. 199 Six distinct things in our reconciliation by
Christ. 130 Why the Church is called all things. ibid. Christ's body better then
ours in five respects. fol. 139. Not like ours in two things, and like ours in
three respects. 140 How many ways Christ does present us to God. 141 How
Christians may be said to be holy, unblameable, and without fault in Gods sight
in this life. 142 Internal holiness must have seven things in it. ibid. What
external holiness must have in it. 143 Signs of an upright heart. 143. and
Means and Motives. By what means men are induced to fall away. 144 How the
faithful may fall away. ibid. Seven things from which the Elect can never
fall. 145 Concerning perseverance, 1. Motives, 2. Means, 3. Helps. ibid. How
many helps a Christian has from the very spirit of God that is in him, and
from the Word. 146 The privileges of an established and grounded heart: and
what we must do that we might be grounded and stablished. 147 What a free
spirit is. 147 Why many after so long profession are so unsettled. 147.148
Concerning Hope: 1. what Hope is not true Hope: 2. what persons have no Hope:
3. what are the effects and properties of true Hope. 149 How the Gospel is
preached to every creature. 151 Why godly men are so cheerful in affliction.
153 How Paul was said to fulfill the rest of the affliction of Christ. 154 How
our afflictions are the afflictions of Christ. 155 Twelve Arguments against the
Cross. 157 How we may know we are of Gods household. 158 What good men get by
their Ministers. 159 How many ways the Gospel is hidden: 161. and how
revealed. 165 What a civil honest man wants. 165.166 What we must do to
preserve affection to the word, 167 The Gospel is a glorious Mystery. 168
Nine Uses of the Doctrine of the calling of the Gentiles. ibid. How Christ is
conceived in the soul of the faithful. 170.171.172. How we may know that
Christ is in our hearts. 170.171.172. The Benefits that come by the
inhabitation of Christ. 170.171.172. What entertainment we ought to give him.
170.171.172. Who have not Christ in them. 170.171.172. The honor, duty and
reproof of Ministers. 173 Reasons to persuade us to suffer admonition. 174 How
we are perfect in this life. 176
The chiefest Typographicall Errors. ERRATA.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, line 6. for counsel read consent, and l. 21.
for Dedicatory r. Dedication. p. 3. l. 41. for Iothanan Iebar, r. Iochanan
Iehan, p. 10. l. 4. for order r. ardor. ibid l. 28. for all r. at. p. 25. l.
13. for definitions r. definitiues. p. 35. l. 47. as love for all love. p. 41.
l. 47. holy life for holy love. ibid. l. 49. love for Lord. p. 51. l. 27.
straying for strange. p. 60. l. 23. salutiferans for salutiferous. p. 62. l.
48. guilefull for gaulefull. p. 63. l. 1. modest and for modest and. l. 6. this
for his. p. 69. sent forth for send forth. p. 73. (...) for (...). p. 88. l.
13. any for and. p. 92. l. 53 our for one. p. 113. l. 13. of God for son of
God. and l. 20. and the very bottom for out of the very bosom. p. 114. l. 46.
decree for decreed. p. 122. l. 49. service for Savior. p. 129. l. 27. repayes
for repayres. p. 140. l. 39. it is not for is it not.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE WHOLE Epistle to the COLOSSIANS.
COLOS. 1.1.2. Verse 1. Paul an Apostle of JESUS CHRIST, by the will of God,
and Timotheus a Brother.

2. To them which are at Colosse, Saints and faithful Brethren in CHRIST.
Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord JESUS CHRIST.


TWO things are worthy our consideration in this EPISTLE, A Description of the
Author of this Epistle.
the Author and the Matter: the Author was PAVL, concerning whom memorable
things are recorded: he was an Hebrew, of the Hebrews, of the Tribe of
Benjamin, Phil. 3.5.
a Pharise, the Son of a Pharise, borne in Tharsus of Cilicia, circumcised
the eight day, Acts 23.6.
brought up in the knowledge of the Law, Acts 22.3.
and Pharisaicall institutions, by Gamaliel, Phil. 3.
a great Doctor among the Jews, acquainted also with the Languages of foreign
Nations, Titus 1.12.
as his quoting of the authorities of Greek Poets shows: and in his youth,
for the righteousness external, which was after the Law, he was vnrebukeabl^
and full of zeal, Phil. 3.6. Gal. 1.13.14. 1 Timothy 1. Acts 8.9. Act 22.26. 1 Timothy 2. 2 Cor. 6. and 11. and 3. Ephesians. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 15. Romans
15.19. 2 Cor. 1.12. 2 Cor. 11.22. to 30.
but withal a violent and blasphemous persecuter. His Calling was exceeding
glorious, his Office unto which he was called, was great and honorable, (viz.)
to be the Legate of CHRIST, the Doctor of the Gentiles, the Minister of God, of
Christ, of the Spirit, of the new Testament, of the Gospel of reconciliation
and of righteousness; He was famous for his labor in the Word, by which he
caused the Gospel to run from Jerusalem to Illiricum with admirable
swiftness; as also for his faithfulness of mind, for his pure conscience,
for his affection to the faithful, for his humanity and courtesy, for his
continency, for his humility, for his care for the Churches, for his honest
conversation, innocence and constancy: he was of nature earnest, acute and
heroical.

Add unto these, the praises of his sufferings, what reproach, what stripes,
what imprisonments, what beating with rods, and such like wrongs did he endure,
five times of the Jews received he forty stripes save one; once was he
stoned, thrice he suffered shipwreck, night and day was he in the deep Sea;
in iourneying often, in perils of waters, of robbers, of his own Nation, of
the Gentiles; in the City, in the Wilderness, in the Sea, and among false
brethren; how he was daily pressed with weariness, painfulness, watchings,
hunger, thirst, fastings, cold and nakedness, besides the incombrances and
cares for the business of the Churches.

A fourfold testimony concerning the doctrine of Paul.
Finally, we may consider the testimony given to his doctrine to prove it to be
without all mixture of error. And this Testimony stands of four branches: 1.
His immediate calling* 2. His immediate instruction and information. 3. The
visible donation of the holy Ghost, which was not only given to himself, but
he also conferred it, Acts 9. Acts 19.6. 2 Cor. 12.12. Acts 20.
by imposition of hands, to others. 4. His working of Miracles, for so he says
of himself, The signs of an Apostle were wrought among you, with all
patience, with wonders, and great works: he raised a man from the dead.
Neither could the miracles wrought by him be small, when Handkerchiefes were
brought from his body to the sick, Acts 19.12.
and their diseases departed from them yea, Devils went out of them.

Lastly, this noble Jew, more famous among the Apostles then ever the great
Saul was among the Prophets, was beheaded by the Emperor Nero, the 29. of
June, in the 70. year of the Lord. And all this should cause us with all
reverence, both to teach and learn the Celestial doctrine delivered in
writing to the Churches by him.

Conceits about the Apostles writings.
Thus of the Author, the M^tter follows: I mean not to search after the
def^ants and conceits that some observe concerning the works of this Worthy,
as that he should write ten Epistles to the Churches to answer the number of
ten Commandment; and four Epistles to particular persons, to express his
agreement with the four Evangelists; only this in general for his hearers or
Auditorie: he had the Romans, the greatest in the earth for power: the
Grecians, the most famous for wit and learning: and the Jews or Hebrews, of
greatest note for divine understanding of the Law of God. But to leave this, I
come to the Matter of the Epistle, and observe three things.

1 To whom he writes. 2 Upon what occasion. 3 The Treatise it self.
What Colosse was, and how the people were converted.
For the first, Colosse was a City in Phrigia, in Asia the less, near to
Laodicea and Hierapolis. The Church in this City was not first gathered by
Paul, but as some think, by Epaphras, whom they take to have been one of the
seauenty Disciples, and an Evangelist. Some say they were first converted by
Archippus, who is mentioned, Chapter 4.17. and that Epaphras, one that was borne
amongst them, Chap. 4.17.
being instructed by Paul, was sent thither to build them up further.

The occasion of the Epistle Crosse-teaching in his time.
For the second: the Occasion of this Epistle was this; After that there was a
Church here gathered by the power of the Gospel Satan after his wonted
manner, stirred up corrupt teachers, who by cross and contrary teaching did
mightily labor to disgrace the Ministry, and hinder the efficacy of the
doctrine of their faithful Minister: these men taught Philosophical
Positions, and vain Speculations, urged the Ceremonies of the Jews, and
brought in praying to Angels, and such like infectious stuff. Epaphras
hereupon being oppressed with the madness and fury of th^se Impes of Satan,
resorts to Paul, who lay in prison at Rome* and acquainting him with the state
of the Church, procures him to write this Epistle.

The Epistle divided into five parts.
Thirdly, the Treatise it self stands of five parts: first, an Exordium, chapter 1.
to v. 12. Secondly, a Proposition, lively expressing the doctrine of Christ,
and his Kingdom, from v. 12. to the 23. Thirdly, an Exhortation, containing a
persuasion, from v. 23. of chapter 1. to v. 8. of chapter 2. and a disswasion, from v.
8. of chapter 2. to the end of chapter 2. Fourthly an institution of manners, giving
rules first in general, chapter 3.1. to 18. secondly in special, from v. 18. of
chapter 3. to v. 2. of chapter 4. And lastly, a Conclusion from v. 2. of chapter 4. to the
end. Or briefly thus, setting aside the Entrance and the Con^lusion, the
Apostle entreates of matters of Faith, in the first two Chapters, and of
matters of Life, in the two last.

And thus in general of the whole Epistle, The Exordium and the parts thereof.
with the persons to whom, and the occasion thereof. The first part of the
Epistle is the Exordium, and it stands of two members, a Salutation and a
Preface. The Salutation, ver. 1.2. and the Preface from verse. 3. to the 12.

In the Salutation I consider three things: The salutation divided.
first, the persons saluting: secondly, the persons saluted: thirdly, the
Salutation it self. The Persons saluting are an Apostle and an Evangelist; The
Persons saluting.
the Apostle is described by his Name, PAVL; by his Office, an Apostle; by the
principal e^^icient that preferred him to that office, and both appointed him
his service, and protected him in it, (viz.) JESUS CHRIST; and lastly, by the
impulsive cause, (viz.) the will of God. The Evangelist is described: first, by
his name, TIMOTHY: secondly, by his adiunct estate, a Brother.

First, of the words that describe the Apostle; and hear first the meaning of
them, and then the Doctrines to be observed out of them.

Paul. The name of the Apostle.
] The Apostle at his Circumcision was called Saul. For, being of the Tribe of
Benjamin, it seems the men of that Tribe did in honor of their King Saul, Why
he was called Saul.
who was the first of all the Kings of Israel; and by a kind of emulation to
retain the first glory of their Tribe (more respecting the outward honor of
Saul, in that he was a King, then the curse of God in his reiection) did use
to give the name of Saul to their Children very often as a name of great honor.

And not unfitly did this name light upon this Beniamite: both if we regard
him as he was before his calling or after: before his calling, as the old
Saul persecuted David, so did this yongling Saul (coming freshly out of the
mint of a Pharise) persecute Christ, who came of David. And after his calling*
as it was said of old Saul, by way of Proverb, Is Saul also among the
Prophets? So may it be said of this Saul, by way of honor, Saul is among the
Apostles: and that not the least of the Apostles, for he labored more
abundantly then they all.

Concerning this other name PAVL, Diverse opinions about the name Paul.
Writers are diversely minded. Some think that thirteen years after Christ,
by the condict of the Apostles, he received both his Apostleship over the
Gentiles, and this name. Others think, that he took unto himself this name
of Paulus, to profess himself the least of all Apostles. Others think the
name was given him for some eminent praise of some quality or action, as Peter
was called Cephas, and James and John called Boanarges, and Jacob called
Israel. Some think he had two names, as Solomon was called also Iedidiah, and
Matthew called Leui, and these should seem to be given by his Parents, to
profess his interest amongst both Jews and Romans. Among Jews by the Hebrew
name Saul, and among the Romans, by the Latin name Paulus. Some think it is
but the varying of the language, as John, Iothanan, Iehar, and Johannes, all
are but differing in several languages. Lastly, it is most likely he was
called Paul for memory of the first spoils he brought into the Church of
Christ, Acts 13.9.
not the head but the heart of Sergius Paulus, that noble Roman, and this is
more probable, because in all the Chapters before, he is never called Paul.

Apostle.] This word in the general signification imports one that is sent,
Phil. 2.15. The signification and Etimologie of the word Apostle.
and so Epiphroditus is called an Apostle: but the Etimologie of the word is
larger then the usual application of it: for, it is usually given to the
twelve principal Disciples, and to Paul and Barnabas: and so it is used as a
term of distinction from other Church Officers: for, they had their Widows
for the sick, Deacons for the poor, Doctors for instruction, Pastors for
exhortation, And what Apostles were.
and these were standing and ordinary Officers. Now, there were extraordinary,
viz. Apostles and Evangelists, the Apostles were men immediately called by
Christ, and had general charge over all the Churches, for planting and
governing them; the Evangelists were called most by the Apostles, and sent with
spiritual charge whither the Apostles saw most convenient.

The use and signification of the words Jesus Christ.
Jesus Christ.] These title given to the Messiah are not in vain used, or
joined together: for, by these names both his Office and his Work are
described. In the one name (CHRIST) showing what he undertook to be, in the
other showing what he was, viz. JESUS, a Savior: the one Name, (viz.) JESUS,
an Hebrew word, is for the Jews, and the other Name CHRIST, a Greek word, is
for the Gentiles: the one showing that he was God (for, Esaias 45.21.
besides me there is no Savior) the other showing that he was Man, (viz.)
Christ the anointed. For, in respect of his humane nature, is this annoynting
with graces or gifts attributed to Christ.

Diverse Christ's.
Again, Christ's were of two sorts, ( viz. false Christ's, Mat. 24. and true
Christ's: the true were either Typical, and so the Prophets, Priests and Kings
were anointed (hence in the Psalm, Touch not my Christ's, etc.) or Essential,
and so only the Son of Mary.

By the will of God.] These words are expounded, Gal. 1.1. where he is said to
be an Apostle, not of men, as Princes send civil Ambassadors, or as the Jews
sent false Apostles; nor by men, as Timothy, Titus, Luke, etc. who were
ordained by man: Tit. 1.4.
and as Titus did ordain Elders. Or else not by the Commendation, pains or
instruction of any man.

Thus far of the meaning of the words: The Doctrines follow.

Three Doctrines from the first words. Doctr. 1. Great sinners may prove great
Saints.
Paul an Apostle.] Here three Doctrines may be observed: first, great sinners
may prove great Saints; a great enemy of sincere Religion may prove a great
founder of Churches; a great oppressor of Gods Servants may prove a great
feeder of Gods flock. In a word, a persecuter, as we see here, may be an
Apostle. This Doctrine as it does excellently sample out Gods unsearchable
mercy, so it teaches us not to despair of any, but to continue to pray for
even the vilest and most spiteful adversaries, Use. 1.
and the most open oppugners, and usual traducers of Gods causes and people;
and to way^e upon God to see if at any time he will give them repentance to
build that they have destroyed, and to gather that they have so much striuen to
scatter. Secondly, 2.
this Doctrine is of singular use in the cure of the hardest of diseases, viz.
affliction of conscience: Affliction of conscience.
for in some of the dear Servants of God (that have appearing upon them some
signs of effectual Calling, a right evidence of hope from Gods promises,
sweet pledges and signifying seals of Gods favor, by the witness of the
Spirit of Adoption) yet there arises some scruples about either the multitude
or greatness of their sins, and a healing of their errors; and uncomfortable
mistakings does most an end arise from the right application of such examples
as this, Dangerous mistaking.
I say, a right application: for, the most men do dangerously and damnably
mistake in alleging the instances of the great sins of Gods Servants. But
if thou observe these four rules thou can not mistake or misapply: Rules to
be observed in alleging examples of great sinners repenting.
First, if thou bring not in the examples of David, Peter, Paul, or any other,
to patronize thy sin, or to defend and nourish thy self in a sinful course.
Secondly, if thou allege them not to wrest Gods promises, as to make the
promises of mercy general, when they are restrained with their several
limitations. Thirdly, when they are not brought out to fortify a profane
heart against the ordinances of GOD, as reproves either public or private.
Fourthly, when thou do as well urge upon thy self the necessity of the
repentance was in them, as seek the comfort of the remission of so great
sins committed by them: These rules being observed, the example of Paul's
sins may with comfort be applied, as he himself testifies. 1 Timothy 1.16.

Secondly, Doct. 2. Doctrine is seldom effectual when the person of the
Minister is despised.
the Apostle to bring his doctrine into greater request, does in the entrance
of the Epistle insinuate himself into their respects, by setting down the
authority and praises of his office and person: which shows unto us that
usually where the persons of the Ministers are not regarded, their Doctrine
works little. The Doctrine is not long in credit, where the person and
function it self is contemned.

And this yields us one Reason, Use. 1.
why a number of profane men get so little by the doctrine they so ordinarily
hear: And the ca^se is, they are contemners, and scoffers, and reprochers of
Gods Ministers; and therefore God will give them no blessing by their
Ministry. 2.
Again, it shows how heavy and hurtful a sin it is to detract from the
name and good esteem of Ministers, Defamation of Ministers.
by tales, lies, and slanders: for, though men believe thee not in thy
slanders, yet it is the property of most defamations, that they leave a kind
of lower estimation many times where they are not believed. 3.
Thirdly, it serves to teach all Ministers and others that are in government,
to preserve by all lawful and holy endeauours the authority and credit both
of their Persons and Callings. There is no doubt but the base carriage and
indiscreet and sinful courses of many Ministers have brought a contempt and
barrenness upon the very Ordinances of God; they can do no good with their
doctrine, they are so wanting to that gravity and innocence that should shine
in the lights and lamps of Christ.

Lastly, Doct. 3. Less then an Apostle must not have dominion ouer^ men's
consciences.
here may be observed, that he that will bear rule over other men's
consciences, must be an Apostle: less then an Apostolical man cannot
prescribe unto other men's consciences: and therefore it is a profane
insolency in any whatsoever to urge their fancies and devises, and to press
them, ma^^er-like, upon the judgments or practices of their brethren, when
they are not warranted in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

Of Jesus Christ. Use. Doct.
] No knowledge can be available to salvation without the knowledge of Christ,
and therefore the Apostle in the very forefront of the Epistle, No knowledge
available to salvation without the knowledge of Christ.
professes to teach the doctrine of Christ, and to aim at such a course of
framing of doctrine, as above all things Christ Jesus may sound in his
instructions, and be received into honor, application and practice. And he
does in the very entrance intimate what the corrupt teachers must look for
from him: viz. that he will batter the whole frame of their building, that
have led men from CHRIST crucified, to vain Traditions Philosophical
speculations, Jewish observations, and given his glory to Angels.

By the will of God.] That is, by his approbation, direction, protection, but
especially by his singular vocation. The Apostle then holds his calling from
God, and therefore believes Gods protection and blessing because God had called
him to his function. And as the Apostle, so every member of the Church holds
his particular standing and function from God; he is ranked into his order by
the special providence and calling of God.

And it is to great purpose that men should know it in their own particular.
The assurance of a lawful calling serves for four uses.
For first, it inforceth diligence: if God have set thee in thy calling, then
it stands thee upon to discharge the duties of thy calling with all
heedfulnesse and painfulnesse. Secondly, it may teach men not to pass the
bounds Every christian has two callings.
Every Christian has two Callings: the one is the external designement of him
to some outward service in the Church or Commonwealth, and this is his
particular calling: the other is the singling of him out by special
sanctification to glorify God, and seek his own salvation in the things of
the Kingdom of Christ, and this is a calling general to him, with all
believers. Now it is manifest, that Gods commandment is, that men first seek
the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and therefore he never
meant that men should so follow their outward business and employments, as to
omit the means of knowledge and grace, prayer, reading, hearing,

The Evangelist described.
Thus far of the Apostle. The Evangelist is described: first, by his name,
TIMOTHY: secondly, by his adiunct estate, a Brother.

Doctr. 1.
Three things briefly may be observed here; first, that consent in doctrine is
a great means and effectual to persuade both to incorruption in Faith, The
profit of consent in doctrine.
and integrity in living. This made Paul to join Tymothy with him; and the
consideration of this, as it should teach all faithful Ministers to make
themselves glorious by a brotherly harmony in matters of opinion: Use. 1.
so it does give occasion to bewail that great sin of wilful opposition and
crosse-teaching, which does in many places too much abound; Wilful opposition
and crosse-teaching.
a course that is taken up by some of purpose to hinder the growth of knowledge
and sincerity: some of these instruments of the Devil, having for the most
part, no life or heart, either in study or preaching, but when envy and malice,
and a desire to be contrary, does instigate and prick them forward. These are
like them of whom the Apostle complained, that were contrary to all men, and
forbid us to preach to the Chruches that they might be saved, 1 These. 2.15.16.
and fulfill the measure of their sins always: God they please not, and the
wrath of God is come on them to the uttermost.

Doct. 2.
Secondly, here we may learn that spiritual aliance is the best aliance; for,
Spiritual aliance.
it is a greater honor to Timothy to be a brother, then to be an Evangelist:
for, he might have been an Evangelist, and yet have gone to Hell when he had
done, as Judas an Apostle did. And this cannot but be exceeding comfortable,
seeing there is not the meanest child of God but he may attain to that which
was Timothies greatest title.

Doct. 3.
Thirdly, the Apostle does intimate by the taking in of Timothies assent, that
the most glorious doctrine of God does need the witness of men, Gods doctrine
needs man's witness.
such a vanity and secret sinfulness does lodge in men's hearts. Which should
teach Ministers with all good conscience and heedfulnesse, to weigh well and
consider thoroughly of their doctrine before they deliver it, Use.
because there is a weakness too commonly found in the very dear children of
God, namely, to receive doctrine upon the trust and credit of the Messenger,
without searching the scriptures as they ought to do.

2.
Thus far of the persons saluting: the persons saluted are described, both by
the place of their habitation, The persons saluted.
at Colosse, and by their spiritual estate: in which he describes them by
four things: they are Saints, they are faithful, they are Brethren, and they
are in Christ.

Four general observations.
Before I come to the particular handling of each of these, I consider four
things in the general: First, here we see the power of the Gospel. But a
little before, The power of the Gospel.
if Colosse had been searched with lights, as Jerusalem was, there would not
have been found one Saint nor one faithful man or woman in the whole City:
Who be the true members of the Church.
and now behold by the preaching of the Word, here are many Saints and
faithful Brethren to be found in her. Secondly, we see here who be the true
members of the Church. The Apostle acknowledges none but such as are Saints,
The Church may be true and yet faulty.
faithful, and in Christ. Thirdly, we see here that a Church may remain a
true Church, notwithstanding gross corruptions remain in it unreformed, as
here these titles are given to a Church much poisoned with humane traditions
and vile corruptions in worship. Lastly it is to be observed, One grace or
privilege cannot be without another.
that the Apostle ioynes all these together, to note that one cannot be without
the other, one cannot be a Saint unless he be faithful, and in Christ, and
so of the rest. The last clause cuts off the Jews apparently from being Saints
or true believers, seeing they receive not Christ: Carnal Protestant.
and the first clause cuts off the carnal Protestant, so as he cannot be a
believer or in Christ, seeing he cares no more for sanctity: and the two
middle-most cut off the Papists and all Heretics and Schismatickes, seeing
they have with insolent pride made a rent and Apostasy from the true
Apostolical Churches, 2 These. 2.4 etc.
by advancing themselves with their Man of sin above their brethren, nay,
above all that is called God.

Thus far in general, the first thing particularly given them, is, that they
are Saints.

Saints. The acceptations of the word Saints.
] This Word is diuersely accepted in Scripture. Sometimes it is given to the
Angels, and so they are called Saints, Deuteronomy. 33.2 Job 15.15. Secondly, men are
said to be holy by a certain Legal or Ceremonial sanctity, Leuit. 11.44.
And in this sense the superstitious are holy: This is the holiness and
sanctity of Papists and Popish persons, which place all their holiness in the
observation of Rites and Traditions, and superstitious Customs. Thirdly, all
that stand members of the Church, by the rule of Charity, or in respect of
outward visibilitie and profession, are called Saints, and so all that covenant
with God by offering Sacrifice, Psalm. 50.5.
are called Saints. Lastly, and properly it is a term given to men
effectually called: the children of God truly converted are called Saints; not
because they are perfectly holy without all sin, Gods children are called
Saints in four respects.
but in four respects. First, in respect of Separation, because they are
elected and gathered out of the world, and joined unto Gods people, and
dedicated to holy services and uses, and thus the word is often taken.
Secondly, in respect of vocation; and therefore the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.2. When he
had said they were sanctified, he said by way of explication, they were Saints
by calling. Thirdly, in respect of regeneration, because they are now new
creatures. And lastly, in respect of justification or imputation, because the
holiness and sanctity of Christ is imputed to them.

The sense being thus given, Doct.
the doctrine is plain, that men may be Saints in this life: Men may be Saints
in this life.
there are Saints in Earth as well as in Heaven. This is apparent also in other
Scriptures, as Psalm 16.3. To the Saints that are in earth. And Psalm. 37.28.
He forsakes not his Saints. And Psalm. 132.9.16. Let thy Saints rejoice. So in
the Epistle to the Ephesians, chapter 2.20. Citizens with the Saints, etc. chap.
3.8. Paul calls himself the least of all Saints, etc. chap. 4.12. For the
gathering together of the Saints; Use.
with many other places. The use of this serves first, to confute the gross
folly of the Papists that acknowledge no Saints till three things come to them:
Three things needful for popish Saints.
first, they must be Canonized by the Pope: secondly, they must be dead first:
thirdly, it must be an hundred years after their death. This last prouiso was
well added, lest their treasons and most vile practices should be remembered.
Secondly, this serves for the severe reproof of numbers in our own Church,
that live as if there were no sanctity to be looked after, till they come to
heaven. Thirdly, the Scripture is not without singular comfort to the poor
despised Saints: Comforts for the despised Saints and servants of God. Psalm.
16.3. Psalm. 30.4.5.
I will take them in order as they lie. Deuteronomy. 7.6.7. If we be sure we be a
holy people to the Lord, then this is our comfort, that God accounts of us
above all the people upon the earth: and no man loves his Pearls or precious
Jewels so much as God loves the meanest Saint. David says, these are the
Nobles of the earth. And Psalm. 30.4.5. These are willed with all cheerful
thankfulness to laud and praise God, and that before the remembrance of his
holiness (as they before the Arc, so we before all the Tokens and Pledges of
Gods love, both the Word and Sacraments, and sweet witnesses of the Spirit of
Adoption, and all other blessings as Testimonies of Gods favor.)

Object.
Oh but it seems the Saints have little cause of joy or praise, for they are
much afflicted, and that by the judgments of God too, either in their
consciences within, Solut.
or in their body, or estates, or names without. The Prophet answers: that the
Lord endures but a while in his anger, but in his favor is life, though
weeping may abide at evening, yet joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 37.28.
And in the 37. Psalm. 28. ver. a charge is given to fly from evil, and do
good: in which words a Saint is described by his practice.

Object.
Oh but what shall they get by this preciseness? Sol. They shall dwell for
ever: Solut.
no men have so certain, sure, and durable estates, as those that make
conscience of their ways, hating the infection of all sin, and delighting
themselves in well-doing.

Object.
Oh but we see they are much maliced and hated, disgraced and wronged in the
world. Solut.
Sol. The Lord loves judgment: if men right not their wrongs, Psalm. 7.
God will; nay, it is a delight unto the Lord to judge the righteous, and him
that contemns God every day: those spiteful adversaries of sincerity shall
never escape Gods hands.

Object.
Oh but we see not only wicked men, but God himself smites and afflicts
those that be so holy. Solut.
Sol. Though God afflict and chastise his people, as a Father his beloved
Son, yet he forsakes not his Saints.

Object.
Oh but the Saints themselves are full of great doubts, whether they shall
persevere, Solut.
or God will change. Sol. It is Gods unchangeable promise, they shall be
preserved for evermore. Psalm. 85.8.
Again, in the 85. Psalm, though the Church be in great perplexities in
respect of outward afflictions, yet this comfort the Saints have: First, that
though Gods strokes seem to be the strokes of war, yet Gods words are the
words of peace: the Word and Spirit of God are sure fountains of rest and
peace to the heart and conscience of Gods afflicted people. Secondly, when God
smites his people, he ever has a regard to this, not to smite them so long, as
they should be driven to turn again to folly: by folly he means sin, for
all sinful courses are foolish courses. The Lord by crosses intends to bring
them out of sin, not to drive them in; and if men find not these privileges
true, it is because either they do not hearken, that is, observe and mark the
Word, Spirit, and Works of God, or else because they are not his Saints. In
the 149. Psalm, there is an honor given to all the Saints: viz. that they
should with a two-edged sword, Psalm. 149.5.6.7.8.9.
execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and corrections upon the people, they
should bind Kings with chains, and Nobles with fetters of iron: thus should
they execute upon them the judgment that is written. So forcible and powerful
are the public threatenings and censures of the Saints assembled in their holy
ranckes, as also their private prayers, that all the swords of great Princes
cannot so plague the enemies of the Church, as do the Saints by these weapons:
So fearful are the corrections and judgments which the Saints by prayers and
censures may bring upon whole troops of wicked men, as no swords or fetters in
nature can be comparable to them.

Dan. 7.27.
When Daniel had described the greatness and glory of the Princes, Potentates
and mighty States in the four Monarchies, at last he comes to speak of a
Kingdom which is the greatest under the whole Heaven; and that is the Kingdom
of the Saints of the most High. So glorious is the state of the poor despised
Servants of God, even here in this world, in the Kingdom of grace. Daniel
7.27. And if there be such suing, on earth, to become freemen of great Cities,
especially to live in the Courts of great princes, how great is the felicity
of every child of God, who is no more now a forreiner or stranger, Ephesians. 2.20.
but a Citizen with the Saints, and of the household of God.

To conclude, this may be a great refreshing to every child of God against all
the discomforts of this present transitory life, that in that great and last,
and terrible day Christ will be glorified in them, 2 These. 1.10.
and made marvelous in the Saints. And last of all, though the Saints be here
despised and trodden under foot, 2 Cor. 6.2.
judged and condemned by men, yet the time will come, when the Saints shall
judge the world.

Oh but some one will say, Qu. Who are Saints?
all the difficulty lies in this, to know who are Saints. Ans. To this end,
besides the four things generally laid down before, Ans.
I will for trial allege two or three places of Scripture: first, in Deuteronomy.
33.3. Deuteronomy. 33.3.
When Moses had praised the love of God to the Jewish Nation, he specially
commends Gods special care toward the Saints of that Nation, The first
sign.
whom, as most dear to him, he had always in his hands, and gives this sign
to know them by, Psalm. 16.3.5.6.
(viz.) They are humbled at his feet, to receive his words.

Secondly, David's four signs.
David having spoken of the excellency of the Saints on earth, to prove
himself to be one of the number, he yields his reasons from four
experimental signs: First, the Lord was his portion, though he had hopes
Psalm. 16.5.6.
and spiritual things were unto him the fairest part of his inheritance, and
though he had many crosses, yet the line was sallen unto him in a fair place:
so long as he could see grace in his heart, and the God of grace to love him
freely. Secondly, he could as heartily praise God for Psalm. 16.7.
(viz.) Counsel, Knowledge, and direction out of the word of God, as wicked
men could for temporal Honors, Riches, Pleasures, and such things as they
love best. Thirdly, his reins did teach him in

Object. Object.
Oh but might not David be deceived in that sign by illusions, etc. Solut.
Ans. David gives two reasons why he could not: first, his feelings did not
make him more careless, Difference between illusions and the feelings of the
Spirit of Adoption.
presumptuous and sinful, as illusions do wicked men, but they taught him,
that is, he learned by them many worthy lessons, and directions, and
encouragements to holy life, and never did he conceive a greater hatred against
his sin, then when his reins taught him: secondly, he shows that he had
them in the night; that is, when he was alone and with-drawne from company,
and the things of the world, and worldly occasions. Fourthly, his last sign
is, that he did set the Lord always he could be content to walk ever in
Gods presence, and to have him the witness of his actions, he was not
careful only to approve himself to men (as wicked men may do) but his
chief care was to walk in all good conscience before God.

Lastly, Esaias 4.3.4.
in the four^^ of Esaias, the Prophet fore-tels of men that under the Gospel
should be called holy or Saints, and these he describes by their happiness,
they shall be written among the living in Jerusalem; and by their holiness,
which will discover it self by these signs: first, they are not acquainted
with an Assize in the soul of the sinner, he has been arraigned, indicted,
and has pleaded guilty, and been condemned: a Spirit of burning, both in
respect of the inward purifying of the heart from the dross that cleaues unto
it, as also in respect of zeal and order, for the glory of God. And thus far
of the first thing given unto the people of God: they are Saints. Now follows
the second.

The acceptations of the word faithful.
Faithful:] This word is diversely attributed in Scripture. It is given to 2
Cor. 1.
God, and God is said to be faithful in the accomplishment of his promises. It
is given to Revel. 19.11.
Christ, and he is called faithful and true. It is given to the Psalm. 89.37.
Sun in the Firmament, because it keeps his certain course. It is given to
the Word of God, so as whatsoever it promises or threatens men may certainly
bind upon it, Psalm. 19.7. and 111.7.
for heaven and earth may fail, but one jot of it shall not fail. Lastly, it
is given to Men, especially and most ordinarily to such men as are true
believers, and walk in all good conscience both before God and Men: and as it
is thus taken, the words of the holy Ghost, Prou. 20.6. may be taken up, Prou.
20.6.
Many men will boast, every one of his own goodness, but who can find a
faithful man? Psalm. 101.6.
These are they that David so earnestly searches for, and having found them,
does so steadfastly set his eyes upon them, and entertayneth them into his
Court, Psalm. 101.6. The names of these we do for the most part take upon our
selves, but the signs of these are but sparingly found amongst us. That we
may examine our selves, I will consider what is required of us that we may
show our selves faithful.

Faithfulness in spiritual things.
The Christian man's faithfulness ought to show it self, first, in spiritual
things; secondly, in temporal things unto faithfulness in spiritual things
five things are requisite. First, faith in Christ, to get sound reasons from
the Word and Spirit of God, Hereunto five things are requisite.
and a sure evidence for the particular persuasion of the heart, that God in
Christ is graciously reconciled with the sinner. He Psalm. 78.
And therefore the Israelites are charged not to be faithful, 37.
because when the wrath of God turned upon them, and the strongest of them were
slain, and their chosen men were smitten, and that their days did consume in
vanity, 31.
and their years hastily, then they cry unto him, 32.
and seek him in their distress, they return and seek him early, they
acknowledge that God is their strength, 34.
and the most high their Redeemer: but when the Lord had been merciful unto
them, 35.
forgiven their iniquities* so as he destroyed them not, and called back his
anger; then they retu^^ed and provoked the Lord again, 38.
they flattered him with their tongue, they tempted God and sinned still, and
therefore they are censured thus: 37.
Their heart was not upright, neither were they faithful in Gods Covenant.
Hos. 11. vlt.
And thus Judah is said to be faithful with Gods Saints, because as yet the
worship of God was preserved amongst them in the ancient purity, in which the
old Patriarchs and Saints, did sincerely worship the God of their Fathers: he
is a faithful man that will worship God no otherwise then the Saints have
done, that is, precisely, according to his will revealed with true spiritual
gain. And thus he is said to be a good Servant and faithful, Mat. 25.21.23
that having received five Talents, has gained with them five more, or two
Talents and does gain two more, and this we do, when having received
Knowledge, Faith, Love, Hope, Patience, Spirit of Prayer, etc. we do by a
constant and daily practice bring them out into exercise for our selves and for
others. Thus doing, two commodities we shall reap: first, it is a sign of
our faithfulness: secondly, the gifts will increase, and to him that has such
gifts to use them, shall be more given. Lastly, faithfulness shows Timothy is
praised to be faithful in the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.17.
1 Cor. 4 17. And thus the Apostle and Apostolical men were faithful, when
they could do nothing against the truth, but for the truth: 2 Cor. 11.8.
and thus men are faithful that can patiently bear and willingly take up the
Cross of Christ, Luke 9.23.
and that daily; so as they may further the building up, and edification of
Gods people. Those then are not faithful that do the work of the Lord
negligently, that set their hands to the plough and look back, that mind
their own things, honors, pleasures, profits, and preferments, and those that
in the time of temptation fall away: these specialties of faithfulness receive
a great increase of praise if two things come to them: first, that men's hearts
be faithful; that is, that though they have many wants and infirmities, and
fail much and often in well-doing, yet the desire, delight, endeavor,
resolution and affection is in all pleasing and firmness to walk before God,
without either hypocrisy or presumption: this was Abraham's praise, Nehem. 9.8.
Nehem. 9.8. Secondly, that men continue faithful unto the death, with all
constancy and holy perseverance, believing in Christ, and worshipping GOD,
even to the end of their days, this is called for, Reu. 2.11.
and crowned, Revel. 2.11. Thus of faithfulness in spiritual things.

Faithfulness in temporal things stands in three things. Faithfulness in
temporal things.
First, in the sincere, diligent, and careful discharge of the duties of our
Calling. It was a singular praise in Daniel, that when his enemies fought
occasion against him, Daniel 6.5.
they could find none concerning the Kingdom, he was so faithful A Caveat
for Professors.
Then does the glory of Gods people shine, when together with their constant
zeal in matters of religion, they are found carefully diligent and faithful
in their callings; then whatsoever befalls them for the Law of their God, they
may bear it with all comfort and constancy, as did Daniel. But how does it
blemish the glory of profession, when men can say and see that Professors are
idle deceitful busybodies, and careless in their places and callings? they
cannot build so much by profession, as they destroy by these scandalous and
careless courses.

Secondly, in the right use and profitable disposing of our riches, even Luke
Christ exhorts to the wise and liberal bestowing of our riches unto the
necessities of the poor, Luke 16.9.
and for other holy and needful uses. And because there lie in the hearts of
carnal men, many Objections against this Exhortation, therefore he forces it
with reasons that mere with men's carnal conceits.

And first, Object. 1.
whereas men out of an over great estimation and liking of these earthly things
do easily object that they must be careful of the saving, and sparing in the
use of their riches: for they are all the comfort they have in this world.
Solut.
He answers that men should not so much love these earthly things: for they
are riches of iniquity, that is sin, that makes a man miserable and accursed
is most an end mixed with riches, Ver. 9.
either they are wrongfully gotten, and sinfully kept, or they are causes of
much sinning against God, or men, or himself.

Object. 2.
Oh, but what good shall a man get by parting with his goods? Sol. They shall
receive him into everlasting habitations: Solut.
they, that is, either the Angels, or the Poor, or thy Riches shall let thee
into heaven; even to sure dwelling places: and this should move the rich;
because the time will come when thou shall want, and all the riches in the
world cannot help thee.

Object. 3.
Oh, but a man may be saved and enjoy these everlasting habitations, though he
do not so part with his riches. Sol. He cannot: for, a man cannot be saved
without Grace, Solut.
and God will never trust him with Grace (the true treasure) that is not
faithful in bestowing riches: Verse. 10.11.
and good reason; for, if God gave a wicked worldling grace, he would never be
faithful in using it: for, he that is unjust in the least, that is, Riches,
would be unjust in much, that is, Grace.

Object. 4.
Oh, but our goods are our own, and therefore why should we give them to
others? Solut.
Sol. Ver. 12. That is false, for Grace only is a man's own, but Riches are
another; Psalm. 24.1. Prou. 3.17.
for God is the Lord of the whole, and the poor is the owner of a part.

Object. 5.
Tush, but a man may have a good heart to GOD, and yet not deliver out his goods
to other men's uses, nor leave his content that he has in the fruition of
them. Solut.
Sol. That is false to: for, a man cannot serve two Masters: Verse. 13.
one man cannot serve God and Riches. And thus our Savior meets with the
Objections of worldly men. The words also contain notable reasons to persuade
to faithfulness, which lies in this good use of Riches: first, they are
riches of iniquity: secondly, the right use of them makes way for heaven:
thirdly, he is like to be a godly man in the use of Grace, that is a faithful
man in the use of Riches: fourthly, God else will not trust us with Grace:
fifthly, he will else be a very unjust man, and his riches wicked: sixthly,
Grace only is his own goods, and to be without Grace is to live and dye a
beggar: lastly, thou can never serve God and Riches.

Psalm. 15. in the honest discharge of the trust laid upon men, either in Church
or Commonwealth. Nehem. 13.13. Prou. 13.17. in witnesse-bearing, Prou.
14.5.25. in just gaynes and lawful means used for profit in our dealings with
others, Prou. 28.20. And such like duties of Justice.

Thus then we see who is a faithful man, even he that knows his own
reconciliation with God by faith; that performs his vows to God; that
sincerely worships God, and labors the increase of holy graces; that will
do nothing against the truth, but for the truth; that is diligent in his
calling, that is serviceable with his riches; and lastly, that is just in his
dealing.

Privileges of the faithful.
Now, if we be such, then is our estate most comfortable: for first, God will
be faithful to us in the accomplishment of all his promises: secondly, Hebr.
2.17. Revel. 15. and 3.14.
so as while we live, we shall find the testimony of JESUS in our hearts, and
when we die he will not be ashamed of us before his Father and the holy
Angels; and lastly, we shall be sure to have a faithful reward. Prou. 11.18.
And this of the second title given to Gods Children.

Brethren.] The Children of God are said to be Brethren in a fourfold
relation: To Christ.
1. to CHRIST: 2. to the Apostle: 3. to the Saints abroad: 4. to the Saints at
home. To Christ.
For the first, are we brethren to CHRIST? then it should teach us two things;
Use. 1. Use. 2.
first, to live comfortably, for an higher estate of excellency can thou not
have; secondly, to live nobly, like the Sons of the most High, not basely,
like the Sons of the Earth. Why wallowest thou in base and filthy pleasures?
why dotest thou upon uncertain and sinful profits? why does thy heart
degenerate to regard, and so aspire after worldly preferment? Romans 8.
Remember whence thou art descended, and with whom alyed, and walk as becomes
the coheyre of Christ.

Secondly, To the Apostle.
are they Brethren to the Apostles and other great Governors of the Church: it
should then teach Ministers, Magistrates, and Masters of Families, Use.
so to rule as to remember that they rule their Brethren: neither to neglect
their good, (for why should thy Brother perish) nor with proud insolency or
tyranny, either in correction, or severe carriage to Lord it over them.

Thirdly, To the Saints abroad.
are they Brethren to the Saints abroad? and are they of the same family with
them? then it should teach them to pray for them, and to lay the distresses of
other Saints and Churches to their hearts: for, though they be removed in place
and carnal knowledge; yet are they near in the mystical union, if it be
considered that the same Mother bare them; and the same Father begat them.

Lastly, To the Saints at home.
are they Brethren to the Saints at home? then they should learn to converse
brotherly, to live and love together, as becomes Saints and Brethren. Oh that
it could sincke into men's minds, or that this were written in men's hearts!
then could there be nothing more glorious and comfortable in this earth, then
this communion of Saints, especially in the fellowship of the Gospel.

In Christ.] Men are said to be in CHRIST three ways: first, as the Plant John
15. secondly, as the Member in the Body: 1 Cor. 12.12. thirdly, as the Wife is
one with the Husband, Ephesians. 5.25.

Do thou ask then how thou may get into Christ. How thou may get into
Christ.
Ans. Observe three things.

First, before thou can be ingrafted into Christ, thou must be cut off the
old tree; either a new man or no man; either lose the World, or never

Secondly, a true Member is not but by generation in nature, nor can

Thirdly, as they are not Man and Wife, where there is no sure making by
Contract or Marriage going before; so neither can any be in Christ, unless

Again, Who are in Christ.
would a man know whether he be in Christ, these Comparisons likewise resolve
his doubt, by a threefold Answer: first, he is in Christ, if he blossom,
grow, and bear fruit, even such fruit as is to eternal life. If a man be
abundant in the works of the Lord; and grow in such graces as are communicated
only to the faithful, he is certainly a true Plant in this Stock: for, by
growing and fruit, is the Plant that is ingrafted known from the sprigge that
is lopped off, and lies by, and is withered. A life barren and void of the
works of Piety and Mercy, is a manifest sign that the person is not in
Christ.

Romans 8.
pleasures, and fleshly things of this world. These certainly are men after
the Spirit, and by the Spirit mystically united to Christ the head: and on the
other side, a more plain and palpable sign cannot be given to prove
demonstrat^uely, that a man is not in Christ, then when a man finds no taste,
has no feeling, can take no delight in spiritual Means, Graces, or Persons,
and yet is easily affected with the least profits and delights of the world.

viz. the persons saluted. Now follows the Salutation it self.

Grace and Peace be unto you, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. Of Salutations.
IT has been an ancient custom, both in the Jewish, Christian, and Pagan
world, to begin Letters and Epistles, with Salutations; and in these they
were wont to wish to their Friends, that which was accounted the chiefest good.
Hence the Heathen as they were opinionated about the chief good, they did
differently wish good things to their friends in their salutations. Some wished
health, (...).
some wished welfare or safety; some, to do well; some, joy and a merry life;
as they were either S^oickes or Epicures. But the Apostle finding that true
felicity was in none of these, does religiously wish that which in the
Kingdom of Christ was in greatest request, (viz.) Grace and Peace.

The acceptations of the word Grace.
Grace.] This word is diversely taken. For kindness, 2 Samuel 16.17. for ability
to affect or persuade, Psalm. 45.2. for the happiness that is had from Christ
in this world; and so it is opposed to glory, Psalm. 84.11. for the preaching
of the Gospel, Romans 1.4. Tit. 2.12. for approbation from God, Prou. 12.2.
finally, it is taken for the spiritual liberty that we have from Christ; and
so it is opposed to the Law, Romans 6.14. lastly, it is taken for the love and
favor of God, receiving the Sinner into covenant in Christ, as it is an
euer-flowing spring of celestial Grace to the soul justified: and so it is
taken here.

Peace. The acceptations of the word Peace.
] This word also is diversely accepted, for rest and ease from pain, Psalm.
38.4. for familiarity, so the man of my peace, Psalm. 41.9. for concord, Ephesians.
4.3. for prosperity in general, 1 Chronicles. 12.18. Psalm. 125.5. Ier. 29.11. for
all that felicity we have by Christ, Luke 19.42. for glory in heaven, Esa.
57.2. Luke 19.38. Romans 2.10. Luke 1.79. for reconciliation it self, Luke 2.14.
Esaias 53.5. for the means of reconciliation, Ephesians. 2.14. for the signs of
reconciliation, Esaias 57.19. Psalm. 85.8. for tranquillity of conscience, Romans
14.17. and 5.2. Lastly, it is also taken for all that rest of conscience
within, and Synecdochically it signifies all those blessings spiritual which
either in this world, or that other better world we receive from Christ,
together with Gods favor and grace: neither is temporal prosperity excluded,
though not principally meant; and so I think it is taken here.

The meaning being thus found: I consider the observations first generally.

First, in that the Apostle does in the very Salutation sow the seeds of the
whole Gospel, we might learn even in our ordinary employments, to mind Gods
glory and the salvation of others.

Secondly, we may hence see that it is lawful to draw abridgements of holy
things, and commend them to ordinary use: as here these graces to an ordinary
salutation from man to man; Three reasons why children may be taught the
principles they understand not.
and so I think of teaching the Lords Prayer and Commandments, with other
Scripture, to children or servants, that yet understand not, and that for such
reasons as these: first, that so they might have occasion much to think of the
things are so much and commonly urged: secondly, that if any time of extremity
should come, they might have certain seeds of direction and comfort, to guide
and support them: thirdly, that their condemnation might be more just, if
having Grace and Peace, and other principles of Catechism so much in their
mouths, they should not get them into their hearts.

Thirdly, Quest.
a question may here be moved: how the Apostle can in these words wish unto
them their chief good or felicity, seeing these are not all the graces or
blessings needful to our happiness? Ans.
I might Answer this diversely. 1. Here is a Synecdoche, all are understood,
though not all named:

Fourthly, Doct.
but the maine Doctrine which generally I observe out of these words,
Spiritual things are the best things.
is this; that spiritual things from God in Christ are the best things, and
most to be sought, and desired, and wished, both for our selves and others.
Reasons.
The reasons are: 1. They serve for the excellentest part, (viz) the soul: 2.
They serve for eternity, and these outward things but for this life: Mat. 16.
lastly, What shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and loose his
own Soul?

Use. 1.
The use is first for the just reproof of the wonderful carelessness and
strength of folly, that has possessed the most people, in the profane
neglect, nay, contempt of spiritual things, with the means of them. Indeed,
if men could be rid of Death, the Grave, Hell, and Gods Curse; or if these
things could be had without seeking, it were to some purpose for men to sleep
still and never wake. Many are the sleights of Satan. Some are stubborn, and
will not regard: some with very prejudice run wittingly to hell: some
confess it to be meet that the best things should be chiefly sought, but
forget: some purpose, but give over, for difficulties in the beginning: some no
sooner rid off terror, but as soon off care for the life to come.

Use. 2.
Secondly, this Doctrine may be a singular comfort to us, if we can find grace
and peace in our hearts, how ever it be with us in our bodies or estates
otherwise.

Use. 3.
Thirdly, it should teach Parents to be more careful to leave grace in their
Childrens hearts then treasures in their Chests for them: and friends should
more endeauout to help one another in the comforts of an holy fellowship in
the Gospel, then in the civil furtherances they do so much engage themselves
to.

4.
Lastly, it should teach us to learn the lesson given by our Savior Christ,
Mat. 6. Mat. 6. Ver. 19. to 25. Ver. 25. to the end.
neither to enlarge our affections to the immoderate desires of superfluity in
outward things, nor yet to rack our hearts with the faithless and fruitless
cares for things necessary. This latter branch is urged with eight or nine
worthy reasons: but of these in another place afterward. And thus much
generally.

Grace.] If Grace (that is, Gods favor, and the graces spiritual that flow
from thence) be of so great worth and excellency; diverse things may be
inferred by way of profitable instruction, for our use, out of several
Scriptures. James 4.6.
for, God gives grace unto the stubborn, wilful, and proud sinner. Again, if
Gods Love, and Christ's Grace be Jewels of so great value, it should teach us,
when Grace is offered in the means, or any way bestowed by Gods Spirit, 2 Cor.
6.1.
never to receive it in vain: so as it should be tendered without effect, Jude
4.
to turn the Grace of God into wantonness, to abuse either the promises of
Grace, or the pledges of Gods Love, to become either bawds for perseverance
Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.
either by resisting, tempting, grieuing, quenching, or despising 2 Timothy 1.6. 2 Timothy 2.1.
reading, conference, and meditation, to stir up the Graces given us, to
labor for spiritual strength in Grace, and to search so carefully into the
evidence of Faith, for what we have; and Hope, for what we want, as never to
give over to examine our selves by the signs and promises settled and
stablished in Grace. Lastly, Gods Children should solace themselves in the
feeling and experimental knowledge of Gods grace, Job 15.11.12.
so as their hearts should never carry them away to make them account the
Consolations of God small, or to despise the Grace given them; but rather in
the midst of all combats with temptations within, or afflictions without, to
support their Souls with that gracious Promise, My Grace shall be sufficient
for you, 2 Cor. 12.9.
and my Power made known in your weakness.

Peace.] The second thing here wished for, and to be desired of all that love
their own good, is Peace, that is, tranquillity of heart, with other
spiritual blessings accompanying it with outward things also, so far as they
may further our happiness: but the Scripture lays a restraint upon the
getting of this peace, and gives rules for the use of it. For if ever we would
have Peace, we must first be righteous persons, that is, men that are broken
in heart for our sins, humbled at Gods feet for forgiveness, and such as
hang upon the Word of GOD, to receive the certain means of our souls
reconciliation, and the righteousness of CHRIST imputed unto us: Esaias 35.8.
such, as to whom there is a way, and their path is holy. But on the otherside,
unto the wicked is no peace: and they are taken by the Prophet for wicked men,
that are never humbled in the duties of Mortification for sin, that in the
hardness of their hearts frustrate the power of Gods Ordinances, Esaias 57.21.
so as they cannot work upon them: these have no peace, neither with GOD,
Angels, Men, the Creatures, or their own Consciences.

Again, have thou gotten peace and tranquillity of heart, even rest and ease
from CHRIST, Phil. 4.6.
then let this peace preserve thy heart and mind, and let it rule. Col. 3.15.
Be careful to reject all matters in thoughts, or opinions in affections, or
desires in words or actions, that might any way interrupt thy peace: but by all
means nourish it, delight in it, and let it guide to all holy meditations, and
affections, and gainefull practices and endeauours. Let the peace of thy heart,
and Gods spiritual blessing be a rule for all thy actions. And lastly, with
all good Conscience and holy conversation hold out, that when Christ shall
come, either by particular Judgment to thee in death, or by general Judgment
to the whole world in the last day, 2 Pet. 3.14. Esaias 9.6.7. Luke 1.79.
thou may be found of him in peace, so shall Christ be unto thee a Prince of
Peace, and guide thy feet for ever into the way of peace.

And thus far of the good things he wishes unto them, now follow the
efficient causes (viz) from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

Diverse things may be here observed.

First, a proof of the Trinity, or, at the least, a plain proof of two
persons, the Father and the Son, united in one essence.

Secondly, GOD is here plainly affirmed to be a Father, and that he is in
diverse respects: first, to all by Creation: secondly, to all the faithful by
Adoption: thirdly, to Christ, by the grace of Union as man, and a natural
Father, as God.

Thirdly, here we may observe, that grace and blessings must not be looked
upon without some honorable meditation of God and Christ the giuers.

Fourthly, seeing believers have a God, a Father, a Christ, a Savior, a Lord,
they are sure to be in a happy case, and may have what is needful, if they
will seek for it.

Fifthly, we may observe, we can have no comfort in the enjoying or hope of any
favor or blessing, spiritual or temporal, unless, first, God be our Father;
secondly, we be in Christ.

Lastly, if GOD be a Father, and CHRIST a Lord, it stands us upon to look to
it, that we perform both honor and service. And thus of the Salutation. The
Preface follows.

Verse 3. We give thanks to God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
always praying for you.


The Division.
THE Salutation has been handled already, the Preface follows, and is
contained in this Verse, and those that follow to the 12. Verse: in which the
end and drift of the Apostle is, to win affection to the Doctrine afterward
to be propounded: and this he does by showing his exceeding great love to
them, which he demonstrates by two things which he did for them, (viz.) he both
gave thanks unto God in their behalf, and also made many a prayer for them:
which spiritual duties are better kindnesses and signs of true affection and
respect, then all civil courtesies or outward complements are or can be.

These things in the Preface are first generally set down in this Verse, and
then particularly enlarged in the Verses afterward: first* the Thanksgiving,
from ver. 4. to the 9. secondly, Prayer, v. 9.10.11. In this Verse he does two
things: first, he gives thanks: secondly, he prays. In the Thanksgiving
consider, first, what he does, in these words, We give thanks: secondly, to
whom he does it, in these words; To God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Thus far of the order of the words.

The Doctrines follow, which must be considered generally from the whole Verse,
and specially from the several words.

Two general Doctrines.
The first general Doctrine is this, that it is not enough to salute others
kindly, but we must do and perform the sound duties of love: this is from
the coherence, and condemns the sinful barrenness of many that know a
necessity of no duties of love, unless it be to salute courteously.

Secondly, we see hear that Tyrants may take away the benefit of hearing,
reading, conference, and such like; but they cannot hinder us of praying. PAVL
can pray and give thanks in prison, for himself and others, as well as ever
before. Let wicked men do their worst, Gods Children will still pray unto God.
And look how many promises are made in Scripture, to the prayers of the
Saints, so many consolations are inuiolably preserved unto them, against the
rage of whatsoever extremity wicked men can cast upon them: this is a singular
comfort.

Misery breeds unity.
We.] Doct. Misery breeds unity. The Apostle that in more prosperous times
iarred with Peter and Barnabas, can now hold peace and firm unity with meaner
men; and therefore he says We, not I. And thus we see it was in the times
of persecution in Queen Mary's days, the Bishops and Pastors that could not
agree when they were in their Seats and Pulpits, willingly seek agreement
when they are in prison, and must come to the Stake. And so it many times falls
out in common Judgments, as the sword and pestilence: Esaias 24.2.
in such times the words of the Prophet are fulfilled, Like People like
Priests, like Servant like Master, like Buyer like Seller, like Borrower like
Lender, like Giver like Taker, to usury. Great and prevailing Judgments take
away all that vanity of conceit and swelling of pride which difference of
gifts and places bred before.

The Lord for his mercies sake grant, that at the length there may be found
some remedy to cure the wound and heal the breach which proud contention has
made, and continued, with effects prodigious and unheard of: lest the Lord be
at length provoked to plague with more fierce and cruel Judgments, and work
union, at least in one furnace of common calamilitie: the same God, for his
Sons sake, work in all that any wise love the prosperity of Jerusalem, on
all sides, that they more regard the glory of God and the good of the Church,
then their own greatness either of place or respects amongst men, and that
they may more seek the truth then victory. And as for those that neither love
the truth nor peace, the Lord open their eyes and convert them, or else give
them to eat of the fruit of their own ways.

Do. Not safe to defer good motions.
] It is not safe to put over good motions. When Paul finds fitness to pray
and give thanks, he does not omit the occasion. In spiritual things delay is
always dangerous, but in sinful motions the only way many times is to
defer the execution. Note.
Many sins are prevented by the very benefit of taking time enough to execute
them.

Give thanks. It is good to praise before thou reprove.
] Paul gives them to understand before he comes to dispraise their vices, and
the corruptions crept into the Church, that he takes notice of their
prayse-worthy virtues: he reserues his taxation to the second Chapter; Reasons.
and this course he holds with them for diverse Reasons. First, to assure them
of his love, and that he did it not of malice, a thing especially I never
liked him since I saw that fault by him. Thirdly, he did thus, that they
riches of the grace of Christ offered, the honorable opinion of the
excellency and sufficiency thereof, to give all sound contentment, would have
preserved them from mixing the worship of God with men's traditions, or
admitting contrary doctrine, and from dishonouring the mediation of Christ with
Angell-worship. Then did Popish Traditions ouer-flow, when the Scriptures were
contemned, and the light of them suppressed: and in general, an unthankful
man is ever a vicious man.

More specially, in the duty here mentioned two things are to be considered.

1. What they do: We give thanks. 2. To whom: (viz.) to God even the Father,
etc.
We give thanks.] Eucharist is sometimes appropriated only to the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, but most commonly is general to all holy thankfulness,
especially to God.

There is a flattering thankfulness to men Acts 24.3.
, and a Pharisaicall proud conceited thanksgiving to God Luke 18.11.
.

Concerning the spiritual man's thankfulness to God, I propound three things
only in the general briefly to be noted: First, Reasons to incite us to the
practice of continual thankfulness to God. Secondly, for what things we are
to be thankful. Thirdly, what rules to be observed for the manner of
performance of it.

There are many reasons scattered in Scripture, Motives to thankfulness.
to incite us to Thankfulness: first, because it is a special part of Gods
worship, or one way by which we yield worship to God. Hence, that the Apostle
accounts it a great loss, if the people cannot say Amen, when the Teacher
blesses in the spirit, or gives thanks 1 Cor. 14.16.
. Again, when he would exhort them to liberality, he urges them with this
reason, that the supplying of the necessities of the Saints would cause much
thanksgiving to God, 2 Cor. 9.12.13.
. And in the 4. of the 2. of Cor. he shows that the thanksgiving of many
would breed both a plenty of grace, and an abounding of much praise to God. 1
Cor. 4.16.
Secondly, the Apostle having dehorted the Ephesians Fornication and all
Uncleanness, and Covetousness, Filthiness, Jesting, and foolish Talking; he
adds, but rather use giving of thanks Ephesians. 4.3.4.
. As if he would note, that thankfulness for Gods Blessings and Graces duly
performed, would preserve them from the filth and power of these base vices.
Besides, becomes the Saints, nothing better. Thirdly, it is a sign of three
worthy things, wherein it behooves every man to be well assured: first, it is
a sign of a heart that has rightly received Christ, and is firmly rooted,
built, and stablished in the faith Col. 2.6.7.
. Secondly, if men in all things let their requests be showed unto God with
giving of thanks, it is a sign of the peace of God, even that the peace of
God that passes all understanding, will preserve their hearts and minds in
Christ Jesus Phil. 4.6.7.
. Thirdly, it is a sign, nay, a very means of a contented mind. He that can
pray unto God for what he wants, and is able thankefully to acknowledge what
he has in possession or promise, he will in nothing be careful, Phil. 4.6.
as it appears in the same place to the Philippians. Lastly, it is one of the
six principal means to make a man rejoice always, as the Apostle writes, 1
These. 5.18.
1 These. 5.18. Thus of the Reasons.

For what we must give thanks.
Secondly, we must consider for what we must give thanks. First, for
spiritual things as well as temporal, as for the Word 2 Cor. 4.16.
, for Mercies in prayer Col. 4 2.
, for Victory over a sin Rom 7.26.
, for Knowledge Romans 1.21.
. Secondly, in adversity as well as in prosperity, and that in all sorts of
afflictions; in danger Acts 27*35.
, in wrongs. Thirdly, in outward things we must be thankful Col. 3.17. 1
Col. 10.3.
, not only for great things done, for our states or names, but even for the
lesser and more daily favors, as for our food, and the creatures for our
nourishment. And in special manner have the Saints in all ages bound
themselves to a set course of prayer and praise over and for their food: and
therefore their gross swinish profaneness is so much the greater, that sit
down and rise from their meat, Scripture for prayer and Thanksgiving for our
very food.
like brute beasts, without any Prayer or Thanksgiving. If any ask whether
there be any express Scripture for Grace before and after meat, I answer,
there is, and allege these three undeniable and plain places of Scripture, 2 Timothy 4.3.4. John 6.23. Romans 14.6.

The manner of Thanksgiving.
Thirdly, for the manner of Thanksgiving, it may be found in that phrase used
by the Prophets in the old Testament of Sacrificing the calves of their lips
Psalm. 5* vlt. Hos. 14.3.
. For here four things may be observed. First, it must be a dead Calfe, to
note that all Thanksgiving must proceed from humble and mortified minds; and
therefore the Pharisees thanks did not a whit justify them Luke 18.11.14.
. Secondly, it must be a sacrificed Calfe. Now, in the Sacrifice three things
were required; an Altar, Fire, and to lay the hand upon the head of the Beast:
An Altar, for not only our prayers must be made in the name of Christ, but our
praises also must be tendered to God in his mediation, or they will never be
accepted, no more then a Calfe not laid on the Altar: neither is it enough to
lay the Calfe on the Altar, but Fire must be put to it: to note, that the bare
throwing out of words of thankfulness, though in the name of Christ, will not
serve, unless we do also get some feeling ardencie and zeal to burn the
Sacrifice. Thirdly, we must lay our hands on the head of the calfe; that is, in
all humility we must confess our unworthiness of all the blessings or
graces we give thanks for. Again, in that they offer a Calfe, it signifies
that we should not offer our thankfulness to God of that that costs us
nothing: we should desire to express our praise by doing some thing to
further Gods worship, or relieve the necessities of others. If GOD bl^s^e us at
home, we should carry a Calfe to the Temple. Lastly, we must not sacrifice to
a strange God, when we give thanks, and that men do when they sacrifice to
their nets, Hab. 1.16.
as the Prophet speaks, that is, when men attribute the glory and praise of
God to the means or second causes.

Thus of thankfulness in the general.

But that which is here intended, We must give thanks for others.
is, that we should give thanks for others as well as for our selves, which
is not a courtesy but a duty. This duty of praising God for others, grows
exceeding commendable, if we can exercise it in these particulars. Four rules
of trial.
First, if we can give thanks for those blessings upon others, which the
world accounts shameful to enjoy, as Zeal all sorts of men, 1 Timothy 2.1.
. Fourthly, if we can be thankful for the true joy we have had in other
men's prosperities 1 These. 3.9.
.

To conclude this point, if we would have others to give thanks for us, we
should labor to be such, as for whom thanks may be given. And thus of what
they do: Now, to whom.

To God. As any are more heavenly minded, they are more frequent in praises.
] These words having been used in the very Verse before, teach us two things,
First, that it is no cloying to a sanctified mind to be much and often, yea,
upon every occasion in the honorable mention and lauding of God, ascribing in
every thing glory to God: so, in heaven they shall never be weary of Gods
praises, no not unto all eternity. And certain it is, that the more men grow
in sanctification, the more easy and apt are their hearts to entertain all
occasions of communion with God, without weariness or deadness.

Secondly, (to God) shuts out the praises of themselves or of men. It is fit
our rejoicing and praise should be directed thither from whence the blessing
came.

The Father.] These words are considered in the former Verse. Thus much of his
Thanksgiving.

Praying for you. A child of God never gives thanks but he has cause to
pray, and contrariwise.
] First, in general from the joining together of these two duties, two things
may be observed: first, that a child of God never gives thanks but he has
cause to pray: for, if it be for temporal things, he must pray both for their
sanctified use, that they become not occasions of sin; and for their
preservation according to Gods will: if it be for spiritual things, he has
reason to pray for increase, strength, and preservation against falling, and
such like. Secondly, on the other side, I say also, that a child of God does
never pray, but he may find reasons to give thanks, we may find mercies in
any misery; yea, it is a singular mercy to have a heart to pray, and to have so
many large promises made to them that call upon God in their distress. But the
maine particular Doctrine is, that we ought not only to pray for our selves
but for others. And the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1. seems to make four sorts of
prayers for others, Four sorts of prayers for others.
Deprecations, Requests, Intercessions, and Giving of Thanks: Deprecations are
Prayers for help against hurtful things; Requests are Prayers for profitable
things; the word rendered Intercessions, is by some taken to signify
complaints unto God against such as wrong them, for whom we pray: or else, it
is a more set or serious imploring of Gods aid with the united forces of the
godly: and lastly, Giving of Thanks stands in the lauding of God for blessings
or graces: and in the 6. of the Ephesians, and in the 1 of Tim. 2. the Apostle
sets down rules to be observed in Prayer for others: Ephesians. 6.18.
in the Ephesians he requires that they pray, 1. at all times: 2. with all
manner of Prayers: 3. in the spirit: 4. with watching: 5. with perseverance: 6.
With spiritual importunity: and lastly, for all Saints: And in Timothy he
requires that they pray; 1 Timothy 2.8.
1. every where; 2. with pure hands; 3. without wrath; 4. without doubting.

Always.] To pray always, is to consecrate every day and night to God by
Prayer: and besides, to pray upon all occasions, with lifting up our hearts unto
God; or by using short prayers, which they have been wont to call
Eiaculations. Neither was it the duty of Paul only, to pray always, that is,
to keep a set order of Prayers; but it is our duty also to set apart time
every day, evening and morning, to pray unto God our selves, and our
households. And because these exercises of Religion are by the most wholly
neglected, Reasons to warrant praying every day.
and in room of it, vile profaneness stains men's houses, I will here set
down, by the way, some few reasons to warrant a daily set course the bread of
the day, Mat. 6.11.
every day: as God will not promise us bread for a week, a month, a year; so
neither will God accept of a prayer for the necessities of a week, month or
year before hand, but will have us make as much conscience to pray continually
1 These. 5.17.
: now, what sense can be probably given of these words, if that a daily set
course of prayer be not included. Thirdly, the David prayed seven times a day;
and Daniell, three times a day. Let wicked and profane people say, what needs
all this prayer; but let us be assured, that as holiness and grace grows in
any, so are they more abundant in this worship of prayer: the holiest men have
ever prayed most: for though they have not most need, yet they have always
most sense of their own 1 Timothy 4.2.
our households, our callings, and our labors by daily Prayer.

Incense and Sacrifice. Now the Jews held it an abomination of desolation,
Psalm. 141.2. and 51.17.
if the morning and evening Sacrifice were wanting: neither do we less need
to seek daily the benefits of the atonement made by the sacrifice of Christ,
and his intercession; then did the Jews: and we are every way as much bound,
as often to profess our faith in CHRIST slain, as they did in Christ to be
slain.

And thus of the demonstratiue and undeniable signs of the Apostles love to
the Colossians, as they are generally set down in this Verse.

Verse 4. Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and your love toward
all Saints.

Verse 5. For the hopes sake which is laid up for you in Heaven.


IN these words and the rest that follow to the 12. Verse, he does
particularly explicate the two signs of affection: first, he sets down his
Thanksgiving to Verse 9. secondly, he prays, Verse 9. to 12. In the
Thanksgiving he gives thanks for their Graces in these words: secondly, for
the means of grace in the rest of the words to the 9. Verse.

Their Graces are three; Faith, Love and Hope.

Of Faith.] In the handling of the Doctrine of Faith, I consider it: First, in
the coherence, Diverse things concerning Faith, noted from the coherence.
as it stands in the Text: Secondly, as it is in it self apart from that which
went before or comes after. From the general consideration of the Coherence I
observe, First, that we can never be reconciled to God, or attain the chief
good without Faith, Without Faith it is impossible to please God Heb. ^1.6.
. Therefore it is good for us to prove our selves, whether we be in the Faith,
and to know whether Christ be in us except we be reprobates 2 Cor 13.5.
.

Secondly, this Faith is not natural: we are not borne believers, we are
concluded under sin, and kept under the Law, and shut up to Faith afterward
to be revealed Gal 3.22.23.
. It is the work of God; yea, of the power of God 2 These. 1.11.
: It is the gift of God Ephesians. 2.8.
: All men have not Faith 2 These. 3.2.
: It must be gotten with much striving 1 Timothy 6.12.
. As not by nature, so not by natural means: and therefore we must seek for
better grounds, then I have been always thus: neither will it avail thee to
show thy education, civility, moral virtues, outward holiness, etc.

Thirdly, whatsoever we gain by the word of God, if we gain not Faith

Lastly, though Nature deny strength to bear, or power to give this grace,
Romans 10.17. Gal. 3.2.5.
Faith comes by hearing, etc. Romans 10.17. and Gal. 3.2.5. he says, They
received the Spirit, by the hearing of Faith preached, etc. Hear, and your
soul shall live. Esaias 55.4.
Esaias 55.4.

Thus much of the Doctrines from the Coherence.

That the nature of this grace may appear, the several acceptations of the
word, the sorts, objects, parts and degrees of it must be considered. Faith is
in Scriptures diversely taken: The acceptations of the word Faith.
sometimes it is given to GOD, and signifies his faithfulness in his
promises, as Romans 3.3. Shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none
effect. And when it is given to man, it is taken: First, for Fidelity, as it
is a virtue in the second Table Mat. 23.23. Secondly, sometimes it is taken for
the Doctrine of Faith, Romans 12.6. according to the Analogy of Faith. Thirdly,
sometimes for Profession of Religion; thus Elimas is charged to have labored
to turn the Deputy from the Faith, Acts 13.8. Fourthly, sometimes for Christ
himself, by a Metonimie, who is both the object and cause of Faith, Gal. 3.25.
Fifthly, for Knowledge only: thus the Devils are said to believe, James 2.
Sixthly, for the gift of working Miracles: If I had all Faith, so as I could
remove mountains, etc. 1 Cor. 13.3. Lastly, for that grace by which felicity
and the chief good is applied; and thus it is called the faith of Gods Elect,
Tit. 1.2. and by Divines, justifying Faith.

Secondly, The sorts of Faith.
there are diverse sorts of Faith: I will not speak of Faith general or
special, infused, or acquired, formed and unformed, but leave them to the
troublesome Schoolmen; only I rest in the usual distribution which has
ground in Scripture: thus Faith is Historical, Temporary, of Miracles, and
justifying.

First, Historical Faith.
Historical Faith is to believe the doctrine of the word of GOD to be true:
and therein is supernatural, and differs from all humane knowledge
whatsoever; neither is it in the power of Nature alone to persuade men that the
Scriptures are Gods Word, further then the remnants of Gods former Image do
give a glimpse of it, and is cleared by the spirit of general illumination.

This Historical Faith does both understand the Doctrine, and give assent that
it is true, yet does not justify: and therefore their case is so much the more
fearful, that have not so much as their ignorance any way redressed, nor
gotten so much as any knowledge by the Word of God.

Secondly, Temporary Faith.
Temporary Faith goes yet further: for, such as have that Faith do not only
get knowledge, and yield assent to the truth, but also profess the truth with
some earnestness, not sticking at it, to give their names in some more
special manner then others, to a respect of Religion; yea, they rejoice
inwardly in the doctrine of the Word* and lastly, bring forth some kind of
fruit, Luke 8.13. Heb. 6.4.5.
and amend some faults, only because the Word of GOD would have them so to
do. Therefore is this Faith unprofitable, because they never had the
particular assurance of Gods favor in forgiveness of sins, nor will be
brought to dislike, much less to humble their souls for those special sins
wherein they have transgressed, but nourish some one particular presumptuous
sin or sins, which reigning in them does wholly engrosse and take up that
inward worship which is due to God only. And this is the Faith of our better
sort of people.

Faith of Miracles.
Thirdly, Faith of Miracles was that Faith by which many in the Primitive Church
were able to work Miracles, and was of two sorts: either Faith to heal, or
Faith to be healed: this Faith may be in such as are reprobates, as Mat. 7.
some shall say, Have we not cast out Devils by thy name? to whom Christ shall
answer, Depart, I know you not.

Justifying Faith.
Fourthly, but that Faith in the enjoying of which is comfort for evermore is
justifying Faith. The nature of this Faith will appear if we consider: The
Objects of it. The Parts of it. The Degrees of it.


The objects of Faith.
First, of the Objects: this Faith may be perceived by that which it carries
the mind unto, and from which it seeks the comfort of the chief good: and
thus the Object is threefold.

The Merits of Christ. The Promises of God. The Providence of God.
So that, would thou try thy Faith? consider then what it is that thou
make thy refuge, and the foundation of thy comfort. What is it that thou most
labourest after? is it the assurance of Gods favor, by the application of
Christ? is it the distinct applying of such and such promises of life in
Scripture? do thou live by thy Faith in the course of life? if so thou have
met with the right Faith, without Christ it is not possible to attain the
chief good, neither is it enough to believe that Christ dyed for sinners, etc.
unless we labor in the day of our visitation, for the certain and particular
apprehension of the efficacy and merit of Christ's righteousness, for the
particular assurance of Gods favor in remitting such and such our
transgressions. And because it is not easy at all times to discern by the
working of the Spirit of Adoption, the imputation of righteousness from
Christ, therefore has the Lord discussed the cases of conscience so
comfortable in Scripture, that if men examine themselves before the conditions
of God promises, they may find in diverse of them the clear determining of
their estate. Here may be justly taxed the gross ouer-sight and security of
many, otherwise the dear Servants of God, that are no better acquainted with
the promises of life, upon the truth of which depends their happiness, and
both present and future comfort. And lastly, by the same Faith, whereby the
just are saved, by the selfsame they live in the course of life in this
world: the ground of his Faith for his preservation, is the providence of his
God, whiles the men of this world wonderfully please themselves in sacrificing
to their nets, ascribing in their affections, the stay of their maintenance,
unto their labor, friends, inheritance, etc.

The Parts of Faith.
Secondly, that the nature of this Faith may yet be further opened, the Parts of
it must be considered. Faith is either in the mind, or in the heart; and by
the change of both it may be discerned.

Faith in the mind.
In the mind it shows it self in two things: Knowledge, Judgment.

There is something in the very illumination of the Understanding of the
Saints, which is of the nature of Faith. Hence it is that the Prophet Isay
says of Christ, Isay 53.11.
By his knowledge he shall justify many: that is, make just.

Judgment is either of truth or of goodness.

Judgment of truth, is, when we give glory so far forth to the way of life,
and the means of Reconciliation, that our hearts being convinced, our
understandings do clearly resolve, that this is the way to be happy, and no
other.

Judgment of goodness, is, when we do not only believe the Doctrine of
happiness to be true as before, but to be the only good tidings our hearts
can rest upon.

Faith, Faith in the heart.
as it shows it self in the heart, stands in three things.

Desires. Fiduce or Confidence. Persuasion, or Apprehension and Application.
It may not be dissembled, Desire to believe is of the nature of faith.
that there are in the world many definitiues or descriptions of Faith, such as
do not comprehend in them that only thing which is the chief stay of
thousands of the dear Servants of God; and that is, Desires, which may not be
denied to be of the nature of Faith. I express my meaning thus: that when a
man or woman is so far exercised in the spiritual seeking of the Lord his
God, that he would be willing to part with the world, and all the things
thereof, if he had them in his own possession, so that by the Spirit and
Promises of God he might be assured, that the sins of his former life, or
such as presently do burden his Soul, were forgiven him; and that he might
believe that God were now become his God in Christ: I would not doubt to
pronounce that this person (thus prising remission of sins at this rate, that
he would sell all to buy this Pearl.) did undoubtedly believe, not only
because it is a truth (though a Paradoxe) that the Desire to believe is Faith:
but also because our Savior Christ does not doubt to affirm that they are
blessed that hunger and thirst after righteousness* Mat. 5.6. Revel. 21.6.
Psalm. 10.17.
because they shall be satisfied. And, to him that is a thirst, I will give to
drink of the water of life freely. And David doubts not to say, The Lord
hears the desires of his poor.

Fiduce, or Confidence in the heart, is a part of Faith, and shows it self in
this, when the Soul rests upon Christ, and the Promises of God, as the only
ground of all that happiness which he must ever get unto himself.

Persuasion, or an apprehending application is the last thing in Faith, and
that in the beginnings of Faith, is more in the power of the Spirit then in the
sense and feeling of the conscience; yet herein it appears, that though the
Soul be tossed with many temptations, and fears, and terrors, yet more or
less, one time or other, they are much refreshed with a sweet joy arising they
know not how, from the very persuasion, that they belong to God in and for
Christ.

So that if we would try our Faith, we must examine what Knowledge we have
gotten, what Judgment of the way of life, what Desires we have of remission
of sins, how our hearts are settled, and what it is that supports us.

There are two Degrees of Faith, The Degrees* (...).
a weak Faith, and a strong Faith: a weak Faith is described before, for all
the former parts of Faith are found in the weakest Faith that is: a strong
Faith has in it a certain and full assurance of Gods favor in remission of
sins, so as doubts and fears are stilled and overcome; and such was the
Faith of Abraham, commended Romans 4.18.19. 20.21. and this Faith may be attained
unto by all sorts of the Servants of God, if they live and may use the benefit
of the ordinances of God; yet a gross fault in the definition of Faith, as it
is made by many, must be carefully shunned, and that is, that they make the
Genus to be a full assurance which is only proper to a strong Faith and is not
usually found in the weak Faith, and yet that Faith is such as does justify
for the present, and will save for ever.

The Benefits come by Faith.
And that we may be affected with an holy desire after this necessary grace, two
things are further to be considered. 1 The Benefits men might have by Faith. 2
The woeful estate of those that want it.
The Benefits may be ordered into five ranckes. 1 What Faith delivers us
from. 2 What it preserues us against. 3 What the weakest Faith gets. 4 What
we might get if we labored for a greater growth in Faith. 5 How it fits us for
heaven.


For the first: Faith does deliver us;

Whosoever believes in me shall not abide in darkness. What Faith
delivers us from. John. 12.46. Isay 25.8.
We no sooner by Faith taste of the Bread of life, but the veil of ignorance,
which naturally covers all flesh, is torn and rent, as the Prophet Isay
shows notably, Isay 25.8.

Secondly, it delivers us from those woeful evils, which as so many
abominations, Faith purifieth the heart. Acts 15.9.
No wonder though men be continually surcharged with evil thoughts, and most
vile affections, and strange evils within, seeing we are so hardly gotten to
set about the earnest labor after spiritual application of the merits and
righteousness of Christ, which righteousness never can be imputed by Faith,
but it is infused by the Spirit of Sanctification at the same time. Neither is
there any more clearer testimony of the want of justifying Faith, then the
continual preuayling of evil thoughts and affections.

beggarly Rudiments, but also from the Moral Law in two things only; first,
from the Curse of it, which is wholly taken away by the imputation of Christ's
Passion: secondly, from the Rigor of it; so that, as it is commanded in the
Gospel, it may not exact of Believers an impossible perfection, but only an
Evangelical and accepted vprightnes: we are not now under the Law, Romans 6.
but under Grace, as the Apostle shows in the Epistle to the Romans and
Galathians at large. And hence it is that the same Apostle says, that the Law
is not given unto a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1.9.
but unto the lawless and disobedient, meaning that so long as we continue in
our natural estate, so long we have this, as one part of our misery, that
we are liable to the Curses and impossible Exactions of the most righteous
Law, but from the time that we are effectually called, and gathered unto
CHRIST, we are not under the Law in these two respects, which is an admirable
mercy.

first death, being by Nature dead in sins and trespasses, John 5.29.
having no more sense of the things that belong unto the Kingdom of Christ,
then a dead man in nature has of the benefits of life. Ephesians. ^.2.
By the power of Faith eternal life is begun here, which is called while we
live here, the life of Grace, and after death is styled by the name of the life
of Glory.

John 3.16.
Lastly, it delivers men from eternal destruction, for Whosoever believes in
him shall not perish.

Thus of the first sort of benefits.

Secondly, Faith has a power to preserve us, and, that in three things.

sound or whole, Tit. 1.13.
or heathfull in the faith. Heb. 10.39.
Hence, that he says, We follow Faith unto the conservation of the Soul.
Heb. 10.39.

Secondly, it preserues us against the use of ill means: for, He that
believes Isay 28.16.
Herein is a special trial of Faith, and is a worthy testimony of
uprightness, when men can so rest upon God, that they will not be entangled
with those profits that either the time makes unseasonable, as the Sabbath, or
the means make sinful, as deceit, lying, etc. but can chearefully believe,
that the same God that now tries him with the occasions of profit in such time
and manner, can give him as much profit at a lawful time, and by lawful
means. It is most difficult for an unsanctified mind to forbear either time
or means when profit and pleasure intise.

Lastly, how miserable is our life here many times in respect of the
temptations Ephesians. 6.16.
Now if there were in us conscionable respect of certain application of Gods
favor, there is a secret power in Faith, as an Helmet, not only to keep off,
but extinguish the fiery darts of the Devil. And the true reason why our life
is continually assaulted, and why the world lies vanquished under a thousand
miseries, is only because men do not labor for a particular assurance of
Gods love in CHRIST, which being once had, we should soon see an happy
victory over the World, Hell, and Death, in respect of the beginnings of many
heavenly contentments.

In the third place we are to consider the benefits which the weakest Faith

First, it iustifies and gives us a portion in the most meritorious
intercession

Secondly, it gathers men into the family of Abraham, and that as Sons,
Gal. 3.7.9.
the least Faith makes a man blessed with faithful Abraham, so that if
Abraham's case were happy, then is every Child of God so.

Thirdly, it makes men not only the Sons of Abraham, but the Sons John
1.12.
As many as received him, to them he gave power to be the Sons of God, even
to them that believe in his name.

Fourthly, by Faith the Son of God, by an invtterable presence, does dwell in
the hearts of the Sons of men. Ephesians. 3.16.
Ephesians. 3.16.

Fifthly, the meanest Faith, that is a true Faith, does ever come attended with
Acts. 24.25.
and therefore to dispute of Faith, is to dispute of Temperance,
Righteousness, etc. Acts 24.25.

Lastly, Faith according to the measure of it, is the foundation of all the
Hebr. 11.1.
therefore it is called the ground of the things which are hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen.

Fourthly, if men would labor for the increase of Faith, and once get a

First, it might be unto us according to our faith: what greater indulgence can
Mat. 9.29.


Secondly, men might live by their Faith, that is, they might have from Heb.
2.5.
even in their carriage about the things of this life.

Thirdly, we might have the sense of peace with God, access unto Grace, Romans
5.1.2.3.4.5.
and be filled with joy in the hope of the glory of God to be revealed; yea, to
be made able to hold up their heads, and rejoice in afflictions, etc.

Fourthly, there is a power in Faith to put such life into the sacred
Scriptures, to make us wise, 2 Timothy 3.15.
even to salvation.

Fifthly, how hard a thing it is for the Creature to have access unto the
without God in the world, Ephesians. 3.12.
able to mind any thing, and to effect any thing but God. But now this which
is impossible to Nature, is become possible to Faith, as the Apostle shows,
Ephesians. 3.12. And how unspeakable a mercy it is to have a comfortable communion
with God, and easy access for our prayers, the Saints may conceive but not
utter.

able to overcome the world; so as we might easily contemn the glory of
earthly things, 1 John 5.4.
the Millions of evil examples and scandals, the thousands of temptations,
allurements, disswasiues, letts, and impediments, which the world casts in
our way, and with which we are often entangled, ensnared, and many times most
shamefully vanquished, to the dishonor of God and our Religion, the wounding
of our Profession and our Consciences, etc. If men had that power of Faith
which the ordinances of God were able to give, how might they astonish
Epicures, Papists and Atheists, which now differ little from them?

Romans 1.12.
as the APOSTLE intimates, Romans 1.12.

work righteousness, and attain to innocence of life, Heb. 11.33.34.
we might receive the Promises, with all those sweet comforts contained in
them, which are matters of as great wonder, as to subdue Kingdoms, to stop the
mouths of Lions, etc.

the pleasures of sin, and account affliction with Gods people better then
perfection of pleasure for a season, Heb. 11.25.
as it is observed in Moses, Hebr. 11. whereas now every base delight is able
to captiuate our affections, and we have scarce strength to stand against one
temptation.

make us free, even Gods spiritual freemen* John 8.32.
so as we should clearly see that no natural Prentise or Bond-slaue could
find so much ease and benefit by his release, as we might by Faith.

Romans 3.25. Acts 10.43. only for sins to come, God gives no acquittance
before there be a debt, and the discharge sued out.

immortal inheritance in heaven for all eternity, as these places show, Acts
26.18. John 6.47. 1 Pet. 1.9. 2 These. 1.10. with many other.

Thus much of the benefits by Faith.

Quest.
Object. Oh, but what if men do not believe? Ans. First, I might answer that
it is yet a comfort, Ans.
that though thousands neglect Faith, yet their unbelief cannot make the faith
of God of none effect: The miseries of such as have not Faith. Romans 3.3.
though the whole world contemn the doctrine of Faith, and please themselves
in their spiritual security, yet God knows how to show mercy to his servants
that desire to believe in him and fear before him.

Mark that CHRIST meruailed at their unbelief; and justly, Mark 6.6.
they were affected with his doctrine, it was confirmed by miracles, and yet
they believed not: we miserable men are a wonderment to God, Christ, and
Angels, and an astonishment to Heaven and Earth for our incredible incredulity.

Matthew, that he did no great works there for their unbelief sake. Math.
13.58.
Surely we are justly debarred the benefit and comfort of many of the works
of God* which might discover the glory of his goodness to us, only because of
our unbelief.

Fourthly, if the Jews were cut off for their unbelief, being natural
branches, Romans 11.20.
how fearful then is the case of many of us, that can have no other standing
then by Faith?

Fifthly, nothing is pure to the unbelieving.

Sixthly, Titus 1.15.
If we believe not, we cannot be esbtablished.

Seauenthly, if men refuse to believe when they have the means of Faith, Isay
7.9.
He that believes not is condemned already.

Eighthly, It is a matter of ease and profit, and pleasure, to live in sin,
John 3.18.
but what is it to dye in them? Except that ye believe that I am he, John
8.24.
ye shall dye in your sins.

Ninthly, consider the contrary to the Benefits before; if we get not faith,
Abraham nor of GOD, without CHRIST, without hope of immortal bliss, without
peace with God, comfort in afflictions, without Grace, without communion with
God. The Scriptures (while we are in this estate) are but as a dead Letter, we
are easily overcome of the World, unconstant in Friendship, without the
Covenant of Promise, entangled with every pleasure and bait, and as
Bond-slaues, abiding in the guilt and power of sins past.

Lastly, how fearful are those threatenings, Mark 16.16. Revel. 21.8. Heb.
3.12.

There remain yet four things to be further considered: The Encouragements to
believe.
1 The Encouragements to believe. 2 The Letts of Faith. 3 How Faith may be
known. 4 How far short the Faith of the common Protestant is.
For the first: we have many Encouragements to believe:

First, because we have a Savior, in respect of merit, both in suffering
Redemption being both precious and plentiful.

Secondly, he is ready to make Intercession for us, at the right hand of God.

Thirdly, we have certain and sure ordinances, unto which if we seek

Fourthly, what greater joy to Angels or Saints, then the coming home

Fifthly, there is no difficulty so great either in respect of sin, or the

Sixthly, God makes a general Proclamation without exception of any Esaias ^5.1.
John 3.16.
but he may be saved.

Seauenthly, Christ himself most graciously inuites men.

Object. Oh, but he does not call me. Ans. He calls all, therefore he excepteth
not thee: Mat. 11.28.29.30. Revel. 3.18. John 7.37.
but least men should encourage themselves in sinfulness, he adds a
limitation, All that are weary and heavy laden. If we can once find that sin
is the greatest burden that ever our souls bare, and that once we could come
to be weary of them, Object.
we might have comfort in Christ.

Object. Solut.
Oh, but if I should take that course, I should lead a dumpish and Melancholy
life. Object.
Ans. It is a false imputation cast upon Religion and Christ, for the promise
is, Solut.
I will ease you.

Object. Object.
Oh, but to exercise such a communion with God and Christ, requires so many
graces that I can never get them. Solut.
Ans. Learn of me, that I am lowly and meek; as if he should say, Get this
one grace which I my self have labored in; and thou may continue in the
ease and comfort once had from Christ without interruption. If men still think
this imp^obable, he wills them to put it to trial, and they should certainly
find rest to their Souls.

Object. 3.
Object. Oh, but to be thus yoaked is a most irksome and impossible servitude.
Ans. Solut.
This he reiects as most false, and says, My yoke is easy, and my burden
light, both in respect of the power of the means, and the secret comforts of
God, able to support the Soul.

1 John 3.23.


beseech men to be reconciled. Wonder at this admirable Clemency in our God. 2
Cor. 5.20.
Nay, then perish and that justly, if so great and infinite goodness cannot
persuade. These things should the rather affect, if we consider who it is, that
proclaims, inuiteth, commands, beseeches; namely, GOD who is able to do
it, and speaks out of his Nature. If a covetous man should offer us any great
kindness, we might doubt of performance, because it is contrary to his nature;
but it is not so with our God, his name is gracious, and his nature is to be
faithful in performance where he has been true in offer or promising.

Thus much of Encouragements.

The letts of Faith.
The hindrances of Faith follow to be considered of. The letts of Faith are
sometimes in the Minister, sometimes in the People.

Letts in the Minister. Romans 10.
Ministers are guilty of the want of Faith in their Hearers: First, when they
teach not at all, because Faith cannot be had without hearing. Secondly, if we
teach not Faith, and that plainly; if they intend not the chiefest part of
their labors to inform men in the doctrine of Faith (under which is contained
the whole doctrine of the Sinners reconciliation with his God) though they
inform manners both for Piety and Righteousness, and busy themselves in
other contemplative Divinity, yet have they not answered their Calling, but
are woeful hindrances of Faith in the hearers.

Letts in the People.
Secondly, in the People Faith is let three ways: 1 By errors in their
Judgments. 2 By corrupt affections in the Heart. 3 By certain things that
befall their Conversation.


There are five especial Errors, with any of which whosoever is infected,
Faith is let.

First, when men think they are bound to follow their Callings, and to mind
their worldly Employments; and therefore cannot spend the time about thinking of
Sermons, Luke 14.16.
etc. Our Savior, Luke 14 16. in the Parable, shows, that though men give
Heaven fair words, yet they take not a course to get it: but what letts them?
Is it Whoredom, Drunkenness, Idolatry, Murder, breach of Sabbath, etc. No such
matter, but only the abuse of lawful profits and pleasures. What more lawful
then a Farm? what more honorable of all pleasures then Marriage? only
observe that the voluptuous person says flatly, He cannot come: and the
worldly man, I pray you have me excused.

Object.
Object. Oh, but I confess, it were a great fault to leave minding heavenly
things, to get superfluity and more then needs, as Farm upon Farm. But I
want necessaries, if I had but sufficient my mind should not be so taken up,
Solut.
etc. Ans. Our Savior shows that this is no sufficient excuse, by bringing in
the man that had bought his five yoke of Oxen, then which what could be more
needful, seeing he could not follow his Husbandry without Oxen?

Secondly, a second Error letting Faith, is a close opinion of merit, which

Thirdly, Faith is hindered, when the Mind is fore-stalled with an opinion,
Psalm. 50. Esaias 1.
If they hear Service and Sermons, and receive the Sacraments, etc. they have
done so much as they think is enough.

Fourthly, many therefore never labor to get Faith, because they think

Lastly, others think it possible to be had, and it is good to be humbled

In the Heart Faith is let five ways. Letts in the heart.


First, when men nourish the secret evils of their hearts, both in thoughts and
affections, and make not conscience to repent for them. An evil heart is
always an unfaithful heart; Heb. 3.12.13.
therefore men are exhorted to take heed of being hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin.

Secondly, Worldliness is a great let of Faith, when men alone suffer their
thoughts and affections to be taken up with continual minding of things here
below, though they cannot be charged with any great covetousness.

Thirdly, there is in men's affections an unwillingness to part with worldly
pleasures and delights, and they are loath to lose their credit with their
carnal friends, which they say they must do if they take this course.

Fourthly, the world is full of common hope and presumption of Gods mercy: men
say, God is merciful, when they have neither comfort from the Promises of God,
nor ground of assurance, nor witness of the Spirit of Adoption.

Fifthly, Faith is let, and men are kept from using the means to get Faith,
and to seek God while he may be found, only through a fear least if they
should examine themselves, and search whether they had a true faith or not,
they should find they had none, and then they should be troubled, and driven
unto Melancholy despair, etc.

Lastly, Lets in conversation.
there are some things in men's carriage which greatly let and hinder Faith.

First, a profane contempt of the word of God, either men will not hear, or

Secondly, the example of the multitude hinders much Math. 7.13.14 Luke
13.23.24.
, especially the example John 7.45. to 50.
.

Thirdly, some when they go about the duties of Mortification and Faith, they
are turned off before they get Faith; either because they find hardness of
heart, or are ouer-charged with temptations or doubts of audience

Lastly, Closeness is a great cause of want of Faith, when people will not
discover their doubts and fears, especially to their Pastors being wise and
merciful, and yet know not what to do, and cannot get information from
public hearing. Here may be taken up a just complaint of the strangeness
between the Shepherds and the Flocks: the one thinking he has done enough
if he preach to them, and the other if they hear him.

There remains two Uses of this Doctrine of Faith.

Uses.
First, seeing there are diverse sorts of Faith, and that many benefits may be
had by a true Faith* and seeing that on the other side, there are woeful
effects of the want of Faith, etc. It should teach us to try whether we have
Faith or no: and that this may be known, we must understand;

The signs of Faith.
First, that before Faith can be wrought, the heart must be mollified by
afflictions, by the continual dropping of the word of God, by the knowledge of
our misery, by Legal fear, or lastly, by terrors from God.

Secondly, before Faith can appear, Repentance will show it self, and that
especially in two things:

First, in godly Sorrow for sin past.

Secondly, in the change of the thoughts, affections and life.

As for godly Sorrow, it may not be denied, but that it may be without terrors
in some, but never so easy in any, but these three things are true: 1. That
they grieve because they cannot grieve. 2. They hate their special sins. 3.
They reform both inwardly and outwardly.

Thirdly, Faith, after the softning of the heart and Repentance, shows it
self in six things: First, in an honorable opinion ready to believe all the
word of God, though it make never so much against our pleasure or profit.
Secondly, by the Combat between the flesh and spirit. Thirdly, by the holy
Desires after remission of sins, and holiness of life, witnessed by constant
Prayers, and diligent use of the means. Fourthly, by a fixed Resolution,
reposed upon the way of God, though they find not comfort presently. Fifthly,
by the forsaking of the world, and pleasures of sin Heb. 11.25.
. Lastly, by the purging out of the evils of the thoughts and affections Mat.
5.7. Acts 15.9.
. As for Joy, Peace, Thankfulness, Admiration, Love, and Desire to convert
others, etc. they belong to Faith grown, not so apparently to Faith begun.

Use. 2. The defects of the common Protestants Faith.
Lastly, here might justly be taxed the defects and wants that are found in the
common Protestant. The Faith of the Protestant at large, is faulty: First,
because he knows no time of spiritual birth, and yet he can tell to a day
when he was borne in nature. Secondly, they seek not unto the means
spiritual to get Faith. Thirdly, they rest in other things in stead of Faith,
as Knowledge, Hope, etc. Fourthly, their Faith is commonly either Historical
or Temporary; for either it is enough to believe that Christ dyed for sinners,
or else if they believe the Articles of the Creed to be true, and be no
Papists, but sound in the matter of Justification, and receive the Sacrament,
especially when they are sick, all is well, or if they believe the word of God
to be true, or especially if they can be willing to hear Sermons, etc. Fifthly,
they regard not Gods promises to apply them, nor to live by Faith, they hold
both to be absurd. Sixthly, they want the judgment that Divines call the
Judgment of goodness. Lastly, they do not believe that application is of the
nature of Faith.

Heard of.] In that their graces are heard of, and by several relation the
fame of them is spread, four things may be observed.

Obser. 1. Grace will be heard of, and observed, if it be true Grace.
1 It is hard to have any saving grace, but it will be perceived and observed,
and that for diverse causes:

First, Grace cannot be without fruit external, and by their fruit ye shall
know them.

Secondly, God does not ordinarily give saving Grace, but it is gotten in or
after some great affliction. A man may get much general knowledge, and go
far in a temporary Faith, without any great pain or perplexity, but the
pains of travail do usually accompany the birth of any saving Grace. Neither
is there any such hearkening after a child borne in nature, as there is after
an afflicted conscience now ready to be delivered of any eternal Grace.

Thirdly, Grace cannot be received but it works a great change and alteration

Fourthly, the Devil usually lies still whiles men please themselves with
Historical and Temporary Faith, because they feed presumption; but so soon as
Justifying Faith is got in the least measure, and works by purifying both the
heart and life from beloved sins (though it work never so weakly) he
bestirres himself and his agents by carnal counsel, temptations, reproaches,
slanders, difficulties, and a thousand devises, to make this birth painful,
and if it were possible, abortiue: the Flesh boyles, the Devil darts fire by
iniection, the World hatefully pursues and wonders at the sudden restraint and
retyring, John 16. 1 Pet. 4.4. Esaias 59.15.
if Men run not into the same excess of riot. He that restrayneth himself
from evil makes himself a prey.

Lastly, the Graces of God are like Lamps on a hill in a dark night, and

Use is, Uses.
first, for confutation of their resolution that will serve God, but it must be
secretly; they will be sincere, but they like not to do it so as every body
may note them; they will go to heaven, but for ease, it must be in a
fether-bed, Indiscretion not the cause of the reproaches and troubles of true
Christians.
and for closeness it must be out of their Closets: these men mean to steal
their passage; and these kind of people commonly think, that the true cause
why others are so talked of is, their indiscretion, and rash and needless
thrusting out of themselves into observation; but in the whole business they
deceive themselves: for it is not possible to be friends with God and the
World; to have GOD, his Word, People, and Spirit, to witness to us, and to
have the World to praise and applaud us. And for Indiscretion, it is a
prejudice let fall by the Devil, and taken up by carnal men without
considering that reproachful observation has been the lot of the wisest and
holiest Saints that ever lived; yea, the portion of the Prince of the Saints.
Secondly, it may be an especial comfort to all the Servants of God, that find
their names encountered with straying reports, and the World suddenly bent
against them round about, when yet many times they rather find purposes then
practices of Grace. I say, they may gather comforts diversely: first, it is the
portion of all Gods people: secondly, it is a sign they are now no more
carnal persons; for, if they were of the world, the World would not thus hate
his own: John. 7.7.
thirdly, their praises are with the Saints, and as now they taste of the cup
of their affliction, so they shall reap the incomparable privileges of their
communion.

A Question in the second place may be propounded: and that is how Quest. Ans.
seeing it is an inward Grace, how it can so outwardly be known? Ans. Faith in
it self hidden and secret, does in people converted, Faith makes it self
known diverse ways.
make it self known by certain demonstratiue effects of it, as by Confession
in time of persecution, when the defense of the truth in any part of it is
required; by constant Profession, notwithstanding the scorns and disgraces of
the World; by Victory over the World, when men retire themselves, and will not
live by example, contemn all earthly vanities, and use the world as if they
used it not; by their love to the word of God more then their appointed food;
by the reformation of their own lives; by the exercise of Faith in their
callings, not hasting to use ill and unlawful means, not sacrificing to their
own nets; and lastly, by their love to Gods people.

Seeing Grace and Fame are companions, we may learn that the surest way to
get a good name, The surest way to get credit is to get Grace. Philip. 4.3.
Mat. 18. Psalm. 15.4. Psalm. 16.3. Prou. 19.1.
is to get Grace: for then their names are written in Heaven: they are known
of Angels, they are imprinted in the hearts of Gods people. A good man
honors them that fear God: And David says, They are the only excellent
ones, and all his delight is in them: And of the same mind is Solomon, even of
the poor Child of God, Prou. 19.1. Yea, they have a name in the very
conscience of wicked men, yea, their very enemies: which appears in this, that
they spend more thoughts about them then the greatest Potentate, and would
gladly dye their death; yea, a faithful man is honored when he seems
contemned. And on the other side, a wicked man is ever at the greatest in his
own eyes, and is not able to conceive, that they that so much depend upon him,
and crouch to him, should contemn him, A sinful person is a shameful person.
as certainly they do: for every sinful person is a shameful and vile
person. Yea, so sovereign and sure a means is Grace for the attayning of a
good name, that it causes the stains and blemishes of former infamous sins
to be blotted out. Esaias 25.8.
When God takes away sin in the Soul, he will take away rebuke from the
name. And this, God (that has the hearts of all men in his hands) works both
wonderfully and secretly. Who does not honor David, Peter, Magdalene, and
Paul, notwithstanding their great sins and faults?

Vainglory to seek fame and estimation, It is not always vainglory to
seek fame.
and to be heard of amongst men. Ans. It is not simply a sin to seek an
honest report amongst men; let them contemn their names that mean to be
allowed to live in presumptuous sin: A good name is better them riches.
Ecol^s. Matthew. 5. Phil. 2.
And Christ commands that our light should shine that men might see our good
works. And the Apostle wills them to hold for the light of the word of truth in
the midst of a crooked and froward generation. But glory is then vain, Four
things make glory vain.
first, when it is sought in vain things: secondly, when men seek praise for
the show of that that is not: thirdly, when they make it the chief end of
their actions: fourthly, when it makes men proud and vicious: otherwise it is
an honest joy that comes of a good name, and a reason to bear many crosses in
other things patiently, where men may support themselves with this comfort of a
good Name.

And of your Love to all Saints. HItherto of Faith, by which we embrace
CHRIST, the head. Now it remains that I entreat of Love, by which we embrace
the SAINTS, the members. By the one we are joined to Christ, by the other to
the members of Christ.

John 3.17.
Love is either in God, or in man: In God it is an Attribute: in man an
Affection, or a quality in the affection.

Love is a vice three ways.
Love, in man, is either a vice or a grace. It is a vice, when it is set upon a
wrong object, or is disordered, and that three ways; first, when we love
unlawful as Sin; secondly, when we love things lawful, but too Lust, and
so is the

All love is a grace (for I omit bare natural affections.) It is only in the
Saints, and so they love, first, God and Christ, as the fountains of all
Natural and Supernatural blessings: secondly, they love the means of
communion with God and Christ, and thus they love the word of God, Psalm 1.2.
and thus they love the second appearing of Christ. 2 Timothy 4.8. thirdly, they
love man, and so their love is either to all men, to their enemies, or to the
Saints. Of this last here.

Concerning this love to Gods children, if the coherence and the general
consideration of the words be observed, Concerning love 7. things may be noted
from the coherence.
seven things may be noted; first, that the love to Gods children, is a grace
supernatural as well as faith; Hereby we know that we are translated from
death to life, because we love the brethren. And again, Let us love one
another, for love comes of God, and every one that loves is borne of God.
Obseruat. 1.
Hence it is called, The love that God has in us. Yea it is derived from that
precious love wherewith God loved Christ. 1 John 3.14. 1 John 4.7. 1 John 4.16.
John 17.26.


Secondly, we must first be joined to Christ by faith, before we can get any
sanctified affection to man; all humane affections in carnal men want their
true comfort, profit, and constancy, because they are not seasoned by faith in
God; Obseruat. 2.
til a man do labor for his own reconciliation with God, he can never get a
sound affection to Gods children, nor reap the heavenly privileges of
communion with Saints.

Thirdly, Obseruat. 3.
to love Gods children for any other respects, then because they are Saints, is
a mere Natural affection, not a Spiritual grace; a wicked man may love a
child of God, for his profit, pleasure or credit sake, for his company sake,
or for his amiable qualities, in conuersing, and such like: but the right love,
1. John 5.1.
is to love them, as they are sanctified, as they are begotten of God, and for
Spiritual respects, and thus he that gives a Disciple a cup of cold water,
in the name of a Disciple, Mat. 10.41, 42.
shall not loose his reward.

Fourthly, Obseruat. 4.
nothing can make more to the praise and credit of men then faith and love, the
highest praise of a man's good estate is to be able to show that he believes
his own reconciliation with God, and that he loves Gods children; He does not
say he was glad at heart when he heard of their riches, honors, etc. But when
he heard of their love to the Saints, and their faith in Christ. 1. Thessal.
3.6.
The good tidings of the faith and love in the Thessalonians was a great
consolation to Paul in his affliction, and all his necessities. No better news
can be brought him, and therefore he prays the Lord to increase them, not in
riches and the pleasures of this life, but to make them abound in love one to
an other.

Fifthly, Obseruat. 5. Galat. 5.6. Ephesians. 6.23. 1. Tim. 1.14.
whosoever does actually believe, does actually love, they are inseparable
companions; Faith works by love: Hence he wishes the people not barely love,
but love with faith: so as commonly they are together in the same degrees also:
If no faith, no love; if a show of faith, but a show of love, if a purpose of
faith, but a purpose of love; if a weak faith, a weak love; if an interrupted
faith, an interrupted love; if often at odds with God, often at iarres with
men, they are begotten by the same seed, given by the same God, received by the
same Saints, and lodged in the same heart.

Sixthly, Obseruat. 6. 1. John 2.9, 10. 1. John 3.16.
there is no hope of heaven, if no love to the brethren; He that says he is
in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness until this time. And,
Whosoever hates his brother, is a manslayer: And we know that no manslayer
has eternal life,

Seventhly and lastly, Obseruat. 7.
he that loves one Saint truly, loves any Saint; and therefore the Apostle in
the praise of their love commends it, for that it was toward all the Saints:
to have Gods children in respect of persons, is not to respect them at all
aright; he that cannot love grace any where, loves not any for grace.

The uses of al these observations briefly follow; Uses.
first, here is reproof, and that first of such wicked wretches as can love
any but the Saints, these are in a woeful and damnable case, whatsoever their
estate be in the world; secondly, of such as allow themselves liberty to hold
Gods children in suspense, they do not hate them, but yet they will be better
advised before they be too forwards to join themselves with them: 1. John 5.1.
But let these be assured, that till they be loved, God will not be loved.

Secondly, here we may make trial by our Love to Gods children, both of our
faith and hope; as also of our love to God; and lastly, the manner of our
affection viz. for what we love others. For natural affection has his
natural rewards: Lastly, the doctrine of love is a comfort two ways, first,
if thou begin to love Gods children, it is a comfortable sign thou art not
without love to God, and faith in Christ: secondly, it is a comfort against
slanders, reproaches, and molestations from wicked men; thou have as much credit
with them as God: if they loved God, they would love thee. It is a great
comfort when a man's enemies be enemies to Religion, Note.
sincerity, and holiness of life.

Thus far of Love in general; In particular I propound four things to be
further considered: first, the nature of this grace: secondly, the reasons to
persuade us to the conscionable exercise of it; thirdly, the helps to further
us: and lastly, what defects are in the love the world commonly boasts of.

What things ought to be in our love. Seven things ought to be showed in our
love.

Roman. 12.15.


secondly, in what manner love is to be expressed.

And for the former of these two, true Christian love has in all these, seven
graces or duties: first, Uprightness in our own things, both in respect of
Right and Truth: secondly, Peaceablenes in the quiet order of our conversation:
thirdly, Courtesy in needful and loving complements: fourthly, tenderness in
the things that befall others, so as we can rejoice for them as for our
selves: fifthly, Liberality: sixthly, Society: seventhly, Clemency: Concerning
these three last duties or branches of Love, it will be expedient to add
something for further explication of them.

Liberality.
Liberality is required, and it stands of two maine branches; first,
Hospitality, and then the works of mercy, Hospitality is required in these
places, Romans 12.13. 1 Timothy 3.2. 1 Pet. 4.9. Hebr. 13.2. But this duty stands
not in the entertainment of drunkards, Wicked hospitality.
and vicious persons, or in keeping open house for gaming and such lewd sports
and disorders, or in feasting of carnal men: for this is so far from being the
praise of great men, as it is a most shameful abuse* and one of the crying
sins of a Land, able to pull down the curse of God upon such houses, and
such housekeeping; but Hospitality stands in the kind entertainment of
strangers that are in want, Heb. 13.2. and in welcomming of the poor, True
hospitatalitie.
that are in distresses: and lastly, in the friendly, and Christian, and
mutual exercise of Love, in inuiting of Gods children to our houses or tables.

Works of mercy.
Works of mercy are the second branch, and those are required of us as the
needful duties of our Love: and these works are either in temporal things,
and so are Almes-deedes; or in spiritual things. Love must show it self in
Almsdeeds, Roman. 12.13.
that is, in distributing to the necessities of the Saints: in relieuing those
that are impouerished and fallen into decay, Leuit. 25.26.
by giving or lending, though they should not be paid again, Luke 6.35.
upon the hope of a reward in heaven; and this to be done both to our power and
without compulsion, for that will show the naturalnesse of our Love. 1 Cor.
8.3, 8.
Thus being ready to distribute and communicate, men may lay up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come: 1 Timothy 6.18, 19
and that that is well given will be a greater help in time of need, then
that that is spared and kept.

Spiritual mercy.
There are works of mercy also in spiritual compassion over the souls of men:
and thus the poor may be merciful to the rich, to wit, in laboring to win
them to religion and sincerity, in praying, admonition, encouragements, and
such like needful duties: and these are the best works of mercy that we can
do for others, whom we love or pity.

Society.
Thus of Liberality, another thing required unto the exercise of Christian Love,
is Society: It is not enough to wish well to the Saints, or salute them
kindly, or relieve them according to their occasions, but we must converse
lovingly and daily with them, make them our delight, company with them, and in
all the mutual duties of fellowship in the Gospel to solace them, and our
selves with them: (...). 1 Pet. 2.17. Roman. 12.11.
This is that that Peter requires, when he charge that we should love
brotherly fellowship: we should not live like Stoikes, without all society; nor
like profane men, in wicked society, but we should both intertaine a brotherly
fellowship, that is, society with the brethren, and love it to. Acts 2.42.
This was their praise in the primitive times; that they continued in the
Apostles doctrine, and in fellowship and breaking of bread and prayers, making
conscience, as well of Christian society, as of hearing, praying, and receiving
the Sacraments.

The holy Apostle Saint Paul blesses GOD for the Philippians, that they did
not only make conscience of receiving the Gospel, Philip. 1.5. Phil. 2.5.
but also of fellowship in the gospel, and that from the very first beginning
of their entrance into Religion. This was the comfort of their love, and
fellowship of the Spirit.

The last duty of love is Clemency, and this stands in the right framing of
our selves in respect of others: and unto the practice of clemency, diverse 1
Pet. 4.8.


First, to cover the faults of others. Love covers the multitude of sins:
Genes. 13.18. Roman. 14.15.
to avoid the occasions of stirring the infirmities of others. And here we
are bound to forbear our liberty in indifferent things, rather than we should
offend our brother: If thy brother be grieved for thy meat, now walk thou
not charitably* It is to be observed, that he says, thy brother: for it
matters not for the cauells and reproaches of idolatrous and superstitious
persons 1 Cor. 13.7.
Thirdly, to take things Ephesians. 4.16.
Love belieueth all things, it hops all things: Fourthly, in our anger both
to be short (Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath) and also to be more
grieved for their sin with whom we are angry, Mark 3.1.
than kindled against their persons; as it is said of our Savior, He looked
round about upon Prouer. 15.1. 1 Corint. 6.7. Genesis 13.8.6. Mat. 17.25.26 Roman.
12.21. Ephesians. 4.31.
mourning for the hardness of their hearts: Fifthly, to appease the anger of
others; and that either by soft answers; or by parting with our own right; or
by ouercomming evil with goodness.

Lastly, clemency stands in the forgiving of trespasses done against us; Be
tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ his sake forgave
you: So that unto Christian love, is requisite a peaceable, courteous and tender
carriage, hospitality and a liberal distributing to their wants, both in
temporal and spiritual things, a covering of their faults, avoiding of
occasions of scandal, a loving composing of our selves in matters of wrong,
and a daily and cheerful association with them.

Thus far of the gracious branches of Christian Love. Now the manner how we
should love Gods children, Matthew. 19.19. and 22.39. Four things in the manner
of our love. 1 Pet. 2.22. (...).
is to be considered: first in general, we should love them as our selves: and
therefore in all our dealings to do as we would be done by: we are to love man
in measure, viz. as our selves, but God above measure. But to consider of the
manner of our love more specially, the particulars may be referred to the four
heads mentioned 1 Pet. 2.22. First, we must love brotherly, that is, not as we
love our beasts, or as we love strangers, or as we love our enemies, but as we
would love our dearest natural brother, with all tenderness and naturalnesse
of our affection: Secondly, (...). Romans 12.9. 1 John 3.18. (...).
we must love without fayning, without hypocrisy: and this is explicated to
be not in word and tongue, out in deeds and in the truth: not only, truly,
for it cannot be a true love unless it arise from a holy agreement in the
truth: Thirdly; it must be with a pure heart, and then we love with a pure
heart, first, when our affection is grounded upon knowledge and judgment:
Philip. 1.9.
secondly, when it is expressed in a Spirit of meekness: Thirdly, 1 Corint.
4.21.
when it is free from wrath or aptness to be offended, from envy, from pride,
and swelling and boasting, from self-love, when men seek not their own
things, 1 Corin. 13.4.5
and from evil suspicions: Fourthly, when it is exercised in holy things, so
as no affection can make us rejoice in the wickedness of them we love: 1
Corint. 13.6.
Fifthly, when it is manifested in long-suffering and all-suffering; 1 Corint.
13.7.
when we believe all things, and hope all things.

(...).
Lastly, we must love fervently: and this has in it Speediness, Prouer. 3.28.
Diligence 1. These. 1.13.
, (called Labor in love Hebr. 6.10.
) Cheerfulness 2. Corin. 9.17
, Earnestness and heat of affection (and this is to follow after Love Galat.
5.13. 1 Thessal. 3.12.
, and to the end it is without interruption Ephesians. 5.2.3. Motives. Matthew. 24.
.

Now, because these are the last days, wherein the most have no Christian Love
at all, and many have lost the affection they had; so as their Love is grown
cold, and the most even of the children of GOD in all places are exceedingly
wanting to their own comfort and spiritual content, in the neglect of the
duties of Love one to another, but especially in the duties of a holy
fellowship, and mutual society in the GOSPEL, and the rules of Clemency: and
that men might be kindled with some sparks of desire to redeem the time, and
gain the comforts they have lost, and seek the blessings of GOD in a holy
Society, I have thought good in the second place to propound out of the
Scriptures Motives, as they lie here and there scattered in the holy Writings,
to incite and persuade all sorts of men, especially Professors, to a more
conscionable respect of this mutual love.

From example.
The first Motive may be taken from Example, and that both of God and CHRIST;
God made his infinite Love apparent to us in that he sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might believe in him, and he might be a
reconciliation for our sins, 1 Ioh. 4.9.10.11
and therefore ought we to love one another, yea so to love one another. Shall
the most high GOD fasten his love upon us, that are so many thousand degrees
below him; and shall not we love them that are our equals, both in Creation
and Regeneration? Shall the Lord be contented to respect with an appearing
love, and shall we think it enough to carry good affections to our brethren,
without manifestation of the outward signs and pledges of it? Was there
nothing so dear unto GOD as his Son, and did he give us his Son also to
assure us of his love; and shall the love of the Saints be ever by us any more
accounted a burdensome and costly love? Has God sent his Son, out of heaven
into the world, and shall we stie our selves up, and not daily run into the
company of the members of CHRIST? Was CHRIST sent that we might have the life
of grace in holy and heavenly and mystical union, and shall not we as
fellow members in all the duties of a Christian society stir up, nourish,
and increase that life so given?

Note.
As Sincerity is the life of Religion, so Society is the life of Sincerity. Was
Christ given a reconciliation for our sins, and shall not we strive to
overcome one another in the religious temper of our affections, and the free
and willing, covering or forgiving of trespasses and wrongs? Our Head, our
Savior, our Lord, our Prophet, our Priest, our King (that we might perceive
his love) laid down his life for us; and should not we immitate so
incomparable an example, 1 John 3.16.
though it were to lay down our lives one for another?

From Commandment.
The second Motive is, from Commandment: it is not a thing arbitrary for us to
love our brethren as is before expressed. Courtesy, peaceablenes, liberality,
society and clemency, are not things we may show, or not show, at our
pleasures, but they are necessary; such as if they be wanting, a sin is
committed, nay grievous sins, John 13.34.
even against the commandment of Christ, Ioh. 13. As I said to the Jews,
whither I go can ye not come, so to you also I say now, a new commandment give
I you, that ye love one another, even as I loved you. He shows here, that
whereas they might be grieved that they should loose Christ's bodily presence,
he had appointed them a course for their solace, and that was instead of
Christ, as fellow members in Christ's absence in the world, to strive by all
means to delight themselves in loving society one with another. And this
Commandment he calls a new Commandment, not in respect of the matter of the
duty; for that was always required, but in respect of the form of observing
it; for the old general rule was, That thou should love thy neighbor as
thy self: but now that form (as I have loved you) has in it something that
is more express, and for the incomparable sufficiency of the president, is
matchless, and more full of incitations to fire affection. Again, the person
that gives it, and the time, is to be considered: I now give this commandment.
Men are used, that have any sparks of good nature in them, to remember, and
carefully to observe the last words of their dying friends, especially if they
charge not many things. Why, these are the last words of Christ, the night
before his death; even this one thing he does especially charge upon us:
Namely, while we abide in this flesh, and are hated of this world, and want
those glorious refreshings would come by the presence of Christ, to unite our
selves in a holy bound of peace and love, John 16.12.
to be kept and strengthened by mutual endeavors in the performance of all the
duties of holy affection, and that till Christ shall gather us unto the glory
that he has with the Father.

The third Motive may be taken from the benefits that may be gotten by From
profit.
and these are diverse.

First, Philip. 2.1.
there is much comfort in love: the Lord does usually and graciously water the
society, conferences, prayers and other duties performed mutually by the
Saints, with the deaws of many sweet and glorious refreshings, by which they
are daily excited, inflamed, and encouraged to a holy contentation in
godliness.

Secondly, Love is the fulfilling of the Law: not only all the duties belonging
Roman. 13.10. How Love is the fulfilling of the Law.
as by that great band that tyeth all estates and degrees) but also, is the
fulfilling of the Law by effect; in that, first it causes abstinence from
doing evil to our neighbor: Secondly, it causes men to make conscience of
fulfilling the Law, and that which is there generally spoken if it be applied
to the love of the Saints may have his special truth in this, that there is
nothing in outward things does more fire the heart of a man to the love of and
labor after a godly life, then a daily loving society with Gods children, in
whom we see godliness, even in an experimental knowledge, not laid before us
in precept, but described unto us in practice, with the rewards and fruits of
it. (...).
Yea love may be said to be the filling up of the Law, as the word seems to
import in this, that it clotheth the duties of the Law, with the glory of a due
manner, and seateth them upon their due subjects, with the vnwearyed labors of
constant well-doing.

Thirdly, the due performance, and daily exercise of the mutual duties of
Galat. 5.22.
for it is one of the inseparable fruits of the spirit: Secondly, many men
follow not Christ at all, and among the followers of Christ a great number are
not true Disciples. John 13.14.
Now by love may all men know that we are Christ's disciples: Thirdly, the wind
blows where it lists: And, that which is borne of the flesh is flesh: and
therefore great Masters in Israel and Teachers of other men may be ignorant of
regeneration: John 3.
yet thereby may we know that we are borne of God, 1 John 4.7.
and do rightly know God, if we love one another.

Fourthly, if we would seek God to find him; behold, If we go to the East,
Job 23.8.9.
he is not there: if to the West, yet we can not perceive him, if to the North
where he works yet we cannot see him: he will hide himself in the South, and
we cannot behold him: 1 John 4.12.
How much more is the way of God in the heart of man unsearchable? And yet
though no man has seen God at any time; if we love one another, God dwells
in us.

Fifthly, the election of man before time, is like a bottomless gulf, and the
making of man blameless and holy in heaven is a dreadful mystery, and yet
those two glorious branches, whereof the one sprowts forth even beyond time, and
the other reaches up to heaven, nay into heaven; are both fastened upon this
stock of love in respect of one way and manner of coming to know them. Ephesians.
4.1.4.


1 John 3.14.
To conclude, Salvation it self, even our own salvation is known by the love
to the brethren, as is clear, and in diverse other places of that Epistle.

Zeph. 1.14.
Lastly, the day of the Lord is a terrible day, a day of trouble and heaviness:
the strong hearted man shall then cry bitterly: then the heavens being on fire
shall be dissolved and pass away with a noise: 2 Pet. 3.10.11 1 Thessal. 4.16
and, the elements shall melt with heat: the Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a showt, and with the voice of the Archangells, and with the
trumpet of God: then shall all the kindreds of the earth mourn, and they shall
see the Son of man come in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory:
Matthew. 14.3.
And who shall be able to stand in that great and fearful day? even all such
as have finished their course in the love of God and his children; as
certainly as we now find love in our hearts, 1 John 4.17.
so surely shall we have boldness

From the misery of such as love not Gods children. 1 John 2. and 3
The fourth Motive may be taken from the miserable state of such as find not in
themselves the love of Gods children; First, it is a palpable sign they abide
still in darkness, and under the bondage of the first death: and in danger of
the second death.

Secondly, a man can never enter into the kingdom of Heaven without it; for
every man can say, a murderer shall not be saved (so continuing:) Now it is
certain, God hates a man that loves not his children as well as he does
murderers; 1 John 3.15.
he that loves not his brother, is a manslayer, and we know that no
manslayer can inherit eternal life.

Ephesians. 3.17.
Thirdly, till we love Gods children, we can never know what the length, breadth
and depth of the love of God and Christ is to us. God shows not his love to us
till we show our love to the Saints: Lastly, for want of love in the heart, and
the duties of love in conversation, the mystical body of Christ is exceedingly
hindered from growing, both in the beauty and glory which otherwise would be
found in the church of Christ. Ephesians. 4.16.




The first place is, Ephe 4.12. to 17. where may be observed 4. things, gotten
by a holy union with the members of Christ and Christian society and
affection. Ephesians. 4.
It furthers our gathering into the body: It is an exceeding great help in
the beginning of our effectual vocation: Secondly, it furthers our edification
in the building, and fits us for our room among the Saints. Godly society does
frame us and square us, and many ways fit us for our place in this building:
Thirdly, loving affection to the members of Christ and mutual society does
much profit us, in respect of our growth in the body: and that till we become
perfect men, Verse 13.16.
and attain to the age of the fullness of Christ: Fourthly, this holy love is
a great fence to the judgment against false and deceitful doctrine: he is not
easily carried with every wind of doctrine, nor unsettled with the vain
deceits of men, that can follow the truth, and the means thereof in a settled
and well grounded love to Gods children. But on the other side, how easily are
such men deluded and thrown off from their purposes and comforts that did
never join themselves to Gods children?

The second place is, 1 Peter 4.7.8. where the Apostle exhorts to sobriety
in the use of the profits and delights of the world in meats and drinks,
riches, recreations and apparel, and withal to spend their time here in
spiritual duties, especially Prayer; watching thereunto, both to observe all
occasions and opportunities to pray, as also noting the mercies of God we
find in Prayer, with our own corruptions in the manner, and the glorious
success of prayer, in preuayling with God: But above all things, he wills them
to have fervent love: and yields two reasons or motives; first, the end of
all things is at hand: and therefore it is best loving and making much of
those, that after the dissolution shall be great heirs of heaven and earth:
secondly, Love covers the multitude of sins, it hides the blemishes of our
natures, and fitteth us for the comforts of Society. Notwithstanding the
infirmities accompany even the Saints while they are in this vale of misery.

The third place is, 2 Pet. 1.7. etc. where he largely persuades men to get
holy graces into their hearts, and to express holy duties in their lives:
among these, as chief, he instanceth in brotherly kindness and love; to this
end he brings diverse reasons: first, it will set our knowledge a work, which
else would idle and unfruitful; Verse 8.
and where should we unload our selves of the fruits of knowledge, which men
get in Gods house, better then in the houses of the people of God: secondly, he
that has not these things, is blind; or if (...).
yet he is purre-blinde, so as he can see nothing that is far off (as
eternal things are) but only things near, such as are carnal things: the
want of love to Gods people is a palpable sign of a pur-blind carnal man:
thirdly, the want of love, and the other graces Verse 9.
is a sign of a spiritual lethargy, even that a man is fallen into a
forgetfulness of the purging of his old sins, that is, it is a sign that a
man lies under the guilt and filth of all his former sins, and never feels
the weight of them, or considers the danger of them: Fourthly, Love, with the
Verse 10.
do make our calling and election sure: Fifthly, loving society and brotherly
kindness is a great means of perseverance, if ye do these things ye shall:
Lastly, by this means an entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly,;
Verse 10. Verse 11.
both because it mightily furthereth faith and hope: As also, because by these
means eternal life is begun on earth, in respect of communion both with God
and the Saints.

Thus far of the Motives; The helps.
Helps follow. These helps are such as serve both for the begetting and
nourishing of a holy love, to and with Gods people.

There are eight things that are great furtherances of holy life.

First, the conscionable hearing of the word of God, for in Gods house
Colossians by their love to the Saints, no otherwise but by hearing the word of
truth, which discovered unto them who were Gods children, and did daily fence
them, against the scorns and reproaches which the world laded them withal.

Secondly, we must get faith and hope as the coherence shows: for till we the
care for and hope of a better life, we cannot receive Gods children aright into
our hearts: But no man was ever truly touched in conscience, and had unfeigned
desires of remission of his sins. Neither did ever a man seriously seek
after the things of a better life, but he did love Gods children above all the
people of the earth: and it is true of the measure, that as we grow in faith
and hope, so we should grow in love and in the comforts of Gods favor.

1 Pet. 1.22.
Thirdly, would we love brotherly, without faining, and fervently; then we must
get our souls purified, through the spirit, in obeying the truth.i. we must
make conscience of the duties of mortification (as of so many purges) to cleanse
our thoughts and affections, of dwelling and reigning lusts and evils: for
secret sins entertained and delighted in within the affections and thoughts do
exceedingly poison affection both to God and man: this is that the Apostle
means where he says, 1 Timothy 1.5.
Love must come out of a pure heart.

2 Timothy 1.7.
Fourthly, we must stir up the spirit of love. The spirit of God is a spirit
of love, and we must stir it up by nourishing the motions of the same, putting
courses or ways of expressing love into our minds; and by prayer, meditation,
or any other means that may inflame our hearts to a holy affection.

2 Timothy 1.13.
Fifthly, it profits much hereunto to get and keep in our minds, a pattern of
faith and love, even a draught of the things that concern faith in God, and
love to the Saints: that we might always have a frame of all holy duties that
concern this holy affection: this was their care in the Primitive times, as
appears, 2 Timothy 1.13.

Sixthly, to be sound in these 3. things, Faith, Love, and Patience, requires
most an end Experience, and a daily acquainting our selves with the things of
the Kingdom of Christ. When we are driven by often crosses to seek comfort in
Gods children, and by much observation do find the worth of the comforts that
arise from holy Society with them; Many are the incredible weaknesses that
discover themselves in the hearts of younger and weaker Christians: Tit. 2.2.
but it is a shame for the elder men, if they be not sound in love, Tit. 2.2.

Seventhly, we must by all holy means strengthen, and encourage, and set our
selves upon perseverance in the profession of our hope, Hebr. 10.24. Note.
for if once we give over profession, it will be easy to see love vanish; a
wavering profession is unconstant in Love.

Lastly, if we would never forsake the fellowship we have one with another, as
the manner of some wicked hypocrites and damnable Apostataes is, then we must
with all Christian care, Consider one another weaknesses and wants; and be
continually provoking, Hebr. 10.25.
inciting and encouraging one another to love, and to good works.

Thus of the helps.

The defects of the common Protestants love.
In the last place I propounded to be considered, the defects that are found in
the love that is abroad in the world, with which the common Protestant pleases
himself. I will not here complain that love is turned into lust, and that
that damnable infection has stained heaven and earth, and polluted our houses,
brought a curse upon our Assemblies, debased our gentry, dishonored our
Nobles, corrupted our youth, and made heavy our elder Age: or show how it has
brought upon us famine and pestilence: but to let this pass, I will speak of
the honester love, and wherein think you stands it?

First, in the ciuiller sort, in complements: never more complements and less
love: Secondly, in freedom from suites a Law, and quarrelling; they are in
charity with all the world, if they can show that they never were quarrelsome,
or that they are friends again: Thirdly, in the baser sort it is mere
Alehouse friendship, their love stands wholly in going to the Alehouse
together; these are the only fellows and good neighbors; and commonly, here
is set up the Devils bench, and Proclamation made of free pardon for filthy
Ribauldry, for drunken spewings, and Viper-like slanders belched out against
good men. Fourthly, many out of their ignorance, know none other love then of
themselves, or for themselves of others: But yet more plainly the
defectiuenesse of the common Protestants love appears diversely.

First, by the usual sins which are rife amongst them, even such as batter
the fortress of Love. How can they please themselves in their charity, if we
consider how Malice, Revenge, Anger, Slandering, Backe-biting, and all sorts of
prouocations to anger, are euery-where abounding? What more usual then
Self-love? what more common then Envy? Shall I instance? The Tradesman while
he is rising is so fleshed with success, and stuffed with the greedy desire
of profit, that he cares not whom he wrongs, nor how much he becomes
prejudicial to other men's trade: But this man is not so filled with
Self-love, but the declining Tradesman that has ouerliued his prime, is
every way as well filled with Envy. And thus men are not in cha^itie neither
full nor fasting.

Secondly, it appears to be defective in the Objects of Love, in a chief
Companion of Love, in the Parts of Love, and in the Manner of loving.

For the first: the only men that are chiefly to be loved, and our affection
to be spent upon, are the Saints; that is, such religious persons as make
conscience of all their ways: but are these the men the common Protestant
loves? Oh times! oh manners! what men find worse entertainment in the world
then these? Is not the least endeavor after holiness chased and pursued with
open hates, dislikes, slanders? Can a man refrain himself from evil, and not
be made a prey? Does there any live godly, and they persecute him not? Away
false wretch, say thou, thou art in charity with all men, and yet can not
bear the Image of God in a child of God?

For the second: all true Love ought to be accompanied with Faith; yea, it
ought to be founded upon Faith: and therefore herein is the common love of the
world defective, that a communion with men is not first sanctified by union
with God. These men that boast so much of their charity never made conscience
of seeking the assurance of Gods favor in Christ, neither ever travailed under
the burden of their sins, so as to seek forgiveness as the true
blessedness.

Thirdly* the common Protestant is exceedingly to blame in the very maine
duties of Love; no tenderness of heart, no true Hospitality, and for mercy to
the poor the old complaints may be taken up, Hosea 4.1. Esaias 57.1.
There is no mercy in the Land: Merciful men are taken away. We may now
adays wait for some Samaritane to come and prove himself a neighbor: and
for society and fellowship in the Gospel with Gods people, it will never
sincke into the understanding of these carnal men, that that is any way
expedient: and finally, in all the branches of Clemency before expressed,
where is the man that makes conscience of them?

And for the last, it is easily avouched, that the Love that is found in the
most men, is neither brotherly nor without gross fayning and hypocrisy, nor
proceeds it from a heart in any measure purified; and lastly, it is so far
from being fervent, that it is stone cold.

Thus of Love.

Verse 5. For the Hopes sake which is laid up for you in Heaven.


IN these words is mentioned the third Grace, for which the Apostle gives
thanks, and that is Hope.

Hope is here taken both for the thing hoped for, viz. the glory of heaven, as
also the Grace by which it is apprehended, but especially the latter.

Heaven is diversely accepted in Scripture; sometimes it signifies the Air
Deuteronomy. 28.12. Mat. 16.16.
; sometimes it signifies the whole upper world that compasses the earth Genesis
49.25. Mat. 3.16.
; sometimes for the Kingdom of Grace and the means thereof Mat 3.2. and 11.11.
; but most usually for the place of the blessed, and the glory thereof; and so
it is taken here.

Hope, as it is here considered by the Apostle, looks two ways: first, by
relation to, and coherence with Faith and Love, [ for the Hopes sake:]
secondly, by a full aspect upon the object of it, which is intimated in the
Metaphor [ laid vp*] and expressed in the word [ Heavens.]

Doctrines from Coherence. Obseruat. 1. One Grace crowns another.
First, of Hope, as it is to be considered in the Coherence.

There is an admirable Wisdom and Mercy of God, in the very manner of
dispensing of his Graces; for he makes one Grace crown another, and become a
recompense and reward to another: as here for Hopes sake Gods Children break
through the difficulties of Faith, and the impediments and discouragements of
Love. When God sees how many ways the heart of man is beset in the spiritual
combat, about the getting and exercise of those two Graces, he is pleased by
his Word and Spirit to trumpet out victory by showing the glory of heaven, and
to set on the Crown of Hope, as the assured pledge of full and final victory:
it is Hope that pluckes up the heart of man to a constant desire of union with
God by Faith, and of communion with man by Love. And the true reason why so
many men utterly neglect the care to get a justifying Faith, and an inflamed
Affection to Gods Children, is, because they have no taste of the comforts of
the evidence of a better life by Hope.

Obseruat. 2.
Secondly, Faith and Hope are two distinct things: Faith believes the Promise to
be true, with particular application of the Promise to ones self; and Hope
waits for the accomplishment of it: Faith usually is employed about
reconciliation and a godly life; Hope, for the most part, is taken up with the
retired and affectionate contemplation of the glory of Heaven, the coming of
Christ, the resurrection of the body, and temporal blessings, and deliverance,
as they are shadows and types of the last and great salvation.

Obseruat. 3. Ephesians. 2.12.
Thirdly, Hope is no more natural then Faith and Love: the carnal man is
without Hope in the world: not that wicked men are clean without all
profession of Hope; for, few men are so vile but they profess and stoutly
avouch their hope in God; but this Hope is vain, empty, without evidence or
promise, such as can never profit them: and therefore in the eight of Job he
says, Job 8.13.
that the Hypocrites Hope shall perish, his confidence also shall be cut off,
and his trust shall be as the house of a Spider. Every carnal man is an
Hypocrite.
It is to be observed, that he calls wicked men (even all carnal and
unconverted people) Hypocrites, and that fitly, for every Sinner is an
Hypocrite in some degree; and if there were nothing else to prove it, their
very Hope and wilful Confidence in the mercies of God, without all warrant
from the Word, or testimony of Gods Spirit, or their own Conscience, would
undoubtedly prove it: and for the vanity of their hope it is fitly expressed
in the comparison of the Spiders web. The silly Spider with many days labor
weaues her self a Web, in appearance able every way abundantly to cover her,
and fit her turn, but at the end of the week, the Maid with a Besome sweepes
all down. This poysonfull Spider is every unregenerate man or woman, this
Web is their Hope, in the framing of which they daily busy themselves, and
in the couerture of which they vainly repose themselves; but when any Servant
comes out of the Lords army to sweep with the Besome of Judgment or Death,
the whole building of these imaginary hopes come suddenly and totally down.
Job 11.20.
In the 11. of Job and the 20. verse it is said, The eyes of the wicked shall
fail, and their refuge shall perish, and their hope shall be sorrow of mind:
In which words the holy Ghost shows that the time shall come, when those vain
hopes shall be driven out of the souls of the wicked, and in stead thereof
they shall be filled either with desperate sorrows on earth, or with eternal
sorrows in hell. Job 27.8.
What hope has the hypocrite when he has heaped up riches, if God take away
his soul? Job 27.8. Noting that if carnal men (again called Hypocrites) will
not forgo their fond presumptions while they live, yet by too late experience
they shall find them vain when Death comes.

Object. Object.
But then they mean to pray God to forgive them, and hope by their repentance
then to find mercy for their souls. Solut.
Sol. In the 9. verse it is answered thus; Will God hear his cry when trouble
comes upon him?

Quest. Object.
But will not God hear men's prayers in the troublesome time of death? Solut.
Ans. Not the prayers at that time made by such men: for they are Hypocrites,
having upon them but the names of God and godliness, and will never in
sincerity pray unto God at all times, neither in their death do they pray
unto God because they delight in the Almighty; and therefore he shows Verse
10. that seeing they delight not in God and godliness, and will not pray at
all times; that is, as well in health as sickness, in prosperity as in
adversity, while they might yet sin, as well as when they can sin no
longer: therefore their hope of mercy in death shall fail them.

Quest. Quest.
But if true Hope be not natural, what is the difference between the Hope of
the faithful, and this common Hope, that so ordinarily goes up and down the
world under the colors of it, or how may we try our selves whether we have a
right Hope or no? Ans.
Ans. The true Hope is described in several Scriptures, by diverse properties,
which are no where to be found in carnal men.

First, the true Hope lays fast hold upon the merits of Jesus Christ only, to
be established and assured 1 Timothy 1.1. Psalm. 31.24.
* The signs or properties of true Hope.
But the common Hope is never emptied of carnal confidence and presumption,
that God loves them for some good things or parts that are in them; neither
does it brook assurance, for with one breath carnal people are absurdly
confident of Gods mercy, and encounter the Doctrine of infallible assurance.

Secondly, true Hope makes a man more humble, but the common Hope Lam 3.29.


Thirdly, true Hope makes a man cheerful under all sorts of Crosses, by Romans
5.2.5.4.
but the common Hope of it self will not yield a man's heart support against
any Cross.

Fourthly, the faithful man can suffer for his Hope Acts 28.20. Romans 8.24.
, but a wicked man

Fifthly, true Hope rests upon Gods promise, though never so unlikely to be
performed by outward and ordinary means Romans 4.18.
; but wicked men with their

Sixthly true Hope will acknowledge as well as know Tit. 1.2.
; but the common Hope

Seauenthly, true Hope is industrious in the use of all means to come to Psalm.
37.3.
but the common Hope is singularly sloathfull, it boasts of a sufficiency of
knowledge, and yet neglects the sincere use of all Gods Ordinances; it affirms
deeply of going to heaven and yet cannot tell of one tear for sin, nor one
hour truly spent in mortification: but trust thou in the Lord, and do good.

Psalm. 73.26.
but the common Hope is then at best rest when the heart is furthest off from
the care, desire, or sense of Gods presence, either in Gods house or abroad.

true Grace, 1 These. 2.16. Secondly, saving Knowledge, Psalm. 9.10. and 78.7.
Thirdly, Experience, Romans 5.4. Fourthly, Patience and comfort of the
Scriptures, Romans 15.4. Fifthly, the joys of the holy Ghost, and peace of
Conscience in believing, Romans 15.13. Sixthly, above all, and for all these, the
Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1.18. Seauenthly, the often meditation of Gods
Promises.

Thus of Hope, as it is considered in relation to Faith and Love.

Which is laid up for you in Heaven.] In these words Hope is described in the
object of it.

Laid up,] (viz) by God in his secret Coffers, as a most worthy Jewel: this
Metaphor gives occasion to observe three Doctrines.

Doct. 1.
First, that Grace and Glory are a man's best treasures, and therefore we should
labor for them more then any thing else, and if we have a comfortable
evidence of them, to be contented though we want other things.

Doct. 2.
Secondly, that Hope is no common Grace, in that amongst many fair virtues
which are common to wicked men, he locketh up this Grace of Hope as a special
Jewel he intends to keep only for his own Children.

Doct. 3.
Thirdly, that the evidence and grace of Gods Children be in Gods keeping, and
laid up safe in heaven, and therefore cannot be lost; and besides, when they
dye, there is of theirs in heaven before they come.

Heaven.] Here I observe two things.

Doct.
First, that there is a Heaven for the Saints after this life: the Doctrine of
Heaven is only proper to Religion; There is a Heaven.
Nature has but a dark glimpse of immortality, or any being after this
life, and is full of stronger Objections then Answers: and as any are more
lewd in life, they are more senseless of immortality. But concerning the
estate of the blessed in heaven, Nature is wholly ignorant, yea, the Doctrine
hereof is so divine, that Religion it self does not fully purtray it out in
this world to any, Uses.
yet as any are more holy it is more discerned. The consideration of heaven may
urge us to many duties in general: if ever we would have heaven when we dye,
we must get holiness both imputed or infused while we live Mat. 5.16. 2 Pet.
1.7. Mat. 7.21. 1 Pet. 2.11.14. Psalm. 15.
. We must be sure we be of Gods Family Ephesians. 3.16.
, and that we are borne again John 3.5. Luke 13.5.
. In particular, we should therefore acquaint our selves with the Laws and
Mysteries of Gods Kingdom Mat. 13.11.52
: and if we may come by the means to be effectually instructed in the way to
Heaven, we should account of this Pearl, and rather then loose it, sell all
we have to buy it Mat. 13.44.45.
. And we should above all things labor for the meat that perishes not, but
endures to everlasting life John 6.27.
: in as much as in the Ministry of the word is many times found the Keys
that open unto us the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 16.19. Romans 10.6.
. And in as much as riches may prove a singular hinderance, we should take
warning, and see to it that they do not entangle us Mat. 19.23.
. And because in Heaven is our treasures, we should set our affections there
Mat. 6.20. Col. 3.1.
, and prepare for our change and departure 2 Cor. 5.1.2. 1 These. 1.10.
. Giving allowance to no sin, no not the least Mat. 5.10.19.
: constantly professing and confessing Christ before men; that he may not
deny us in that day Mat. 10.32.33 and 5.10.
. Yea, where God means to bestow heaven, he bestows heavenly qualities on men
in this life, they are poor in spirit Mat. 5.3.
: they are eager after heaven and the things thereof Mat. 11.12.
: they are like Children, void of earthly carking and distressefull cares Mat.
18.2.
: they are merciful Mat. 25 34.36.
: they love their Enemies Mat. 5.44.
.

Secondly, the meditation of Heaven serves for reproof not only of Atheists,
that would deny it, or Papists, that claim so great glory for their base
merits; but also of the most Protestants: for, are not the most such as can
discern the face of the Sky, and yet have no discerning of the season, to get
Grace and Heaven? to say nothing of those that by their gross and horrible
sins have forfeited over and over the claim of any interest in the Kingdom
of heaven, living in daily blasphemies, whordomes, drunkennesses, etc. Yea, do
not the better sort give Heaven fair words, and yet have their excuses why
they will not come to Gods Feasts when he inuites them? Luke 14.17.
And thus while men bless themselves Gods curses usually devour them.

Lastly, Note.
it is a Doctrine of wonderful comfort to Gods Children Heb. 12.23. Luke 11.20.
; neither is this the peculiar advancement of some principal Saints, as
Abraham, David Mat. 8.11. and 13.31.
, etc. neither should the miseries of this life before we come to heaven
trouble us, seeing there is no comparison between the troubles of this life
and the glory of the world to come, where there shall be no sin, sorrow,
labor, weakness, disgrace, fear, death; where we shall enjoy the sweet
presence of God, Christ, Angels, and just men, with unspeakable Joys; perfect
holiness, exquisite knowledge, and a total righteousness, and all this for
ever.

Secondly, Doct. 2.
from hence also does plainly arise this second Doctrine, viz. that the hope
of Christians is in another world; there is their stay and comfort. When they
seek by Faith the comforts of Gods favors, and by Love separate themselves to
the communion with Gods Children, they find presently such a rent from the
world, and all sorts of carnal men assaulting so their rest, that a little
experience learnes them the knowledge of this truth, that in this world, Romans
8.24.25.
and from the men of this world, and the things thereof, they must look for no
peace or contentment.

The Use is first, Use. 1.
for Instruction, to teach us therefore to use the world as if we used it not,
and so to care for earthly things and persons, as to resolve that Heaven is our
portion, and there only must we provide to find some rest and contentment;
Heb. 11.13.
yea, therefore as strangers and Pilgrims we should seek and provide for our
abiding City.

Secondly, 2.
this Doctrine gives occasion to answer that imputation that is cast upon many
professors, viz. that forwardness in Religion makes them mindlesse of their
business; and much hearing of Sermons makes them careless of their callings.
Men may here-hence inform themselves, that howsoever Religion ties men to
honest cares and daily diligence to provide for their families (else the very
Scripture brands such Professors to be worse then Infidels, that make Religion
a mask for idleness) yet seeing our hope is not in the world, therefore Gods
Children do well first and chiefly to seek the Kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof; and so to mind an earthly calling as it hinder not an
heavenly, and provide means for a temporal life, as not to hinder the hope of
an eternal life.

Thirdly, 3.
this Doctrine may much settle and comfort Gods Children against the scorns
and hates of the World and all sorts of carnal people, the World will love his
own.

Object. Object.
Oh but why should they hate us? Ans. Because you are not of the world, Solut.
and Christ has chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
And therefore both provide for it, John 15.19.
and bear it when you find it.

Object. Object.
But we will not be so rash and indiscreete to provoke men to hate and
reproach. Solut.
Sol. Verse. 20. They have persecuted Christ who was the fountain of all
wisdom: and therefore it is a vain persuasion for any child of God to
think by any discretion, wholly to still the clamours and hates of wicked men.
And those men are grossly deceived and prejudiced that think the true cause
of the troubles of Gods children is their own indiscretion.

Object.
Object. It is strange they should hate us so; we never did them wrong. Sol.
Verse. 21. Solut.
All these things will they do unto you for my name sake: it is not your evil
doing, but your holy profession of the Name of Christ, which is named upon you,
that they hate.

Object.
Quest. But how comes it they should dare to be so presumptious and so palpable
malicious? Solut.
Ans. It is because they have not known my Father, ver. 21. their ignorance of
the Majesty and Justice of God is the cause of it.

Object.
Object. If it be of ignorance, it may be easily pardoned them. Sol. Verse. 22.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, Solut.
they should have had no sin, but now there is no cloak for their sin;
that is, if Christ by the preaching of the Word had not discovered their
sins, and set before them the way of godliness, then it had been no such
grievous and monstrous sin, but in as much as many men do lie in wilful
ignorance, and will not be informed of the vileness of their course;
therefore, before God, of all sinners, they are without color or excuse.

Object.
Object. But may they not have good hearts to God though they do thus
intemperately and unjustly malign and abuse the Preachers and Children of God?
Solut.
Sol. Verse. 23. He that hates Christ in his Ministers and members hates the
Father also, and cannot have a good heart to God.

Object.
Object. But it may be that Christ and Christians are hated the more securely
by wicked worldlings, because they see nothing but their baseness and
humiliation. Solut.
Sol. Verse. 24. If I had not done works among them which none other did, etc.
By which words our Savior shows that no works of God for, by, or amongst
Gods Servants, can be so great testimonies of the undoubted certainetie of the
goodness and holiness of their cause; but wicked men will still, against all
right, hate them. And therefore we should so inform our selves by this and
other Scriptures ( verse. 25.) as to set down our rest, that in the world we
must have troubles, and in Christ and heaven peace, and therefore lay up hope
in our hearts, as God has locked up our treasures in heaven.

Thus of Hope. Thus also of the Grace for which he gives thanks.

Whereof ye have heard before by the Word of truth which is the Gospel.

Verse. 6. Which is come unto you, even as it is unto all the world, and is
fruitful as it is also among you, from the day that ye heard and truly knew
the grace of God.


IN these words, with those that follow to the ninth Verse, is contained the
second part of the Thanksgiving (viz.) his praise to God for their means of
Grace.

The means is either Principal, Verse. 5.6. Or, Isntrumental. Verse. 7.8.


The principal means is the Word, and this is described by six things:
First, by the ordinance in which it was most effectual, viz. Hearing.
Secondly, by the property which was most eminent in the working of it, viz.
Truth. Thirdly, by the kind of Word, viz. the Gospel. Fourthly, by the
providence of God in planting it amongst them, is come unto you. Fifthly, by the
subject persons upon whom it wrought, You (the Colossians) and the whole world.
Sixthly, by the efficacy, It is fruitful from the day. Thus for the order of
the words.

From the general I observe, out of all the words, two things.

First, Doct. 1.
that Nature directs not to the apprehension either of Grace or Glory: 1 Cor.
2.4.
The Natural man cannot perceive the things of God: these Colossians had never
known the face of God, nor gained the grace of Christ* had not God sent them
the means. Briefly, this may inform us of the lamentable condition of such
as live in their natural estate, only pleased with the desire or possession
of the riches or gifts of Nature; and withal, shows us the Fountain of the
want of Sense or care of Grace* and holiness, in the most Sense comes not from
Nature, Who is a natural man.
but from the Word: and he is a Natural man that is still lapped and covered
with the veil of Ignorance, whose wisdom is cross to Gods Wisdom* that
lies in gross sins like a dead man without sense, Esaias 25 8. Romans 8.6.
Ephesians. 2.1. Romans 6.
that serves some particular gainefull or pleasing sin, without using aright
any ordinance of God against it, and is without the spirit of Adoption, his
heart never broken for sin, and without desire of righteousness.

Secondly, Doct^. 2.
it is a worthy blessing of God to any people, to have the Word of God amongst
them. This is that men should be exceeding thankful for to God, Psalm.
147.19.20. Esa. 2.3. And by the contrary, the want of the Word is a terrible
famine.

Use 1. Uses
For reproof both of men's profaneness in neglecting and contemning of the
Word; as also of our great unthankfulness for such a

Thus of the general Doctrines out of the whole Verses.

The first thing in special, is the kind of ordinance in which the word was
effectual, (viz.) Hearing.

Whereof.] That is, of which, Heaven or Hope It is a great mercy of God to
hear of Heaven before the time come it should be enjoyed, Doctr.
or lost. If we heard not of Heaven till death or judgment, we should
continue still in our slumber, drowned in the lust after profit or pleasures;
we should be so far from finishing our mortification, as we should hardly
begin to set about the washing of our own uncleanness both of hands and
life; we should look upon Grace and Holiness with a dull and feeble eye:
yea, it is good even for Gods children to hear of it before they have it, both
to support them in their crosses and discouragements, as also to pluck up
their minds to holy contemplation, and to weane them from the love of base
things; yea to inflame them to a greater desire to magnify and glorify the
singular grace and mercy of God in these days of their pilgrimage.

Ye have heard. Doctr.
] No man can get eternal graces, or an enduring contentment, arising from the
hope of a better life, without the hearing of the word of GOD Math. 17.5. Luke
16.29.30. John 8.47.
.

Quest. But tell us distinctly, what good shall men get by hearing of Sermons?
Answ. Many are the singular benefits come to men thereby. First, What good
comes by hearing Sermons.
the holy Ghost is here given, Acts 10.44. Secondly, men's hearts are here
opened, Acts 16.14. Thirdly, the fear of God does here fall upon men, Acts
13.16. Fourthly, the proud and stony-hart of man is here tamed, melted, and
made to tremble, Esa. 66.2. Fifthly, the faith of Gods Elect is here begotten,
Romans 10.14. Sixthly, Men are here sealed by the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians.
1.13. Seauenthly, here the Spirit speaks to the Churches, Revel. 2. Eyghtly,
Christ here comes to suppe with men Revel. 3.10.
: Let men tell of their experience, whether ever their hearts tasted of the
refreshing of CHRIST, till they devoted themselves to the hearing of the Word.
Ninthly, The painful distress of the afflicted Conscience is here or no
where cured: by hearing, the bones that God has broken receive joy and
gladness, Psalm 51.8. Tenthly, what shall I say, but as the Evangelical
Prophet says? If you can do nothing else, yet hear, and your souls shall
live. Esa. 55.4. Live I say, the life of Grace, yea and the life of Glory: for
Salvation is brought unto us by hearing, Act. 28.18. and 4.16.

Use 1.
The use of this point is, First, for instruction: Let him that hears hear
Ezech. 3.27.
: yea, let all rejoice in the mercies of their God, that have tasted of this
bounty of the Lord: blessed are your ears, in as much as you have heard: Many
Prophets and righteous men have desired to hear the things that you hear, and
have not heard them Mat. 13.16.17
. 2.
Secondly, for humiliation; under the consideration of the lamentable estate of
such people as have not the Word preached unto them. How do the thousands,
even in Israel, perish through the failing or wanting of Vision? Is there not
almost millions of Men and Women that have scarce heard (by preaching) whether
there be any holy Ghost? Oh the cruel torments that abide those
soule-murtherers! Shall I name them? I wish their repentance, that so they
might have a new name; but because lamentable experience shows that the
unsavory Salt seldom finds wherewith it may be salted; therefore it is the
duty of all Gods people to bow the knees of their hearts to God, beseeching
him to inflame the hearts of those that are in authority, with such bowels of
compassion, that they would in due time purge the Church of them, that so their
names may no more be heard amongst us. Whiles men lie sick of the spiritual
Lethargy in their own hearts, they are little troubled with the distress of
others; but if men would even in Gods sight duly weigh, without shifting and
prejudice, these propositions, viz, that the hearing of the Word is the
ordinary means to convert men's souls to God, Romans 10.14. 1 Pet. 1.23. etc.
And that except men be borne again they can not enter into the kingdom of
God, John 3.3. if I say these things be weighed, how should our bowels turn
within us to consider the case of some hundreds of Parishes in this famous
Kingdom, Mourn and pray.
that in the midst of this great Light, in this respect, yet sit in
darkness? Thirdly, for the reproof of the disorders and vicious dispositions
of men in the hearing of the Word. Many are the sorts of evil hearers:
exceeding many are the wicked humors of men, by which they sin against the
Word heard: the Scripture has noted and taxed diverse corruptions in men, in
hearing, and fearfully threatened them. For the better explication of this use
I consider two things; First, the sorts of evil hearers: Secondly, their state
in respect of it.

The sorts of evil hearers.
The sorts of evil hearers may be distinguished into two kinds: some are
openly impious and audacious; some more civil and restrained. Of the first
kind. First, some are so wayward nothing can please them, either the Preacher
is too terrible, or he is too comfortable. If John fast, he has a Devil, if
Christ eat, he is a glutton Mat. 11.16. etc.
. Secondly, Some hear and are scandalized Mat. 15.12.
: Men are so wedded to their own conceits, and stuffed with prejudice, that
they many times wilfully study, and strive to frame scandale and offense out of
the words of the Teacher. Thirdly, Some hear, and are filled with wrath and
envy, and that sometimes so as they cannot restrain the signs of their rage
and fretting, no not in the Sermon-time Luke 4.24.
. They gnash with their teeth, and their hearts are ready to burst for anger
Acts 7.54.
. And this comes many times because men cannot abide wholesome Doctrine, but
are given to fables 2 Timothy 4.3.4.
. Fourthly, Some hear, and their mouths make jests, while their hearts go
after their lusts Ezech. 33.30.
, they hear and mock Acts 17.32.
. Fifthly, Some make the Auditory of Christians the study of all manner of base
filthiness: thither comes the Adulterer, the Covetous, the deceiuer, the
accuser of the Brethren, etc. and there they damnably frame their dogged and
swinish imaginations. Sixthly, Some hear, and if they find any power in the
Doctrine of the Preacher, they enquire whether he be not a Puritan; for they
have heard so much evil of that Sect every where, that that one color may
serve to make them cautelous, and better advised then to be much troubled with
his Doctrine Acts 28.22.
. Seventhly, Some will hear if he speak of this world 1 John 4.5.
: He is an excellent Preacher, that in their understanding gives them liberty,
and sow pillowes under their fleshly and worldly elbowes. Eyghtly, Some hear
fearfully, as loath to be drawn to the Sermon of any that rebukes sin, as
the people of Israel were to come nere the Mount Heb. 12.19.
. Ninthly, (like the chief Priests and Pharisees) when they perceive that the
Preacher rebukes their sins, seek to lay hands upon him Mat. 21.45.46
, and as far as the fear of the people restrains them not, they practice
to remove him.

The ciuiller sorts of hearers are diversely sinful in their several humors:
First, some hear but it is to be rid of their diseases, that is, to see
whether by heering Sermons, and coming to Church, they can assuage the trouble
of their minds, and dull the stinging cares of their hearts. Secondly, some are
like the young man, for they go from the Sermon sorry that the word requires
such things as they are not willing to do Mat. 19.
. Thirdly, Some hear and say, God forbid Luke 20 76.
: It is pity it should be so as the Preacher says. Fourthly, Some hear
because a great report goes of the Teacher Mat. 3.8.
. Fifthly, But above all others, they are straying hearers that are mentioned
Mat. 22.22. they hear and admire, and yet leave and forsake for any
reformation or practice of what they hear.

Under this rank I may refer the three sorts of hearers, Matthew. 13. The
first sort suffer the Devil presently to take away the Word. The second sort
choke it with cares and lusts. The third forsakes the profession, and hearing,
and liking of it, in the time of temptation or persecution. Thus of their sorts.

The state of men transgressing against the Word, The misery of evil hearers.
by refusing to hear it aright, is exceeding fearful; if they could see
their misery they would do as the Prophets require, they would cut their
hair and cast it away, under the sense of the horror of Gods indignation Ier.
7.22.29. etc.
. The dust of the feet of Gods messengers will rise in judgment against such
hearers Mat. 10.14.
. It shall be easier for Nineveh, and Tyrus, and Sidon, and Sodom, and
Gomorrah, then for such hearers Mat. 12.41. etc.
. Yea, all their suites for mercy are abomination in Gods sight Prou. 28.9.
. A heavy ear is noted for a singular judgment, Matthew. 13.13.14. etc. Esa.
30.8.9. Yea, because men will not hear the Word they must hear the rod, Mich.
6.9. and their ears (if they belong to God) must be forced open by
corrections, Job 3.3. To conclude, if all this can not affect men, then I say,
as the Lord said to the Prophet of such persons, He that leaves off to hear,
let him leave off, Ezekiel. 3. vlt. Thus of the first part of the description
(viz.) the ordinance, in which it is most effectual, (viz.) Hearing.

The second part is the property of the Word, which is most eminent in the
working of it, (viz.) Truth.

Word of Truth.] He means not the personal Word, which is Christ* but the
enunciatiue Word, made known either singularly by Revelation, Oracles,
Visions, Dreams, or commonly by tradition of Doctrine, from hand to hand for
2000. years; or by a more excellent manner, afterward by Scripture: the Word
of holy Scripture is here meant.

The properties of the word.
There are many properties of the Word of God, wherein it does excel. First, it
is divine. The testimony of Gods mouth. Wonderful, 1 These. 2.13. Psalm.
119.18.88.129. Secondly, It is eternal and incorruptible, a living Word, or
the Word of Life, Psalm. 119.89.144.152. Phil. 2.16. 1 Pet. 1.22. Thirdly, It is
swift, Psalm. 147.15.18. Fourthly, It is powerful and terrible, Hebr. 4.12. The
sword of the Spirit, Hos. 6.5. Esa. 11.2. Hebr. 4.12. Ephesians. 6. Fifthly, It is
nourishing and healing, it has a property to nourish and heal. Psalm. 107.20.
Sixthly, It sanctifies both our persons and the use of the creatures.
Seauenthly, It is comfortable, joyful, sweet, Psalm. 119.14.111.143. 162.
Eighthly, It is apt for generation, it has a quickening power, Psalm. 119.
25.28. 1 Pet. 1.22. Ninthly, It is preservative both from sin, Psalm. 119.11.
and from shame, Psalm. 119.22. So will not gold and silver. Tenthly, it is wise
and exceeding large, Psalm. 119.96.98.99.100.104. Eleauenthly, It is light, and
pure, and just, Psalm. 119.105.130.140.128.138. But here the Word is commended
for the Truth of it, and that as a most eminent property in men's conuersions.

Truth is taken diversely: for a virtue in speech, in the second Table: for
Truth of Doctrine, John 5.33. for the substance of a type, John 1.17. for
uprightness and sincerity, John 3.21. for the true form of a thing, Romans
1.28.

How the word is said to be a word of truth.
Here the word of God is said to be the word of Truth, in regard of the use of
the word in the conversion of a sinner; and that, first, as it is apprehended
to be in itself: secondly, as it is by effect in the hearer. For the first,
before a man can have experience of the power of the Word in the gathering of
his soul, he must know it to be a word of Truth four ways.

First, that it is the very word of God, and therefore true: considering the
admirable antiquity of the Story before all other Histories: the dreadful
miracles by which it was confirmed: the certain event of the vaticinies or
prophesies, the immutable and every way sufficient frame of piety,
righteousness and divine worship, contained in it: the durablenesse of the
wisdom thereof, which no punishments could ever extort out of the hearts of
the professors thereof: and lastly, the dreadful judgments upon the enemies
of it.

Secondly, that it is true, whatsoever Doctrine it reuealeth, though it make
never so much against our profits, or pleasures, or lusts: till a man be
brought to this, the Word never works soundly.

Thirdly, that there is an especial glory of Truth in the promises, both in
the promise it self and the condition.

Fourthly, that we acknowledge Truth in the performance of what God has
promised, and so give glory to his faithfulness: and thus of the word as it is
apprehended in it self.

The word works truth in us six ways.
In the second place the word is the Word of Truth by effect, because it works
truth in us, and imprinteth it self in us, and fits us for godliness, Tit.
1.2. and thus it works Truth in us six ways.

First, In that it works knowledge, and so Truth in the understanding.
Secondly, In that it works in the Truth of worship, John 14.23.24. Thirdly,
In that it works in us plainness and uprightness, in the exercise of Grace
and Holiness, and so it is opposed to hypocrisy, Ephesians. 4.24. Fourthly, In
that it works Truth of Constancy, that is, an everlasting resolution to
hear and keep the Word of Truth, John 8.37. 1 John 4.6. Fifthly, In that it
begets in us the sincerity and Truth that becomes our callings and behavior
in the world; as, we are free from lying, calumnies, perfidiousnes, slandering,
boasting, flattery, etc. 1 Cor. 5.8. Sixthly, In that it makes all our
conversation virtuous, and so guids us to do the truth; Ioh. 3.22. Iam. 3.17.

Use is both for Instruction, Uses.
and for Reproof.

For Instruction, therefore we should labor that the Word may be a Word of
Truth to us, and to this end; First, we should pray God to give us the spirit
of Truth, John. 16 13. Secondly, we must repent, that we may come to the
knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 2.25. Thirdly, we may not test in the form of
Truth, Romans 2.20. John 3.22.

For Reproof of four sorts of men. First, such as will not receive the love
of the Truth: With these gain is godliness, 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 These. 2.10.12.
Secondly, such as strangle the light of the Truth either of Nature, conscience,
or the Word; and withold it in unrighteousness, that strive against the light
of the truth in their hearts, that they might sin the more freely, Romans 1.18.
Thirdly, such as will not obey the Truth, which yet they admire, commend,
affect, etc. Gal. 3.1. and 5.7. Fourthly, such as by their wicked lives cause
the way of Truth to be blasphemed, which Truth they both hear, and profess to
obey. Thus of the second part of the description.

Thirdly, the word of God is described by the kind of word, viz. the Gospel.

Which is the Gospell] By the Gospel is meant the Doctrine of the
reconciliation of Man with his God after the fall. The doctrine of a man's
reconciliation with God, is principally to be taught and learned.
Concerning the Gospel, we may in the general here observe; That of all
other Doctrines, the Doctrine of a man's Reconciliation with God, is especially
to be urged and explained by the Preacher, and to be most minded and enquired
into by the hearer. The knowledge and experience of this point acquaints a man
with the saving power of God: never do men indeed see the beauty of the feet
of Gods servants, Romans 10.15.
till they have traveled about the obtaining of their peace with God. If
Ministers would bend the very force of their ministeries, about the sound and
daily enforcing of the Doctrine of man's particular assurance of his peace and
reconciliation, it would produce, by Gods blessing, singular fruit. This
Doctrine would judge the very secrets of men, and give them a glimpse of their
last doom. It is a most prevailing Doctrine, and therefore extremely envied
in the world. The high Priests and Scribes with the Elders of the people many
times show they can not abide it, Luke 20.1. Hence it is that life is not dear
unto Gods faithful servants, so they may in the comfort thereof fulfill their
course and ministration, received of the Lord Jesus, in testifying the Gospel
of the grace of God Act. 20.24.
. Of all other Doctrines the Devil labors to keep the world ignorant of the
necessity and power of this 2 Cor. 4.3.4.
: but woe is to those Preachers that teach it not 1 Cor 9.16.
; and horrible woeful shall the estate of those people appear to be at the
last day that obey it not 2 These. 1.8.
* And therefore we should strive to keep afoot the sparkles of light in this
point, and whatsoever we loose in hearing, this Doctrine should never run out.

In particular, concerning the Gospel, I enquire into three things. First,
wherein this Doctrine lies. Secondly, who receive this Doctrine of the
Gospel. Thirdly, what are the effects of it.

For the first; What the Gospel principally urges.
the Gospel, or the Doctrine of it, lies in two things.

First, in our true repentance for our sins, and secondly in the infallible
assurance of faith in Gods favor, in Christ, forgiving us our sins, Mat.
3.2. Mark. 1.15. and this duly waighed, First, reproues those that dream of
salvation, and the benefits of the Gospel without mortification: and secondly,
it should teach us to nourish faith by all means, by nourishing of desires; by
removing of lets; praying for it; waiting upon hearing; beholding the faith of
Gods children, and delivering up our souls to some able and wise Pastor.

The second Question is, Who receive the Gospel.
Who receive the Gospel. Answ. We must consider, First, who may receive it:
and that is answered Mark 16.15. every Creature, that is, any Man or Woman, of
what Nation, Language, Profession, Calling, State, and Condition soever: and
secondly, we must consider, who do receive it; and this may be answered
generally, or more specially; generally, none receive the Gospel but they
find in it the very power of GOD to salvation Romans 1.16.
. None but such as are begotten again by it to God 1 Cor. 1.16.
. If there be no change in thy life, thou have yet no part in the Gospel:
without conversion, no glad tidings. In special, the persons that receive this
treasure, are signed out by diverse properties in Scripture: they are poor in
spirit Mat. 11.5. Luke 4.18.
: they find such need of it, that heaven suffers violence, and they press to
it Luke 16.16. Mat 11.10.
, and they so highly esteem the comforts of it that they can be content to
lose liberty, friends, means, and life too, for Christ's sake and the Gospel
Mark. 8.^5. and 10.29.
, and it works so forcibly upon men's souls, that they consecrate themselves
to God, to sincerity and godliness Romans 15.16.
, and learn consionably to practice the service of God in their spirit,
minding the reformation of their thoughts and affections within, as well as of
their words and actions without Rom 19.
.

And thirdly, for the effects of it; great are the praises of the power of it;
it begets men to God: The effects of the Gospel.
it is the power of God to salvation: it judges the secrets of men. Of these
before. It brings abundance of blessings* Romans 15.19. it makes men heirs and
coheires with Christ: it is a witness to all Nations, Matthew. 24.14. And
lastly, life and immortality is brought to light by it, 2 Timothy 1.10.

The Uses.
The consideration hereof should much encourage Ministers to press this
Doctrine, and never cease to preach it in the Temple, and from house to house,
and make use of all opportunities when a door is opened unto them; either in
respect of power in their own hearts, or in respect of tenderness and
affection, and desire in the people Act 5.42. 1 Cor. 1.12.
. Gods people also should so labor for the assurance of Gods favor, and peace
in Christ by the word, as they should store their hearts with provision of that
kind, not only for their deathbed when they dye, but renew the persuasion of
it in their hearts daily, the better to fit them, even in their callings and
special standings. This knowledge is not only a Crown and shield for their
heads, but shoes also for their feet, against the filth of the times, and
thorny cares of the world, and all the difficulties of a daily diligence in
their standings Ephesians. 6.15.
.

Thus of the third part of the description. The fourth follows.

The manner of providence in planting it amongst them, in these words.

And is come unto you.] Where we may observe, that if the means of happiness
find not us out to work upon us, God sends the Word before we seek it.
we would never look after it: if God were not more careful to send it, then
we to seek it, it would never be had. We see this by common experience, that
whole multitudes of people live without any sense of the want of the Word, and
did not God by some great providence send it them, and persuade them to the use
of it; it would never be had: and this comes to pass because men are dead in
sin, and sick of a lethurgie in the very use of the light of Nature, in
matters of godliness; and besides, there is an incredible inclination in our
Natures to seek for contentment in things below, and to be pleased with any
condition, rather then soundly to digest a sense of the necessity of using the
means for happiness in better things. And lastly, this neglect of seeking the
Word, comes from errors about men's estate, while they think that they may be
in Gods favor, and like enough to be saved, without any such ado.

Thus of the fourth part.

The fifth thing in the description is, the subject persons to whom the Gospel
came, (viz.) the Colossians, and all the World.

Unto you, as it is even unto all the World.] Hence we may note, First, the A
trial of Doctrine*
yet his Doctrine were to be detested as accursed Gal. 1.8.
. And therefore we may justly complain of the Papists, and all popish men
that chain men down to a necessity of looking upon the hundreds of years
near unto us, and will not bear it that men should seek ground for their
Conscience, by over looking all the hundreds of years since Christ, and
minding only conformity to the Doctrine that first founded the Churches of
the Gentiles; all Doctrines since then, though in the purest times, are to be
received no further then they agree with the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles.

Thirdly, Men must seek the word whenever it may be had.
that men are bound to seek the word wheresoever it may be heard: for if this
had not been so, how could all the World receive the light of the Gospel? and
further, we may see that the want of Teachers was no warrant to commit the
Churches to the care of such as could not teach; a necessity lies in the
people to seek the word where it may be had. And therefore those
Church-gouernours sin grievously, that in this light, create so many
insufficient men, and set them over the flocks of CHRIST. For if want of able
men had been a reason, the Apostles should have seen into this necessity, to
ease the labor and care of the Churches, but it is a more grievous sin to
admit, ordain, and place them, and yet see many worthy and able men wholly want
places.

Fourthly, All the world cannot signify every particular man in the world.
we might here note the vanity of their argument that would prove universal
grace, because Christ died for all men; for in this place here is not only the
world, but all the world; and yet here can not in any reasonable sense be meant
all the singular men and women in the world; for there were many thousands of
particular persons, to whom the Gospel came not, and therefore by all the
world (as here, so in that question) may be understood all the Elect world: or
if the world universally, then it is true in respect of offer, or not excepting
out of any of any Nation; or by all the world is meant men of all sorts and
conditions in the world.

Fifthly, The swiftness and power of the Gospel.
We might here note the incredible power and swiftness of the Gospel, that
could overcome, and that in so short a time; and the rather if that we consider
that the Magistrates generally drew the sword against it, and there were not
wanting Ministers to oppugn it, even false teachers of all sorts: and besides,
the people had been so long time settled in their false Religion,: and lastly,
if we look upon the meandness or the fewness of those that were Gods
Ambassadors to the Gentiles.

Thus of the fifth part of the description.

The last thing by which the word of GOD is described, (...).
is the efficacy of it, and here the Apostle shows: first, what it does, It
brings fruit: and, It increases.] for so it is added in some Copies:
secondly, upon whom, as even in you.] thirdly, when it began to be so, viz.
from the day that you heard, etc. fourthly, what made it work so, viz. the
hearing and true knowledge of the grace of God. And is fruitful.] Concerning
fruitfulness required as an effect of the word, I consider four things.
First, the Reasons to move us to fruitfulness. Secondly, the sort of Fruits we
should bear. Thirdly, the means to make us fruitful. Lastly, the Uses.

For the first, there are many things might move us to make conscience of
glorifying God in our places, by bearing the fruit of the Gospel, even
expressing the power of it in our lives.

First, it is a special glory to GOD, and to our Adoption and calling John
15.8.
. Secondly, it is a testimony that we are in deed Christ's Disciples John 15.8.
. Thirdly, the practicing of those things which are within the compass of Gods
promises (such as are all the fruits of righteousness) is the very
groundwork of true prosperity Psalm. 1.3.
. Fourthly, To this end did God by election before time, and special vocation
in the Gospel, choose us, and call and single us out of the world John 15.16.
. Fifthly, It procures unto us an unstained and in offensive glory, even until
the day of Christ Phil. 1.11.
. Sixthly, If a man endeavor to bring forth fruit, and to walk as becomes the
Gospel, he is sure to speed when he has any suite to God John 15.16.
. Seauenthly, against such there is no law Gal. 5.23.
. Eyghtly, it shall be to us according to our fruit Ier. 17.8.
. Ninthly, The fruits of righteousness are better treasures for a Christian,
then all riches Ier. 17.10.
. Tenthly, If we be not fruitful we shall be cut off from CHRIST, and utterly
for ever remain frustrate of all his merits and virtue John 16.2.4.6
.

Now for the second; the fruits that we should bear, are such as these. What
fruits we should bear.
The forsaking of our particular beloved reigning sins ( this is all fruit
Esa. 27.9.
.) The exercise of the true love and fear of God in a conscionable, both
worship of God, and practice of Life: the fruits of zeal for Gods glory,
humility, patience, and the exercise of the duties of Mortification; as
Prayer, Sorrow, Fasting, and the rest; Fidelity in the diligent discharge of
the duties required of us in our Families and Calling; Sobriety in the use of
Gods Creatures, Contentation, Iust-dealing, and to be rightly ordered in
matters of Report: Finally, works of Mercy, and all duties of Love.

What we must do that we may be more fruitful.
Thirdly, that we may be more fruitful; first, we must labor for greater
tenderness in our hearts, and plow our ground deep with long furrows of
Mortification: the seed will not grow if it fall upon the trampled and smooth
heart of man Mat. 13.
: the stones must be taken from the roots Esa. 6.2.
: secondly, we must learn to make God our trust, and Gods promise our
treasure, else in many parts of Christian fruitfulness, worldliness will
teach us to deny to obey Ier. 17.8.9.
: thirdly, we may not neglect to send forth the leaves of profession; for as
these leaves are of medicinable use Ezekiel 47.12.
, so they are good inducements to force a necessity of more fruit; if no
profession, there will be little fruit. Fourthly, we should labor to be
abundant in storing up of saving knowledge; for the wisdom that is from
above, is full of good fruit Iam. 3.17.
. Fifthly, we should seek the prayers of Gods Ministers for us, and subject
our selves to be directed by their care and pains Luke 13.6.7.
: though the ungrateful world contemnes Gods Messengers, and Vine dressers,
yet the truth is, that if many times they did not rise up in the gap, woe would
be unto men for their barrainnes. Sixthly, we should make use of our crosses,
and learn humility and acknowledgement of our sins by them, breaking our
hearts in Gods sight, and beseeching him for the compassions of a Father, to be
showed to us, that so we might after much exercise under our crosses, bring
forth the quiet fruit of righteousness Heb. 12.
. Seauenthly, we should importune the Lord for our sakes to visit the great
Leuiathan, the Devil, and to receive us under his protection to watch us, and
daily to water us Esa. 27.1.2.3.4. etc.
.

Lastly, in the first Psalm are diverse rules; first, we must not sit with
wicked men: secondly, we must privately and constantly exercise our selves in
the Word of God: thirdly, we must seat our selves under the powerful
ministry of the word, near the Rivers of these waters of life: and lastly,
we must take heed of procrastination, delay no time, but with great
heedfulnesse respect the season, or due time of fruit: all the year is not
Seeds-time or Harvest.

The Use is for bitter reproof of the barrainesse and perverseness of our
hearts. Use.
Some men are so ignorant that they know not that they owe any thing of
necessity unto Religion. Some bear fruit, and more then enough of it, but it
is only to the flesh Hos. 10^ 1^ Romans 6.
. Some hear the Preacher with Herod, gladly, but they mend but what they list.
Some rest in the means of fruitfulnes. It is enough with them, for their
praise, that they have the means and frequent it. Some will bear fruit, but
they choose which fruit; for some will do somewhat in civil righteousness in
their dealing with men, but are little or nothing in sincere piety to God.
Others bear fair Leaves of profession in the first Table, but in the second
Table bear such wild fruit, as it is a shame to behold it in this light; and
a sorrow it ought to be to them to hear God, with disdain, expostulate about
it. Some are good abroad, but naught at home: but at the hands of all these
will the Lord of the Vineyard require fruit, and judge them according to their
works.

And increases.] This also is added in some Copies* Here I observe two things.
First, In what it increases. Secondly, By what means. For the first, the word
increases five ways.

First, The word increases five ways.
in the number of hearers, so Act. 9.31. Secondly, in the power of working, the
efficacy of it is, and is felt of godly minds, more and more. Thirdly, In the
fairenes of the leaves of profession. It is noted of a good tree that his
leaves shall not fail; and it is certain that the word makes the glory of
profession both more and more inoffensiue. Fourthly, In the goodness of fruit,
it causes men to bring forth more and better fruit at the last then at the
first: yea, Christians refreshed with the daily comfors of Gods word, bring
forth new fruit every month Ezech. 47.12.
. Fifthly, in the height of growth Gods Children are made every day more
heauenly-minded then other.

Secondly, What we must do that we may increase.
that the word of God may increase by making us to increase in fruitfulness,
we must do five things. First, we must labor to continue near the waters of
the Sanctuary Ezech. 47. Psalm. 1.
. We should never, but in case of necessity, withdraw our hearts from the
directions and comforts of a daily and settled effectual Ministry. Secondly,
we must take root downward, and then the world will be filled with fruit Esaias
27.6.
. The Tree grows two ways, upward in branches, and downward by rooting it
self more and more in the earth: so ought a Christian to grow upward in the
external fruits of holy life, and downe-wards in the roots of faith, hope and
other holy graces,; and it is certain, if men be careful to fasten their
roots more and more, there will be a happy increase in the outward life of
man. Thirdly, we must arm our selves against the heat of tribulations, or
persecutions, as against the means of fa^ling Ier. 17.8.
. Fourthly, we must abide in Christ John 15.4.
, laboring to nourish the sense of his presence, and the contentment arising
from the Communion with his members etc. Lastly, we must be much in the
exercises of Mortification, every branch that bears fruit the Husbandman
purges, that it may bear more fruit John 15.2.3.
.

Before I pass from these words, it is to be observed, that he says not they
were fruitful, or increased: but the word is fruitful, etc. To note that when
men have given their names to the Gospel, that which befalls them is said to
befall the Gospel: partly, because what good men do they do it by direction
from the Word, and assistance of the spirit of Christ: and partly because the
world attributes what is done by professors of the word, to the word they
hear: if their lives be full of good fruits, the word of God is glorified, but
if they be any way vicious, the word is blasphemed Romans 2.
. Then they say, this is their preaching, this comes of gadding to Sermons, and
tossing of their Bibles, etc. The use is both for Instruction and Comfort. For
Instruction, therefore Gods Children should work out their salvation with
fear and trembling, and labor to be filled with the fruits of righteousness,
living inoffensiuely, and holding forth the word of life in all holy
conversation, shining as lights in the midst of a froward and crooked Nation
Phil. 1.11. and 2.15.16.
. For Comfort also, because the Lord is pleased to communicate the honor of
his word to his people, so as where the word is in credit, they shall be in
credit, and if they be despised, they are not despised alone, but the Word is
despised with them.

Thus of the first thing in the efficacy of the Word, viz. what it does. The
second thing is upon whom it works, or the subiect-persons.

Doct.
As it is also in you.] Doct. It helps not us that others (though many) be
wrought upon by the word, gathered, made fruitful, and increased: unless we be
sure of the efficacy of it in our selves. It had been a small comfort to the
Colossians to know that the word was fruitful all over the World, if it had no
power amongst them. There is a windy vanity preuailes in the heads of many
hearers, they think they do worthily when they commend the Sermon, praise the
Preacher, tell of the working of the word in such and such, though they
perceive not that unto them it is but a dead letter. Many are full-mouthed, but
have empty hearts and hands: but it should be our discretion to labor the cure
of this looseness and wandering of heart, and not to suffer our souls to be
led aside from considering our own way by any such smooth wiles of Satan. Thus
of the persons; the time follows.

From the day.] Here I observe three things.

There is a season for fruit.
First, that there is a season for men to be fruitful in, we are naturally dry
trees, or no trees. We are but dead stocks: neither if we should stand in
Gods Orchard to all eternity, would we of our selves bear the fruits of the
GOSPEL, or exercise our selves in those fair fruits that are unto eternal
life: if before this day the City of Colosse had been searched with lights,
there would have been found no true fruits of Grace or Righteousness amongst
them: our season to bear fruit is then when God calls for it. At some time of
our life, God (giving us the means) does set before us the way of Life and
death, affects us inwardly with sense of our misery, or the glory of
conversion, or the necessity of our repentance. Now when the Axe of Gods Word
is laid thus near to the root of the Tree, it is then time to bear fruit, or
else we are in danger. The consideration hereof, as it shows that the works
of civil honest men are but shadows or blasted fruit: so it should enforce
upon us a fear of standing out the day of our visitation. Consider with thy
self, God calls now for repentance, and the duties of new obedience. If now
thou answer Gods call, and pray God to make thee such as he requires thee to
be, thou may find favor in his eyes; for God is near them that calls
upon him if they seek him in due time, while he may be found: but if thou
delay; consider first, that thy heart of it self without dressing, will never
be fruitful: secondly, that thou art not sure of the means hereafter:
thirdly, if thou werest sure, yet who can prescribe unto the most high? He
has called, and thou have not answered; therefore fear his Justice, thou
may call and he will not answer.

Secondly, that it is exceeding praiseworthy, and a singular mercy of God; if
the word of God work speedily upon us; if we yield and stoop with the first;
if it make us fruitful from the first day. This lively working of the word,
first is a seal to the word it self; for hereby it is out of all doubt, that
it is the true word of God, and this effectual work of Grace upon our
consciences, does fence us against a thousand objections about the Word:
secondly, it is the Ministers seal; as soon as he sees this power of
Doctrine; he has his seal from God: the fruitfulness of the people, is the
Preachers testimonial 2 Cor. 3.2.
: thirdly, so soon as we find the Word to be a favor of life unto us, it
becomes a seal to our own Adoption to life; and therefore we should again,
every man, be admonished, to take heed of delaying the time; for not only we
want the testimony of our own happiness, while we live without subiecting
our souls to the power of the word, but exceedingly provoke God against us: we
should consider that the holy Ghost says peremptorily, Now is the Axe laid to
the root of the Tree, and every Tree that brings not forth fruit is cut
down and cast into the fire. Note that he requires present fruit, or
threatens present execution Mat 3.10. John 15.2.
. Neither may we harden our own hearts with presumption, because we see not
present execution upon this rebellion of man against God, and the offer of his
grace; for we must know that men are cut off by more ways then one. Some are
cut off by death, as an open revenge of the secret rebellion of the heart, not
opening when the spirit of grace knocks. Some are cut off by spiritual
famine; God removing the means from them, or suffering them to be their own
executioners, by withdrawing themselves from the means. Some men are cut off by
Gods fearful Judgment, being cast into a reprobate sense. Some are cut off
by Church censures, God ratifying in Heaven, what is done in Earth by the
Church.

Thirdly, hence we learn, that if we would be truly fruitful, we must be
constantly so; not loose a leaf, much less give over bearing fruit Psalm. 1.3.
Ezech. 47.12.
. Sudden flashes will not serve turn: the Lord knows not how to entreat
them, whose goodness is but like the morning dew Hos. 6.4.
, either (from the day) constantly, or not (upon the day) truly. Thus of the
Time.

Fourthly, this efficacy is limited; First, by the kind of Doctrine which
especially makes men fruitful, viz. the Doctrine of the grace of God:
secondly, by the application of it, both by Hearing and Knowledge, and both are
limited, (...).
in that they are required to be in the truth.

That ye heard and knew the grace of God in truth.] In the opening of these
words I consider, first, the words apart: secondly, the Doctrines out of the
whole. For the first: here are three things to be considered: 1. what grace of
God the Gospel propounds to men: 2. what we must do that we may have the
comfort of this, that we do truly hear: 3. what it is to know truly.

For the first, Five things principally to be acknowledged from Gods Grace.
the Gospel requires of men a deep sense of the singular Grace or free Mercy
of God toward men, and that principally in five things: first, in giving
Christ to mankind fallen; and finding out so happy a means of our
deliverance: secondly, in accepting of the mediation of Christ in particular
for the believer, in the age that he lives in: thirdly, in forgiving sins
past, through his patience: fourthly, in blessing the means, for man's
sanctification: and lastly, in allowing unto men their lot in the inheritance
of the Saints in heaven.

Secondly, That we may hear the word in truth seven things are to be done.
that we may have the comfort of this, that we do truly hear the word, seven
things are to be done: first, we must deny our own carnal reason, wit,
parts, and outward praises, and become fools that we may be wise 1 Cor. 3.18.
: secondly, we must fear God, and set our souls in Gods presence Psalm. 25.14.
Acts 10.33.
: thirdly, we must come with a purpose and willingness to be reformed by it
Psalm. 50 16.
: fourthly, we must labor for a meek and humble spirit, mourning over Pride,
Malice and Passion Iam. 1.22. Esaias 57.15. 1 Chronicles. 34.27.
: fifthly, we must hear all Deuteronomy 5 27.
, both at all times, that is constantly; and all doctrines that concern the
grace of God: sixthly, we must hear with faith and assurance Heb. 4.1. 1 These.
1.5.
: lastly, we should especially in hearing, wait for a blessing from God, in
the particular knowledge of Gods grace to us, else all hearing is to little
purpose.

Thirdly, men may be said to know, and yet not truly: first, when they know
false things, How men may be said to know and yet not truly.
as in the Church of Rome, to know the doctrine of Purgatory, Intercession of
Saints, Image Worship, the Supremacy of the Pope: or in Germany, to know the
Vbiquitie of Christ's humane nature, universal grace, falling from grace; or
that the Sacraments confer to all, the graces they signify, and such like.
Secondly, when men have the form of words, and understand not the meaning.
Thirdly, when the notions of the truth are entertained in the mind, and not
let down into the affections; when men have knowledge in their heads and no
affections in their hearts: the Law should be written in their hearts.
Fourthly, when men know things by opinion, not by faith, as the most men know
the greatest part of Religion. Fifthly, when our knowledge is not experimental
in practice. Sixthly, when men know other things, but not the grace of God to
themselves.

Thus of the words apart. The Doctrines follow.

Doctr. 1. The causes why many hearers get not knowledge.
First, men may hear and yet not know. Knowledge is not attained by all that
hear: and this comes to pass either as a curse for men's home-sins unrepented:
where Manners will not be informed, there Faith cannot: or by reason of pride
and conceit of our own wits, and that we need not be informed: Thus the
Pharisees are blind though they hear Christ himself: or it comes to pass by
reason of men's faultiness in hearing, they hear carlesly, or without
application, or with prejudice, or not at all: or else it is because men
smother their doubts, and seek not resolution in private by conference, or
seeking the Law at the Priests mouth: and in many, fruitless hearing is caused
by want of catechizing, when people are not fitted for preaching by information
in the principles before.

Doctr. 2.
Secondly, the hearing and true knowledge of Gods grace to a man in particular,
does make fruitful: the salutiferans appearance of Gods grace in a man's heart,
works in a man a desire and endeavor to show all good faithfulness that may
adorn that doctrine, by which he comes to know God to be his Savior. It
teaches men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godly,
righteously, and soberly: it purges upon iniquity, and inflames the zeal of
good works Tit. 2.10* 11.12.14.
. When Gods Children have the tidings of grace given unto them, it kindles in
them a singular encouragement to go about Gods work, and to hold out to lay
the very last stone with joy Zach. 4.7.
.

Doctr. 3. The doctrine of Gods grace hard to the most.
Thirdly, as other Doctrines, so especially the doctrine of our reconciliation
with God, or of our particular assurance of Gods grace to us is exceeding hard,
and men are strangely turned off from the right knowledge of it. This comes to
pass (where it is effectually preached) because it is hindered by common hope,
and by a resolution in many to part with no sin for the attayning of it; and
by a natural darkness in the understanding of man in matters of the Kingdom
of Christ, and by the special malice of the Diuill, and by pride in other
knowledges. And lastly, by an incredible averseness in our natures, that will
not be brought to set time apart to mind this point seriously, and to apply
our selves unto the means that might further us thereunto. The great
commodities of assurance.
Whereas if men were assured of Gods favor, and possessed of saving grace, the
profit of the knowledge of it, would appear to be exceeding great: though the
heart of man be exceeding dull, yet it could not but meruailously refresh us to
think of the pardon of all our sins; yea, if we were sure of this point,
and had traveled soundly about the experience of Gods grace to us in
particular, it would for ever settle us in the plerophorie of our religion. A
man needs never care for disputes and the thousands of Volumes, about which
should be the true Church or true Religion? for if a man by sound reasons from
the word and Spirit of God, had gotten the assurance of Gods love, he would
become as Mount Sio^, that could not be moved. This also would make a man able
to contemn all earthly mutations, and live in firmenes of heart, in some
measure, out of the fear of any afflictions, or of death it self: and
besides, it would preserve us from the poison and infection of earthly
pleasures, and vain delights and profits. And to conclude, it is to enjoy a
kind of heaven upon earth, as being an entrance into the first degree of
eternal life.

When men get from under the Law to live under Grace, it works not only a
dissolution of the dominion of sin, but a consecration of the members for the
service of righteousness Romans 6.14.13
: of the fullness of Christ do all the faithful receive even grace for grace
John 1.14.16
; the truth of Sanctification and new Obedience, together with the perfection
of Redemption and Justification. To conclude, every faithful man may say as
the Apostle said, By the grace of God I am that I am 1 Cor. 15.
.

The use is first for instruction, even to labor so much the more earnestly
for the certainty of assurance of Gods grace and free favor to us in
particular, because it will make us abundant in the work of the Lord, and
enrich us with those things that may further our reckoning against the last
day. But that we may speed in suing for Gods grace, and waiting for the
tidings of his special love, we must labor to be good men, and show it by
this, that we be men of holy imaginations Prou. 12.2.
. Our understandings will never be capable of this knowledge till the evils of
the thoughts be in some measure purged out and subdued. Besides, we must take
heed of scorning and contemning the means of grace Prou. 3.34.
, and labor for a hatred of every sin; for till then we never get any sound
experience of Gods favor. So long as a man makes a mock of any sin, and
securely against the light will commit it, so long he remains under the power
of folly and unregeneration Prou. 14.6.
: but especially we must labor to get and grow in humility; for God bestows
his graces on the humble 1 Pet. 5.4. James 4.7.
. And if God ever comfort us with his grace, let us so learn to make it our
portion, and to trust perfectly upon it 1 Pet. 1.13.
: as not to receive it in vain 2 Cor. 6.2.
, but obey all the counsel of God and his Ministers that beseech us to
express the power of it in our lives.

Secondly, the doctrine of the power of Gods grace does bitterly reprove four
sorts of men: First, such as neglect Gods grace, and seek not any particular
evidence for it. Secondly, such as fall away from the grace of God, and give
over the use of the means of grace Gal. 1.6.
; which apostasy many times befalls such men as will not wash off the
pollution, nor by mortification stay the springing up of some bitter root or
other within their hearts: such Apostates, when they were at the best, had in
their hearts some imperious lusts and passions or other, that they made not
conscience of to subdue Heb. 12.15.
. Thirdly, such as turn the grace of God into wantonness: men that before
they have any reason of comfort, upon the bare hearing of the promises of the
Gospel, take liberty to live licentiously, and follow their sins with
presumptuous abuse of Gods mercy. These are ungodly men, ordained before to
condemnation Iud. 4.
. Lastly, such as cannot abide the doctrine of Gods grace, but despise and hate
the very Spirit of Grace, how sore shall their punishment be Heb. 10.29.
?

Thus far of the Thanksgiving for the principal means of Grace. The
Isntrumental follows.

Verse 7. As ye also learned of Epaphras our fellow-seruant, who is for you a
faithful Minister of God.

Verse 8. Who has also declared unto us your love, which you have in the
spirit.


He has given thanks for the Ministry: Division.
now he gives thanks for the Minister: who is here described by his name
(Epaphras) by the adiunct Love of others to him (beloved) and by his Office (a
Servant,) by his willingness to join with others (...), a fellow-seruant) by
his faithfulness in the execution of his Office (which is for you a faithful
Minister of Christ:) lastly, by his love to his people, which he shows by the
good report he thankefully gives of them. Verse. 8.

Doct. 1. What a Minister should be.
From the general consideration of all the words I observe:

First, it much matters to the efficacy of the doctrine what the Ministers be:
he that would profit his hearers must be: First, able to teach. Secondly, he
should be beloved, not a man against whom the hearts of the people had
conceived incurable prejudice, or such a one as was scandalous. Thirdly, he
had need to be a fellow-seruant, one that will draw with others. Fourthly,
he must consecrate his service to God and the Church. Fifthly, he must be
faithful. And lastly, one that will love his people.

Doct. 2.
Secondly, Ministers of greater gifts, or places, or learning, may here learn
how to carry themselves toward their fellow-Ministers: Paul commends Epaphras,
confirms and countenances his doctrine, and gives him the right hand of
fellowship. Which example much condemns the haughty pride and arrogance of
many great Cleargy-men, in whose eyes their brethren are despised; sometime
swelling against them with envy, sometimes openly pursuing them with censures,
especially if God bless their labors with any good success; easily setting
out with the foremost to detract from their just praises for gifts, sincerity,
or pains: woe and a fall will be to the great pride of Cleargy-men.

Thirdly, the Apostle strives to win a greater estimation to the Minister
that so he might the better fasten their respects to his Ministry, to note
that where the Messenger is not in credit, the Message is easily neglected or
contemned. And therefore as men would desire good success in the Ministry of
the Word, they should labor to get and retain an honorable opinion of the
Ministers. And to this end consider that they are called Gods Coadiutors 1 Cor.
3.
, Ministers of the Spirit 2 Cor. 3.6.
, Gods Stewards 1 Cor. 4.1. Tit. 1.2. 1 Timothy 3.4.
, Candlestickes Revel. 11.4.
, the mouth of Christ Revel. 1.16.
, Stars, Angels Revel. 1.20.
; and many other titles of dignity.

From these words (as ye also have learned of Epaphras,) I observe: First that
if men would be effectually wrought upon by the word, they must plant
themselves under some settled Ministry: they that hear now one, and then
another, at one end of the quarter hear a sermon of this man, and at the other
end of that man, have their knowledge much like their pains.

Secondly, he is a true member of the Church that can show sound grace and
knowledge learned of the Teachers of the Church. It is neither the account of
the world, nor profession of true Religion, nor coming to Church, demonstrates
necessarily a true member of the Church, but the effectual subjection of the
soul to be formed and wrought upon by the Ministry of the Word.

Thirdly, it is an ordinary infirmity in the better sort of hearers that in
many points they receive Doctrine upon the credit of the teachers, yielding no
other reason, but Epaphras taught so; which should awaken affection and
conscience in Ministers, out of the fear of God, and sound and infallible
knowledge and premeditation to deliver what they do deliver, and to utter
nothing for certain but the word of God.

From these words ( the beloved, our fellow-seruant,) I observe, first, that
common affliction for the cause of God, works in men tenderness of love. The
Prison makes a great Apostle embrace with singular love a poor and mean
Minister; the smell of the prison, and sight of the stake, (if such times
should ever come again) would frame a better amity amongst our Churchmen;
ambitious men might then lay down their personal and guilefull eagerness of
have and hate; and humerous men would then be ashamed to devise how to enlarge
the dissension, by coining new exceptions, and urging of peremptory new
scruples: mode stand humble men on both sides that have sought the peace of
Sion, would then have double honor.

Secondly, that he that is faithful is beloved; beloved I say of God and Gods
household. It is an ill sign in a Minister that he is not sound, when he
finds no tokens of Gods love in his heart, nor signs of respect with Gods
Servants in this life.

Thirdly, that to be Gods Servant is an high dignity: it is here the special
glory of an Apostle, and was acknowledged and proclaimed to be the best part of
a Kings title, Psalm. 36. the title of it. Which may serve for comfort to poor
Christians: they can get no Wealth, offices, nor Honors in the world; but here
is their joy, they may get to be Gods servants, which is better and more worth
than all Honor, Besides, it condemns the aspiring of the Clergy: yet when
they have done all they can to make themselves great men, he is a better man
in Gods books, that by faithful service can win souls to God, then he that
by his money or pains can only purchase many livings and great dignities to
himself.

Which is for you a faithful Minister, or Deacon.] Concerning the word (...),
rendered Minister, it is expressly a Deacon: and it is a title of Office,
Service, or Administration, given sometimes to Christ, he is called, The
Deacon of Circumcision Romans 14.8.
; sometimes to Magistrates R^m. 13.4.
; yea, sometimes to Women Romans 16.1.
; sometimes to a special calling or sort of Church Officers Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy
3.8.12.
; sometimes, to the Ministers of the Gospel both ordinary and extraordinary:
so Timothy is a Deacon, 1 Timothy 4.6. so Judas, Acts 1.17.15. But the Doctrine I
observe is:

That every faithful Minister is Christ's Deacon: and this may comfort painful
Ministers; for to be Christ's Deacon is no base office; or to be called so, a
title of disgrace: for it is a title given to Christ, and the greatest
Magistrates. And concerning them is that promise that he that receives one of
them in Christ's name, shall not be without his reward Mark 9.35. with 37.
. Besides, Christ says of them, that where he is, there shall his Deacon or
Servant be, and his father will honor him, though the world do not John.
12.26.
. Further, it may refresh them that they are said to be Deacons, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6.7.8. Lastly, we may see what power these
Deacons have, Mat. 22. They call, they persuade, they are heard of the great
King, if they complain and inform; and they bind men hand and foot and cast
them into utter darkness. Only, if Ministers would have the privileges of
Christ's Deacons, they must put on and practice their properties. First, they
must become as little Children: for humbleness of mind and confidence in Gods
fatherly care and providence, and for freedom from malice Mark 9.35.36
. Secondly, they must follow their Master Christ, in doctrine, in life, and in
sufferings John 12.26.
. Thirdly, seeing they have this Deaconship, as they have received mercy, they
should not faint, but cast from them the cloakes of shame, and not walk in
craftiness, nor handle the word of God deceitfully; but in declaration of the
truth should approve themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God 2
Cor. 4.1.2.
. So as for the daily expressing of their doctrine upon the hearts and lives of
the people, their people might be their Epistle 2 Cor. 3.2.3.
.

Thus of the 7. Verse. Out of the 8. Verse I observe diverse things.

First, from the word [ declared,] as it is here used and applied to reports, I
note, that those things are to be reported and spoken, that may give light to
the hearers. A good man's report tends to clear things in the minds of them
that hear him: there should be light and a Lantherne in our words Prou. 6.23.
. To this end we should use wisdom, and truth, and meekness, when we
speak: Wisdom, by preparing our selves to speak: Truth, to report things as
they are: and Meekness, to avoid passion; for anger is a great darkener. We
should also take heed of diverse sins in both Tables, that greatly corrupt
the hearers, not only in the general, but in this, that they greatly darken
and make muddy the understanding of man. As in the first Table, discourses or
disputes of Atheism against the Word, Religion, or Ordinances of God;
Apologies for Idolaters or Idolatrous Religion, in whole or in part; the very
naming of vices or Idols without disgracing or hating of them; Impatiencie or
murmuring against God, and such like: And in the second Table, flattery,
tale-bearing, false accusing, rash judgment, answering of matters before they
be heard, are great darkeners of the understanding.

Secondly, in that Epaphras intending to complain of them for their
corruptions in opinion and worship, does here first declare their praises and
graces of Gods Spirit. It shows that it is a worthy grace to be apt to
express others just praises, especially when we are to speak of their
faults; for that will show that we are free from envy, ostentation or
disdain, and that we seek not our own things, that we are not suspicious,
nor think evil, nor rejoice in evil.

Love in the spirit.] Love is either in God or in man: in God there is the
personal love of Christ, the love of the Creature, the love of man, and the
love of goodness or good men: (...).
In man there is both the love by which he loves God, and the love by which
he loves man. I take it, here it is meant of whatsoever love the Spirit
works in man. Of Love I have spoken at large before, here only I note
briefly two things in general. First, the necessity of Love: secondly, the
trial of it; both in the negative. For the first. If the true love of God, and
Gods children, be not in us, we have not faith Gal. 5.6.
, nor the Spirit of God; for Love is the fruit of the Spirit Gal. 5.22. 2 Timothy
1.7.
: nor the Seal of our Election Ephesians. 1.4.
: nor a pure heart or good conscience 1 Timothy 1.5.
, nor strength to hold out against errors 2 These. 2.20.
. And for trial: first, of our love to God. We must know, that he loves not
God that will not come to Christ for life John 5.42.
; that keeps not his Commandments John 15.10.
; that is ashamed of the cross and profession of Christ Rom 5.5.
; that loves not the word, so as to hide (as precious treasure in his heart)
the instructions and comforts of the Word 1 John 2.6.
; that is not inflamed and inwardly constrained to an ardent desire of holy
duties in that place God has set him in 2 Cor. 5.13.14
; that serves the lust or love of his profit, sports and carnal delights 1
John 2.15.
. And for trial of our love to men, he loves not his neighbor; first, that
cannot do it in the Spirit, that is, in spiritual things, and from his heart,
according to the direction and motions of Gods Spirit: secondly, that does or
works evil to his neighbor Romans 13.10.
: thirdly, that wilfully will offend his brother in a thing indifferent Romans
14.15.
: fourthly, that will not pray for his neighbor Romans 15.30.
: fifthly, that is not prone to show mercy 1 Cor. 8.8.
.

Quest. But how must I love my Neighbor. Ans. As Christ loved us; and that
has four things in it. For, Christ loved us first, and though we were his
inferiors, and for our profit, and with an everlasting love: so should we,
first, we must love with a preventing love; secondly, we must love, though
they be meaner persons in place or gifts then we; thirdly, we must love them
for their profit and good, not for our own; and lastly, we must love
continually and fervently.

Verse 9. For this cause, we also, since the day we heard of it, cease not to
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of
his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.

Verse 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, in all pleasing, being
fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God.

Verse 11. Strengthened with all might, through his glorious power, unto all
patience, and long-suffering with ioyfulnesse.


THese words are the second part of the Preface, The Division.
wherein he shows that he prayed for them, which he both generally
affirms, and specially declares.

The general Affirmation is in these words: For this cause, we also, since
the day we heard of it, ceast not to pray for you.

The special Declaration is in the words that follow: And to desire that ye
might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will: and so forward to the end of
the 11. Verse*

In the affirmation are three things: first, an Intimation of a reason, (for
this cause;) secondly, the Notation of time, (since the day we heard of it;)
thirdly, the Matter affirmed, (we cease not to pray for you.)

In general we may plainly observe that the desires of our hearts, We are
neither borne, nor borne again for our selves*
and endeauours of our lives ought not to be employed for our own good only,
but for the good of others. We are neither borne nor borne again for our
selves. Sanctified and holy men have been full of constant and ardent
affections and desires after the good of Gods Children: The manifestation of
the spirit is given to every member to profit withal 1 Cor. 12.7.
. Religious Love seeks not his own things 1 Cor. 13.
: we should not seek our own things, as many do, but that which is Jesus
Christ's, viz. that which tends to his glory, and the profit of his members:
yea, Christians should serve one another by love: he is not of God that has
not holy affections to promote so far as in him lies, the good of Gods
Children 1 John 3.10.
. Herein are the Children of God, and the children of the Devil usually
known: certainly that which any man is in Religion, Note.
he is relatiuely; if not fit to serve the body, then not fit to be of the
body; he is not a Saint, that seeks not communion of Saints.

This may serve: Uses.
First, to show the misery of such as have no inflamed desires after the good
of Gods Children. Secondly, it may give us occasion to examine our selves, what
good the body of Christ reapes by us. If any Christian of less power, gifts
and means in the world, ask; what good can I do to Christians? I answer, if
thou can do nothing else, thou can pray to God for them, and desire their
good, rejoice in their prosperity, and mourn for their miseries: neither let
this be thought a mean and unprofitable service to the body; for we see here
a great Apostle employing himself about such work: yea, thou do benefit the
body by keeping an holy order in thine own work, walking in offensiuely. If
one stone fly out of the building it may breed great annoyance to the whole.
Thirdly, this should teach us to avoid what lets our desires or abilities to
serve the Brethren by love, and what may wrong the body: Take heed of
worldliness, even these carking cares, or plodding thoughts, about earthly
things: use the world, but serve it not: take heed of irreligiousnesse or the
common profaneness of the world: take heed of rash censuring, and the customary
liberty of speech to judge, and master-like to tax the actions of others:
lastly, take heed of presumptuous and scandalous courses of life. And here
also may be gathered a comfort to afflicted consciences, that are distressed,
because they find not what they would in themselves: they must know that our
great way of trial of sincerity, is by the constant uprightness of their
hearts, in the desires of good to the Church and people of God. And therefore
though they cannot speak so much good of themselves as were meet, yet it is a
great grace of God, that they have inflamed affections to wish all spiritual
prosperity to Gods people, and to bless them in the Name of the Lord.

Doct.
For this cause.] Doct. When we see the Word of God beginning to work
effectually in any people, When thou s^ell the word begin to work in any place
pray fervently to God.
and that they wax fruitful, it is the duty of all that love Sion, to
bestirre themselves, and cry mightily to God, with incessant prayers for them.
If it be asked what we should pray for, or wish unto them. I answer, we
should pray; first, that God would restrain the Devil and all wicked men,
that profession be not dishonored in the birth of it, by scandalous persons:
for it is one of the first practices of the Devil, to thrust up wicked men
into profession, What thou should pray for.
that so the glory of sincerity might be darkened. Secondly, that the word
might have free passage without interruption or hurtful opposition. Seldom
does powerful preaching make a division in the heap, but the Devil and
devilish men strive to wring the Fan out of Christ's hand, that the winnowing
may cease. The Doctrine that separates the precious from the vile, and without
respect of persons, yields comfort to the gracious, and terrors, as the only
present portion of the profane, is exceedingly opposed of the world. Thirdly,
that they may grow in grace. But, to omit other things, the Apostle here shows
by his own example that we should pray; first, that they may truly know the
will of God in Christ: secondly, that they be discreet and wise in carriage,
as well as in understanding: thirdly, that they may walk worthy of the Lord,
etc. fourthly, that they may increase in knowledge: fifthly, that they might
persevere, being strengthened with Gods might: lastly, that they may lead a
patient and joyful life. And we should be thus careful of the good of
others, both because God requires it, and the Saints have practiced it; and
besides, if thou have any grace, thou stand or fallest with others, in
respect of the credit of profession.

Since the day that we heard of it, we cease not to pray for you.] First,
from the coherence of these words with the words following, we may note the
great efficacy of Prayer, how mightily it preuayles with God: it is a way by
which a Christian may exceedingly help himself and pleasure his friends. The
prayer of the righteous avails much, both for helping of the body, and
healing of the soul James 5.16.
. If two sound-hearted men agree in earth, in a suite to God the Father in
heaven, they prevail with incredible success, they get what they would have
Mat 18.19.
.

Encouragements to prayer.
And that we may be encouraged to Prayer, there are diverse things that might
undoubtedly persuade us to resolve of the efficacy of prayer. First, Gods
Commandment; certainly God will not require prayer but that he means to
hear it Psalm. 50.15.
. Secondly, The Nature of God, he is a Father, and has the compassions of a
Father. Though Abraham would not know his seed, if they had suites to him, and
Jacob be ignorant of his posterity; yet God will hear and redeem Esaias 63.16.
: Though a mother should forget her motherly compassions, yet God will not
forget his Esaias 49.15.
: and therefore if earthly Fathers, that have a great deal of ill nature in
them, can give good gifts to their children, and that because their children
ask them; how much more shall God our Father, who is perfectly compassionate,
give good things; yea, the best things, yea, the very fountain of all good,
his holy Spirit, if we ask him Mat. 7 9.
? Thirdly, the manner of Gods presence of grace; when we have any suites, he
is not far off, or hard to come to, as earthly Princes are, and great men in
the world many times; but he is near to all that call upon him in truth Psalm.
145.18.
; yea, for more assurance of this, that he is ready to receive petitions, it
is said, His ears are open to the cry of the righteous: he is so far from
being absent, that there is not so much as any little impediment in his ear.
God is ever ready to hear, if our hearts were ready to pray. Fourthly, The
property of Gods liberality; he holds it a great blemish and dishonor to his
bounty, either to deny when he is asked, or to reproach when he has given;
either to except against the person, or to stick at the greatness of the gift
James 1.5.
. Fifthly, the assistance of the spirit of Adoption* The Spirit helps our
infirmities* though we know not how to pray as we ought, yet that shall not
let audience; for The Spirit it self will make request for us, even in the
sighs which cannot be expressed Romans 8.26.
. Sixthly, The merits of Christ and his intercession; he has prayed for us, so
as what we ask the Father in his Name, he will grant it Ioh. 14.13.14
. Seauenthly, The hate God bears to the enemies of his people; Gods Servants
shall speed in their sui^es* even because of them that rise up against them.
Lastly, our prayers are furthered by the very Faith and Holiness of our godly
and spiritual Ancestors, the posterity speedes the better for their sakes;
yea, without question we speed the better in England, because we are the seed
or Successors of the Martyrs.

Object. Object. Solut.
But I have prayed for my self and others, and yet ^inde not success. Sol.
First, if thou speed not, it is either because thou art not a righteous person
Psalm 34 16. and ^9 7.
: or thou art disordered in thy carriage in the family 1 Pet. 3.7.
: or thou did not continue in prayer Luke 18.1. to 8.
: or thou do ask amiss.

Quest. But how may I know whether I did ask amiss? Ans. Thou did ask
amiss: Quest. Ans.
first, if thou did pray and doubt James 1.6. Job 21.15.
. Secondly, if thou did make prayers thy refuge, but not thy recompense, when
thou came to pray thou consideredst what thou did want for thy self, not
what thou should render to God; thou use prayer to serve thy turn, but
when thou had sped, thou did not return by prayer to render unto God his
honor Psalm 116.12.
. Thirdly, if thou did not make conscience of the use of other ordinances of
God; for God will not give all to any one ordinance. Fourthly, if thy prayers
were ignorant, proud, hypocritical prayers Mat. 6.
. Fifthly, if thou wast not in charity but broughtest thy gift, and did not
forgive, or seek reconciliation with thy brother Mat. 5.
. Sixthly, if thou did ask of God for wrong ends, or wrong things, as to
spend on thy lusts James 4.3.
: or for temporal things only or chiefly Hose 7.14.
: besides, many times it comes to pass that men speed not, because they are
not humble. We should so prize and esteem holy things, as we should
exceedingly rejoice, if we could get but the crummes that fall from the
Fathers table. This Humility is ever joined with great Faith and wished
success in all suites to God. Again, it is to be noted, that men may be
deceived about the success of Prayers: for the decree for our succors may go
forth at the very beginning of our supplications, though the knowledge of it be
not revealed unto us till afterward. Further, God hears prayers diversely;
sometimes, he hears to grant the very thing we desire; sometimes he hears,
and grants, and gives, not the very things we desire, but that which he
holds to be best for us, and for the distress we are in: so he was said to
hear CHRIST, Heb. 5. Lastly, God does hear and grant, and yet defer to
give* and that for our great good many times: he deferres that he may prove
us, that our faith may be the more kindled, that his benefits may be more sweet
when they do come, and that we may know by the want, that it is his gift,
when they are bestowed, and that we may be more careful of the good use of
his graces, gifts, and benefits, when we have them. Thus of the Coherence.

For you. Doct.
] Doct. We are bound to pray for others as well as our selves. In this place I
consider in this point only two things. First, the kinds of prayers for
others: secondly, the sorts of persons for whom we must pray.

The kinds of Prayers for others.
For the first; I observe here in the original, two words, (...) and (...), in
the translation, Prayers and Desires: as I take it, all the sorts of prayers
for others may be referred to these two heads: and these two differ not so much
in the matter, as in the motives to prayer; (...), Prayers, are such suites
unto God, as we are vehemently moved to, by the contemplation of God and his
Attributes. The difference between (...) and (...) is somewhat shadowed out by
Oration and Adoration. (...) here rendered Desires, are all suites unto God,
arising from the deep sense of man's estate, either in dangers, wants, or
blessings: and under this kind may be placed the three sorts of prayers in 1 Timothy 2.1. (...).
for our desires for others, are either Deprecations, in which we desire God
to turn away, or keep from them some great evil; or Intercessions, which are
either complaints of wrongs, or most importunate supplications unto God for
their conversion and the pardon of their sins: or lastly, Thankesgiuings for
Gods mercies and blessings.

The persons for whom we must pray.
Secondly, to the Question, for whom we must pray. It is shortly answered, 1 Timothy 2.1. for all men, excepting dead men, or such as sin unto death, or
such, concerning whom the will of God is revealed for their perdition, as the
Man of sin: 2 These. 2.
so as also by all men, we understand all sorts of men, not all the particular
men of every sort: for we may not desire salvation for all the men that God
has made (universally considered,) seeing the counsel of God is unchangeably
past concerning reprobates, but that which in this Text is principal, is, that
Ministers and People must pray one for another. Ministers must pray for their
People: thus do the Apostles in every Epistle; yea, Samuel says, God forbid I
should cease praying ^or you; as if he knew it to be a detestable thing for a
Minister to be so retchlesse or careless, as either not to pray, or not to
continue to pray for his people. The people must also pray for their Ministers,
and that especially for these things, that God may deliver them from the rage
of the disobedient, and the practices of their enemies Romans 15.30.
; that God would open their mouths, and give them utterance Ephesians. 6.19.
, with a fitness to discover the secrets and mysteries of Christ Col. 4.3.
; and that their Gospel may run and grow, both in efficacy and credit 2
These. 3.1.2.
; yea, in as much as they labor about saving other men's souls, the people
should by prayers labor to further the salvation of their Ministers.

We cease not.] Note. First, he that loves the people of God truly, loves
them constantly.

Secondly, that a heart truly sanctified is much in prayer, cannot give it
over. It is a woeful thing to neglect prayer; but how cursedly miserable is
their case whose hearts rise against prayer, and cannot abide it, but persecute
it in others?

Not ceasing what it implies.
Thirdly, the not ceasing in prayer, has in it constancy and perseverance in
prayer; and teaches, that as we are bound to pray, so are we bound to
persevere in prayer; yea, if we must not cease to pray, it implies: first, that
we must pray in all places: secondly, that we must watch to pray: thirdly,
that we must believe, and hope we shall obtain what we pray for: fourthly,
we must not appoint God either time or means: fifthly, that we must pray with
all manner of prayers; for all these five things are requisite John 4.21. 1 Timothy 2.8. Mat. 26.41. Col. 4.2. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Pet. 4.8. James 1.6.7. Heb.
10.36. etc. Heb. 2.3.
: or if any of them be wanting, there will not be constant and faithful
prayer. Yea, not ceasing, notes that there is singular comfort in prayer, else
men would never hold out.

Object. Solut.
Object. But, not ceasing, implies, multiloquie, vain babbling. Sol. Not so: a
man may pray earnestly and often, and yet not use many words Eccles. 5.1. Man.
6.
.

Object.
Object. But, to pray without ceasing, is to be tied to use idle repetitions;
for how can men be furnished and find matter to pray so often and so much?
Solut.
Sol. A Christian is furnished many ways with needful occasions of continual
prayer. First, he is tied to a daily Sacrifice both morning and evening, by
Prayer and Praises. Secondly, he finds continually new Mercies, and those
require new songs of praise and prayer Psalm. 40.4.
. Thirdly, as his knowledge increases by the use of the means, he finds an
increase of matter, to drive him to prayer, and make him pray better. Fourthly,
new infirmities breaking out in himself and others, and that daily, gives an
occasion to renew his suites to God. Fifthly, the Creatures, and his callings
must be sanctified by the Word and Prayer. Sixthly, variety of crosses breaking
in upon him, gives him cause to run to God for the sanctifying or removing of
them.

Let such pray seldom as think they owe God no Sacrifice, or receive no
blessings from God, or care not for knowledge, or find no infirmities in
themselves, or have no crosses, or need no blessing upon their callings and
labors: but let all that fear God stir up themselves to pray without
ceasing, because God requires it, and has made gracious promises; because they
find daily necessities, and may hereby exercise their faith, and show their
love to God and to others, after the example of the Saints, and by the motion
of the Spirit of Adoption, which will not be idle in them.

Thus of the Affirmation. The Declaration follows.

That ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will in all Wisdom and
spiritual understanding, that ye might walk, etc.]

In this Declaration he describes the knowledge he prays for, by five
things: 1 By the Object of it; The will of God. 2 By the Parts; Wisdom and
Understanding. 3 By the End; That ye might walk, etc. Verse. 10. 4 By the
Cause, His glorious power. Verse. 11. 5 By the Effects; Patience,
Long-suffering, Ioyfulnesse.


The Object is described in these words; fulfilled with knowledge of his Will.
And here is, 1. the Object it self, Will of God: 2. the Means of apprehension
(viz.) Knowledge: 3. the Measure, filled with it.

Of his Will.] Will is a propriety in God. Proprieties in God are either
Personal or Essential: Proprieties in God.
the Proprieties of the Person are such as these; in the Father, to beget and
send forth; of the Son, to be begotten and sent forth; and of the holy Ghost,
to proceed: the Proprieties of the Essence, are of two sorts: some note the
Essence, as they say a priori; and these are such Proprieties as are
incommunicable, that is, are so in God as they are in no Creature, as
Infiniteness and Simplicity, free from all mixture, parts or composition:
some note out the Essence a posteriori; and these are such as are first and
principally in God, but in the second place communicable to the Creature; and
of this sort are Power, Wisdom, and Will in God.

The will of God is either, The Will of Gods good pleasure; or, The Will of his
pleasure.

The Will of Gods good pleasure is in things where the effect is good. Been
placiti. Placiti.


The Will of his pleasure is in things where the effect is evil; and so he
wills in respect of the end, but not in respect of the means to the end, as
Sin, and some Miseries.

The Will of Gods good pleasure is here meant: and this is secret or revealed.
The revealed Will is here meant.

The revealed Will of God is of four sorts. It is 1. His determining Will
concerning us, what shall become of us Ephesians. 1.5.
. 2. His prescribing Will, where he requires either Odedience; and this is
revealed in the Law: or Faith and Repentance, and so it is revealed in the
Gospel Ephesians. 1.9. Acts 22.9.
. 3. His approving Will, and that is that Will, by which he graciously
accepts, and tenderly regards those that come to him in Faith and Repentance
Gal. 1.4. Mat. 18.14. John 1.23.
. 4. His disposing Will, and this is the Will of his providence 1 Cor 1.1. Romans
1.10.
. The prescribing Will of God is wholly revealed, the other three but in part,
and by consequent.

Thus of the Will of God.

(...).
Knowledge.] This is the Grace by which the Will of God is apprehended. The
original word is three ways accepted: Sometimes, for Knowledge; so
ordinarily: Sometimes, for Acknowledgement; as it is translated in these
places: Luke 1.4. 1 Cor. 16.18. 2 Cor. 6.9. Sometimes, for Knowing again. All
three senses may be here well considered off.

First, of knowing Gods Will. Here I consider three things: first, what we must
know: secondly, why: or, the motives to persuade to seek for knowledge:
thirdly the means to be used thereunto.

What we should seek to know.
For the first: we must know that God does approve of us in Christ: the
approving will. And this is so necessary, that our hearts can never be rid of
the occasion of fear of our Reprobation, till we do know it 2 Cor. 13.5.
. Secondly, we must know what God has determined of us: his determining will.
To this end has God given us his Word and Spirit, that we might know what he
has prepared for us, if we love him 1 Cor. 2.9.
. Thirdly, we must labor to know what he requires of us: his prescribing
will. It is said of David. Acts 13.22. that he did all the wills of God; and so
should we also labor to know, and by practice express the power of all Gods
wills: and the rather, seeing we have fulfilled, not the will, but the wills of
the flesh from time to time Ephesians. 2.3.
.

Motives to knowledge.
For the second: there are many things might inflame us to the desire of
knowledge. For this is the glory of Gods Elect, not riches, not strength, not
carnal wit Ier. 9.24.
. It is the singular gift of Gods grace, and special portion of his Chosen
Mark 4.11.
. It is a great sin, and grievous curse to want it Hos. 4.11.
: but a damned plague to contemn it Job. 21.14.
. Knowledge? Why? it is more excellent then all things: all but loss and dung
in comparison of it Phil. 3.9.
. Without it, Zeal is little worth Romans 10.2.
, and Sacrifice is in vain Hos. 6.6.
. What shall I say? This is eternal life to know God, and whom he has sent
Jesus Christ John 17.3.
.

Thirdly, what must we do that we may attain to the knowledge of Gods will?
Rules for attaining knowledge.
I answer: First, we must get to be true members of Christ: for No man knows
the Father but the Son, and they to whom the Son reuealeth him Mat. 11.27.
. Secondly, we must conscionably practice what we do already know by the light
of Nature, or general light of Religion, and then Christ's gracious promise
lies for the further revelation even of saving knowledge John 7.17.
. Thirdly, men never soundly prosper in the attainment of saving knowledge:
till they have been in the furnace of affliction of Conscience: after men have
been wounded in spirit and their hearts smitten within them, they will then
know, and endeavor themselves to know Hos. 6.1.3.
.

But this Question may be excellently answered out of two places of the Apostle
Paul.

First, in the 12. of the Romans 1.2.3. The Apostle shows that a man must do
five things, if he would know what the good, and acceptable, and perfect will
of God is. First, he must deuote himself to a religious course of life: this
he calls sacrificing of our selves to God, Verse. 1. Secondly, he must no more
follow the fashions of the world. Thirdly, he must by prayer, and the use of
all the means, repent for the sins of his mind, and get a new mind to put
his knowledge in. Ver. 2. Fourthly, he must be proving and trying, often
examining himself, and trying his evidence concerning the faith of Gods good
will to him, as the hope of his glory. Verse. 2. Fifthly, he must not be
ouer-curious to pry into such knowledges as concern him not; but be wise to
sobriety, laboring especially by hearing and practice, to get within compass
of the knowledge of his own Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation,
Verse. 3.

Again, in the 5. of the Ephesians, Ver. 14. to 22. to gain the true light of
Christ, and understand Gods will, the Apostle shows that we must do nine
things. First, we should awaken our selves out of the spiritual slumber of
our hearts; laboring, by prayer and meditation of our danger, to force open
the eyes of our minds; Awake thou that sleep, Ver. 14. Secondly, we must
forsake the company of wicked and carnal men, that have no taste nor feeling
of things that belong to the kingdom of God; Stand up from the dead, (...).
Verse. 14. Thirdly, we must walk circumspectly: precisely, the original word
is: now resolved to make a conscience of all our ways, or else in vain to go
about to dig for knowledge, Verse. 15. Fourthly, we must allow much time for
hearing, and reading, and conference; even as men that mean to redeem all the
time past they have unprofitably spent, Verse. 16. Fifthly, we must bring a
mind willing and desirous in all humilit^e, to understand Gods will: a froward
spirit cannot prosper; or a man wise in his own conceit, Verse. 17. Sixthly, we
must in special take heed of drunkenness, or any kind of typling, wherein
is excess, Verse. 18. Seauenthly, we must labor for a cheerful spirit, and a
glad heart, and show it by singing of Psalms, making melody in our hearts to
God: a heavy spirit is dull of apprehension, Verse. 19. Eighthly, we must give
thanks for all things, readily acknowledging every mercy, and rejoicing for
any success in the means, Verse. 10. Lastly, we must submit our selves one to
another, ever willing to learn in any thing of any body, Ephesians. 5.21. He that
scorneth information is a fool.

Thus of Knowledge.

Secondly, Of acknowledgement, or profession.
it is not enough to know, but we must acknowledge the will of God, that is,
by a constant and open diligence in the use of the means, and conscionable
heedfulnesse even in all things in practice: we must hold forth the light of
the truth, in a religious profession of it, in communion with the Saints, and
separate from sinners: this is required in Gods Elect as well as Faith, Tit.
1.1. Neither is it a precise humor in some few, but God would have all come to
the acknowledgement of the truth 1 Timothy 2.4.
; not to hear it, or to know it only. Without this, I will not say
absolutely, a man cannot be in Christ; but this I say, with the Apostle, A man
cannot be perfect in Christ, and of ripe age Ephesians. 4.13.
. By this acknowledgement we escape an exceeding great deal of filthiness
that is in the world 2 Pet. 2.20.
: and because that many men will by no means be drawn to acknowledge the way
of God, therefore by a just judgment of God they are delivered up to a
reprobate sense Romans 1.18.
. Only two things are to be urged upon professors herein: first, that they do
soundly repent of their sins before they make profession, and enter upon
acknowledgement 1 Timothy 2.4.
; or else acknowledgement will be a veil for filthy Hypocrisy: secondly, that
they take heed of sinning presumptuously after acknowledgement. Fear the
Curse, Heb. 10.26.

Thirdly, Of knowing again.
we must know again: this has three things in it. First, we must be often
viewing and looking over our evidence, to be sure of the whole and every part
of it, as we would do if we had assurances for matters of the world.
Secondly, because sins after callings do greatly darken knowledge, therefore
we must not only renew our repentance, but our knowledge also. Thirdly, we
must know the truth of God, not only in our minds, by understanding and
thinking of it; but we must know it again, in the affections of our hearts in
respect of sense and feeling: and again after that, in the practice of our
life; for that is experimental knowledge, and the very power of godliness.

Use.
This Doctrine of the knowledge of the Will of God, reproues many sorts of men.
First, such as desire not knowledge at all Job 21.14.
: and so perish for want of it Hos. 4.6. 2 These. 1.8.
. Secondly, such as sometimes desire knowledge, but they will not use the
means, or not constantly, or not all the means. Thirdly, such as will know
something of the prescribing Will of God, but never heed his approving or
determining Will. Fourthly, such as, though they use the means for Knowledge,
yet will at no hand abide Acknowledgement. Lastly, it reproues the carelessness
even of Gods people many times, neglecting to make their Calling and Election
sure, by looking often over their evidence, and renewing their knowledge, and
laboring the cure of their natures from slumber and relapses. Thus of
Knowledge.

Obser. 1.
Filled, or fulfilled.] From the observation of the measure I note four
things. First, that we must not rest in beginnings; we must be filled with all
knowledge Romans 15.14.
: not only get Grace and Truth, but be filled with it John 2.14.
: so full of Wisdom Act. 6.3.5.
, of Faith and power Acts 6.8.
, of Good-workes Acts 9.36.
, of Joy in Gods favor Acts 2.28.
, of all Hope Romans 15.13.
, full, even with the fullness of him that fills all things Ephesians. 1. vlt.
. But it is contrary with the most men: for we may complain out of diverse
Scriptures, even of them that they are filled, not with Grace, Knowledge,
Faith, Works, etc. but with the Leprosy of all spiritual Infections Luke
5.12.
, with all Deceit Acts 13.10.
, with Wrath, even when they hear Gods word Acts 19.28.
, with worldly Grief and Passions John 16.16.
, with all kinds of Unrighteousness Romans 1.19.
, with Drink Ephesians. 5.18.
, with the measure of their Fathers Sins Math. 23.32.
; yea, so wretchedly vile are the lives of many, that they show themselves to
be filled with the Devil himself Acts 5.3.
: but the works almost of none are perfect, or filled before God Revel. 3.2.
.

Secondly, that there is something in Grace or Knowledge still wanting: we
know but in part. Obser. 2.
Man's heart may be compared to a Vessel, the means to a Pipe, the Spirit of
God to the Wheel that beats the water into the Pipe, the Minister is the
Servant that opens the Cock; and then the reason why we know but in part, is,
either the Cock always runs not, or not always in the same measure: and
sometimes our Vessels are filled with other things, as the cares and lusts of
the world, and so they run over; and usually our Vessels run out, and lose
what we receive by the means.

Obser. 3.
Thirdly, the knowledge of the Will of God, and spiritual things, only can
fill and satisfy the heart of man, all else is mere vanity and vexation of
spirit Eccles. 1.2.
. Earthly things cannot fill, neither the knowledge of them, nor the use or
possession of them, Nothing can fill but knowledge and spiritual things.
because they are not infinite nor eternal: besides, there is nothing new, nor
are they of a like nature with the Soul: they are enjoyed with vexation and
much sacietie, for our affections will not love them still; yea, most an end
the vanity of men's minds so turns devises, concerning their knowledge or
use, that death or loss takes them or us away, before they can find out that
way of using of them, that could satisfy and fill the heart.

Obser. 4.
Lastly, nothing but the will of God binds conscience: the Apostle of purpose
lays the foundation in the Preface, concerning the knowledge of, and resting
upon Gods will, that so he might the more easily beat down their Traditions
and Philosophical Speculations, of which he meant to entreat in the next
Chapter. Now, if this Doctrine be true, as it is most true, then Apocryphe
Scripture, Councels, Fathers, and Princes Laws, do not bind further, then
they are agreeable to Gods will; and therefore much less Popes Decrees,
Traditions, and humane Inventions.

Thus of the Object of Knowledge.

In the next place it is described by the Parts of it, The differences between
Wisdom and Understanding.
in the next words [ In all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding.] Where the
Apostle shows that saving Knowledge has two parts, (viz.) Understanding and
Wisdom. Concerning the difference between the two original words, in this
place rendered Wisdom and Understanding, there is a great stir amongst
Interpreters. Some say that the one proceeds out of the principles of the Law
of Nature, and the other out of the principles of Faith. Some take the one to
be a knowledge concerning the end; the other, of things that are for the end.
Some think by Understanding is meant apprehension; and by Wisdom is meant
Judgment, (...).
or dijudication. Some think, that Synesis, rendered Understanding, receives
the will of God in the whole; and that Sophia, Wisdom, conceiueth it in the
parts, and with weighing of all circumstances: by the first they consider what
is lawful, and by the second what is expedient. Some say that the one of them
conceiueth the object of felicity; the other, the means by which men attain
it. Some think they differ thus, that the one understands of God absolutely,
by Scripture, as he is; and the other considers of God by collation, or
comparison with the creatures, by experience, as he is tasted to be good: but
the plainest and soundest difference is this, that Understanding is
contemplative knowledge; but Wisdom is active knowledge: the one gives rules
for practice, the other for Judgment and contemplation. But before I consider
of them apart, I observe two general Doctrines.

First, Two general Doctrines.
that saving Knowledge and Wisdom is not natural, but from above, and had
only by CHRIST, here it follows Faith and Love: it is wrought by the power of
the Gospel, it is prayed for; and lastly, it is plainly said to be
spiritual: See more, James 3.17. 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Cor. 1.30. Tit. 3.3. and it
may serve for many uses.

First, Uses.
it should enforce us to labor to become spiritual men, as we would desire
to have any thing to do with the knowledge of Gods will: for if we be not
more then natural men, it is certain we know not the things of God. Be sure
therefore thou be no natural man.

Quest. How a natural man may be known.
How may a natural man be known. Ans. He is a natural man: First, that has
in him only the spirit of the world, 1 Cor. 2.12. Secondly, that knows not
that wisdom of God that is in a mystery, that is, his Reconciliation and
Salvation by Christ, 1 Cor. 2.7.10.14. Thirdly, that loves not God, Verse. 9. as
they do not that love not the word, people, and way of God. Fourthly, that
knows not the things given of God by the Spirit, Verse. 12. Fifthly, that
accounts spiritual things fooli^h things, and religious courses foolish
courses. Verse. 14. Sixthly, that hates sincerity, and walks after his own
lusts, Iud. 19.18.

And it is worthy to be noted, Who make the Schi^me in the Church.
that the Apostle, when he fore-tels of these wicked loose persons and profane
men, living in the Church, he says, they make Sects; and it is most sure, that
not only Heretics and false-Teachers, that draw men out of the bosom of the
Church, to divide them from our Assemblies, but even wicked men, that wallow in
sin, make Sects and Schism, and division in the Church, though they
otherwise come to the Word and Sacraments as the people of God do: for the
Word is seldom effectual in the working of it in any place, but we may find
the Devil stirring up carnal and natural men, that strive by all means to
pursue such as desire to fear God, lading them with reproaches, and blowing
abroad slanders, and wilfully both disgracing them, and shunning their
presence; and when they have done, call them Sectaries, and other Heretical
names: them, I say, that excepting their care and conscience to walk uprightly
with God and unrebukable amongst men, live in peace by them: but though men
are deceived, God will not be mocked; these are the men that God means to
indite for making of Sects in the Church, as well as Heretics.

Secondly, seeing true Wisdom is from above, it should work in us a dislike
both of hellish wisdom and earthly wisdom: Devilish wisdom. 1 Cor. 2.8.
Exodus 1.10.
by hellish wisdom I mean such wisdom as was in the Priests when they
killed Christ, or that that was in Pharaoh, who counts it to deal wisely, to
oppress Gods people: It is devilish wisdom to be cunning or artificial in
hiding the practice of sin: it is devilish wisdom to have skill in
defending sin: It is devilish wisdom that is used in the refining of
sin; as for example, drinking of healths began to grow to that detested head,
and was accompanied with that filthy villainy and abomination, in respect of
the excess of it, that certainly the Devil should never have gotten the most
men in a short time to have had any thing to do with such a damned
beastliness; now the Devil not willing to loose his homage and sacrifice,
inspires some men to bring in a libert^e to drink in less glasses, and with
allowance of choice of drinks or Wines, and now the sin is refined it goes
current.

Earthly wisdom.
Earthly wisdom is of two kinds: for either it is a skill to get goods, or
else it his humane learning and policy, both allowable in themselves, but
neither to be much liked or trusted to: for as for the skill to get riches,
What would it profit a man to win the whole world and loose his own soul?
and the praise of humane wit, learning, policy, etc. is much curbed by
certain terrible places of Scripture. The conceit of this wisdom makes the
Cross of Christ of none effect 1 Cor. 1.18.
; and a man may have a great measure of it, and be famous, and yet be without
God, without Christ, and without the covenants of promise, and without hope in
the world Ephesians. 1.12.
: for, not many noble, not many wise has God chosen 1 Cor. 1.26.27.
. Yea, God many times hides the mysteries of the Kingdom of Grace from these
great Wisemen Mat. 11.27.
, and sets himself of purpose to stayne their pride, to destroy their
wisdom, and to infatuate their counsels. Where is the Scribe (learned in the
Scripture?) where is the Disputer of this world (skillful in humane learning
and policy 1 Cor. 1.19. and 2.6.
?) Has not God (to vex the very hearts of these men) tied conversion of
souls, ordinarily, to the foolishness of preaching?

Doct. 2. It is not enough to get Piety, unless we get Wisdom also, 1 Cor.
1.24.30. Acts 6.3. Ephesians. 1.8.17.

Use is, first, for confutation of those that hold all labor for the attaining
of spiritual things to be folly; of most men those to be fools that make such
ado about the use of the means of Salvation. But it is certain that Christ,
that gives godly men righteousness, gives them Wisdom. Religion does not
make men foolish, but gives wisdom to the simple Psalm. 29.7.
. Secondly, Professors should be advised to make conscience of discretion in
their carriage, as well as holiness: and to this end they should take heed, 1.
Of pettishnesse and peevishness; a vice, should be only found in the bosom
of fools Job 5.3.
. 2. Of conceitednesse; a foul vice, to be so wise in their own conceit, that
their own ways should always so please them, that they think better of
themselves then of seven men that can give a reason Prou. 12.15. and 26.12.16.
. 3. Of rash meddling with other men's business, or prying into their estates
Prou. 17.27.
: men's eyes should not be in every corner of the world. Lastly of unadvised
opennesse; in all companies, without respect or heedfulnes, to pour out all
their minds Prou. 29.11.
.

Thus of the general Doctrines.

The first part of saving Knowledge is here rendered Understanding, and is
Contemplative Knowledge.

Contemplative Knowledge has in it two things, Apprehension and Meditation;
that is, the power to discern Doctrine, and the power to meditate of it; both
are needful, and in both men are exceeding wanting; especially in the power of
Meditation. If you ask me what the object is about which we should meditate,
it is answered before; it is the Will of God, determining, approving,
prescribing and disposing. And it is no wonder, that men get so little
knowledge, or are so unable for contemplation, because every one is not capable
of it; the Scorner may, in a passion, seek Wisdom, but he cannot find it
Prou 14.6.
. Besides, the means must be used: especially in Contemplation, it is
exceeding hard to hold any course constantly, but the ground must be from
matter of prayer, Rules for Contemplation.
or hearing, or reading. Further, many things are required to fit a man to
capablenesse, and power, of holy Contemplation: First, Chastity of heart, and
affections; for, such as are carried about with lusts are ever learning, but
never come to the knowledge of the truth 2 Timothy 3.6.
* Secondly, Meekness, or rest of heart from the hurry of disordered
affections and troubled passions; hasty affections and a foolish mind are
inseparable; he that is passionate can lift up no holy thoughts, but he can
easily exalt folly Prou. 14.29.
. Thirdly, A good mind, that is, an understanding, not exercised in imagining
and plodding of evil: men of wicked imaginations are utterly disabled from
contemplation. Fourthly, Humility, or a tender sense of ones own wants and
unworthiness: the proud-conceited man, for matter of Meditation, is of an
empty mind, unless it be that they dote about questions, or strife of words,
or vain disputations, that tend to nothing but strife or vain ostentation 1 Timothy 6.4.5.
. Besides, a heart fatted and fleshed with presumptuous hopes, or profits and
pleasures, and hardened through long custom and practice of sin, is almost
wholly blinded in the things that belong to the Kingdom of Christ; These men
have eyes, and see not; and ears, and are as if they heard not Mat. 13.14.
.

To pass from this point of Knowledge Contemplative, I conclude only with the
consideration of the 8. of the Proverbs, where it is the drift of the holy
Ghost to persuade men to seek to store their hearts with knowledge, both for
sense and Use. Wisdom cries to be heard. God would feign fasten knowledge
upon all sorts of men. Now if any should ask why Wisdom is so importunate, or
wherefore they must set all aside to get her; there are three Reasons given.
First, because we are naturally foolish, and not wise in heart: there is no
inward substance of sound knowledge in us, Verse. 5. Secondly, the things to be
imparted are the most excellent in heaven and earth, Diverse objections against
Knowledge answered.
Verse. 6. Thirdly, no knowledge but this, but it is stained with error or
lewdness: now in the Scripture we are sure of two things, Truth and Purity.

Object. Object. 1.
But the Doctrine of Religion, as it is revealed in Scripture, is exceeding
cross and contrary to our natures. Solut.
Sol. It is answered, that there is no frowardness in it; it is in us, not in
the Doctrine it self, Verse. 8.

Object. Object. 2.
But the study of saving knowledge is exceeding difficult. Sol. That is
answered, Solut.
Verse. 9. My words are all plain to him that will understand, and straight to
him that would find knowledge: If there were a constant desire and endeavor
in men, they would find great success.

Object. Object. 3.
But it is not a profitable course nor gainefull. Sol. That is denied, Verse.
10.11. Solut.
Knowledge is better then Silver, or Gold, or precious Stones; and it is more
thrift to get it then to get riches.

Object. Object. 4.
But I see that many that follow Sermons, and study the Scriptures, are very
indiscreete, Solut.
and men of no reach nor parts. Sol. It is answered, Verse. 12. that Wisdom
dwells with Prudence or Discretion, and finds forth Knowledge and Counsels: and
if men were compared, in their present knowledge, with what they were before,
it would appear that they have gotten more discretion, etc. then ever they
had, and therefore it is a mere imputation.

Object. 5.
Object. Many great professors are men of wicked lives. Sol. Verse. 13. The
fear of the Lord is to hate evil, Solut.
as Pride and Arrogancy, and the evil way, and a mouth that speaks lewd
things: and therefore if any such be of wicked lives, they are hypocrites,
thrust unto profession by the Devil, of purpose to shame the study and
endeavor after saving knowledge.

Object. 6.
Object. But the most that follow Sermons, and read the Bible so much, are
base persons, Solut.
and men of no fashion in the world. Sol. That is denied, Verse. 15.16. For, the
holy wisdom of the Word has been the fairest ornament, and help, and
support to Kings, Princes, Nobles and Judges; By me Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice.

Object. 7.
Object. But this knowledge fills men with terrors and Melancholy. Sol. Solut.
That is denied: for it is a most lovely study; I love them that love me. It is
only terrible to such as so love their sins, as they will not part with them.

Object. 8.
Object. It is a knowledge never attained in any perfection. Sol. That is
denied to, Solut.
Verse. 17. They that seek me early shall find me: men get no ripeness in
knowledge, because when they use the means, their heads are full of cares or
lusts, etc. or they wait not upon the opportunities and advantages of the
means: they seek not early.

Object. 9.
Object. But, at the least, it is an enemy to Thrift, and a hinderance to men's
outward estates. Solut.
Sol. That is false too, and he gives two Reasons for it, Verse. 18.19.20. For
first, the most durable riches (that is better then all gold or pleasure) is
righteousness, and this is gotten by the knowledge of the word. Secondly, that
that most an end impouerisheth men, is the hand of God, or of men; and sin
usually and disorder is the original cause of all losses or poverty. Now
Wisdom causes a man to walk in the ways of righteousness, and so to
inherit substance; and as God sees it meet for them, to fill their treasures.

Object. 10.
Object. But a man can never observe the rules of holiness required in the
word, Solut.
and urged upon men by preaching. Sol. The word does not only show men what
they should do, but it gives power to do it: It causes men to walk in the
way of righteousness, Verse. 21. Lastly, to put all out of doubt. Knowledge:
Why? It is the very glory of Christ, and dwelt with God in the very beginning
of the world; yea, it was begotten from everlasting, when there was no depths,
nor the mountains settled, nor the earth framed, etc. from Verse. 22. to 32. The
exhortation is in the end of the Chapter, that as men would assure themselves
to be Gods Children, or to be blessed in their ways they should hear
instruction in this point and be wise, and daily watch at the gates of
Knowledge: so should they get the life of grace and obtain the favor of God,
when others that despise knowledge, and the means of it, shall be so wounded
in soul, that they shall certainly dye eternally, Verse. 32.33.34.35.

Thus of Contemplative Knowledge.

Wisdom, or Active Knowledge follows: the consideration hereof is exceeding
difficult: for it lies in the prescribing of the discretion in practice. I
take it, Wherein wisdom or discretion consists. 1 Wisdoms order in seven
rules.
that Wisdom in practice stands principally in two things: first, in Order of
practice: secondly, in the Specialties of good behavior.

Wisdoms Order lies in the prescribing of Rules concerning the prioritie and
precedencie of things in practice: she tells what must be first done, and
chiefly; and thus she gives seven Rules.

1 That Heaven be sought for before the earth, and remission of sins in
Christ, before any other thing Mat. 6.32.
. 2 That men choose present affliction rather then future; rather suffer now
with hope of reward in another world, then take pleasure now, to endure the
pains to come 2 Timothy 2.3. to 8
. 3 That God (...) before man, whether it be other men or thy self: thus it is
wisedom^ (...) let God have the first place in the morning, before thou serve
thy self in thy calling: thus it is wisdom to obey God rather then man, when
the Commandment of God and the commandment of man lies before thee, and are
contrary one to another Acts 5.
: thus also the duties of the first Table are to be done before the duties of
the second Table, in equal comparison Mat. 22.38.39
. 4 That death be provided for before life; first learn to dye, and then it is
easy to learn to live Deuteronomy. 32.29.
. 5 That opportunity be preferred before time: Work in harvest: walk while
ye have the light: delay not whilst thou have the means, seek God whilst he
may be found. 6 That the first place in dignity over any, be accounted the
greatest place of service unto all Mat. 9.34.
. 7 That in duties to men, we first regard to practice the duties of the fifth
Commandment Ephesians. 6.3.
.
Secondly, Wisdoms specialties in the behavior. 1 Of the heart, in five
things.
concerning behavior; Wisdom binds the Heart, the Tongue, the Conversation

First, in binding the heart to good behavior, she charge five things.

1 That in the dearness of affections, and clearenesse of knowledge, in the
purity of our thoughts, God be loved above all Mark 12.33.
. 2 That we draw weapon upon every imagination, or what else exalts it self
against Contemplation, and the obedience of Christ, never ceasing till those
inward sins be led away captive 2 Cor. 10.4.
. 3 That we grow in Meekness, as we grow in knowledge James 3.13.
: and that we be wise to sobriety, desiring the knowledge only that can
profit us Romans 12.13.
. 4 That we rest not till we be clearly resolved, in Religion, Gods Love,
and our own Salvation Prou. 24.15.
. 5 That the fear of God, throughout all our whole life, be our chief
treasure Esaias 33.6.
.
Secondly, 2 Of the tongue, in seven things.
in binding the Tongue to the good behavior, she charge: 1 That our words be
few, when we speak either to God or men Eccles. 5.1. James 1.19. Eccles. 10.
vlt.
. 2 That we do not so much as whisper against the Lords Anointed Deuteronomy.
28.58. Command. 3.
. 3 That we presume not to come near the sacred Name of God to take it up in
vain Prou. 17.15.
. 4 That we censure not the just, nor justify and defend the wicked Prou.
17.15.
. It is not safe for the Prince to smite with the tongue the meanest servant of
God Prou. 17.26.
. 5 That we answer not a matter before we hear it Prou. 18.13.
. 6 That we judge nothing before the time 1 Cor. 4.5.
: and speak evil of no man, but be soft, showing all meekness to all men
Tit. 3.2.3.
. 7 That we seek a due season for good words Prou. 15.23.
.


Thirdly, 3 Of the conversation in eight things.
in binding the conversation to the good behavior, she charge: 1 That men
walk exactly, accurately, precisely: it is translated circumspectly Ephesians.
^.15.
. 2 That with all delight men set their hearts to keep Gods Commandments and
do them Deuteronomy. 4.5.6.
. and by good conversation men show their works James 3.13.
. 3 That men meddle with their own business 1 These. 4.11.
. 4 That profit and pleasure give place to godliness Psalm. 4.6. 1 Timothy 6.6.
. 5 That men trust not fair pretenses, but have some sure trial before we
commit our selves to any John 2 24.
. 6 That we fear and depart from evil before the cross come Prou. 16.6.
Esaias 27.11.
: it is every bodies course to talk of repenting when misery is upon them: but
a wise man will redeem his own sorrows, and fear GOD vvhiles the curse
hangs in the threatening though it come not yet into execution. 7 There is a
special wisdom in knowing how to give place to the time, so far as may
stand with keeping of Faith and a good Conscience: Thus Paul forbeares to
speak directly against Diana of the Ephesians for three years Acts. 19.10.26
. 8 That temporal things be ordered to conformity with God.


Hitherto of the Parts of saving Knowledge.

Verse 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord in all pleasing, being
fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God.


IN these words the end of Knowledge is at large set down: to this end we
should fill our selves with the knowledge of Gods will, that our conuersations
might be rightly ordered, to the glory of God, the profitable pleasing of
others, and the stirring up of good fruits unto eternal life, in the salvation
of our own souls. Neither does he think it enough (for those that have by
the Gospel gained much knowledge) to do good, or live well, but they must
raise their endeauours to an eminency, and this he expresses in three forms
of speech.

First, they must walk worthy of the Lord.

Secondly, they must walk in all pleasing.

Thirdly, they must be fruitful in all good works.

And if any should ask how all this can be attained, he answers in the end
of the Verse, when he says, increasing in the knowledge of God.

The general Doctrine.
The Doctrine out of the whole Verse is, that the life of Christians ought to
answer their profession, knowledge, and the means they enjoy. In the
enlarging hereof I consider four things. 1. The Motives to excite us to an
holy endeavor after innocence. 2. The Reasons why so many men in the visible
Church, inioying the means, have attained to so little innocence. 3. What we
must do that we may thus walk. 4. The Benefits would be gotten by a holy
care of Christian Innocence.

Motives to holy life.
The Motives are such as these:

1. We are not in our own power, to live to our selves, but are tied to live
to him that dyed for us 2 Cor. 5.15.
.

2 Our souls and bodies are destinate to incorruption in the Heavens: and
therefore we should set our selves so to live, for this short space in this
world, as we might deliver them up undefiled in the day of the Lord.

3 Have we ever found unrighteousness in God Ier. 2.8.
? shall we then serve Satan, that never did us good, and forsake the Lord our
God? When our hearts are tempted to sin, we should say: Shall I thus requite
the Lord for the innumerable benefits he has bestowed upon me?

4 The long night of sin and ignorance and hellish darkness and danger (by
the light of the Gospel, by the means of Christ our Savior) is past, and a
short season remains unto us, to glorify God, and work out the assurance and
fruition of our own salvation. Shall we not then arise from the sleep of
sin, and now cast away the works of darkness? Is it not now time to arm
our selves against the sluggishnes of our own Natures, and the corruptions
that are in the World; to walk honestly, as becomes this day of grace and
favor Romans 13.11.12
?

5 The miserable events of serving the flesh might move us. If we have the
means, and make a show, and yet live carnally and scandalously, we may
deceive our selves, but God will not be mocked: we shall reap as we sow; if
we sow to the flesh, we shall of the flesh reap corruption Gal. 6.7.8.
. And for these things the wrath of God comes upon the Children of
disobedience Ephesians. 5.6.
. And therefore let no man deceive us with vain words: and if Jerusalem will
not be instructed, my soul (says the Lord) shall depart from her, and she
shall be desolate, as a Land that no man inhabiteth Ier. 6.8.
. And contrariwise, if we would sow to the spirit* and never be weary of well
doing, nor faint or fail, in due season we should reap: reap I say of the
Spirit, even life everlasting Gal. 6.7.8.
.

6 We should be much moved by the dreadful relation we stand in, to God, to
Christ, to the holy Ghost, and to the Church: to God; for we are his Servants,
and therefore ought to be holy, as he is holy 1 Pet. 1.
: we are his Children and therefore ought to prove it by our obedience Mal. 1.
. To Christ; for he has washed us in his blood, and shall we pollute our
selves again? he was in his own practice a perfect pattern of innocence,
and shall we not learn of him Mat. 11.28.
? we are his Members, shall we shame and dishonor our Head? our Savior is
in Heaven, and shall we be buried, like Moles, in the love of sensual and
earthly things? or rather, ought not our affections and conuersations to be
where Christ is, even in heaven, at the right hand of the Father Col. 3.1.
Phil. 3.21.
? To the holy Ghost; we are his Temple, and shall we defile Gods holy place?
To the Church; which is the City of the holy God, which he has consecrated
to himself: and therefore were it not wickedness to profane it with
impuritie? Let us live as the Citizens of God Ephesians. 2.20.
.

Lastly, in the 1 These. 4. I find an Exhortation to holiness, and it is
enforced by five reasons: first, it is the will of God, Verse. 3. Secondly, a
holy life is an honorable life, Verse. 4. Thirdly, they are Gentiles, not
Christians, that live profanely, Verse. 5. Fourthly, God is a certain auenger
of all unrighteousness, Verse. 6. And finally, we are called unto holiness,
Verse. 7.

Secondly, How it comes to pass, that such multitudes live without holiness.
if it be asked, how it comes to pass that such multitudes of people, living
in the bosom of the Church, are touched with so little care of holiness of
life? I may answer, diverse things.

1 The Veil of Ignorance lies upon their hearts Esaias 25.8.
, and gross darkness still couers those people Esaias 60.2.3.
. Though the light be come, and the glory of the Lord; Yet for the most part
these men abhor the light Job 24.13.
, and therefore are their ways dark and slippery Psalm. 36.6.
.

2 Men's hearts go after their eyes, and men's senses are made Masters of their
lives Job 31.7.
, and therefore are their affections only stirred with carnal things, they
take their directions from their own flesh, and walk in the way of their own
lusts Eccles. 11.9.
.

3 Many times their brethren deceive them Job 6.13.
: I mean, they are misled sometimes, by their own mistaking and misapplying
of Gods promises, and sometimes by the sinful dawbing of wicked Teachers, that
set themselves to strengthen the hands of the wicked, and discourage the hearts
of the righteous; crying, Peace, and safety, where there is no peace. Ungodly
men these are, that gainesay the doctrine of those faithful men, that would
cure this sinful generation, by a meet severity of doctrine.

4 The most men see no necessity of the restoring of their souls: they cannot
be persuaded of the necessity of Regeneration and conversion by the Word, and
when they come to the means they seek not to God to lead them Psalm. 23.3.
.

5 Men are double-hearted, and divide one part to the flesh and the world, and
another to God; the more open part of their lives, some pretend to direct, with
some respect of holiness, but the secret and inward part is full of all
rottenness: and yet men will not see, that God and Sin, God and Riches, God
and the Flesh, cannot be served both of one man, at one time.

6 They are incorrigible, will neither be healed by the word, nor be forced by
the works of God, They will not understand, though all the foundations of the
earth be moved Psalm. 82.5.
.

What we must do that we might be holy.
Thirdly, that we might attain unto this holiness of Conversation:

1 We must grow out of liking with our own ways, and our present carnal
course, and forsake that way, and return from it Prou. 9.6. Ezech. 18.
.

2 We must get out of the way of sinners, for he that walks with the
ungodly will be like them Psalm. 1.1.
.

3 We must mightily labor for knowledge, and be much in contemplation: and to
this end exercise our selves in Gods word day and night, and dwell in Gods
house. Coherence with Verse before, and Psalm. 1.2. Prou. 8.20. and 2.11.12.
Psalm. 84.4.5. Esaias 2.3. yea, we should by conference ask the way one of
another Ier. 51.4.
.

4 We must get into Christ; for he is the way, and till we labor our
ingrafting into Christ, and settle our selves to seek a Savior, even unto us
by faith, all our works are in vain.

5 That our conuersations might be more holy, and unrebukable, we should
first labor to get holiness into our hearts; for if grace be within, duties
will be without; if corruption be mortified in the Soul, which is the
fountain, it will have no great sin in the life, which is the stream which
flows from the heart: first, we should guide our hearts into the way Prou.
23.19.
, for thereout comes life Prou. 4.23.
.

6 We must submit our selves to Gods corrections: learn obedience by the
things we suffer Heb. 5.8.
, obey the checkes of our conscience, and be contented to eat the bread of
affliction Esaias 30.20.
: bear the words of rebuke and admonition 1 These. 5.13.
: for he that refuses correction will certainly go out of the way of life
Prou. 10.17.
.

Lastly, we should commit our way to God, and by constant and daily prayer
beseech him that he would show us the way, and lead us forth Psalm. 25.4.
; and then, that he would stay our steps in his paths, that our feet do not
slide Psalm. 17.5.
: and to this end, that he would remove out of our way, all impediments, and
every lying way Psalm. 119.29.
: and that he would daily quicken us in the way, against the sluggishnesse of
our own Natures Psalm. 119.37.
: and bend our hearts to his holy fear, but especially every morning we should
beseech God so to assist us, and guide, and strengthen us, to do the duties of
the day, and that he would see to and defend the thing of the day in his day 1
Kings 8.58.59.
, by the virtue of Christ's intercession, and his words, which are near unto
God day and night.

The gain of godliness.
Fourthly, thus doing, and endeavoring our selves to know and do Gods will.

1 The Lord would know us by name, and take notice of our ways, even with the
knowledge of approbation Psalm. 1. vlt.
.

2 Our lives would be full of Joy and cheerfulness Psalm. 138.5.
: yea, they that have tasted of the joys of a Crown, shall leave the Throne
and Palace, to seek the sweet delights of the faithful, and to sing their
songs.

3 God would walk in the midst of us Leuit. 26.11.
.

4 Yea, he would keep his Covenant and Mercy with us 1 Kings 8.23.
.

5 We should be protected against all hurtful troubles, being either
preserved from them, or in them: if we walk in the day we shall not stumble
John 11.8 9.
; yea, though we went through fire and water, yet Gods holy presence and strong
arm would be with us Esaias 43.3. Psalm. 23.3.
: yea, we might dwell with everlasting burnings, that is, within the knowledge
of Gods terrible presence, and sight of his great judgments, when the
hypocrites of the world would be afraid Esaias 33.14.16
.

6 Or if there were sorrows and griefs upon us in this world, yet heaven
shall come, and we shall rest in the beds of eternal ease, whatsoever betides
us, we shall not lie down in sorrow Esaias 57.2. and 50. vlt.
.

7 Thus to live, is, to rule with God, and to be faithful with his Saints Hos.
11.12.
.

8 Thus shall we escape the vigor of the Law Gal. 5.18.
, and the flames of Hell Romans 8.1.
.

Lastly, if we continue faithful to the death, there is laid up for us a
crown of life Revel. 2.10.
.

Thus of walking, or holy conversation in the general: now in particular, that
we might walk in an holy eminency, three things (as is before noted) are
here urged.

First, that we should walk worthy of the Lord.] That is, so to know and
consider the singular mercies of God in Christ, as to endeavor to express our
thankfulness in the obedience of our lives, in such a measure as might become
the mercies of God. Before I open the words further, I consider in the
general, two things.

1 That the obedience of the faithful is raised by the contemplation of the
mercies of God: General observations.
which should teach us, as we desire more to abound in good fruits, so to be
more in the assurance, and often meditation of Gods love to us: more knowledge
of this kind would work more obedience; and a confused knowledge of Gods
mercy is usually accompanied with an unconstant obedience. Besides, this
reproues the dangerous and sinful abuse of Gods mercies in the common people,
that use to plead their safety (notwithstanding their sins) by the
alleging of the mercy of God to sinners: whereas it is most certain, that the
right knowledge of Gods mercy would make men afraid to sin; There is mercy
with thee that thou may be feared, says the Psalmist Psalm. 130.4.
: and it is the infallible sign of a true convert, that he does fear God and
his goodness Hos. 3.5.
: every man can fear God and his Justice, especially in some kinds of
judgments; but a child of God does never more tenderly fear God, then when
he has greatest taste of Gods mercies.

2 The Papists would find merit of works in this Verse: both because
holiness of life is so much urged, as also because here is the word [ worthy]
used, as if the Apostle should grant, that they might be worthy of, and merit
the blessings of God.

My answer is, Against merit of works.
First, that merit cannot be founded upon Scripture; and secondly, it cannot be
founded upon this Scripture. For the first, we cannot merit for many reasons in
Scripture: first, we are not our own men, we are so tied unto God that gave us
being in Nature and Grace, that when we have done all we can do, our own
mouths must say we are but unprofitable Servants Luke 17.
. Secondly, all our sufficiency to do any good is of God, not from our selves
2 Cor. 3.5. Phil 2.13.
. Thirdly, God gains nothing by us, If thou be righteous, what give thou to
him? or, what receives he at thy hands Job 35.7.
? Fourthly, men talk of their well-doing, but what shall become of their
sins? If the Papists will first go to hell for their sins, and stay all
that eternity there, then afterward if God create another eternity, they may
have hearing to relate what good they have done: the curse of the Law will be
first served; the punishment of Adams one sin barred the plea for any reward
for former righteousness. Fifthly, what comparison can there be between the
glory of heaven and our works on earth Romans 8.18.
? Sixthly, it is worthy to be observed, that it is mercy in God to set his love
upon them that keep his Commandments, Ezod. 20. Command. 2. Seauenthly, we
are so far from meriting, that we are taught to pray God to give us our
daily bread; we have not a bit of bread of our own earning. Eighthly, the
Sanctification of the most righteous is but begun in this life. Lastly, unto
all these Reasons add the further Testimony of these Scriptures, Dan. 9 9.
Romans 4.5. and 11.9. 1 Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.8.9.

Secondly, this place has no color for merit: for (to pass over that reason,
that the Scripture requires good works, therefore our works merit, as a most
false and absurd argument:) the words [ worthy of the Lord] cannot be applied
to merit by any means: for in as much as the Lord had bestowed many of his
favors already upon them, and giving his hand and writing, and seal for the
rest, they cannot by any works afterward be said in any color to merit what
is past. They are urged, Mat. 3. to bring forth fruits worthy repentance: now
it were absurd to think that the fruits afterward borne, should merit
repentance, which God gave before; for that is to affirm that not only a
wicked man might merit his own conversion, but that he might merit it by the
works he would do after his conversion, which I know not that any Papist
will affirm: and the like reason is there of the phrase here used.

Quest.
Quest. But, letting the Papist go, what is it to walk worthy of the Lord?]

Ans.
Ans. It is so to cleave unto God, that we refuse not (out of the holy
estimation of Gods free mercies) to forsake our selves and the world, and to
testify our obedience to the Law and Spirit of God, in uprightness with all
thankfulness. But that this may appear more plainly, if we would walk
worthy of the Lord.

In general our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees; we must be so far from resting in the custom and practice of
the vile sins that abound in the world, that we must not be satisfied, with
this, that we be civil honest men, and well thought of in the world: for Gods
mercies challenge more at our hands then civil honesty Mat. 5.20.
.

If we would walk worthy o^ the Lord we must do six things.
In particular, if we would walk worthy of God: 1 We must walk with God in
the sense of Gods presence, and in the light of his countenance; so knowing his
love as we forget not his presence Genesis 17.1.
. And because the wandering and unmortified heart of man is not easily brought
to this, therefore we must humble our selves to gain a better ability to
walk with our God Mich. 6.8.
. 2 We must set the Law of God (as the only rule of our actions) always
before us Psalm. 119.1.
; and by all means be careful to obey the motions of Gods Spirit, even the
Law in our minds, that is, to walk after the Spirit Gal. 5.21.
, and according to the Spirit Romans 8.1.
. 3 We must labor to glorify God, by endeavoring by an open light, to
approve our selves to the world, in showing the power of Gods grace in our
works, and the newnes of our lives James 3.15. Math. 5. Romans 6.
. 4 We must be contented to deny our own reason, wit, desires, delights, and
profits, and to take up any cross God shall lay upon us Luke 9.24.
. 5 We should go beyond all civil honest men in this, that we would respect
all Gods Commandments, and make conscience of every sin, by Prayer and
endeavor to avoid it, and to obey God both in our souls and bodies; and in
every part of both. Lastly, we should so admire Gods love, in delivering our
souls from death, and our feet from falling, etc. that we should seek Gods
face in the light of the living, and never to come empty handed, but Gods vows
should be upon us, and we should ever be rendering praise. Thankfulness is all
we can give to God Psalm. 56.12.13.
.


In all pleasing.] This is the second thing required in our conversation: we
should not think it enough to live justly and religiously, but we must live
pleasingly also, and this is true: 1. In respect of God: Let us have grace that
we may so serve God, that we may please him Heb. 12.28. 1 Cor. 7.31.
. 2. In respect of our own Conscience, preserving the rest and goodness of
the conscience. 3. In respect of men: thus the wise cares to please her
husband, and the husband to please his wife 1 Cor. 7.34. What we should do
that we mig^t not only serve God but please him to.
. It is not enough to be persuaded that that we do, be good; but we ought to
look to it, that it be pleasing. So, in all duties to God, and in our carriage
to men.

Quest. But what should we do, that we might so serve God, as please him to?
Ans. This is answered in diverse Scriptures.

1 Be sure thou be not in the flesh; for no such can please God Romans 8.8.
: and they are in the flesh that can relish nothing but fleshly things; that
take no care to provide for the life of Grace and peace of Conscience; verse. 6.
that will not be subject to the Law of God; verse. 7. that have not the Spirit
of Christ, verse. 9. and that dye not to sin, verse. 10.

Object. Object.
But there are many wise men, to whom those signs agree, and may not they for
their good parts otherwise be pleasing to God? Solut.
Sol. No; so long as they are fleshly persons, their wisdom, bread in the
flesh, is so far from pleasing God, that it is enmity to God.

2 Thou must let the will of God revealed in this word, be the rule of all thy
actions, a light to thy feet, and a lantern to thy paths; for in the Word
is contained both what he requires, and what will please him.

3 Thou must make conscience of little sins as well as great sins* if a man
break the least Commandment, and then by doctrine or defense maintain it to
be a small matter, our Savior Christ shows that this is not only displeasing
to God, but it will cause God to cast men out of heaven with indignation: on
the other side, whosoever shall make conscience to observe Gods Commandments
in the things the world counts less matters, and shall constantly by doctrine
or profession declare his sincerity herein, he shall be exceeding pleasing to
God; and God will show it, by making him great in the Kingdom of Heaven Mat.
5.19.
. What commandment could be less then the commandment about the not eating
of blood, and yet with many words, their obedience herein was urged, and that
with this reason; as they would have all things go well with them and theirs,
and do that which is pleasing or right in Gods sight Deuteronomy. 12.24.26.
.

4 Thou must desire and pray for the best things; thou must so think of
profits and pleasures of the world, as especially thy heart must desire, and
thy lips request of God, the wisdom and grace that is from above. It did
exceedingly please God that Solomon asked wisdom and not riches, or long life
1 King. 10.3.
.

5 Thou must get an humble and contrite spirit; a heart able to see and hate
sin, and mourn over it; and with a tender sense of thine own wants and
unworthiness, to implore Gods favor, and the renewing of his mercies.

6 Thou must so profess respect of piety, as thou be careful in all things
to deal justly and truly with men, delighting in all the occasions and means
to show mercy: he cannot please God that does not endeavor to please men;
Sacrifice is an abomination, when men do not judgment and Justice Prou. 21.3.
: and God delights in men that will deal truly Prou. 12.22.
. If a man will deal justly, and love mercy (not be merciful only,) and when
he has occasion to come to God in the duties of piety and worship, will come
in all humility and contrition of heart, this is that (says the Prophet
Micah) that is required; yea, that is good, that is exceeding pleasing and
acceptable to God Mich. 6.5.6.7.
.

7 Thou must be tenderhearted and merciful, to supply the necessities of the
Saints: for works of mercy are Odours of smeet swell, Sacrifices acceptable,
well pleasing to God Phil. 4.18.
.

8 Thou must take heed of such sins as God hates with a special hatred; for
there are some evils, which a man being guilty of, God will at no hand be
pleased with him: as first, the sins of the third Commandment, swearing and
cursing, and the like; for God has told us before, that what sins soever he
will bear with, yet he will not hold us guiltless if we take his Name in
vain Command. 3. Deuteronomy. 28.58.
. Secondly, luke-warmnesse in Religion, when men are neither hot nor cold; this
is so exceeding loathsome upon Gods stomach, he cannot be at rest till he have
spued such persons out. Thirdly, for a man to bless his heart when God
curses, and to plead his hopes, when God threatens Deuteronomy. 29.19.
. Fourthly, to fear God by men's traditions Esaias 29.13.
. Fifthly, presumptuously to break Gods Sabbath Ier. 17. vlt.
. Sixthly, through impatience or unbelief in adversity, to withdraw our
selves Heb. 10.35.36. etc.
etc. and without faith it is impossible to please God. Seauenthly, to offer
unto God the blind, the lame, and the sick, the torn and the corrupt thing
Mal. 1.8.9.10.13.14.
. Eighthly, to be found in the fashions of the world, either in life or attire
Romans 12.2.
. Ninthly, out of frowardness and malice, to cross and persecute such as
fear God; God these please not 1 These. 2.15.16
.

Thus of walking in all pleasing, in respect of God.

What we must do that we may please men.
Quest. 2. What must we do that we may walk pleasingly amongst men? Ans. I
consider of this first generally, then more particularly. That we may please
men we must observe these Rules: 1. We must be careful to please God, else it
is just with God, that though we strive to please men, yet we should not
attain to it, because we are not in the first place careful to please God. 2.
We must get that Philanthropian, love of men into our hearts, but especially
Philadelphian, the love of the Brethren, for this ingenders care and diligence
to please, and makes the labor thereunto seem no baseness or burden. 3. In
the general corruption of our callings we must live innocently. Samuel is
much set by, and pleases the people, when he stands by Hophni and Phinehas,
men so egregiously corrupt. 4. If we would please in conuersing, we must
learn to bear infirmities Romans 15.2.
. 5. We must practice those virtues that especially win favor: as courtesy,
meekness, candor, faithful dealing, (though it be to our hinderance) we
must give soft answers, overcome evil with goodness, be slow to wrath, and
forgive, and not revenge. 6. We must hate those vices, and avoid them, which
in conversation appear hateful amongst men; as backbiting Romans 1.29. 1 Timothy
5.13. Prou. 26.20.
, discovery of secrets Prou. 11.13.
, bitter words Ephesians. 5.3.4.
, boasting Prou. 27.1.2.
, suspiciousnesse 1 Cor. 13.
, rashness in reproves and admonition, offensive carriage 1 Cor. 10.32.
, and the stirring of the infirmities of others Genesis 13.8.
.

In particular, we must be careful to please, in the Family, in the Church,
in the Commonwealth. In the Family: 1. The Governors must labor to walk in
all pleasing; and to this end, they must govern in the Lord, and cast the
impression of Religion upon the souls of their people, that the reason of
their obedience may be the will of God; How governors in families may walk
pleasingly.
they must retain wisely their authority: it is not the way to please, to
loose the reins, and lose their authority: they must take notice of virtues
as well as vices, and reprove in love, not in passion, and avoid that behavior
that irritates and prouokes to wrath.

How Inferiors in the family may please their Superiors.
2. Inferiors, if ever they would please GOD, must be careful to please their
Masters, Parents, and Husbands, as bearing the Image of God: and to this end,
they must pray God to make them able, both to obey and please, they must be
teachable, and not such as must be continually told of the same fault: they
must avoid answearing again; for, as a sullen silence is hateful, so prating,
and have to answer does provoke Tit. 2.9.10.
. Lastly, they must avoid such sins as prove in their places: specially
hateful; as pride, lying, unfaithfulness, ( viz.) to be such as cannot be
trusted in any thing; stubbornness, slownesse, especially when they are sent
upon business.

How Ministers may walk in all pleasing.
As in the Family, so in the Church, Ministers must walk in all pleasing; and
to this end they must practice what they preach, and avoid envy, passion,
contention, and partiality; they must be wise and gentle, apt to teach and
instruct in meekness, though they be opposed 2 Timothy 2.24.25
; they must be vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality; they
must not be pot-companions, or quarrelsome, or covetous, more desiring and
delighting in the the gain of the Benefice, then the profit of the peoples
souls: they must order their families as well as themselves, and keep their
children in subjection and gravity 1 Timothy 3.^.3.4.
. Peace, peace, and dawbing with untempered mortar, will not make them
pleasing, though many strive to win applause by such daubing: for the
conscience of the men that are so soothed does secretly contemn these
plausible seers.

The Hearers also must strive to please their Teachers, How the hearers may
please their Teachers.
and that they may do so, they must yield them meet honor, and sufficient
maintenance, but especially they must labor, from the heart, to yield
obedience to the doctrine of their Teachers: for that pleases a faithful
Minister more then all dignities or riches.

3 The Magistrate must strive to be pleasing to the people, How the Magistrate
may please the people.
and for that purpose, they must be men fearing God Exodus 18.
, studious of the Scriptures Josh. 1.9.
, lovers of the good Mich. 2.3.
, just, hating covetousness Exodus 18.
, lovers of the Commonwealth, industrious to acquaint themselves with the
estate of their flocks, walking in and out before the people, with all
wisdom, courage, and gravity, careful to purge out those vices, which as
evil humors, disease the public body, for this eases and pleases the body
afterward: such as will charge and remunerate, as well as punish; countenance
the good as well as restrain the evil: such as in factions and emulations
will cleave to neither side: men that conceive a general care for the persons,
goods, and good name of the Subject: guiding them to holiness as well as
happiness, to sanctity as well as safety.

The people again must strive to please their Rulers, How the people may
please their Rulers.
by reuerencing them, and obeying them, though against their profit, with
constancy and for conscience sake: they must pray for them, and speak well of
them. It was without doubt a great contentment to David that whatsoever he did
pleased the people 2 Samuel 3.36.
.

Thus of walking in all pleasing in respect of others. How we may walk ^n all
pleasing toward our own Consciences.


Thirdly, we must walk in all pleasing toward our own Consciences,
providing by all means for the rest, peace and contentment of our own hearts
within, and that this inward peace and pleasing may be had, many things are
profitable and auayleable: 1. Sorrow for our sins; for this sorrow will be
turned into joy John 16.20.
; whereas the end of all carnal laughter will be sorrow and unquietness of
heart Luke 6.25.
: and there is no peace to the wicked, and he is wicked that is not contrite in
heart Esaias 57. vlt.
. 2. The Faith or belief of our Justification in Christ; for, being justified
by faith, our souls have peace Romans 5.1.
: we must seek the rest of our hearts in Gods favor in Christ, for he is the
Prince of Peace Esaias 9 6.
. 3. The love of Gods Law; for great peace and rest have they that love Gods
Law Psalm. 119.165.
; yea; it is added, and nothing shall offend them. 4. Diligence and constancy
in the use of Gods ordinances: it is a secret joy to the heart of every one
that is a friend to the Bridegroom, to hear the Bridegroomes voice John 3.29.
; and to be much in prayers is a way to be much in joy John 16.24.
. 5. Meekness; while angry and wrathful persons fret themselves, to their
own singular evil, meek men shall delight themselves in abundance of peace
Psalm 37.8.11
. 6. Just dealing in all businesses with all men: for, the work of
righteousness is peace, and the effect of righteousness is quietness and
assurance for ever Esaias 32.17.
. Lastly, would we attain that peace and pleasing contentment that passes
all the understanding of the carnal man, we must take heed of worldly cares.
In nothing be careful.

Object. Object. 2.
But we have so many crosses, how can we but care? Sol. Let your request be
known to God. Solut.


Object. Object. 3.
We have prayed, and are not rid out of them. Sol. Add supplication to your
prayers. Solut.


Object.
Object. We have prayed, and that earnestly, and daily, and with much
importunity, Solut.
and yet are disquieted still. Sol. Be thankful for the mercies thou have;
unthankfulness hinders the restfull success of prayer Phil. 4.6.7.
.

Fruitful in all good works.] The Son of man is ascended, and has given
authority and gifts unto men, and unto every Servant his work: he calls for
obedience, and detests sleeping, and requires all watchfulness to the speeding
of all his works, and what he says to one, he says to all, Watch Mar.
13.34.36
: This is showed unto all that turn unto God, that they must do works meet
for repentance Acts 26.20.
; considering the season, that it is now high time to awake out of sleep: the
night is far spent, and the day at hand, and therefore we should arm and
address our selves, to cast away the works of darkness, and to labor in the
light Romans 13.12.13.
, Good works are the best apparel of Christians, professing godliness 1 Timothy 2.10.
. and their most durable riches and treasures 1 Timothy 6.18.19
. To this end has the light of the gracious and saving Doctrine of God shined,
that men might be familiarly instructed to conceive the necessity of doing all
the works, both of piety, righteousness and sobriety Tit. 2.12.
. Yea, to this end did Christ give himself for us, and redeem us at so high a
rate, that he might purify a peculiar people to himself, zealous of good
works Tit. 2.14.
. We are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has ordained that we should walk in them Ephesians 2.10.
: and it shall be to us according to our works Romans 2.6.
: and therefore it should be our Wisdom, to show by good conversation our
works James 3.13.
, and our Love, to provoke others unto good works Heb. 10.24.
.

Concerning good Works, I propound three things: 1 What works are not good
works. 2 What rules must be observed to make our works good works. 3 What
works are good in particular.


What works are good works.
For the first: the works that are done to be seen of men are not good works
Mat. 23.5.
. The works of persecutors are all naught John 8.39.40.
: all works are naught that have not repentance going before; for good works
are the works of the penitent Acts 26.20.
: all the works that are done too late are thrust out of the Catalogue of good
works; as to cry to God after a man has stood out all the opportunities and
seasons of grace Prou. 1.28.
. It is a sign men's works are not good, when they hate the light, and cannot
abide to be reproved John 3.19.20
. And of the like nature are those works that are guided after the example of
the multitude, of which men say, they do as the most do Exodus 22.
. Lastly, does not the world hate them? John 7.7.
then suspect thy works.

What rules must be observed to make our works good works.
For the second: that we may have comfort, that God will account our works
good works: 1. They must be warranted by the word of God: if we do truth,
we must go to the light that our deeds may be manifest, that they are
wrought in God John 3.21.
. 2. Our persons must be made good by Justification, we must be created in
Christ Jesus Ephesians. 2.10.
. Would we work the works of God, we must believe in him that God has sent
John 6.28.29.
. 3. Our works must be finished John 4.34.
. 4. By mortification we must purge ourselves, that we may be mee^e for the
Masters use, and prepared for every work we would have accepted as good 2 Timothy 2.21.
. Lastly, the ends must be good: and the ends of all good works are, 1. The
glory of God: 2. The discharge of our obedience: 3. The edification of our
neighbors: 4. The testification of our Faith and Thankfulness: 5. The
escaping of the punishment of sin, and the destruction of the wicked: 6. The
answering of our high calling in Jesus Christ: 7. The obtaining of the glory of
Heaven.

What works are good works in particular.
For the third: in our conversation with men there are diverse kinds of good
works; some spiritual, some corporal: they are good works to instruct,
admonish, encourage, reprove, and pray for others; to pull an infant, or weak
man out of a flaming fire, is a good work, and such is it to recover a sinner,
by admonition, counsel, etc. It is a good work to cover infirmities; yea, a
multitude of them: and to forgive trespasses, and to overcome evil with
goodness: so also they are good works to grieve with them that grieve, in
giving honor to go one before another, to lift up the just praises of others,
to lend to the needy, and to give liberally and chearefully toward the
relieuing of the necessities of the poor, especially them of the household of
Faith.

To conclude, from the manner of phrase, [ bearing fruit in every good worke]
these things may be observed: First, that good works are fruits: for they are
such things as show our Faith, prove our planting, and yield us comfort in Gods
acceptance of them. Secondly, that a religious mind will labor to get fruit
of every sort; he will not know a good work, but he will desire to carry
some fruit of it. Thirdly, a Christian man carries his fruit, both because he
carries the blessing of his well-doing, and because he is never without some
fruit, as also he shall be sure his works will go with him, when all things
else shall leave him.

Thus far of the eminency of Christians in holy conversation.

Increasing in the knowledge of God.] Whereas a Question might be asked what
should we do that we might attain to the holiness of life before
described? These words contain an answer to it, that they must increase in
the knowledge of God.

The words in themselves stand of three parts: First, the Grace, Knowledge:
Secondly, the Measure of it, increase: Thirdly, the Object, of God. Of the
Grace it self I have entreated before, only from the repetition two things
may be observed.

First, Observation from the repetition.

We need to be often stirred up to seek knowledge.


we had need to be often urged, and put in mind, and stirred up to seek
knowledge, we are naturally so unapt to spiritual things, that line must be
upon line, and precept upon precept Esaias 29.
. Of our selves there is none of us have any great mind to understand or seek
after God Psalm. 14.2.
: or if we begin we soon leave off to understand to do good Psalm. 36.3.
; and some of us are so wayward and wilful, that we know not, nor will not
know, but walk on in darkness, though all the foundations of the earth be
moved Psalm. 82.7.
.

Secondly, men are not only to seek knowledge, that they may be converted and
sanctified, and live a righteous life; but even after all these are attained,
We must still seek to get more knowledge.
we must still be industrious to get more knowledge: because knowledge
enlarged gives the comfort and sense of grace received: else a man may have
Faith, and yet for want of knowledge live without the comforts of it. Besides,
it furthers the sanctification of our callings, and the Creatures we use 1 Timothy 4.3.
. Further, it makes us able to discern things that differ, and in matters of
salvation to trust our own Faith Phil. 1.10. 1 John 4.1.
; and it keeps down corrupt affections ^say 11.7.9.
: and in what measure we retain our ignorance, we retain fear, and the
spirit of bondage.

Increasing. Doct. 1.
] The adiunct increase follows. Here are two Doctrines.

First, that we must increase in knowledge; else that we have, will decay,
and knowledge is given but in part, and not all at once. Besides, it is a
special part of Gods Image; and therefore of great both necessity and honor.
If men be never weary of seeking for wealth and riches, why should a Christian
be weary of seeking Wisdom, which is better then all treasures.

Secondly, Doct. 2.
that increase of knowledge is a great furtherance of holy life: the preuayling
of sin in the life of the Jews, was caused by the preuayling of ignorance
Esaias 1.3.
. Therefore there is no mercy, nor piety in the Land, because there is no
knowledge of God in the land Hos. 4.1.2.
. God shows his righteousness to them that know him Psalm. 36.10.
. And therefore neither the Papists must tell men that Ignorance is the Mother
of Devotion: nor the common Protestant so idly ask, what needs all this
Knowledge?

More particularly, three Questions may be here resolved.

What are the letts of increasing.
Quest. 1. What are the letts of increase? Ans. There are many letts. 1. Ill
opinions about knowledge: as that it is unprofitable, unnecessary, etc. 2.
Abuse of our Callings. 3. The love of other things Ier. 9.23.24.
. 4. The smothering of doubts, difficulties, and prejudice in the use of the
means. 5. Security; when a man grows proud of what he does know, and
presumes of Gods mercy for what he wants. 6. Presumptuous sin, as it hinders
other graces, so it casts men behinde-hand in knowledge. 7. Resisting of Gods
Spirit, pricking the conscience to get it awake, and smothering of terrors
Hos. 6.1.2.3.
. 8. Internal evils nourished, as lust Tim. 3.7.
, evil thoughts Prou. 14.22.
, passion Prou. 14.29.
, etc.

Quest. 2. How may we know when we increase in knowledge. Ans. We increase in
knowledge. 1. If we increase in the affection to any use of the means: How we
may know when we increase with knowledge.
for God is never wanting in the success. 2. If we increase in the power of
godliness: it is certain, we grow in knowledge if we grow in grace. 3. If
we grow stayed, and settled, and more resolved in the doctrine of Gods grace,
and practice of holy life.

What we must do that we may increase in knowledge.
Quest. 3. What must we do that we may increase? Ans. We must observe these
Rules. 1. We must practice what we do already know John 7.17.
. 2. We must not be ouer-curious, or suffer our selves to be drawn aside with
fond questions, controversies and speculations, but be wise to sobriety Romans
12.13.
. 3. We must redeem the time, and watch to all the opportunities, for the use
of the means Ephesians. 5.16.
. 4. We must use the world as if we used it not. 5. We must acknowledge,
that is, confess and profess what we know, least God by our unthankfulness
and fearfulness, be provoked to scourge our spirits with a slumber or
reprobate sense Romans 1.28.
. 6. We must mind our own way Prou. 14.8.
. Lastly, we must use Gods ordinances, and all of them, and without
interruption, constantly and chearefully.

Thus of the Grace it self, and the Measure of it: the Object follows.

Our knowledge must be of God four ways.
Of God.] Our knowledge must be of God four ways: for the first, it must be
spiritual and divine knowledge, not humane, natural, and earthly. 2. It must
be of God; as he is the author of it, we must seek it from above, by prayer.
3. It must be of God, as he is the end of it, it must draw us nearer to God.
Lastly, God must be the object of it, we must know Gods Name. In this last
sense here are two things imported.

First, that even after regeneration there may be sometimes some working of the
seeds of Atheism. So wretched is the evil nature of man, that in this
respect there is cause many times to hang down the head with horror, shame,
and bitter mourning of heart, and confusion of face.

Secondly, that increase in holy conversation does abate the mouings of
Atheism: as any be more holy, so they are more freed from the trouble of them.
Be first holy, and then be an Atheist, professed or resolved, if thou can.

Concerning the knowledge of God four things are to be considered: 1. How he
is made known: 2. Who they are that God charge with this, that they know him
not: 3. How it comes to pass that man knows not his God: 4. What we must
do, that we may know God.

How God is made known
God is made known, 1. in his Son: in Christ, God is as it were visible John
14.9.
. 2. By his Spirit 1 Cor. 2.10.11
. 3. By his word; both by the testimony it gives of God, and by the relation
of Prophesies accomplished, and Miracles wonderfully wrought; it shows a God,
as it is a sacred treasury preserving the memory of wonderful things. 4. By
his works; and that either in general, as God has stamped upon them some
marks of his invisible things Romans 1.
; or in his particular works, as the founding of the Earth, the hanging of the
Clouds, the spreading out of the Heavens, the recoyling of the Waters, leaving
an habitation for man; terrors of Conscience, Plagues upon wicked men at their
wish, answearing of Prayers, Miracles, the Soul of Man, and state of Devils.

2 There are many sorts of men; Who they are that know not God.
yea, even in the Church, besides professed Atheists, that are hated of God,
and charged with this, that they know not God: as, 1. All that keep not his
Commandments Esaias 1.5. 1 John 2.4.
: 2. All that hear not us 1 John 4.6.
: 3. All Persecutors John 16.3.
: 4. All that honor not such as fear God 1 John 3.1.
: 5. All that deny the Natures or Offices of the Son of God 1 John 2.23.
.

3 This wretched Atheism and Ignorance of God, and evil thoughts of his
Nature, Presence, Attributes, etc. is caused: first, by corruption of our
natures in the Fall: The causes of this ignorance of God.
2. It is increased by the custom of all sorts of sins: 3. If it prevail,
it may come by some special judgment of God, who being provoked by other
sins, does leave men to a spirit of slumber, or eternally rejecting them,
does leave them to a reprobate sense, or in the power of the sin against the
holy Ghost.

4 That we may know God and increase in it, What we must do that we may know
God.
we must view his works, search his Book, obey the motions of his Spirit,
humble our selves to seek the signs of his presence; and for the better
success in all, labor for a pure heart Mat. 5.6.
.

Hitherto of the Object, Parts, and End of Knowledge: the Cause follows in
these words.

Verse 11. Strengthened in all might, according to the power of his glory.


IN the words I note, 1. The thing it self, Strengthened: 2. The manner of it,
in all might: 3. The ground of it, according to the power of his glory, or
glorious power.

From the Coherence I observe that we must be strengthened in Grace, Doct. 1.
before we can be filled with Knowledge: till Grace prevail, evil motions
and temptations grow many times too hard for the seeds of Knowledge: and the
Devil steals away much of the seed.

Strengthened. Doctr. 2.
] There are two sorts of Christians fearing God: some are strengthened with all
might; Two sorts of Christians.
some are feeble in the Knowledge and Grace of God. There are strong Christians
and weak; infants, and men of riper age. It is profitable more exactly to
consider of both: and in the weak Christian I consider, 1. Who are weak. 2.
What helps to make them strong in the might of God.

For the better understanding of the first, I propound three things. 1* What
the Infant or weak Christian wants, by which he discouers his weakness.
2. What he has, notwithstanding his wants. 3. The happiness of his estate,
though he be weak.

They are but Babes and Infants in Grace: Who are Infants in grace.
1. That know not the love of Christ, with particular, distinct, and full
assurance Ephesians. 3.19.20.17.
. 2. That are not able to practice the more strong and purging duties of
mortification Mat 9 15. etc.
. 3. That serve any passion and unruly affection 1 Cor. 3 1.2.3.
. 4. That are unsettled in the way of life John 14.5.
, and tossed with the wind of contrary doctrine Ephesians. 14.
. 5. That stick at acknowledgement, and dare not stand out to the profession
of the truth Ephesians. 14.
. 6. That cannot digest some truths of God, Ephesians. 4.13.
as being strong meat, and in their account hard sayings. John 6.60. and 16.22.
7. That are inexpert and unskillful in the word of righteousness Heb. 5.12.13.
(especially, if they be ignorant in the principles,) other signs may be
gathered from the contrary estate of the strong Christian afterward.

What the weak Christian has.
2 Yet the weakest Christian (whatsoever he wants) has these things: 1. He
discernes the season of Grace, and the day of his peace and redemption, which
the wisemen of the world do not Mat. 16.3.
. 2. Though in his own account he can do but little for the truth, yet he
will be sure to do nothing against the truth, if he may know it 2 Cor. 13.8.
. 3. He is not in the flesh, he is more then a natural man, he is borne
again 1 Cor. 15.50. John 3.5. Romans 8.8.
. 4. He has an earnest appetite and constant desire after the sincere milk
of the Word 1 Pet. 2.2.
. 5. He believes whiles he struggles with unbelief. 6. The strong man armed,
which is the Devil, is so cast out by Christ, that he preuayles not as he was
wont. 7 He can deny his reason, pleasures, profits, and beloved sins, and
take up his cross in some measure Luke 14.26.27.33.
. Lastly, such a door may be opened to them that have little strength, as no
man can shut, and such courage they may have, that they will stick to the
word, and keep it as their best treasure, whatsoever they lose, and by no
means be induced to deny Christ and his Name Revel. 2 8.9.
.

His happiness though he be weak.
3 His case is happy though weak, for he has such a High Priest, and Savior,
as knows how to have compassion on the ignorant Heb. 5.2.
, and is touched with a feeling of his in^irmities Heb. 4.15.
, and has wrought the reconciliation of all his brethren, and was tempted
himself: and therefore will succor the weak when he is tempted Heb ^.18.
: and will see to it, that more shall not be laid upon him then he is able to
bear 1 Cor. 10.
; it being his charge and office to provide, that the bruised Reed be not
broken, or the smoking Flax quenched, till judgment be brought forth unto
victory. And at all times the weakest Christian may go bol^ly to the throne of
Grace, and obtain mercy to help in time of need Heb 4. vlt.
.

Helps for the weak Christian.
The helps for stren^^ening of the weak, are of two sorts: some without us,
some to be used by us.

Without us* there are many things that may strengthen, and encourage, and
animate the weak: 1. There is proposed a glorious inheritance to them that
overcome* 2. We have the example of all the Saints. 3. We have a strong and
sure foundation 2 Timothy 2.19.
. 4. We have a strong God, and his power is engaged to exercise it self in our
weakness, and to keep us unto salvation, without falling till he present us
faultlesse before the presence of his glory Iud. 24. 1 Pet 1 5 2 Cor 12.9.
. 5. We have a strong word of God, able to build us up, and make us wise* and
save our souls Acts 20.33. 2 Timothy 3.16. James 1.21.
, as being Gods Arm, and mighty instrument, of his power 1 Cor. 1.18. Rom
1.1^.
. 6. The spirit of God is a Spirit as of Grace, so of Power 2 Timothy 1 7.
, and helps the weak, as in Prayer Rom 8 ^6.
, so in every Duty and grace. 7. We have a strong Savior: Christ does
strengthen and encourage the Christian three ways: first, by his own example,
becoming a pattern to us to follow: secondly, by application; for unto all
that lay hold on him by Faith, ^ee is a Priest after the power of endless life
Heb. 7.16.
; the Wi^edome of God, and the Power of God 1 Cor. 1.24.
: thirdly, by operation, for he has borne our infirmities, by his own
offering he has and does consecrate and make perfect our persons and works,
in Gods sight Heb. 2.10.
; he does unite us to the Father Ioh. 17.21.23
; he gives us his Fathers glory, both in that he gives us such Graces as will
bring to glory, and in that he gives us credit where himself and the Father
are in credit. Thus of the helps without us.

If any ask in the second place, what we must do, that we may be
strengthened. I answer: 1. We must pray for Knowledge and Faith, to discern
and believe Gods power and promise: Ephesians. 1. ^ 8. etc. And in the fourth of
that Epistle there are five things more to be done, that we may attain to a
ripe age in Christ, first, we must subject our selves to be taught, and
wrought upon, by such Teachers as are set over us by Christ. 2. We must resolve
and settle our selves in the doctrine of the foundation and the Principles of
truth, that we be not tossed to and fro with every wind. 3. We must so be
satisfied with the voice of Christ in our Teachers, that we cast aside all
respects of the voice of strangers, not opening our ears willingly to the
sleights of cunning men, that will lie in wait to deceive us. 4. We must take
heed of personal discords with any that fear God, following the truth in
love. 5. We must mutually strive to yield and seek help to and of one
another, that every joint in this mystical body, according to the measure of
the part may supply and make up the increase of the body by virtue of union
with the Head, and communion with the Members Ephesians. 4.11. to 17.
. Besides, if we would increase in strength, we must let Patience have his
perfect work, making conscience to mortify corrupt passions, as worldly
grief, anger, fretting James 1.4.
, etc. And lastly, we must be careful to keep what God has given us, that
no man take away our crown. Neglect of grace received is a great hinderance of
strength and increase.

Thus of the weak Christian.

A strong Christian discouers himself by diverse things. Of the strong
Christian: and how he may be known.
First, he is spiritual, that is, such a one as not only has a taste and
desire after spiritual things, but is also ruled by the Word and Spirit of
God, that he restraines the evils of the flesh both in heart and life, so as
he gives not occasion either of scandal to the weak, or of scorn to them
that are without 1 Cor. 3.1.
. Secondly, he is able to be baptized with the baptism that Christ was
baptized with, and to drink of the cup that Christ drank of: he is not only
willing to bear ordinary wrongs and crosses, but is prepared for the worst the
world or Satan may do to him Mat. 20.22.23
. 3. He can bear the infirmities of the weak, and in conuersing, deny
himself, and please his Brother in that that is good to edification Romans
15.1.2.
. 4. He is full of goodness and knowledge, and is able to admonish Rom ^5.14.
, and comfort others, with the comforts he has found himself 2 Cor. 1.4.
. 5. He sins not in word James 3.1.
, that is, he is able to govern his tongue with Wisdom, Meekness, Grace
and Truth; the ordinary faults of speech are not found in his Tongue. 6. He is
not careful for life, to take thought for what he shall eat, or what he
shall drink; nor does he disquiet his heart about his body, what he shall
put on: for these outward things he can easily trust his heavenly Father Mat.
6.25.30.
. 7. He can love his enemies, endure wrongs without resistance or revenge; or
if he use the help of the Magistrate, he can seek it without malice or
cruelty: he can bless them that curse him, and pray for them that despite
him, and do good to them that hate him Mat 5.38. to the end.
. Lastly, in Faith he is strong, like Abraham, Romans 4.16. to the end. He can
believe things to come as well as if they were present, Verse. 17: he can
believe above hope and under hope* Verse. 18. he looks, not to the means,
but to the promise: Verse. 19. he vanquisheth doubts: Verse. 20. he is as
thankful for promises, as others would be for performances: Verse. 20.21. for
these things were not only true of Abraham but may be true in us also, Verse.
23.24. who may have as great help from Christ as ever he had, Verse. 25.

Thus of the strong Christian.

In all might. Why all might.
] Note how the Apostle presses to perfection: before, in all knowledge, all
pleasing, all good works; now, in all might. And we had need to be
strengthened with all might, because not one part of the soul only is to be
looked to, but the whole soul, spirit and life throughout: nor have we one
Grace to tend, but all sorts of Graces from God: nor does there abide us one
trouble, but calamities, indignities, and temptations of all sorts. We have not
one adversary to encounter, but many, and of many sorts; inward, outward,
visible, invisible, public, private, at home and abroad. Neither do we stand
upon our guard at one time, but must look to our selves in all these respects
at all times.

It must be all might that we should labor after in four respects: All might
in four respects.


First, it must be a Might that extends to the strengthening of all the
faculties of the soul, powers of the body, and duties of the life: our Minds
must be strengthened in the approving of truth and goodness, and in
reprobating of evil and falsehood 1 Cor. 14.20.
: our Memories must be strengthened in retayning and recording the secrets and
hid things of GOD, which are committed to it: the Will must be strengthened in
the Election of good, and reiection of evil: and our Affections need strength
also: thus we were to be strengthened in Patience Iam. 1.4.
, Joy 1 These. 5.16.
, Love 1 John 4.18.
, Mercy Col. 3.12.
, Hope and Confidence 1 Pet. 1.13.
, Desires Psalm. 27.4.
, in Reverence Heb. 12.28.
, in Hatred of Sin Psalm. 139.21.22.
, Contempt of the World Phil. 3.8. Esaias 30.22.
. So do we need strength to every duty of holy life.

Secondly, it must be a Might that is gotten from the use of all the means,
we must be strengthened in the power of every ordinance of God, and supported
with the use of every help to make us strong.

Thirdly, it must be a Might showed in the use of all the Armor of God. We
must strengthen our selves with every piece of Armor, whether it be Armor of
Defense, as the Girdle of Truth, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shoes
of the Gospel of Peace, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Hope: or Armor of
Offense, as the Sword of the Spirit, Gods Word, and the Darts of Prayers Ephesians.
6.12.
.

Fourthly, it should be a Might extended to all possible degrees and power of
every Grace and Duty: thus in mercy we should communicate in all good things
Gal. 6.6.
: our service should be an hearty Service Ephesians. 6.6.
, we must love the Lord with all our hearts, with all our souls, with all our
might Deuteronomy. 6.5.
.

According to the power of his glory.] In the handling of these words, I
consider them, first, apart: secondly, as they are joined together: and
thirdly, the Doctrines out of them.

Here are two things laid to pawn for the strengthening of the weak
Christian, Gods Power, and Gods Glory.

The extent of Gods power.
Power is one of the Attributes they call in Schools relate: the Power of God
is infinite, both in respect of Essence (for it is as large as the Essence;
yea, it is the Essence it self) and in respect of Objects, he has not done
so much, but far beyond our capacities, he could do infinitely more: and so
is it infinite in respect of continuance. Yet to speak of it according to our
capacities; What God cannot do.
it is restrained, 1. By his Will; he cannot do what his Will is against: 2.
By his Glory; he can do nothing against his own Glory: 3. By his Nature, he
cannot lie, etc. because it is against his Nature: 4. In some respects by the
nature of the Creature; so as whatsoever destroys the essential definition of
the Creature, God cannot do: as God cannot make a man unreasonable, and yet
he remain a man; he cannot make a body infinite, and it remain a body
still: 5. Sometimes by the condition and qualities of the Creature; as, Be it
unto thee according to thy Faith: 6. By impossibility; I say, by that which is
simply impossible, for there are many things impossible in respect of us, which
are not only possible but easy to God. And therefore the common people reason
foolishly; God can save me, therefore he will do it: and the Papists as
wilfully; Christ can be present in the Sacrament, therefore he will. For
besides that they will never prove his body can lie in all places, at one time,
truly and locally present, remaining a true body; they also reason but
absurdly, till they find his will to be there in their manner.

What the glory of God is.
The Glory of God is taken sometimes for the sign of his presence, Exodus 16.10.
for the means of his worship: 1 Samuel 4.22. for praise and honor: 2 Chronicles.
29.11. But here it is taken for the excellency of God above all creatures, as
it may be revealed. Wherein God excels the creature.
God is more excellent then all Creatures, in Trinity of Persons; in our
essence, in perfection of Nature, in infiniteness of being, in eternity, in
purity and singleness, in immutabilitie of Nature, Will, and Qualities; in
understanding, in prescience, which absolutely falls to no creature; in the
Idaea of Virtue, and in omnipotency. By reason of man's Fall and custom in
sin, Gods glory is much darkened: so as now man of himself cannot so
conceive of the wonderful excellency of his Creator.

Gods Glory is revealed unto man, How many ways Gods glory is revealed.
1. By his Works Psalm. 104 31.
: especially his dreadful and great works Esaias 24.16.
. 2. By the Signs of his presence Exodus 16.10
. 3. By the means of his worship 1 Samuel 4.22. Psalm. 89.7.
* 4. By the Confession of guilty persons Josh. 7. 1 Samuel 6.5. Mal. 2.2.
. 5. By the Praises of his Servants: and therefore to give glory, is
translated, to give thanks Luke 17.18.
. 6. By Christ, who is the Lord of glory 2 Cor. 2.8.
, the King of glory Psalm. 24.
, he makes the Glory of God, as it were visible in his flesh. 7. By Man 1 Cor
11.7.
. 8. By the Spirit of Revelation Ephesians. 1.17.
. 9. By the Gospel 1 Timothy 1.11.
.

But if you ask who of all men see Gods glory, I answer; only the Saints, in
the brightness of it Psalm. 89.7. Esaias 26.10.11.
; to wit, such as have the Gospel shining in their hearts, 2 Cor. 4.3. etc.
Esaias 61.1 2.3.
etc. such as acknowledging Gods threatenings, turn unto him by true repentance
Ier. 13.16.
: such as lead an holy and innocent life Psalm. 138.5. etc Esaias 58.7.8.9.
: such as have a true and lively Faith John 11.40. Esaias 46.12.13.
.

Thus of the words apart. John 1.14


Power of his Glory.] There are four Reasons why the Power of God should be
said to be the Power of his Glory, or glorious. 1. Because it will never leave
strengthening, Who see Gods glory.
till it bring to Glory. 2. Because the power of all the means of salvation is
from heaven, and therefore a glorious power. 3. Because Gods Glory sets his
Power aworke, in as much as by promise it lies engaged to his people. 4. It is
a glorious Power, because of the persons and things that are used in Gods
work, as God himself, the Son of God, the Spirit of God, ordinances that
are of God, and men specially consecrated by God.

Doctrines. First, the perseverance of Gods Children is most certain: so long
as there is Power in God or Glory, they cannot fall away by losing their
happiness.

This point has abundant and apparent confirmation out of the old Testament in
these places, Four Reasons why the power of God is said to be the power of his
glory. About falling from grace and perseverance. Proofs that Gods elect
cannot fall away.

This Doctrine does not tend to security.


Psalm. 145.10.13.14 Esaias 42.3. Ezech. 36.24.25.26.27. Ierem. 32.40. Hos. 2.19.
Out of the Gospels, Mat. 16.18. and 24.25. John 4.14. and 5.24. and 6.39. and
10.28.29. and 13.1. Out of the Epistles also, Romans 6.8.9.10.11. and 8.30. and
11.29. Ephesians. 4.12.17. Phil. 1.6. 2 Timothy 2.19. Heb. 7.16. 1 John 2.19. and 3.9.
1 Pet. 1.5.13.18.20.23.

Secondly, there is little reason of presumption in this Doctrine: for, as
Power will preserve, so Glory will revenge: if such as are in covenant with God
return to sin, woe unto them, Gods Glory will not bear it; and he has many
ways to scourge them: for by their sins they may bring upon themselves
crosses of all sorts Psalm. 89.22. Esaias 30.20. Zach. 13.7.8.9. Mich. 7.9.18.
, terrors of Conscience Psalm. 51.
, loss of many gifts, and want of sense of all grace, Gods presence, and the
joys of his promises, and Salvation Psalm. 51. Cant. 3.
, Church Censures 1 Cor. 5.
, the want of many blessings Ier. 5.24.25.
, sore travel and terrors upon their return again Psalm. 51.
, terrible buffets, both of the Word and Spirit, etc. And therefore we should
work out our salvation with fear and trembling. It is a fearful thing to
fall into Gods angry and scourging hand.

Hitherto of the Object, Parts, Ends and Causes of Knowledge: the Effects
follow, which in the end of the Verse are noted to be three, viz. Patience,
Long-suffering, and Ioyfulnesse.

Patience. Motives to Patience.
] This is a virtue that well becomes a Christian, and a blessed fruit of the
tree of life, much to be desired of man: though it may seem troublesome to the
flesh to endure crosses and afflictions, yet if all things be considered, it is
a virtue of great praise. God himself is magnified of Men and Angels for his
patience and forbearance Rem. 2.4.
. It is the admirable glory of the Son of God, that in the great work of his
Father, about the gathering of the Churches, in the midst of the oppositions
of the world and evil Angels, he should not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his
voice to be heard, and yet hold out without failing or discouragement Esaias
42.2.4.
: yea, as the Captain of our salvation, he was made perfect by suffering Heb.
2.10.
. This is the praise of the Saints, (which they may remember with comfort) that
they have endured many and great fights of afflictions Heb. 10.32.
. The Soldier cannot please his Captain, unless he endure hardness; nor
he that strives for Masteries be crowned, unless he toil in the Combat; nor
the Husbandman reap, unless he patiently endure the labor of sowing, and
wait till harvest 2 Timothy 2.3.5.6
. All that will live godly must suffer 2 Timothy 3.12.
: the holy exercise of Christian Patience is a good sign that men are good
hearers of the Word, and that they practice what they hear Luke 8.15.
. Men are not therefore miserable because they suffer much Mat. 5.10.
: Christians need not to be ashamed to suffer 2 Timothy 1.22.
: they may be troubled on every side, yet not distressed: they may be
perplexed, and yet not despair: they may be persecuted, and yet not forsaken:
they may be cast down, and yet not destroyed 2 Cor. 4.8.9.
. Patience is a virtue full of good fruits: it appeaseth strife Prou. 15.18.
and 25.
: it helps away the cross: it is impatience and stubbornness that makes the
father continue to beat his child: it fits us for perseverance with comfort,
as the Coherence shows, The patient abiding of the poor shall not perish for
ever Psalm. 9.
: but they shall receive, at the length, a crown of life James 1.12.
. The worth of this grace appears by the hurt of impatiencie: for Impatiencie
exalts folly Prou 14.17.
, depriues a man of the possession of his own soul Luke 22.19.
, dishonours all a man's gifts and graces, and all the good things he has
before done Job 4.6. etc.
, etc. Let us therefore run with patience the race that is set before us.
Thus did Christ endure the Cross, and now wears the Crown Heb. 12.1.2.3.
. The things we commonly bear are nothing to that Christ and the Martyrs have
borne: we have not yet resisted unto blood Verse. 4.
: by suffering we may reap the comfort that we are Sons and not Bastards
Verse. 5.6.7.8.
; besides the profit of our sufferings, which God ever intends to the patient,
viz. the holiness of the heart, and fruitfulness of the life Verse. 9.10.11.
.

That we may be patient, What we must do that we may be patient.
first, we must get Wisdom, and if we want it, ask it of God. It is
Ignorance makes men passionate: a great understanding is slow to wrath Prou.
14.29. James 1.3.4.6.
. Secondly, we must get Faith to believe our own reconciliation with God: our
hearts need not be troubled, if we believe in God the Father, in Jesus Christ
John 14.1.
. When the heart is possessed with peace in the assurance of Justification by
Faith, then it is easy to be patient in tribulation; yea, to rejoice in
affliction Rom 5.1.2.4. John. 14.27.
. Thirdly, we must be much in the meditation of the comforts of another life.
Fourthly, we must be often and constant in prayer Romans 12.12.
. Fifthly, the hearing of the word faithfully and conscionably breeds a patient
mind: and therefore is the Word called a Word of patience Revel. 3.9.
; the Comforts of the Scripture beget both Patience and Hope Romans 15.4.
. Sixthly, we must be temperate in the desires after, and use of, outward
things; therefore are men unquiet under the loss, absence, want, or desire of
earthly things about their bodies or estates, because they have not sobriety
and temperance in their hearts and carriage 2 Pet. 1.6.
. Seauenthly, if we would have patience we must be careful by godly Sorrow
and Confession to cast off the sin that hangs on so fast: it is our
wretched corruption of Nature that makes us so unquiet, it is nothing without
us Heb. 12.1.
. Lastly, we must be diligent in our callings, and trust upon God, and cast all
our care on him. Idleness and unbelief are the great nurses of impaciencie.

Thirdly, We must show Patience in seven things.
we must exercise Patience in seven things. 1. In bearing the common crosses
that accompany our mortal estate of life, and therein to put on, as near as
we can, Jobs mind, and in all losses or wants to give glory to God,
acknowledging that he has as much right to take away, as reason to give. 2.
In bearing with the infirmities of such as are about us, with whom we converse,
that show themselves to be so, out of weakness, Romans 15.1.3.4. 3. In enduring
persecution of all kinds for the truths sake, 2 Timothy 3.12. 2 These. 1.5. Reu.
2.8. 1 Pet. 4.12. etc. 4. In tentations there is use of Patience, both in
waiting upon God for succor, and issue, and in keeping the soul at as much
rest and quietness as may be: it is the Devils desire to set us on a hurry,
he knows his tentations will then work best, James 1.4. 5. In the
expectation of the performance of Gods promises, and our spiritual happiness
in Christ, Heb. 6.12. and 10.35.36.37.38. 6. In the troubles of the mind and
conscience, believing Gods truth, and waiting for the appearing of his face,
and the healing of the soul. 7. In perseverance in well doing unto the end,
Mat. 24.13. Romans 2.7. Reu. 2.2. Gal. 5.9. 1 John 3.2.

Long-suffering. Motives to Long-suffering.
] This virtue, in case of wrongs, must order us aright in our selves and
toward others: in our selves it must restrain Anger and desire of revenge;
Exodus 34.6. 1 Pet. 2.22.
and great reason, for God himself suffers wrong, and that long too, and it is
Gods commandment we should suffer long Mat. 5.21.22 45. Romans 12.21.
: besides, injuries befalls us by Gods providence 2 Samuel 16.10.
; and revenge is Gods right Romans 12.19.
. Moreover, these raging and reuengefull affections are great hindrances both
to Prayer 1 Timothy 2.8.
, and to the profit of the World James 1.21.
. And lastly, anger lets the Devil into a man's heart Ephesians. 4.21.
.

Quest. 1. But how should I prevent it being wronged? Ans. First, carry some of
thine own sins always in thy mind, that being provoked thou may turn
the course of thine anger thither. Quest. Ans.
Secondly, avoid the occasions, which are both contentions Phil. 2.3.
and contentious persons Prou. 22.26.
. Thirdly, be daily jealous over thine affections, How to prevent anger and
desire of revenge being wronged.
and keep them down by prayer.

Quest. 2. What if passion do suddenly surprise me? Ans. 1. Conceal it Prou.
12.16.
. 2. Depart from them with whom thou art angry 1 Samuel 20.34. Genesis 27.43.44.
. 3. Appoint at the least that bound unto thine anger, that the Sun go not
down upon thy wrath Ephesians. 4 26.
.

Toward others we must show the practice of this virtue thus.

In things that might displease us, Quest. Ans.
but not hur us, endure them without any notice at all: and in things that do
hurt, if they be lesser injuries, see them and forgive them; and in the greater
wrongs, thou must seek the helps of the Magistrate, and the Law: after thou
have sought all private means, by entreaty, offers of peace, desire of
Arbitration, etc. follow the Law with love to thy adversary, without passion or
rage, and in the issues be moderate, without showing extremity Math. 5.25. and
18.15. Romans 12.18. 1 Cor. 6.5.
.

Ioyfulnesse.] A Christian estate is a joyful and comfortable estate. Saving
Knowledge makes a man live joyfully and comfortably, true joy is one of the
fruits Gods Spirit bears in the heart of a Christian; Gods people have cause
to be joyful.
yea, it is a chief part of that kingdom that God bestows on his people on
earth. None have cause of joy but the Children of Sion, and none of them but
have great reason to shout for joy, to rejoice and be glad with all their
hearts Zeph. 3.14.
, Zeph. 3.14. Is it not a great Mercy to have all the judgments due unto us
for sin taken away? and the great enemy of our souls cast out? Is it not a
great honor that Jehovah, the King of Israel, should be in the midst of us?
and that our eyes should not see evil any more? What sweeter encouragement
then that the Lord should cause it to be said unto us, fear not? and again,
Let not your hands be slack? If we have great crosses, enemies, dangers,
wants, temptations, etc. we have a mighty God; if there be none to help us,
he will save; yea, he will rejoice to do us good; yea, he will rejoice over
us with joy; yea, he so loves us, that he will rest in his love and seek no
further. Shall man be sorrowful when God rejoices? Shall the Lord rejoice in
us, and shall not we rejoice in God Zeph. 2.14. etc.
, etc. And if these reasons of joy be contained in one place of Scripture, how
great would the number of reasons grow, if all the Book of God were searched?
such a joy and contentment is the joy of Christians that crosses cannot hinder.
Life is not dear to a child of God, so that he may finish his course with
joy Acts 20.24.
. They suffer the spoiling of their goods with joy, knowing that in heaven they
have a more enduring substance Heb. 10.34.
. Yea, in many crosses they account it all joy to fall into tentation James 1.2.
. They seem as sorrowful, when indeed they are always rejoicing 2 Cor. 6.10.
.

Quest.
Quest. What might we do to get this constant ioyfulnesse and immovable
firmness and contentment of heart? Ans.
Ans. In general thou must be sure to be Gods Servant Esaias 65.13.14
, a man justified and sanctified Ier. 33.8. Esaias 61.10. and 12.5.
: thou must know that thy name is written in the Book of life Luke 10.20.
, What we must do that we might get constant ioyfulnesse of heart.
which cannot be without Faith 1 Pet. 1.8. Phil. 1.25. Romans 15.13. and 12.
.

In particular, there are many things which have a sure promise of joy and
comfort annexed to them.

First, thou must lay the foundation of all eternal joys, in godly sorrow for
thy sins, John 16.20. Mat. 5.4. Psalm. 126.5.6.

Secondly, thou must hang upon the breasts of the Church ( viz. the Word and
Sacraments) continually, with trembling and tender affection, waiting upon the
word of God: the Law must be in thy heart, thou must buy thy liberty herein at
the highest value, Esaias 66.2.5.11. and 51.7. Mat. 13.44.

Thirdly, in thy carriage thou must be a counselor of peace, Prou. 12.20. and
live in peace as near as may be, 2 Cor. 13.11.

Fourthly, take heed thou be not ensnared with gross sin, Prou. 29.6.

Fifthly, would thou reap joy? sow good seed: to be much in well-doing,
procures (as a blessing) a secret and sweet gladness upon the heart of man: a
barren life is an uncomfortable life. Many would reap, that will not be at the
pain to sow, John 4.36. Gal. 6.7.8. He that uses his Talents to advantage,
enters into his Masters joy, a joy liker the joy of God then man, meeter for
the Master then for the Servant, yet such a Master we serve, as will crown us
with this joy, Mat. 15.21.

Sixthly, be constant, bear fruit, and get the knowledge of the love of Christ,
and abide in it, John 15.10.

Lastly, in the 2 These. 5.16. to 24. there are seven things required in our
practice, if we would always rejoice. 1. We must pray always: if we be much
in prayer we shall be much in joy. 2. We must in all things give thanks: a
heart kept tender with the sense of Gods mercies, is easily inflamed with joys
in the holy Ghost. 3. We must take heed of quenching the Spirit: when a man
puts out the holy motions of the Spirit, he quenches his own joys. 4. We
must, by all means, preserve an honorable respect of the word publicly
preached: despise not prophesying. 5. And whereas there be some things we
hear, do specially affect us, and concern us, we must be careful with all
heedfulnesse to keep those things whatsoever we forget: try all things, but
keep that which is good. 6. In our practice we must not only avoid evil,
but all appearance of evil, else if we disquiet others with grief or offense
of our carriage, it will be just with God we should find little rest, or
contentment in our selves. Lastly, we must endeavor to be sanctified
throughout, inwardly and outwardly, in soul, body and spirit, having respect
of all Gods Commandments, and retayning the love of no sin, so shall we
reap the blessing of all righteousness, and procure to our hearts the joys
that are everlasting.

Hitherto of the Preface.

Verse 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.


HItherto of the Ezordium of this Epistle, as it contained both the Salutation
and Preface.

The second part both of the Chapter and Epistle follows, The order of this
second part of the Epistle.
and is contained in the 12. Verse, and the rest to the 23. And it has in it
the proposition of Doctrine. This Doctrine propounded stands of two parts: for
it concerns either the work of Redemption, or the person of the Redeemer.
The work of Redemption is considered of in the 12.13. and 14. Verses: the
person of the Redeemer is entreated of from Verse the 15. to the 23. The work
of Redemption is two ways considered of: first, more generally, in the 12.
Verse: secondly, more particularly, Verse. 13.14.

In the work of our Redemption, as it is propounded in this Verse, three
things are to be observed: 1. The efficient cause [ God the Father.] 2. The
subject persons redeemed [ us.] 3. The Redemption it self, as it is either in
the inchoation and first application of it on earth, and so it lies [ in
making us fit;] or in the confirmation of it, what it shall be in the end: and
so it is praised, first by the manner of tenure [ inherit;] secondly, by the
adiunct company, [ Saints;] thirdly, by the perfection of it [ in light.]

Giving thanks.] The blessings of God upon every true Christian, are such, as
they require continual thankfulness to God for them: such I say, for the
worth of them, for number, for freeness of gift, for continuance, and as they
are compared with what God bestows upon others in the world.

To the Father.] A sanctified heart that has sense of grace, so sees God, the
first cause of all blessings, through the second and next causes, that it
makes God the principal object both of prayer and praises: it is a great
sin not to acknowledge the instrument by which we receive any good; but it
is a great impiety not to give that which is due, to the principal Efficient.

The Father.] Father is a term of relation, and is given sometimes to the
whole Trinity Mat. 23.9. Luke 3.38.
: sometimes to Christ Esaias 9.6.
: sometimes to the first Person in Trinity; so commonly, and so here.

God may be said to be a Father in this place two ways: first, in respect of
Christ; secondly, in respect of the Christian.

1. In respect of Christ, God is a Father both by Nature, and by personal
Union: and in this sense two Questions may be moved.

Quest. 1. Quest.
Whether prayer is to be made to the whole Trinity, or but to one person. Ans.
Ans. It is to be made to the whole Trinity, Acts 7.59. 1 These. 3.2. 2 Cor.
13.13.

Object. Object.
But prayer is here made to one person. Sol. Though but one person be named,
Solut.
yet the rest are included: for the Persons may be distinguished, but severed
or divided they may not be.

Quest. 2. Quest.
Is the Father a Redeemer, in that Redemption is here given to him? Ans.
Ans. The actions of God are twofold: some are inward, as to beget, to
proceed, etc. Some are outward; as to create, redeem, etc. Now the outward
actions are common to all the three Persons; they are distinguished only in
the manner of doing: the Father begins, the Son executes, the holy Ghost
finisheth: as in the works of Redemption, the Father redeemes us, in that he
begins it, by devising this course, and willing it from eternity, by
calling, sanctifying, sending and accepting of CHRIST in time: the Son
redeemes us, by taking our nature and in obeying the Law, and suffering death,
even the death of the Cross for us: the holy Ghost redeemes us, by applying
the merits and benefits of CHRIST to every Believer.

2. In respect of the Christian: God is a Father, and the meditation hereof
should serve for a threefold Use. Uses.
1. For Trial: 2. For Instruction: 3. For Consolation. For Trial: for it
stands us much upon to be assured of this, that God is our Father in Christ by
Adoption: for this is the foundation of true hope for what we want, and of
true thankfulness for what we have. Now such men as are borne of God by
regeneration, as well as of man by generation, Marks of a child of God.
are wont to be described in Scripture by such marks as these. They have in
them the Spirit of Adoption both in the working and witness of it Romans
8.15.16. Gal. 4 6.7.
. Romans 8.15.16. Gal. 4.6.7. They are separate from sinners, they cannot delight
in the works of darkness, or in the wicked fellowship with workers of
iniquity, they hate ungodly company 2 Cor. 6.17. etc. 1 Ioh. 2.^5. etc.
, etc. They have consolation and good hope through grace 2 These. 2.16.
. Christ is to them their way, the truth, and their life: and they love their
Savior more then any Creature, and show it in this, that they will rather obey
his words, then the commandment of any man or Angel John 14.6.21.
. They are a people that in respect of Mortification, purge themselves by
voluntary sorrows for their sins; and in respect of new obedience, Come to
the light, that their works may be manifest that they are wrought in God 1
Ioh. 3.1.2.3 and 1.6.7. 1 Pet. 1.17. etc.
. They honor God with great honor, and tender his Name more then their own
credits Mal. 1.6.
: they worship God, not for show, or with the adoration of the lips and knees
only, but in spirit and truth John 4.23.
. They labor for the meat that perishes not, and esteems it above their
appointed food John 6 27.
. Lastly, they love their enemies, and pray for them that persecute them, and
are willing to do good to them that hate them and hurt them Mat. 5.45. etc.
.

Secondly, if God be our Father, it should teach us; First, to care less for
the world, and the things thereof: we have a Father, that both knows our
wants, and has all power and will to help us and care for us Mat. 6.32.
. Secondly, to come to him in all crosses, and make our moan to him that sees
in secret: for if evil fathers on earth, know how to give good things to their
children when they ask them, how shall not our heavenly Father give us
whatsoever we ask in the Name of Christ Mat. 7.11.
. Yea, it should teach us patience under, and a good use of all crosses Hos.
12.9.
. Thirdly, to be willing to dye and commend our spirits to God that gave them;
seeing in so dying, we commit them into the hands of a Father. This made
Christ willing to dye, and this should persuade with us also Luke 13.46.
. Lastly, it should teach us to glorify God as a Father: we call God Father
(many of us) and thus we speak, but we do evil more and more, and
dishonor him, not living like the children of the most High Ier. 3.4.5.
. If he be our Father, let the light of our good works shine before men, that
they may glorify our Father Mat. 5.6.
. Herein is God the Father glorified, that we bear much fruit John 15.8.
.

Thirdly, this point serves for Consolation, and that many ways: First,
against the fear of our own weakness; It is not our Fathers will that one
of the little ones should perish Mat. 18.14.
: None is able to take them out of his hand John 10.29.
. Secondly, against our doubts about prayer: Whatsoever you ask the Father in
Christ's name it shall be given you John 16.23.
. Thirdly, against all the troubles of this world: if he have been a Father
of Mercy, to forgive thy sins, and give thee grace, he will be a Father of
Glory, to crown thee in a better world in the inheritance of his Sons Ephesians.
1.17.
.

Who has made us fit.] Doct. We are neither naturally happy, nor universally
so: not naturally; for we are made fit, not borne so: not universally; for he
has made [ vs] fit, not all men. Christ dyed for his sheep only John 10.
; for his Church only Ephesians. 1.
, not for the World John 17. How Christ dyed for all.
. And therefore when the Scripture says, Christ dyed for all men, we must
understand it; first, in respect of the sufficiency of his death, not in
respect of the efficiencie of it. Secondly, in respect of the common oblation
of the benefits of his death externally in the Gospel unto all. Thirdly, as
his death extends unto all the Elect: for all; that is, for the Elect.
Fourthly, for all, that is, for all that are saved, so that none that are
justified and saved, are so, but by the virtue of his death. Fifthly, for all,
that is for all indefinitely; for all sorts of men, not for every man of every
sort. Lastly, he dyed for all, that is, not for the Jews only, but for the
Gentiles also.

Qu. Quest.
Are not all in the visible Church that are sealed with the Sacrament of
Initiation made fit? Ans.
An. No: for Nicodemus was circumcised, yet not as then fit for heaven; and
Simon Magus was baptized, and yet perished in the gall of bitterness; and many
of the Israelites were signed with the same Sacraments of righteousness, and
yet were destroyed with fearful plagues 1 Cor. 10.
; the Pharisees were baptized with John's Baptism, and yet in great danger of
wrath to come Mat. 3.
.

There are five sorts of men that live in the Church* Five sorts of men not
made fit.
that are not made fit? First, such as are in heart disioynted, so as indeed
they care for the doctrine of no Church: and thus Atheists and Epicures are
unfit. Secondly, such as are in heart fastened to a false Church, though in show
they be members of the true: thus Church-Papists are not fit. Thirdly, such as
receive Religion and care for it, but only as it may fit the humors of such
as are in authority, and may serve the current of the present times: and thus
temporising Politicians are not made fit. Fourthly, such as admit some parts of
Gods worship, and stand in professed enmity, and dislikes of the jest: and
thus the common Protestant of all estates and degrees; they think if they come
to Church to service, and be no Papists, it will serve turn, though they
neglect, yea, contemn, yea, commonly despite Preaching, private Prayer, true
Fasting, religious Conference, and Fellowship in the Gospel.

Fifthly, and lastly, among the better sorts that are hearers, and constant
hearers, there are many not made fit for the Kingdom of God: for many hearers
rest in an Historical Faith and external righteousness, either betraying the
seed, by suffering the Fiends of hell, those invisible fowls of the Air, to
take it away, or choking the seed by worldly cares, or if they get a taste of
the good word of God, and of the powers of the life to come, by their wicked
reuoults and backe-slidings, they show themselves not fit, nor worthy the
Kingdom of God.

Who.] Doct. God only can make men fit for his Kingdom: he only can rescue
us from the power of darkness and Satan: it is he only is the Lord of
righteousness: it is he only that can pardon our sins: it is he only can
heal our rebellions, and take away our iniquities: he only is the fountain
of all inherent holiness: he only is stronger then all, to preserve us to the
end, and crown us with glory.

Made fit.] The word may be rendered either made fit, or worthy, so it be
understood of the merit of Christ imputed to us, in whom only we are worthy
of heaven.

We are made fit by Redemption, by Vocation, by Adoption, by Justification, by
Sanctification, and by Glorification: for each of these adds something to our
sufficiency. The Use is, to teach us to magnify Gods exceeding mercy, that
does not only give us heaven, but make us fit for Heaven. Note.
The greatest King in the world, if he set his love upon a base slave or
vassal, well he may give him an Earldom or great Office, but he cannot give
him fitness for his place, and gifts to execute it: he may change his estate,
but he cannot change his nature. But God does not only give a Kingdom to his
Servants, but he endues them with royal inclinations, desires, and behavior.

The Rhemists upon this place note, that we deserve salvation condignely; but
we need not answer them: for Thomas Aquinas, the ordinary Gloss, and
Cardinal Caietain upon this place, cross them. Aquinas says thus; Dixerunt
aliqui Deus dat dignis gratiam, etc. Some have said God gives grace to the
worthy, but not to the unworthy: but the Apostle excludes this, because
whatsoever worthiness thou have, God has wrought it in thee: and to this end
alleges, 2 Cor. 3. We are not sufficient of our selves to think a good
thought. The Gloss thus: He makes us worthy, not in the Law, but in Light:
that is, through God, who is light of light, by whose grace we are
enlightened. Caietain thus: worthy, that is, fit; by lot, that is, only by
Gods gift. Note, only by Gods gift, the Papist says.

To be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light: or, as it is in the
original, verbatim, Unto the part of the lot of the Saints in light.]

The lot of the Saints, is by some taken for the sufferings of the Saints; by
others, for their happiness, as it is had in this life, in the right or
inchoation of it; by others, for heaven, and that as it is held by true title
here in this world: so I take it here.

How the lottery of Canaan shadows out our inheritance in heaven.
The word lot leads us by allusion to Canaan, and the division thereof; and
the comparison holds in many things. As none had right to the Land of Canaan,
but Israelites; so none have right to heaven, but the Saints: and as Canaan was
furnished with buildings and all commodities, but not by the Israelites Deuteronomy.
8.7. etc.
, etc. so Heaven was prepared of old, before the Saints entered it Mat. 25.
. The builder and maker of it, was not the Saints, but God 2 Cor. 5.
. And as the Canaanites were thrown out, that Israel might enter; so the
Devils were thrown out of Heaven, that the Saints might enter. And as without
a Joshua, though there were a Land, there would be no lot; so without a Jesus,
though there were a heaven, there would be no inheritance: and though the Land
were given by lot, yet it must not be possessed without a Combat; they must
first fight, and then inherit: so must Heaven suffer violence, and before it be
had, we must wrestle with Principalities and Powers: and as all their Lots
were known to Joshua; so every Christian, in his standing, is known to
Christ: as Joshua had what he asked Josh. 19.50.
; so our Joshua obtaines what he asks, though he ask the ends of the earth
Psalm. 2.
. And as the comparison has those things for information, so may diverse
instructions be gathered from hence also: and first, if we would have any Lot
in Heaven, we must be sure we be true Israelites. Balaam seems a friend to
Israel, but he is so far from inheriting with them, that he is destroyed
by them; the sword of the Lord roots him out: this will be the portion of all
Hypocrites Josh. 13.12.
. And we should labor for a particular warrant in the knowledge of our own
portion: this would encourage us against all difficulties. Caleb dares fight
with the Anakins if Joshua give him Hebron Josh. 14.6.11. etc.
, and feeble and complaining Ephraim shall overcome and enlarge himself, if
Joshua particularly encourage him Josh. 17.
. And as no Cananites ought to be left in the Lot of Israel; so no wicked
workers should be suffered to remain in the assembly of the Saints, to be
pricks and goades in the sides of the righteous. And as they that have their
inheritance allowed them already, must not rest, but fight till their brethren
have rest Josh. 1 12.
; so they that have comfort in their own conversion, must strengthen their
brethren. And if any have too little room, the way is not to murmr and
doubt, but to fight it out for more; so must Dan Josh. 19.14.
: so should weak Christians not give way to coffeehouse, but strive in the
spiritual Combat, till more grace, and room for the enlarging of the heart be
gotten. Lastly, as seven Tribes are justly taxed and censured by Joshua, for
their negligence and sloth, in not seeking speedily to possess the Land God
had offered them Josh. 18.2.
; so may the most of us be justly rebuked for grievous security about the
heavenly Canaan. Many rest in the probabilities and hope of a title: nay, the
most rest satisfied in such a condition as is without title and without hope,
unless they amend: yea, the better sort diverse of them, have but a title: and
therefore it justly falls out, that these are buffetted by Christ, as they
were disgraced by Joshua: and as they must stand to the courtesy of the viewers
of the Land, for the report of the goodness of their part; so must these
secure Christians stand to the courtesy of their Teachers: for how much
knowledge and comfort they shall think meet to impart unto them, concerning
their inheritance in heaven and heavenly things.

Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.] The happiness of the
faithful is an inheritance, illustrated here, first, by the persons that must
enjoy it: it is not common to all, but appropriated to Saints: secondly, by the
quality of it, it is in light.

Christ is the great heir of all things Heb. 1.1. Psalm. 2.
, the Christian is coheyre with Christ. It is a doctrine that has much comfort
in it: a Christian holds by the fairest tenure, and firmest, and surest to: for
though his life be changeable, and his days on earth must have an end, yet his
inheritance endures for ever, and whiles he lives God will know him all his
days; for no worse a man then his own heir Psalm. 37.17.18.
. And the consideration of the inheritance of the Saints, should teach us
diverse things: first, to pray, that God would remember us with the favor of
his people, and visit us with his salvation: and that then he would open our
eyes to see the glory of such an inheritance Psalm. 106.3.4. Ephesians. 1.18.
: Secondly, to honor the righteous, and not despise poor Christians, seeing
God has made them his heirs, and rich in faith James 2.5.
. Thirdly, to endeavor with all care to walk worthy of such honor, as to be
made Gods heirs. And lastly, to be willing to suffer any thing in this world
for Christ, seeing in the world to come we must reign with him as coheyres
Romans 8.17.18.
.

Of the Saints.] Only Saints inherit, and therefore be sure thou be a Saint,
be sure thou be more then flesh and blood 1 Cor. 15.50.
; be sure thou lie in none of the sins God has threatened with the loss of
this inheritance Ephesians. 5.5. 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.21.
; be sure of the imputation of the righteousness of Christ Romans 4.13.14. Tit.
3.7.
; be sure thou have in thee the spirit of the Son Gal. 4.7. Ephesians. 1.14.
; be sure to commit thy self to the word of grace Acts 20.32.
.

In light.] The Christians inheritance is said to be held in light in six
respects.

First, because he now obtaynes it in the times of the Gospel, which times in
comparison with the times of the old Testament, are called times of light: the
light of the Jews being spread abroad among the Gentiles, and exceedingly
enlarged by the rising of the Sun of righteousness.

Secondly, because this inheritance can never be assured without the light of
knowledge. A threefold light in man.
In the understanding of man there is a threefold light of knowledge;
Natural, Evangelical, and Celestial: the Natural light is the light of
Reason: the Evangelical light is the light of Faith: and the Celestial light
is the light of Heaven. Before we can see our inheritance in the light of
Heaven, we must first see it in the light of Faith: and as for the light of
Reason it will do no good for any evidence in this tenure.

Thirdly, because this inheritance is held with true joy on earth, and perfect
joy in heaven: and Joy is expressed by the word light, in many places in
Scripture.

Fourthly, in respect of the admirable communion that a Christian has with God
and Christ, who is light of light; that true light, John 8.12.

Fifthly, because of the certainetie of this inheritance, it is said to be held
in light. It is worthy the noting, that Catharinus, a Papist, writing upon this
place, thus understands the meaning of Light: and is much offended with those
that plead for uncertainty of assurance.

Sixthly, in light, that is, in Heaven: and the light of Heaven is an excellent
light, both for the perfection of it, and the continuance of it. It is a
perfect light: for there shall be on Gods part a clear revelation, and on man's
part a clear vision and for continuance; that light shall never be overcome of
darkness; nay, it shall never admit any mixture of obscurity, in as much as
Heaven is a City that needs not the Sun nor Moon to shine in it, for the
glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, Revel. 21.23.
In the mean while till God translate us to this light of heaven, let us labor
to settle our hearts in the light of Faith and certainetie, and glad our hearts
with the light of the Spirit and joy, choosing rather to dye then to forsake
the face and presence of God, the fountain of all true light both in earth and
heaven.

Verse 13. Who has delivered us from the power of Darkness, and translated
us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.


IN this Verse our redemption is considered more particularly: for as it is by
inchoation in this life, it stands of two parts: the first is our deliverance
from the power of Darkness, and the second is, our translating into the
Kingdom of Christ.

A sixe-folde darkness in every unregenerate man.
Darkness.] This Darkness imports the misery of unregenerate men, from
which the Children of God, in the days of Redemption are delivered: and it
notes not only the darkness of Gentilisme, proper to the Pagans of that
time, but also the darkness of Sin, of Ignorance, of Infidelity, of
Adversity, of Death, and of Hell: for every unregenerate man is covered with a
sixe-fold darkness. First, the darkness of Sin Romans 13.13.
. Secondly, the darkness of ignorance, which as a veil, couers all flesh
John 8.12. Esaias 25.8. 2 Cor. 3.17.
. Thirdly, the darkness of Infidelity; for as there is the light of Faith in
the regenerate; so there is a darkness of unbelief, that possesses every
unregenerate man. All men have not Faith; it is the gift of God: both the
Prophets and Apostles have complained, Who has believed our report Esaias 13.1.
Romans 10.16.
? Fourthly, the darkness of Adversity Esaias 8.22.
: miseries of all sorts breaking in upon the soul, body, state, and names of
men. Fifthly, the darkness of Death: for Death is the house of darkness, and
this is the wages of Sin Psalm. 88.1^.
. Lastly, the wicked man is in danger of utter darkness, even of the
darkness of hell: out of all this we may see the extreme misery of all
carnal persons, upon whom the Kingdom of darkness breaks in, and preuayles
so many ways: and therefore accursed is their misery that can live in this
estate without sense, or remorse, or fear. If Security as a wretched
Lethargy, had not ouergrowne men's hearts, how could they eat, drink, sleep,
marry, give in marriage, etc. when they find themselves in the power of such
fearful and horrible darkness?

Power.] This darkness gets power, and preuayles over the world, by the
unwearied labor of the Prince of darkness: who as he seduced our first
Parents, to extinguish the fair light in which they were created, (whence
flowed an universal darkness upon all mankind) so does he still, as God of
the unregenerate world, work effectually, in binding men's minds more and
more, that the light of the Gospel might not shine in their hearts, both by
hindering by all the ways he can, the means of light, and by leading man on
from sin to sin, till custom have worn out sense, and bred a very liking
of darkness more then the light. And thus poor man runs from darkness to
darkness, and from dungeon to dungeon, till he fall unto the everlasting
dungeon of utter darkness, and this would be the end of all flesh, were it
not that God of his infinite mercy has provided a means in Jesus Christ to
deliver the Elect from the power of this Darkness.

Delivered.] Every man has great reason to think of this deliverance out of
the Kingdom of darkness, wherein naturally he is: for while he so
continues, he knows not whither he goes John 12.35. 1 John 2.11.
: he has no fellowship with God 1 John 1.5.
: his deeds are all evil Ioh 3.19 20.
: his ignorance will not excuse him John 1.5.
: yea, it will be his condemnation John 3.19.
: his feet tread not in the way of peace Luke 4.79. (...).
.

Who has delivered us.] Here are four things: 1. What, [ delivered;] 2. Whom,
[ us;] 3. When, [ has;] 4. Who, viz. God the Father.

Delivered.] The original word does not signify, only, to let out, or lead
out, or buy out; but it notes forcibly to snatch out. Man is not gotten so
easily out of Satan's hands: nor will the World and Flesh let them go without
force, or without blows.

Quest. Quest.
What must we do that we may be delivered from this power of darkness. Ans.
Ans. Believe in Jesus Christ, who is the true light John 8.12.
. Know that all true light is begun in the assurance of Gods love to thee in
Jesus Christ: seek this knowledge. To this end, attend upon the preaching of
the Gospel, by which, life and immortality are brought to light: And because
this Son does not always shine, Walk in the light while you have the light
John 12.35.
, and because a man can never sincerely seek the comforts of God in Jesus
Christ, or constantly love the word of the Kingdom (the fountain of light)
but that there will be great opposition from Satan and the World. Therefore
every one (that is a weary of this darkness, of Ignorance and Unbelief, and
feels what darkness of Adversity his sins have brought upon him, and
fears the darkness of Death and Hell) must arm himself, resolve and
prepare and fight for his own deliverance, putting on the whole Armor of
light, using all the means with Faith and diligence, and then shall Gods power
be made known in his weakness; and the strong man armed, which is the
Devil, shall be cast out by him that is stronger then he, even by Jesus
Christ.

At the time when this deliverance from the power of darkness is wrought there
are at the least these nine things in every one that is truly delivered. Nine
things in every one that is delivered from darkness.
First, he seeks knowledge with great estimation of it. Secondly, he is
careful to amend his ways and to avoid sin. Thirdly, he feels and resists
temptations. Fourthly, he renounceth the world, as being neither besotted with
vanity, nor swayed with example. Fifthly, he fights against his own flesh.
Sixthly, he loves the word of God. Seauenthly, he forsakes evil company.
Eighthly, he mournes over, and prays against some special sins. Ninthly, he
loves all the children of the light. These are not all things that are wrought
in man in the day his heart is changed and he delivered: but less then this
can be in no man nor woman that is truly delivered from the power of
darkness.

Who.] Doct. It is God only that delivers us from darkness. This is needful
to be considered of, both that carnal men might know they can never see the
light, if they use not the means God has appointed: and that godly men might
not despair under the sense of their wants; for as God has called them to the
light, and given them means, so he is able to create light at his own
pleasure.

Us.] Doct. The Saints, even the dearest of all Gods Children, have been
ignorant, sinful, and miserable, as well as any other.

Has. Quest.
] A Question may here be asked: how it can be said that Gods Children have
been delivered, Ans.
seeing they are ignorant, sinful, fleshly, full of afflictions, and subject
to dye still? Ans. They are delivered in respect of Inchoation, though not in
respect of Consummation; though they be ignorant, yet the veil is not whole,
but many pieces are torn off; though they be in a dungeon in this world, yet a
great window is broken down, and much light appears; though there be sin in
them, yet it reigns not; though they must dye, yet the sting of death is
pulled out; though they endure the same afflictions that wicked men do for the
matter, yet they are not the same for nature and use: they are not curses or
punishments, but only chastisements, and trials, or preuentions.

The consideration of this, that we are not all at once delivered from the
power of darkensse, may defend often preaching, and the frequent use of all
good means, public or private. This darkness will not away with one days
shining* these clouds will not be dispelled with one blast; what is the light of
one candle, when the night has enclosed the whole air?

And translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son.] Or, as it is in the
Original, of the Son of his love.

These words contain the second part of our Redemption on earth in this world:
the redeeming of us is the translating of us: and this translation is amplified
by the condition of life into which we are translated, which for the
excellency of it, is into a Kingdom; and for the author of it, is into the
kingdom of Jesus Christ, the Son of Gods love.

Translated.] The word, is a Metaphor and the comparison is taken from Plants
in nature, and there are diverse things signified unto us, concerning our
Redemption, in the similitude of translating Plants. As trees are translated in
Winter, not in the Spring; so commonly our Redemption is applied in the days
of special affliction and sorrow Job 33.14. verse. 31.
: and as the Plant is not first fruitful and then translated; but therefore
translated, that it may bear fruit: so we are not therefore redeemed because
God was in love with our fruits; but therefore translated out of the kingdom
of darkness, that we might bring forth fruit unto God. And as a tree may be
truly removed, and new planted, and yet not presently bear fruit: so may a
Christian be truly translated, and yet in the first instant of his conversion
he may not show forth all that fruit he does desire, etc.

What translating has in it.
In particular, translating has two things in it: first, pulling up: secondly,
setting again. The pulling up of the tree, shadows out three things in the
conversion of a sinner. First, separation from the world: he cannot be in
Christ that has his heart rooted in the earth, and keeps his old standing
amongst these trees, the wicked of the world. Secondly, deliverance both from
original sin in the reign of it (which is the moisture of the old earth)
and also from hardness of heart, (for translating has removing of the mould
and stones that were about the root.) Thirdly, godly sorrow raised by the
sense of the strokes of the Axe of Gods threatenings, and by the loss of many
sprowts and branches that were hidden in the earth: A Christian cannot escape
without sorrow; for he has many an unprofitable sprowt of vanity, and
sinful profit and pleasure he must part with. The setting of the tree notes
both our ingrafting into Christ by the Spirit of God through Faith, and our
communion with the Saints, (the fruitful trees in Gods Orchard) as also it
notes our preservation by the infusion of the sap of holy graces.

Our natures are translated, not destroyed.
And it is worthy to be noted that he says ( translated us) to teach us that
there remains in man the same nature after Calling that was before: for, our
natures are not destroyed in conversion, but translated: there remains the
same faculties in the soul, and the same powers in the body; yea, the
constitution and complexion of man is not destroyed: as the melancholy man does
not cease to be so after conversion, only the humor is sanctified unto a
fitness for godly sorrow, and holy meditation, and the easy renouncing of the
world etc. and the like may be said of other humors in man's nature.

Into the Kingdom.] The kingdom of God is either universal over the whole
world, or spiritual over the faithful Souls on earth, or blessed souls in
heaven, till the day of Judgment: or it is both spiritual and corporal, over
all the Saints, after the day of Judgment for ever. It is the Kingdom of
Grace by Inchoation, in the way, present, here below, that is here meant, not
the Kingdom of Glory by Consummation in our Country above.

The Kingdom of Christ here on earth, Christ's Kingdom better then all other
Kingdoms.
though it ^e not so visible and pompous as other kingdoms are, yet it excels
all the kingdoms on earth: for when all other kingdoms are not only shaken,
but translated or removed, or dissolved, the kingdom of Christ will endure to
the end: and in Christ's kingdom the number of possessors does not diminish the
largeness of the possession of each: whereas in other states many Kings make
little Kingdoms. Besides, wicked men may be not only Subjects but Kings in
other Kingdoms; but this Kingdom, though it be every where, yet it is wanting
to the ignorant and sinners. Christ reigns in this Kingdom by his Word and
Spirit: and his government is taken up especially by two things; first, the
collection of his Church; and secondly, the maintenance of it.

Great are the privileges of the Saints under the government of Jesus Christ;
The privileges of the Subjects of this Kingdom.
they are qualified with eternal graces; they are comforted with the daily
refreshings that flow from the sense of Gods favor; they are confirmed in the
assured peace with Angels and good men; they are estated into an everlasting
inheritance; they daily reap the benefits of Christ's Intercession; they often
suppe with Christ, and are feasted by the great King; they live always in the
Kings Court, in as much as they are always in Gods special presence; they
partake of the privileges, Prayers, and Blessings of all the righteous; and
they have the Spirit of God in them, to unite them to God and Christ, to lead
them in the paths of holy life, to comfort them in all distresses, to warn
them if they go out either on the left hand or the right, and to help them in
their prayers, making request for them, when they know not what to pray as they
ought.

Object. Object.
The World sees no such glory in the estate of Christians in this Kingdom.
Solut.
Sol. There lies a veil over the eyes of all worldly men: and besides, this
Kingdom though it be in the world, is not of it: though it be here, yet it is
not from hence: and the afflictions that commonly cover the face of the Church,
do hide from carnal men the beauty of it; and by reason of the opposition
that is between the Kingdom of Christ and the Kingdom of Darkness, though
the world know the glory of Christians, yet they will not acknowledge it.

Object. Object.
The faithful themselves discrene not any such excellency in their earthly
condition. Solut.
Sol. We must distinguish of Christians: some are but infants in grace and
babes: these may be entitled to great things, and yet have no great sense of
it; as the Child in Nature has no great discerning of the inheritance he is
borne too; or his own present condition wherein he excels others. A kingdom
is never the worse because the infant Prince cannot discourse of the glory of
it. Some Christians fall away, for the time, into gross sin or error: and
these are in matters of Grace like the drunken man, or Paraliticke in nature,
their discerning is lost with their uprightness: other Christians either want
the means in the power of it, or are tossed with great afflictions, or are in
the fit of temptation; and then they have but a dark glimpse of their
felicity in Christ: but the strong Christian that has digested the assurance
of Gods love in Christ, and is exercised in the word of righteousness, sees
such a glory in the Kingdom of Grace, and does acknowledge it with such
immovable firmness of heart, that all the powers of either earth, or hell,
cannot alter his judgment, in the high estimation of such a condition.

Uses.
The Use of this Doctrine concerning Christ's Kingdom, is:

First, for Consolation: Gods Children should much exult and rejoice in their
estates; and in as much as Christ sits as king for ever, all that are in his
Temple should speak of his glory Psalm 29.10.18.
: and if there were nothing else for a Christian to joy in, yet let all the
Children of Sion rejoice in their King Psalm 149.2.
. Yea, the thought of this, that God is our King, should uphold us, and fence
us against all crosses Psalm. 74.12.
: for Christ is a hiding place from the wind* and a cover from the tempest, as
rivers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
Land Esaias 32.2.
. And therefore let our eyes never grow dim in viewing this glory, or our
ears grow dull in harkening to the word of this Kingdom.

Secondly, for Reproof and terror unto all wicked men that harden their
hearts, and refuse to return. What greater loss then to lose Christ's
Kingdom? and what fayrer service then to serve the Son of God? Who would not
fear thee, O King of Nations Ier. 10.7.
: accursed is the estate of all such as subject not their necks to Christ's
yoke: that refuse to let him reign over them by his Word and Spirit: that
come not up to do their homage in Jerusalem, even to worship this King, the
Lord of Hoasts Zach. 14.17.
. ^f Jesus Christ be a great King, then where shall they appear, that say to
the King Apostata Job 34.18.
? Even all such I mean that dare reproach the way of Christ, and deride the
sincerity of such as desire to employ themselves in the business of the
Kingdom, etc. Is he a great King, how dare we then offer that unto him which
they durst not offer to a mean King on earth? What mean the blind and the
lame in Gods house Mal. 1.13.14
? ^ow dare men so securely offer up their blind lip-seruice, an^ lame
devotions? It is a Kingdom that is offered, why do we then triflle? why do
they excuse? What means these fond excuses; I have married a wife, and cannot
come: I have bought ^iue yoke of Oxen, and must go prove them: I have bought
a Farm, and must go see it? I have this pleasure and that profit, and
therefore cannot come? Will they lose a Kingdom upon so silly a pretense? when
thou need not to lose either Wife, Farm, or Oxen. God does not bid thee
leave thy Wife, thy Labor, thy Calling, thy Living, but only wills thee to
attend thine own further advancement in the season of it: seek lawful
profit, but seek Grace first. Use thy lawful pleasures, but chiefly seek
the pleasures of God, even these spiritual joys that are more worth then a
Kingdom.

Thirdly, for Instruction: it should teach us above all things to seek our
happiness in this excellent estate under the government of Jesus Christ. We
should, in respect of the worth of it, forsake our Fathers house, and the
immoderate desire of any earthly thing: so that the King will please to delight
in us Psalm. 4.5.
. We should open our hearts wider, that the King of Glory, by his Word and
Spirit, may come in Psalm. 24.10.
. We should labor for all those Graces, by which an entrance is ministered
into this Kingdom 2 Pet. 1.8.11
: and whatsoever we are uncertain of, we should make our Calling and Election
sure: and though we be never so many ways opposed, yet seeing we fight for a
Kingdom (nay, in a Kingdom) we should hold it always a good fight 1 Timothy 6.
, and continue constant and immovable: and if Christ lead us into his Chambers
Cant. 1.3.
of presence, and delight us with the sweet joys of his presence, we should
remember such princely love and joy in him always: Let the Christian sing and
make a joyful noise to the rock of his salvation, and let him worship and bow
down, let him serve with all reverence, and hear without all hardness of heart
Psalm. 95.1.3.
: let no coffeehouse possess the heart of the true Christian: for to serve
Christ is to reign, and all his Subjects are Kings, and the worst estate of
the meanest Christian is a rich Kingdom.

Of his Son. Quest.
] Quest. Why is it called the Kingdom of the Son, rather then of the Father.
Ans.
Ans. Because God has given all the power to the Son, and this Kingdom is
assigned over to him. The merit of this happiness is only in Christ, and the
virtue that gathers us into this kingdom is only from Christ, and no man
comes to the Father but by Christ.

Son of his love.] Christ is the Son of Gods love: first, because he is
most worthy of all others to be beloved. as Judas is the Son of perdition,
that is, most worthy to be damned. Secondly, because he was from everlasting
begotten of the love of his Father: he is Gods natural Son. Thirdly,
because he is infinitely filled with the sense of his love: so they are said to
be the Children of the marriage, that are full of joy, in respect of the
marriage. Fourthly, because it is he by whom love is derived into others: It
is he that makes all other Sons, beloved. Lastly, in respect of his humane
nature: he is that Son upon whom God has showed his principal love, in
respect of the gifts, with which that Nature is admirably qualified. The
meditation of this, that CHRIST our Savior is the Son of Gods love, is very
comfortable; for he is like to speed in any thing he requests the Father for
us, and he will be sure to preserve us. That himself is a Kings Son, yea,
Gods Son, yea, a King, and God himself; and so infinitely beloved of the
Father: it is an excellent thing to be Christ's member, seeing he inherits so
great love: and if God gave us this Son so dear to him, how shall he deny
any thing, seeing never can ought be so precious, but that with Christ he will
willingly give it?

Verse 14: In whom we have redemption, through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins.


IN the former Verses our Redemption is considered, as God the Father is the
efficient cause of it. In this Verse it is considered as CHRIST is the
Isntrumental cause of it: in the Verse four things are to be noted. 1. By
whom we are redeemed ( viz.) by the Son of Gods love, employed in the first
words. 2. Who are redeemed [ we,] that is, the faithful. 3. how we are
redeemed, ( viz.) by his blood. 4. With what kind of redemption, not by
redemption from loss in estate, or servitude in body, but from sin in the
soul.

In whom.] Doct. That is, the Son of God is the redeemer of the sons of
men: he that had no sins of his own, did worthily cancel other men's: he
that was in no debt, paid our debts. In this work of Redemption we may see
Piety it self beaten for the impious man: and Wisdom it self derided for
the foolish man: and Truth it self slain for the lying man: and Justice it
self condemned for the unjust man: and Mercy it self afflicted for the cruel
man: and life it self dying for the dead man. None can redeem us but Jesus
Christ: he only is God and man, he only was deputed hereunto, he only it
is that is the first borne, the brother, and the kinsman Leuit. 25. Two things
required in a Redeemer.
. Two things are required in a Savior or Redeemer, viz. Right and Power: and
the title or right must be either by propriety or by propinquitie. In power
and propriety the Father or holy Ghost might redeem, but in propinquitie
Christ only is the next kinsman.

Secondly, it is to be noted, that he says ( in whom) not ( by whom) to teach
us, that the comfort of our Redemption is not then had when Christ, as
Mediator, does pay the price: but when, as our Head, he receives us to
himself: we must be in Christ before we can be pardoned: it is a vain thing
to allege that Christ dyed for us, unless we can clear it, that we are the
members of Christ by conversion and regeneration: we must be in Christ before
the Devil will let go his hold: we must be in Christ before we can receive
of the influence of his grace; for that descends only from the Head to the
Members: we must be in Christ before we can be covered with his garment: and
if we be not in the Vine we cannot persevere.

We. Quest.
] Quest. How could the obedience and sufferings of one man serve to redeem so
many men? Ans.
Ans. It is sufficient because he did all willingly; because also he was
himself innocent and without fault: but especially because this obedience and
suffering was the obedience of him that was more then man.

Again, it is to be noted that he says (we,) not all men, have redemption,
as the Vniuersalites dream.

Have. Quest.
] Quest. Had not the Fathers before Christ, redemption in him as well as we?
Ans.
Ans. They had: first, in Predestination, because they were hereunto elect:
secondly, in efficacy, in as much as they that did believe in Christ, had the
virtue of the redemption to come. Hence, that Christ is said to be the Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world.

By his blood.] Christ shed his blood many ways: as when he was circumcised,
in his Agony in the Garden, when he was crowned and whipped, when he was
crucified, and when with a Spear his side was pierced; but here it is by a
Synecdoche taken for all his sufferings.

Four ways of redemption.
There have been in former times four ways of Redemption. First, by
Manumission, when the Lord let his Vassaile voluntarily go out free: but thus
could not we be redeemed; for the Devil never meant to manumit us. Secondly,
by Permutation, as when in the wars one is exchanged for another: and thus
could not we be redeemed; for who should be changed for us? Thirdly, by
violent Ablation, as Abraham redeemed Lot, by force rescuing him: but this way
did not stand with Gods Justice. Fourthly, by giving a Price, and thus we are
redeemed: but what price was given? not Gold and Silver, nor the blood of
Goats; not thousands of Rams, or rivers of Oil; not the Sons of our
bodies, for the sins of our souls Mich. 6.4.5.
: nay, if a whole thousand of us had been burned in one heap, it would not
have expiated for one man's sin: but the price was the blood of Jesus Christ 1
Pet. 1.19.
, and by this price we may see how hateful a thing sin is in Gods sight;
and we may resolve that we are not our own men, any more to do what we list.
Uses.
Neither ought we to be servants of men 2 Cor. 5. The comforts in the doctrine
of forgiveness of sins.
. Besides, if there had been merit in the works of the Law, the Son of God
needed not to have shed his blood: and seeing it is shed, we need no other
Mediator, nor works of satisfaction, or superrogation.

Forgiveness of sins.] The doctrine of remission of sins is many ways
comfortable: it is a comfort, 1. That sins may be remitted 1 John 2.1.
: 2. That this remission may be applied particularly; thou may have it, and
keep it for thy self 1 John 1.9.
: Esaias 43.25. Ier. 35.34. Micha 7.19. Psalm. 32.1.
3. That if our sins be once forgiven, they can never be laid to our charge
more; they return not: 4. That where God forgiues one sin, he forgiues all
sins 1 John 2.6.
: 5. That where God forgiues sin, he heales the nature; where he iustifies
he sanctifies. An earthly Prince may forgive the Felon, but he cannot give
him a better disposition: but GOD never forgiues any man, but he gives him a
new heart also Ezech. 36.26.27 1 John 1.9. and 2.1.4. Acts 5.31.
. 6. That where God forgiues the sin, he forgiues the punishment also Psalm.
32.4. Mat. 9.2.5.
. Lastly, that by remission of sins we may know our salvation Luke 1.77.
.

Secondly, as it is a comfortable Doctrine to faithful men, so it is a
terrible Doctrine to wicked men, The terror of the doctrine of forgiveness of
sins.
and that many ways: first, all men's sins are not forgiven: secondly, all
need remission of sins: thirdly, if sin be not forgiven, it makes men
loathsome to God Psalm. 32.1.
; which the word ( cover) imports: it sets the Soul in debt: it seperates
between God and us, and hinders good things from us Esaias 59.2.
: it defiles Psalm. 51.1.
: it remains upon Record, written with a pen of iron* and with the point of a
Diamond Ier. 17.1.
: it causes all the disquietnesse of the heart Psalm 38.3.
: it is the cause of all Judgments: It brings death Romans 6. vlt. What a man
should do to get his sins forgiven him.
.

Thirdly, a Question is here to be considered of, viz. What should a man do
that he may get a comfortable assurance that his sins are forgiven him? Ans.
He that would be assured of remission of sins must do these things. First,
he must forgive other men their trespasses against him, else he cannot be
forgiven Luke 4.18. 1 John 1.9. Hos. 14.3. Zach. 12.12. Chap. 13.1.
. Secondly, Mat. 6 14.
he must search out his sins by the Law, and mourn over them in Gods
presence, striving to break and bruise his own heart with grief in secret,
in the confession of them to God, Luke 4.18. 1 John 1.9. Hos. 14.3. Zach.
12.12. to the end, and 13.1. Thirdly, we must take heed of the sin against
the holy Ghost: which beginning in Apostasy, is continued in Persecution of the
known Truth, and ends in Blasphemy; and is therefore a sin unpardonable,
because the sinner is utterly disabled of the power to repent. And howsoever
all sins against the holy Ghost are not unpardonable, but only that sin
that has the former three things in it; yet the man that would have evidence
of pardon* must take heed of all ways of offending against Gods Spirit: and
therefore must take heed of speaking evil of the way of godliness, of
contemning the means of Grace, by which the Spirit works, and of tempting,
grieuing or vexing of the holy Ghost within his own heart or others. Fourthly,
he must daily attend upon the preaching of the Gospel, till the Lord be
pleased to quicken his own Promises, and his heart unto the joyful
application of the Comforts of Gods Love, continued in his Word. And when men
come to Gods presence to seek so great a mercy as the pardon of sin, they
must above all things, take heed of wilful hardness of heart, least their
unwillingness to be directed by Gods Word, be requited with that curse that God
should grow unwilling that they should repent, and he should forgive them
Mark 4.11.12. Acts 26.18.
. Fifthly, the Prayers of the faithful are very available to procure the
pardon of sin Mark 1.4. Acts 5.31. and 10.43.
. Sixthly, he must with due preparation be often in receiving the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; which is to the worthy Receiver, a worthy Seal of Remission
Iam 5.16.
. Seauenthly, he must amend his life and believe in Jesus Christ Mat. 26.28.
.

Verse 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, and the first begotten of
every Creature.


HItherto of the work of Redemption: now follows the person of the Redeemer;
who is described as he stands in relation: 1. To God. Verse. 15. 2. To the
universe or whole World, Verse. 15.16.17. 3. To the Church, Verse. 18.19. etc.


In all the Verses in general, That Christ is God.
may be observed the evident proof of his divine Nature. For, as the Verses
before, when they mention Redemption in his blood, prove him to be man; so
these Verses, ascribing to him, Eternity, Omnipotence, etc. prove him to be
God. That our Savior is God, may be further confirmed, by these places of
Scripture: Genesis 19 24. Judge. 2.1.4.14 Psalm. 45. Prou. 8.22. Job. 19.25. Isay
7.14. and 9.6. and 35.2.4. and 40.3.10.12. and 43.10.11.23. and 45.22. Ier.
23.5.6. Hos. 1.7. and 12.4. Mich. 2.12. and 4.1. John 1.1. etc. 1 John 5.20.
Revel. 1.6.

Christ more excellent then all Monarchs in diverse respects.
Besides, the Apostles drift is to extol the excellency of Christ, by whose
blood we are redeemed. Howsoever he appeared in form of a servant, yet he
exceeded all Monarchs, that ever were on earth: for Christ is the essential
Image of God, whereas the greatest Monarchs are Gods Image, but by a small
participation. He is the Son of God by generation, they are so only by
creation or regeneration. He is the first borne, they are but younger Brothers
at the best: He is the Creator, they are but Creatures: All things are for
him, whereas they have right and power over but few things: he is eternal,
they are mortal. Things cannot consist without a Redeemer in Heaven; but so
they may without a Monarch on earth: he is a mystical Head, and by his Spirit
unites all his Subjects to him, and by influence preserves them: but so can
no political heads do their Subjects. Other things I might instance in the
Verses following, but these shall suffice.

The first thing in particular by which the Redeemer is described is his
relation to God in these words: Who is the Image of the invisible God.]

Here three things are to be considered: First, the Person resembling, Who:
Secondly the manner how he resembles, viz. by the way of Image: thirdly, the
person resembled, in his Nature, God: in the Attribute of his Nature,
Invisible. For the first, if we be asked of whom he here speaks, it is
easily answered out of the former Verses: It is the Son of GOD, the Son of
his Love, Verse 13. And thither I refer the consideration of the first point.

Image.] Our Redeemer resembles God by way of Image.

Difference between Image and Similitude.
There is difference between the Image of a thing, and the Similitude of it.
The Sun in the Firmament expresses GOD by similitude; for as there is but
one Sun, so there is but one God: And as no man can look upon the Sun in
his brightness; so no man can see God with mortal eyes, etc. But yet the
Sun is not therefore Gods Image. Gods Image is in Man, and in Christ.

Gods Image is in man three ways.
Gods Image is in man three ways: First, by Creation; and so it is in all men,
even worst men, in as much as there is in them, an aptitude to know and
conceive of God, etc. Secondly, by Recreation; and so it is in holy men, that
do actually and habitually know and conceive of God, etc. but this is
imperfectly. Thirdly, by similitude of glory; and so the blessed in heaven
conceive of, and resemble God, and that (in comparison with the two former)
perfectly.

The difference between the Image of God in Man and in Christ.
But there is great difference between the Image of God in man, and the Image
of God, in Christ. In Christ, it is as Caesar's Image in his Son; in Man, it
is as Caesar's Image in his Coin. Christ is the natural Image of God, and of
the same substance with God, whom he does resemble: but the Christian is Gods
Image only in some respects, neither is he of the same nature with God. Man is
both the Image of God, Imago, and ad Imagin^m.
and after the Image of God: The Image of God because he truly resembles God;
and after the Image of God, because he resembles him, but imperfectly. But
Christ is the perfect Image of God, and not after his Image. Some express the
difference thus: Christ is the Image of the invisible God, but Man is the Image
of the visible GOD, that is, of Christ.

Christ, is the Image of God three ways: 1. in Operation, because it is he
that works Gods Image in us: 2. in Apparision, because he appeared for God,
to the Fathers in the old Law: 3. in Person, and that in both natures, both as
God and Man; for the most perfect Image of God, is Christ, God: the perfect
Image of God is Christ, Man: the imperfect Image of God, is Man.

That Christ is the Image of God, as he is God, is apparent by that place,
Phil. 2.6. and Heb. 1.4. And here, two things are admirable: first, that this
Image is an infinite Image, like the thing resembled: secondly, that the Image
is the same in Number, not in Specie only, with the thing resembled.

Christ as man, is the Image of God, 1 Timothy 3.16. And that three ways: First*
as the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily: in respect of the unutterable presence
of the divine Nature. Secondly, as by his Miracles and great works, he
manifested the Divine Nature, and showed God in the world. Thirdly, as his
Humane Nature is qualified with Knowledge, Righteousness, Purity, and other
gifts: for if man be Gods Image in respect of this, Christ is so much more. To
conclude, Christ as he is God, is not only the Image of the invisible God,
but the invisible Image of God: but as man, he is the visible Image, of the
invisible God.

The Considerations of this Doctrine, Use.
that Christ is the Image of the invisible God, may serve for six Uses. First,
to teach us the admiration of that God, whose Image is of so admirable praises.
Secondly, to show the fearfulness of their estate, that turn the glory of
the incorruptible God into the Image of corruptible Creatures. Romans 1.23.
And this is the sin not only of the Gentiles, but of the Papists also.
Thirdly, it should wonderfully quicken us to all the duties of humbleness of
mind, and meekness, and make us ready in all things, to serve one another,
without wrangling, or contention, in love, Phil. 2.1.2.3.6.
seeing he that was in form of God, equal with God, put upon him the form
and Image of a Servant. Fourthly, we may hence learn, that if we would know
God, we must get into CHRIST; for in him only is the Father known: he that
has seen Christ, has seen the Father John 14.9. 2 Cor. 4.4.
. Labor then in the business of Mortification and Justification, and then
that knowledge of God, which is impossible to Nature, will be possible to
Grace. They have the firmest apprehension of God, not that have the most Wit or
Learning, but that have the most grace in Jesus Christ. One may be a great
Scholar, and yet a great Atheist. The surest way, is to know the Creator in
the Redeemer. Fifthly, seeing it is Christ's honor to be Gods Image, let it be
our honor to be Christ's Image, which we can never be, unless we put off the
old man, and his works Col. 3 9.10.
. And see to it, that the light of the Gospel be not hid from us, by the God
of this world for: the Gospel is the Gospel of glory 2 Cor. 4 4. and 3.18.
Gal. 4.19. (...).
, 2 Cor. 4.4. and 3.18.9. etc. Gal. 4.19. Now, we may be framed like to the
Image of Christ, in three things: 1. in Knowledge Col. 3.10.
: 2. in Sufferings Romans 8.29.
: 3. in holiness and righteousness of heart and life Ephesians. 4 21.24.
: lastly, shall the Devil make men worship the Image of the beast Revel. 13.
; and shall not we for ever honor this everlasting Image of our God?

Invisible God.] God is invisible John 1.18. 1 Timothy 6.16. Ioh 9.11. etc. and
23.9.10.
; God cannot be seen, because he is a Spirit, not a body; and because of the
exceeding thinness and purity of his nature, and because of the
transplendency of his glory; and lastly, because of the infiniteness of his
Essence.

The Use is, first, to teach us to walk always in fear and trembling, seeing
we serve such a God, Use.
as sees us, when we see not him Psalm. 65.5. etc.
: secondly, this should check the secret and beastly coffeehouse of our
hearts, which are many times moved to vexation, because our God is not visible;
whereas we should therefore the more admire him, that is so absolutely perfect:
It were imperfection to be visible. And yet notwithstanding, though God be not
visible to sense, he is visible to understanding: and though Nature cannot see
him, yet Grace can. Now, if any ask what he might do that he might see God,
I answer, that he that would see God: first, he must look for him in the Land
of the living k: seek for him amongst true Christians: he must first know and
love his brother: and then he shall know and see God 1 John 4.12.
. He that would know the Father, must be acquainted with the Child. Secondly,
he must with fear, and reverence, and constancy, wait upon the
manifestation of God in his house; in that light we shall see light. We must
eat at Gods Table, and it must be our contentment to taste of the fatness of
his house, and to drink out of the River of those pleasures, if we would with
clear light see God Psalm. 36.8.9.
. God is to be seen in Sion Psa. 84.5.7.8.
: Gods goings are seen in the Sanctuary Psalm. 68.24.
. Thirdly, he must learn Gods Name; for he that knows his Name, sees his
Nature. When God would show his glory to Moses, he proclaymes his name to him
Exodus 33.19. and 34.6. etc.
. Fourthly, he must be sure to get into Christ by Faith, being borne of God by
regeneration Job. 6.46. and 14.7.
. Lastly, he must be pure in heart Math. 6.7.
: he must especially strive against the corruptions inward, in his thoughts and
affections. Thus of the second use.

Thirdly, the consideration of this, that God is invisible, should encourage us
to well doing, even in secret; seeing we serve such a God, as can see in secret
Math. 6.4.
.

Hitherto our Redeemer is described, as he stands in relation to God: now, in
the second place, he is described as he stands in relation to the Creatures.
And Christ is in relation to the Creatures five ways: 1. as the first begotten
among them: 2. as their Creator: 3. as the end of them, all for him: 4. in
respect of Eternity, as he is before all things. 5. as all things in him
consist: All things depend upon Christ as their preserver, as their ancient,
as their end, as their Creator, and as the first borne.

The first begotten of every Creature.] Two things are here to be considered of
Christ: 1. that he is Gods Son, by generation: 2. that he is the first
begotten.

For the first: God has Sons by Nature and by Grace; Christ is borne as Man,
(...).
and begotten as God. Things are begotten three ways: 1. Metaphorically, only
by comparison, or in some respects: 2. Corporally: 3. Spiritually: some things
do beget without themselves, as bodies do; but this is more ignobly and
basely; some things beget within themselves, as does the Spirit or soul, more
perfectly. But the most perfect and unutterable glorious generation, is the
begetting of the Son of God, by God. The way of God in eternity, who can find
out? and his generation who can tell? His ways are not as our ways; yet a
glimpse of this great work, we may reach to two ways: 1 By way of Negation,
as they say in Schools. 2 By way of Comparison.


First, by denying that unto God, which has imperfection in it. In the
generation of the Creatures we may see something into the generation of the
Son of God. There are eight things in the generation of the Creatures, which
are not in this begetting of the natural Son of God. 1. The Creatures beget
in time, because themselves are first begotten: but this is not in God, Christ
is of the Father, but not after the Father: there is here a prioritie in order,
but not in time. 2. The Creatures beget by affection (this is imperfection) but
God begets by Nature. 3. The Creature begets without himself, so as Sons
are diverse, and divided from the Father, because they are finite: we are of
like nature to our Fathers, (...). not, (...).
but not the same nature: but it is not so in God; for Christ is not divided
from the Father, as he is the natural Son of God. 4. The generation in the
Creature is not without corruption, or diminution of the nature of the
Begetter: but here, God the Father begets without corruption or diminution,
by a way divine, inenarrable, and incomprehensible. 5. Our Children are less
then their Parents; but Christ is as well Coequall as Coeternall. 6. The
Creature communicates but a part of his substance, but God communicates the
whole. 7. The father and son, among the creatures, are two in number, one in
Specie only; but in God it is not so: for the Son of God is another, but not
another thing; he is another, Alius, but not aliud.
viz. in Person, but not another thing in Essence. Lastly, the creature begets
mortal creatures, and propagates but a being for a time, but God begets a Son
immortal by nature, such as can never die in the nature so begotten.

Secondly, this generation is shadowed out by some comparison with Creatures:
the river and the spring are two, yet not divided; so is the Sun and the Beams
of it, the Savor and the Ointment are together, and yet the Ointment is not
corrupted: but the principal comparison is in the Mind and the Word; the
Mind begets the Word naturally, without passion or corruption, within it
self; so as the Word begotten, remains in the Mind, the Word afterward,
clothed with a voice, goes into the ears of men, and yet cease not to be
still in the Mind: This in many things, as you may see, is like to the
generation of God, by the Father. But all these are but shadows; the glory of
the thing it self cannot be expressed by any words of man or Angels.

The consideration of this Doctrine should inflame us to the love of such a
Son, who being as he was, coequall and coeternall with the Father, yet was
pleased to delight himself in Gods earth, Prou. 8.22.31.32.
which is man. And we should for ever hearken and attend to the words of this
wisdom of God, who teaches us the secrets and the very bottom of his
Father. And seeing this is the Son, of whom GOD has spoken, to the dreadful
astonishment and wonder of Heaven and Earth, woe unto them that sin against
the Son, and provoke him to anger: How shall they be broken to pieces like an
earthen Vessels? But blessed are all they, that with all fear and trembling,
Psalm. 2.5.7.9.11.12.
and with all reverence and affection, subject themselves to the Scepter of his
Kingdom, and trust in the love of the Father, through the merits of the Son.
Thus of the consideration of Christ, as he is begotten of God: it is here added
that he is first begotten.

First begotten.] Christ is the Son of God John. 1.14.
: He is the only begotten Son of God John 1.18.
: he is the natural Son of God Romans 8.3. Primogenitus.
; and here is termed the first begotten Son of God. He is first begotten, as
God, two ways: 1. in Time, he was before all other things. Of this afterward.
2. in Dignity, he is the foundation of all that respect, by which others are
made Sons: he is first begotten, as Man, not in time, but in dignity and
operation: first, in respect of the miraculousnesse and wonderfulnesse of his
birth and conception; so are none other borne: secondly, in respect of his
Resurrection, in which God did as it were beget him again: thus he is
afterward said to be the first borne of the dead: thirdly, in respect of
pre-eminence; as he is the right of the first borne, being made heir of all
things.

The Use is diverse: Heb. 1.6.
First, let all the Angels of God worship him. Secondly, it should kindle in
our hearts godly sorrow for our sins. If we can mourn for the death of our
first borne, Zach. 12.12.
how should we be pierced to remember, that our sins have peirced Gods first
borne? Thirdly, we should never think it strange to suffer in this world, Romans
8.29.
seeing God spared not his own first borne. Lastly, it may be a great comfort
to Christians; and that two ways: first, because they shall be accepted with
God, in, and for, Christ, who is the first borne, and has received a blessing
for all the rest: secondly, because in Christ they themselves are accounted as
Gods first borne, in comparison of other men: God will use them as his first
borne, Exodus 4.22. Heb. 12.23. Psalm. 89.27. By this Gods Children are made
higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. and therefore woe shall be to
them that wrong Gods first borne, Exodus 4.22. And therefore also every
Christian should so esteem his birthright, as by no means, with profane
Esau, for any lust, profit, or pleasure to sell it. Heb. 12.16.

Verse 16. For in him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are
in Earth, visible or invisible; whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities or Powers. All things were created for him and by him.


IN this Verse four things are to be considered: first concerning Creation it
self, in the general: secondly, who created: thirdly, what was created:
fourthly, the distinctions of Creatures.

Created.] God works not as the Creatures do, God works in an instant:
Angels work suddenly: Nature works by little and little, and by degrees.
There is a threefold effusion of the goodness of God: 1. by Generation: 2. by
Spiration: 3. by Creation.

The Works of God are either Internal and imanent, and are in the Essence of
God, by an act internal and eternal; and thus Predestination is Gods work;
or external and transient, passing to the Creatures, by an act external and
temporal. And these works are either works of Nature, or works of Grace:
Quae est in fieri. qua est in sacto
the works of Nature respect her, either as she is in making, or as she is
made: the latter works are works of Providence, the former, are works of
Creation.

A difference must be made between creating, generating, and making. A thing
comes into being, of nothing, by Creation: of something, by making: and of a
substance, by generation. Creation is of God, by himself: Generation is of
Nature according to God.

Doct.
Doct. The World, even this whole Frame of all things, were created, and had a
beginning. This we may know by Faith, out of Scripture Genesis 1. and 2. Psalm.
33.6.9. Job 38. and 39.
; and by Reason, from the state of Creatures: their alterations,
subordinations, debillities, and expirations, prove a beginning; and that they
are not eternal.

Object.
Object. This drownes our thoughts, that we cannot conceive of Eternity, what
it was before the world was. Solut.
Sol. It is not meet we should account our selves able to judge of Eternity.
What do Plants judge of Sense? what do the Beasts judge of Reason? how can
thou be fit to judge of Eternity, that, thy self, have no certain
continuance in time?

Thus of Creation in general: the second thing is, who is Creator.

Opera ad extra sunt indiuisa.
In him, or by him.] The whole Trinity did create the world; because it is a
rule, that the works of God that are without, are undivided; so as that which
one Person does, all the three Persons do. yet there is difference in the
Order: Pater est causa. (...).
for the Father moves and wills it, the Son works it, and the holy Ghost
finisheth it. Creation is given to the Father, Acts 17.24. to the Son, John
1.3. to the holy Ghost Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 33.6.

Filius, (...). Spiritus sanctus, (...).
But in this place, the honor of the work is specially given to the Son; And
it is to be noted, that the original has more then barely [ by him,] for it
is said, in him, etc. The Creation of the world, was in Christ, in two
respects: First, it was in him, as in an examplar; the Frame of the world, to
be made, was in him, as the Image of the Fathers understanding: for, in the
building of a House, there is a double Frame; the one in the head of the
Carpenter; the other, the Frame external of the house, built after the
pattern of that, that was in the Carpenters head: So is it, in the Creation of
the World. Secondly, it was in him, as that decree, and fore-appointed head and
foundation, in which all the other things should be placed and consist: thus he
is said to be the beginning of the Creatures of God. Revel. 3.14.


This work of Creation ascribed unto Christ, proves his Deity, Eternity, and
Omnipotency. Thus of the Creation.

Mundus Archetipicus.
Thirdly, it follows, what was created, viz. All things,] The whole world. By
the world I mean not the frame of all things, as it was in Gods Essence from
Eternity: Mundus Microcosmus. Mundus Macrocosmus.
nor Man only, which is called a little World: but this whole Universe, and
great building, consisting of all sorts of Creatures. Concerning this creation
of all things, I only note two things: First, how they were created: secondly,
the errors that sprung up against this Doctrine.

Now, All things were created.] First, most freely, without any necessity that
compelled God thereunto Psalm. 33.9. and 115.3.
. Secondly, without any labor, motion, or mutation of himself, with a beck
only; and by his omnipotent Word Psalm. 33.9.
. Thirdly, of nothing: of nothing I say, negatiuely, in the Creation of the
first mass of all things; and of nothing priuatiuely, in the second Creation
of things, out of the first mass or Chaos. For though in the order of nature,
and by men, nothing is made of nothing, yet this extends not to God and the
first Creation. Fourthly, most wisely, so as there flowed in the Creation, a
goodness to every Creature, so as they were all good, in Gods account Genesis
1.31.
: This Goodness in Man and Angels, was Gods Image in them. Fifthly, in time,
with time, in the very beginning of time Genesis 1.1.
. Sixthly, in the space of six days; not at one time only, and this showed
the Creatures disabilitie, that could not form it self when the first matter
was created. Herein also God showed his power, and that he was not tied to
second causes, as he declared when he gave light to the world, while yet there
was no Sun.

Then herein he teaches men to dwell long upon the meditation of the Creation,
seeing God himself did prolong the Creation for so many days, which yet he
could have dispatched in an instant.

There were four errors about the Creation: Four words confute four Errors.
Some said the world was eternal: some said, though it were not eternal, yet
it had a material beginning, it was made of something: Some said, God made the
superior Creatures himself, and the inferior by Angels: some, made two
beginners of things; they imagined that one Beginner made things incorruptible,
and another, made things corruptible. The very first Verse of the Bible,
confutes all four Errors: the word, in the beginning, shows the world was
not eternal: the word Creation, notes, that it was made of nothing; when he
says, God created all, he excludes Angels: and lastly, when he says, God
created Heaven and Earth, he shows he was the only beginner of all sorts of
Creatures.

Fourthly, Sorts of Creatures.
the distinction of the Creatures follows: here they are distinguished three
ways: 1. by Place, some are things in heaven, some things in Earth: 2. by
Quality, some are visible, some are invisible: 3. by a subdiuision of the
invisible; some are Thrones, some are Dominions, etc.

Thrones, Diversity of opinions about the meaning of Thrones, Dominions, etc.
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers.] These words are diversely
interpreted. Some think, there is no necessity to understand them of Angels;
but in general of all Empire, and of the order of oeconomie, among the
Creatures, in Marriage, Laws, or Governments, in heaven or Earth. Some
restrain the words, to order amongst men only. Some understand by Thrones the
Palace of Gods Majesty, and the seat of blessed immortality; and the rest
of the words they interpret of Angels. But the commonest opinion, and most
ancient, is to understand all the words of Angels only: But in this there is
not agreement, for some think the Apostle speaks by way of Concession, as if
he should say; Be it so that Angels are Thrones and Dominions, etc. (as the
Jews and false Apostles affirm, when they go about to persuade you to
Angell-worship) yet if that were granted, Christ only were to be worshipped,
because he made all those; and what excellency they have, they had it from him.
Others think that the Apostle reckons up the excellent'st things in humane
government, and gives them to Angels, to shadow out their glory; and
consequently, the glory of Christ that made them. I think there is no hurt in
their opinion, that give all these words unto Angels: Why Angels are called by
these names.
And they are called Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers, because
God by them gouernes the Nations, and as some think, moves the Heavens;
restraines the Devils, works Miracles, foretells things to come, protects the
faithful, and exercises his judgments upon the world: yet so as these names
may be given to all Angels, in diverse respects, and upon occasion of diverse
employments: Or they may be given to some Angels for a time, and not for ever.
Or if it be yielded that those names do distinguish the diverse sorts of
Angels, and their order; yet it will not follow, that we can tell their sorts,
The Uses of the doctrine of Creation.
as the bold Dionisius, and the Papists have adventured to do.

Thus of the doctrine of Creation; the Uses follow, and they are, 1 For
Reproo^e. 2 For Consolation. 3 For Instruction.


The doctrine of Creation cannot but be a doctrine of great reproof and
terror to wicked men; because those goodly Creatures, being Gods workmanship,
will plead against them, and make them inexcuseable in the day of CHRIST; in as
much as they have not learned to know and serve God with thankfulness and
fear, that showed his Wisdom and Power, and other the invisible things of
God, in the making of all those Creatures Romans 1.19.
. And besides, from the great power of God, in the Creation of themselves and
other Creatures, they may see that they are in a woeful case, that by sinning
strive with him that made them: for he has the same power to destroy them
Esa. ^5.19.
.

And further, if God made all, then he knows all, and so all the sins of the
sinner; and in that he made all, he has all at his command as Lord by
creation; all Armies, to raise them against the wicked for their subversion.

Secondly, the Doctrine of the Creation may comfort Gods Children many ways:
first, it may comfort them in the faith of the worlds dissolution: it is he
that created Heaven and Earth that will accomplish it, that time shall be no
more, I mean not times of mortal^tie, sin, labor, infirmity Revel. 10.6.
, etc. Secondly, it may comfort them in the success of Christ's kingdom on
earth. Though it be a great thing to gather men again into covenant with God,
and to open the eyes of men, blind with ignorance, and to deliver the souls
of men that have long line in the prisons of sin and misery; yet we may be
assured that God, by the ordinances of Christ, will accomplish all the great
things of this spiritual kingdom; because he was able to create the Heavens
and Earth. And God himself does remember his power in the Creation, to assure
his performance in our regeneration Esa. 42.5.6.
. Thirdly, it may comfort us in our union with Christ; for what shall separate
us from his love? in as much as he is unchangeable himself, nothing else can,
for they are all his Creatures, and must not cross his resolved will Romans 8.
. Fourthly, it must needs be a comfort to serve such a God, as has showed
himself in the Creation to work so wonderfully. Blessed is he that can
rejoice in God, and his service, and is refreshed with the light of his
countenance, and assured of his love Psalm. 89.11.15.
. Fifthly, the wonders of the Creation serve to show us how wonderful the works
of Grace are; in the working of which, the Lord uses the very term of
creating. To regenerate a man is as glorious a work as to make a world Ephesians.
2.10. and 4.24. 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. ^.15.
: the protection of a Christian has in it also diverse of the wonders of the
Creation. The peace that comes into the hearts of Christians, as the fruits of
the lips, is created Psa. 57.18.
: a clean heart is a rare blessing, for it is created also Psalm. 51.8.
. Sixthly, it is a comfort against the force of wicked men, and their wrongs:
the wickedst men are Gods Creatures; He created the destroyer to destroy, and
the Smith that blows the Coals, and him that brings forth an instrument:
and therefore all the weapons that are made against Gods Children cannot
prosper. And it is a part of the Christians inheritance, to be protected
against the malice of the wicked, that would destroy him Esaias 54.16.17. and
43.1.2.3.
. Lastly, it may comfort Gods Children, in the expectation of their salvation;
for God has promised, as certainly as he has created the Heavens, he will
save Israel, though it should be as hard a work as was the spreading out of
the Heavens Esa 45.15.17 18.19.
.

Thirdly, the doctrine of the Creation should teach us diverse duties.

First, the admirablenesse, and variety of Gods works should provoke us to
contemplation: How dear are thy thoughts unto me? Psalm. 139.17.

Secondly, in affliction; we should willingly commit our selves to God, and
trust in him, though our means be little, or unlikely; for he is a faithful
Creator: his love to us affords him Will to do us good, and the creation
proves his Power 1 Pet. 4.19. Esa. 45.12.7.22.
.

Thirdly, the greatness of the works, in Creation, should imprint in us
Reverence and Fear, and force us to the duties of the adoration and worship of
God, Revel. 4.11. and 5.13. Psalm. 104.31. and 100, 13.

Fourthly, the knowledge of the glory and greatness of the Creator, should
inflame in us indignation against Idols, and the worship of the creature, Ier.
10.3.7.10 11.12.14.16. Romans 1.25.

Fifthly, the remembrance of our Creator, and Creation, should work in us an
abatement of our pride and iollitie, and dull the edge of our fierce appetite
to sin, Eccles. 12.1.

Sixthly, the consideration of our equality in our Creation, should keep us
that we transgress not against our Brethren: We have all one Father, and one
GOD has created us Mal. 2 10. Job 31.14.15.
. Thus of the Creation.

The third thing in Christ's relation to the Creatures, is, that All things are
for him.

For him. All things are for Christ, in diverse respects.
] In diverse respects: first, as it is he only, in whom the Father is well
pleased; and so the love of God to the World is for his sake. Secondly, as all
the Creatures do serve to point out the Son, as well as the Father, and that
because they show Christ, as the wisdom of the Father. And besides, their
changes and corruptions do cry for the liberty of the sons of God in Christ:
and further, they are all at command, for the propagation and preserving of
the kingdom of Christ. Thirdly, as he is heir of all things s, they are for
him, that is, for his glory; so as he is not only the Efficient, but the
final cause of all things. The Carpenter makes his House, perhaps for one more
honorable then himself, but not so Christ in making this great House, the
World. The consideration of this point, that all things are for Christ, should
teach us diverse things.

First, Uses.
we should less dote upon the world, and the things thereof, in as much as
these things were principally made for Christ, and not for us. And secondly, we
should use all these things as helps to lead us to Christ. Thirdly, in the use
of the Creatures, we should be careful to express the glory of Christ, by
giving thanks, by magnifying his Wisdom, Power, Goodness, etc. and by
distributing them, according to his appointment, as to the poor, and to the
maintenance of the worship of God: for seeing they are his, and for him, we
should despose of them as he requires. Lastly, it should keep us from the use
of all ill means: for seeing it is for Christ, we should not lie, deceive, use
false weights, run to Witches, or take any other ungodly course; for he
needs not our lie, nor desires to be helped by any sinful course.

The fourth thing which Christ is commended for, is his Eternity.

He was before all things]

The Immensitie of Christ's Divine Nature has four things in it. First,
infiniteness in respect of it self. Four things in the immensitie of Christ's
divine Nature.
Secondly, incomprehensiblenesse in respect of our sense, and understanding.
Thirdly, incircumscriptiblenesse, in respect of place. Fourthly, Eternity, in
comparison of time; that Christ is eternal these places prove, Prou. 8.22.
etc. Mich. 5.2.4. etc. Revel. 1.8.11. and 21.6. and 22.13.

The Eternity of Christ may be thus defined: The Eternity of Christ,
described and explained.
it is a pleasant, and at once, perfect possession of endless life. And hereby
may the eternity of Christ appear, to differ from the eternity of all other
things. The Heavens have an endl^snesse of Essence, but they want life. The
Devils have an endless, not only being, but life, but it is not a pleasant
life. The Saints in Heaven have a pleasant life till the day of Judgment, but
they have not whole possession. The Angels in Heaven have a whole possession,
but it is not at once, but successively, both in revelation and joy: I say, it
is whole in them, because their whole Nature or Essence is possessed of
pleasant and endless life. And lastly, Christ's eternity differs from all
eternity, of all the Creatures, because no creature has the former things
absolutely perfect; that is, such a possession of endless life, as unto which
nothing is wanting, for they want many of the perfections that are in Christ,
though they be perfect in their own kind.

Seeing Christ was before all things, we should prefer him before all
things: we should acknowledge his Title as heir of all things: as the eldest
among all things, we should willingly hear him speak, and honor his words;
we should trust in him, and live by faith, etc.

And in him all things consists.] That is, he vpholds, rules, and gouernes all
things by his providence: and this is the fifth thing by which our Redeemer is
described in relation to the World. That providence is given to the Son, as
well as Creation, these places prove, Heb. 1.2.3. Pro. 8.15. John 5.12. Christ
is not like the Carpenter, that makes his House, and then leaves it: or like
the Shipwright, that frames his Ship, but never after guides it. All things are
said to consist in him, How all thi^^^ consist in Christ. Cons^r^^anio.
Prescriben^^. Mouendo. Ordinando. Disponendo.
in respect of Conservation, in that he keeps all things in their being: in
respect of Precept, in that from him are prescribed the Laws, by which Nature,
Policy, and Religion are governed: in respect of Operation, in that all
things move in him: in respect of Ordination, in that he appoints all things
to their end: in respect of Disposition of the means to the end: and lastly,
as the universal cause of Nature, and natural instincts in all Creatures, by
which they further their own preservation.

Object. But we see the means by which all things are wrought and preserved,
as by their causes? Sol. The means, notwithstanding all things, consist in
Christ: first, because Christ uses not the means necessarily: secondly, he
ordaines the means as well as the end: thirdly, the means is many times
evil, in matter or form; yet the work is made good by Christ: fourthly, he
is not tied to the means, but he can work either with, without, or against
the means: fifthly, all means, has his efficacy from Christ. But the words
would be particularly weighed.

As Christ is God, all things consist in him four ways.
In him.] All things consist in Christ, both in general, as he is God; and in
special, as he is Redeemer. Four ways, all things consist, in, or by CHRIST;
as he is God: first, in respect of Vbiquitie* he comprehends all things, and is
comprehended of nothing. The Nations are but a drop of his Bucket, and time
it self is but a drop of his Eternity: secondly, in respect of power, in his
power this whole frame stirs: thirdly, in respect of Omniscience, and
Wisdom, for all is within his knowledge, and receive order from his Wisdom:
fourthly, in respect of decree; for the world to be made did from everlasting
hang in the foreknowledge, and pre-ordination of Christ.

As Christ is Redeemer, And as he is Redeemer, three ways.
all things consist in him three ways: first, because he is that atonement
which kept the world from being dissolved for Adams sin: secondly, because
the respect of him and his Church, is that that keeps up the world to this
day: if his body were once complete, the world would not stand one hour:
thirdly, because the promise made to man, concerning his prosperity, in the
use of all Creatures, are made in Christ.

All things. Act. 17.25.
] Even all things which are, or are done in Earth, or Heaven; things visible,
or invisible, which have either being, life, sense, or reason, past, present,
or to come, adversity as well as prosperity, etc.

Consist. The word Consist, n^^es four things.
] This word notes four things: Order, Continuance, Cooperation, and
Immutabilitie.

First, the Creatures consist, that is, by an excellent Order, agree together
in a glorious frame: for God is the God of order, and not of confusion.

Object. Object.
There be many miseries, evils, and mischiefs in the world, and therefore how
can there be order in all things? Sol.
Sol. First, there may be order in respect of God, though not in respect of us.
Secondly, it follows not that there is no order, because we see none: O the
depth! etc. Romans 11. Thirdly, many of the reasons of the fearful miseries
that are in the world, are revealed as the justice of God, in punishing of a
sinful World; either whole Nations, or particular persons, the humbling of
his Children, and the preparing of them for Heaven, and such like. Fourthly,
there may be Order, in respect of the whole, though not in respect of every
part.

Obiest. 2. Object. 2.
There be many sins in the world, and those consist not in Christ, Sol.
neither tend they to order. Sol. The truth is, that those come into the world
by the Devil and man, and they are by the providence of God not effectiue, but
permissiue. Yet so as there is operation in four respects about the sins of
the world: for first, Christ is the Author of the Motion in general; though
not of the evil of the Motion. Secondly, Christ works, in that he
withdraws grace* being provoked thereunto. Thirdly, he works, in
determining, or setting a measure unto sin, that it pass not his bounds.
Fourthly, he works, in converting the sin to a punishment of the sinner, or
in working thereout an occasion of humiliation, and of grace in the penitent.

Secondly, Consisting notes the continuance together of the Creatures, for by
the providence of Christ it is that no substance in Specie that was at first
made, ever ceased; but there are still as many Creatures as ever were: and the
very singulars of every sort, do consist in Indiuiduo, as long as pleases
Christ: and the like may be said of the essential qualities of all the
creatures.

Thirdly, Consisting, notes the Cooperation of the Creatures, so as by the
providence of Christ, all things work together for his glory: and all things
are ready at Christ's will and command by joint moving, etc.

Fourthly, Consisting, notes immutabilitie, in the providence of Christ.

Thus of the Doctrine: the Uses follow.

And first, Uses.
the meditation of the providence of Christ, serves for great reproof of
wicked men's security in sin, who carelessly add sin unto sin; so it may
be hid from men: as if they were of the mind of those that thought God did not
see, or had forsaken the earth, and the care of men's actions below. But seeing
all things consist in Christ, wicked men cannot stir but Christ discovers
them, as plainly as any thing that is in his own heart. Yea, seeing all
things consist in Christ, it checketh the doubtfulnesse, and mistrustfulnesse,
that is in the hearts of Gods Children; as if in their crosses God did not care
for them, or that they should be helpelesse. This is at large reproved in these
places, Esa. 40.27. and 49.14. etc. and 54.7. etc.

Secondly, seeing all things Consist in CHRIST, it should teach us to trust in
Christ, and not in the second causes: and it should make us less careful for
our preservation, never asking what we shall eat, or what we shall put on
Math. 6.
: yea, seeing he rules all things, let us willingly subject our selves to his
Scepter, and let him be our guide unto death Psalm. 49.14.
.

Qu. But what must we do that it might go well with us, by the providence of
Christ? What we must do that it might go well with us.
Ans. First, we must be Saints, if we would have Christ to keep us and
preserve us: that is, such men as hide not their sins, but confess them, and
forsake them, and live innocently 1 Samuel 2.9. Psa. 48.17.18. Psa. 5.8. and.
7.10 Hos. 14.9.10. Pro. 28.13.
. Secondly, true prosperity must be learned out of the Word, we must be taught
to profit: And the next way to get Christ to bless us in our Houses, is to
wait upon his direction in his House; for all prosperity depends upon Gods
promise, and if we would prosper, we must do such things as are of promise
Psalm. 1.3. and 23 Esa. 48.17.
. Thirdly, we must in true humility and sense of our own unworthiness, rest
upon the providence of Christ. It is just if I prosper not in my estate, if I
will not trust God with it. Fourthly, we must pray God to direct the works of
our hands continually Psalm. 90.7.
. Fifthly, we must take heed of cruelty, and despising and backbiting of Gods
poor afflicted Servants Psalm. 41.1.2.3 and 140.11.12.13.
.

Lastly, if all things consist, and are preserved in CHRIST, then much more the
righteous are preserved with a special preservation, and in a peculiar
safety. In the 37. Psalm this point is excellently and at large handled, both
by direct proof, and by answer to all the usual Objections against their
safety. That they shall be preserved, is affirmed Verse. 3.17.23.25.28. The
Objections answered, are many.

Object. 1. Wicked men flourish. Sol. a righteous man should never grieve at
that; for they shall soon be cut down, like the grass, and wither as the
green herb, Verse. 12.

Object. 2 Righteous men are in distress. Sol. Verse. 6. The night of their
adversity will be turned into the light of prosperity: and as surely, as they
can believe when it is night that it shall be day, so surely may they be
persuaded, when crosses are upon them, that comfort and deliverance shall come.

Object. 3. But there are great plots laid against the righteous, and they are
pursued with great malice, and their intended ruin is come almost to the very
issue. Sol. Verse 12.13 14.15. The Lord sees all the plots of wicked men, and
laughes at their spightfull and foolish malice; while they are busy to destroy
the righteous, and hope to have a day against them, the Lord sees that their
own day is coming upon them; even a day of destruction, a day of great
judgment, and eternal misery; their Bow shall be broken, and the Sword that
they have drawn shall enter into their own heart.

Object. 4 But the Just have but small means. Sol. Verse. 16.17. A little that
the righteous has, is better then the riches of many wicked; for the arms of
the wicked shall be broken, and the Lord vpholdeth the just.

Object. 5. Heavy times are like to befall them. Sol. Verse 19. They shall not
be ashamed in the evil time, and in the day of famine they shall have enough.

Object. 6. But the wicked wax fatter and fatter, and they prevail in vexing
the righteous. Sol. Verse 20. Indeed the wicked are fat, but it is but the fat
of Lambs, their prosperity shall soon melt, and as they be like smoke in
vexing the godly, so shall they be like smoke in vanishing away.

Object. 7. But the righteous do fall. Sol. Verse. 24. Though he do fall, yet
he falls not finally, nor totally; for he is not utterly cast down: and
besides, there is an upholding providence of God in all the falls of the
righteous.

Object. 8. We see some wicked men that do not so fall into adversity, but
rather are in prosperity to their dying days. Sol. Verse. 27. Though they do,
yet their seed shall be cut off.

Object. 9. But some wicked men are strong yet, and in their seed spread also.
Sol. Verse 35.36. Note also, that those spreading Bay-trees many times soon
pass away; and they, and their houses, are sometimes utterly cut off.

Object. 10. But upright men are under many and long crosses. Sol. Verse. 37.
Yet, his end is peace.

Object. 11. But no body stands for the godly, when they come into question.
Sol. Verse 39.40. Their salvation is of the Lord; he is their strength, he
will help them, and deliver them, etc.

But if we would be thus delivered, observe

1. That we must not unthankfully fret at Gods providence, verse 1. 2. We
must trust in the Lord, and do good, verse. 2.3. 3. We must delight our selves
in the Lord, and not place our contentment on earthly things, verse 4. 4. We
must commit our ways to God, verse. 5. 5. We must get patience, and humble
affections, verse. 7.8.9.10.11. 6. We must be of upright conversation, verse.
14. 7. We must be merciful, verse. 25.26. 8. We must speak righteous things,
and get the Law into our hearts, verse 30. 31. 9. We must keep our way, and
wait on GOD, neither use ill means.

Verse 18. And he is the Head of the Body, the Church; he is the beginning
and first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.


Our Redeemer is described before, both in his relation to God, and to the
World. In this verse, and the rest that follow to the 23. he is described as
he stands in relation to the Church: and that two ways. First, in relation to
the whole Church, verse 18.19.20. Secondly, in relation to the Church of the
Colossians, verse. 21.22.

The praise of Christ in relation to the whole Church, is first briefly
propounded, and then more largely opened. It is propounded in these words. And
he is the Head of the Body, the Church.] There is great odds between the
worlds subjection to Christ, and the Churches: for the faithful are subject to
Christ as the members are to the Head; but the wicked are subject as vile
things under his feet Ephesians. 1.22.
.

Great are the benefits which come to the Church from CHRIST, as her Head I
instance: The benefits flow from Christ as the head of the Church.
in six, viz. Love, Simpathie, Audience, Aduocation, Union, and Influence.
First, Infinite Love: no man so loves his Wife, as Christ loves his Church
Ephesians. 5.27.
. Secondly, Simpathie, by which Christ has a fellow-feeling of the distresses
of all his members, that which is done to them, he takes it as done to him,
whether it be good or evil Math. 18.5. and 25.40.45. Heb 2.17. and 4.15.
. Thirdly, Audience, and willing acceptance of all the desires and prayers of
all his members: the Head hears for the Body. Fourthly, Aduocation, no
natural Head can so plead for his members, as does our mystical Head for us.
Fifthly, Union, we as members, are honored with the Union of Essence; in that
he has taken our nature: with the Union of Office, so as the members are
anointed Kings, Priests, and Prophets, in their kind, as well as CHRIST: and
also with the Union of Virtue, and benefits: by which Union we partake of his
Righteousness, Holiness, and Glory. By Virtue of this Union with Christ, the
faithful have the everlasting presence of Christ; to and after, the end of the
World Math. 28.
. The last benefit is influence; influence I say, both of Life ( for the second
Adam is a quickening spirit 1 Cor. 15.
) and Light, (for CHRIST is the Fountain of all true Wisdom 1 Cor. 1.30.
: the Head sees for the Body, and the Body by, and from, the Head) and Grace,
(for of his fullness we receive all grace,) and Motion: for all good desires,
feelings, words, and works, come from the working of the Head in us.

Our head is more glorious then all political heads.
The political Head is the glory of the World; and the mystical Head is the
glory of the CHVRCH: yet the mystical Head excels the political many ways.
For, 1. CHRIST is the Head of such as are not together in the being of Nature
or Grace. 2. CHRIST is a perpetual Head; the other is but for a time. 3.
CHRIST is a Head by Influence, the other but by Government. 4. CHRIST is an
absolute Head; the other but subordinate to Christ, and his Vicegerent.


That Christ might become our Head, we must consider what he did in fitting
himself thereunto: and secondly, what he does in us. For himself, he took
the same Nature with his Church; else had the Church been like Nabuchadnezzars
Image. Yet as he took our Nature, so we must know that he bettered it. The
Head differs in worth from the Body, because therein is seated the mind, which
is the noblest part of man: so in the humane Nature of Christ, dwells the
Godhead bodily; and by expiation, in his own person, Christ takes away the
sins of the Church, which else would have let all Union. And lastly, he
exalted his suffering Nature, and seated himself aloft, as meet to have the
pre-eminence, and become Head of all the faithful: And as the Head is there
seated, so are the Members: for, 1. they are collected out of the World, by the
sound of the Gospel: Let them lie hidden in the world that mean to perish
with the world. 2. They are framed, formed, proportioned, and begotten, by
daily hearing. 3. They are ingrafted into an unspeakable, and invisible Union;
presently in truth, afterward in sense.

Church.] This word is diversely accepted: it is taken sometime in evil part,
for an assembly of wicked men; and so there is the Church of the malignant
Psalm. 26.5. Act. 19.32.40.
: sometimes for the faithful in heaven Ephesians. 5.27.
: sometimes for Christians on Earth 1 Timothy 3.15. Act. 5.11.
: and this not always in one sense: sometimes for the Pastors of the Church,
and governors, as some think, Matthew. 18.17. sometimes for the People, and the
Flock 1 Pet. 5.2. Act. 20.28.
: sometimes for particular Churches. And lastly, sometimes for all the Elect of
God, that have been, are, or shall be: so Matthew. 16.18. Ephesians. 1.23. and 5.23.
And so here.

Reave. 2.18 12
The Church of Christ is glorious in three praises.

1 She is One. 2 She is Holy. 3 She is Catholic.
She is One, in respect of one Head, and Service: in respect of one Spirit and
Binder, and in respect of one Faith and Constancy in doctrine. She is Holy, by
segregation from the sinful world, by the inchoation of the grace of Christ,
and by imputation of his righteousness. She is Catholic, especially, in the
New Testament; in respect of place, the Elect may be in any place: in respect
of men, for it is gathered of all sorts of men: and in respect of Time, for it
shall continue unto all times, even till time be no more.

Thus of the Doctrine concerning Christ and the Church. The Uses follow.

The first Use is for Confutation: Uses.
and that three ways.

First, in vain do the wicked enemies of the Church pride themselves in the
greatness of Learning, Power, Means, etc. thinking to suppress the being or
glory of Christ's Church on Earth; for the stone that the Builders refused, will
prove the Head of the corner.

Secondly, in vain do the Papists go about to maintain their ministerial
Head; for the Church is neither without a Head, nor many-Headed. And it is
absurd to excuse it, that the Pope is but a Head under Christ: for the body
were monstrous that had two heads, one above, and another under.

Thirdly, in vain do carnal men plead their hopes in Christ, when they can
yield no sound reason to prove they are Christ's members. They are not members
of this body under this Head, that want Faith; that have not the spirit of
Christ; that are not quickened with the life of Grace; that are not wrought
upon by the word of Christ, nor built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, that feel no influence of graces from CHRIST; that want the
knowledge of Prophets, or mortification of Priests, or victory over the World,
as Kings; that either pride themselves in their own civil righteousness, or
can fall away wholly, and for ever.

The second Use is for Instruction: and first, as Christ is considered to be
our Head, we should 1 Pray, that God would open the eyes of our understanding,
that we might with sense and affection see what the hope of our calling is
Ephesians. 1.19.22. etc.
, to become members of such a Body, under such a Head. 2 Take heed of all
pollutions, that might any way tend to the dishonor of our Head, whether it be
of Flesh or Spirit 2 Cor. 6.
. 3 Consider our place in this Body, and under this Head, and not presume to
know above what is meet Romans 12.4.5.
. 4 Use all means to grow in this Body, and not pull it back, or shame our
Head by spiritual security, or unprofitableness: and to this end we should
stick fast to the words of the Prophets, and not suffer ourselves to be
carried about by every wind of doctrine, and follow the truth in Love Ephesians
4.12. to 16.
, without pride or discord. 5 Obey as the Members do, in Union with the Head
by faith; in Communion with the Fellow Members by Love, and with a natural
voluntary, and not extorted obedience.


Secondly, if the CHVRCH be the Body of CHRIST, and we Members of this Body,
we should learn to carry our selves one toward another, in all humbleness
of mind, and long-suffering, supporting one another, and keep the bond of
peace in the unity of the spirit Ephesians. 4.2.3.4.5.
. And we should labor to profit one another with the gifts God has bestowed
upon us, that our graces, as holy ointment, may run down from member to
member: and all our Love should be without dissimalation Romans 12.6.9.
: in giving honor, going one before another, in as much as what honor one
member receives, is done in some respect to all. And we should willingly
distribute to the necessities of the Saints, and rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep Romans 12.10.13.15.16.
, out of the Simpathy of Members: by all means shunning to give offense in the
least thing; especially not censorious, or contentious in matters of
indifferency 1 Cor. 10.24.14.
.

Lastly, all discontentments with our place or calling, or estimation in the
body, and all contempt, or envy, at the gifts or place of other Christians,
should be banished out of our hearts 1 Cor. 12.15 22.23.26.
.

Thus of the excellency of Christ, in relation to the Church, as it is briefly
propounded: the explication follows.

The head has three Privileges, or excels all the Members in Order,
Perfection, or Virtue, and Efficacy. The pre-eminence of Christ is three ways
considered. First, in respect of the dignity of Order, verse 18. of order I
say, toward the Members. Secondly, in respect of perfection in himself, in the
fullness of grace, verse 15. Thirdly, in respect of Virtue, Efficacy, and
influence toward the whole body, verse 20.

The primacie of CHRIST in order, or relation to the Members, is twofold.
First, in the estate of Grace, He is the beginning. Secondly, in the respect of
the state of Glory, He is the first begotten of the dead.

Christ is said to be the beginning, in three respects.
He is the beginning.] Christ may be said to be the beginning, in three
respects. First, as he is the first fruits, for whose sake the rest are
accepted, and blessed. Secondly, as he is the repayrer of the world, decayed
by man's sin. Thirdly, as he is the beginning of the good things that are in
the Church: he is both the object and efficient cause of faith. Mortification
flows from his death, and new Obedience from his Resurrection: Justification
is wrought from his obedience.

Uses.
And this shows the misery of all carnal men, that are not members of Christ:
in respect of the life of Grace they are dead: in respect of Faith they are
Infidels: in respect of Justification they are without GOD: in respect of
Repentance they walk in trespasses, and sins: in respect of Communion of
Saints, they are strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel. There can be a
beginning of no true felicity without CHRIST. Christ is said to be the
beginning of the creation of God Revel. 3.14.
: and from thence is inferred a most severe reproof of man's lukewarmenesse in
matters of Piety, Repentance, and Grace, verse. 15.16.17. And if Christ be the
Author and beginning of Faith and Grace, it should teach us to persevere in
the Faith, and contend for the truth, and keep that is committed to us, with
all Patience, Wisdom, and Constancy Heb. 12.2.
. And in as much as he is Alpha, he will be Omega: as he is the beginning, so
he will be the end; and therefore blessed are they that do his Commandments.
And let him that is righteous be righteous still: and let profane men, that
will not by Faith and Repentance seek unto Christ, be filthy still Revel.
22.11.13.14.
.

The first begotten of the dead.] Christ, as head of the Church, holds his
relation both to the living, as their beginning, and to the dead as their first
begotten.

There is a threefold primogeniture of Christ: He is the first begotten.
First, in respect of eternal generation; as he is the Son of God. Of this
before. Secondly, as he is borne of the Virgin Mary; for she is said to bring
forth her first begotten Son Mat. 1.
. Thirdly, when God raised Christ out of the Grave, he is said to beget his
Son, for so the words of the second Psalm: Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee, are applied to the Resurrection of CHRIST Act. 13.33.
. In that Christ is said to be the first begotten of the dead, three things may
be noted, as implied here, concerning the members of Christ: and three things
concerning Christ himself as Head.

First, concerning the Members, these things may be gathered:

1. That not only wicked men, but the true members of Christ dye, Heb. 9.
Psalm. 89. 2 Samuel 14. The consideration of this, that the godly must dye, may
serve for many Uses: first, Why does vain man dye then without wisdom Job
4.21.
? secondly, how shall wicked men escape Job 21.32. Esaias 28.
? their Covenant with Death must needs be disanulled: thirdly, it should cause
us deeply to digest the vanities of this life Eccles. 2.16.17
: fourthly, it should cause us to take heed of Eues, Least ye dye; for it is
out of all question, dye we must, and therefore meet it were, we should
provide for it, without mincing or procrastinating: lastly, we should encourage
our selves, and dye like the members of Christ, with all willingness, Faith
and Patience.

2 The governance of Christ reaches as well to the dead as to the living
Members. This the faithful were wont of old to note, when they would say a man
were dead, they would say, he was joined to his people. This should be a great
encouragement unto godly men to dye.

3 From Coherence; that if we would have Christ to be the first begotten to us
when we are dead, we must subject our selves to his Ordinances, that he may
be the beginning of true Grace to us while we live.

Secondly, concerning the Head, these three things may be noted:

1 That he was among the dead, and this was good for us: for thereby he
dissolved the power the Devil had to inflict death, or the fear of it, upon
his Members Heb. 2.17. Heb. 9.15.
, and thereby he finished the expiation of all our sins, thereby he ratified
Gods Covenant, thereby he kills the power of sin in us, and thereby he takes
away the curse of our natural death.

2 That he was not only among the dead, but he was begotten among the dead,
that is, raised from death to life; and this also was profitable for us, for
he rose to our Justification, Romans 4.23.24. to our vivification, Romans 6.4. to
our deliverance from wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10.

3 That he is not only begotten, but the first begotten among the dead; and
that in three respects. First; as he was more excellently raised then any of
the dead are; for he carried no corruption to the grave; and he saw no
corruption in the grave, and he was but a short time under the power of the
grave. Secondly, in respect of time; he was the first that rose from the dead
Acts 26.23.
. Thirdly, in respect of efficacy; it is he by whose power all the rest rise
1 Cor. 15.20.22 John 5.21. and 11.28.
.

This must needs be a great comfort to us while we live, against the time our
bodies must go into the house of darkness, the darkesome lodging in the
grave; only, let us seek the virtue of the Resurrection of Christ in this
world, and the experiment of the vigor of it, first upon our souls, in
plucking us up out of the grave of sin, to walk before God, in newness of
life Phil. 3.9.
.

That in all things he might have the pre-eminence.] These words are added for
further amplification or Explanation of the former. They give unto Christ a
primacie and pre-eminence in all things: First, over both living and dead: as
he is the beginning to the living, and the first begotten to the dead. Christ
then has the pre-eminence, he is first in all things, Mat. 28.18. Romans 4.9.
Phil. 2.9. Ephesians. 1.23. He is first in diverse respects.
He is first many ways: first in Time, as before all things: first in Order,
he has a primacie of order, he is the first to be reckoned and admired in
the Church: first in the Dignity of Person, he excels in both Natures all
that is in the Church or ever was: first in Degree John 1.5.
: first in Government Mat. 20.27. Luke 19.4. Esaias 9.
: first in Acceptance with God Mat. 17.5.
: lastly, he is first Effectiuely, as the cause of all the respect, order, and
excellency in others: he is the Root out of which springs all the glory in
the Church.

The use is, first, for Terror to all those that sin against Christ's
pre-eminence, as they do in a high degree; Uses.
that having begun in the Spirit, will end in the flesh: such as having
known the way of righteousness, afterward turn from the holy course, with
the Dog to the vomit, and with the Swine to the wallowing in the mire 2 Pet.
20.21 Revel. 2.4.19.
. Secondly, the consideration of Christ's primacie and pre-eminence, should
learn us to take heed of climbing in the Church; it is dangerous to desire to
be chief; it is almost the sole power of the Head of the Church Mat. 20.27.
Mark. 9.35. and 10.44. 3 John 9.10.
. Lastly, let it be our care both in heart and life, to yield Christ the
pre-eminence; which we shall do, if we labor to know nothing more then Christ
crucified; if we mind the things of Christ's Kingdom, more then the things of
this life; if we make him our chief refuge by Faith, for all happiness and
reconciliation; if we make him our joy; rejoicing more in Christ then carnal
men can do in the World, How we may in life yield Christ the pre-eminence.
(for a discontented life denies Christ the pre-eminence;) if the zeal of Gods
house can eat us up; if in all our actions we perform the worship of God
first; if we stick not to confess and profess Christ; if we honor the
faithful, and contemn the vile, and join our selves to such as fear God,
though they be despised in this world: and lastly, when we can in all things
rather choose to please God then men.

Verse 19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell.


THere is great reason Christ should be acknowledged head, as in the former
Verse, by reason of his primacie and pre-eminence; so in this Verse, by reason
of the plenitude that dwells in him: No natural head so full of senses, as he
is full of Grace.

It is to be noted in the general, that the head should excel the members in
gifts: and therefore it is a fault in Cities, when the people choose unto
themselves unmeet men to be their Heads. God may choose Saul following his
Fathers A^les, because if he make Princes, he can give spirit unto Princes; but
it is not so with men; they may give the Office, but they cannot give the gifts
to execute it. And it is likewise a great shame to such Rulers of the people,
as are so far from repressing disorders, that they are disordered themselves
and their households. So domestical Heads likewise, if they would not see
swearing, lying, whoring, passions, idleness, etc. in their Children and
Servants, they must be free from ill example themselves, and be as heads,
excelling the rest of the family in gifts and good behavior.

It pleased.] The moving cause and foundation of all the grace showed to the
Creature, is the good pleasure of the will of the Creator Ephesians. 1.5. 2 These.
1.11.
. Why is Israel planted Psalm 43.3.
? why are the great Mysteries of God hidden from the wise, and revealed to
Babes Mat. 11.27.
? why has the little Flock a Kingdom Luke 12.32.
why has God mercy on some and not on others Exodus 33.19.
? why has Job riches, and why are they taken away Job 1.
? why is Judgment and righteousness in a forlorn world, that deserved
nothing Ier. 9.24.
? why is Judah as Potters clay Ier. 1^.6.
? why is the world saved by preaching 1 Cor. 1.21.
? why are some predestinate to be adopted Ephesians. 1.5.
? why is the Mystery of Gods will opened now and not before? To conclude, why
is all fullness in the Head, or any grace in the Members, but only, because it
pleased him? Ephesians. 1.9.


Uses.
The use of this is: first, to teach us to do likewise, that is, to do good
without respect of desert; it is Royal, yea, it is Divine: Secondly, it should
teach us, if we would get any grace or blessing from God, to examine our
selves, whether we be in his Favor, and to labor in all things so to serve
him, as to please him. Thirdly, to subject our Reasons and Affections to Gods
Will, though he should show us no other Reason of his doings, but his Will:
for we must always know that things are always just, because he willed
them. Fourthly, in our troubles, and under crosses, it should teach us patience
Psalm. 39.9.
, and to labor to pacify God, by Prayer and Humiliation, in the Name of
Christ, and to acknowledge the sovereignty of God, referring our selves to his
pleasure for deliverance Psalm. 40.13.
; not trusting upon the means Psalm. 4 4.3.6
. Lastly, it may be a comfort that nothing can befall any Christian, but what
pleases God.

Doct. 2. God is well pleased in Esaias 42.1.
CHRIST: He loves him infinitely; he can be content he have any thing, yea,
all things: and therefore it should teach us to fly to Christ for help, and
hear him Mat. 17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17.
. And we should never seek nor acknowledge any other Mediator or Advocate,
seeing God is well pleased in him.

That in him should all fullness dwell. All fullness is in Christ in five
respects.
] Doct. There is a fullness and absolute compleatenesse in Christ. 1. In
respect of Members; so the Church is the fullness of Christ Ephesians. 1.23.
. 2. In respect of the inhabitation of the Divine Nature in the Humane; for the
Godhead dwells in him bodily Col. 2.9.
. 3. In respect of Power; so all power, and fullness of authority was given to
him, over all things in heaven and earth Mat. 28.
. Fourthly, in respect of merit, for here is great fullness, if we consider,
either who merited, not man only, but God also: or when he merited, viz. from
the very moment of Conception: or for whom, not for himself, but for millions
of others: or what he merited, viz. remission of all Sins, Graces of all
kinds, Glory that will last for ever. 5. In respect of Grace; there is a
compleatnesse of Grace in Christ, not only in respect of the grace of
personal Union, or of Office, or of Adoration, but in respect of habitual
graces, or gifts, and endowments of his soul. The last is here meant; all
fullness of gifts dwell in him.

The Uses follow. Uses.


First, Great is the mystery of godliness; God manifested in the Flesh,
justified in the Spirit, etc. 1 Timothy 3.16.
. Secondly, this is joyful news to all Christ's members; for of his fulness
they receive Grace for Grace. Thirdly, this confutes Papicolists, in the
opinions of their head: he cannot be a Head, in whom there is not fullness to
serve the whole body: and therefore the Pope can be no head of the whole
Church. Lastly, let the rest of Christ be glorious to our souls Isay 11.10.
. He has the words of life, whither shall we go from him? Thus in general.

This fullness has increase of praise three ways: 1 It is all fullness. 2 It
is in him. 3 It dwells in him.


For the first: there is in Christ all fullness, both in respect of the number
of Graces Esaias 11.2.
, and in respect of the measure of them John 3.34.
: and therefore let the Christian rejoice in the Lord 1 Cor. 1.30.
; and in all wants of the soul, seek to him by Prayer in Faith; for from him,
and out of his fullness, may be had Wisdom and Sanctification 1 Cor. 1.30.
, Counsel and Strength Esaias 11 2.
, Joy and Gladness Esaias 61.3
; yea, a Christian should be covetous, seeing here is enough to be had; and
therefore should labor to be full of Knowledge Esaias 11.9.
, and of the fear of God Prou. 19.23.
, and of good fruits James 3.17. Phil. 1.11.
. This also reproues the Iusticiaries, and Sancti-colists, Pharisees and
Saint-worshippers. A fullness is no where to be had but in Christ, and there is
so much as needs no supply from Saints or Angels. It shows also, that the
common Protestant serves an Idol in stead of Christ, in as much as he gets in
his relation to Christ, no more Joy, Grace, and Holiness. The true Christ has
all fullness, not only in himself, but by influence, for the good, and
according to the state of his Members.

For the second: this fullness is in Christ: and this has matter of great
weight; for thereby is employed the misery of all unregenerate men. There is no
fullness, compleatnesse, sufficing felicity, wheresoever to be had out of
Christ. And besides, the Emphesis imports great comfort to the true convert;
for this fullness is in Christ. God does not look to have the members actually
absolute in themselves, it will serve turn that all fullness be in the head.
And in as much as the perfect bliss of a Christian is in his Christ, it is
well for his safety, against the malice of Satan, who now may bite the heel,
but cannot touch the head. And from hence we must learn, if we would ever g^t,
by participation and influence, any grace from Christ, we must by Faith and
effectual calling, get into Christ.

Thirdly, in that he says, this Fullness dwells in Christ; it notes the
continuance of it: the personal Union shall never be dissolved, and therefore
the habitual graces of Christ, shall never be abolished. And these Graces had
need continue in him, for in him rests the calling of the Elect, not yet
gathered, and the perseverance of the Saints.

Uses.
The Rivers must needs be empty if the fountain be dry. This is comfortable,
we may now beseech him to help our unbelief, as well as the man in Gospel.
We may find joy and victory in CHRIST crucified, as well as Paul, his Grace
will still be sufficient for us. There dwells in him still fullness of wisdom
to keep us from error: fullness of Grace, to keep us from Apostacy:
fullness of Joy, to keep us from Despair: fullness of power to preserve us
against all evil men and evil Angels: only, refuse not knowledge, when he
offers the means: wincke not when the Sun shines: Shut not the door, when
he knockes: fight, when he gives thee Weapons: and cast not away thy
confidence, and let no man take thy Crown.

Hitherto of the plenitude in the Head.

Verse 20. And by him, to reconcile all things to himself, and to settle at
peace, through the blood of his Cross, both the things on Earth, and the
things in Heaven.


IN these words the Redeemer is described as a Head by influence: the Apostle
shows us the good comes from Christ, as our Mediator: and the sum of all is*
that he reconciles us to God.

In this Verse there are eight things to be noted.

First, why, or the moving cause; and that is, It pleased him: for that must be
supplied out of the former Verse, as the Copulative (And) shows. Secondly, by
whom, or the Instrument; By him. Thirdly, what, to reconcile. Fourthly, whom,
in general, All things. Fifthly, to whom, or to what end, viz. To himself.
Sixthly, the effect, making peace. Seauenthly, the means of merit, By the blood
of his Cross. Eighthly, what in particular, viz things on earth, and things in
Heaven.

Reconciliation is our first step to happiness.
The principal point in the whole Verse to be observed, is, that man has then
attained the chief good, when his soul is reconciled to GOD: this is the
sum of all that which Christ has procured for his Church. Blessed are the
people, whose God is the Lord. Others may be more rich then they, but none more
happy; for hereby man is joined to the fountain of all good, and not only
has interest in his favor, but reapeth unspeakable benefits by communion
with his Attributes, Word, Works, Holiness and Glory. Our reconciliation with
God gives us a title to a better happiness then ever Adam had, it estates us
in the possession of eternity, and frees us from immortal woe.

Uses.
All this should encourage, with all care and constancy to seek Gods favor,
and forsake our sins, that we may be reconciled, whatsoever it cost; sparing
no labor or tears, till we see the face of God with joy Ier. 50.5.
. This shows also, the woeful estate of such men as are left to themselves,
and have this peace and reconciliation hid from their eyes. And of all
Judgments, it should most grieve us to be separate from God. If to be
reconciled be our greatest happiness, to miss the comforts of Gods presence
and love, cannot but be an extreme affliction. And to this end, we should
beseech God to deliver us from a blind or stony heart, or a sleepy conscience,
or impure affections: for these, if they reign in us, hinder the vision of God.

And. Our reconciliation is founded in Gods good pleasure.
] This carries us to it pleased the Father, in the former Verse. Whence we
may note that our reconciliation stands with the everlasting good pleasure of
Gods will; and therefore it follows: 1. That our reconciliation cannot be
hindered or altered: 2. That it arises from no sudden motion in GOD, but is
aunciently decreed: 3. That we are not reconciled for our merit; for it was
decreed before we had done good or evil: 4. That the reasons of the reiection
of some, and the gathering of others in time, are just, though not always
expressed, because there is no decree without Gods counsel: 5. That if ever we
would have the comfort of our Election, we must make sure our Reconciliation;
we can never know Gods eternal love to us, till we find the experience of
this favor in our Reconciliation: the Prisoner knows not what favor is in
the Kings breast, till his Pardon comes.

By him. Christ is the means of our reconciliation.
] Doct. Christ is the instrument of our Reconciliation: the first Adam took
God from us, the second Adam restored God to us. Man would needs become God,
and therefore lost God from us: God out of his love becomes man, and restores
us again to God. The world is now restored by the same wisdom it was first
made.

Gods Image is restored in us, by him that is the eternal Image of the Father.
The middle Person in the Trinity is the Mediator between God and Man, the
natural Son makes men Sons by Adoption: it is Christ that both can and
ought to reconcile us. He could not do it if he were not God; he ought not to
do it if he were not man 1 Timothy 2.5. Romans 3.25. 1 Cor. 1.3. 1 John 2.1. 1 Cor.
3.11. Act. 4.13.
.

This Doctrine yields us matter of admiration of the love of Christ, Uses.
if we consider what either he was, or what we were. The Lord in the form of
a Servant, procures the salvation of the Servant: he that was the beginning of
Gods works, repayes him, that at best, was the last of them. God descended
from heaven to earth, that man might ascend from earth to heaven: God is made
the Son of man, that man might be made the Son of God: he that was rich
became poor, to make us rich; the immortal became mortal, to make us
immortal. He is a Physician to us sick, a Redeemer to us sold, a Way to us
wandering, and Life to us dead. Secondly, this should teach us in all suits to
God, to seek to Christ the Son of God: it is he must offer up our Prayers,
procure our Pardon, and make our Peace; yea, it is he and none other. Thirdly,
we should seek the testimony of Jesus, as well as his Ransom: if he witness
to our Reconciliation, we need never doubt of it: if he give no witness,
we can have no assurance. The Testimony of Jesus is given, partly by the
Promises of the Word, (he putting spirit and life into them for our particular
comfort,) and partly by the witness of the Spirit of Adoption, in the
unutterable feelings and joy of our hearts 1 Timothy 2.6. Esaias 55.6. 1 Cor. 1.6.
.

Reconcile.] The word imports a restoring of one to Amity, from which he was
by his own fault fallen. There is a threefold estate of man: there is the
estate, 1. of Innocence; and here the man is at Amity with God: 2. of
Corruption; and here is mortal enmity between God and man: 3. of Grace; and
here they are made friends, and the League renewed. Into the first estate we
came by Creation; into the second by Propagation; and into the third only by
Regeneration. The distinct knowledge of this threefold estate of man, cleares
Gods Justice, from the blame of all those plagues, broke in upon mankind,
through corruption: and it should scarre wicked men out of their wretched
condition, as they are by nature servants of corruption. And it greatly
commends the mercy of God, that could love us when we were enemies.

In the performance of this work of Reconciliation or Mediation, there are
six distinct things done by Christ: the first is Discretion, or Dijudication
of the cause: he takes notice of the state and business of the Church.
Secondly, he does report the Will of God, the Covenant and Conditions of
agreement with God, to the Church, Thirdly, he makes Intercession for the
offending party. Fourthly, he satisfies and expiates for sin. Fifthly, he
applies that Satisfaction. Sixthly, he conserues the Elect in the state of
Reconciliation. Discretion and Relation belong to the Prophetical office:
Intercession and Satisfaction to the Priesthood: Application and Conservation
to his Regal Office. Who are not reconciled to God in Christ.
Enquire then whether thou be reconciled to God in Jesus Christ. I consider it
negatiuely; thou art not reconciled, if thou be not enlightened and inspired
with the holy Ghost, to lead thee into all truth. For if Christ did reconcile
thee, as a Prophet, he must teach thee both by his Word and Spirit. Again,
thou art not reconciled, if thou have not consecrated thy self to kill the
beasts, thy sins, in sacrifice before the Lord; and by the Spirit of
Intercession, to pour out thy soul in Gods sight. When Christ reconciles as a
Priest, he poures upon man the spirit of Compassion and Deprecation Zach. 12.12.
: Thou art not reconciled, if Christ beget thee not by the immortal seed, or
rule thee not by the Scepter of his Word, or conserve thee not, in
uprightness, with respect to all Gods Commandments.

Why the Church is called all things.
All things.] That is, the Church or Elect of God; all the faithful. The Elect
are called All things: 1. because of their number, there is a world of them 2
Cor. 5.19.
: 2. Because there is for their sakes a reconciliation with all the Creatures
in general; for corruption is taken from the whole, though not from every
part: 3. Because God does not receive their persons into favor, but all things
that belong unto them, that may concern their felicity: 4. Because whatsoever
they have, in heaven or earth, comes by virtue of this Reconciliation.

Uses.
The Use is: 1. to teach us to take notice of the worlds vanity: What is all
the world, if Gods Children were out of it? Nothing. The Elect are all things,
worth all, better then all. Kingdoms and Scepters and all the glory of the
earth, is nothing in Gods account. As all is now corrupt with sin, God would
have it known, he stands not bound to any in the world, or the whole world,
but only to the Elect. 2. It should teach us to know no man after the flesh,
that is, not to respect men for their Lands, apparel, titles, parentage, etc.
but for Grace 2 Cor. 5.16.
. 3. We should not much wonder at the disorders are in the world: for were it
not for the Elect, it would soon appear, by the ruin of all, how little God
cared for rebellious Reprobates. 4. It is a great comfort, no one of the Elect
shall perish; for all things be reconciled. 5. It should teach us to make much
of them that fear the Lord. Let them be in stead of all things in our account.
Lastly, seeing all things are reconciled, now let us keep the peace, even the
unity of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace Ephesians. 4.6.
.

To himself.] Some read, in him. There is difference between for Christ, by
Christ, and in Christ. For, notes the meritorious cause: In, notes the
conjunction with the head: By, notes the instrument.

To himself four ways.
Doct. We are reconciled in Christ or unto Christ. This is true four ways. 1.
As he is the person, by whom we are reconciled: 2. As his glory, is the end of
our reconciliation. 3. As his glory and holiness, is the pattern after which
our happiness and holiness is proportioned. 4. In respect of his love,
providence, custody, and protection, unto the which we are received.

The Use of all may be to teach us: Uses.
1. To take heed of opposing, disgracing, or persecuting of such, as are
reconciled to God; for, he that touches them, touches the apple of Christ's
eye. Note he says, to himself. 2. In the Use of all things, to carry our
selves so, as we provide to give account, and give the things to God which are
Gods, and as good Stewards dispose all things in that time, and according to
those rules, Christ has appointed. 3. Seeing we are now brought so near unto
God, we should humble our selves to walk before him in all reverence and
fear: And to this end, we should labor for purity of heart, that we might
see God Mich. 6.8. Mat. 5.7. Heb. 12.29. 1 Samuel 6.10.
: Yea, we should hate all spiritual pollutions, and be zealous in all good
works. And seeing God has chosen us to himself, we should set up the Lord,
to be our God, to serve him with our whole heart, and have respect to all his
Commandments 1 Pet. 2.9.11.12. Tit. 2.13. Deuteronomy. 26.16.17.
. And to this end we should labor for special sincerity in the profession
of Religion: an ordinary care will not serve the turn: if we will live with
the multitude, we may perish with the multitude 2 Chronicles. 15.3
. But let us cleave to the Lord with a perpetual Covenant, and resolve to
receive him as our guide unto the death Ier. 50.5. Psalm. 49. vlt.
.

Set at peace.] The effect of our reconciliation is peace. Concerning this
peace, I propound five things. Who made peace.


1. Who made it: no other can set a peace among the Creatures, but he that
reconciles men to the Creator: he is the Prince of peace Esaias 9.7.
; the chasticement of our peace was upon him Esaias 53.
; He is our peace Ephesians. 2.13.
.

2 With whom the faithful are at peace: With whom they are at peace.
they are at peace, first, with themselves; Peace rules their hearts Col. 3.15.
. Secondly, with good Angels Psalm. 34. Heb. 1.14.
. Thirdly, with the seed of Abraham, the Jews; the partition wall is broken
down Esaias 2.15.
. Fourthly, with Gods Ordinances, God creating peace, or else the Word would
always be goring and smiting with the strokes of war, and words of
vengeance Esaias 11.4 and 57.19.
. Fifthly, with the godly Esaias. 11.6.7.
. Sixthly, with all Creatures Job 5. Heb. 2.18. Psalm. 91.13.
, only there can be no peace: first, with the Powers and Principalities; for
after the two strong men have fought, there is no more peace Ephesians. 6.12.
: secondly, with the World, the World has hated the Master, and therefore the
servants may not look for better entertaynment John 15.8.
.

3 The effects of this peace, which are principally two: first, the restitution
of sovereignty and dominion over the Creatures: secondly, the safety of the
Christian in all estates; The effects of this peace.
for from this peace flows great security and protection, even to the poorest
Christian, either from, or in, dangers Job 5 15. etc.
.

4 That we may attain the sense of this peace, What we must do to attain
the sense of this peace.
we must be reconciled to God Hos. 2.18.
: we must be sincere worshippers Hos. 2.17.
: we must keep us in our ways Psalm. 91.13.
: we must get a meek and quiet spirit Psalm. 37.12.
: we must in nothing be careful, but in all things show our requests unto God
Phil. 4.7.
: we must love God and show it by the love of the knowledge of his Name Psalm*
91.14.
.

Uses. First, Gods Children should know this privilege for themselves, it will
be a preservation against sin. 2. Hence we may gather the misery of all
carnal persons that are not reconciled to God. They want the protection of
Angels, they are under the government of the God of this world; the Creatures
are armed against them, Uses.
they are stripped of the royal privileges arising from the communion with
Saints; yea, God fights against them, in, and by themselves, as by terrors of
conscience, and by unquiet affections and passions, giving them over to an
unruly heart. What are Envy, Malice, Lust and Rage, but so many weapons to
fight against the soul? Yea, God fights against the sinner, by the deadness
of his heart, which both affamisheth the soul in spiritual things, and takes
away the contentment of outward things.

By the blood.] Here he notes how we are reconciled, viz. by the blood of
Christ, this is that blood of sprinckling Heb. 12.24.
, the blood of the immaculate Lamb 1 Pet. 1.19.
, the blood of the everlasting Covenant Heb. 13.20.
, Christ's own blood Heb. 13.12. The fruits and effects of Christ's blood.
.

Many are the fruits and effects of the blood of Christ: 1. We are elected
through it 1 Pet. 1.2.
: 2. It ratifies the Covenant of God Luke 22.20 Heb. 9.18.
: 3. It is that Reconciliation, justifying us from our former sins Romans 3.25.
and 5.9. Ephesians. 1.7. 1 John 1.7. Revel. 7.14.
: 4. It ioynes Jew and Gentile together in one City; yea, in one house Ephesians.
2.13. etc.
: 5. It purges the Conscience from dead works Heb. 9.14. and 10.4.
: 6. It turns away wrath, and saues us from the destroying Angel Heb. 11.18.
: 7. It makes Intercession for sins after Calling Heb. 12.24.
: 8. It makes perfect in all good works Heb. 13.20.
: 9. By it the Faithful overcome the Dragon Revel. 12.11
, and Antichrist Revel. 19.23.
: Lastly, it opens the Holy of Holies, and gives us an entrance into heaven
Heb. 9.7. and 10.19.
.

The Use is: first, to teach us, to take heed of sinning against the blood of
Christ; for, if it be thus precious, it must needs diffuse a horrible
sinne-guiltinesse, upon such as transgress against it. If Abels blood,
wronged, cried so fearfully; and the blood of Zacharias, what shall the blood
of Christ's do Mat. 23.30 35 Luke 11.50. How many ways men sin against
Christ's blood.
? And men sin against Christ's blood: 1. By resisting the means of
application of Christ crucified: 2. By profane Swearing and Cursing: 3. By
ascribing remission of sins to the works of the Law Romans 3 20.24.25.
: 4. By committing the sin against the holy Ghost Heb. 10.26.29
: 5. By returning to the lusts of our former ignorance 1 Pet. 1.14.
: 6. By profane and unworthy receiving of the Sacraments 1 Cor. 11.
: Uses.
And in the Sacraments men offend against the blood of Christ: First, when they
come to it with an opinion of real presence, either by Transubstantiation or
Consubstantiation; for thereby they deny the truth of the blood of Christ by
consequent, and open a gap to the adoration of Christ, in, or before, Bread or
Wine. Secondly, when men use the Sacraments but as bare signs, not discerning
spiritually the presence of the Blood and Body of the Lord. Thirdly, when men
come thither unbidden, being not called, nor within the compass of the
Covenant by conversion. Fourthly, when men come to eat this Lamb, but without
the sour herbs of godly Sorrow for their sins, and Repentance. Fifthly,
such as come without Faith (by which they lay hold on Christ,) and Love (by
which they are joined to Christians.)

Thus of the first Use.

Secondly, the consideration of the dignity of Christ's blood should teach
Christians to esteem their new birth. It is better to be borne of the blood of
Christ, then of all the bloods of men John 1.13.
: seeing by his blood we have the atonement, we should rejoice in God Romans
5.11.
: and comfort our selves in this great prerogative, that our many sins and
infirmities are done away in the Intercession of Christ, his Blood speaking
better things then the blood of Abel Heb. 12.24.
.

Thirdly, we should never be much perplexed for the ordinary troubles befall
us; for if we look upon the Author and finisher of our Faith, he endured the
shame and the contradiction of sinners, and yet shed his blood to: whereas we
have not yet resisted unto blood Heb. 12.2.4.
.

Fourthly, it should inflame us to a desire of all possible, both
Thankfulness, giving glory to him that shed his blood for us Revel. 1.5.
: and Obedience, striving to walk worthy of the effusion and application of
such precious blood Heb. 13.20.
, striving after perfection in all well-doing.

Of his Cross.] It was needful our Savior should be upon the Cross, that so
he might be the accomplishment of what was signified by the Heave Offering and
the Brazen Serpent, and that so he might bear the special curse of the Law
for us: of all deaths, the death on the tree, being by a special Law of God
made accursed.

Uses of Christ's Cross.
The consideration of this, that Christ suffered on the Cross, should teach us
both Humiliation and humility: we should be pricked in our hearts, to think
of it that our sins caused him so to be pierced Zath. 12.12.
: and we should put on all humbleness of mind, when we see him that was
equal to God, abasing himself for us, in the form of a Servant, to dye on a
tree Phil. 2.8. etc.
: yea, the more baseness he suffered, the more we should glory and rejoice
in his sufferings: nothing should glad our hearts more then Christ, and him
crucified. Gal. 6.14.


Further, Christ dyed on the Cross, to break down the partition wall, and to
slay Hatred Ephesians. 2.16. 1 Cor. 1.13.
: And shall Enmity and Discord live, when Christ is dead? Shall he be nailed,
and shall not our vile affections be nailed down with him? Besides, it should
be our care to see to it, that the Cross of Christ be not made of none effect
1 Cor. 1.18.
, which it is, when by Faith it is not applied, when the Doctrine of Christ is
not Gods power in our souls; when our Flesh is not crucified with the lusts of
it Gal. 5.24.
: and when we take not up our cross to follow Christ Mat. 10.38.
: And lastly, when we are so bewitched that we cannot obey the truth.

By him.] This is repeated in the Original (though the Translation express it
not) for four Reasons: By him repeated for four reasons.
first to show how hardly men are drawn to ascribe from their hearts, their
happiness unto Christ. Secondly, to show the necessity of it: It is not
possible to be saved, but by the imputed righteousness of Christ. Thirdly, to
show that all things in Christ's action and Passion, were meritorious, least men
should superstitiously dote or dream upon his Blood, or the word of the
Cross, or the sign of it, or the like. There is no merit in Blood, but as it
was in him. Fourthly, to exclude the worship of Angels, which abuse began then
to grow among the Colossians.

Both the things upon earth.] This All things, by a distribution, is again
repeated, to medicine the doubtfulnesse of Gods Children, which question it*
whether Christ's merits extend unto them; as also to inflame us to an admiration
of the virtue of his death, by considering how it extends.

On Earth.] Note here two things. First, that eternal life is begun in this
life: we shall never see Gods face in Heaven, if we taste not of his favor
on Earth. And if this must be begun on earth, why do men defer so great a
work as their reconciliation, as if it belong to heaven rather then to be done
on earth; yea, this taxes the slownesse of heart, and coffeehouse of Gods
Children. This knowledge, joy, affection, etc. is the same thou must have in
heaven. And we should learn hence, to live on earth, like the Citizens of
Heaven, that new Jerusalem. Citizens will not live so rudely as the Country
Swains, much more odds ought there to be between Sarazons and Hagarens, if I
may so say; much difference between them that dwell in Sion, and those that
have no portion but in Sinay. Gods Children are the Sons of the Freewoman,
and Citizens; wickedmen are the Children of the Bondwoman, and forrainers, and
strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel.

Secondly, where he says, upon the Earth, and yet in Heaven, I might note the
uncertainty of our abode on earth: we have nothing to possess but the
outside of the earth, which is ready to shake us off daily.

All things in Heaven. Whether Angels be reconciled in Christ or no.
] For the meaning of these words, we know, that there are in Heaven, both
Angels and Saints. And it may be questioned whether Angels be reconciled in
Christ or no: though Angels sinned not, yet Angels have gained by Christ, a
more perfect adhering to God, and establishing in their standing, Ephesians. 3.9.
increase of knowledge, and of Joy Luke 15.10.
; yea, the Angels are reconciled by Christ thus, that is, they are made friends
with us, with whom they are at enmity: yet I think this is not meant here,
but the Saints only are intended, because it seems, he entreats here of
Christ, not only as head (for so he is head of Angels) but as Mediator
between parties fallen out. Whence we may note two things: first, that the
very Saints now in heaven, once needed the merits of Christ; none come there
but were first reconciled, which may be a comfort to the afflicted spirits of
mourning and drooping Christians, if they consider that the greatest Saints did
need remission of sins as well as they. And besides, it pounds to pieces
merit of works, inasmuch as they come not into heaven, but by the merits of
Christ. Secondly, we may learn that Christ merited not only our persons, but
our grace and glory.

Verse 21. And you has he now also reconciled, that were in times past
strangers, and enemies, because your minds were set in evil works.


HItherto of the description of the Redeemer, as he stands in relation to the
whole Church: In these two Verses he is described by relation, in particular,
to the Church of the Colossians. In this description consider two things:
First, the misery the Colossians were in, without Christ: Secondly, the
remedy in Christ. Their misery is both propounded and expounded: It is
propounded to stand in two things: viz. Alienation and enmity: It is expounded
in two things; viz. that they were thus miserable; first, in their Minds;
secondly, in their Works: the remedy follows in the next Verse.

Before I come to consider of their misery, there are certain words of
Coherence to be weighed, viz. And you has he now also reconciled: where
observe first, the word of Connection, And: secondly, the benefit repeated,
reconciled: Thirdly, the person whom, you: Fourthly, the time when, has now:
Fifthly, the person who, He.

Six things observed from the coherence.
From the general consideration of the matter contained in this Verse and the
next, with the Coherence, six things may be observed.

First, that CHRIST is a true head, to every particular Church.

Secondly, that then is any people happy, and not before, when the Gospel
gathers their souls to God.

Thirdly, they cannot be miserable, that cease to be strangers and enemies to
God, whatsoever their outward estate be.

Fourthly, Doctrine must be applied, for the humiliation of Gods Servants: so
to David, for the conuincing of the wicked: so to Ahab, for the trial and
detection of the temporary Faith: so to Herod, for the hardening of the
reprobates, and their reiection, and cutting down by the Sword of Gods
servants, and for the special consolations and directions of Gods Servants.
And therefore Ministers should employ themselves in application, and to that
end should study for power of matter, as well as form of words, and turn
themselves into all forms, requesting, beseeching, reproving, etc. with all
diligence and sincerity. The People also must know that their profiting lies
in application: and to this end, they should attend, meditate, repeat, pray,
strive against Security and Objections, keeping alive the sparks that are
kindled in their souls. When a man can conscionably apply the Word, it shows,
he truly hates sin, and is a true hearer.

Fifthly, men may know particularly, they are reconciled; which both checkes
Security, 1 Cor. 2.11.
in not laboring for this knowledge; and confutes Papists, and drowsy
Protestants, that say it is presumption to think so.

Sixthly, Experience gives sure testimony to the Doctrine of the Gospel: then
we know profitably, when we know the doctrine in our own case, as the
Colossians here their Reconciliation. We need not wonder then, if we see
that the most powerful parts of practical Divinity have little or no
testimony, or if it be, it is dark and seldom, from the most men; yea, from
many Churchmen. The cause is, they never had experience themselves. And we
should learn to esteem their judgment most, that do draw Religion most into
practice; for God will show the humble his way.

And you.] In the gathering of Souls, God works beyond desert, and many times
beyond probabilities. If we respect the men, they were Gentiles, hardened by
hundreds of years, in custom of sins: if we respect the means, it is
Epaphras, none of the greatest of the Apostles. Which should teach us to live
by Faith, and use Gods ordinance with confidence: As in the business of
conversion, so in matter of preservation, knowing that God is not tied to
desert or means.

Also.] Doct. The Church and Kingdom of Christ is in this world still in
progress; Christ has not done, when he has conquered Rome spiritually, that
had conquered the world before corporally, but here is a fresh increase and a
new; You also. And thus it will be still, till the end of the world: and
therefore we should every one do what we can to help forward the Kingdom
of God, and the adding of such souls as yet belong to the vocation of Christ.
And this we may do, both by furthering the Gospel preached, and by seeking a
holy seed; getting within the Covenant our selves, and by education, laboring
to mend that which by propagation we have marred. Yea, the consideration
hereof, should much encourage us in the combat against Sin and the World:
for in the war, Soldiers use to gather spirit and valor upon the tidings of
new supplies.

Now.] Men are not reconciled till redemption be applied: Christ dyed before,
but they were not reconciled till now: It is not safe for men to rest in the
Historical belief of Christ's death: either learn to dye to sin, to
crucify thy flesh, and to take up thy Cross daily, or else forbear to
mention CHRIST; for it is in vain, thou have no part as yet in Christ.

Has.] Though Sanctification, while we tarry in this world be imperfect, yet
Reconciliation is past so soon as a man is turned to GOD. Gods rich favor may
stand with the many wants and infirmities of man: but then we must remember it
is free and gracious: for if we be perfectly reconciled and yet not perfectly
sanctified, then it must needs follow, we are not reconciled from our own
works.

He.] That is Christ, which being again mentioned, shows, 1. that he is
God, seeing Reconciliation is here given to him, which was before ascribed to
the Father. 2. It proves that in the one essence of God are more Persons then
one. 3. It proves that Christ dyed willingly: he is not only the means but
the undertaker of our Reconciliation Heb. 9.14.
: he is not only the Sacrifice, but the Priest also.

Reconciled.] The repetition or application of this word and work to the
Colossians, shows that there is one constant way, that God holds vnalterably
with all his people. No sort of men can be happy, until they be reconciled: if
men will not mind their peace, and sue out their pardon in Christ, their hope
will fail them; there is no other way to be saved.

Thus of the words of Coherence: There remains both their misery in this
Verse, and the remedy of it in the next Verse.

Strangers and Enemies, etc. Good to think much of our misery.
] In general we may first observe, that it is profitable for men to know and
meditate of their natural misery, though men be never so unwilling to it; yea,
though they be already delivered from it. For the consideration hereof shows
men the need of a Savior, and as a Schoolmasters traynes them up to Christ:
it mollifies the stony hearts of men; it breeds watchfulness over our nature,
when we know it is so poisoned and corrupted: it makes us compassionate over
others in their distress or infirmities: it sets an high price upon spiritual
things, and makes us account Gods favor our greatest joy: it makes us cleave
to God in a perpetual Covenant. To omit many other commodities that arise
hereof, it reproues the seldom teaching and learning of the doctrine of man's
natural miseries.

Wicked men are strangers in five respects.
Strangers.] Unregenerate men are strangers in five respects: 1. in respect of
Heaven, not only pilgrims here, but without promise of a better life, so
continuing. 2. In respect of God, without God in the world. 3. In respect of
Gods people, not fellow-Citizens, but Forrainers Ephesians. 12.
. 4. In respect of the special providence of God, Strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel. 5. In respect of the Life of God Ephesians. 4.17.
: And that if we consider either the rule of life, they account the Law a
strange thing Hos. 8.
; or the fountain of life, viz. Regeneration, They are dead in sin Ephesians.
2.1.
; or the Obedience of holy life, Their imaginations are only evil,
continually Genesis 8.
.

But if any ask how this strangeness comes: the word in the original seems
to note it; for it is estranged, which is more then Strangers; for it imports
they were not so created, but made so. They were made so; 1. Originally, by the
transgression of the first man, from whence flowed the first strangeness
between God and Man; man running from God, and God refusing to delight in the
sons of men. 2. By their own actual sins, which separate between God a^^
them Esaias 59.2.
. Alienation is to the workers of iniquity Job 31.3.
.

The hurt of living thus estranged.
Quest. But what hurt is it to carnal men to be thus estranged? Ans. There is
no safety against dangers, where God is not to protect men: there is no
comfort in affliction, where one can neither look to God, nor the Saints, for
succor and comfort.

The God of this world does rule effectually in all the Children of
disobedience, they are in bondage to the world, they are in bondage to their
own flesh, even to a passionate, blind, hard heart, and rebellious nature.
They want the delightful refreshing of all the blessings of God, his
ordinances, graces or outward favors: All glory is departed from men, when God
is gone. Besides, obstinacy may cast them into a reprobate sense and eternal
death may swallow them up.

That we may be delivered from this strange estate of separation, the blood of
Christ must be applied, we must become new Creatures, our peace must be
preached, access must be had to God by prayer, we must be joined to Gods
Children, we must be built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
and our souls must become Temples for the holy Ghost to dwell in: all this is
set down in the second of the Ephesians from Verse. 13. to the end of the
Chapter.

And to this end we must take heed of working iniquity Job 31.3.
: of Ignorance Ephesians. 4.17.
: of an uncircumcised and an unmortified Heart Ezech. 44.7.
: of strange Doctrine Heb. 3.9.
: of the strange woman Prou. 6.
: of strange Fire, that is, Will Worship: and of the Manners of strange
Children; for all these, by effects, will estrange.

Lastly, if it be so great a misery to be estranged, woe be to them that lie in
this misery, and regard it not: the less sense the more danger; and most
faulty is that frowardness in any, that profess to fear Gods Name, that
voluntarily bring a curse upon themselves, by estranging themselves from the
society of the faithful. But let all that know Gods mercy in their
reconciliation, rejoice in their deliverance from this misery.

Enemies.] Unregenerate men are enemies both actiuely and passiuely: Actiuely,
Enemies they are both actiuely and pussiuely.
they are enemies to their own souls; for he that loves iniquity hates his
own soul: 2. to holiness of life, they hate to be reformed Psalm. 50.
: 3. to Gods children, for it is certain, they shall be hated of all carnal
men, for Christ's names sake John 15.8.
: 4. to the light, he that does evil hates the light John 3.22. Amos 5.10.
: 5. one to another, they are hateful and hating one another Tit. 3.3. Who
hate God.
: 6. to God. Object. Sure no man hates God. Sol. Many men do hate God, as
appears by the threatening in the second Commandment: and the Scripture
elsewhere, note such as in Gods account hate him; such are these: 1. Such as
with-stand the truth, and labor to turn men from the Faith, Acts 13.8. 2.
Such as are friends to the World, James 4.4. 3. The carnal wise men of the
world, whose wisdom is enmity to God, Romans 8.7. 4. All workers of iniquity,
Psalm. 37.18.20. and 92.9. 5. All Scoffers, that reproach Gods Name, Truth or
People, Psalm. 74.18.22. 6. All that hate Gods Children, Psalm. 81.14.15. and
83.2.3. and 129.3.5. John 15.18.23. 7. All those that refuse to subject their
souls to the Scepter of Christ, and will not be ruled by his ordinances: These
are called his enemies, Luke 19.27. And among other, such are those loose
people that live under no settled Ministry. Lastly, all Epicures, whose God is
their belly, and mind only earthly things, and glory in their shame, Phil.
3.17.18. Passiuely, they are enemies to God, who hates them, Psalm. 5.4. to Gods
ordinances, which smite, and pursue, or threaten them, Psalm. 45.4. to all the
Creatures* who are in arms against the sinner, till he be at peace with God:
and in particular to the Saints, which hates the company and assemblies of the
wicked. Psalm. 26.4.

And all this shows the great misery of wicked men: and how can they but be
miserable, that are in the estate of enmity? All severity will be accounted
Justice, all their virtuous praises but fair sins: stripped they are of all
the peculiar privileges of the Saints; and that which men would desire to do
to their enemies, God will certainly, by an unavoidable providence do to
them. All the Creatures are against him: a wicked man is as he that should
always go upon a Mine of Gunne-powder: either by force or by stratagem, the
Creatures will surprise him. O that men would therefore labor to mortify
active hatred in themselves, that the passive destroy them not; and seek to
Christ, in whom only this enmity can be removed.

Again, this makes against merit; for what could we merit that were enemies?
And let such as are delivered, and have felt the bitterness of this enmity,
take heed of secret sins after Calling, unrepented of, least GOD return and
visit them with the strokes of an Enemy. Job 13.24. etc. Ier. 30.14. Esaias
63.19.


In the mind. (...).
] It greatly matters in the business of man's happnesse, how the minds of men
are ordered: 1. Man makes it the fountain of all his actions; it is his privy
Counselor: he speaks first with his mind, he obeyes his mind Ephesians. 2.3.
: it is the shop, whence he frames all his engines against God and Man. 2. The
Devil especially labors to be possessed of this fort, and to have it in his
custody 2 Cor. 10.4.
. 3. The godly man repenting, first labors to be renewed in his mind Ephesians.
4.23.
. 4. God especially looks after man's mind, which appears in that he gave a
Law to the mind Romans 7.
, setting as it were a Guard to rule and appoint it: and the inward worship of
God is here performed. We must love God with all our mind Mark 12.
, and pray in mind 1 Cor. 14.
. God makes a special search after men's minds: it is his special glory to
search the heart, and mind of man 2 Chronicles. 18.
: and if God be enraged, the strength of the battle is directed against the
mind, and his worst strokes light there: one of his last curses is a reprobate
mind.

The consideration hereof may serve for reproof of the great carelessness that
is in the most, for the mind, and the inward man, and the purity thereof.
Thought is not free, as many fondly think; he will never truly repent for
evil works, that does not first care to repent for evil thoughts, and such
like corruption in the mind. There should man begin his repentance, where God
begins the discovery of our misery.

And let us learn to be more watchful against the sins of our minds, and
be more grieved for the dross and corruption we find there, and learn more
to hate the sins of the mind, such as are ignorance, distracted service,
false opinions, emptiness of holy meditations, evil, dishonorable, impure,
and unchaste thoughts against God or man; pride, malice, frowardness, vanity,
security, and unbelief.

Doct. 2. There is in unregenerate men a strange minding of sin, they imagine
mischief, they have a spirit of fornication, profound to decline deeply set:
they trust in their own ways; so as many times, they regard neither Gods
word, nor the rod, nor the threatenings of God, or rebukes of man; neither can
they be stirred with the four last things. This shows, as man's misery, and
death in sin, so the wonderful mercy of God, in forgiving such sins: It is a
comfort, that sins of set knowledge may be forgiven. And hence may be
gathered a difference between the sins of the regenerate, Plena voluntate.
and the sins of the unregenerate; for the godly sin not with a full mind,
they are not set in evil; sin rebels in them, but not reigns. Lastly, this
may let us see how little cause we have to stand upon our minds or reason, or
natural parts, in matters of Hope and Salvation.

In evil Works.] If the dependence, and the words themselves be duly
considered, we may here gather five things: First that the evil works of the
sinner, cause the strangeness and enmity aforesaid. Secondly, that a wicked
man can like himself well enough, though his very works, and outward
behavior be evil: He can bless himself in his heart, when his iniquity is
found worthy to be hated Psalm. 36.2.
. Thirdly, that where the life is evil, the mind is evil, the heart cannot
be good, where the works are naught. Fourthly, that he that allows himself
in one sin, will pollute himself with many sins. [ Works.] Fifthly, when
God looks upon the works of evil men, they are all evil: Note.
note a difference; if the carnal man look upon his own works, they are all
good; if a godly man look upon them, they are partly good and partly evil;
but if God look upon them, they are all naught, because his person is naught,
his heart is naught, his end is naught, the manner is naught, etc.

Hitherto of their misery, both as it is propounded and expounded.

Quest.
A Question may be asked, how it comes to pass, that men have so little sense
of their misery, Ans.
and are so loath to take notice of it? For answer hereunto we must
understand, that this comes to pass, because the God of this world, having
possession, blindes their eyes, and men do not examine themselves before the
Law of God. And they are with-drawne by the deceitfulness of sin, which in
particular they have allowed themselves in: neither do men remember their
latter ends, or the Judgment of God before their death. Their eyes are not
anointed with eye-salue; a number have not the word to direct them, and some
are deceived by false Teachers, which cry peace, peace, where there is no
peace. And the most are deceived with false opinions and conceits; for either
they think, that such like places as this, are true of Gentiles, and not of
them: whereas unregenerate Israel is as Ethiopia unto God: Amos 9.9.
or they fear that this knowledge will make men melancholy. Yea, some are so
foolish they say, this course drives men out of their wits: thus Paul is mad,
and Christ has a Devil: or they think, late Repentance will serve the turn,
and then they may have time enough to consider. Thus of their misery.

Verse 22. In that Body of his Flesh, to present (or make) you holy, and
unblameable, and without fault in his sight.


IN this Verse the remedy of their misery is set down: where observe: first,
the Means: secondly, the End. The Means is by that body of his flesh through
death: the End is to present us, etc.

In that body of his flesh, through death.] Here are two things: 1. the Nature
of Christ: 2. the Sufferings of Christ. But first in the general, I observe
two Doctrines.

First, there is no remedy for the sinner, but the death of his Savior: how
foolish mankind has been distracted about the cure for their misery, is
lamentable to consider: Adam gets Figge-leaues, and Israel a foolish Cover Esa
30.
. As for Death and Hell, men are at a point, they have made a covenant with
them. Or they think they are helped of their misery, if they can forget it:
they can bless their hearts, that they will not feel the smart of any curses
Psalm. 36.2. Deuteronomy. ^9.19.
; or they will make satisfaction, the sons of their body shall serve for the
sins of their souls Mich. 6.
; or else the Temple of the Lord: their going to Church must make God amends
Ier. 7.
. Others cover all, with the garments of their own civil righteousness:
others put their trust in the wedge of gold, and say to it, thou art my
confidence. But unto us, there is no name by which we can be safe, but the name
of Jesus Christ. He must rescue us, that first created us: he makes us
partakers of love, that was the Son of Gods love: he makes us adopted
sons, who himself is Gods natural Son.

Secondly, It is profitable to be much in the meditation of Christ's sufferings,
that it might sincke into our minds, that we must go out of our selves for
happiness; and such meditations open a way to godly sorrow Ezec. 12.12.
. They tend to the mortification of sin, and they incline the heart of a
Christian to be willing to suffer with him: for he suffered as the Master, we
are but Servants: he suffered for others sins; The good that comes by
meditating of Christ's sufferings.
we deserve more then we can suffer by our own sin. He suffered all sorts
of crosses, and infinite much: we suffer butlight affliction. And the thought
of his sufferings, may make us willing to contemn the world, seeing hereby we
discern that his kingdom is not of this world. Yea, we owe unto Christ the
remembrance of his sufferings. It is a small thing he requires of us, when he
wills us to think on him often, what he has endured for us.

In that body of his flesh.] These words note Christ's Nature: yet we must
consider which Nature: in Christ there were two Natures in one person,
personally united: his divine and humane Nature. His divine Nature was from
Eternity, Immutable, Immortal, Impassible. His humane Nature, was conceived,
and borne in time; Mutable, Mortal, Passible; one and the same: without time
begotten of the Father, the Son of God: without Mother; and in time borne of
the Virgin, the Son of Man without Father: Son to both, Natural and
Consubstantiall. These Natures are in one person, for that God and Man might
become one in Covenant: one is become God, and man in person. These Natures are
personally united: this union is personal, but not of persons; and it is a
union of Natures, not natural.

In these words the Apostle speaks of the Nature assumed, viz. his Humane
Nature. And there are two things to be noted in these words. First, that he
says, that body, not the body. Secondly, that he says not simply, his body,
but that body of his flesh.

That body. Christ's body more excellent then all other bodies.
] Here he points out a special excellency in the body of Christ, above all
other bodies in Heaven and Earth: for his body was without sin, formed by the
ouershadowing power of the holy Ghost; so is no man's else. 2. It is assumed
into personal union with the divine Nature. 3. It was honored with special
Prophecies, Types, and Sacrifices. 4. This body was offered up as a full
expiatory Sacrifice. 5. It is to be remembered to the end of the word, in the
Sacrament.

Christ's body not like ours in two things.
Body of his flesh.] To note, that it was a true Body, like unto ours; and to
distinguish it from his Sacramental and mystical body. In two things Christ
body was not like ours, and in three things it was like. It was not like:
first, in the manner of subsisting: it was not independent, or a person of it
self. 2. In the vicious actions of the substance of it, no sin, either could
or ought to infect it: Could not; because original sin was restrained by the
Holy Ghost: Ought not, because in it a purgation for our sins must be made.
In three things it was like ours: first, in substance, he took our whole
Nature; he was the seed of the Woman, of Abraham, of David, In three things it
was like.
the Son of man, etc. And he took the parts of our Nature, both soul and
body. 2. In properties, and thus he assumed both the properties of the whole
Nature, in that he was finite, and create. And in the parts, as in the soul,
he assumed, Understanding, Will, Memory: and in the Body, Figure, Quantity,
and Circumscription, etc. 3. In infirmities, for he assumed not only our
Nature, but the infirmities of Nature. But we must know that he took the
defects, or infirmities, they call miserable: not those they call damnable.

Thus of the Doctrine of his Nature: his Sufferings follow.

Through death.] The death of Christ does reconcile us, in as much as it
ratifies the covenant, and takes away the guilt of the sins of the former
Testament, and the virtue of it eats down the power of present sins, and
destroys the power of our natural death.

Christ's death differs from ours, in three things.
Christ's death differs from the death of all the Elect, in three things. First,
in that in death he sustained not his own person, but dies as our surety, and
so is a sacrifice for sin. Secondly, he was in death a whole burnt offering;
for as he died in body, so his soul was an offering for sin, in as much as
he sustained the sense of the infinite wrath of God in his Agonies. Thirdly, in
that his death was the death of him that was the Son of God. Hitherto of the
doctrine, of the Nature and sufferings of CHRIST, the Uses follow.

First, for Instruction. The consideration of all this should teach us, 1. to
vallew reconciliation, Uses of Christ's death.
with all the graces that flow from it, according to the worth of the means by
which they are procured. If there were no other way to know the worth of Gods
Favor, Knowledge, Spiritual refreshings, and Graces, yet by the price, paid
for the purchase of them, we may discern they are worth more then all the
world. 2. It is not possible for us to hate sin, upon the consideration of so
pregnant an example of the odiousness of it, when the imputation of sin
brought the Son of God on his knees, to his death. O the soul Lethargy,
that has ouergrowen us! 3. That we may have the profit of the Incarnation,
and Passion of CHRIST, in his natural body, we must be careful to get into
his mystical body. 4. The Apostle uses the Meditation of Christ's humiliation
to the death, as an argument to persuade us to Compassion, Mercy, Fellowship in
the Spirit; Unity, Humility, Clemency, and meekness of mind, Phil. 2.1. to
9.

Secondly, wicked men may here see what smart they are like to feel from the
impartial justice of God. Does he not spare the body, the flesh, the blood,
the life, of his own Son, when he became but a surety for sin? How shall
ungodly men, ever enemies, and never sons, that themselves have committed
sin, escape, when the day of wrath shall come?

Thirdly, godly men may here see great reason of comfort, not only by
considering the great love of Christ, and the great benefits must needs flow
from his death; but if but two things be weighed: 1. the honor done to our
Nature, in that in the humanity of Christ it is joined to the divine Nature.
This makes amends for that breach that is made by the damnation of millians, 1 Timothy 3.16. Phil. 2.6 7,
in our nature. 2. The great certainty of Gods covenant, of Grace and Mercy.
For a man's covenant, if it be once confirmed, no man abrogates it, Gal. 3 9.
or adds, or takes from it: therefore, much more Gods Covenant shall stand
unchangeable, being ratified and confirmed by the death of Christ.

Thus of the Means.

The end follows, in these words: To present you holy, and without spot, and
unblameable in his sight. And in these words, is both the presentation, and the
sanctification of Christians to be considered.

To present you.] The original word is very significant, and diversely
accepted: it signifies to restore: so Asts 9.41. to assemble, Acts 2.26. to
make present: so Acts 23*33. to make ready, furnish, purge, or make clean,
Acts 23.24. to make acceptable, 1 Cor. 8.8. to make manifest, 2 Timothy 2.15. to
prove evidently, Acts 24.13. to assist, and stand too, Romans 16.2. 2 Timothy 4*16.
to offer by way of dedication, or gift to God, 2 Cor. 11.2. Luke 2.22. Col.
1.28.

It is true that Christ restores us, Ephesians. 5.27. Ephesians. 1.6.
collects us, brings us into Gods presence, cleanses us, makes us acceptable,
assists, and defends us, and manifests us to be holy. But I take it principally
in the last sense, he presents us by dedication to God. Thus Christ shall
present us wholly, both at the day of judgment Romans 14.10.
, and in the day of death, when he shall deliver the soul to God. Thus also
Christ does present us in this life: 1. When by the preaching of the Gospel,
he seuers and segregates us from the world, and brings us into Gods household.
2. In Justification, when clothing us with his own righteousness, he becomes
our Justification. 3. in new obedience: and that two ways: first, when he
presents our works, covered with his intercession. Secondly, when he causes
us to present our selves to GOD, both by Prayer and consecration of our selves
to Gods Service, and holiness of life. It must be every man's care then to seek,
his presentation from Christ, and to that end, by Covenant, Prayer, and
practice, deuote himself to a subjection, to all the ordinances of CHRIST.

Thus of Presentation: Sanctification follows.

Holy, How the words are to be understood.
unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight.] At the first sight I should
incline to understand these words, either of Justification, or our consumate
holiness at the day of judgment; but that the sway of interpreters force me
to expound them of Sanctification. It is greatly to be weighed, that a man in
this life should be heresaid to be holy, unblameable, and unreprovable, or as
the other Translation has it, without fault in his sight. For the better
conceiving of it, we must compare with these words, other Scripture, wherein
is given unto the godly, that they have clean hands, and a pure heart, Psalm.
24.4. that they are pure, Prou. 21.8. upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. sanctified
throughout, 1 King. 8.61.
1 These. 5.23. perfect, or undefiled in their way, Psalm. 119.1. perfect, 2 Cor.
13.11. Phil. 3.15. Matthew. 5.48. faultlesse, Iud. 24. without spot, and
blameless, 1 Pet. 3.14. walking in all Gods ways, 1 King. 8.58. and that they
keep Gods covenant, Psalm. 25.10. and 78.8.10. and 132.22. Thus Noah is said to
be perfect, Genesis 6.9. Ezekiah walked before God, with a perfect heart, Esa. 38.
David's heart was perfect, 1 King. 11.4. Zachariah, and Elizabeth, were both
righteous before God, and walking in all the commandments of the Lord
blameless, Luke 1.6.

The question is, how those sayings should be true, and in what sense they are
meant: And for the clearing of the doubt, the way is not simply to reject the
propositions, as impious, and untrue, and heretical, as some ignorant and
malicious persons do: but seeing they are the sacred words of Scripture, to
consider what it is may be attained, and what God requires of us. To think
with the Papists, or Anabaptists, that any mortal man can perform the
obedience required in the moral Law, perfectly; so as never to commit sin
against the Law, is a most blasphemous, detestable, and cursed opinion, for
there is no man that sins not: the best of the Saints have had their
thousands of sins. But those places are to be understood of the
righteousness of the Christian, as he is considered to be under the covenant
of grace, and the Gospel, not of legal perfection, but of an Evangelical
innocence, and uprightness. Not as their works are in themselves, but
comparatively, either with the works of wicked men, or as they are in their
desire and endeavor, and as they are presented in the intercession of Christ,
who couers the imperfect^ons that cleave to the works of the faithful.
Sometimes the faithful are said to be perfect, that is, strong men in CHRIST;
compared with the weak Christian, and Infant in grace: so that we^ see what a
Christian in this life may attain unto; the rigor of the Law being taken
away, in the covenant of grace, and the imperfections of his works, and
fra^ltie, being covered in Christ's intercession.

Holy.] This word Holy, is the general; and comprehends the other two. For
holiness is either internal, and that is expressed by the word (...),
unblameable, or external, and so it is expressed in the word (...),
unreprovable. Holiness is given to God, and so essentially Luke 1.49.
; to the spirit of God, and so effectiuely, because it works it in others, to
Christ, as he deriues it by influence to his members Act 3.14. Luke 1.35.
; To Angels, Matthew. 25. to sacrifices, by way of type; to the Covenant of GOD,
as it promises holiness to the faithful Luke 1.71.
; to the Prophets, as Teachers of holiness Act. 3.21.
; to the Scriptures, as the rule of holiness Romans 1.2.
; to places, for the holiness of the subject: but here it is a glorious
adiunct, conferred upon the faithful by Christ.

Concerning holiness of heart, and life, in general, there are here four
things to be noted. Four things ob^erued about holiness.
1. The necessity of it; we can never be reconciled or glorified without it,
Tit. 2.12.13. 2. The difficulty of it; less then the power of Christ
crucified, cannot make men lead a holy life. 3. the meritorious cause of it:
holiness is merited by Christ, as well as salvation. 4. The order: men must
first be reconciled to God, before they can get holy grace, or lead a holy life.

Unblameable.] Christian perfection has two things in it. First, uprightness
of heart, noted by this word. Secondly, uprightness of life, noted by the word
following. Internal holiness has seven things (...)
Internal perfection or holiness, must have these things in it. First, the
stain of former sins must be washed away with the tears of repentance Ier.
4.4.
. Secondly, the inward worship of God must be set up in the heart: some
impressions men have of an external worship, but of the inward worship, men
are naturally almost wholly ignorant. God is inwardly worshipped, by the
constant exercise of grace from above, as Love, Fear, Trust, Delight, Desire,
etc. 3. There must be in us an assurance of Gods favor Heb. 10.22. Act. 15.9
. 4. There must be a freedom from prevailing evils in the mind or affections,
as ignorance, wicked thoughts, errors in the affections, or impatiencie, lust,
servile fear of men, malice Prou. 19.2. Psalm 41 6. Iam. 1.4.
, etc. 5. Hypocrisy must not reign, our desire must be more to be good, then
to seem so Psalm. 125.4.
. 6. Our whole heart must be set upon Gods whole Law, to have respect unto all
Gods Commandments. God abhorres a divided heart Hos. 10.2.
, and a double heart Iam 4.8.
. 7. The mind must be set upon heavenly things, and converse in heaven Col.
3.1.
. Where these things, are happily attained unto, there the heart is upright,
whatsoever defects, or infirmities be in it: these things are different in
Christians, in the degrees; for there is an infancy, and weakness, in
sanctification, as well as Faith.

The signs of an upright heart are these: Signs of an upright heart.
first, it desires perfection Phil 3.
: secondly, it will not cease well-doing for crosses Job 2.3.
: thirdly, it will serve God, though alone Josh. 24.15.
: fourthly, it will not follow the eye, it is not sensual Job 31.7.
: fifthly, it rejoices in the love of CHRIST, above all things Cant. 1.3.
: sixthly, It will smite for lesser sins, as David's did, 2 Samuel 24.
seauenthly, it is constant Psalm. 78.37. Rules.
.

That we may attain an upright, and unblameable heart, in general; we must
get a new heart Ezekiel. 36.27.
, in particular, 1. we must by mortification circumcise our hearts Deuteronomy. 3.6.
: 2. we must get Gods Law written in our hearts Ier 31.33.
: 3. we must seek and love purity of heart Prou. 22.11.
: 4. we must keep our hearts with all diligence Prou 4.17.
: lastly, we must walk before God Genesis 17.2. Motives.
.

Motives to inward holiness. First, we shall never see the righteousness of
God imputed, till we be upright in heart Psalm 36.10.
. Secondly, a pure heart is one of the clearest signs of a blessed man Matthew.
5 6.
. Thirdly, God searches to find what men's hearts are, as well as what their
lives are 2 Chronicles. 28.9
. Fourthly, the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, to show himself strong,
with all them that are of a perfect heart 2 Chronicles. 16.9.
. Fifthly, light is sown for the righteous and joy for the upright in heart
Psalm. 97.10. What external holiness must have in it.
. Lastly, the whole 125. Psalm incites hereunto.

Unreprovable.] This word notes the external uprightness, or Christian
perfection of life. External innocence must have in it diverse things. 1. we
must be free from the gross sins of every Commandment. 2. we must cease from
our own works Heb. 4.10.
, keep us from our wickedness 2 Samuel 22.23.
: and not turn after the ways of our own heart Esa. 57.17.
: that is, we must be sure to cease from our particular beloved sins: 3. our
families must be well ordered, both for peace, labor, and piety Tit. 1.6.7.
: 4. we must be free from Idolatry Deuteronomy. 18.3.
: from the customary sins of the tongue Iam 3.3.
: from the reign of hardness of heart Prou. 21.29.
: from hasting to be rich; for he that hastes to be rich cannot be innocent,
as the Proverb is. Lastly, we must love our enemies, Matthew. 5. vlt. That we
may attain heereunto, we must walk in the way of good men, Prou. 2.20. we
must set good Laws, ever before us, and let them be our warrant, 2 Samuel 22.
23. we must not be destitute of heavenly gifts, 1 Cor. 1.6.8.

In his sight.] These words may be referred, either to our presentation, or to
our sanctification. And whereas some would think that they overthrow the
former sense of the words, and prove, that he entreates here of our holiness
in Gods sight by justification, they are deceived; for they may find these
words given to sanctification, ordinarily in Scripture, as Luke 1.6.7. Hebr.
13* 21. 1 John 3.22. Revel. 14.5.

The words being referred to Sanctification, import four things.

First, that what we are, or do, is in his presence: so the words used, Luke
2.18. and 13.26. Acts 10.33.

Secondly, that God is a witness of all we do: so the words used, Luke 8.47.
2 Cor. 7.12. Gal. 1.20..

Thirdly, that God accepts of what is truly good, in any measure, Luke 1.75.

Fourthly, that God highly priseth all that is good in the good, Luke 1.25. 2 Timothy 2.3. and 5.4. As the words there used show.

Verse 23. If ye continue grounded, and stablished in the faith, and be not
moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof ye have heard.


THe second part of the Epistle, The division of the third part of the Epistle.
viz. the proposition of Doctrine, has been handled hitherto, from the
twelfth verse unto these words. In these words, and those that follow, to the
end of the second Chapter, is contained the third part of the Epistle, viz.
matter of exhortation: wherein he both persuades and disswades. The persuasion
is contained in this verse, and the rest, unto the eight verse of the next
Chapter. The disswasion is from verse 8. of Chapter 2. to the end of the
Chapter.

In the persuasion, the Apostle exhorts them to perseverance, both in Faith and
Hope: where is to be observed: 1. the exhortation it self, in the beginning of
this verse, and the reason to enforce the exhortation, in all the verses
following. The exhortation is twofold: first, to perseverance in Faith, in
these words, if ye continue grounded and stablished in the faith: secondly, to
perseverance in hope, in the next words: and be not moved from the hope of the
Gospel, whereof ye have heard. From the Coherence, and general words of the
Exhortation, Consideration of the doctrine from the Coherence.
we must observe, that Gods Children after they have gotten true grace, and
were comforted in their reconciliation, must look to their Faith and Hope. It
is not enough once to get Faith and Hope, but after they are conceived in us,
they must be daily looked to: for the just must live by his faith: Hebr. 7.5.
Hebr. 11. Ephesians. 3.16. Acts 15.9. 2 Timothy 3.15. 1 John 5.4.
It must be to him according to his faith, not according to his friends, money,
labor, means, etc. By faith he must draw virtue out of all Gods ordinances:
by faith he must purge his heart of his daily sins: by Faith and Hope, he
walks with God, and ouercomes the world. This may greatly reprove man's
carelessness; men look to their Grounds, Cattle, Shops, etc. but who looks
to their Faith and Hope?

If you continue grounded and stablished in the faith.] Here are two things:
first, the manner of the propounding of the exhortation, viz. with an If:
secondly, the exhortation it self: where note; 1. the duty, continue: 2. the
manner, of the duty, grounded and stablished: 3. the object, in Faith.

Why propounded with an If.
If.] The Apostle propounds this Exhortation with an If, because he speaks
to a mixed multitude, among whom were many that would not continue; and thereby
show they were not truly reconciled. Yea, it was needful that the godly
amongst them, should have it thus doubtfully set down, that so they might be
more careful to settle, and establish themselves in the Faith, that they might
hold out in it.

As this ( If) looks upon the wicked, it shows, that in places where the
Gospel gathers souls to God, Men will fall away: look for it.
many that for a time were forward, and greatly affected, will afterward fall
away. And therefore Gods servants, both Ministers and People, should look for
Apostasy, and not be overmuch troubled when they see any fall away.

What makes many fall away.
It is not amiss to consider by what means, or motives, men are plucked away
from the love of the truth. Some fall away for hard sayings John
6.30.42.52.60.61. etc.
, some cannot follow Christ long, because of their carnal friends: others are
corrupted with lewd company: others cannot bear the reproves of their faults;
and if they be reproved, either they will lift Amos away from Bethel, or they
get themselves away from hearing Amos. Some hear this Sect every where so ill
spoken of, that they will be better advised ere they settle upon such courses.
And the rather, because they do not see the multitude set out with them, or
great men yield any countenance to such strict courses. Others are seduced by
time-seruing flattering, false, or corrupt teachers, who (laboring to hinder
the efficacy of the doctrine of paineful Ministers) hope to accomplish either
the stopping of their mouths, or the increase of their bonds, or at least
their disgrace with the people Ezekiel. 13.19.20.22. 2 Timothy 3.12.13.14. Heb.
3.12.13.
. Others are ensnared with the earthly things, and forsake the sincerity of
the truth, to embrace this world with Demas. Many fall away for the Cross, and
all are caught with the deceitfulness of some sin.

Quest. But may the faithful fall away and not continue? Answ. The faithful
may loose, The faithful may fall away, in some respects.
and fall from 1. some degrees of innocence of life. 2. Some degrees of the
working, and efficacy of Gods Spirit. 3. Some degrees of Communion with
Christ. Their Communion may be lessened, though their union can not be
dissolved. 4. from Faith, of which he makes mention here. Quoad sensum. Quoad
gradum. Quoad actum. Quoad doctrinam. Quoad media doctrinae.
And thus they may fall; in respect of sense: in respect of some degree: in
respect of some acts of faith: in respect of some doctrine of faith: and
lastly, in respect of the means of the doctrine of faith: But there are seven
things from which the Elect can never fall: first, they can not lose eternal
life, John 10.29. secondly, confirming grace in some measure, Psalm 14.5.
thirdly, Seven things from which the Elect can never fall. Psalm. 94.14.145.14.
Mo^^ues to continuance.
remission of sins past, Esa. 43.25. fourthly, the seed, either of doctrine,
or grace, 1 John 3.9. Fifthly, the spirit of sanctification. Sixthly, the habit
of Faith, Luke 22.32. Seauenthly, union with CHRIST, John 17.22.23.26.

Continue.] Three things I propound concerning perseverance. First, some
reasons to move us, to labor, to hold out, and continue. Secondly, rules to be
observed, that we might continue. Thirdly, the helps the faithful have to
further their perseverance.

For the first: Unless we continue, we shall never have the full truth of
God, nor be made free by it: nor have found comfort, that we are the Disciples
of Christ John 8.31.32
. Neither is any man fit for the kingdom of God, that puts his hand to the
plow, and looks back Luke 9.62.
. The branch cannot bear fruit, except it abide in the Vine John 15.4.
. And, if they continue not with us, it is because they were not of us 1 John
2.19.
. It had been better (for men) never to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandments, delivered
unto them. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through
the knowledge of Jesus Christ, they be again entangled, and overcome; the
latter end will be worse then the beginning 2 Pet. 2.19.20.
. Yea, the very children of God by backesliding, may fall into a miserable
condition; the powers of Hell may assault them Psalm. 77.11.
. They may go to the grave with unrecoverable affliction: yea, they may lose
some graces, without all restitution in this world: as the joy of their
salvation plerophorie, or full assurance, etc.

For the second: Eight rules for continuance.
If thou would continue, thou must observe eight rules. First, thou must get
a continuing faith: get thee an infallible assurance of Gods favor, arising
from the wise Application of Gods promises, and the sure witness of Gods
spirit John 6.40.
. Secondly, thou must at first be thoroughly cleansed of all thy filthiness;
making conscience to repent of all sin, and have respect to all Gods
Commandments. And thou must be sure thou get a new heart: for the old heart
is deceitful, and will not hold out in any thing that is good Ezekiel. 36.26.27.
. Thirdly, thou must continue to use the means of preservation: thou must
still hear, pray, read, confer, meditate, and receive the Sacraments; for
the spiritual life is preserved by means, as well as the natural. Fourthly,
thou must join thy self to such as fear God, in the society and fellowship
of the Gospel. The affections, and desires of many, are blasted, and soon
vanish, like a morning cloud, for want of communion with such as are able to
direct, comfort, admonish, or encourage them Ier. 32 39.40. Phil. 1.5.6.
. Fifthly, thou must see to it, that thou get knowledge, as well as affection
Hos. 2.19.20 Psalm. 145.20.14.
; and affection as well as knowledge n. Sixthly, thou must so receive the truth
of the doctrine of Christ, as thou be also ready and willing, to confess it,
and profess it, amidst the different opinions, and humors of men Math. 16.16.
. Thou must be a sheep; meek, tractable, profitable, sociable, innocent: for
boisterous, conceited, perverse, unteachable natures will never hold long John
10.28.
.

Lastly, thou must be ever wary, and take heed of cross teachings, and the
puffs of contrary doctrine: and withal; take heed of coldness, in following
the truth, and of discord, with such as fear God. Many times personal
discords work through men's singular corruptions, apostasy from the truth once
received Ephesians. 4.13.14
.

The sum of all is; that, if we get a justifying faith, and be once assured
of Gods favor; if we at first make a through reformation; if we daily stick
to, and wait upon the means; if we converse with Gods children; if we have
wise affections, that are warmed with piety, and showed with discretion; if we
make a sound profession of the sincerity of the truth; if we be meek, and
teachable, and follow the truth without coldness, or contention, we shall
never fall, but continue as Mount Sion, that cannot be moved. And out of all
this we may discern the cause of the backe-sliding of many, either they were
deceived by a temporary faith; or neglected the constant use of Gods
ordinances, or were slightly in mortification; or they forsook the fellowship
of the Saints; or they were tossed with contrary doctrine; or they were people of
unruly affections; or were seduced by secret lusts.

Helps for continuance.
For the third: though it be a hard work to continue, by reason of the
infirmities within us, and the impediments from without us; yet a Christian
has great helps to further him in perseverance: he has helps, first, from
the Saints, and is furthered by their example, by their exhortations, and by
their prayers Hebr. 12.1. and 10.24. 1 Timothy 2.1.
: secondly* from the immortal seed which is within them, which has as great
aptness to grow as any seed in Nature: and is a seed that is sown for
continuance, even for Eternity it self 1 John 3.9.
. Thirdly, from the easiness and grace of the Covenant, in which they stand in
favor with God. And here it would be observed how the words of the Covenant
run: for when God says, He will make his everlasting Covenant, his promise
is, that he will not turn away from them, to do them good: and his fear he
will put in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him Ier. 32.4.
. And in another place he says, he will not only cleanse them, but he will
give them a new heart, and take away the stony heart out of their bodies, and
put his spirit within them and cause them to walk in his statutes, and to do
them Ephesians. 36.26.27.
. Fourthly, from the spirit of God, which is in them; for the spirit sets the
soul at liberty 2 Cor. 3.17.
: and furnishes it with graces Gal. 5.22.
: seals up unto the day of redemption Ephesians. 1.14.
: strengthens the inward man Ephesians. 3.16.
: shows the things given of God 1 Cor. 2.12.
: is a perpetual comforter John 14.16.
: leads into all truth John 15.13.
: frees from condemnation, and the rigor of the Law Romans 8.1.3.10 Zach. 12.12.
, Romans 8.1.3. is life for righteousness sake, ver. 10. mortifies the deeds of
the flesh, verse 13. bears witness that they are the children of God, verse
16. is a spirit of prayer, to cause them to cry Abba Father, verse 15. helps
their infirmities, and makes request for them, verse 26. Fifthly, from CHRIST:
for from Christ they have protection, John 10.18. Influence, John 15.1.4.5.
Intercession, by which he couers their sins and infirmities, presents their
works in his merits, and moves the Father to keep them from evil, etc. John
17.9.11.15.17.22. Sixthly, they have helps from his Ordinances; for by Prayer,
when they ask according to Gods Will; they may be sure to have any thing, 1
John 5.14. And by the Sacraments, Faith is confirmed, and sealed, and Grace
nourished.

How many ways the word furthers continuance.
And by the Word they are many ways furthered. I take but only the 119.
Psalm, to show how our continuance is helped by the Word. It redresseth our
ways, verse 9. It keeps from sin, verse 11. It strengthens against shame
and contempt, verse 22.23.143. It quickens, and comforts, verse
25.28.50.54.93.111. It makes free, verse 45. It makes wise, verse 98.100. It is
a Lantern to our feet, verse 105.130. It keeps from declining, verse
102.104.118.155.160.165. Lastly, they are helped by the promises that concern
perseverance, and preservation, and falling away: such as are contained in such
Scriptures as these, John 13.1. 1 Cor. 10.13. Romans 8.29. Psalm. 84.12. 1 Timothy
4.18. Revel. 2.25.26.

Grounded, and stablished in the faith.] It is not enough to get Faith, and
continue in it; but we must be grounded and stablished: and when he says,
stablished in the Faith, we must understand, the Doctrine, profession,
exercise, assurance, and effects of Faith. And this establishing, and grounding
of our hearts, has in it four things, to wit, particular Knowledge,
Certainty, Resolution, and Contentment.

To be thus established, The privileges of an established and grounded heart.
would fortify us against all the changes, and alterations of estate, or
Religion in aftertimes: and as the Coherence imports, it would much further
us, in the attainement of an unstained and unrebukable life: whereas of
doubting can come nothing but the shunning of God, the liberty of sin, and
desperation, and the like. Besides, this grounded establishment in Faith, would
free our profession from the dishonours, which an unsettled or discontented
Faith, or life, does cast upon us. Atheists, Papists, Epicures, and Belly-gods,
if this were in us, would be astonished to see the power of Religion, in our
resolved contentment, and to consider how immovable we were; so as the gates
of Hell could not prevail against us. Besides the unsearchable solace that a
peaceable and restfull conscience would breed in us.

That we might be thus grounded, What we must do, that we might be grounded
and stablished.
and stablished, diverse things are carefully to be observed. 1. We must be
founded on the Prophets, and Apostles Ephesians. 2.20.
; we must be daily conversant in the Scriptures. 2. We must be much in prayer,
but in practice of prayer; we must nourish the hatred of every sin; and
daily labor to increase in the reformation of evil. And it is a great help
to be much with such as fear God, and call upon God with a pure heart. It
would much establish us, to see the faith, affections, feruency, and power of
Gods spirit in others, in prayer 2 Timothy 2.19.22.
. 3. There is a secret blessing of God, in settling a man's heart, follows upon
well doing: so as to be abundant in Gods work, is a great means of
steadfastness; whereas a fruitless and barraine life, is both uncomfortable,
and unsettled 1 Cor. 15.58. 1 Timothy 6.19.
. 4. We must pray God to give us a free and ingenious spirit Psalm. 51.12. What
a free spirit is.
: we must pray to God to give us a mind, cheerful, speedy, full of
incitations to good, glad of all occasions to do good: free from the stain of
the sins of the Time, Nation, or Calling, and from the reign of former
lusts, inclineable to serve God, and our Brethren by Love: fearing the Gospel
more then the Law, and Gods goodness more then his justice. 5. We must set an
order* in Faith and Life. It is exceeding behoouefull in matter of opinions, to
deliver up our souls to some sound frame of Doctrine, in which we will ever
quietly rest; and in matters of life, to gather out of the Commandments a
platform of living, that might fit our own cause Pro. 4.26.
. 6 We are not usually settled, and soundly stablished, till we have been
shaken with affliction, and have gotten the experience which the Cross learnes
us 1 Pet. 5.10.
. Lastly, we must consecrate our selves to God, endeavoring daily to practice
what we daily hear: for he that comes to Christ, and hears his sayings,
and does them, is like a man which has built a House, and dug deep, and
laid the foundation on a Rock; and when the flood arose, and the stream beat
vehemently upon that house, it could not shake it, because it was founded on a
Rock Luke 6.48.49.
.

Quest. What should be the reason why many after long profession, and much
hearing, Quest. Ans.
and some comfortable signs of assurance, at sundry times conceived, should
yet be unsettled, and distracted, and show so much perplexity and want of
firmness, The causes why many after long profession, and some signs of hope,
are still so unsettled.
either in contentment or practice?

Answ. This is occasioned diversely. First, sometime for want of a distinct
direction, or careful examination, about the Application of the signs of Gods
favor: some Christians have not the signs clearly and distinctly collected:
others that have them, and know the use of them, grow sloathfull and negligent,
and are justly scourged with the want of the glory of this establishment.

Secondly, sometimes it comes to pass, for want of using private means more
conscionably; as Reading, Prayer, or Conference.

Thirdly, it is so sometimes with Christians, because of some sin they lie
in, without repentance; there may be some sin, which they too much favor,
and are loath to forsake, whether it be secret, or more open.

Fourthly, Unfruitfulness, and barrenness in good works may cause it: for if
Faith did bear fruit upwards, it would take root downwards.

Fifthly, many are grievously pressed, under legal perfection, being not able
distinctly to discern the benefit of the Covenant of grace, in freeing them
from the curse, and rigor of the Law. The ignorance of this one point, has,
and does cover the faces and hearts of millions of Gods Servants, with a
perplexed confusion, and fear without cause.

Sixthly, many professors live in much unrest, for want of discerning things
that differ, and the right use of Christian liberty.

Seauenthly, there is a kind of luke-warmenesse in practice, after hearing,
which is in many scourged with the withholding of this rich grace of spiritual
steadfastness. I say, luke-warmenesse in practice: for it may be observed, that
many hear with great affection, and continue to be stirring, in expressing
their liking of the Word, and yet are exceedingly negligent in the conscionable
and daily practice of such rules, as in the ministry of the Word they seem to
receive with admiration, and great liking.

Eyghtly, this comes by reason of the want of patience, and a meek spirit:
some Christians are froward, passionate, transported with violent affections,
either of anger, or wordly grief: and these seldom or never, gain any long
rest, or continual contentment: troubled affections, greatly hinder
setlednesse, even in the best things.

To conclude, many professors revolt to the world, and give themselves to an
unjustifiable liberty, in following either their profits, or their pleasures.
And therefore no marvel, though Grace and true Religion, thrive so slowly in
them, when they eat up their hearts and lives with these cares and delights of
life.

Hitherto of Faith. Now of Hope.

Be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof ye have heard.]

Though by Faith we are interressed in GODS favor, and our souls garnished
on earth with diverse graces, as the fruits of Faith, and our lives protected
with caelestiall privileges; yet the glory of our kingdom is neither of this
world, nor in this world. Hope must guide us to future things, as well as Faith
to present: and therefore the Apostle Peter does with great reason teach us to
bless God, for begetting us again to a lively hope 1 Pet. 1.3.
: our whole happiness may be branched out into these two parts. First, what we
have already on earth; and secondly, what we look to have hereafter in
Heaven. The one, Faith procures, the other, Hope assures. Now in that we have
not all our happiness here, but hope for it else where, it should teach us
diverse things.

First, we should effectually pray unto GOD to give such sound wisdom, and
revelation, by his word and spirit, that we may indeed know this hope of our
calling Ephesians. 1.18.
.

Secondly, in all troubles, we should be the more patient, seeing we hold
our full and final deliverance, when we shall feel no more troubles or
crosses, by Hope. Perfect salvation is had here only by Hope Romans 8.
.

Thirdly, when our friends go out of the world, such as were dear unto us in
the bonds of grace, we should not mourn immoderately for them; for that were
to proclaim our want of knowledge, or want of sense and feeling, in the
thoughts of the happiness of another world 1 These 4.13.
. Yea, fourthly, seeing the greatest part of our happiness is yet to come, we
should learn to place our joys in the contemplation of Heaven, according to
the Apostles direction; who bids us rejoice in hope Romans 12.12.
. And lastly, we should prepare for death, and wait when the time of our
changing should come, that we might enjoy the glorious liberty of the sons
of God.

Not moved away.] Doct. It is not enough to have hope, but we must get to be
immovable in it: for as the Author to the Hebrews shows, we should be
diligent to get and have a Plerophorie, or full assurance of Hope to the end
Heb. 6.11.
. We must hold fast the confidence, and rejoicing of hope Heb. 3.6.
. This is our sure and steadfast Anchor, to which we should in all storms have
our refuge, to hold fast by it Heb. 6.18.19
.

The Use is twofold: first, it may reprove that unsettledness, and
coffeehouse is found in men, Note.
in the times of their affliction, when every cross can move them away from
their confidence. We would think him a strange man, that in time of peace,
would walk up and down with a Helmet on him, and when he were to go into
any battle, or fray, in the midst of the fight, when it was at the hottest,
would take his Helmet, and throw it off him. And yet so strange are we. In
prosperity, we out-brag all men with our hope in God, and our strong
confidence; but when the Devil, or the World, begin to deal their blows, and
to molest us with sharpest assaults, then we grow hartlesse, or impatient, and
throw away our hope, when we have most need of it. Secondly, it should teach
us to labor after this vnmoueablenesse of hope; which, that it may the better
be done, two things are to be looked to. 1. that our hope be a true hope: 2.
that we use the means to make this hope immovable.

And for the first, we must consider three things. First, what hope is not
true hope. Secondly, what persons have no hope. Thirdly, what are the effects
or properties of true hope. Some things of many, in each of these, shall be
instanced in.

First, What hope is not true hope.
there is a hope, of which men shall one day be ashamed: such is, men's hope in
their riches Psalm. 52.7.
; in the arm of flesh Ier. 17.5.
; in oppression, vanity, and sin Psalm. 62.10.
: in the instruments of deliverance, as the Bow, or Sword, etc Psalm. 44.6.
: in the d^ceitfull conceits of their own brains Esa. 28.15.
, or in their civility of life. This is to trust in Moses John 5.45.
. All these, and other such like hopes, are egregiously vain.

Secondly, there are many sorts of men in the world, concerning whom it is
plain in Scriptures, Who have not true hope.
they have not hope. For in the general, there is no hope in any unregenerate
man 1 Pet. 1.3. Ephesians. 2.12.
; and in particular it is clear, there is no true hope. First, in the
ignorant, Psalm. 9*10. Secondly, in profane men, that make not conscience of
sin, Psalm. 115.11. Thirdly, in the presumptuous, that bless their hearts
against the curses of the Law, Deuter. 29.19. Fourthly, in the hypocrite; for
though he have wouen to himself, out of the bowels of his poisonous breast, a
fair web of hope, yet it shall be as the house of the Spider, one swope of
Gods Beesome shall easily lay him and his hope in the dust of misery Job 8.13.
. Lastly, it is not in workers of iniquity, that make a Trade of sin, and
every day plodde about mischief.

Thirdly, true hope is most stirring in affliction, and then it shows it self
by four things. Which are the effects or properties of true hope.


First, By Profession: it will not only know, but acknowledge that truth,
which is according to godliness Tit. 1.1.2.
. It will confess, and profess; whereas the common hope, seldom, or never at
any time, holds it convenient to be so forward. Secondly, by Abnegation; for it
will endure scorns, losses, temptations, oppositions, etc. It is not moved
away by the carnal reasons of the flesh; the disdain of carnal friends; the
violence of unreasonable adversaries, or the like: the chain will not fear
it, nor the reproach shame it 1 Timothy 4.10.
. It will be busy, though it have no thank for his labor Act. 28.20.
: And secretly, it will not haste to ill means, to get out of distress Esa.
28.15.16
: Whereas the common hope is frighted with the noise of a chain, and put out
of countenance with a scoff of disgrace: it will speak CHRIST fair, but
loose nothing for his sake: it likes preaching well, but it will never believe
it is so as the Preacher says: it loves GOD above all, but yet it must have a
care to see to it, at any hand, that such and such friends be not displeased:
it will be better advised then to be in danger of such and such troubles. And
if it be hard be stead, it will venture to send to a Wizard, to use now and
then a lie, or an oath, or a little fraud, and false dealing, etc.

Thirdly, by Mortification: He that has this hope, purges himself, that he
may be pure, as Christ is pure 1 John 3.3.
. It stirs up to much prayer, confession, sorrow, fasting, and spiritual
revenge. He that has most hope, is most in the humiliation of his soul. It
is not as the world conceiues, that Mortification is the way to desperation:
but the common hope has no hands to do good works; nor eyes to shed these
tears; nor stomach to abide this fasting; nor flesh to endure this revenge;
nor tongue to speak this language.

Fourthly, by Perseverance: It will not cease from yielding fruit Ier. 17.8.
. Job guided by this hope, resolves to trust still in God, though he kill him
Job 13.15.
: but the common hope will be sure then to fail when there is most need of
help.

What we must do, that we might be immovable.
Now that we might be immovable in this Hope, we should wait patiently upon
Gods ordinances, that we might abound in the comforts of the Scriptures,
increasing in Knowledge and Wisdom Romans 15.4. Prou 24.14.
: but especially, we must stick to the Word preached, and never give it over
Ephesians. 1.1.4.
: nourishing every grace of CHRIST 2 These. 2.16.
: and we must be much in prayer Psalm. 62.8. and 61.2.3.
, and soundly careful to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts Tit.
2.12.13. Job 11.14.15.
.

Thus of the Duty, and the Object [ Grace.] Now of the Means, by which it was
wrought, which was the Gospel preached.

Of the Gospel.] Doct. The Gospel is the ordinary means to breed hope in a
man's heart 2 Timothy 2.10. Romans 1.16.
, and therefore it is called the Gospel of the Kingdom; and the Gospel of
Salvation Math. 4.13. Ephesians. 1.13.
. And the Gospel breeds hope, as it shows us the Doctrine of our
reconciliation with God; and as it contains the promises of the Covenant of
Grace; and as it shows our deliverance from the rigor and curse of the Law:
and lastly, as it shows Christ crucified, with all his merits.

Of which ye have heard.] Doct. The Gospel is then most effectual when it is
preached: and more particularly, what efficacy is in preaching, may appear by
these Scriptures following: Psalm. 51.8. Esa. 55.4. Luke 4.18. Romans 10.14. 1
Cor. 1.21. etc. Acts 10.36.42 and 15.21. 2 Cor. 1.19.20. Gal. 3.1 1 Timothy 3.16.
Tit. 1.3.

Again, in that the Apostle alleges the efficacy of the Doctrine they
heard* to prove that they ought not to be moved away from it: we may note,
that that Doctrine which conuerts souls to God, is true; and men ought to
continue in it. The Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.2. proves his Doctrine to be true, by
this seal of it: and this must comfort faithful Teachers, against all the
scorns of men, if they gather souls to GOD, and breed hope in Gods people.
And the people must hence confirm themselves in their resolution, to stick to
their Teachers, when God has given this Testimony to their ministeries. Thus
of the Exhortation.

The Reasons follow: 1 From consent of the Elect, Verse. 23. 2 From the
testimony of Paul, Verse. 23.24. 3 From the testimony of God, Verse. 25. 4 From
the excellency of the Doctrine of the Gospel, Verse. 26. 5 From the excellency
of the subject of the Gospel, Verse. 27. 6 From the end or profitable effect of
the Gospel, Verse. 28. 7 From the endeavor of Paul, Verse. 29.


Which was preached unto every Creature under Heaven.] These words contain the
first reason, and it stands thus: In as much as the doctrine taught you, is the
same Doctrine that has been taught to, and received by, all the Elect;
therefore ye ought to continue in it, and never be moved from the Grace
wrought by it.

Quest. Quest.
But was the Gospel preached to every Creature under heaven? Ans. Ans.
Some understand the meaning to be this: that the Apostle intends to note, How
the Gospel was preached to every creature.
by the preaching of the Gospel to every Creature, only thus much; That it
was now no more confined in Judea, but was published to Gentiles as well as
Jews: and so it was preached to every Creature, in as much as all mankind had
as much interest as the Jewish Nation. Others think the speech imports no
more, but that the fame of the Gospel was spread by the Merchants and other
that lay at Rome, Jerusalem, and other great Cities, unto all known Countries
of the world. Others think it is no more then if he had said, it was
published far and wide: as in John they say, the whole world goes after him;
but they mean a great multitude; an usual Hyperbolicall speech. Lastly,
others think, that when he says, it was preached, he means it should be
preached to every creature; the time past being put for the time to come, to
import, that it shall as certainly be done, as if it had been done already.
But I take, it is meant of the preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles and
Evangelists, in the conversion of so many Nations to the Faith of Christ.

There may be seven Observations gathered out of this speech of the Apostle.
First, that Doctrine only is true which is agreeable to the Doctrine of the
Apostles, by which the world was converted to God. Secondly, we may see that no
power is like the power of the Word of GOD: here it conuerts a world in a short
time: And our eyes have beheld that it has almost in as short time restored a
world of men, from the power of Antichrist. Thirdly, we may by this phrase be
informed, that the words, all, and every one, are not always in Scripture to
be understood universally, of all the singular persons in the world, as the
vniuersalists conceive. Fourthly, they were but a few Fishermen that did this
great work, and they were much opposed and persecuted, and in some less
matters they iarred sometime among themselves. Whence we may observe, that
Doctrine may be exceeding effectual, though 1. but few teach it; 2. though
they be but of mean estate and condition; 3. though it be opposed by cross
and contrary teaching; 4. though it be persecuted; 5. though the people be
indisposed and m^zled in sin and superstition, as these Gentiles were; 6.
though the Preacher be often restrained; 7. though there be some dissension in
less matters. The fifth thing that may be gathered hence, is, that in the
conversion of sinners, God is no respecter of persons; men of any age, nation,
sex, condition, life or quality, may be converted by the Gospel. And sixthly,
it is plain here, that preaching is the ordinary means to convert every
creature: so as ordinarily there is none converted but by preaching. Lastly, if
any one ask what shall become of those nations, or particular persons, that
never yet heard of the Gospel; I answer, the way of God in diverse things is
not revealed; and his Judgments are like a great deep: It belongs to us to
look to our selves, to whom the Gospel is come.

Thus of the first Reason.

The second Reason is taken from the testimony of Paul, and he gives a double
testimony; 1. By his Ministry; 2. By his Sufferings.

Whereof I Paul am a minister.] Out of these words many things may be noted:

First, in that the Apostle, notwithstanding all the disgraces and troubles
that befell him for the Gospel, does yet lift up the mention of his Ministry
therein, as an inducement to the Ephesians: It may teach us, that the glory of
Gods truth is such, as no man need to be ashamed to teach or profess it; nay,
there can be no man or woman, to whom it may not be their chiefest glory,
whatsoever carnal Worldlings or timorous Nicodemites conceive of it.

Secondly, in that so great an Apostle does not disdain to yield his
testimony, of purpose to show that Epaphras their Preacher had taught nothing
but what he had likewise taught: it shows that it is the property of
faithful and humble Ministers to strengthen the hearts and hands of their
Brethren; though they be their inferiors, and then it will follow, that they
are proud, and envious, and malicious persons, that by cross teaching labor
to increase their bonds, whom God has honored with success in their labors
in the Gospel: such are they, that in many places strive to pull down as fast
as others build, making havoc in the Church, and bending their whole might in
their ministry to hinder the sincerity of the Gospel, and the conversion of
sinners.

Thirdly, in that the Apostle urges his own testimony, [ I Paul,] it shows
that the testimony of one Apostle is better then a thousand others; One Paul
opposed to many false Teachers: which should teach us to converse much in the
Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets (which are of like authority.) And the
rather, because the best of other men may err; nay, have erred: and therefore
a heap of humane testimonies should be of no value against one Scripture. And
as the people should try the Spirit by this witness, so should Preachers make
conscience of it, to take more pains to inform the consciences of the people,
by the testimony of the Word, then by humane authority, of what sort soever.

Fourthly, in that here is but one Paul, that comes in, to confirm the truth
of the Gospel, it shows that many times the soundest Teachers are the fewest
in number. Here it is so in the best times of the Church: so it was before;
there was but one Michaiah for four hundred false Prophets: so in Christ's time
there was a swarm of Pharisaicall, proud, vainglorious, hypocritical,
silken Doctors, that loved the chief room, and sought pre-eminence, teachers
of liberty and strife, defenders of traditions, and their own glory and
greatness, when Christ and his Disciples were by their envy scorned, as a few
precise singular fellows.

Fifthly, in that the Apostle styles himself by the name of Paul, and not of
Saul it may intimate that men truly regenerate hate the vain name of their
vnregeneracie: it is a foul sign when men can glory in the titles and names
of their lewdness and sin past.

Lastly, in that the Apostle terms himself a Deacon, (for so the word
translated Minister, is in the original) it notes his great humility: it was
a happy time in the Church, when the Apostles called themselves Deacons: and
then began the Church to decay in true glory, when Deacons would needs be
Apostles: great titles have ever been dangerous in the Church.

Thus of the second Reason, and the 23. Verse.

Verse 24. Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church.


THese words contain the Apostles second testimony, and it is taken from his
sufferings for the Gospel: and he conceiueth that they have great reason to
persevere in the love of the truth, since he has with joy endured so many
things for the confirmation of the doctrine he had taught.

In these words I note two things: First, the Apostles joy in affliction:
secondly, the Reasons which moved him unto this rejoicing. His suffering in
which he does rejoice, he amplifies by the time [ now;] and the diverse sorts
of crosses he endured, which he expresses indefinitely, when he says
plurally, [ my sufferings;] as also by the use of them, [ for you,] that is,
for confirmation of your Faith and encouragement. The Motives are four, first,
because they are [ the afflictions of Christ,] secondly, because they are laid
upon him by the Decree of God; his measure is set him, and he has almost done
his task, he is ready to dye: thirdly, because they are but [ in his flesh:]
fourthly, because they were for the good of [ the Church.]

Now rejoice I in my sufferings.] Doct. Gods Children have much joy; The godly
rejoice in afflictions.
even in affliction they are cheerful, and with great encouragement, they
bear their Crosses Romans 5.3. James 1.2. 2 Cor. 7.4. and 8.2. Heb. 11.37.
: and if any ask the reason why they are so glad in their affliction and
trouble; I answer, Gods Servants are the more cheerful under crosses, because
they know: first, that the Prince of their Salvation was consecrate through
affliction Heb. 2.10.
. Secondly, that their Savior did therefore suffer, that he might succor them
that suffer Heb. 2.18. John 16.33.
. Thirdly, that the sting is taken out of the Cross, and therefore it is not
so painful to them as it is to the wicked men. Fourthly, 2 Cor. 1.5. etc.
that the same afflictions are upon their brethren that are in the world 1 Pet.
5.9.
. Fifthly, The reasons why the godly are so cheerful in affliction.
that the way to life is such a kind of way, a strait and narrow troublesome
way Mat. 7.4.
. Sixthly, that after all their troubles are a while borne in this world, they
shall have rest with the blessed in heaven, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed, and better and more enduring substance, then any here they can want
or loose Heb. 10.34. 2 These. 1.6.7.
. Yea, that their afflictions are to be accounted a part of that treasure that
they would lay up against the last day. Seauenthly, that God will in the mean
time comfort them in all their tribulation 2 Cor. 1.4.
. Eighthly, that their manifold temptations serve for great use; as for their
trial of their precious Faith, and refining of all Graces, with the purging
out of much dross and corruption in their natures 1 Pet. 1.6.7.
. Ninthly, that no afflictions can separate them from the love of God in
Christ, with many other reasons, which I might instance in, besides those
mentioned in the end of this Verse. If any yet ask, how Gods Seruans have
attained to such Joy, since there are worlds of people, that in their troubles,
could never be induced to conceive of such contentment, by any reason could be
brought them; I answer, that there are diverse things in Gods Children, which
are not in wicked men; which are great causes of, and helps to joy in
tribulation: As, first, they will receive the light, and treasure up holy
knowledge, which they find singular use of in their Troubles: whereas an
ignorant mind is usually attended with a distempered heart Heb. 10.32.34
. Secondly, they have Faith in God, and carry about in their hearts the warm
and inflamed love of Jesus Christ, and are therefore able to trust in Gods
providence in any distress 1 Pet. 1.7.8.
. Thirdly, Gods Children hold such a course as this when as (...), the
sufferings which are mala poenae, evils of punishment do fall upon them, they
presently run and revenge themselves upon those inward (...), mala culpae,
evils of sin; even their secret passions and affections, and by crucifying
them, they work their peace and tranquillity within themselves: for no man
would be hurt by his afflictions without, if he would mortify his passions
within Gal. 5.24.
. Fourthly, they are much in Prayer, and keep a good Conscience, in an
upright, innocent and sincere conversation 2 Cor. 1.5.11.12.
. And lastly, the word is a continual Fountain of joy in all troubles, which
keeps them from discouragement, or unquietness. Psalm. 119.

For you.] These words may be referred either to rejoice, or to Sufferings. It
is true, Gods servants do feel great joy one for another 1 These. 3.7.
. And to think of the grace or prosperity of other of Gods Servants, is many
times a great comfort in trouble. But I rather think the words are to be
referred to [ Sufferings] and then the sense may be, for you, that is, for the
doctrine, which as the Apostle of the Gentiles, I taught you: Or for the
confirmation of your Faith, and encouragement to like patience. And the rather,
because the offering of him up for the sacrifice and service of their Faith,
was as the consecration of the first fruits to God, upon which followed a
greater blessing upon the whole Church.

Uses.
The consideration hereof should teach Gods people, not to faint at the troubles
of their Teachers, since they are for them, (though to carnal reason it seems
contrary,) yea, the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.13. says, it is their glory. Which also
shows the vain pains that wicked men take, when they persecute faithful
Teachers: for though they think thereby to plague the people, that so greatly
rely upon them; yet indeed God turns all so for the best, that those
sufferings are for them, and not against them. And if wicked men were thus
persuaded, they would spare such wicked labor: and if the godly could believe
this, it would make them immovable in trouble; for what shall make against
them, if this kind of troubles make for them?

And fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ.] Some of the late Papists
gather from these words, that CHRIST did not suffer all that was needful for
man's deliverance from sin, but left a deal to be suffered by his members,
especially men of principal note: and hence grew their Supererogation,
Satisfactory pains, and Indulgences. But that this cannot be the meaning of
this place, is clear, first, because that doctrine is contrary to other
Scriptures, as Esaias 53.4.5.6.8.10.11.12. John 19.30. Heb. 10.1. to 15. Heb. 9.
14.25.26. 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 John 2.1. Psalm. 49 7. Secondly, themselves being
Judges, this sense brings in a gross absurdity: for if the words be
understood of the suffering Christ left to his people, to endure for
satisfaction for sin, then it will follow, that Paul suffered all was
wanting, and so there should remain none for any other to suffer; for he
says, he suffered the rest of the sufferings of Christ. Thirdly, Calvin and
Fulk say, that none of the Fathers did here thus understand the words: August.
tract. 84. in John.
and it is plain, that S. Augustine is flat against this sense, when he
says, Though Brethren dye for Brethren, yet no blood of Martyrs is shed for
remission of sins: this Christ only has done. And Leo, a Pope, could say,
The just receive, not give Crowns. And out of the fortitude of the faithful,
arise examples of Patience, not gifts of Righteousness. Fourthly, the next
Verse clears this: for he did thus suffer, according to the dispensation
given him of God. Now, he was given to edify, not to redeem the Church.
Fifthly, their Schoole-Diuines are against them; the Gloss has it thus, Pro
vobis, i. Confirmandis in doctrina Euangelij. Aquinas doubts not to say, that
to affirm that the Passions of the Saints are added to make up, or fulfill the
Passion of Christ, is heretical. Caietan referres the words, quae desunt unto
in carne mea. The plain meaning is, that the Apostle did endure that measure
of affliction that GOD in his counsel had appointed him to endure for the Name
and Gospel of CHRIST, and the good of the Church, in the confirmation and
encouraging of men's minds in the truth of the Gospel.

Of Christ.] His sufferings may be said to be the sufferings of Christ, How our
afflictions are the afflictions of Christ.
either as Christ is taken for the whole mystical body, (which is not strange
in Scripture; for by Christ, in 1 Cor. 12. he means the body of Christ,) or
as he is the head of the Church: and so the afflictions of Gods servants may
be said to be his sufferings; either because they be such as he should suffer
himself, if he were on earth; or because they were laid upon him by Christ,
for the Churches good; or because they were for Christ and his doctrine; or
because they deserve nothing, but all the praise is Christ's; or because of the
sympathy of Christ with the Christian, who accounts them as if they were his
sufferings. And in this latter sense I think chiefly, these words are to be
taken: for it is certain, Christ does so feel the miseries of his people,
that he accounts them in that respect, to be his own miseries, as these
places show, Heb. 4.15. Romans 8.17. Mat. 25.42. etc. Phil. 3.10. 1 Pet. 4.13. 2
Cor. 1.4. Acts. 9.4. Hence grew that witty division of Christ's sufferings into
(...) and (...); so as the first should be understood of the sufferings he
endured in his own person, and the latter of the sufferings he felt in his
members.

The consideration of this, Uses.
that Christ accounts the afflictions of his members to be his own, may
serve for diverse uses: For first, it shows that they be in a woeful case, that
have ought to do against Christ Ministers, or any of his Servants. They would
easily grant it, that the Jews were brought into great distress, by the
wrongs they did to Christ himself; then must it also follow that they cannot
escape scot-free, that despise, revile, traduce, or any way abuse the Messengers
or Servants of Christ, since he accounts it as done to himself. Secondly,
this may be a wonderful motive to stir us up to be industrious in
well-doing, and in helping and relieuing the poor Members of Christ, since we
are sure to have thanks and reward from Christ himself, as if we had done it
to him. Lastly, in all our sufferings we should strive that we might be
assured that our sufferings are his sufferings. And that it might be so, we
must be sure of two things: 1. that we be found in him Phil. 1.9.10
; for unless we be the members of Christ, we cannot have the benefit of this
Sympathy: 2. that we suffer not for ill doing 2 Pet 4.15. etc.
.

Rest of his sufferings.] Doct. So long as Christ shall have a member on earth,
there will rest something for him, to suffer in his members: and therefore we
should learn not to promise our selves rest and ease while we are in this
world.

To fulfill.] The word signifies, either to do it in stead of another, as if
the Soldier fight in his Captains room; or to do it in his own course or
turn, according to the appointment of his Governor, and in such proportion as
is required: and thus I think it is taken here. It is certain, that all the
Afflictions of the members of Christ come from Gods decree, and the continuance
and measure of them is appointed of God Reu 2.8 10. Esaias 27.7.8.9. 1 These.
3.3.4.
. And therefore. it should encourage every Christian the more chearefully in
his course, and when his turn comes, to take up his cross and follow Christ,
and never stand much upon the malice of men, or the rage of Devils, but to
look principally to God, with this assurance, that God will deliver them when
his measure is full.

In my flesh.] Doct. First, God does afflict the flesh of his Servants, he
spares not the best of his Servants herein. Uses.
Use is, to teach us, therefore not to pamper our flesh, but to be resolved to
suffer it willingly, to be used like the flesh of Christ and the Saints. But
especially, we should take heed of taking care for the flesh, Rom 13. vlt.
, or serving to the flesh Gal. 6.
: It is an unseemly thing in a Christian to make very much of his flesh, but it
is worse to spend his cares about it, but worst of all to let his whole
husbandry be only for his outward man.

Why some of Gods servants are so immovable in affliction.
Secondly, great things may be suffered, and yet the soul be untouched: as here
the Apostles sufferings (which were exceeding great and manifold) reach only
to his flesh; they enter not into his soul. And the reason why some of Gods
Servants are so immovable in their crosses, is, because they converse in
heaven, and their spirits walk with God, and so are without reach of these
earthly perturbations. Besides, when a man's heart is settled, and grounded in
the truth, and in the assurance of Gods love, what should disquiet his soul
that knows nothing to mourn for but sin, and the absence of God? and
nothing joyous, but what comes from the light of Gods countenance?

Thirdly, he that has felt the troubles of the soul for sin, is not much
troubled with the crosses that are but outward. Note.
The use is, for great reproof of carnal Christians, that are seldom
observed to grieve, but when somewhat ayleth their flesh; but on the other
side, are not at all touched with the miseries of the soul. As also, we
should learn of the Apostle, in all outward crosses, to say with our selves,
why should I be troubled or disquieted? or rather, why should I not be joyous,
since what I endure is but in the flesh? and since the Lord does spare my
soul, let him do whatsoever pleases him.

Lastly, we may here note the wonderful love and compassion of Christ, that
pittieth not only our souls but our flesh, accounting what we suffer, to be
as his sufferings. Is it not enough that he should accept of the contrition of
our souls, but that also he should regard the sorrows and troubles of our
flesh?

Two kinds of sufferings: 1. of the Church; 2. for the Church.
For his bodies sake, which is the Church.] Sufferings are of two kinds:
Either, of the Church; or for the Church. Of the Church, are also of two
kinds: Either, Chastisements, or Trials. Sufferings for the Church are
likewise of two sorts: Either, Expiation, and so Christ only suffered; or
Martyrdom for confirmation of Doctrine, or encouragement in practice, and so
the Saints have suffered for the Church.

The principal Doctrine from hence is, that the particular sufferings of Gods
Servants, especially the Ministers, serve for the good and profit of the whole
body. Uses.
The Use is manifold: First, we should hereby be informed to mind the good of
the Church, and to seek the advancement of Religion, and the good of religious
persons, above our own estate. Our care should be most for the body of Christ,
and we should rejoice in any service we could do to the Church of God.
Secondly, such as are called to suffer, should labor to show all good
faithfulness, zeal, constancy, and holy discretion, seeing their sufferings
concern more then their own persons. Thirdly, this should stir us up to
pray for such as are in trouble for good causes, since their afflictions are
some way for our sakes 2 Cor. 1.11.
. Fourthly, this may encourage poor Christians, that complain they have not
means to do good; they may be hence informed, that if God call them
thereunto, they may do good, yea, to the whole Church, by their sufferings: no
wants can hinder, but that the poorest Christian may profit others, by prayer,
fastings, counsel, admonitions, comfort and suffering. Fifthly, since the
sufferings of the righteous are for our confirmation and encouragement, we
should use the meditation of such sufferings, when we find our selves
inclineable to discouragement, or impatience, or doubting. Lastly, this greatly
reproues carnal Christians, which are so taken up, generally, with the care of
their natural bodies, that they have utterly neglected the care and service of
the mystical Body. And in as much as men are generally so barraine in doing
good, it is a plain sign there is no hope that ever they would suffer for God.

Secondly, further hence may be noted, that the Doctrine or Sufferings of the
Saints, are no privilege or benefit to any but the true Church; and therefore
Papists have no cause to boast of Peter and the Saints, so long as they remain
a false Church.

Thirdly, we may also observe hence, that they only are the true of Church, who
are of the body of Christ; and therefore we must be sure, we be members of
Christ, before we glad our hearts with our privilege in the Church. And a
member of Christ thou art not, Who are members of Christ.
unless, 1. thou believe the remission of thy sins; for we are ingrafted
only by Faith: 2. Unless thou have had in thy soul an influence of holy
graces from Christ, as from the head: 3. Unless thou work the works of
Christ, and bring forth the fruits of a reformed life; for thereby thou must
try whether thou be a true plant in this Vine. And lastly, if thou be of this
body, thou have some room in the affections of Gods Children, or else it will
be hard to prove that thou art a fellow member.

Fourthly, here we may see, that seldom comes there any good to the Church,
but there is suffering for it; it cannot be redeemed but Christ must dye: and
if the merit of this Redemption be applied, Paul must dye. It is an ill sign
thou have no true grace, when thou suffer nothing for the grace thou
trustest to: It is an ill sign that God is not with the Watchmen of Ephraim,
when they suffer nothing for the efficacy of their doctrine. Neither may any
think this may be prevented by meekness or wisdom, for the treasures of
both these were in Christ, and yet he was a man full of sorrows.

And for conclusion, Arguments against the cross.
out of the whole Verse we may gather together a number of Arguments against
the Cross: 1. Paul suffers: 2. One may rejoice notwithstanding afflictions: 3.
The longer we bear the cross, the better able we shall be to endure it;
this may be gathered out of the word [ Now.] 4. They are such as Christ
accounts his: 5. They come from the decree of God: 6. Their measure is set by
God: 7. We bear them but in our course, others have gone before us, and after
us must others follow: 8. Christ suffered the great brunt of Gods wrath; our
sufferings are but small relics, or parcels, that are left behind. 9. The
measure will once be full, and that shortly: 10. They are but in the flesh for
the most part: 11. Christ respects the troubles of our flesh, as well as the
affliction of our spirit: 12. We must profit the Church by our sufferings.

Verse 25. Whereof I am made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God,
which is given to me, for you, to fulfill the word of God.


IN this Verse is contained the third general Reason: and it is taken from the
testimony of God. Wherein he shows, that they ought to continue in the
Doctrine they had received; because God by a special dispensation, had
ordained him, and the rest of the faithful teachers, by their ministeries, to
serve to the good of the members of Christ, by fulfilling and accomplishing
thereby whatsoever concerns the salvation either of Jew or Gentile.

In this dispensation I consider five things: First, who is the Author of it;
(...).
GOD: Secondly, what kind of dispensation it is, viz. a household
Administration, for so the word imports: Thirdly, what he dispenses; viz.
the service of his Ministers: Fourthly, how he dispenses; viz. by granting
out a Commission to them in particular, unto me is given: Fifthly, to what end;
viz. To fulfill the word of God.

From the Coherence with the 23. Verse, I note, that if men would be
established in Faith and Hope they must be subject to the power of the
ministry of Gods Servants. From the Coherence with the former Verse, I note
that if the Ministers of CHRIST do find that their service is available and
powerful to profit the souls of the people, they must not think it strange,
that they fall into many tribulations.

From the general consideration of the whole Verse, I observe, both the
dignity and the restraint of the Ministry. The dignity of a Minister stands
in three things: first, that he is Gods Ambassador: Secondly, that by his
Commission he is sent unto Gods people, who are the only Worthies of the
world: thirdly, that a great part of the efficacy of the word, rests by Gods
appointment upon him and his Office. The restraint is likewise in three things:
first, he is a Minister or Servant; not a Lord or Savior: secondly, he
receives his commandment from God: he must not run of his own head, nor
hold his office by mere humane ordination: thirdly, the word of God must be
his ground and rule, for all his dealing, in dispensing the things of God.

Of God.] God is the dispenser of all good things to the Church, but in
special of the Ministry of his Servants, both in respect of the Embassage, and
the calling of the Ambassador; and in respect of the efficacy of the
Embassage; both in the preparation and power of the Teacher, and in the hearts
of the hearers.

Uses.
Which should teach us especially two things: First, in the Churches want of
able Ministers, to seek to GOD, the great Lord of the Harvest, to send forth
more Laborers. And secondly, we should reverence Gods Ministers, in as much
as they are the Dispensers of Gods Secrets 1 Cor. 4.1.
. Ministers also may hence learn, to execute their Commission with all
diligence 2 Timothy 4.1.2.
: In the declaration of the truth, approving themselves to men's Consciences, in
the sight of God 2 Cor. 4.2. and 2.17.
: with discretion Mat. 24.45. and 13.52.
, as becomes Servants of God Tit. 1.7. etc.
, rebuking sin with all zeal and power Mich. 3.8
. Lastly, hence arises the woeful estate of such Ministers as preach not the
Gospel 1 Cor. 9.16.
, and of such People as hear not Gods Ministers 1 John 4.6.
, either for want of means Prou. 26.18.
, or through vvilfull unbelief Luke 16.31.
.

Thus of the Person dispensing.

This kind of dispensation is (...): God governs his Church with a household
government, as a Father governs his family, not as a Tyrant, that rules what
by right he ownes not; nor as a Monarch, that knows not the thousand part of
what he rules; nor as a Captain, that trains his Soldiers only to labor
and danger while their treasures are at home; nor as a Schoolmasters, that
rules children that are not his own: but as a most provident and loving
Father, that keeps none but he ownes them, and knows them particularly, and
prouides for them, and all at home Mat. 20.1. Gal. 6.10. Ephesians. 3.16. and 2.19.
Mat. 13 27. and ^1.33.
.

Uses.
The use is: first, for Instruction; if we would have God to rule us, with this
most familiar and fatherly providence, How we may know whether we be of Gods
household.
we must then be sure, that we be of his Household. And that we may try,
first, by the manner of Gods taking possession of us: for before he comes thus
to rule us, there is a strong combat between Christ and the Devil, that
strong man. And if sin and Satan rule still in our hearts, the Lord is not
there, neither can we serve two Masters Mat. 12.29. Luke 16.13.
. Secondly, by our affection to Gods glory and his people: if we be right, the
zeal of Gods house will eat us up. Thirdly, by the gifts of Gods Spirit: as
namely, by the spirit of prayer; for Gods house is a House of Prayer, and all
his household can and do pray. Fourthly, by the privilege of the house; for
if we be admitted of God, the Son does make us free John 8.35.
. Fifthly by the sovereignty of Christ, for as many as have this honor, they
do submit themselves to be ruled, by the word, and spirit of Christ Luke 1.33.
. If the Son cannot rule us, the Father will not own us. And further, if we
find our selves to be of this household, we should live in the household of
God; showing all faithfulness, in using our tallents, and carfulness, in
dispensing those earthly things that God has trusted us withal: And also
observing the orders of Gods house; and not receiving appointment from the
example, will, custom, or traditions of men Gal. 4.8.9.
.

The third thing is, What good men get by their ministers.
what he dispenses, viz. The ministry of his servants, whereof I am a
minister.] The Church has great need of Ministers.

Quest. But what good do they to us? Ans. They are Gods Ambassadors, to
reconcile us to God 2 Cor. 5.20.
: they are the arm of the Lord, to collect us out of the world 2 These. 2.14.
Esaias 53.1.
: they are the light of the world Mat. 5.15.
, and the Salt of the earth Mat. 5.13.
: they are our spiritual Fathers to beget us to God 1 Cor. 4.15. 1 Pet. 1.23.
, and Nurses after we are begotten 1 These 2 7.
: they are our Intercessors to God, being our mouth in public and in private,
rising up in the gap, praying to stay Gods anger: they are Stewards over Gods
house Luke 12.42.
, and the Keys of heaven are delivered to them Mat. 16. John 20.23. Mat. 18.18.
. All which should stir us up to honor and love them, with a singular love for
their works sake.

Which is given to me.] Ministers must be called by special commission from
God, as well as by outward calling from man.

To fulfill the word of God. Diverse things may be hence observed. First, the
Word is that special treasure, and the chief portion that God has left, both
to Ministers and People. Secondly, whatsoever the word seems to to be unto
carnal men, yet it is certain, God will see to it, that all that is in it
shall be fulfilled. Thirdly, the Preachers of the Gospel, are the means to
set the word a working. And therefore no wonder, though troops of people that
are not subject to the ministry of the word, find little power in it.
Besides, it evidently confutes those that think by reading at home, to get
enough both for knowledge and salvation: for it is preaching that by Gods
blessing and ordination does put life into the word, and brings it into
accomplishment. How the Ministers fulfill the Word.
Fourthly, Quest. How may we conceive of it, that Gods Ministers do fulfill
the word? Ans. The word is said by them to be fulfilled four ways: 1. if we
respect preaching it self: 2. if we respect the manner of preaching: 3. if we
respect the suffering that follows preaching: 4. if we respect the efficacy
of preaching.

For the first: Paul may be said to fulfill the word, in that he does preach,
as he was by his commission appointed: he was charged by God to preach and in
obedience to Gods word or will, he did preach it. It is not enough for
Ministers to receive commission to preach, but they must fulfill it: and
therefore woe to those Loyterers, and Non-residents, that care more to fill
their barnes, then to fulfill their ministration.

For the second: Ministers are said to fulfill the word, when they execute
their Commission in a due manner: and this they do; first, when they preach
with all diligence: secondly, when they hold out to the end, not taking pains
for a Sermon or two, or a year or two, till they can get preferment, but with
all constancy, perseuering in the labor and work of their Ministry, till
their course be ended, and the fight finished 2 Timothy 4.8.
: thirdly, when they reveal all the counsel of God, that is needful for
their hearers: thus Paul fulfilled the word. Acts 20.18.

Thirdly, Ministers fulfill the Word by afflictions, for thereby they confirm
the hearts of their hearers: as also, thereby is fulfilled upon them that which
is in Scripture so often foretold, should befall the faithful dispensers of the
word John 15. and 16 and 17.
.

Quest. Can all Ministers show their bonds for the Gospel? Ans. Nay, some can
show the livings they have lewdly gotten, their ease, their dignities, their
resisting of the word, faithfully taught by others, the disgraces they have
cast upon their Brethren; but alas, their pains or sufferings may easily be
reckoned. But woe unto them; for, for all the evil they have done, they have
brought evil upon their own souls: the Lord Jesus shall consume them with
the breath of his coming.

Lastly, in respect of the efficacy of the word, it is fulfilled by them; for
many great things, threatened or promised in the word, were to be accomplished
by them, some extraordinary, some ordinary. The extraordinary, were bound to
certain times, such as were heretofore, the calling of the Gentiles, and the
induration or obstinacy of the Jews; and such as are now in doing, or to be
done, as the reclayming of the world, by the everlasting Gospel, the downfall
of Antichrist, and the gathering of the Jews: These things have been promised
in the word, and have, are, and shall be, wonderfully fulfilled by the ministry
of preachers. The Ordinary are fulfilled in the Church at all times: and thus
the Word is fulfilled in the elect, and in the reprobate. In the elect,
Ministers fulfill the Word; 1. In converting those by the word, which were
foreordained of God Romans 1.16. and 15.19.
. 2. In conueying Christ to their souls: so as the word is not a bare history
of the merit, and grace of Christ, but is fulfilled in the application of
Christ Romans 8.4. 2 Cor. 2.14. 1 Cor. 1.17. Gal. 3.1.3.5.
. Romans 8.4. 3. By dividing the word amongst them, as the food of their souls,
to preserve them. 4. The application of the Promises, which are effectually in
the Minister fulfilled in the hearts of the hearers Luke 4.21.
. Lastly, in causing the Elect to fulfill the word, both in obeying the Word
Romans 15.18.
, and in perseuering in the doctrine to the end. In the Reprobate they fulfill
the word: 1. In hardening them, 2 Cor. 2.15. 2. By making them inexcusable by
illumination: 3. In occasioning many sins through their own wilful
corruption, Romans 7.8. 4. In slaying them, or by sentence cutting them off, Esaias
11.3. Mat. 16.16. 2 Cor. 10.6.

The Use of all this is: 1. To show the necessity of continual preaching,
seeing by it, the word must be fulfilled: many are still to be converted, and
all to be com^orted, directed, strengthened, reproved, etc. 2. To justify the
continual travail of faithful Ministers, that will never give over to
exhort, reprove, convince, etc. They are enjoined to see the word of God
fulfilled, and therefore no wonder though they will not let men rest in their
sin and security. 3. To teach us in all temptations or afflictions, to run
to the word preached, for thereby God will certainly perform all needful
consolation, or direction, or humiliation. 4. To inform Ministers, that they
must add indefatigable pains, since so much is to be fulfilled by them. 5. To
admonish stubborn sinners, to take heed of provoking God, for if the word may
not be fulfilled in their salvation, it shall be fulfilled in their induration.

Verse 26. Which is the Mystery hid since the world began, and from all ages,
but now is made manifest to his Saints.


THese words are the fourth general Reason, taken from the excellency of the
Gospel: which is here described in four things: 1. By the nature of it, a
Mystery: 2. By the antiquity of it, since the world began, or from ages and
generations: 3. By the time of the full revelation of it, viz. Now, in the new
world by Christ: 4. By the persons to whom it is revealed, viz. the Saints.

The Mystery.] The Gospel is a great Mystery 1 Timothy 3.16.
, a hidden Mystery Romans 16.25.
, hidden in God Ephesians. 3.9. 2 Timothy 1.9.
: because it was a secret in the purpose and grace of the Father, before the
world began. Hidden in Christ, because he was that storehouse in which the
Father laid up all his treasures Col. 2.3.
, that concern man's life and immortality: and because he was the meritorious
cause of all our happiness. Hidden in the Word Romans 16.26.
, because the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, are the sacred
fountains of knowledge, and originals, from the bowels of which flow the
comforts of the Gospel to the Church. Hidden also in the dark shadows of the
Ceremonial Law. Hidden from Adam himself in Paradise, so long as he
acknowledged his happiness by the Covenant of works. Hidden from the Gentiles
many hundred years, while they served dumb Idols, and had not the Sun of
righteousness shining among them. Hidden from the Jews in part and
comparatively, because in a manner all the Jews were ignorant of the manner of
Christ's Kingdom, and of the calling of the Gentiles, and such like:
comparatively, in respect of us; they had the light of a Candle, but we have
the light of the Sun: and therefore John is said to be least in the Kingdom
of God. Hidden from the natural man still, who cannot perceive the spiritual
things of God 1 Cor. 2.7.14.
; no, though otherwise he abound with wit and learning. Hidden also from the
very faithful, comparatively, in respect of what they shall know in the
kingdom of glory; and in respect of the differences of degrees among
themselves now.

Quest. Quest.
But why is the doctrine of man's happiness so obscure to many, even in the
Church, in these days? Ans.
Ans. Man is by nature covered with the veil of original blindness Esaias 25.8.
; and besides, he is bewitched with the deceitfulness of his actual sins
Heb. 3.13.
, the God of this world, with his wiles and subtilties, his deepenesse and his
methodes, blinds many thousands, to their destruction, that he may hide the
Gospel from them 2 Cor. 4.3. Ephesians. 6. Revel. 2. 2 Cor. 10.4.
. Also evil thoughts nursed and fortified, as thick clouds, hide the light
from diverse: to some, in judgment, Christ speaks in Parables Mat. 13.
: others shall never have the light was offered, because they used not the
light they had. The envious man in many places sowes the tares of corrupt
doctrine. And unto many congregations for want of sincere preaching,
Immortality and life is not yet brought unto light 2 Timothy 1.10. Tit. 1.3.
, besides, the transplendencie of the doctrine it self is such as exceedes the
capacity of the most.

Quest. Quest.
But how comes it, that even the godly themselves in all places, attain to so
small a measure of knowledge in the Gospel? Ans.
Ans. There are remnants of natural blindness, even in the best: and the
sin that hangs on so fast is not without pollution, and an obscuring
property. Faith also, that should have principal use in conueying this light,
is not without some mixtures of doubts and other dross. Affections are not
without their fumes, which beeloud the understanding: sometimes they want the
means, sometimes they are negligent in the use of them; and to see perfectly
is the only privilege of the new Jerusalem, that is above.

The Uses are for Reproof, Uses.
for Information, for Instruction, and for Consolation.

First, it reproues the horrible prophanenes of those that so securely contemn
the Gospel, so sacred a Mystery: and fearful is the curse with which God
does avenge the quarrel of his word, even this, that unto these men, the
Scriptures both read and preached, are a sealed Book Esaias 29.11.
. And is the Gospel a Mystery? then singular is their dotage and madness,
that say, they know as much as any of them all can teach them.

Secondly, we may hereby be informed concerning the necessity of preaching:
the greater the Mystery is, the greater need of laborious and studious men,
that are thereunto set apart, to make manifest those secrets of the Kingdom:
for this is the appointment of God our Savior, that by preaching committed to
certain men, thereunto sanctified, (as the Apostle says,) the word promised
before the world began, should be manifested in due time Tit. 1.2.3.
.

Thirdly, this should teach us diverse duties: 1. Let every man account of
faithful Teachers, as the Ministers of Christ, and such as dispense the
Mysteries of God 1 Cor. 4.1.
. 2. We must bring Faith to the Gospel, else it will not profit Tit. 1.1.3.
Heb. 4.2.
: Reason and Sense are no competent Guides or Judges in these divine Mysteries.
And the Lord has commanded these secrets to be manifested and revealed by the
Scriptures, for the trial of his Elect, and for the exercise of their
obedience, in believing as well as in doing Romans 16.25.26.
. 3. As we should bring a resolution to believe Gods word in all things,
though it be never so contrary to sense, and to common reason of the world. So
when the Lord does reveal his Promises and Statutes to us, we should hide
them in our hearts as great Jewels and worthy Treasures, meet to be kept in
our secretest remembrance, and the very bowels of our Affections Ier. 31.34.
. 4. This Doctrine urges the necessity of observing the rules of preparation:
and to this purpose we may find five things charged upon us, all drawn from
this consideration of the Mystery of the Gospel. First, we must be sure we
he turned to the Lord by true repentance; for till then, the veil cannot be
taken away 2 Cor. 3.16.
: though the word were never so plain in it self, yet we cannot discern it,
by reason our understandings are covered with a veil, and no man can look
upon this bright Sun, till his eyes be anointed with eye-salue Re^el. 3.18.
. Secondly, in as much as the Book is sealed with seven seals, and no man
nor Angels is able powerfully to unfold and open Gods eternal comforts to the
conscience of man for his salvation, save only the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
which is also the Lamb slain, having seven eyes, which are the seven
Spirits of God: therefore in acknowledgement of his wisdom and power, we must
go unto him, importunately begging this Blessing, for his glory, that the
Book may be opened, even to enrich us Reu. 4.1.3.4.5.6.12.
; and that to this end he would make acceptable the odours of our desires and
prayers to God. Thirdly, we must remove letts; for if it be a mystery in it
self, we had not need to bring hardness of heart with us, or worldly cares,
or troubled affections, or a sluggish spirit, or preiudicate opinions, or
inordinate lusts, or any such impediments. Fourthly, we must bring with us the
loan and advantage of former doctrine communicated to us: for to him that has
for practice and increase, shall be given; but from him, that has not for
employment and conscionable use, shall be taken away that which he has Mat.
13.11.12.
. Fifthly, we must bring a pure Conscience, as a holy vessel, to receive this
mystery of faith in 1 Timothy 3.9.
: and the conscience is then pure, when it is purified by the blood of Christ,
and does daily excite the desire of purity of heart and life, bearing with the
love and liking of no sin.

Ministers also must here learn, with all reverence and painfulness, to
behave themselves as becomes those great Mysteries: they must not only be
clean themselves by holiness of heart and life, but must in compassion to the
People, and the holy fear of the Majesty of Gods truth and presence, teach
with power, frequencie, perspecuitie and authority, and since the Lord has
made them his Stewards of his Mysteries, and holy Jewels, and Treasures, it is
required of them that they be faithful 1 Cor. 4.1.
, both in applying them to the right owners, and in setting them out according
to their truth.

Lastly, the meditation hereof may serve for singular comfort to all those that
find mercy from the Lord in the revelation of his Mystery: blessed are their
eyes that see it, and their ears that hear it Mat. 13.16.
. They are more happy then many millions of men besides.

Hid since the world began, and from ages.] (...). The first of these words
is diversely accepted, sometimes it is translated from Eternity, (...).
as Psalm. 52.1. The goodness of the Lord has endured from all eternity, as
Beza thinks, writing on Luke 1.70. sometimes, Since the world began, as Luke
1.70. Acts 3.21. sometimes it signifies but of old, or a long time ago: as
the Hebrew word (which is thought to answer it) is rendered, Psalm. 119.52.
sometimes it is taken for the space of a man's life, as Peter said; Thou shall
not wash my feet, (...), that is, never while I live: and in the 3. Ephesians.
vlt. there is such a phrase as this, Glory to God, etc. (...): as if it should
be rendered unto or throughout all the generations of the world of worlds, that
is, of the world to come. And 2 Pet. 3. vlt. he says, glory to him, (...):
that is, henceforth, to the day of eternity. There is unto man two worlds: the
one begins with his life, the other with his death. But some would have it
thus, (...), a seculis, i. a filijs seculi huius, from the men of this world:
sometimes the word notes the state of things in the world, as Romans 12.2. (...),
Be not conformed to this World: and Ephesians. 2.2. (...); According to the course
of this world* but other render it Ages; and so from ages, may note the time of
the Gentiles, or the time since the world began: so that it is well rendered, in
the last Translation, [ Hid from ages, and from generations,] And if any will
have the two words distinguished, then it may be from ages, quoad Tempora; from
generations, quoad successiones hominum; but howsoever it is, it fully imports
the great antiquity of the Gospel. If the Papists will plead antiquity, let
them have recourse to the Word, or if their Trumperie will not bear the trial
of this antiquity, it is because there is no truth in them; and let this be a
sufficient stay to all godly minds, that our Doctrine is grounded upon the
Doctrine of the Prophets, Patriarchs, and Apostles, which are the best
ancients: but this is general.

Ages, and generations.] From the particular consideration ^f these words
diverse things will arise.

First, the transitory estate of the world may here be noted: the things of the
world in their best frame are so mutable, that they expire and are altered with
varieties, and the men of the world have but their short time, and then they
go out and leave their rooms to their succeeding generation; which may serve
for diverse uses, if it be seriously thought on. First, it should cause us to
fear him that cannot only change us, but mow down with his Sith whole
generations of men, before whom the nations are but as a little dust of the
balance, or drop of the Bucket: and we should also magnify and adore that
God, that is of himself subject to no change, and lives for evermore Revel.
4.10.
. Secondly, it should make us in love with the world of worlds: and to admire
the blessed estate of such as shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world,
and the resurrection from the dead Luke 20.25.
, to such an Angelical and unchangeable condition; and to this end we should
be quickened to a serious preparation for the world to come, seeing we have but
our turn and course upon earth, we should not fashion our selves to this
world Romans 12.2.
: we should refuse to square our actions according to the lusts and humors of
men 1 Pet. 4.2.
: let us serve, not the time nor the fancies of men, but the King of times 1 Timothy 1.17.
. Secondly, we should look to it, that neither the cares of this world
choke, nor the God of this world hide or take from us, the word of the
kingdom Mat. 13. 2 Cor. 4.4.
. Thirdly, and if we must not serve the men of the world, nor the things of
the world, much less may we serve sin: for if any man be a servant to sin,
he shall not abide in the house to the next world John 8.35.
. Fourthly, this may abate the great opinion of the wisdom of this world: for
what shall it profit me to have great skill to get money and means for this
life, if I have no skill or wisdom for the saving of my soul? What shall it
advantage me to have a nature and carriage, tilled and fitted for the winning
of friends for this world, if I know not how to make me friends for a better
world? what avails it to have gifts for an eminent place, in man's
Commonwealth, and for want of grace be not acknowledged of the Commonwealth
of Israel? to what purpose is it to be a Disputer of this world, and in the
day of Christ to be swallowed up with amazed silence, as not having a word to
^ay for thy poor soul? And yet providence for our future estate may be
learned from these Children of this world. For if the Children of sin, be so
industrious to make shift for their time, how much more should the hearts of
the Children of eternity be enlarged to an inflamed care of large provision
for their mortal estate? Fifthly, this should embolden us to a willing
forsaking of our selves, in the worst of all outward trials, which is, to
forgo even all for Christ's sake and the Gospels, if we be put to it. What
great thing is it to part with that little All that we have in this world,
seeing it could serve us but for a little time, and at length we must leave
all? and besides, by a voluntary abregation we shall be aduantaged in the
gain of an eternal recompense of reward a hundredfold better.

Note.
First, that these people were instructed by the Creatures, and had a Law
written in their hearts Romans 1. and 2.
. Secondly, that these terrible desertions, and exquisite judgments, were
deserved by an infinite measure of horrible ^innes: which if we could soundly
consider^ of, our Objections about their falls would be much dulled. Thirdly,
that it is God that prescribes and describes Justice: and therefore things are
just, because he does them; not that first man must pronounce them just, and
then God will do them. Fourthly, that the reasons of this dealing may be just,
though not expressed unto us. Fifthly, that Christians are charged to be wise to
sobriety: they may not let their thoughts run as far as they will, but
must let God alone with his secret judgments. Sixthly, that the things are now
strange and obscure, shall be more fully revealed in the day of Christ, when
all shall be cleared and made manifest.

Object.
Object. But some Papist may say, it is plain by these words, that the
Scripture is hard, and not fit for the common people, seeing it is called a
mystery?

Answ. This place cannot help them; because it is said, that now it is
revealed; and so their cavil comes out of season. Sol.
2 Because it is, and was hidden from carnal men, not from Gods servants: we
do not wonder though the Scriptures be as a soaled Book unto such carnal
wretches as they are.

Now revealed. How the mystery is revealed.
] God has revealed the mystery of his Will diverse ways: first, by Dreams: by
Day-visions: by Types and Sacraments: by Angels: by Prophets, and extraordinary
Men: by CHRIST, appearing in our Nature: by his Spirit: by the Scriptures, and
by the ordinary Preaching of the Ministers Dreams, Visions, and Types, were
peculiar in a manner to the old Testament: the ministry of Christ, in his
own person: of the Prophets, and extraordinary Men, and Angels, is now ceased:
so as unto us this Mystery is revealed, by the Spirit, in the ministry of
Gods Servants, and in the use of the Scriptures.

Quest. Quest.
But was not the Gospel revealed till now, since CHRIST?

Answ. Ans.
Yes, it was: as these places may prove, John 8.56. Abraham saw his days, 1
Pet. 1.10.
and Moses wrote of him. All the Prophets gave witness unto Christ, Act.
10.43. Romans 1.2. Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Hebr.
13.8. but the Gospel was hidden in respect of the time, of the manifestation,
of the glory of Christ, especially, to the Gentiles, and diverse things in the
manner of Christ's kingdom were not revealed unto them 1 Pet. 1.10.
: as also in respect of cleerenesse of revelation, and the more ordinary life
and power of the graces of the Messiah, and the more plentiful efusion of the
gifts of the spirit. Fifthly, that it was not revealed before, viz. as it is
now, they had before Christ (...), that is, the promise of the Messiah to be
exhibited, and we have (...), the tidings of the Messiah exhibited. Two things
may be here observed.

First, That Gods Servants may know their own particular blessedness for he
says, it is revealed to the Saints.

Secondly, that the seasons of the revelation of the Gospel, in the power of
it, are singular privileges, and greatly to be heeded, and therefore woe is to
those souls that neglect such days of grace, it is double condemnation. It is
damnable to sit in darkness, and have no means of life, but it is much more
the condemnation of these worlds of profane persons, that light is come into
the world: John 3.
yea, into the Country: yea, even to their own Towns and Congregations; and
yet they will love darkness rather then light. And on the other side, it
should teach men that know the times of such visitation, both to bear witness
to the light, by presence, countenance, maintenance, and establishing of it for
them and theirs; and also to walk as the children of the light, even as a
people exceedingly privileged, and blessed of God.

To his Saints.] The word Saint is sometime given to Christ Psalm. 16.10.
, sometimes to Angels Job 15.15.
, sometimes to the blessed in heaven Math. 27 52.
, sometimes to the faithful on earth Psalm. 16.3.
. The Pope has his Saints, and such are the choice of the most desperate
Traitors, as he orders his Canonisations in our days: And the world has
his Saints to; and they are civil honest men: but here, by Saints, he means
the Faithful on Earth; and they are Saints, that are holy by the
righteousness of Faith Act. 26.18.
: that have the spirit of Sanctification 1 Cor. 3 16.17.
: that are separate from sinners, by a holy calling Rom 16.
: that are reformed from the principal evils of their former conversation 1
Cor. 6.11.
: that call upon the name of the Lord 1 Cor. 1.2.
: that are consecrate to God in special holiness of life.

Quest. But if a man live ciuilly in the world, will not that serve the turn?

Answ. Quest.
It will not: our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees. Answ.
And it may be profitable often to recount the defects of the civil honest man.
The defects of the civil honest man.
First, he wants sincerity in the first Table. Secondly, he sticks not at the
inward corruptions of the second Table. Thirdly, his praise is of men, in his
best actions, or else some other corrupt ends. Fourthly, he is wholly void of
the inward worship of God, and in the outward he is either secure or
superstitious. Fifthly, he never traveled in the new birth for his honesty.
Sixthly, he wants the righteousness of Faith. Seauenthly, for the most part
his heart is not sound nor upright in his family, especially for matter of Gods
worship.

Verse 27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of his glorious
mystery among the Gentiles, which riches is Christ in you for hope of glory.


THese words contain the fifth general reason, taken from the excellency of
the subject; the Gospel in the preaching of it propounds unto men: and that is
Christ. And in this revelation of Christ, consider, 1. to whom: viz. to the
Saints: 2. by whom: viz. God: 3. what is the cause, viz. the Will and good
Pleasure of God. He would. 4. the manner: 1. if we respect the unregenerate
world, it is in a Mystery. 2. if we respect the grace communicated, it is a
glorious and rich mystery. 3. if we respect the place where Christ as a Sun
of righteousness rises: it is in you: that is, in the heart of man. 4. if we
respect the persons he makes choice of, it is the miserable Gentiles. Amongst
the Gentiles. 5. if we respect future things, he is revealed as the hope of
glory.

To whom.] Of the persons to whom, I have spoken in the end of the former
verse: only this Doctrine may be added. That only the Saints, that is, holy
men, find Treasures and Riches in the power of the glorious Gospel of Christ.
The Lords secret is only with them that fear him Psalm. 25.14.
: till faith be revealed men are shut up Gal. 3 23.
, as in a dungeon or prison; the Lord speaks peace only to his people and his
Saints Psalm. 85.8.
. The righteousness of God is revealed to the just man that will live by faith
Romans 1.17.
. Flesh and blood, till there be a new birth, is not capable of this revelation
Math. 16.17.
, men that hate to be reformed have nothing to do with Gods Covenant Psalm. 50.
. Hence we may see where the fault is when men be so auerse, and unteachable,
when people have the means and cannot understand to profit and do good, it is
only in their own hearts, lusts, and wickedness of life: and therefore let
every one that would grow rich in knowledge, labor to be abundant in practice,
for the saving knowledge of this mystery increases, as grace and holiness
grows.

God.] Doct. God is the author of all saving knowledge: he is the Father of
lights. The use is therefore: First, if any man lack wisdom, let him ask it
of God Iam. 1.5.
. Secondly, let all that would have knowledge use good means: Those people
that are too wise to use reading, hearing, conference, and Prayer, are but in a
miserable case; those they account ^illy people, even as Babes and Sucklings
Math. 11.25.
, in comparison of them, carry away the blessing, while they live and dye in
their sins. Thirdly, in the ministry of men, we must believe them no farther
then they bring warrant from the word of God: it is Gods word, and not men
sayings or precepts, must be our guide: a fear of God bred by man's precepts
will be in vain Mat. 15.
. Fourthly, we should prise every dram of true knowledge got from the Word,
at a high rate, even to excel all other things, as being the peculiar gift of
God.

Would.] The reason of the dispensation of spiritual favors in Christ, are
not in us, neither in will nor work, but in the good pleasure of Gods will,
which should teach us with so much the more thankfulness to express our
admiration of Gods love, that could find nothing in us but cause of hate, even
for ever; what are we, or what are our fathers houses, that we should be thus
exalted in the Courts of our God? and withal, we should in all things resign
our selves over to Gods will, as the highest cause of all things: we should
rest in his approving will, as our chiefest happiness, and obey his
prescribing will, as the absolutest and perfectest form of holiness, and be
subject to his disposing will, being patient in all trials and troubles,
because he did it Psalm. 39.9.
. Lastly, this might break to powder carnal hopes: how can thou plead,
thou hopest that God will save thy soul, seeing there is simply nothing in
thee that the Lord cares for; and thou have not sought his grace by sound
Repentance and true Faith?

Make known.] Diverse things have been noted before, concerning this
manifestation and revelation of the Gospel: that which only I will here add
is the effects of it. The proper effect of the powerful publication of the
Gospel is, to bring life and immortality to light 2 Timothy 1.10.
: But the accidental effect, is to make variance and oppositions amongst men*
When CHRIST comes in this manner, he comes not to bring peace: as the Fan
scatters the Chafe from the Wheat, so is the word, powerfully preached. I
need go no further then this City for an instance; though matters of
controversy have been wholly forborne, and differences in matters about
Church-gouernement and ceremonies have not been so much as touched with
public preachings; and that matter of regeneration, faith, and sanctification,
has been almost only urged: yet see what stirs; what differences of
censures; what indignation at the reformation of any souls that have been
wrought upon by the word; what inuectiues; what strange reports; what
abominable lies, and slanders have been almost weekly raised, and divulged
throughout all the Country round about?

What is the riches of the glory.] The Apostles variety, and effectual
terms are to be noted, though he have spoken much, yet he is not drawn
dry; but speaks still with great feeling and efficacy, both of words and
matter. And indeed as any men are more holy, they have the more deep and
tender Affections in the meditation of the glory of the things of the Gospel.
This holy man cannot fall upon the mention of the Gospel, but his affections
burst out into great terms of admiration, as if he thirsted after variety
of words to express his inward estimation: and as it is a sign of a
sanctifying disposition to be so affected; so, when we see holy men striving
for words to express the glory of spiritual things, it may secretly condemn
the coldness and barrainnesse of our dull spirits, that usually through the
deceitfulness of sin, prove to have the dullest affections, where we should
be most stirred: and the Apostle does well in seeking these affecting terms,
that so he might excite affection and appetite in the hearers; for people will
no longer profit by the word, then they admire it, and long after it with
estimation: and therefore it should be a holy discretion in Ministers, to study
by all means to teach in such a manner as might most stir affection and just
admiration at the power and fitnes of the Word. Quest.
But here a question may be asked. Say that we have gotten a great affection to
the Word, What we must do to keep affection in the admiration of the word.
and that we do highly esteem of it, and long after it, what must we do to
keep this appetite, that we lose it not, and that it dye not in us by little
and little? I answer: thou must look to thy self in five things. First, take
heed of evil company: the people that cried out, for very admiration, Hosanna,
blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord; Answ.
when they were gotten among the Scribes and Pharisees, had altered their note,
into Crucify him, crucify him. Secondly, thou must purge often, that is, thou
must, by mortification, be often in humbling thy soul, by confession and sorrow
to God in prayer; else fullness and satietie will ouer-charge this appetite,
for so must he do that has a stomach apt to be filled with ill humors: as
experience, both in body and soul shows. Thirdly, if thou would not
despise prophesying, thou must try all things, and keep that which is good;
which thou do if thou observe these two rules: 1. if in hearing such
Ministers as have either their hearts, or the doctrine unsound, thou separate
the precious from the vile: 2. If in hearing the best men, thou be especially
careful to keep that part of Doctrine, as did particularly touch thee, and so
was in a special manner good for thee. Fourthly, thou must look to thy self,
that the profits, pleasures, or lusts of the world, steal not away thy heart
from communion with God, in the means. Whoredom and Wine, and the cares of
this life, etc. will take away any man's heart Hose 4.11. Luke ^1.34.
. Fifthly, thou must exercise thy self in the rest of Gods Ordinances, else
disvse in one, will in time breed contempt of all, and God will not have all
the honor given to one of his ordinances; and does of purpose many times
withdraw his blessing, (which is the bellows of affection and estimation) from
one of his ordinances, because he will be sought in all.

Again, out of the Apostles terms, we may observe the great excellency of
the Gospel: for wit, it is a mystery most deep: for worth, it is riches: and
for credit, it is glory.

True knowledge, is a rich knowledge.
Riches.] Doct. The true knowledge of Christ is a rich knowledge. Hence the
Corinthians are said to be rich in knowledge 1 Cor. 1.5.
: and Paul compares it with, and commends it beyond, all earthly riches Phil
3.9.
: and it is so both in respect of the Object, which is CHRIST, the fountain of
all Treasure; and in respect of the nature of it, being a part of eternal life
John 17.3.
; and in respect of the effects, because it makes a man rich in grace. And it
appears by the contrary; for to be blind is to be poor, and naked, and
miserable Revel 3.17.
: and therefore they are far wide that think all this studying of the
Scriptures, Uses.
and following Sermons, Use 1.
will make men beggars; they remember not that to take the Gospel from
Jerusalem, was to leave their Houses, as well as Gods House, desolate Mat.
23.37.^^.39.
: and the want of the knowledge of GOD in the Land, was the cause the Lord
contended with them by so many judgments Hos. 4.1.2.
: and if any Nation under Heaven may avouch the truth thereof, this English
Nation may: for we may well say, the Gospel has been a rich Gospel unto
us: it has brought us Peace, and Prosperity within our walls, 2.
and abundance into all the quarters and corners of the Land. Hence also we
may gather a trial of our faith: for if we have faith, we are careful to
seek, and as glad to find, saving knowledge, as the carnal man is to find
his earthly wealth. Parents also may hence know which way to go about to make
their children happy, even by stirring up in their hearts the instruction and
nurture of the Lord.

Glorious.] Doct. This mystery is glorious; and it is so. First, if we respect
the original of it: it was begotten and conceived in the bosom of Eternity.
Secondly, if we respect the persons employed in the ministry of it, viz. GOD
himself, CHRIST, Angels, and the choice of men. Thirdly, if we respect the
effects: It brings glory to God; for upon the opening of the Book by the
Lamb, there follows Himnes to God Reu. 5.
. It brings a glorious rest to the hearts of Christians, when they are
satisfied in the assurance of the tidings of Gods love, and purged of those
unruly affections that so tormoiled their hearts before Esa. 1.10.
. Besides, the glorious privileges which after men are called out of
darkness, they enjoy in this maruailous light 1 Pet. 2.9.
. Finally, it shows a Christian the glory of Heaven: this should comfort Gods
Servants against the scorns of the world, and troubles of life. The Gospel
with disgrace and much want, is a great portion; and it matters not how we be
esteemed in the eyes of the world, if we be made glorious by the Gospel in
Gods eyes; and in the eyes of the Saints: they are glorious times when the
Gospel works openly in the life and power of it.

Nine Uses of the Doctrine of the calling of the Gentiles.
Among the Gentiles.] In the calling of the Gentiles, we may inform and
instruct our selves many ways.

First, it should settle us in the assurance of the truth of Gods promises.
Never any promises more unlikely: and besides, they lay dead for a long time.
That which Noah foretold, is come to pass* for laphet is persuaded to dwell
in the Tents of Sem Genesis 9.27.
. That sea of knowledge, which Esaias spoke of, is likewise gloriously
accomplished among the Churches of the Gentiles Esa. 11.10.
. Jeremy said the Gentiles should come unto God from the ends of the earth,
and it is fulfilled Ier. 16.19.
. The concourse to the preaching of the word, which Micha and Zachary foretold,
is likewise verified Mich. 4.1. Zach. 8.20.
.

Secondly, we may hence see that the word will make great alterations where it
comes.

Thirdly, that God is tied to no place nor people: if the Jews will not bring
forth fruits worthy of the Gospel, but despise it; the Lord will provoke them
to envy: even calling unto himself a people that sought him not.

Fourthly, that they that are last may be first, and that they that now are not
under mercy, may go to Heaven before us.

Fifthly, that as any people are more sensible of their misery without grace*
they more see the riches of their calling. The Gentiles that wallowed in sin,
and wickedness, see a wonderful glory in Religion, when by the Gospel they
are converted. And that may be the reason why Publicanes and sinners are so
deeply affected, and inwardly touched, when civil honest men are scarsely
moved with any sense of the need of their conversion.

Sixthly, their conversion may assure us, that none are so miserable but the
Gospel can make them happy.

Seauenthly, we may see cause to bewail the hardness of our hearts. Can the
Gospel conquer so mightily and effectually, these worlds of people, to the
obedience of faith, and such a tender sense of the glorious riches thereof: and
are our hearts no more melted and stirred within us? Though the Lord cry and
roar, and stir up himself in his jealousy, as a man of war, yet are we
deaf, and hear not; and blind, and see not.

Eyghtly, in that he says, that this mystery is glorious among the Gentiles,
it shows, that the Monarchy of CHRIST over these conquered Gentiles, is truly
glorious. Which may justly confound our Statists and Politicians, that can see
no glory but in earthly kingdoms.

Ninthly, let us that are abiects of the Gentiles, that have no true honor but
by Gods covenant, draw water with joy out of these Wels of Salvation Esa. 12.3.
: and lastly, our calling, that are Gentiles by nature, should make us in
compassion of the Iewish-nation, pray heartily for their restoring; since they
were cut off, that we might be grafted on Romans 11.
: and the Law came out of Sion, and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem Esa.
2.
.

Which riche^ is Christ in you.] Out of these words 4. things may be observed.

First, that there is one and the selfsame happiness, conferred by the Gospel
to all the faithful; the same I say, in nature and quality, though not the
same in quantity, the same spiritual meat, and the same spiritual drink;
the same GOD, and Father, the same CHRIST, and Savior* the same means, and
the same merits, the same graces, and the same glory. Which may serve for good
use. For if the Lord give us the same wages he did his best Servants, we
should strive to do the same work: we should bewail our sins with the
same sorrow, and watch over our lives with the same care, and abound in the
same fruits of righteousness, and live by faith in all trials and tentations,
as they did. And again, it may be comfortable for penitent sinners. For the
same God that had mercy on David, will confirm unto them (if they truly desire
his favor, and will forsake their own imaginations) by an everlasting
covenant, the sure mercies of David Esa. 55.1.4.8
. And if by faith we prove our selves the children of faithful Abraham, we
shall be blessed with Abraham Romans 4.24. Gal. 39* 2.
.

Christ the only true riches of the Christian.
Secondly, that Christ is the only true riches of the Christian. 2 Cor. 8.9.
Ephesians. 1, 7. and 2.7. and 3.8. Heb. 11.26. This may serve for diverse uses. 1. To
warn us, that we despise not poor Christians, seeing they are made rich in
the faith of CHRIST, and heirs of the Kingdom Iam. 2.5.
. They are truly rich men, though they be never so mean in the world. 2. Let
us all look to our selves, that we despise not this riches of the
bountifulness of God, when in the Gospel it is offered unto us: though we
may go on with the hardness of our not repenting hearts, yet if by speedy
repentance we prevent not our ruin, we shall heap up wrath against the day
of wrath, even the day of the declaration of the just vengeance of God upon
such obstinate and secure sinners Romans 2.4.5.6.
. 3. Let not worldly rich men glory in their riches Ier. 9.24.
, but rather use their outward riches as helps to further them unto this true
treasure: else their riches shall not shelter them in the day of Gods wrath
against the woes denounced against them Job 36.18.19 Luke 6.12.
. Lastly, would any man know some sure way how to thrive with great success in
these spiritual riches, let him then amongst other things, especially,
remember to pray hard: for the Lord is rich to all them that call upon him Romans
10.12.
.

Thirdly, CHRIST is in the faithful 2 Cor. 13.5.
: he lives in them Gal. 2.20.
: he dwells in them Ephesians. 3.18.
: but that this doctrine may be more fully understood, I propound five things.

1. How Christ is conceived into the soul of the faithful. 2. By what effects
he discovers himself to be there. 3. What they get by his coming. 4. What
intertainement they ought to give him. 5. Who have not Christ in them.
For the first, there is this order. First, God secretly gives Christ to the
believer, How Christ is conveyed into the faithful.
and the believer to Christ Romans 8.32. Esa. 9.6. John 17.6.
: then Christ begins to manifest himself, riding in the Chariot of the word 2
Cor. 2.14.
. The word (that before was a dead letter) receives life by the presence of
Christ, and that both in the Law and the Gospel. The law being made alive,
attacheth the particular sinner, and plays upon him the part of a Sergeant,
accuser, Iaylor, or Judge. And the sinner putting in bail, the Law brings him
to Christ, and will not let him go to another Gal. 3.24.
* then the Gospel gets alive, and crucifies Christ before his eyes Gal. 3.1.
: and propounds variety of sweet promises. The sinner being beaten, and
wounded almost to death before he would yield to the arrest of the Law; seeing
now whither he is brought, laments with unspeakable groans his own sins,
and the horrible torments he sees the Son of God put to, for his sake: and
at the same time the spirit of the Son working faith, a wide door is opened,
Christ enters in with invaluable joys, wrought in the heart of the sinner.

Now if you ask by what effects Christ discouers himself to be there. I
answer: How we may know that Christ is in our hearts.
there is a light (when Christ comes in) that gives the knowledge of the glory
of God, in the face of Christ 2 Cor. 4.6.
. And being ravished, they behold as in a mirror, the glory of God, and are
transformed into the same Image, the spirit of God, making them suddenly new
Creatures 2 Cor. 3.18.
. 2. The convert now finds a savor of the things of the spirit: and his heart
is bowed to be subject to the law of God Romans 8.5.7.
. 3. He is baptized with the fire of zeal, and holy affections, and desires
Math. 3.11.
. 4. There appears a battle and combat in the soul, and much Iusting on
either side, the spirit resisting with tears, and strong cries. 5. In this
combat Christ undertaking the battle, sends out by his ordinances, his
arrests, and apprehends one by one, every imagination that rebelliously puts it
self forward in the opposition, and exalts it self, and will not leave till
it be brought in subjection, so as the obedience of Christ may have the upper
hand 2 Cor. 10.5.
. 6. The spirit of the Son discouers himself as a spirit of supplications,
by which the tender infant begins to learn with holy desires, and secret
encouragements to speak in Gods language, and by prayer to make known his
griefs and wants, in the best manner, uttering his affiance in God, as a
Father Gal. 4.6.7.
. 7. The love of God, and of Christ, and of Gods Word, and Gods people, is shed
abroad in his heart, and it now constrains him to holy duties Romans 5.9. 2
Cor. 5.14.
. 8. The body grows dead in respect of sin, and the spirit is life for
righteousness sake Romans 8.10.
: resolution more and more increasing, both for reformation of sin, and new
obedience. 9. He finds himself proclaimed free, the prison door set open,
his fetters knocked off, his wounds made by the law healing apace, his debts
paid, and himself in a new world, inioying a true lubile. 2 Cor. 3.17. Esa.
61.1.2.
. 10. He lives thence-forward by the faith of the Son of God, for Salvation,
for Iustifica^ion, and for preservation Gal. 2.20. 2 Cor. 13 14.
. 11. The heavenly dewes of spiritual joys, often water and refresh his heart
in the use of the means, with delightful peace and tranquillity in his heart
and conscience Hos. 14.6. Romans 14.17.
. Lastly, in a holy couenanting with God, his daily purposes and desires are to
cleave unto God, deuoting and consecrating himself and his vowed sacrifices
unto God, in the mediation of Christ.

Thirdly, The benefits come by Christ dwelling in us.
the benefits he has by the inhabitation of CHRIST, are such as these. 1. GOD
is in Christ, reconciling him, not imputing his sins 2 Cor. 5.19.
. 2. Christ is made unto him Wisdom, Sanctification, Righteousness, and
Redemption 1 Cor. 1.30.
. 3. All the promises of Christ are to him, Yea, and Amen: having the earnest
given in the spirit, and the same sealed by the same spirit 2 Cor. 1.20.22.
. 4. He is not destitute of any heavenly gifts 1 Cor. 1.6.7.
, but has the seeds and beginnings of all saving graces. 5. The grace of
Christ shall be sufficient 2 Cor. 12.9.
against all temptations, by the power of Christ, that dwells in him, and as his
outward afflictions do abound, so shall the consolations of Christ abound also
2 Cor. 1.5.
. 6. Paul is his, and Apollo is his; yea, all things are his, as he is Christ's
1 Cor. 3.22.23.
, has his interest in all the means of salvation. 7. God has given him
Christ, how shall he not with him give him all other things also Rom 8.34.35.
? Finally, eternal life is the gift of God, in, and with Jesus Christ Romans
6.^3.
.

For the fourth, if you ask what you must do when you find Christ in your
hearts. I answer, if you live in the spirit, walk in the spirit Gal 5.24.
, let old things pass, and all things be new: for if you be in Christ Jesus,
you must be new Creatures 2 Cor. 5.16.17.
, the old conversation in times past will not now serve turn, but the old
man with his deceivable Iusts must be cast off Ephesians 4.22.
: Now thou must learn also to live by faith, and not by sense, and carnal
hopes as thou have done. For CHRIST keeps his residence in our hearts by faith
Ephesians. 3.16.
: for in that we henceforth live in the flesh, we must resolve to live by the
faith of the Son of God that lives in us Gal. 2 20
: being assured that in him are all the treasures of holiness and happiness.
And to this end thou must pray constantly to God, that thou may be able to
discern the length, breadth, depth, and height of this love and loving presence
of Christ Ephesians. 3.18.
. For otherwise it is a knowledge passes all natural understanding, and his
working in us is above all we can ask or think. Why should a Christian fear
any want, that carries a Mine of treasure within his own breast? And what a
shame is it that we grow not exceeding rich, seeing there is nothing but Faith
and Prayer will get it Romans 10.12.
? and why should we fear either tribulation, or persecution, pain, or
peril, seeing this is our victory, even of faith, and we are assured that in
the end we shall be in all these things more then conquerours through him that
loves us, and lives in us Romans 8.35.37.
?

Further, does the spirit of meekness, and of Christ, dwell in thee? Oh then,
above many things learn lowliness and humility Mat. 12.29.
, and if the Lord give thee a tender and a harmless heart, watch with all
carfulness that thou be not beguiled from the innocent simplicity that is in
Christ Jesus 1 Cor. 11.3.
. Lastly, thou must labor for inward sincerity, both of thoughts and
affections: thy heart is Christ's chamber of presence, where he always resides,
and as thou art careful to look to thy behavior because of man's presence, so
must thou much more look to thy heart, to keep it clean, and pure, and
chaste, and every day to dress it new, since the King of glory is come, in to
dwell with thee. Men would be very careful to look to that room where they
would give their best entertainment. Alas, we have no better room then our
hearts to welcome our Savior into: and shall not we keep them with all
diligence? woe be to us, if we tempt or grieve him by our inward uncleanness.

Seven ill signs that Christ dwells not in a man's heart.


First, when a man savors nothing but carnal things.

Secondly, when a man has, or desires, or esteems, or labors after no other
knowledge, but what is ordinary or natural.

Thirdly, when a man makes no conscience of inward sins.

Fourthly, when a man has no zeal in Gods worship, or holy affections toward
God, and his people, and his word.

Fifthly, when a man has not a faith that he can live by.

Sixthly, when a man never feels the heavenly joys of Christ in his heart.

Seauenthly, when a man can live in any gross sin, without trouble and
anguish of spirit or desire, and endeavor to break it off by repentance.

The hope of glory.] The riches of a Christian are either in this life, and so
it lies in the grace of JESUS CHRIST; or else in the world to come, and so it
is glory, even a most glorious and admirable excellency of felicity; which
shall have in it eternal righteousness, and the continual blessed vision of
God, eternal joys, and perfection of all things round about, everlasting
honor, and singular esteem, most sweet society with holy Angels, and blessed
Saints, with unspeakable peace, and rest; together, with that admirable
clarification of the very bodies of the righteous.

The consideration hereof should allure us to the continual thought of Heaven,
Uses.
and to a fervent affection after it, striving to express our hope of Heaven,
Phil. 3.21. Col. 3.1.2. Romans 5.3. 2 Cor. 4.18. 1 Pet. 4.13.
by a conversation that tends to glory and immortality: and to this end we
should be importunate with the Lord, to show us this glory by the spirit of
revelation, that we may be able profitably to solace our souls in the midst
of the tentations and afflictions of this world, with the serious contemplation
of our right, in Jesus Christ, to this admirable glory, that is to be revealed.
And the meditation of the glory poor Christians shall one day have, Iam. 2.5.
Romans 15.7.
should teach us to honor them now, and receive them into our hearty and
inward society, and to use them as such, as we are assured are the heirs of
more glory then this world is worth: and lastly, do we look for glory from
God in another world, then we should seek to glorify GOD in all things, with
all our might in this world.

Secondly, we may in these words note, that where Christ will glory in
another world, there he is the hope of glory in this world. A Christian holds
his glory by this Tenure. Now concerning this hope, many things have been
noted already upon the fourth verse, and upon the 23. verse: and therefore
thither I refer the Reader.

Verse 28. Whom we preach, admonishing every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.


IN this verse is contained the sixth general Reason, taken from the end and
profitable effect of the Gospel. If they continue constant, by the power of
the word, they will be made fit to be presented in some measure of ripeness
and perfection, unto God, in Jesus Christ.

Two things are in the verse to be observed: the Means, and the End: the
means is preaching; which is amplyfied by the parts of it, admonishing and
teaching, and by the manner of it, in all wisdom.

Whom we preach.] The reason why the Apostle falls so often into the mention
and praise of their preaching, is to rescue it from the contempt, under which
many times it lay disgraced.

There are four things may be observed here, The honor of Ministers.
which tend to express the honor of the ministry in this place. 1. They are
as it were, the Lords high treasurers, to dispense the riches of the kingdom
of Jesus Christ. And if such an office be in such request under earthly
Princes, what is it to be so honored of the Prince of all Princes? All the
world is beholding to the ministry, for they show that Mine of incomparable
Treasure; they dig it up; they offer it as spiritual Merchants: yea, the Lord
by them does as it were, particularly enrich all Christians. 2. This honor of
publishing the Gospel, is now taken from the very Angels, and given to them:
now We, not the Angels, preach unto you. 3. They have the best subject that
ever men had to entreat of: all other Sciences are base, in comparison of them,
they entreat of Christ, and grace, and glory, for ever by him: nay, 4. herein
differs preaching from all other relations whatsoever, that they do not preach
of Christ, but they preach CHRIST, that is, they give what they speak of.

And these three little words express diversely the duty of Ministers. The
duty of Ministers.
1. they must preach, that is plain. 2. they must preach diligently, which may
be gathered from the expressing of it in the present-tence: It was not a
sufficient excuse, we have preached as diligently as any in our young times,
or before we came to such preferment: No, this must be the comfort of a
Minister, and his continual plea; we do preach; not, we have preached. 3.
They must preach CHRIST, that is, that part of Divinity that concerns
Redemption, Justification, and Sanctification. 4. They must labor in
preaching, to express as much as lies in them, consent. Consent, I say, with
the Prophets, and Apostles, and consent with their fellow Ministers; We, not
I, there is one only truth for all Ministers to teach. 5. They must resolve to
win the honor and reputation of their ministry, for the work of it, not
from the reward of it: they must get their credit by preaching, not by their
great livings.

And from hence also is impliedly to be collected the just reproof of many
Ministers.

1. Such as preach not: The reproof of Ministers.
some would preach and cannot: some can preach but will not: some neither can
nor will, all shall be judged accordingly in the day of Christ, when he shall
call for an account of their Stewardship.

2. Such as preach, but not Christ; and these are not all of a sort: for 1.
some preach themselves, not Christ: or if they paint out Christ, it is in their
own likeness; so as under his name they commend themselves to the world. 2.
some preach, but it is beside Christ: in raking together men's inventions. And
surely, that so great affecting of humane authorities in preaching, when it is
with a kind of neglect of the search of Scriptures, as if they wanted wit or
power, cannot be justified. 3. Some preach, but it is against Christ: and such
are they that care not covertly to contradict the maine Doctrines of Christ, or
else bend themselves in their whole ministry to strengthen the hands of the
wicked, and make sad the hearts of the righteous.

Thirdly, such as preach Christ; but it is for envy: and to increase the bonds
and disgraces of others, or it is not diligently, or they preach not Christ
crucified, they teach not soundly the doctrine of mortification: or they preach
not Christ risen again: they teach so coldly, so barrainely, so
insufficiently, as if Christ were still in the grave: some there be that preach
of Christ, but it is chiefly of his Crown and Scepter: they are never kindled,
till they get into questions of Church-gouernement: they teach their hearers
the doctrine of reforming of Churches, when they had more need to teach them
how to reform themselves, and their households.

Admonishing and teaching.] There is some a-doe among Interpreters, to put the
difference between these two words. Some thus: Admonishing them that are out
of the way: teaching them that are in the way. Some thus: Admonishing them that
are ignorant: teaching them that have knowledge. Some thus: Admonishing those
that teach false doctrine, or contradict the truth: teaching such as are
desirous to learn the truth. Some thus: Admonishing about things to be done:
teaching about things to be known. Some thus: Admonishing to stir affection:
teaching to inform the understanding. But I think there is no necessity thus
to restrain the senses, so as it may be thus. Admonishing, that is, checking,
rebuking, warning the ignorant, wandering, wayward, slothful, dull, or profane
hearers both about things to be done and known: and teaching the rest the
whole doctrine of Christ.

Admonishing] From this word, these things may be observed.

First, Preachers must intend to rebuke sin, as well as to direct or comfort
Esa. 58.1. 2 Timothy 3.17. Heb. 9.10. Act. 20 31. 1 These. 5.11.
.

Secondly, men commonly never care for instruction, to grow in Christ, till
they be touched with the rebukes of the word for sin,

Thirdly, preaching may be said to admonish in diverse respects. 1. the very
sending of the Word preached to any place, is a warning to men to look to
themselves, and repent Act. 17.3.
: for then is the Axe laid to the root of the Tree Math. 3.11.
. 2. Because preaching does set before us such examples as do admonish 1 Cor.
10.11.
. 3. Because by it Christ secretly smites the earth, that is, the consciences
of carnal men, that are so glued to the earth Esa. 11.3.
: many a time is their hearts smitten, that the world little knows of; but
especially, by preaching are the public abuses in the lives of men publicly
reproved.

Every man.] Every one needs to be rebuked and admonished: and there is no man
nor woman but they are bound to stoop to the rebukes of the Word; whether they
be rich or poor, learned or unlearned, Jew or Gentile, young or old, in
authority, or under authority, converted or unconverted.

Uses.
The Use of all should be to teach us to know them that are over us, and
admonish us in the Lord These. 1.12.
. Now there are diverse reasons to persuade men to be willing to suffer
admonition: 1. It is noted to be in Gods account a beastly quality to rage, or
to be senseless, when we are rebuked: therefore David says, be not as the
Horse or Mule Psalm. 32.9.
. 2. If we will not be rebuked, sin lies at the door Genesis 4.12.
: and we know not how soon we may be arested with judgment. 3. Thou may
by stubbornness provoke the Lord so much, that in his very judgment he may
set a continual edge upon the word, to rebuke thy conscience, so as rebukes
being now turned into a punishment, the Lord may consume thee by them, eating
upon thy conscience as a moth Psalm. 39.11.
, till he have wearied thee with his secret buffets and terrors, and then in
the end, cast thee off into a reprobate sense. Woe is unto man, when the Lord
in his Word, or by his Spirit, sets himself to disgrace and vex him. 4.
Instruction is evil only to him that forsakes the way, and he that hates
correction shall dye Prou. 11.10.
. It is a brand of a scorner, to hate him that rebukes him Prou. 15.12.
, and a man that hardens his neck when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and cannot be cured Prou. 29.1.
. 5. The Lord may be so much incensed by sins of this kind, that at length
there will be no remedy: as he was by the Jews, 2 Chr. 36 2 Chronicles. 36.11.16.
. Lastly, great is the profit of admonition, to such as are wise to make use of
it, as these places show, Psalm. 141.5.6. Job 5.15.16.17. and 36.8. to 16. Prou.
28.13.

Teaching. What we must do to profit by preaching.
] This is the second part of preaching: this also is absolutely necessary: we
shall not partake of Christ's riches, or be fit to be presented to God without
it. Now that we may profit by public preaching, we must pray God by his
Spirit to lead us into all truth John. 14.
: and we must strive to be truly humble, for the Lord will teach the humble
his way Psalm. 25.9.
: and we must be much in confessing our own sins unto God in secret Psalm.
119.26.118. 2 Chronicles. 6.26.27.28.29.30.
; we must take heed of frowardness, in trusting to our own reasons, and
wills, and affections, and bring Faith to the word, glorifying it in what we
understand, and waiting upon God for what yet we want, mourning for our own
vnteachablenesse, and praying God to be with the mouth of the Teacher, opening
to him a door of utterance.

Every man.] This is again added, and not without reason: for it imports:
First, that every man is bound to live under some teaching and admonishing
Ministry. Secondly, that the people, yea, all Gods people, must be
instructed; contrary to the doctrine of the Papists. Thirdly, a right
persuasion of this, that the word will admonish and teach every man, would make
men more quiet under rebukes, and more willing to be taught. He says not,
you, but every man; to import that the word has not a particular quarrel at
some one man, but will find out the sins of all men, etc. We see by
experience that this is the sore in many minds, that either the Preacher
should meddle with no body, or not with such as they: he must not meddle with
great men, or not with Scholars and learned men, etc.

In all wisdom.] These words may be understood either of the subject matter
taught, or of the instruments, the Teachers; or of the effect in the hearers.

For the first: Why the word is called wisdom.
the word of God is well called wisdom, either as it is the pattern, or
Image, or resemblance of Gods everlasting wisdom, which from all eternity in
his counsel he had conceived: or as it portrayeth out Christ, who is the
natural wisdom of God: or as it unfolds the depths of Gods wise
providence, especially in his Church: or comparatively with all the forms of
Doctrine, conceived by the wisest of the Gentiles, or any carnal men.

For the second: What it is to teach in all wisdom.
these words may be referred to the Teachers, and then the sense is, they must
teach in all wisdom. They are called wise men Mat. 23.
, and that they may teach in all wisdom: first, they must be sure they teach
truth, and not errors: neither errors of Doctrine, nor errors of fact. It is
a grievous shame for Preachers out of the Pulpit, of purpose to disgrace some
kind of men to report of them things utterly untrue: especially to fail often
or usually this way. Secondly, they must labor to express the power of the
spirit, as well as a sound form of Doctrine. Thirdly, they must make use of
all opportunities and advantages, to work upon the people, when a door is
opened. To preach wisely, is to preach seasonably. Fourthly, they cannot preach
in the wisdom of God, if they hunt after and effect that which the Apostle
calls the wisdom of words 1 Cor. 1.17.
: or excellency of words 1. Cor. 2.1.
. Fifthly, there is a special wisdom in fitting doctrine to the state of the
heaters, to give every one his own portion.

Thirdly, it may be said to be in all wisdom, by effect in the hearers; as
being such a preaching as tends to work true wisdom in the hearers, as well
as other graces: a wisdom I say, by which they understand their own way
Prou. 14.8.9.15.16.
, and deny their own reason, in the things of God: becoming fools, that
they may be wise 1 Cor. 3.
, and know their days of peace, and accordingly gather in Summer Prou. 10.5.
, even in the seasons of Grace, while it is yet called to day; walking with the
wise Prou. 13.20.
, preferring spiritual things above all earthly, as things that are truly
excellent Phil. 1.10.
, carefully watching over themselves, and with all preciseness Ephesians. 5.15.
or circumspection; avoiding even the lesser evils, redeeming the time, with
all discretion, laboring to avoid all occasions of just offense; and lastly,
considering and providing for their latter end Deuteronomy. 32.23. Job 4. vlt.
.

Quest. Answer.
Quest. But can all wisdom be attained? Ans. He says, all Wisdom, either
comparatively with the knowledges of the heathen or carnal men: or else, by
all wisdom, he means all, necessary to salvation: or else he means
wisdom of all kinds, though not perfect in every kind.

We present our hearers to God in fine respects.
That we may present every man.] The hearers are said to be presented to God
by their Teachers in diverse respects: First, as they gather them out of the
world, into the profession of the Faith of Christ. Secondly, by framing and
working upon the hearts of their hearers, fitting them for Christ, even in the
presence of Christ, in his ordinances. Thirdly, by forcing men through the
strength of terror or comfort, to run and present themselves to God.
Fourthly, they may be said to do it in respect of their prayers, carrying the
suites of the people unto God. Fifthly, they shall present them at the day of
Judgment, when every Teacher shall say, Here Lord I am, with the Children thou
have given me.

Uses.
This should teach the people so to order themselves toward their Ministers,
that they might have encouragement to go to God, either for them, or with
them. To this purpose they should honor them, maintain them, obey them, show
their hearts and states to them, etc. And woe is unto them that despise Gods
Ministers, or discourage them; that hate their doctrine, or shun their
society: howsoever they account of them, yet these are the men should have
made way for them to Christ, they are of his Privy Chamber, and the dust of
their feet shall witness against contemners; yea, the time shall come, when
they would be glad to have them excuse them to Christ Luke 14.18.19
, but it shall not be granted. And Ministers also may from hence both be
comforted, considering the honor Christ has done them, and instructed to
look carefully to their Flocks, and to go to God for them, and by all means
to carry themselves, so as they that must once give an account for their People.

Perfect.] The word (...), is not in the Text in some Copies: but Stephanus
has it in, and it is acknowledged of the Translators and Expositors both old
and new; and therefore perfection cannot be denied, only the sense must be
inquired into.

How we are perfect.
The faithful are said to be perfect, first, comparatively with wicked men, or
the Gentiles unconverted: Religion will make a man perfect in comparison of
that which by nature man can attain unto: secondly, they may be said to be
made perfect, that is, to want nothing that is absolutely necessary for
salvation: thirdly, in righteousness, there is perfection; and so they shall
be absolutely perfect at the day of Judgment, and are already perfect in
respect of Justification* yea, this word here used, is given to the
sanctification of the faithful, and that two ways: first, as to be perfect
notes nothing else but to be a strong man in Christ, so, Heb. 5. vlt. Secondly,
as to be upright is accepted with God for perfection, by the benefit of the
Covenant of Grace, and the Intercession of Christ: Thus I think the very word
is used in these places, 1 Cor. 2.6. Phil. 3.15. James 1.17. Heb. 6.1.12.13.
Thus there is perfection is Doctrine, Heb. 6.1. In Faith, James 2.22. In Hope,
1 Pet. 1.13. In Love, 1 John 4.18. and John 17.23. In Understanding, 1 Cor.
14.20.

Quest. Quest.
But who is a strong man in Christ, or a perfect man, as here?

Ans. Answ.
First, he that is a strong man in Christ can forgive his enemies, and pray
for them, and do good to them, Mat. 5.48. Secondly, he does finish his work,
Twelve signs of a strong Christian.
he does not begin slightly, and work for a spirt, but perseuers. The word
used in that sense, John 17.4. Thirdly, he does hold a constant amity and holy
communion with Gods Children, 1 John 4.12. John 17.23. Fourthly, he has
renounced the world, denied himself, and consecrated his life to God, Romans
12.12. Fifthly, he will not be carried away with every wind of Doctrine, but
will acknowledge and follow the truth, with all constant vnmoueablenesse,
Ephesians. 4.13.14. Sixthly, he presses after perfection, forgets what is behind,
and looks to the mark of the high price of his calling, laboring to find
out the virtue of Christ's death and Resurrection, Phil. 3.13.14.15.10. 9.
Seauenthly, he has a Plerophory or full assurance of the will of God toward
him, Col. 4.12. Eighthly, he can digest the stronger Doctrines of Religion,
Heb. 5.14. Ninthly, patience has in him her perfect work, James 1.4. Tenthly,
he sins not in word, James 3.12. Eleuenthly, he keeps the word, 1 John 2.5.
Twelfthly, he is settled in the love of God, and has not fear but boldness, 1
Ioh. 4.18.17.

Every man.] Every true Christian might be made a strong Christian, which may
serve for great humiliation to such as having the means, have neglected so
great grace or measure of it. What knowledge, what power of gifts, what
abundance of fair fruit we might have had, and borne, if we had attended the
means, and seriously labored to redeem the time? we might many of us have
been Teachers, that now need to be Catechized.

In Jesus Christ.] All that supposed perfection that is out of Christ Jesus, is
not worth seeking after, whatsoever carnal men propound unto themselves,
concerning the worth of their own proiects, yet all in the end will prove
vanity that is not in Christ Jesus. And contrariwise all true perfection is in
Christ, which should so much the more comfort fearful Christians, seeing
their perseverance and the perfecting of grace begun, is in him, it is his
office to see it performed, and it will be accomplished by his power, as it is
given for his merits: and it should teach all the faithful to make much of
communion with Christ, to keep their hold, and not let go their confidence:
to preserve by all means tenderness, in an holy intercourse with Christ; for
if once Christ absent himself, the work of grace will stand still. Thirdly,
this shows how perfection can be attributed to Christians; namely, as in
Christ Jesus the evil of their works is covered by him, and what is good is
presented by him to the Father. Lastly, it should teach us in all our wants to
seek to Christ, in the use of all means appointed by him, to give or confirm
grace, waiting upon him with Faith and Prayer.

Verse 29. Whereunto I also labor and strive, according to his working that
works in me mightily.


IN this Verse is contained the seventh reason to enforce the Exhortation, and
it is taken from the great pains and strife of the Apostle, and the great
success the Lord was pleased to give to his pains.

Whereunto.] Some read [ in whom,] viz. in which Christ, that is, by whose
assistance, and blessing, and protection, etc. But I take it as it is here,
Whereunto: and so it may be referred either to the Exhortation in the three and
twentieth Verse, or to perfection in the Verse before. It is sure that the
perfection of Ministers labors should be the perfection of their hearers. It
is not enough to know how to preach Sermons, but it must tend not only to
beget men unto Christ, but also to build them up, which is a wonderful hard
work, and few Ministers are well skilled herein; and therefore Ministers
should much consult with God, and the people should pray constantly, and
earnestly for their Teachers.

Labor.] An effectual Ministry is a painful Ministry: the Lords work must
not be done negligently 2 Timothy 4.1.2.3. 1 These. 5.12.
; which may justify continual and daily preaching.

Quest. Answer.
Quest. But what needs all this preaching. Ans. It is exceeding needful; for
it is the ordinary means to save men's souls, and to beget Faith: and in as
much as there are daily still to be added to the Church, The need of daily
preaching.
therefore still the means is to be used, besides the secret judgment of God
in the indu^ation of the wicked, and leaving them without excuse. And as there
needs daily food for the body, so does there for the soul: and the Lord by
his word does heal the daily infirmities of his people Psalm. 107.
. Men think it needful the Exchequer should be open all the year, that their
Law-cases may be determined: and more need it is, the Lords spiritual
Exchequer should stand open for the daily determining of the Cases of
Conscience, which arise in the souls of Gods people: and we need a daily light
for our paths, and Lantern for our feet Psalm. 119.
. What shall I say? our very Calling needs direction out of the word, and our
crosses and temptations cause us to feel a daily need of the comforts of the
word to be applied to us: the godly are to be encouraged in well-doing, and
that continually; and we all need to be called upon daily, for reformation
and prevention of sin. Grace will not hold out without means, and Knowledge
must be increased; and a daily Ministry is of singular use to prepare us for
death, and weyne us from the world. These and many other be the reasons of
daily preaching, which should greatly reprove such Ministers as labor not,
either for want of gifts, or plurality of places, or distraction of business,
or for very idleness, or unwillingness to take pains. Woe unto them, for as
they provide evil for peoples souls, so they reward evil to their own
souls.

Note the Apostles ^ffection in observing Gods providence in the success of
his labors.
According to his working that works in me mightily.] Before I consider
particularly of these words, I note how feelingly the Apostle speaks of Gods
Providence, and with what affection he sets out the observation he made of it:
which greatly shames the most of us, that are so excessiuely dull in
apprehending, and so affectionlesse* in the thought of things. Now if any would
know what should be the reason we are so dull, and the Apostle so tenderly
sensible of Gods power and providence: I may answer, that a number of us are
not thoroughly persuaded of Gods particular providence: besides, he was
excellently acquainted with the word of God, and thereby, he saw lively, how
every promise or threatening came into execution: there could hardly any thing
fall out, but he remembered some Scripture that foretold or fore-shewed it.
And no question he knew how unable the means was to work without Gods
blessing, he knew what unfitness was in man: now we give too much to the
means. Further, it is certain, that such holy men as he, sought Gods
blessing by prayer, and therefore now they were affected, when they observed
what followed their prayers. And besides, the Apostle did walk with God in a
great measure of sanctity and holy care in all things to keep his communion
with God, whereas we are estranged by our corruptions, and for the most part
negligent in a daily walking with GOD. Lastly, he was humble, and not
conceited of his own gifts, and had consecrated himself, and devoted his life
to Gods glory, and therefore he was sensible of the glory of God in his
working providence.

But the maine particular Doctrine is, It is God that works in the ministry
of the Word.
that in the Ministry of the Gospel there is Gods special working: for it is
Gods work to raise up men that will labor in the Gospel, considering the ill
success in many hearers, and the infirmities in themselves, and the strange
discouragements from the world: and when the Lord has gotten him Laborers, it
is his working, that they can get fit Meditations and Affections into their
hearts in private, and fit utterance in public: it is not Art and Learning
alone that will furnish them with powerful matter. And thirdly, it is Gods
working to extend the power of the word to the hearers, so as the heat of it
go not out before it kindle in the peoples hearts. What shall I say? it is
Gods mighty working that the people are preserved and daily built up by the
word in Grace. All which should teach us to place our Faith, not in men but in
the power of God. And let wicked men be advised least by resisting the
Ministry they be found fighters against God: and it may be a great comfort to
a Minister to; for if God work for us and by us, it matters not who be against
us. And lastly, Christians should make much of, and be thankful for, and
greatly admire all Knowledge and Grace gotten from the word, for it was wrought
by the very finger of God.

FINIS.
THE ANALYSIS of the second Chapter.
TWo things are contained in this Chapter. First, the continuation of the
exhortation begun in the 23. verse, of the first Chapter, to v. 7. Secondly, a
dehortation, from verse 8. to the end.

The exhortation is continued two ways: First, By alleging more reasons, v.
1.2.3. Secondly, by prolepsis, removing sundry objections, v. 4.5.6.7.

There are three reasons to press them to care of perseverance in the doctrine
they had received: The first reason is taken from the care of the Apostle, for
the delivery and defense of the Gospel, in these words, I would you knew what
great fighting I have for your sakes, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many
as have not seen my face in the flesh, verse. 1.

The second reason is taken from the effects of the Gospel, and they are two:
1. consolation, that your hearts might be comforted: 2. love, and knit together
in love.

The third reason is taken from the adjuncts of the Gospel, and they are
three: First, certainty, unto all riches of full assurance of understanding.
2. Sublimitie, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God even the Father and
of Christ, v. 2. Thirdly, perfection in these words, in whom, or, in which are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, v. 3.

Thus of the reasons; The answer of objections follows.

Ob. 1. Why does the Apostle urge us so largely with this exhortation. Sol.
This I say lest any beguile you with enticing words.

Ob. 2. But how does he know our estates being absent. Sol. To this he
answers, that though he were absent in the flesh, yet he was present in
spirit,

Ob. 3. But is it charity to entertain surmises of us, Sol. He says he did
rejoice in their order and stedfastnes present; But he wrote this to warn them
to take heed.

Quest. Tell us at once what you would have us do. Answ. v. 6.7. two things are
to be done: the first concerns holy life, the second faith. Concerning holy
life, there is first a precept, walk on. secondly, a rule, after which that
precept is to be squared, viz. as ye have received the Lord Jesus Christ.
Concerning faith, there is first a precept, they must be rooted, built up, and
stablished. secondly, a rule, as they had been taught.

And thus of the exhortation: The dehortation follows, from v. 8. to the end.
There are three parts of the dehortation. First, he sets down the matter
from which he dehorts, v. 8. Secondly, he gives six reasons to confirm the
dehortation, from verse. 9. to 16. Thirdly, he concludes and that severally from
v. 16. to the end.

In the 8. verse he sets down three things from which he dehorts. 1. From
Philosophy, which he calls vain deceits. 2. From traditions of men. 3. From
the ceremonies of Moses, which he calls the rudiments of the world.

The reasons are, 1. because they are not after Christ, v. 8. 2. Because in
Christ there dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, v. 9. where note an
excellent description of Christ; In him, he notes his person; the Godhead, his
divine nature; corporally, his humane nature, and dwells, the union of both;
and for the measure, it is in all fullnes.

3. Because we are complete in Christ, without any of these things, v. 10. Here
note the persons, ye, the time, are, the benefit, complete, the author,
Christ, the limitation, in him.

4. Because we are circumcised without hands, and therefore need not
circumcision made with hands, and consequently no ceremonies. This reason is
propounded, v. 11. and confirmed by prolepsis, v. 12.

Concerning Circumcision without hands five things are to be noted. 1. the
persons, ye. 2. the time, are. 3. the manner, set down negatiuely, without
hands. 4. the form of it, affirmatively, putting off the body of the sins of
the flesh. 5. the efficient cause, the circumcision of Christ.

Ob. But it follows not we are circumcised without hands, therefore need not
circumcision with hands. Sol. It follows to us now in the new Testament,
because we have baptism in steed of circumcision with hands: we are buried
with Christ by baptism.

Ob. But was not Circumcision a more lively sign. Sol. It was not, which he
shows to be true, both in respect of mortification, buried with him, and in
respect of viui^ication, raised up together with him by baptism, which is
amplified by setting down what is required in them to whom baptism is thus
effectual, viz. the faith of the operation of God.

5. Because none of these can help us in misery, nor further to happiness,
when we want it, v. 13. The words in themselves expres a twofold estate of
Christians, First, what they are by nature, and so 1. they were dead in actual
sins. 2. they were in the uncircumcision of the flesh, in respect of
original sin. Secondly, what they were in the state of grace, 1. they were
quickened. 2. they were forgiven all their sins.

6. Because Christ has cancelled the Chyrographie that was against us, which
were these ceremonies, v. 14.15. concerning these, two things may be noted. 1.
what the ceremonies were in themselves. 2. how the Church was discharged of
them.

For the first, they were for honor, ordinances of God, for use, hand-writings,
for effect, they were against us.

For the second, Christ on the cross cancelled them, fastened them, and took
them out of the way: yea he spoiled the devils, and triumphed over them
openly, who had the power to serve execution for forfeitures, v. 15.

Thus of the reasons: the conclusion follows from v. 16. to the end. The
conclusion has three branches. For first he concludes against ceremonies, v.
16.17. Secondly, against philosophy, v. 18.19. Thirdly, against traditions, v.
20. to the end.

In the conclusion against ceremonies, note 1. the things which are named to
be abrogated, viz. the respect of meats and drinks. 2. of times, which are
threefold, 1. days. 2. months. 3. Sabbaths, these are the things, v. 16. The
reason is v. 17. because these are but shadows of things to come, and the
body is Christ.

In the conclusion against philosophy, note first the thing which in special
he reasons against, viz. Angell-worship. Secondly, the reasons by which he
condemns them that brought it in, 1. they did it hypocritically, under
pretense of humblenes of mind. 2. they did it ignorantly, advancing themselves
in things they never saw. 3. they did it proudly, rashly puffed up in their
fleshly mind. 4. they did it dangerously: their danger is laid down, and
amplified; Laid down in these words, not holding the head, amplified by a
digression into the praises of the mystical body of Christ, 1. for ornament,
furnished. 2. for union, knit together by joints and bands. 3. for growth,
increasing with increase of God.

In the conclusion against traditions, observe, first the matter condemned, why
are ye burdened with traditions, amplified by the kinds, touch not, taste
not, handle not, v. 21. Secondly, the reasons, 1. ye are dead with Christ, v.
20. 2. Ye are dead from the rudiments of the world, therefore much more from
traditions. 3. They are burdens. 4. The matter of them is light, and vain,
and idle, v. 21. 5. They all perish with the using. 6. They are after the
commandments and doctrines of men, v. 21.

Ob. But there seems to be a depth in them. Sol. He confesses that they have
a show of wisdom, and that in three things. 1. In voluntary religion. 2. In
humblenes of mind. 3. In not sparing the body. But yet he censures them two
ways. 1. It is but a show all this. 2. It withholds the honor due unto the
body, neither have they it in any estimation to satisfy the flesh. v. 23.

THE METAPHRASE upon the second CHAPTER.
VERSE 1. FOr I would ye knew what great fighting I have for your sakes, and
for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my person in the flesh.
FOr I would ye were thoroughly informed of it what great care, conflict, strife,
and fighting I have for your sakes, and for them of Laodicea, and for such as I
never knew, but only hear of to be such as embrace the Gospel which we
preach, and to this end I tell you of my care and fighting so to move you to be
much the more resolute in perseuering in the faith and hope of the doctrine you
have received.

Verse 2. That their hearts might be comforted and they knit together in love,
and in all riches of the full assurance of understanding to know the mystery
of GOD even the Father and of CHRIST.
Great are the benefits which you and all those that believe in your parts
receive from our pains in the Gospel, for hereby both your hearts are
comforted with true refreshings, and besides you are hereby knit, one to
another, and established in brotherly love; and as the benefits of the adjuncts
of the Gospel should much move you to stick still to it if you consider how
rich GOD has made you, in the infallible and full persuasion of understanding
which you have felt, and withal what admirable desires, there are in the
doctrine of the Gospel concerning GOD the Father and CHRIST.

Verse 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

Verse 4. And this I say least any should beguile you with enticing words.

Verse 5. For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit,
rejoicing and beholding your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in
Christ.

Verse 6. As ye have therefore received CHRIST JESUS the LORD, so walk ye in
him.


Or lastly, if you consider the perfection of the doctrine of the Gospel either
as it conteines the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, or as it shows us
CHRIST, in whom are all admirable perfections of all sorts of rich knowledge.

Now if you ask me why I am so tedious in urging these things, I answer it is
only for fear least any should by plausible and probable inticements of speech
beguile you from the simplicity that is in CHRIST.

And if you say I know not your estate, I answer though I be absent from you
in the flesh yet I am present with you in the spirit, and if you think that
this discourse implies that I dislike you, know that I do truly rejoice to
hear of your good order of life, both public and private, and how steadfast
your faith in CHRIST is.

Now if you ask me at once what is the sum of all I would have you to do, I
answer that as concerning holy life, I would have you walk on in the same
manner as ye have received CHRIST hitherto.

And for matter of faith, Verse 7. Rooted and built up in him, and stablished
in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.

Verse 8. Beware lest there be any man that spoil you through Philosophy and
vain deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ.


I would have you by all means to seek to be further rooted and built up and
stablished in the assurance of faith accordingly as you have been taught, but
by any means remember to abound in all thankfulness to GOD* for the happy
estate you are in: And thus for what I have to exhort you to in matters of
doctrine.

Now I must enter upon matter of dehortation, take heed, least any man of what
gifts or profession soever, make a prey of your souls, and carry them away as
a spoil: And in particular look to it in three things, first in Philosophy,
not simply in the doctrines of Philosophy, but in such devises, and vain
fancies, as under color of such speculation, or from the authority of
Philosophers are brought in by any. Secondly, take heed of traditions of men.
And thirdly, of the ceremonies of Moses, which were things at first brought in
to be as the A.B.C. or alphabet to train up the people of GOD in the
principles: But now this and the other are not to be regarded for many reasons,
whereof the first is, they are not after CHRIST.

Besides there is such an infinite fullness in CHRIST, Verse 9. For in him
dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodily.

Verse 10. And ye are complete in him who is the head of all principality and
power.


by reason of the divine nature that dwells by an inexpressible union in the
humane nature, that we need not seek to any thing else but only unto CHRIST.

And you your selves in CHRIST have all compleatnes, and sufficiency by reason
of your mystical union with him, and such is the fulness of CHRIST, that the
very Angels those excellent and potent creatures, are subordinate to him, and
acknowledge him as their head, which by the way shows that they are not to be
worshipped.

And to speak yet more expressly what should you do with circumcision or any
part of the law ceremonial, Verse 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh by the circumcision of CHRIST.

Verse 12. In that ye are buried with him through baptism, in whom ye are
also raised up together through faith of the operation of GOD, which raised him
from the dead.

Verse 13. And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of the
flesh has he quickened together with him, forgiving you all your trespasses.

Verse 14 Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances, that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross.


seeing in CHRIST ye have received that which was signified by circumcision;
for in him you are circumcised not with the hands of men, as they were under
the law, but by the finger of the spirit of GOD: which stands in the
mortification of that body of sins, which ye were guilty of while ye were
in the flrsh, and this ye have by the virtue of CHRIST'S circumcision.

And if you say that Abraham had the circumcision without hands, and yet was
circumcised in the flesh, I answer that we have baptism instead of that
circumcision, and therefore need it not: and the rather because baptism does
so lively set out our spiritual burial and resurrection with CHRIST, which
all they attain unto that have the faith of GODS operation, that is, that can
believe that which GOD by his power will do what he promises in baptism,
grounding their faith upon the resurrection of CHRIST from the dead.

And further this should move you to disregard those things, because they
neither could help you, when you were miserable, nor confer the benefits upon
you, which you enjoy without them, for in your estate of nature you were dead
in actual sins, and in respect of original sin you lived in the
uncircumcision of the flesh: and since you were quickened by true regeneration
you have obtained the forgiveness of all your sins, and therefore what would
you have more from these things.

Lastly, the ceremonies though they were ordinances of GOD at the first, yet
they were hand-writings against us, and now CHRIST has cancelled them, and
fastened the obligation upon the cross, and so taken them out of the way, and
therefore you should never more have mind to them.

Verse 15. And has spoiled the principalities and powers, and has made a show
of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same cross.

Verse 16. Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect
of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days.

Verse 17. Which are but a shadow of things to come: but the body is in Christ.

Verse 18 Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you by humblenes of mind,
and worshipping of Angels, advancing himself in etc.

Verse 19. And holds not the head, whereof all the body furnished and knit
together by ioints and bands, etc.

Verse 20. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the
world, etc.

Verse 21. As, touch not, taste not, handle not.

Verse 22. Which all perish with the using, and are after the commandments and
doctrines of men.

Verse 23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom, in voluntary religion
and humbleness of mind, and in not sparing the body, neither have they it in
any estimation to satisfy the flesh.


And the rather because our Savior has not only cancelled them, but he has
spoiled the Devils which had power to execute the forfeitures of these bonds, I
say both in himself on the cross, and in us daily he has and does spoil
them, and triumph over them, and make an open show of them, so as we are freed
from the danger of their arrests.

Now therefore I come to the conclusion which I direct distinctly, first,
against the ceremonies, then against philosophy, and lastly against
traditions. First, I say let no man condemn you, (or if they do care not for
it) condemn you I say for any of the ceremonies, whether it be about meats or
drinks, or about the ceremonial days, or months, or sabbathes, that were
required in that law.

For these and all the rest were but shadows of things to come, and now in
CHRIST we have the substance and body of them.

The like I say against philosophy and in special against Angel worship. let
no man bear rule over your consciences, for they that bring in this doctrine
do it hipocritically upon pretense that it tends to make men humble, and they
do it very ignorantly, for they never saw the kingdom of Angels, nor what is
done in heaven, and most proudly do they advance themselves, swelling in the
vain conceits of their fleshly minds.

Yea they that bring in this doctrine fall from the foundation, and hold not
CHRIST, who is the head of the Church, of whom every member does depend, and
the whole body is excellently furnished, and indissolubly knit together, and
increase with the increasing of GOD.

And lastly for traditions I wonder at it you should be clogged with them,
seeing you are delivered from them in the death of CHRIST, and they are not so
honorable as the ceremonies of Moses, but are vile burdens.

Think but with your selves, how vainly they impose upon you, when they say,
touch not, taste not, handle not.

Besides all these are perishable things, and fit nothing at all to eternal
life, and further they are evidently the common documents and devises, and
doctrines of men, that never had warrant in the word of GOD.

It is true they find out many fair pretenses to blind men's eyes withal, as
that hereby we show special zeal to GOD in doing more then he commands, and
these things seem to tend to humility and the taming of the flesh, but all
these are but shows, and therefore naught whatsoever they say, because they
yield not a due respect even to the body of man.

CERTAIN OF THE choicest and chiefest points handled in the second CHAPTER.
HOw many ways faithful Ministers sight. fol. 3. The comfort comes by the
word with the answer of many objections. 5.6. Causes why many ^inde no more
comfort in the word. 7. Seven inconveniences of an uncomfortable heart. 7. The
differences, author, bond, seat, effects, objects and properties of love, and
rules for preserving it. 7.8. Four sorts of disturbers of the Church. 8. Seven
things of which we should be assured. 9. Seven signs of full assurance, and
what we must do to get it. 9. Wherein our spiritual riches lie. 10. An answer
to the vbiquitaries. 11. What Pithanologie is. 13. Who are deceivers. 14. Rules
to prevent beguiling. 14. Of order in the common wealth, and the Church, and in
the family. 15.16. Ten helps of order in conversation. 16. Rules to bring our
lives into order. 17. Nine lets of order. 17. Of steadfastness of faith. 18 The
properties of a man steadfast in faith. 18. The causes of unsettledness. 18. The
means of steadfastness. 19 The vnconueniences of an unsteadfast faith. 19. How
weak faith may be discerned, and the causes of unsettledness or weak faith,
and remedies. 19. Causes of faith weakened, signs, and remedies. 20. Causes of
the loss of steadfastness. 20. The effects of falling away. 20. Remedies for
the loss of steadfastness. 21. The privileges of such as receive Christ. 24.
Rules for perseverance to be observed in our first conversion. 24.25. What a
free spirit is. 26. Signs of a true heart. 26. Rules for perseverance to be
looked to after our calling. 26.27. How philosophy becomes vain deceit. 30.
Of traditions in the Church of the Jews and of the Gentiles, and in the times
of the fathers in the primitive Church and in popery. 31.32. Of the abr^gation
of the law. 33. Morrall, i^diciall, and ceremonial in what respects. 34 How
the divine nature can be in the humane, and how Christ was like us, and how
unlike. 36 Distinctions of unions. 37. Gifts supernatural and natural in
Christ. 38. A threefold wisdom in Christ. 39. Of the power of Christ. 39.
Christians are complete both comparatively and positiuely, and that four
ways. 40. The compleatnesse of the weak Christian. 41. The compleatnesse of
the strong Christian. 41. Of Angels, as they are principalities and powers. 42.
The benefits Angels have by Christ as their head. 42. A twofold circumcision.
43. Of circumcision in the flesh, what is signified by it, and the ends of it,
and why it was abolished. 43.44. Eight reasons of the hard kinds of phrase or
speech in Scripture. 44. What circumcision without hands is. 45. The time of
circumcision without hands. 46. Six defects of the carnal Isralite. 47. The
practices of the flesh, and courses to tame it. 47.48. Why our sins are
called a body of sins, verse. 11. How many ways sin is put off, verse. 11.
Of the circumcision of Christ. verse. 11. Ten reasons why Christ was
circumcised. verse. 11. Christians buried in three respects while they live.
verse. 12. The degrees of mortification, and what the burial of sin is. verse.
12. Christ raises men up diverse ways. verse. 12. Of the resurrection of
graces. verse. 12. Of the resurrection of duties. verse. 12. Of Baptism. verse.
12. What faith has to do in baptism or in sanctification. verse. 12. Of the
operation of God, and in what things we have warrant to bear our selves upon
the power of God. verse. 12. A fourefold death, and of death in sin. verse. 13.
Of the uncircumcision of the flesh. verse. 13. Of quickening and our new birth,
the means, necessity, prerogative and signs of it. Of forgiveness of
sins. verse. 13. Of the handwriting that was against us, and the cancelling,
of it. v. 14. Of a great combat. verse. 15. Of the battle between Christ and
the Devils. verse. 15. Of Christ's victory and triumph over the Devils both in
himself and in us. 72.73. Of ceremonies, and how they were shadows; of
meats, and days, and sabbaths. 74.75. Of the Christian race, and lets in
running. 77. Rules to be observed concerning this race of godliness. 77. About
worshipping of Saints and Angels against the Papists in three things. 78. Of
the pretense of humbleness of mind. 79. Of the diverse kinds of ignorance.
80. How men please themselves in their own devises. 81. Of pride, and how it
is in vain in three respects. 82. The privileges flowing from our union with
Christ. 84. Wherein the Church grows. 85. Three things that make men grow.
86.
CHAPTER II.
VERSE I. For I would ye knew what great fighting I have for your sakes, and
for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my person in the flesh.


THe exhortation begun in the 23. verse of the former chapter, The order of the
first part of this chapter.
is continued in the first 7. verses of this chapter: wherein the Apostle
propounds three other reasons for confirmation, and answers diverse secret
objections. The reasons are in the three first verses, and the answer to the
objections in the four next.

The first reason is taken from the care the Apostle took for them in the
work of his ministry, in this verse. The second reason is from the effects
of the Gospel, viz. consolation and love, verse. 2. The third reason is from
certain adjuncts of the Gospel, viz. certainty, sublimitie, and perfection,
verse. 3.2.

Ob. But what needs all this a do, might some of the Colossians say? Why are
we thus tediously urged, and with so many reasons?

Sol. verse. 4. This I say lest any man beguile you.

Ob. But you are a stranger to us, and absent from us, how know you our estate?

Sol. verse. 5. Though I am absent in the flesh, yet I am present with you in
the spirit.

Ob. But it is uncharitableness to entertain such conceits of us, as if we
were a people corrupt and fallen away.

Sol. verse. 5. For your present condition, I rejoice in your order, being fully
assertained of your present steadfastness of faith in Christ. But I write this
to keep you as you are, that you may not be drawn away.

Quest. But what would you advise us? Tell us briefly, and at once, what you
would have us to do.

Answ. As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him, etc. v. 6.7.

Thus we see the order and general meaning and dependence of all these first
7. verses.

In this first verse the Apostle would stir up the Colossians to constancy
in the Gospel received, by showing his great care and daily strife for them
and their good.

It is not unlawful in some cases to praise a man's self; the Apostle here
does it: nor is it unlawful to use rhetorical insinuations, to win and
excite affection in the people. Paul would persuade by showing his own care
for them. But sure it is, Ministers shall hardly ever profit the people, or
powerfully persuade with them unto constancy in receiving and retaining the
care of their doctrine, unless they show their own care in teaching, and
their own love to the people they would persuade.

What a great conflict.] Paul shows his great love to them: he fights for
them, and this he did when in all likelihood he should employ his cares for
himself, being now in such straits, as it were in the midst of death, and
the rather they should be affected with this proof of his love in them,
because they were absent from him.

For.] This for shows an aitiologie; for it points to a dependence upon the
last verse of the former chapter: there he had showed what pain he took, and
how mightily the Lord had showed his power in working through his ministry.
Now he tells of a fight and combat, which evidently imports, that when the
Gospel works upon men's consciences, and the ministry of Gods servants
proves effectual and powerful, there will follow some stir and opposition,
there will be a conflict and strife.

Yet hence also may be gathered, that the grace of the Gospel is excellent,
and worthy the having, else there would not be so much ado to hinder it.

What great conflict or fighting.] (...) the original word is diversely
rendered: some render it care or solicitude, some danger; sometimes it signifies
a race, as Heb. 12.1. sometimes it signifies only to strive: but here and in
diverse places it is fitly rendered a conflict, or fighting, or wrestling. But
leaving the signification, the matter is plain, that if Ministers execute
their offices sincerely, they must look for a battle and opposition. Indeed
the life of faithful Ministers is but a continual battle; they must look to
suffer and be shamefully entreated 1 Thessalonians. 1.2.
: if they be bold to speak the Gospel of God, it will be with much
contention: if they discharge the trust God has put in them, not pleasing men,
but God that tries the hearts Verse 3.4.
, war they must, this is their comfort, it is a good warfare 1. Tim. 1.18
, and a good fight 1. Tim. 4 7.
: to undertake the ministry, it is to go a warfare 1 Cor. 9 7 12. Enemies to
sincere preaching.
.

If any ask how this fight should grow: I answer: First, it is manifest the
devil is the enemy of all goodness, and will cross the Gospel what he
can: Besides, the flesh both in Ministers and people will lust and strive
against the spirit; a Minister should have something to do to beat down his
own flesh 1. Cor. 9.27.
. And in the Apostles times Tyrants with their civil or rather uncivil sword
did fight against the truth: so did heretics with the tares and poison of
their infectious doctrine: so did the Infidels also with slanders and outrages.
And though these cease, yet opposition will rise from other sorts of men: for
in general all men of wicked life will be contrary to sound doctrine 1. Tim.
1.10.
; and particularly both worldlings and epicure, do in all places discover
their dislike of the faithful and diligent preaching of the Gospel, in as
much as the word would restrain the excess of their pleasures and cares of
life; yea the civil honest men of the world, though they give heaven good
words, and can be long more quiet then the former, yet let once their inward
corruption be ransacked, or their special evils powerfully unmasked, they
will become like horses and mules, they will strike at all that crosses the
praise of their quiet estate. And for temporizers, it is wonderful evident,
that in all places they hold it a point of their care, to see that sound
preaching be disgraced. For howsoever by Gods singular mercy amongst us in
this Nation, by the laws of the Kingdom, preaching is both established and
protected with honor, yet because in practice people of all degrees tend to
liberty, and many great ones like not that preaching that should discover or
restrain the grievous excesses of the time: hence it is that such as serve the
humors of men, and run in the current of profaneness, do every where take
all advantages to disgrace painful and godly Preachers and preaching. Besides,
such is the hellish spite and rage of Papists and popish persons in all
places, that in imitation of their holy father, who is noted to oppose and
exalt himself 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
, they, especially the locusts among them are as horses prepared to the battle
Revel. 9.
, as soon as the Gospel begins in any place to be sincerely taught. Lastly,
this opposition many times is made by corrupt teachers, men that either are
poisoned with unsound opinions, or otherwise be of corrupt and ambitious
minds, as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so do these resist the truth 2.
Tim. 3.8.
, and withstand the words of faithful men, and do much evil 2. Tim. 4 14.15.
, these by cunning craftines he in wait to deceive Ephesians. 4.14.
. So that there are 12. opposites, that set against the sincerity of the
preaching of the Gospel.

Now if any ask how Paul, How many ways faithful Ministers fight.
and so every faithful Minister does fight against these: I answer, that as
the adversaries are diverse, so their sight is diverse also. For against their
own flesh they fight, by renouncing the world, and the care or confidence in
worldly hopes, making profit and credit stoop to the calling of God.

2. Against the temptations of Satan and the many objections by which he
labors to discourage or hinder them, they fight by care, that is, by a daily
study, deui^ing how to advantage the good of the Churches, deuoting their best
desires for the peoples good.

3. They fight by apology and just defense, and so both against corrupt
reachers, and the calumnies and slanderous reproaches of the wicked.

4. They fight against the corruptions and abuses of the time, by reproves and
the denuntiation of the threatenings of Gods word. 5. They wrestle and fight
even in prayer to God, Col. 4.12.
and so they fight by complaining against the injuries of wicked men, or else
by striving with God himself to overcome him by importunity. 6. They fight
even by their sufferings: they win many battles by their very patience, and
faith in affliction, by enduring the fight of affliction.

The consideration of this fight, may first awaken careless Ministers, in as
much as they proportion out such a course of preaching as they can escape
blows, it gives just cause of suspicion that they are combined with the
enemy, in that they are let alone and not opposed.

Again, this may both sound an alarm, to all faithful Ministers to arm, and
prepare for a fight: and it may comfort them, in that this has been the case
of the best of Gods servants. And withal the people may learn how to be
affected to their godly Teachers: do your Ministers so many ways labor and
strive for you, and shall not you strive for them, by apology, prayer, care,
and all ways of just defense?

I would you knew] Q. Why was the Apostle so desirous they should know, his
care, patience, fighting etc. for them? Answ. There might be great cause of it.
1. To remove all conceit that he did not respect them. 2. To encourage them to
constancy in that doctrine for which he suffered so much. 3. It might arm
them with patience to suffer, if they should be called to it, considering his
example. 4. That so they might be stirred up the more earnestly to pray for
him. In general this shows that it is not enough, that we love one an other,
but we must manifest it, especially affection between the Minister and his
people should not be concealed.

For you and for them of etc.] There were two sorts of godly men in the
Apostles times. 1. such as were converted mediately by the Apostles, in their
own persons. 2. such as were converted by others sent of the Apostles. The
Apostle here shows he loves these latter as well as the former.

There is a communion with the absent members of Christ, even with such as we
never saw in the face, a communion I say in the same head, and in the same
spirit, and in the same privileges, of a regenerated life. And we see here we
are bound to desire and endeavor the good of the absent Saints as well as the
present, we may fight for the absent, by prayer, by apology, by our
sufferings, and by using the means of consolation or information, yea herein
is a lively trial of our true love, to the brethren, if we can love them we
never saw, for the grace of God we hear to be in them.

For them of Laodicea.] Though there were many Cities of this name, yet I
think this is the Laodicea mentioned Revel. 3. If the estate of these
Laodiceans be well marked as it is there described, we may observe, That in
matters of religion and Gods worship, they were neither hot nor cold, That they
thought they had as good hearts to God as any, that they were in love with no
saving grace, that they were utterly ignorant of the doctrine of their misery,
that they would take no pains either about justification or sanctification,
etc. yet no doubt God had his remnant among these, Christ was Amen in this
Church, he did faithfully perform his promises, and they were such as by a new
creation of God were begotten again, even amongst so careless a multitude.
The general security of a people, does not simply dissolve the covenant with
a people, and the Gospel is with all care to be taught, though but the tithe
of men be wrought upon by it.

And for such as never saw my face.] Two things may be here further noted.

1. That we have the profit of the prayers and holy endeavors of such as we
never saw in the flesh.

2. That it is a great benefit to enjoy the presence, of those that are eminent
in Gods service, for that is employed in the words. Certainly it is one thing
should make us willing to die, because then we shall see the Worthies of the
Lord, face to face; if so much grief, Act. 20. because they should see Paul's
face no more, then what joy shall it be when we shall sit down in the kingdom
of heaven, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

VERSE. 2. That their hearts might be comforted and they knit together in love,
and in all riches of the full assurance of understanding to know the mystery
of God even the Father and of Christ.


In the beginning of this verse is contained the second reason, taken from the
effects of the Gospel, which are two: the first, consolation, the second,
establishment of their hearts in brotherly love; the rest of the words of this
verse belongs to the third reason, as shall appear afterward.

This is the fruit of the care and earnest strife of godly Teachers in their
painful labors of the gospel, that it breeds much comfort in the hearts of
Gods people, and likewise greatly confirms them, and settles them in the
mutual love one of an other: it knits their hearts together. And contrariwise
we may generally here note the hurt and mischief that false and corrupt
teachers bring upon men. They hinder the consolation of Gods people, in that
they draw them away from God the fountain of all consolation: and likewise
they withdraw them from the society and fellowship with the Saints. But this
is but general. I consider distinctly of each of these effects.

That their hearts might be comforted.]

Doctrine 1. An vnregene rate heart is a comfortless heart.
The people whose hearts are not effectually wrought upon by the gospel, are
void of the consolations of God. They are in comfortles distress; a natural
heart is a comfortles heart; and they must needs be without comfort, for they
are without God and Christ, and the promises, and communion with the godly,
which are the wells of comfort: besides by reason of the veil of ignorance,
their souls sit in darkness: and what comfort can they have in such a continued
spiritual night of darkness? neither will the disorder of their affections,
passions or lusts, suffer their hearts to enjoy any true ease or rest, or joy,
and how can comfort dwell, where evil angels have their throne? the powers of
hell prevail in every child of disobedience: and the joys of the holy Ghost
are altogether restrained from them, neither can there arise any true
consolation from outward things, for in their own judgments most an end they
are at a want of contentment, they are daily fretted with the interruptions
befall them: and vanity and vexation of spirit, are the inseparable companions
of earthly things, or if they were not, what were the possession of all things,
if they be set before the thoughts of death or Gods wrath, or the last
judgment, or hell? Imagine a man driven out of the light by devils, where he
should see nothing but his tormentors, Note.
and that he were made to stand upon snares or grennes with iron teeth ready to
strike up, and grind him to pieces, and that he had gall powered down to his
belly, and an instrument raking in his bowels, and the pains of a traveling
woman upon him, and an hideous noise of horror in his ears, and a great giant
with a spear, running upon his neck, and a flame burning upon him round
about, do you imagine this man could be solaced in this distress, with
bringing him strawes or trifles to play withal? Alas, alas, this is the estate
of every wicked man, if he had eyes to see what belongs unto him, and what is
his danger, as these places show, whence these comparisons are taken, Job
18.18.7.8. and 20.24.15. and 15.20.21.26, 30. certainly heaven and earth shall
pass away before one jot of these miseries shall be removed out of the way so
as they should not fall upon wicked men being impenitent: and alas what then
can outward things do unto them? Oh then shall not men be warned and awaken,
and stand up from the dead that Christ may give them light? and shall not our
bowels turn within us, to think of this comfortles distress of so many
thousand souls? And will the rebellious world still rise up against the
messengers of God, that give them warning of their miseries? shall he still be
made to sin in the word, and be taken in a snare, that reproves in the gate?
Oh the inexpressible senselessness and slumber that possesses the hearts of
some men! But I come to the second doctrine.

This is a maine end of the Gospel to bring men to true consolation and
contentment. Doct. 2. The Gospel brings a man the true consolation.
The Gospel brings joy, because it brings knowledge, which refreshes the
mind, as the light does our senses, it comforts as it reviues Gods favor in
Christ: how can it be but comfort, when it gives the Spirit, which is the
Comforter: and it is a daily refreshing against the guilt of sin and the
afflictions of life, it shows mortality and the hope of glory to come; it
discouers the mines of treasure that are in Gods promises, and it shows us
also our right in earthly things, as it is conferred upon us in Christ.

The use is first for confutation, Uses.
it does not make men desperate and melancholy: but contrariwise it eases and
solaceth the hearts of men.

2. All that are in any distress either inward or outward, may here be
directed whither to go for hearts ease and comfort, viz. to the word, and
though any use of the word in sincerity has much life, yet is the power of
the word most available in the sincere preaching of it. In the 19. Psalm,
this is one evident fruit of the word, that it rejoices the heart: Now if we
seriously consider the praises of the word in that place, we shall perceive not
only that this truth is maintained, The solace that comes by the word, with the
answers to diverse objections Psalm. 19.
but many objections are answered too: only this we must know, that where the
word has this effect, it must first convert us to God, for to the unregenerate
mind, it does not so work: but where men's hearts are turned to God, it is
perfect, it is of excellent and exquisite use, it is good for all occasions, it
will direct in all our ways, and comfort in all distresses.

Ob. But may a man trust upon it, if he subject himself to the word, and wait
upon God in it, that he shall be directed and comforted?

Sol. Yes, for the testimonies of God are sure, they never fail.

Ob. But might one say, it may be great learned men might find so much good by
it, but alas I am unlearned, and simple. Sol. It makes the simple wise. The
word can help the unlearned as well as the learned.

Ob. But can it be that the word should fit my turn, to serve for my
particular occasions, of need, of direction and comfort? Sol. Yes, the statutes
of the Lord are right, and out of the fitnes they have to our estates, they
greatly rejoice the heart.

Ob. But I am much troubled with evil thoughts, and continual infirmities,
and weaknesses, besides many outward faults. Sol. The word of the Lord is pure,
it is so by the effect, it will make thee pure, it will purge out those evils,
and greatly help thee against these corruptions, that molest, and trouble, and
annoy thee.

Ob. But I cannot tell how to do to order my course for hereafter, if I were
now comforted. Sol. It gives light to the eyes: it will teach us what to do.

Ob. But yet there are many evils that I am by nature so addicted to, or by
custom so entangled in, that I fear God will never take any delight in me
etc. Sol. The fear of the Lord is clean: That word of God which tells us how
to fear God, is clean by effect, it will pull down and master any sin, and
cleanse our hearts and lives of it.

Ob. But how may I know it will work this in me, though others have found it
so: because I know not how I shall persevere and hold out?

Sol. The fear of God endures for ever, The word I say which works in us the
true fear of God, will never cease to be effectual, and there is as much
force in it now, as ever was in it. No time can ever wear out the efficacy of
Gods word in the hearts of such as fear God. If it have wrought the true fear
of God in thee, thou may be assured thou have right to the directions and
comforts contained in it, and it will still be of force to thee, if thou wait
upon God in the true use of it.

Ob. But I see many are otherwise minded, and some teach otherwise.

Sol. Yet the judgments of the Lord are true: Gods word must and will stand
howsoever we are minded.

Ob. But may a man find help against any sin, from the word, and direction in
all things? Sol. Yes, for Gods judgments are righteous altogether. They are
exactly sufficient, to make a man a godly man, complete in all his ways, and
to order him in all that justice he should perform, either toward God or man.

Ob. But might not the hearts of men be delighted with other things, and men's
estates made happy with other treasures? Sol. No, it is more to be desired
(the word is) then fine gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter also then honey
and the honey comb.

Ob. But if I should deuote my self thus to the word, the world would account
me a very fool, and that I would grow to strange simpleness. Sol. By them is
thy servant made circumspect. Nothing teaches men true discretion, but Gods
word: and if many hearers be not circumspect, it is either because they attend
not to the word, or because they are not Gods servants.

Ob. But what profit will come of all this? Sol. In the sound practice of the
directions of the word there is great reward.

Thirdly, this may comfort Gods servants in their choice: they have chosen the
better part, in that they have set their hearts upon the word, howsoever the
world think of them.

Fourthly, we may here see the state of scorners and contemners of the word,
implied: let them mock on, but this they shall have, they shall never taste of
the ioies of God.

Fifthly, Gods servants should be admonished from hence, to express the power
of the word in their carriages, that the world might see and know there is
wonderful comfort and contentment in following the word.

Lastly, this may serve for the humiliation of all such as have long heard the
Gospel, and yet have not gotten any sound contentment.

Now that men may not be mistaken, Causes why many find no more comfort in the
word.
it will not be amiss to discover the true causes of this want of contentment
in many that enjoy the Gospel. It is true that the proper effect of the
Gospel is to comfort: but it is true also, that it comforts only Gods servants
Esaias 65.5.
. Again, if men have not mourned for their sins, no wonder though they be
not comforted Math. 5.4. Esaias 61.1.2.3
. Besides, many do not lay up the word in their hearts, and then how can it
comfort their hearts? We must be a people in whose heart is Gods law Esa. 51.7.
, if we would feel this inward joy and consolation. Many also are ensnared
with gross sin, whereas only the righteous sing and rejoice Pro. 29 6.
. Many want assurance, and therefore no wonder though they rejoice not with
those unspeakable joys, which are companions of faith and the love of Christ
only 1. Pet. 1.8.9.
. Besides, many have but little joy, because they use but little praying: we
must pray much if we have our joy full Ioh. 16.14.
. Further, some through unbelief resist comfort Psalm. 7^.3.
.

There are seven inconveniences of an uncomfortable heart. Seven inconveniences
of an uncomfortable heart.
1. It is exceeding liable to temptations. 2. It is under the reign of
continual unthankfulness. 3. It is easily perplexed with every cross, and
turned out of frame and quiet. 4. It is a daily let to the efficacy of all
Gods ordinances. 5. It is accompanied with strange infirmities, in doing good
duties. 6. It is usually barren in the very disposition to do good. 7. It
prouokes God to anger, Deuteronomy. 28.47.

Being knit together in love.]

Love is in God, Differences of love.
in Christ, in Angels, in Saints glorified, in godly men converted, and in
carnal men also. In the Trinity it is infinite, in Christ without measure, in
Angels and men glorified perfect, but measured, in godly men on earth
imperfect, but holy; in carnal men unholy, yet natural; in the other
creatures without reason by instinct.

It Is a religious and holy love amongst the members of Christ is here meant.

The author and fountain of this love is God, The Author, Bond, Seat, Effects,
2. Cor. 13.11. The bond internal is the spirit, external is the Gospel: the
subject or seat of it is the heart, yet not every heart, but a pure heart, 1.
Tim. 1.5. The effects are a heavenly comfort in the Gospel, with all the
fruits of it.

If thou ask whom thou must especially love; Objects,
I answer, the Saints, that is, such as thou see to strive after holiness of
life, making conscience of their ways. These and all these are to be loved.

Neither will bare affection to them serve, Properties of love.
but thou must seek to have fellowship with them in the Gospel, Phil. 1.5.
and 2.1. If thy love to Gods children be right, 1. it is diligent 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
, 2. in things indifferent it does not willingly offend Romans 14.15. Gal. 5.13.
, 3. it will cover a multitude of sins 1. Pet. 4.8.
, and it will forgive great offenses upon repentance 2. Cor. 2.7.8.
, 4. it is compassionate and liberal 1. Ioh. 3.17. 2 Cor 8.24. Rules for
preserving love.
, lastly, it has the properties mentioned 1. Cor. 13.4.5.6.7.

That this holy and religious love might be preserved amongst Christians,
diverse rules must be observed. 1. Men must not so much respect their own
earthly things Phil. 2.4.
. 2. Men should labor with all meekness for union in judgment, without all
contention and vain glory Phil. 2.2.3.
. 3. Men must take heed of reioicing in the evils one of another 1. Cor. 13.
. 4. Men must get more patience to suffer longer, and upon more occasion 1.
Cor. 13.
. 5. We should with all possible care endeavor to increase in knowledge, and
sense of Gods love, for that inflames to the love one of another Phil. 1.9.
. 6. We must study to be quiet, and meddle with our own business 1 Thessalonians.
4.11.
. Lastly, we must much and often think of our living together in heaven, for
the hope of heaven and the love of the Saints are companions.

The restraint of this love.
Yet that we may not mistake, there are diverse sorts of people with whom we may
not hold open and professed love, and union, and amity, and society. 1. With
such as are open enemies to the truth, by Infidelity or Idolatry 1. Cor. 6.
. 2. With men that live in notorious wickedness and profaneness, such as are
Atheists, swearers, drunkards, adulterers, Usurers, etc. Psalm 26.5.6. Ephesians.
5.6. Phil. 3.18.
3. With scandalous brethren, that make shows of religion, and yet are leand
in conversation 1. Cor. 5.
. 4. With corrupt teachers and seducers, that would draw men from the
sincerity that is in Christ, and speak evil of the way of righteousness
Phil. 3.2.
. 5. With those members of the Synagogue of Satan, whose tongues are set on
fire with the fire of hell, in respect of slandering and disgracing such as
truly fear God Revel. 2 9.
. 6. With such professors of religion that live idly, and in that respect walk
inordinately, and will not be reclaimed, but in that respect live offensiuely
2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
. 7. With such as openly refuse to obey the sayings and censures of Gods
servants 2 Thessalonians. 3 14.15.16.
.

As the knitting together of Gods people is wonderful comfortable, and a
gracious effect of the Gospel: so to disturb the love and unity of the
Church and people of God, is most execrable and abominable. It is a grievous
sin to disquiet and disioine Gods servants. Now if we observe in our own
times who they are that are disturbers of the Church and the holy unity
amongst true Christians, Four sorts of disturbers of the Church.
we shall find four sorts of men may be justly taxed with this grievous
fault. 1. Papists and halfe-Papists, these in all places labor to hinder the
progress of the Gospel, and the unity of the Church. 2. Ambitious
temporizers: Diotrephes had his hand deep in this sin. Too many there are
that scarce know any readier way to cover their damned Simoniacall practices,
and to advance their own aspiring ends, then to blaze and enlarge, and with
bitter exaspirations to proclaim that heavy rent and dissent of opinion, that
has divided the sons of the same mother. 3. Men of flagitious and wicked
life: for wicked men disturb Gods Church, both by their sins vexing the
righteous, and by their railing opposing the truth, and cause God by his
judgment to afflict his own Israel. 4. Sectaries and humorous persons, that
out of their hellish pride, despise all the assemblies of Gods people, because
they favor not their fantastical proiects. These many of them divide from us
both in Church and habitation.

Thus of the affection it self. But I must more specially yet consider of the
manner in the word knit together.

(...).
Knit together.] The original word, when it is taken properly, it signifies to
set in a frame of building, but usually it is taken in the new Testament in a
borrowed sense: sometimes it is to demonstrate a thing by evident testimony
Act. 9.22.
, sometimes to assure Act. 16.10.
, sometimes to instruct 1. Cor. 2.16.
, but most frequently to knit together as the members are knit in a body
Ephesians. 4.16.
; and so it may well be taken here: and so we are considered as joined
together in the mystical body of Christ. And we may hence observe, 1. That
our union one with another must be sanctified in one head; if we be not joined
to Christ, we do in vain plead our love to men. 2. Our affections must
carry us to a thirst and constant desire to procure the good of the body; the
body of Christ must be dearer to us then our particular good. 3. That we
must respect all that fear God, and not contemn the meanest Christian. We are
knit to the whole body, and not to some one member only.

Thus of the second reason, viz. from the effect of the Gospel.

And unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding.]

The third and last reason is taken from the adjuncts of the Gospel, which do
more and more appear, by the power of it, in the pains of Gods faithful
servants: and these are three; 1. certainty, 2. sublimitie, 3. perfection. The
first is in these words.

The Gospel is certain two ways: The Gospel is certain two ways.
1. in it self, 2. in the infallibility and steadfastness of the persuasion
of the elect. In it self the Apostle had good reason to say so; for it was no
new device lately broached, but long before from the beginning propounded to
Gods servants, and confirmed in all ages by the Prophets, etc. But in this
place it is considered in the certainty of the persuasion of the godly, by
faith laying hold upon it and believing it. Thi^ he expresses in the word full
assurance or plerophorie. A twofold fullness.
The fullness of a Christian is either general or special: the general is
that fullness which every member has in Christ their head, and by influence
from him. The special is that fullness wherein some members excel. Thus some
are full of the spirit Ephesians. 5.18.
, of love 1 Thessalonians. 3.12
, of joy Romans 15.13 2. Cor. 7.4.
, some in obedience and goodworkes Act 9.36. Psalm. 1.11. Revel. 3.1. 2. Cor.
10.6.
, some in faith and know^ledge. So Romans 15.14. So here.

Quest. But is full assurance essential unto true faith? Answ. Some seem to
say so: but I see no reason so to think. And experience shows us many worth^e
in the praises of the Gospel, and yet have not gotten full assurance. Full
assurance is in the greatest faith, but faith may be true in the least measure,
though it be not so confirmed: it is essential to a strong faith, not to a
little faith.

Quest. Full assurance may be had.
May this plerophorie or full assurance be had in this life? Answ. It may
without all doubt, as these Scriptures evidently prove, 1. Thessal. 1.5. Heb.
6.11. and 10.22. Romans 4.21.

Quest. It must be sought.
But are we bound to labor for this full assurance? Answ. We are, Heb. 10. he
says, let us draw near in the full assurance of faith Heb. 10.22
: and in the sixth chapter they are exhorted to show their diligence unto the
full assurance of hope to the end Heb. 6.12.
We make no question but we ought to make sure our houses and lands, etc. and
shall life and happiness lie unassured?

There are 7. things wherein this assurance has been employed. 1. There is a
full assurance of the things done by Christ, mentioned Luke 1.1. 2. There is a
full assurance required in the knowledge of our liberty in things indifferent
Seven things of which we should be assured.
. 3. There is a full assurance requisite unto the persuasion of the truth of
their ministeries to whom we subject our souls, as the original word imports,
2. Tim. 4.5.17. 4. We must be fully assured of the doctrine of the Religion
that we profess. 5. There is a full assurance of the hope of a better life
Heb. 6.12.
. 6. There is a full assurance sometimes in special and particular persons, as
that to Abraham about his son, Romans 4.21. Lastly, there is a full assurance
of faith in Gods favor, upon the warrant of Gods word and spirit. This is
chiefly to be labored for.

Now there are seven properties or signs of a plerophorie or full assurance of
faith. Seven signs of full assurance.
1. It will receive the word in affliction with much joy 1 Thessalonians. 1.6.
. 2. It will not be carried about with every wind of doctrine Ephesians. 4.14.
. 3. It is industrious and laborious in the duties of love to Gods children
Heb. 6.11.12
. 4. It is unrebukable and full of innocence and integrity of life: it
cannot possibly stand with any presumptuous sin Heb 10.22.23.
. 5. It will give glory to God against all sense and reason Romans 4.20.
. 6. It mortifies and extinguisheth all headstrong affections Esaias 11.7.9.
. 7. It is carried with full sails unto holy duties (for so the word
signifies) and is fruitful in good works. 8. It is able to admonish Romans
15.14*
.

If we would obtain this plerophorie, What we must do to get full assurance.
we must be much in hearing and prayer, for they do both exceedingly settle
faith: especially we must attend much unto the promises of God, and the
testimony of the spirit of adoption: and we must get calm and quiet
affections, we must grow in grace, and strive to be strengthened in the inner
man. But especially we must beg it often of God by prayer, and strive against
hardness of heart, and unbelief, carefully discerning and re^ecting the
objections of Satan and the flesh, consulting daily with such as have the
oversight of our souls.

Use.
The consideration hereof may both confute the Papists, that plead so earnestly
against the assurance of faith, and it may serve also to scourge the wanton
distempers of carnal Protestants, that against a principle of their own
Religion, will so commonly disgrace the assurance of faith, by saying men
cannot be so certain of their own salvation. And it may excite all that fear
God to labor after it, and the rather considering the worth of it, as the word
riches of full assurance imports.

Wherein our spiritual ri^hes ^e.
Riches of full assurance] There are two sorts of rich men: there is a worldly
rich man, and a spiritual rich man. Now our spiritual riches lie, 1. in the
word of Christ dwelling in us Col. 3.16.
, 2. in the spirit of Christ Tit. 3.6
, 3. in works of mercy and liberality Ephesians. 2.4. 2 Cor 8.1. and 9.11.
, 4. in sufferings and patience, 5. in prayers Romans 10 11.
, 6. in good works 1. Tim 6 18.
, 7. in utterance and all holy knowledge 1. Cor 1.5.
; lastly, it lies in our faith Iam. 2.5.
: and so the more full assurance we have, the more rich we are. Now this in
general may inform how to conceive of rich men, and who are to be accounted
indeed great rich men; and it may lesson worldly rich men not to swell in the
thoughts of their greatness, but rather rejoice that God has made them low:
and withal it should teach them to think more highly of poor Christians,
that have the true grace of Christ, whom God has enriched with faith and holy
graces of his spirit.

Assurance is riches ^n many respects.
Worthily is full assurance of faith called riches, for it does all that riches
can do unto men. It comforts the heart, it defends from dangers, much better
then outward riches can, for the just live by their faith. It gains the godly
more true reputation, then houses or land or money could do. It abounds more
to spiritual mercy and well-doing with more sufficiency then outward riches
can, and it buys for the soul all necessaries: it is unto Gods servants
according to their faith, and unto faith all things are possible: yea it does
that that all the riches in the world cannot do, for it will settle a man's
heart against all earthly mutations, yea it will make a man stand undaunted
against the rage of tyrants, yea of death it self; yea in somesense, it will
fence a man against the weapons of God himself: though God kill Job in the
battle, yet he will not let go his hold, but he will still trust in him, yea
the Lord is pleased many time^ to yield the victory to the wrestlings of
faith, and accounts it no disparagement to be overcome of the faith of his
servants, and to let them bind his hands, that he should not do, what
otherwise he might and would have done: how can it be but great riches, when it
brings a man the assured pardon of all his offenses? and how does it establish
the heart of a man in his religion, more then ten thousand arguments or volumes
of controversies?

Thus of the adiunct certainty; the sublimitie of the Gospel follows.

To the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, even the Father and of Christ]

The Gospel is a divine mystery, both for the admirable depth of it, for it is
a secret only God can reveal, and for the excellency of the subject it
entreats of, which is God the Father and Christ.

How the Gospel is a mystery, and to whom, has been showed in the former
chapter: only let us from the repetition of it here, be confirmed in this,
never to trust the judgment of carnal persons, in matters of godliness and
salvation, for they pronounce of things they never e^fectually understand, they
cannot perceive the things of God; and withal we should be excited to a daily
care of faith, for reason will not reach here.

Further we may here observe, That when the Lord does reveal this mystery
unto us, we must not only believe it, but we must acknowledge it, even by an
outward profession of our faith in Christ, and our consecration of our selves,
to the worship and knowledge of God. The world wonderful hardly brooks
acknowledgment: most men ask what needs this profession? they will not
understand that we must bear about, and hold out the light of the truth
received, laboring to win glory to God by the power of confession and
obedience.

Of God even the Father and of Christ.] Diverse things may be from these words
particularly observed.

1. We may see here the glory of the Gospel, and the studies of Christians,
they have the only excellent subject in the world: other sciences consider of
the creature, but Theology of the Creator.

2. Here is a plain proof of the divine nature of Christ, for God is said to
be the Father or Christ.

3. From coherence we may know, that as men grow in faith and love, so they
will be more and more settled in the doctrine of the persons of the Trinity,
it is such a mystery as is revealed by degrees, as holiness and other saving
knowledge, increase in us.

4. That we never rightly know God till we know Christ, Matthew. 11.27. 1. Ioh.
2.23.

5. We may hence observe the misery of all unregenerate men, they neither
know God nor Christ aright.

6. That howsoever we be ignorant in many other knowledges and that of matters
of religion too, yet it is a glorious riches to know God to be our father in
Christ, and to be fully assured of Gods love in Christ.

VERSE. 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.


In whom] In quo, is referred either to Christ or the Gospel, it is true
either way: or rather both are conjoined together in one sense; In Christ who
is the subject of the Gospel, is all treasures etc, or in the Gospel as it
entreats of Christ, is all treasures etc, so that these words contain a third
adiunct of the Gospel, and that is singular perfection of wisdom.

Note here with what feeling the Apostle speaks, when he falls upon the mention
of Christ, and the Gospel: he abounds in powerful affections and admirations
of these things, which may wonderfully abase and humble us, for our barrennes
both in thoughts and affections, and words, when we have to deal with the
things that belong to the kingdom of God.

Again, if there be any such treasures in Christ and the Gospel, we may
conclude it is not in vain to deuote our selves to the knowledge of Christ in
the Gospel, though it cost us never so much pains or care or cost, and though
we be never so much opposed by the flesh and the world.

Further, we need not doubt but that all things needful to salvation and
happiness, are contained in the word, here are treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, we need no traditions nor inventions of men, nor decrees of Popes
etc.

The vbiquitaries abuse this place to prove, Answer to the vbiquitaries.
a real communication, of the properties of the divine nature to the humane.
Now for answer to their cavil, diverse things may be propounded.

1. If the words be understood of the Gospel, then their conceit wholly falls
to the ground. 2. If they be understood of Christ, yet there is no necessity
to understand them, as these treasures are in Christ himself only, but as they
are in his members by communication. 3. If as it is in him, yet it is not
necessary to understand it of all knowledge in general, but of that which is
needful for the salvation of the elect. 4. If of all knowledge, yet the
Apostle says not that it is in the soul of Christ, but in Christ. 5. If in
the soul, what wisdom? not increate and infinite, but created wisdom.

Thus in general.

In whom] Wisdom and knowledge are in Christ, in Angels, in men, but
differently: The difference of knowledge in Christ and Angels and men.
in Christ, by union, in Angels, by vision, in men, by revelation. There are
diverse gifts conferred upon the humane nature of Christ, the gift of personal
union, the gift of office of mediator, and head of the Church, the gift of
adoration, with his divine nature, and the gifts they call habitual, which
above the measure of men or angels are conferred upon him.

Which may comfort us against all our defects in our selves, for though we have
so many wants, yet we have an head in whom we have all fullness, and it should
be our course to make use of this doctrine, by stirring up our selves daily to
lay hold upon Christ for the supply of our wants out of the riches of his grace.

Are hidden] The admirable excellencies of wisdom and knowledge in Christ are
said to be hidden, 1. In respect of our apprehensions, because we can never
reach to the depth of them, 2. In respect of the cross, that followed Christ
and his members: for the cross like a veil obscured the glory of Christ's
perfections, both in himself, and the communication of his gifts to his
members.

And may not this teach us singlenes of heart, and humility, even more to
seek to be good then to seem to be so? Christ was contented his treasures
should be hidden, and shall we fret our selves when our drops of grace are not
admired? shall it not be enough to us that we shall appear in glory, when his
glory shall be revealed?

All treasures] Wisdom and knowledge in Christ is called treasures, not for
the quantity only, but for the worth also, for grace and knowledge are the
best treasures.

Which may show the misery of all wicked persons, for in as much as they are
not of Christ, they are destitute of the treasures of God: and contrariwise,
they are most happy that have Christ, for in him they find all true treasure
and riches, he cannot be poor that has Christ, nor can he be rich that wants
Christ.

Quest. But what is the cause that so many Christians want treasures, and yet
profess Christ?

Answ. Either they want workmen, to dig for the mine, through want of
Preachers: or else they dig for this treasure in a wrong earth, by seeking
it, but not in the Scriptures: or else men know not the mine, when they find
it: or else they let the earth fall upon their work, after they have begun,
through negligence in slightly working in their entrance.

Of knowledge and wisdom.] The different terms may note but the same
knowledge in Christ, but for our capacities varied: It is true that there is in
Christ a most admirable perfection, both of the knowledge of contemplation, and
of the wisdom and discretion of working and practice, and thus it was in him,
in his own obedience, and is still by participation to his members to make
them wise and discreet, as well as full of understanding and judgment: sure it
is that Christ would be rich unto us, in the gift of holy discretion, as well
as in the gift of holy understanding, if we would seek it of him, for he is
made unto us of God wisdom 1. Cor. 1.30.
, neither can true wisdom be found in any men under the sun, that have not
the true grace of Christ, neither can any Christian be found without the
grounds of heavenly wisdom, such wisdom I mean as none of the wisest men in
the world could ever attain, for though it be true, that there may be and are
many deficiencies in such as otherwise truly fear God, yet if the best wisdom
be inquired after, the meanest and simplest Christian does exceed the greatest
and exactest politician, or disputer of this world. For what wisdom can it be
for a man to have excelling skill to know the secrets of nature, or the order
of civil affairs, or the ways to advance his own outward estate, and yet
know no certain and safe way how to save his own soul?

VERSE. 4. And this I say lest any should beguile you with enticing words.


Whereas the Colossians might ask, why the Apostle is so large in urging them
to constancy, he shows in this verse, that it is to prevent the inticements
of seducers.

1. It is the duty of every Minister to labor by all possible means, to
preserve his people, that they be not beguiled: it is not enough to teach them
true doctrine, but they must be watchful, that neither Satan nor evil men
infect and corrupt them.

2. It is the usual practice of the devil, when the word has wrought with
any power in any place, to assay by all means, to draw away and deceive the
minds of the people: let men look to themselves, and not live securely, for
certainly the devil will attempt them with all cunning and fraud.

3. If these words be compared with the Apostles exhortation in the 23 verse,
of the former chapter, it will appear manifestly, that one reason why many are
deceived, is their vnsetlednes, in the doctrine of faith and hope: if they had
been established in their assurance of Gods favor in Christ, and and the hope
brought by the Gospel, they could not have been so deceived, and beguiled, or
not so easily.

4. The way by which men are in points of religion deceived, (...) What
Pithanalogie is.
is not by apparent falsehoods, but by probabilities of truth: the Apostle calls
them paralogismes, of pithanologie. Pithanalogie, which the Apostle condemns is
a speech fitted of purpose, by the abuse of Rhetoric, to entice and by
tickling the affections of men, to please and seduce; and herein properly lies
the abuses of Logic or Rhetoric in matters of Divinity, when out of
affection, and some subtle purpose to deceive, vain and false arguments are
varnished and colored over, and made probable to the minds of the simple: yea
though the matter taught be sometimes truth, yet many minds are beguiled, from
the power and profit of it, by placing their respects and affections, upon the
wisdom of the words and the affected artificial frame: otherwise there is
singular use both of Logic and Rhetoric, when they are applied to set out
the wisdom of God in his word, unfolding the hidden depths of the power of the
word of God: the very preaching of the Gospel is exceeding effectual, when
without affectation, men use their art, to express the native force and life
of the words of the holy Ghost in scripture: but the chief thing in general,
is for us hence to learn, that heresy and error, was never so unclothed, but
it was presented to the world with great colors and probabilities; many simple
people wonder that Papists or Brownists should be able to say so much for their
idolatry or schism: but we must know, that any heretics that ever were, have
brought great probabilities for their heresies as well as they. The devil were
wonderful simple, if he should think, to bewitch men so far, as to believe
with any confidence, things that had manifest appearance of falsehood, that
cannot be. Thus in general.

Now in particular, concerning the corrupting or deceiving of the souls of
men, we may consider three things. 1. The miserable estate of the soul, that
is deceived, or beguiled, or corrupted. 2. How the soul is corrupted. 3. The
means to prevent it.

For the first, look what the carcass is when it is putrified, such is the
soul when it is corrupted, it is spiritually loath some, and wonderfully
unpleasing unto God, and cast out of his sight: and the more is the misery of
such souls, because to plead that they were deceived, will not serve turn;
we may deceive or be deceived, but God will not be mocked.

For the second, if we ask by whom or how the soul is deceived or corrupted?
It is to be answered generally, Who are deceivers.
we must take notice of it to beware: the two great deceivers, are the devil
and Antichrist 2. Cor. 11.3. 2 Thessalonians 2.
. It is true that by the malice of Satan, and frowardness of wicked men, Gods
faithful servants are every where called deceivers 2. Cor. 6.
. They that most labor to preserve men's souls from corrupting, are most
charged with seducing; but these are so called and are not.

The most ordinary deceivers, are 1. carnal friends, 2. the profits and
pleasures of life, 3. evil company, this corrupts like leaven, 4. carnal
reason, 5. sin Heb. 3.13.
, 6. but especially corrupt and false teachers Ier. 23.14. Ezech. 13.10. Mich.
3.5. Gal. 5.9. 3.
.

Thirdly, if we would not be beguilde and deceived, we must look to three
things, 1. we must get a steadfast faith in Jesus Christ, plerophorie or full
assurance of Gods favor is a wonderful preservative against corruption of
doctrine or life. Rules to prevent beguiling.
2. we must constantly cleave to the means, unto which God has given
testimony by the power of his presence, and blessing; we should get under the
shelter of a powerful ministry, and this will be a rock of defense. 3. we
must preserve vprightnes of life, and our care of innocence in what we know to
be required: contrariwise, so long as we are unsettled, and want assurance,
especially if we live not under the power of the word, we are in continual
danger to be drawn away: and so it is with us too, if we fall unto the love
of any sin, of knowledge; for corruption of life is many times scourged with
corruption of doctrine and opinions.

But if we would have more abundant caution for our preservation, then I will
follow the similitude of beguiling amongst men, from whence by comparison, we
may learn many things, for our caution and observation.

Men that would thrive in their estates, and would not be beguiled in the world
or wronged, observe most an end, these rules. 1. They will buy such things as
are durable, not toys or trifles: so should we, we should set our hearts upon
eternal things, and not mind earthly things, which will last but for a short
time, and when death comes, if we trust upon earthly things, we shall find
our selves deceived. 2. They will know their commodities themselves that they
sell or buy: so should we both for the sins we would part with, and the
opinions, or duties, we would purchase. 3. They will know the persons, with
whom they deal: so should we try the spirits. 4. They will have all the
security may be had: so should we see all warranted by the scriptures, for
other security we cannot have put in that is sufficient: if the devil or the
world or corrupt teachers, tempt and entice us, we must put them to it, to put
us in security from the scriptures, which because they cannot do, we must
wisely reject them. 5. Men that deal for much, are glad to seek the
protection of some great men: so should we seek the protection of the great
God. 6. If men doubt in any thing about their estate, they will presently
consult with their friends, and in difficult cases they will have opinions of
Lawyers too: so should we do if we would have our states safe, we must
propound our doubts one to another, especially to our Teachers, that they may
resolve us out of the word of God.

VERSE. 5. For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit,
rejoicing and beholding your order, and the stedfastnes of your faith in Christ.


These words depend upon the former, as the answer of two objections; First
they might say, How does he know our estates? to which he answers in the first
words, That though it were true, that he were absent, in respect of the flesh,
yet it was also true, that he was present in the spirit, both in that his
affection, carried him to a daily thought of them, and so to a willingness upon
all occasions to take notice of their estate: and besides, as some think, he
was acquainted with their estate extraordinarily, by revelation of the spirit.
And thus also he secretly gives them notice to look to their ways: for he
takes notice of all that passed amongst them. How careful should we be in all
our courses, as well as they? For we have the spirit of God in us, and the
people of God round about us. Here also Ministers may take notice of their
duties: their spirits should cleave to their people, and their daily thoughts
and cares should run upon them, they should still observe them, and watch
over them in the Lord.

Ob. 2. But might some one say, Is it charity in the Apostle, being thus
ab^sent, to entertain surmises and hard thoughts of us, as if we were falling
away, etc. Now to this he answers, that though he wrote this to exhort them and
to warn them, yet he did greatly rejoice to know so much as he did of their
order of life, and steadfastness of faith. Many are so diseased, that they
think, if a man reprove them or admonish them, that then he hates them
altogether, and likes nothing in them: but the Apostle to prevent that,
acknowledges the praise of their life and faith. A holy mind can rejoice in
the good things of those he warns or reproves.

Your orders] Order has original in God, he is the God of order 1. Cor. 14.33
, a all disorder and confusion is of the devil. Order is that wonderfully
commends whatsoever it is in. There is a kind of seed of order sown in the
creatures. This order in man is their eutaxie or well disposing of themselves.

The Apostle might commend their order generally, both in relation to the
commonwealth, and to the Church, and in their families, as also in their
particular conversation.

That there might be order in Commonwealths, Of order in the common wealth.
God has set man in au^thoritie, (for by him Kings reign and have their power
Prou. 8. Romans 13.
) and has communi^cated a part of the honor of his own divine laws to their
civil laws, viz. That they should bind men's consciences so far as they are
not disagreeing from his word. Besides, he has recorded threatenings against
the disobedient, and acknowledges Magistrates to bear his image, to be as it
were Gods by representation, and he guides them by his spirit for the time,
many times qualifying them with gifts, and guiding their mouths in judgment,
(for a ^^uine sentence in the mouth of a King) yea he himself drew a
plat-forme of rules for Commonweals, to give them a taste of government.

Now that men may attain to this Eutaxie and good order in Commonweals, they
must read the law of God, and let that be a general guide to them, and they
must propound sanctity as well as felicity as the end of their government;
and in calling to office, they must be careful not to set the feet where the
head should be, but to choose men that fear God and hate covetousness, and are
men of courage. The fear of God and courage is wonderfully wanting in all
sorts of Magistrates. And as for courage, in respect of the people, what are
they the better if they have a good man, that will do no good, then if they
had evil men, that would do no evil? Yet in truth Magistrates, whether good
or evil men, do much evil by suffering evil to be unpunished. But to
return to the point, Magistrates that would preserve order, must give good
example themselves, and mend the disorders of their own households, and bring
such a sympathy and love of the people, as they should both preserve their
authority, and yet remember that they rule their brethren. And in their
government they cannot observe order, unless they punish vice as well as
command or provide for virtue and wealth. Besides, they must take away the
persons or places that are occasions of disorder, and they must charge and
remunerate as well as punish. Finally, the people out of the obligation of
conscience must strive to live in order, with reverence and fear yielding
ready obedience and furtherance to those that are placed in authority over
them.

Order in the Church.
There is order also in the Church: and thus there is order, in doctrine, for
milk must be propounded before strong meat, or with sufficient reference to
the parties to be taught. There is order also to be observed in the time,
places, and manner of celebration of Gods worship. There is order also to be
respected in the use of things ecclesiastically indifferent. There is order in
the subordination of persons, in the ministry, some to rule, some to teach,
some to exhort, some to distribute. There is order also to be observed in the
discipline of the Church, proceeding by degrees with offenders, so long as they
are cureable.

Order in the family.
Neither may our families be without order; order I say, not only in the duties
that concern the maintenance of the family, but also in the exercises that
concern religion and the service of God in the family. In families there must
be a care also of reformation: especially that openly profane persons, only for
temporal advantage, be not retained or admitted there. In the family also
there must be a daily exercise of patience, humility, knowledge, and all other
Christian graces, that concern mutual edification. What should I say? There is
a mutual relation in all the members of the family one to another, and the
discharge of their several duties one to another is charged with a daily care
of order.

But I think the Apostle commends the order of holy life unto which every
Christian is bound. It is certain we can never soundly proceed in godliness
without a care of a settled frame and order of living. We may not live at a
venture in religion. It Is not enough to do good now or then, by flashes. There
is an order in holy conversation. We must walk by rule Gal. 6.16.
. There is an holy disposing of our ways required Psalm. 50. vlt.
. It is required of us that we should ponder the paths of our feet Pro. 4.26.
. We must order our affairs with discretion Psalm. 112.5.
. This is called the way of prudence or understanding. There is a guiding of
our feet unto the ways of peace Luke 1.79.
. It Is a wonderful curse to be left to our security to walk in dark and
uncertain ways: and contrariwise the vision of the salvation of God is
promised to such as dispose of their ways aright Psalm. 51. vlt.
. And to be careful o^ an orderly course of life, is to keep our souls Pro.
19.16.
, and peace shall be unto such. But alas, men have corrupted their ways, and
their understandings are darkened, and they are strangers from the life of God:
neither will men cease from their rebellious ways. The ciuillest men walk
after the way of their own hearts, yea the most men hate those that are right
in their ways, and are like Dan, that would bite the heels of such as
endeavor to walk in sincerity. Some hypocrites there are that will know the
way of the Lord, and ask of him the ordinance of justice, as if they would be
careful to please God; but alas they were never washed from their old sins,
and they quickly return with the dog to their vomit, and corrupt their
ways, being of purpose set on by the devil, to make a clamorous profession,
that so their fall might more dishonor the glory of an exact and circumspect
conversation. Alas, what should I say? There is wonderful want of order in the
very lives of Gods children. Scarce the tithe of professors of sincerity of
the Gospel, that have gathered a catalogue of holy duties, and observed out of
the word that frame and order of settled holy conversation.

Ten helps of order in conversation.
There are 10. helps of order in holy life: 1. knowledge, 2. uprightness, that
is, an unfeigned resolution to show respect to all Gods Commandments; 3.
constant diligence, 4. watchfulness, 5. contemplation or meditation, 6.
prayer, 7. reading the word daily, 8. frequent hearing of the Gospel preached
in the power of it, 9. a tender conscience, 10. society and fellowship with
gracious Christians in the Gospel.

There are many impediments of an orderly conversation: Nine lets of order.
1. Men are not reconciled to God, and so not being in Christ, they receive not
influence of grace from Christ to enable them to walk in an holy course. 2. In
others it is negligent mortification; the stain of former sins being not
washed away, there remains in them an ill disposition to sin. 3. Many are
ensnared with evil opinions, either in doctrine, (and so error of life is the
scourge of error in opinion) or else about practice, as that such strictness
is not required, or it is impossible, or none do live so. 4. Many know not
what order to appoint unto themselves. 5. Many are confirmed in a heart
accustomed to evil, and they love some one sin, wherein they especially
break order. 6. Satan strives above all things to keep men in a dead sleep,
that they might not awake to live righteously, or express the power of
godliness. 7. Many are so set in the way of the ungodly, that their very evil
society chains them down to a necessity of dissoluteness. 8. Many are put
out of all order by their daily distempers and disorders in their families.
Lastly, some fail and fall through very discouragement, received either from
opposition, or contempt, or scandal.

Now if any be desirous to know in general what he should do to bring his
life into order, Rules for bringing our lives into order.
I shall profitably advise five things: First, that he do resolutely withdraw
himself from the sins of the times, and keep himself unspotted of the
world, in respect of them. Now the sins of the times are apparent, pride of
life, contempt of the Gospel, coldness in faith and religion, swearing,
profanation of the holy Sabbath, domestical irreligiousnesse, contention,
usury, whordome, drunkenness, and drinkings, oppression and speaking evil of
the good way. Secondly, that he observe the more usual corruptions of the
calling of life he lives in, and with all heedfulnesse shun them, whether he
be Magistrate, Minister, or private person. Thirdly, that he especially strive
against and subdue the evils that by nature he is most prone unto. Fourthly, he
shall do wonderfully profitably, if he would get a catalogue of duties out of
the whole law, Use of catalogues.
that directly concern himself in particular, which is very easy (especially
by the help of some that are experienced) to bedistinctly gathered, laboring
to show all good faithfulness in duties of piety as well as righteousness,
and to strive for inward piety as well as outward, resolving to continue, as
well as once to begin. Hence it is, if we mark it, that the holy Ghost in
diverse Scriptures draws for the people of those times diverse catalogues,
either of grace which specially tended to their praise, or of duties that most
fitted their state, or of sins that they must most carefully avoid, as being
most commonly committed: yea it could not but be of excellent use, if we did
task our selves to the more strict observation of some of those catalogues,
either of grace, or sins, or duties, as we might perceive they most fitted
us.

But if ever we would go about the order of our lives, More rules.
we must in general 1. labor to weaken the love of earthly things. 2. We
must resolve to keep our hearts with all diligence, I mean we must with all
care and conscience strive against inward sins. 3. We must put on a mind to
live by faith, whatsoever befall us. 4. If we fall, we would speedily recover
our selves by confession and prayer, and not accustom our selves to sins
either of omission or commission.

Upon the consideration of all this, Uses.
what should we do, but even pray the Lord that he would make his way plain
Psalm. 5.8.
before our face, and direct the works of our hands Psalm. 90. vlt.
and hold up our goings in his paths Psalm. 17.5.
, that our steps do not slide? And to this end we should every one be peecing
and amending his ways, making his paths straight, being ashamed and confounded
for all the disorder of our lives past. But if thou go about this, be not
(...), a man that has two hearts, for then thou will be unstable in all thy
ways; either go about it with all thy heart, or else let it alone. What shall
I say but this, let us all learn the way of God more perfectly.

Thus of order.

The second thing he commends is their faith, which he praises for the
steadfastness of it.

The steadfastness of their faith.] Concerning steadfastness of faith, I
propound five things to be considered of. 1. That it may be had, and ought to
be sought. 2. What the nature and properties of it are. 3. What is the cause
why the faith of many is not steadfast. 4. What we must do to attain it. And
lastly concerning unsteadfast faith.

That steadfastness of faith may be had.
For the first, that it may be had, is manifest: for God that gives the earnest
of his spirit, and seals and anointeth us in Christ, does stablish us in him
2. Cor. 1.21.22
. There is a sure foundation of God 2. Tim. 2.19. Matt. 7.24.
, upon which we may found our affiance. And God willing more abundantly to show
unto the heirs of promise the immutabilitie of his counsel, interposed
himself by an oath to confirm his promise, that by two immutable things, in
which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, which
sly for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us: which hope we have as
an anchour of the soul both sure and steadfast Heb. 6.17.18
. And we are commanded to resist steadfast in the faith 1. Pet. 5.9.
. And wavering is secretly threatened and disgraced by the Apostle James, after
he had charged that we should pray in faith without wavering Iam. 1.6.
.

The properties of the man steadfast in faith.
Now for the second, there are many excellent properties and praises in a
steadfast faith: for a man that is indeed settled and steadfast in his faith,
knows both the truth and the worth of the love of Christ Ephesians. 3.17.19
; he is able to contemn and deny the allurements, examples, customs, and
glory of this world 1. Ioh. 5.4. Gal. 6.14.
; he can bear adversity with singular firmness of heart, without hasting to
evil means Romans 5.4. Isa. 26.16.
, or limiting God for the manner, or time, or instruments of deliverance; he
can stand in the combat against frequent and fiery tentations, and go away
without prevailing infection; he can believe without feelings Romans 4.
. The promises of God are not yea and nay 2. Cor. 1.18.19.
, but always a sure word and undoubted. He has a kind of habitual peace and
contentation in his conscience, with easefull delights and refreshings in the
joys of Gods favor. He has a kind of spiritual boldness and confidence
when he approaches to God and the throne of his grace. Lastly, he can look
upon death and judgment, with desire to be dissolved.

The causes of vnsettlednesse.
And for the third thing, the reasons why many men show not this
vnmoueablenesse, and steadfastness, are diverse: some have not faith at all 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
, some have not a true justifying faith, but either rest upon common hope, or
an historical or temporary faith. In many the presumption of certainty does
hinder steadfastness it self. Some want powerful means, that should
establish them; and some having the public means, are justly blasted in their
faith because of their daily neglect of the private means. And this reason may
be given also why some of the better sort are not yet stablished, namely
because they are so hardly excited and persuaded seriously to try their own
estates, by the signs of Gods favor, and marks of salvation. And for the
worser sort, they shun trial, because they know before hand their state is not
good, and besides they live in some one master sin or other, which they
cannot be persuaded to forsake, and therefore resolve at least for a time to
live at a venture, and refer all to the unknown mercy of God.

The means of steadfastness.
4. If we would be established in believing, 1. we must be much in the
meditation of the promises of God. 2. we must be much in prayer, and the
acknowledgment of secret sins, observing the comforts of Gods presence, and
keeping a record of the wonders of his presence, and striving to retain
constantly the assurance, we sometimes feel in prayer. 3. we must cast
about, how to be more profitable in well doing: An orderly life, especially
fruitfulness in our places, does maruellously though secretly, establish and
settle a man's heart in faith 1. Cor. 15.58. whereas it is almost impossible,
that a barren life should have much stedfastnes, of assurance; again, would
we yet further know, how it comes to pass, that some men get such a
steadfastness above many others? Observe then and you shall find, that when
they find the pearls of grace, and the means, they will sell all to buy
them: Now the love to the means, is like death or Jealousy, that cannot be
resisted, there is in them a constant coveting of the best things, with a true
hunger and thirst after them, and if they offend God they cannot be quiet, till
they return and confess their sin, and get favor: they will not live days
and weeks in a voluntary neglect of communion with God, and therefore reap
this vnmoueablenesse, as the fruit of their daily conuersing with God.

Thus of stedfastnes in it self.

Now in the contrary, concerning an unsteadfast faith, I propound two things to
be considered, 1. The effects or consequences, and concomitants of it: And then
the kinds of unsettled faith.

Not Scripture only, but usual experience show the many inconveniences that
attend such as are not stablished in the faith.

1. They want the many comforts, The inconveniences of an unsteadfast faith.
the steadfast faith feels. 2. They are disquieted with every cross. 3. They
are tossed with the wind of contrary doctrine, yea the very truth is sometimes
yea with them, and sometimes nay: sometimes, they are persuaded, and sometimes,
they are not. 4. They find a secret shunning of the ordinances of God, when
any approach should be made unto God. 5. The fear of death is almost
inseparable. 6. They are sometimes frighted with fears of perseverance,
besides their daily danger to be foiled, by the baits of Satan and the world.

Unsteadfastness may be considered three ways. Unsteadfastness of faith three
ways.
1. as faith is weak. 2. as faith is weakened. 3. as stedfastnes is lost.

For the first, in the first conversion of a man unto God, while they lie yet
in the cradle of godliness, They are assailed with much doubting and many
fears, etc.

Quest. But what might some one say, How weak faith may be discerned.
How can faith then be discerned in the midst of so many doubts and fears?
Answ. The truth of their faith and grace appears, 1. By their earnest and
constant desire of Gods favor. 2. By the tenderness of the conscience in all
their actions, and their daily fear of sinning. 3. By their frequent
complaints of unbelief, and secret mourning for it. 4. By the lowliness of
their carriage, even toward the meaner sort of those that truly fear God. 5.
By their desire after the sincere milk of the word. Lastly, by their endeavor
to walk inoffensiuely.

Quest. But seeing their faith is true, Causes of the vnsetlednes of faith
weak.
what is the cause of the unsettledness of it? Answ. They are unsettled, partly
because they have yet but a small measure of saving knowledge: and partly
because they discern not the consolations, offered to them: and partly for
want of application of particular promises, that belong unto them: and
sometimes it is for want of some of the means: and in some it is, because they
see a greater power in some of their corruptions, then they think can stand
with true grace.

Now for the remedies of this vnsetlednes; Remedies for faith weak.
This weak faith will grow settled more and more, if they continue upright in
the use of the means, especially as their reformation and victory over sin
increases, and as they grow more and more confirmed in the divorce from the
world, and carnal company, and they grow more expert in the word of
righteousness, especially after the Lord has refreshed them, with the
frequent comforts of his promises, and presence, besides conuersing with the
faithful and established Christians: And all this the sooner, if they do
propound their doubts, and by asking the way, seek daily direction, especially
if they resign over their souls to the ministry of some faithful and
merciful man of God, who as a nurse shall daily feed them, with distinct and
particular counsel and comfort.

Thus of the unsteadfastness that accompanies faith weak.

Now there is an unsteadfastness accompanies faith weakened, that is such a faith
as was sometimes stronger; For the clearer understanding hereof, I consider
three things. 1. The causes of this weakness of faith. 2. The signs to discern
it. 3. The remedies.

There may be diverse causes or means to weaken strong faith. Causes of faith
weakened
1. Loss of means. 2. secret sins ordinarily committed, not lamented, not
reformed. 3. Presumptuously to use ill means to get out of adversity. 4.
Relapse to the love of the world.

The signs to discern it, Signs of faith weakened.
are 1. the sleepiness of the heart. 2. fear of death. 3. constant neglect or
secret contempt of fellowship with the godly. 4. The ceasing of the sensible
working of Gods spirit within. 5. Reigning coffeehouse. 6. Security under
known sin.

Remedies for faith weakened
The remedies are 1. A serious and sound examination of the wants and faults,
which by this weakness they are fallen into. 2. A constant and daily judging of
themselves, for their corruptions, till they recover tenderness of heart, and
some measure of godly sorrow for them. 3. It will be expedient that they plant
themselves under the droppings of a daily powerful ministry. 4. The
meditation of their former feelings. 5. The use of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; this is a means to confirm faith both weak and weakened. Lastly, they
must hold a most strict watch over their hearts and lives, till they be
re-established in a sound course of reformed life.

Thus of faith weakened.

3. Stedfastnes may be lost, note that I say stedfastnes of faith may be lost,
I say not that faith may be lost that is true faith; this stedfastnes was lost
in David, Solomon, and it is likely in Job too.

Causes of the loss of stedfastnes.
The causes of this loss of stedfastnes are diverse; in some it is the
inundation of afflictions, violently and irresistably breaking in upon them,
especially raising the fierce perturbation of impatiencie, thus it was in Job.
2. In some, it is some horrible sin, I say horrible sin, either because it
is some foul transgression, as in David and Solomon; or made horrible by long
continuance in it.

Now into this evil estate, Steps in falling away.
some fall suddenly, some by degrees, commonly it begins at spiritual pride,
and proceeds after from the careless use of the means, to the neglect of
them, and from thence to a secure disregard of the inward daily corruptions of
the heart, joined with a bold presumption of some infolded mercy of God, till
at length they fall into some special sin or wilful relapse.

The effects.
The effects and concomitants of this relapse, and loss of stedfastnes, are
diverse, and fearful, as 1. The ceasing of the comforts of the spirit, the
spirit being a sleep, and in a manner quenched. 2. The heart is excommunicated
from the power of Gods ordinances, as they may feel when they come to use
them. 3. Spiritual boldness or encouragement to come unto God is lost with it.
4. They are secretly delivered to Satan to be whipped and buffeted with
tentations many times of blasphemy or atheism, or otherwise through his
spiritual wickedness, held in internal vassalage. 5. Most an end, the
outward providence of God is changed toward them, yea some times they are
scourged with horrible crosses. 6. Many times they are given over to be
punished with other sins.

Yet for the morefull understanding hereof, Distinctions about apostasy.
it will be profitable to consider of some distinctions, both of the persons,
and the cause, and the effects. For of these that fall from their stedfastnes,
some are sensible of it, some are insensible: Those that have their hearts
wakened after this loss, do usually feel a strong conflict of terrors, the
conscience being wearied with the tortures that their wounded spirit is
tormented withal, under the sense of Gods fierce anger, and in many of these
their terror is renewed upon every cross, yea almost at every word of God, so
does the conceit of Gods fighting against them prevail with them.

Now in the insensible, the special effect is a spiritual slumber or
lethargy, with the rest of the ill effects before in common propounded.

Secondly, a distinction must be made of the cause, for the sin is sometimes
secret, sometimes open: now the consequents or fruits of open falling, by open
sin is diverse, usually the fall thereof is great, it makes a wonderful noise
in the Church, besides it wounds the hearts of Gods children, and breeds
exceeding great distaste in them. Further their falls makes them wonderful
vile before the world, the mouth of every beast will be open to rail against
them: wicked men will keep the assise for them, yea the banks of blasphemy in
wicked men will be broken down, so as they will with full mouth speak evil
of the good way of God; besides it cannot be avoided but many will be defiled
by it, and wonderfully fired and confirmed in sinning.

Again, we must distinguish of effects or consequents, for some are ordinary,
some extraordinary: for sometimes besides the ordinary events, the Lord
scourges those falls with satanicall molestations, either of their persons or
houses, yea sometimes they are smitten with death.

1. Quest. But do all these come always for sin?

Answ. Not always, but where sin is presumptuous they do.

2. Quest. But do all these things befall all such as fall into presumptuous
sin? Answ: The judgments of God are like a great depth, and he afflicts how
he will, but these are his rods, he may use all of them, or any of them as
pleases him.

3. Quest. But are these things found in those that loose their stedfastnes by
the violence of crosses? Answ: Though many of them are, when the cross has a
mixture with any special impatiencie, as in Jobs case: yet properly they are
rods for presumptuous sins.

Object. But is it not better may some say, to continue as we are, then to
acknowledge and make profession and be in this danger to fall into so evil an
estate? Soint. Is it best to live and die a beggar, because some one great
heir through his own default has ruined for a time his house? Or is the
condition of a beggar better then a Prince, because Nabuchadnetzar was seven
years like a beast?

4. Q. But if his losses be thus many and miserable is there any thing left in
him? Answ. There is. 1. His seed abides in him, the holy seed of the word can
never be rooted out of him wholly. 2. He has faith though it be in a trance.
3. Grace is alive in him, though he be in the state of a palsy man, or as
one that has a dead palsy, and yet is alive. 4. He has the spirit of God in
him, but he is locked up and taken prisoner.

Now for the remedies of this loss of steadfastness, Remedies for the loss of
steadfastness.
they must know that there is required of them, a special humiliation, note
that I say a special humiliation: For they must in private afflict their
souls before the view of their special sins, and Gods feirce wrath, with
strong cries and sighs unspeakable making their moan before God, They must
cry unto God out of the deep, as the Psalmist says. Besides they must shame
themselves openly by making themselves vile before the people of God, so did
David and Solomon and Paul; yea they must voluntarily resign over themselves
unto Gods scourging hand, being so desirous to be cleansed of their sins, as to
be contented God should wash them thoroughly though it were with many crosses.
And further they must be revenged of their own flesh, by streitning and
curbing themselves in their lawful desires and delights. Thus of their
special humiliation: Now secondly, they must take special pains to recover
their faith in God; and to get pardon of their sins, They must cry daily
unto God, they must search again and again in the records of Gods promises,
especially waiting upon the preaching of the Gospel, to see when the Lord will
return and have mercy by reviving of their hearts with the comforts of his
presence. And for this they must be wonderful careful of the spirit of grace,
to stir it up by daily prayer, and to observe with all watchfulness the
stirring of it, resolving with all thankfulness to acknowledge any measure of the
reviving of the spirit.

Lastly when they are in any measure recovered, they must look to two things.
1. They must forsake all appearance of evil. 2. They must use a continual
watchfulness, and with fear and jealousy look to their hearts, even in
their best actions: least Satan beguile them, and they revolt again, and then
their case of reciduation be worse then the former, blessed is the man that
fears always.

Thus of the loss of steadfastness, especially, as it is in the cureable, for
there is a loss of stedfastnes, and the joy of Gods salvation even in the
elect, which in this life is incureable; Of this I can say little, because the
Scripture is in this point exceeding sparing, and because the judgments of God
especially of this kind are exceeding deep, who can wade into them? only a
word or two of it. This loss is incureable two ways, sometimes in the cross
or judgment it brought upon the offender, sometimes in the unsteadfastness it
self; for sometimes though the Lord restore inward joy and assurance, yet he
will not remove the outward sign of his wrath, sometimes he draws back the
outward affliction, but does not restore the inward comfort, or not in so great
a measure, so as some of Gods children, may die without the sense of the joy of
Gods salvation till they come to heaven, yea they may die in great terror and
despair: yet the Lord may be reconciled, and they may truly repent, though
these terrors or judgments be not released: because God many times will
thereby purge the public scandal and clear his own justice: Besides, such
spectacles do give warning to a careless world, to let them know that God
has treasures of wrath for sin if they repent not. Thus of the doctrine of
steadfastness of faith, and unsteadfastness also; now briefly for some uses of
it.

Uses.
It may serve for great reproof, of the great neglect of seeking this
steadfastness of faith. We may complain as well of the common Protestant, as of
the Papists herein, for they are alike adversaries to the assurance of faith;
let such as are touched with fear of God and desire to believe, travel more
and more for attainement hereof, and to this end cleave to the sure word of
the Prophets and Apostles, and labor in the practice and exercise of all holy
and Christian graces.

And for particular consideration of the troubles and losses of Gods children,
we may note 1. That it is a wonderful fearful thing to fall into Gods hands,
and that the promises of God yield no protection to a willing offender: woe
unto profane beasts; if sin make God angry toward his own children, and
make them also vile before men, then where shall those beasts that wallow in
sin appear? if they be justly abased that fall once into one sin, what
shall be the confusion of face and heart in those men, when all the sins they
ever committed, shall be revealed before Gods Angels, and men at the last day?
2. They that stand have great reason to take heed lest they fall from their
steadfastness, Psalm. 56.9. and 116.7.
and be carried away with the error of the wicked. 3. We should be wonderful
thankful, if God has kept us from falling, it is his singular grace to keep
the scot of his Saints.

VERSE, 6.7. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye
in him.

7. Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.


In these two verses the Apostle concludes the exhortation begun in the 23.
verse of the former chapter; for whereas after all these reasons and the answer
of sundry objections, they might finally have said, tell us then at once what
it is you would have us to do? the Apostle answers summarily, that concerning
holy life, he would have them walk as they have received the Lord Jesus
Christ: and concerning faith, he would have them to be rooted and soundly
edified and established in the faith, especially to abound in thankfulness to
God for their happy estate in Christ Jesus.

The 6. verse contains a precept concerning holy life, viz. to walk on in
Christ, and a rule by which that precept is to be squared, and determined, viz
as they have received Christ Jesus the Lord.

As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, etc.]

These words may be diversely urged upon them, according to the diverse senses
may be conceived of them, For

1. To walk as we have received Christ, may bear this sense, namely, to frame
our obedience according to the measure of the knowledge of Christ we have
received, it shall be to us according to what we have, to whom God has given
much, of them he requires much; and judgment certainly abides for him that
has received the knowledge of his masters will, and does it not, if our
practice be according to the knowledge we have, this may be our comfort, God
will accept of us: and otherwise they are but in a miserable case that are
barren and unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ 2. Pet. 1.9.
.

2. Such a sense as this may be gathered, viz. So live with care of a godly
life, as ye neglect not to preserve the doctrine, concerning Christ, ye have
received. Certainly it ought to be the care of every godly mind, to do his
best to preserve the purity of the doctrine he received together with Jesus
Christ; great is the general neglect of many sorts of people herein.

3. Or thus, Let the doctrine you have received from Christ Jesus be your
only rule both for life and manners, So live and walk as you have received;
The Apostle commands to separate from every brother that walks
inordinately, and not after the traditions which they had received of the
Apostle 2 Thessalonians 3.6.
. By tradition he means the holy word of God delivered by lively voice unto
the Churches, while yet it was not written, even the same which now is written:
The elect Lady and her children are commended for walking in the truth, as they
had received commandment of the Father 2. Ioh. 4.
. Yea so must we stick unto the word received, as if any man teach otherwise
he should be accounted accursed Gal. 1.9. 1. Cor. 15.1.2.
. For the Apostles received it not of men, but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ Gal. 1.12.
. And as they have received of the Lord, so have they delivered unto us 1. Cor.
11.23.
. Therefore we must conclude with the Apostle, These things which we have
learned and received, and heard out of the holy word, those things we must do
Phil. 4.9.
.

4. The sense may be thus; as ye were affected when ye first received
Christ, so walk on and continue, at first men receive Christ with singleness
of heart, with great estimation of the truth, with wonderful joy, with fervent
love to Gods children, with a longing desire after spiritual things, with
endeavor to bear fruit, and without the mixtures of men's traditions and
inventions.

Now then they are exhorted to take heed that they lose not what they have
wrought 2. Ioh. 9.
, but preserve those holy affections and desires still; striving against the
witchcrafts of Satan and the world, that they be not beguiled from the
simplicity that is in Christ Jesus.

The doctrines hence to be noted are*

1. That Christians do receive Christ, and that not only publicly into their
countries and Churches (which yet is a great privilege, for Christ brings
with him many blessings, and stays many judgments, brings a public light to
men that sit in darkness and shadow of death, and raises immortality as it
were to light and life again,) but privately and particularly into their
hearts and souls. The privileges of such as receive Christ ^ Phil. 3.9.
This is the happiest receiving of Christ. Oh the glory of a Christian in
receiving Christ! for he that receives Christ into his heart, receives
excellent illumination, unspeakable joy 1. Pet. 8.
, sure atonement Romans 5.11. and 3.25.
, hid Manna Reu. 2.17.
, eternal graces 1. Cor. 1.6. and 4 7.
, yea the very spirit of Christ Romans 8 9.
, to make him know the things given of God, to set the soul at liberty 2 Cor.
3.17.
, to mortify the deeds of the flesh Romans 8.13.
, to be a spirit of prayer Zach. 12.12.
, to give answer concerning our adoption Rom 8.15.
, to furnish the soul with gifts Gal. 5.22.
, to seal us up to the day of redemption Ephesians. 1.14.
, to be an eternal comforter Ioh 14.
, to be life for righteousness sake Romans 8.10.
, to help our infirmities Romans 8 26.
, and to raise up our dead bodies at the last day Rom 8.11.
. Lastly he that receives Christ, receives with him the promise of an
eternal inheritance, into which he is presently acknowledged an heir, yea a
Co-heire with Christ Jesus.

2. The second doctrine. It is not enough to receive Christ, but we must walk
in him; to walk in Christ, Heb. 9.15.
is not only so to live, Romans 8.17.
as we be sure that Christ lives in us Gal. 2.20.
, or to walk after the appointment of his will expressed in his word, but it
is chiefly to continue a daily care of holy perseverance in the graces and
duties of holy life, holding fast our communion with Christ, this the Apostle
thinks wonderful needful to be often urged and pressed by all means upon us,
so shamefully do many fall away, and so cursedly is the sincerity that is in
Christ Jesus pursued by the Devil, and the flesh and the world, and so
necessary is the endeavor to preserve the glory of perseverance in all well
doing to the end. Oh this perseverance, it is a wonderful thing, and where is
the man that does not lose something of what he had? Oh that we could be
soundly awakened to the care of it, or that we had minds that would be
willing to do any thing we could to further it: but alas there is not a
heart in us, there are diverse excellent directions in the word to confirm us
herein, if we were not overcome with sluggishnesse.

There are diverse things which if they were looked to at our first setting out,
we were sure to hold out and continue walking in Christ. Rules for perseverance
to be observed in our first conversion.
As,

If men did at first put their hearts to these questions of abnegation, so as
they would be thoroughly advised, if thou had asked thine own heart these
questions; Can thou take up thy cross and follow Christ? Can thou suffer
aduesity with the righteous? Can thou profess Christ amidst the different
opinions of multitudes of men? Can thou be content to deny profit and
reason, and thy desires and pleasures and credit, and all for Christ's sake? if
not, thou will certainly fall away, and therefore better never begin.

2. At men's first setting out they must take heed they be not slightly in
their reformation and mortification: but do it thoroughly, not sparing to
afflict their Souls with sensible and sound godly sorrow: for else they will
afterward repent of their repentance: whereas if it were done with sound
advice, and serious humiliation, this would be an immovable foundation of
rest and encouragement to faith and well-doing. It is a great question, whether
such will hold out that come in without sorrow for sins.

3. Men must at first look to their kind of faith: we see many are grossly
deceived: temporary faith makes such a show, that unless it be thoroughly
tried it will deceive many: and there is a marvelous loathnesse in our nature
to abide the trial, though we know it be plainly here required 2. Cor. 13.5.
; whereas if we did get a continuing faith at first, we might have the more
assurance of holding out.

4. It would much further perseverance if we did at first endeavor, that
knowledge and affection might be inseparable twins: not to be much proud of
knowledge without affection, nor to trust much to zeal without knowledge:
either of these may be alone in men, that will fall away shamefully.

5. When men go about reformation, they should do it thoroughly, and be sure
their hearts are renewed: for the old heart will not hold out long to endure
the hardship of a reformed life: and if some sins have been favored and
spared, though they lie still for a time, yet afterward they will revive and
show themselves. We see in some, what a do there is to leave some corruptions
and faults, they are seven years many times before they can be persuaded to
forgo them, resting in the reformation of other faults: whereas there is no
assurance that they walk with a right foot in the Gospel, till they make
conscience of a ready reformation of every known sin, and till they reform
thoroughly they are like to fall away, whatsoever fair show of zeal and
forwardness they make.

6. In particular diverse men are to be warned of passion and violent
affections, if thou mean to prosper in thy persuasion of reformation, then
speedily cease from anger and leave of wrath, else there will be little hope
that thou will not return to do evil Psalm. 37 8.9.
, the promise of constant protection is with such as are sheep Ioh. 10.28.
, and are so far humbled, as they have left their wooluish qualities and
passions.

7. To make thy standing more sure, acquaint thy self with such as fear God,
and join thy self to them by all engagements of a profitable fellowship in
the Gospel: there is a secret tie unto constancy in the communion of Saints,
Ier. 32.39.40.
he is not like to walk long that walks alone, especially if he might walk
with good company; and this is a clear mark of a temporary faith in such as
for many things go far, when men see they shun society with the godly.

8. It is an excellent help also, at first, to strive by all means to get the
testimony of Jesus confirmed in us 1. Cor. 1.6. 1. Tim. 2.6.
: Christ gives testimony especially three ways: 1. By the promise of the word.
2. By the graces of his spirit. 3. By the witness of the spirit of adoption.
Now if we did study the promises diligently, especially recording such as we
had interest in upon our conversion to God, and did withal try our selves
diligently and particularly concerning those saving graces, which are marks
and signs of regeneration and salvation, and did also beg the witness of
the spirit, waiting for those unspeakable and glorious joys of the holy Ghost,
and with all thankfulness acknowledging Gods seal for our confirmation, when
he is pleased so to set it to: me thinks this threefold coard could never be
broken. Oh the heavy slumber and sluggishnesse of our natures: how wonderful
rich is God in compassion? how ready is he to forgive and multiply pardon? how
willingly does he lift up the light of his countenance upon us? and yet men
have not the heart answerably to wait upon him, or to be at the labor of this
confirmation. How are many that set me somewhat unto many, how are they, I say,
bewitched with security, so as they cannot be fired out of it, but live at a
venture, and neither seek nor esteem the testimony of Jesus?

9 Would we be set in a safe condition, and stablished? then we must strive
for a free spirit, remembering David's prayer, stablish me with thy free spirit
Psalm. 51.12. What a free spirit is.
. Now if any ask what a free and ingenuous spirit is? I answer: 1* It is a
mind that will not be in bondage to the corruptions of the times, it
acknowledges no such bonds or relations to any, as to sin for their sakes.
2. It is a mind that apprehends liberty in Christ, a mind that will not be
in bondage to legal perfection, but discerns his release from the rigor and
curse of the law: it will not be subject, neither to a corrupt conscience, nor
yet to a conscience erring or ouer-busie, but sees his prerogatives he enioyes
in Christ, either in the hope of glory, or sense of grace, or use of outward
things, or his liberty in things indifferent; there is a kind of seruilenesse
or spirit of bondage in many, that wonderfully holds them down, and if they be
not better lightened of their daily fears and burdens, the flesh will lighten
it self, by rebellion and apostacy, 3. It is a mind not cheined down to the
love of or lust after earthly things. 4. It is a mind ready pressed to do good,
full of incitations to good things, and careful to preserve it self from the
occasions of evil: as resolved so to stand upon the sincerity of his heart,
as rather to loose his life then his integrity: as neither caring for those
things which ^he common sort seek after, as praise, profits, outward shows,
etc. not fearing their fears.

10. Men must at first labor to get a sound and hearty love of the truth,
desirous to store and furnish themselves with the treasures of holy knowledge:
if the law be written in the hearts and bowels Ier. 31.33. Psalm. 37.31.
of men, they will hold out to the end.

Lastly, men must be sure that they be good and true in their hearts Psalm.
125.1.24.
, as the Psalmist says, for then they shall be as the mount Sion that cannot
be moved, and the Lord will always do well unto them.

Signs of a true heart.
Now the signs of a good and true heart, are such as these. 1. A true heart is
a new heart, that must be taken for granted, else in vain to inquire any
further, if there be not a newness of the heart to God. 2. It loves God with
unfeigned and undivided love, though it cannot accomplish all it would, yet
(...) has holy desires without hypocrisy, after God, above all things. 3. It
labors for inward holiness as well as outward, both seeking the graces that
should be within, and mourning for inward sin, as well as outward. 4. It will
smite for small sins; as well for numbering the people, as for murder and
whoredom* he has not a good and true heart, that is vexed only for great
evils and offenses. 5. A true heart is a constant heart, it is not fickle and
mutable, as many are in all their ways, but that it is once, it desires to be
always. 6. It desires the power of godliness more then the show of it: and
is more affected with the praise of God then of men. 7. It quickly finds the
absence of Christ, and cannot be at rest, till he return. 8. It constantly
pronounces evil of sin and sinners, and well of godliness and good men.

Now on the other side, the reason why many fall away, was because they were
not true in their hearts at first: they set up a profession of repentance with
carnal ends, and through hypocrisy beguiled themselves and others.

Secondly, if men find that they have been rightly formed in the womb and
birth of their change, then there are other directions for them to observe,
throughout their lives, that they might continue in this holy walking with God
and his Saints. Would thou be sure not to fall away? then look to these
things. Rules to be looked unto after our calling.


1. Be sure thou continue in the careful use of the means, as the word,
prayer, conference and Sacraments, else know that when once thou give way to
a customarie hardness of heart in the use of the means, or neglect of them,
thou art near either some great sin or temptation, or some great judgment
and apostacy; and therefore concerning the means principally look to two
things, 1. preserve appetite. 2. practice that thou hear, without omission
or delay.

2. If thou discern any spiritual weakness or decay, or feel any combat
with the flesh, or the tentations of Satan, be sure thou complain betimes, and
resist at the first, for then the grace of God will be sufficient, and the
weapons of our warfare mighty through God: prayer will easily master sin at
the first through the victory in Jesus Christ.

3. Resolve with thy self not to let go thy assurance, or cast away the
confidence of thy hope whatsoever befall thee: Heb. 10 36.
or at least, not till thou may see wonderful evident reason. It is a
marvelous great fault, to call the love of God into question upon every
occasion, whereas men cannot glorify God more then to live by faith, and to be
immovable in it: God takes little delight in a soul that will withdraw it self
upon every occasion by unbelief. Are they not strangely foolish, that will
wear their helmets when their is no stir, and as soon as they see an
adversary, or any blows toward, then to cast away their helmet, and do it
so usually? such are we and worse, that stand bragging of our faith and hope in
prosperity and ease, and when affliction and temptation comes, then most
childishly we cast away both faith and hope, and till reason and sense are
satisfied, we will not be persuaded.

4. Set perfection before thine eyes to strive after it; and to this end
acquaint thy self with the rules of holy life, Phil. 3.
and consider the examples of such as have walked therein, and the woeful
events that befall the contrary minded, especially think much of the great
recompense of reward, even the price of our high calling in Jesus Christ.

5. Take heed of the occasions of falling, such as are spiritual pride, known
hypocrisy, desire to be rich, discord with the godly, and vain ianglings,
with out discretion, neglect of our particular callings, and ungodly company.

Hitherto of perseverance in life. Now in the next verse he entreats of
perseverance in faith.

Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as you have been
taught. 7.
In these words is both a precept and a rule; a precept, to be rooted, built,
stablished: a rule, as ye have been taught. The substance of the precept is but
to counsel them to increase more and more that they might be steadfast in the
assurance of Gods favor in Jesus Christ. Of this stedfastnes I have at large
entreated in the 5. verse. Only we may here again be instructed and informed.

1. Of the necessity and excellency of stedfastnes; the Apostle would not
thus often peale upon it, but that he knew it to be of singular worth in the
life of man, and of great necessity unto our consolation; besides it implies
that people are for the most part slow hearted herein, and hardly drawn to the
unfeigned and diligent labor after the establishing of their faith and
assurance.

2. That all this stedfastnes of assurance is not the work of a day; a great
tree is not grown or rooted but successively; a great house is not built all
at once, we must be every day adding something to Gods work, that the building
of grace may be in due time finished: none are so established, but they may
grow in faith, none have such great roots, but they may take root yet more:
many men strive hard to make their trees show in branches and leaves, I mean
in outward profession in the world, but alas what should this great bulk, and
so many branches and leaves do, unless there were more roots within? yea
many dear children of God mistake wonderfully; they every day carry together
heaps of precepts for life, but alas poor souls so great a building will not
stand, unless they lay their foundation sure, I mean that they get their
faith in Christ (the only sure foundation) more confirmed and established.

As ye have been taught.

Note here the Apostles candor, he does not arrogate the glory of their
establishment to himself, but sends them to their Minister, and teaches
them to depend upon him, to wait upon the blessing of God upon his labor, and
to acknowledge the good they have, to have received by his ministry.

Here diverse things may be noted.

1. That the people should labor for a reverend estimation of the doctrine
they receive from their faithful teachers.

2. That as faith comes by hearing, so does the establishment of faith also.

3. That it is wonderful dangerous to neglect either the charge of our
teachers when they urge us to assurance, or the rules by which they guide us
out of the word of God, for the attainment of it; if we would go about it,
when our teachers call upon us, the Lord would be with his ordinance to bless
it to us; we should be afraid to delay, when we are taught how to confirm our
souls in faith and grace.

4. The faithful Ministers do greatly labor to establish their hearers in the
assurance of Gods favor, and the duties of holy life.

Abounding therein with thanksgiving.

In these words the Apostle shuts up all; wherein his intent is to stir them
up to thankfulness, that as they did thrive in the means or matter of faith and
holy life, so they should glorify God by all possible thankfulness for it: as
he would have them abound in faith and holiness, so also in thankfulness to
God. This may wonderfully smite our hearts: for if we observe our wretched
evil dispositions, we may find that we are wonderfully bent to the very habit
of unthankfulness: and therefore it is just with God many times, that we do
no more thrive in victory over our corruptions, or in the power of diverse
graces, or in the progress of duties, because we do not more tenderly and
constantly acknowledge the goodness of God we have had experience of. Oh that
it were written upon our hearts, and graven deep in our memories, that nothing
becomes us more then to abound in thankfulness, no fairer sight then to see
the Altar of the Lord covered with the calves of our lips; never can the estate
of a child of God be such, but he has exceeding great cause of thankfulness for
his happiness in Christ.

VERSE. 8. Beware lest there be any man that spoil you through philosophy and
vain deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ.


The order of the rest of the chapter.
Hitherto of the exhortation. From this verse to the end of this chapter is
contained the dehortation, wherein the Apostle labors to dissuade the
Colossians from receiving any corrupt doctrine, or any vain observations,
either borrowed from philosophy, or from humane traditions, or from the
abrogated law of Moses.

The dehortation has three parts.

1. He sets down the matter from which he does dehort. verse 8. 2. He gives
7. reasons to strengthen the dehortation, to v. 16. 3. He concludes against the
things from which he dehorts, and that severally, from v. 16. to the end.
In this verse he dehorts from three things.

1. From Philosophy, that is, doctrines taken out of the books of
Philosophers, not agreeing to the word of God, which though it had a show of
wisdom, yet indeed was but very deceit. 2. From traditions,.i. observations
and external rites and vain superstions, concerning either ordinary life, or
else Gods service, devised by men whether learned or unlearned, and imposed as
necessary upon the consciences of men. 3. From the elements of the world,.i.
from the ceremonies of Moses now abrogated, and so from Iudaisme.
In general, we see in the Church of God, men must bear the words of
dehortation, as well as of exhortation: men are in a strange case, that love to
eat poison, and yet cannot abide to receive any antidot.

Again, from the coherence we may note, that the best way to be sound against
the hurt of corrupt doctrines or traditions, is, so to cleave to the doctrine
of the Gospel, as we grow settled in the assurance of faith, and experienced in
the way of a holy life; he cannot be hurt that minds holiness and assurance.

Beware] When we find these caueats in the Scripture, we must think of them
as more then bare notes of attention, for they show some great evil or
deceiuings, and withal it imports, that we of our selves are inclinable to
fall; as in this place, this [ Beware] imports, that men naturally are inclined
to falsehood more then truth, to evil more then good, to wise men more then the
wise God, to traditions more then the written word, to their own devises, more
then Gods precepts, to false teachers, more then the true Apostles, to
ceremonies, more then the weighty things of the Law.

Any man] See here the vanity and leuitie of man's nature: many men either by
word or example cannot reduce unto order, or unto truth, yet any man may seduce
unto sin and error. All sorts of men may be fountains of evil, but in case
of returning, an obstinate sinner or superstitious person, is usually wiser
then seven men that can give a reason.

Spoil you] This word is various in signification; (...).
it signifies as some take it, to make bare, or to prey upon, or to
circumuent, or to deceive, or to drive away as a prey, or to lead away bond and
captive, or as here, to spoil; it is so to seduce, or to carry away as a
spoil: for the matter expressed in this word, we may note.

1. That a Christian stands in danger of a combat, and if he look not to
himself, may be spoiled and carried captive. for the word seems to be a
military word, and so imports a battle.

2. That there are worse losses may befall us, then the loss of goods or
children, a man is never worse spoiled then when his soul suffers spiritual
losses. Jobs losses by the Sabaeans was great, yet theirs were greater. 1. That
lost the good seed sown in their hearts Math. 13.
. 2. That had those things taken away that sometimes they had in spiritual
things Math. 13.
. 3. That lost their first love Revel. 2.
. 4. That lost the kingdom of God in losing the means of the kingdom Math. 21.
. 5. That lost what they had wrought 2. Ioh. 10.
. 6. That lost the presence of God Hos. 5. vlt.
. 7. That lost vprightnes and sincerity. 8. That lost the taste of the powers
of the life to come Heb. 6.
. 9. That lost the joys of their salvation Psalm. 51.
. And lastly, much more theirs that lose their crown Revel 3.11.
.

3. We may here see, that corrupt opinions may mar all, and spoil the soul,
and make it into a miserable prey to evil men and angels.

4. That matters, that seem small things and trifles, may spoil the soul,
and bring it into a miserable bondage, such as those traditions might seem to
be.

You] This word notes the persons spoiled, and so gives us occasion to observe
2. things.

1. That we may be in the sheepfold of Christ, and yet not be safe. You, yea
you Christians. The Devil can fetch booties even out of the temple of Christ.

2. When he says you, not yours, it shows that howsoever it be true, that
most an end false teachers, seek theirs not them, that is, seek gain, not
the souls of the people; yet it sometimes falls out, that even the most
dangerous and damned seducers, may be free from seeking great things for
themselves. It is not any justification to the popish Priests, nor proof of
the goodness of their cause, that they can deny their own preferments and
liberty on earth, to win Proselites to their religion. There have always
been some even in the worst professions of men, that have at least seemed
outwardly to care for nothing but the souls of the people.

Through Philosophy] This is the first kind of corruption here condemned.

Quest.
But is Philosophy naught and here rejected?

Answ.
It is not simply condemned, but in some respects: namely, as it does not
contain it self within his bounds, or is not to the glory of God: or as it
is, vain deceit. (...)
So that vain deceit may be here added interpretatiuely: it explaines the
sense.

Quest.
But how became philosophy to be vain deceit?

Answ.
It is vain deceit four ways. 1. When it propounds and teaches devilish
things, How Philosophy becomes vain deceit.
as the philosophy of the Pagans did: As in their Magickes, when they taught
the diverse kinds of Southsayings, coniurings, casting of natiuities, and a
great part of Judicial Astrology. 2. When the placets and opinions of
Philosophers that are false, are justified as true. As their doctrine of the
worlds eternity, or the souls mortality, or the worship of Angels, or their
Stoicall fate and destiny, or their vilde opinions about the chief good. 3.
When the principles of philosophy, that in the ordinary course of nature are
in themselves true, are abused to deny things propounded in the Gospel above
nature. As those maxims, that of nothing nothing is made. And that of a
privation to a habit there is no regression, and that a Virgin cannot conceive.
The first is brought against the creation of God, whereas it is true of the
second cause only. So the second is brought against the resurrection, whereas
it is true only in the ordinary course of nature. 4. When the truest and best
things in philosophy are urged, as necessary to salvation, and imposed as
meet to beioyned with the Gospel.

Philosophy may yet be used, so as she be content to be a servant not a
mistress. If when Gods word reueales any thing absurd in her, that then she
will humble herself, and acknowledge her blindness, and be admonished by
divine light. And on the other side, men may be corrupted with philosophy, and
that diverse ways. When men are corrupted by philosophy.
1. If men use any part of philosophy that is devilish, as too many do. 2. If
men neglect the study of the Scriptures, and spend their time only in those
humane studies. 3. When men measure all doctrine by humane reason and
philosophical positions. 4. When men depend not upon God, but upon second
causes. 5. When men strive to yoke men's consciences with the plausible words
of men's wisdom. Hence also we may note, that false doctrine may be supported
with great appearance of wisdom and learning, as was the corruption of those
false teachers. We may not think that Papists are fools, and can say nothing
for their religion: but if the Lord should let us fall into their hands to try
us, we must expect from diverse of them great shows of learning and colors of
truth.

Thus of Philosophy.

The diverse acceptance of the word, Tradition.
After the traditions of men.] The word Tradition has been used 3. ways.
Sometimes to express the doctrine of Gods servants by authority from God,
delivered to the Church by lively voice, but afterward committed to Scripture:
so the doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles, and of the Patriarchs before the
Law, was first delivered by tradition. Sometimes to signify such opinions as
are in Scripture, but not expressed: they are there but not spoken therein,
that is, are drawn but by consequence or impliedly. Sometimes to express such
observations, as were never any way written in the word, but altogether
unwritten in the Scripture, Not (...) but (...).
as being devised merely by men. So it is taken ordinarily, and so traditions
are to be condemned.

There is another distinction about traditions, A distinction about tradition.
and that is this. 1. Some things are founded upon Scripture, and did always
tend to further godliness, and are therefore Apostolical and to be observed:
as all the doctrines of the word, and the public assemblies of prayer and
preaching. 2. Some things were founded in Scripture, and were sometimes
profitable, but now are out of all needful use: and therefore though they be
Apostolical, yet they bind not, as the tradition of abstaining from things
sacrificed to Idols, and strangled and blood. 3. Some things have not
foundation in the word, yet may further piety, if used without superstition,
and therefore not unlawful, as the observation of the feast of the Nativity
of Christ, and such like. 4. Some things have no foundation in Scripture, nor
do at all further piety, but are either light or unnecessary, or repugnant to
the word, those are simply unlawful.

Traditions were both in the Church of the Jews, Traditions in the Church of
the Jews.
and in the Churches of the Gentiles; the Jewish traditions were called the
traditions of the elders, not because they were enjoined them by their Sanadrim
or College of Elders, but because they were brought in by their fathers after
the captivity, the most of them after the rising of the sect of the Pharisees.
For among them was that distinction, of the Law written, and the law by word of
mouth: this Law by word of mouth is the Cabalisticall Theology, Cabalisticall
Divinity.
a Divinity so greatly in request amongst the Pharisees; but how well our
Savior Christ liked those traditions may appear. Matthew. 15.

The traditions in the Churches of the Gentiles may be considered two ways.
Traditions in the Churches of the Gentiles.
1. As they were in the times of the primitive Church. 2. As they were in the
times after, under Antichrist.

In the primitive Church they had by degrees one after another a great number
of traditions: such as these; To stand and pray every Sabbath from Easter to
Whitsontide; The Sign of the Cross; to pray toward the East; the anointing
of the baptized with oil; the canonical hours; Lent and diverse kinds of
fasts; the mixing of water with wine; the addition of diverse orders in the
Church, as Canons, Exorcistes, Ostiaries, etc; Holy Days; to sing Halleluiah
at Easter but not in Lent, and such like.

Now if any ask what we are to think of those and the like traditions then in
use. Quest.
I answer. Answ.
1. That the Church had power to appoint traditions in indifferent rites, so
that the rules of the Apostles for indifferent things were observed, as that
they were not offensive, nor against order, or decency, or edification. As to
appoint the time and place of public prayer, to set down the form of it, to
tell how often the Sacraments should be administered, etc.

2. We must understand that the word Traditions used by the Fathers, Traditions
in the times of the Fathers in the primitive Church.
did not always signify these and such like things devised by men, but
sometimes they did mean thereby, such things as were warranted by Scripture,
though not expressly. As the baptizing of Infants, the observation of the
Sabbath, etc.

3. There were some Traditions in some Churches, in the first hundred of year,
that were directly impious, as the Invocation of Saints and Images.

4. Someother things were then used that were not every way impious in their
own nature, and yet not greatly justifiable in their use, and such were diverse
of the aforenamed observations.

5. That diverse things at the first brought into the Church with good intents
and to good purpose, afterward grew into abuse: as for example; In the
Primitive order of Mounks.

6. The worser traditions were brought in by false teachers, and too
pertinaciously observed by the people, the Fathers bewailing it, and sometimes
complaining of it.

7. The Fathers themselves in some things showed leuity and inconstancy of
judgment: sometimes to please the people, approouing things; and again,
sometimes standing upon the sole perfection of the Scriptures.

Lastly, it cannot well be denied, but that the liberty taken in the
primitive times to bring in traditions, opened a door to Antichrist.

Traditions in Popery.
Now concerning the traditions in Popery under Antichrist, their doctrine is
abominable, for they say that the word of God is either written or unwritten;
and they say their unwritten verities are necessary as well as Scripture, yea
that they are of equal authority with Scripture. And those traditions they
would thus exalt, Scriptures against traditions.
are for number many, for nature childish, unprofitable, impious and
idolatrous. But that we may be fully settled against their impious doctrine of
traditions, we may profitably record in our memories these Scriptures, Deuteronomy.
12.32. Reu. 22.18. Matthew. 15. 1. Pet. 1.18. Galat. 1.9. Isay 8.20. 2. Tim.
3.16. Ier. 19.5. Col. 1.28. Luke 16.29. 1. Cor. 1.5.6.7.

Ob. 1.
Ob. But our Savior told his disciples, I have many things to say unto you,
but ye cannot bear them now, but the spirit when he is come shall lead you
into all truth Ioh. 16.12.13
. Ergo, it seems there are diverse truths of Christ which were not revealed in
Scripture, but by the spirit uttered by tradition after.

Sol.
Sol. This may be understood of the gifts of the Apostles, and of the effects
thereof, and not of doctrine: for of doctrine he had said in the chap. before,
all things that I have heard of my father, I have made known unto you Ioh.
15.15.
. 2. If it were understood of doctrine, yet he does not promise to lead them
into any new truths, but into the old, and those Christ had already opened,
which should be brought to their mind, and they made more fully to understand
them. For so he says of the Comforter in the 14. chapter, he shall teach you
all things and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said
unto you Ioh. 14 26.
. 3. Be it he had not revealed all as yet, what did he therefore never reveal
it? why, the very text is against it, for he said, I have yet many things to
say unto you Ioh. 16.12.
, therefore he did say them, namely after his resurrection Act. 1.3.
. 4. Let it be noted that he says, ye cannot bear them now: the things he
had to say they could not then bear, why should we think that they could not
then bear these grave traditions, as the Anointing and Christening of bells
and such like? Lastly, let them prove it to us that those toies are the things
Christ promised to reveal, and then they say somewhat.

Ob. 2.
Ob. But in the 20. of John he says, Ioh. 21. vlt. and 20 30.
there were many things which were not written which Jesus did. Answ. He says
that the things which are written are to this end written, Sol.
that we might believe, and believing might have eternal life, so that what is
needful to faith and eternal life is written. 2. He says there were other
things not written, he says other things, not things differing from these:
other things in number, not in substance or nature, much less contrary things.

Ob. 3.
Ob. But the Thessalonians are charged to hold the traditions they had been
taught. Sol. The Scriptures were not then all written. 2. The Apostle
understands not traditions as the Papists do. For in the same place he
calls the things written in Scripture, Traditions, as well as those were not
yet written.

To conclude this discourse concerning traditions, we must further understand,
that the traditions in any Church though they be things indifferent in their
own nature, become unlawful, if they be such as be taxed in these eight rules.

1 If they be contrary to the rules of the Apostles concerning such things
ecclesiastically indifferent. Ways any tradition grows evil.
2. If they be urged and used with superstition. 3. Or as any parts of Gods
worship. 4. Or with opinion of merit. 5. Or as necessary to salvation. 6. Or if
they be equalled with the Law of God; or the weighty things of the Law,
neglected, and those more urged. 7. If they be light and childish. Lastly, if
by their multitude, they darken and obscure the glory of Christ in his
ordinances. Thus of the second thing.

The third thing from which he does dehort is the Rudiments of the world.

The Rudiments of the world]

By the Rudiments of the world he means the laws of Moses, What he means
by rudiments.
especially, concerning meats, washings, holidaies, garments, and such like
ceremonial observations.

Those laws were called Rudiments or Elements, Why called rudiments.
as some think, because the Jews and false Apostles held them as needful,
as the four elements of the world: or else because in their first Institution
they did signify the most choice and fundamental principles of the Gospel,
that were necessary for all to know that would be saved; but it is most likely
they are called so by a Gramaticall Relation to the Abcedaries, that as little
children begin at the Alphabet and so go on to higher studies, so did the
Lord give those laws, as the A. B. C. of the Jews, to be their Paedagogie,
in the infancy of the Church.

Now they might be said to be of the world, Why of the world.
because they were external rites and subject to the sight and sense: and
because they consisted of a glory that was more worldly then spiritual, and
because worldly men do most stand upon that which is external.

It Is the drift of the Apostle to dissuade from the observation of those rites,
because now the law of Moses was abrogated. Abrogation is a plausible doctrine
in popular estates; Proclamation concerning immunities from tributes and
taxations, or concerning Isonomie, that is, indifferent liberty for all to be
competitors for honors or free for profits of a commonwealth, those were wont
to be wonderful grateful to the multitude, and such is the doctrine of
abrogation in Divinity: yet because it may be abused by Epicures, it is to be
more carefully opened.

The Law may be said to be abrogated diverse ways. The law abrogated 4. ways.
1. When it is antiquated or obsolete, so as men are neither bound to duty nor
punishment: and thus the ceremonies are abrogated. 2. When the punishment is
changed, only the obedience still remaining in force, as in the law of
stealth. 3. It is abrogated to the guilty, when the punishment is transferred
on an other, so as the law cannot exercise her force upon the guilty person. 4.
It is abrogated, when it is weakened and eneruated by transgressors: to break
the law is to loose or dissolve the law; thus wicked men by their lives
abrogate it.

Quest. But is the whole law of Moses abrogated? Answ: No; for though Moses be
said to give place to Christ, that does not import a change of the law, but of
the Lawgiver. Moses gave three kinds of laws, Moral, Judicial, Ceremonial.

For the moral Law, How the moral law is abrogated. Rom 8.1.2.
it may in some sort be said to be abrogated, as 1. In respect of the curse and
malediction, as it did work anger and made execrable: for so there is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, in as much as the law of the
spirit of life has freed them from the law of sin and death. 2. In respect
of the inexorable rigor and perfection of it: Rom 6.14.
for we are not now under the law but under grace. 3. In some sense it is
abrogated in respect of justification: for now it is no more required of the
godly, that they should seek justification by the law, but by Jesus Christ.
Again, we must distinguish of the persons: for the law still lies on the
neck of the unregenerate, but in the former respects is abrogated to the
faithful, for against them there is no law, Gal. 5 23. 1. Tim. 1.9. How the
Judicial Laws are abrogated
but the law is given to the unrighteous.

Now for the Judicial laws of Moses, they were as it were civil laws,
concerning Magistrates, Inheritance, order and process of Judgments,
contracts, marriage, bondage, divorce, vows, usury, and trespass between man
and man.

These Judicial laws must be considered two ways. 1. As they bind the
Jews, as they were men, that is, in a common and general right, and so those
laws are perpetual in the nature and equity of them. 2. As they bound the
Jews as they were Jews, in a personal, national, or singular right: And
thus where the reason of a law is particular, there the law is so, and binds
not other people, but as it may fit their Commonwealths.

The Ceremonial laws did concern sacrifices, and sacraments, and other holy
things, and rituall observations. Divines have a saying, that the Iudicialls
are dead, but the Ceremonialls are deadly. That the Ceremonies are abrogated,
was signified by the renting of the veil of the Temple, yea the Temple it
self is destroyed, as will more fully appear when I come to the 15. verse.

And thus of the rudiments of the world; Hitherunto also of the matter of the
dehortation: the reasons follow.

And not after Christ.]

These words contain the first reason against philosophy, traditions and
ceremonies: they are not after Christ, and therefore to be avoided, lest our
souls be spoiled. These things were not after Christ, 1. because they no way
tended to the furtherance of heaven and reconciliation with God, which in
Christ we should principally look to. 2. Because they were no way warran^ed,
or approved, or commanded by Christ: Christ when he came imposed no such
things. 3. Because they do now no way lead us after Christ, but from him
rather, in as much as we rest in those works done, and neglect the commandment
of God. Lastly, they feed the humors of carnal men, and draw away men's minds
from the spiritual worship of God in Christ.

Hence we may note an answer to that question, whether the Gentiles may not be
saved without Christ by philosophy? The Apostle determines that the soul is
spoild by philosophy, if it be not after Christ.

Again, hence we may learn a note of trial concerning the truth of
religions: that religion which is not after Christ, is a false religion. for
this is a foundation, that everlasting happiness must be expected from Christ
alone.

Lastly, here we may note, that sins against Christ will be accounted for,
though they were not forbidden in the moral law. we have now another law in
the Gospel, so as whatsoever is not after Christ is a great transgress^ion:
neither may we think that we sin not against Christ but only by traditions
and ceremonies: for there are many other ways of offending against him, as, To
live without Christ and communion with him Ephesians. 2.12.
. To be an enemy to the cross of Christ Phil. 3.18.
. To make the doctrine of redemption an occasion of liberty to the flesh 1.
Pet. 2.16.
. To live after the lusts of men and not after the will of Christ 1. Pet. 4.1.2.
. To harden our hearts against the doctrine of reconciliation 2. Cor. 5.20.
. To hold false opinions concerning the person or office of Christ. To pervert
the Gospel of Jesus Christ Gal 1.7.
. To persecute or despite Christ in his members Matthew.
. To trust in the merit of our own works Romans 10.3.4.
. To deny him before men Mat. 10.33.
. To reproach the servants of Christ H^b 11.26.
Not to believe the report of his messengers Esaias 53.1. Romans 10.16.
. Not to imitate his graces Mat 11.29.
. To offend one of Christ's little ones Mark. 9.42.
. To make division or schism 1. Cor 1.12.
. Not to discern his body in the Sacrament 1. Cor. 11.28
. To build again things destroyed Gal. 2.17.18 19.
. To break our vows 1. Tim 5.11.12.
. To fall away from the doctrine of Christ 2 Ioh 9.
. To grieve the spirit of Christ Eph^s 4.30.
. To be beguiled from the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus 2. Cor. 11.3.
. To cast away their confidence Hebr. 10.
. Or to fashion our selves to the lusts of our ignorance 1. Pet. 1.14.
.

Thus of the first reason.

VERSE. 9. For in him dwells all the fullnes of the Godhead bodily.


These words contain the second reason: and it stands thus; If in Christ there
be all divine fullnes and sufficiency, then there needs no supply from humane
inventions, either for doctrine, or worship, or manners: but in Christ there
dwells all fullnes even from the ocean of all perfection, and therefore let no
man spoil you through philosophy, traditions or ceremonies, etc.

For the explication of the Minor, we may conceive of the words of the text
thus; There is in Christ all fullnes of wisdom as the Prophet of the Church,
therefore there needs no philosophy. 2. There is all fullnes of merit in
Christ's satisfaction as Priest of the Church, therefore there needs no
expiating ceremonies. 3. There is all fullnes of power and efficacy in Christ
as king of the Church, therefore there is no need that we should help him with
inuenting traditions to uphold the lives or godliness of Christians, or any
way to further the ordinances of Christ.

This verse conteines in it self an excellent proposition concerning Christ,
viz. That the Godhead is in the body, that is, in the humane nature of Christ;
And this is amplified, 1. by the manner of presence, he dwells there. 2. by
the measure, in all fullnes.

The word Corporally has been diversely interpreted. Corporally, that is, truly
and indeed. Corporally, that is, not in show or shadow only, but completely, in
comparison of the shadows of the law, or prefiguring signs. He dwells not
in Christ as he did in the Temple. Corporally, that is, according to the flesh.
Corporally, in respect of the manner of his presence, not as he is in all
creatures by efficacy or power, nor as he is in the Saints by his grace, nor
as he is in the blessed by glory, but corporally, that is, by union with the
person of the word; but I think it is safest and plainest, to take it in the
third sense, viz. corporally, that is, in his humane nature.

Christ is commended in the praise of his relation 1. to the Godhead in this
verse. 2. to Saints and Angels, v 10.

In him, notes his person, Godhead, expresses his divine nature, corporally,
import^ his humane nature, and dwells, tells us of the union of the natures.

The sum of all is, that in as much as the Lord has saved us by so
wonderful salvation in Christ, and in that our Savior was true God as well as
man, Why our Savior was the second person in the Trinity and no other.
as being the second person in Trinity, therefore we should wholly rest upon
him, and not distract our thoughts, or faith, or services, with either
philosophy, or traditions, or ceremonies, as supposing that our salvation
should be any ways furthered by those. Now in that the holy Ghost is so
careful to teach the divinity of Christ, we should also learn to be affected
with the wisdom of God, that has designed the second person in Trinity to be
our mediator: Think of it often, and weigh with your self the glory of Gods
wisdom herein; who is fitter to restore the world then he that made it Ioh.
1.1. Col. 1 15.
? Incarnation is a mission; now it was not fit he should be sent by another,
that was not of another, as the Father was not. It is wonderful suitable that
the natural son should make sons by adoption Ioh. 1.12.
. Who fitter to restore the image of the Father lost in us, then he that was
the eternal image of the Father Col. 1 15. Heb. 1.3.
? who who fitter to break open the fountain of Gods love, then the that was
the son of his love Col. 1.13.
? The personal word became the enunciatiue word, to declare unto us his
Fathers nature and will: he that is the middle person in the Trinity, is
fittest to be the middle man, or mediator between God and man.

Is our Savior God then? then he is eternal Revel. 1 7.
, omnipraesent Mat. 28.21.
, omniscient Revel. 2.23.
, and omnipotent Phil. 3.21.
.

The consideration of the divinity of Christ, may and ought wonderfully to
comfort us against the greatness of our sins and Gods wrath, remembering that
the Lord Jehovah is he that is our righteousne^^ Ierem. 23.6.
, and justification from all our sins: as also against the greatness of the
enemies and adversaries of our souls, and the truth or true grace of Christ in
us; Our Savior is the mighty God Esaias. 9.6.7.
, and therefore can and will easily subdue all our enemies under our feet:
besides hereby we are assured of the supply of all our wants, seeing he that
has all the fullnes of God in him, has undertaken to fill all things in the
Church Ephesians. 1 vlt.
. And as this may comfort, so it should instruct: why should we not come
willingly at the time of assembly Psalm. 110.3
, seeing we serve the God of heaven, and have all our service done in the name
of the Son of God, and presented by his mediation to the Father? And further
shall we not account unbelief to be a monstrous sin, considering how little
cause we have to fear or doubt? but especially shall we not learn humility
of him, that being in the form of God humbled himself for our sakes to take
upon him the form of a man, and to be subject to the very death Psalm. 2. Math.
11.29.
? Lastly, shall we not learn hence the hatefulness of sin, and the odious
filth of it? we may commit sin, but God must remit it, and become a
sufficient propitiation for sin.

Corporally]

How the divine nature can be in the humane.
Quest. How can the whole divine nature be said to be in the humane, seeing the
one is infinite, the other finite?

Answ. 1. It is no more then to affirm, that the humane nature is united to
the divine in the fullness of it. Or 2. That it is incorporate, or made flesh
incarnate, or has a body joined to it. Or else 3. Let it be granted of the
inhabitation in the flesh of Christ: yet it follows not that therefore it is
there included. For it is so in the flesh whole, that without the flesh it is
every where. For the divinity is not only immense that it can be every where,
but also most simple, that it can be and be every where whole, as the soul in
the body and the light is in the sun, and yet not included there, yet truly
and whole there.

Quest. But since this text plainly affirms that Christ had a body, and so by
Synecdoche, a true humane nature, it may be here inquired whether his humane
nature was like ours, and the rather since the godhead did dwell in him bodily.

How Christ was like us, and how unlike.
Answ. That this may be clearly resolved, we must know that what is said in
this verse notwithstanding, Christ in his humane nature was like unto us. But
for evidence, I show briefly in what he was like, and then in what he was not
like. He was like 1. in that he took a true body, not fantastical. 2. He
took a true humane body, and not a caelestiall body, and he was endued with a
reasonable soul. 3. He had the essential faculties of both. 4. He had the
very infirmities of our nature, I mean such as were not sinful. Now Christ was
unlike us in body, in soul, in both: In body, 1. In his conception there was
a difference, for we are of Adam and by Adam: but he was of Adam and not by
Adam, for he was not begotten but made: and so original sin was avoided, and
some think his very body had all the parts at the first conception formed. 2.
His body was not corruptible, it saw no corruption. In soul he differed two
ways. 1. In that it was without sin. 2. In that it was endued with gifts
above men and Angels. In both there was difference. For 1. They subsisted from
the beginning in the divine nature, and did not make a person of themselves. 2.
They are admitted unto the grace of adoration, so as now Christ-man is
worshipped though not properly as he is man.

Thus of the natures of Christ: the union of them follows, in a double
consideration. 1. Of the manner, in the word dwell. 2. Of the measure in all
fullness.

Dwell] There are two kinds of unions in Christ. 1. Of the soul and body. 2.
Of both those with the person of the word, the later is here meant.

There are 2. questions about union in Theology, Distinctions of unions.
that are wonderful full of difficulty. 1. The union of three persons in one
nature. 2. The union of two natures in one person. This latter is in Christ,
he is begotten as God, created in respect of his soul, and borne in respect
of his body.

There are diverse unions. 1. Substantial in the Trinity. 2. Natural in soul
and body. 3. Carnal in man and wife. 4. Mystical in Christ and the Church. 5.
Personal in Christ, for in him as soul and body are one man, so God and man
are one Christ.

It is much easier to tell how this union in Christ is not then to tell how it
is. Negatiuely thus.

Things are united three ways; Some things are compounded and made one, yet
the things united are not changed, mingled, or confounded, but remain perfect:
as many stones united in one building. 2. Some things united are perfect, but
yet changed and not what they were: as the body of a man made of the union of
the four elements. 3. Some things remain whole and not changed but imperfect
of themselves, as the soul and body of themselves apart. Now this union of
Christ is not after any of these ways. Again this union in Christ is. 1. Not
by bare assistance or presence (...).
. 2. Not by habitual union (...).
, either by affection, as friends are one, or by grace (...).
, as the Saints are one with God. 3. Not by worthiness (...).
, or authority. 4. Not by harmony or consent of will (...).
or opinion: as the Angels are one with God, and as the Saints shall. 5. Not by
joint authority (...).
as two Consuls are one. 6. Not by homonumie or giving of the same name to each
nature. 7. Not of pleasure only (...).
, as if it were so only because God would have it so. Lastly, Not by bare
inhabitation, for the word is made flesh. And therefore though the holy Ghost
use the similitude of dwelling here, to note the continual residence of the
divine nature in the humane, yet that similitude does not express this union
clearly. For the householder and the house cannot be fitly called one.

The effects of this union may be considered either as they are in Christ or to
us ward.

In Christ, from this union flows,

1. The predication of the things of each nature, to the person and that truly
and really, as when his blood is said to be the blood of the Son of God Act.
20.
, etc.

2. The enriching of the humane nature with admirable gifts, as great as could
possibly be in a created nature; In respect of which he came the nearest unto
God of any that ever was or could be. Nay if all the goodness of man and
Angels were conferred on one creature, yet it were not comparable to that that
is in one Christ.

These gifts in Christ they were either natural or supernatural, Gifts
natural and supernatural in Christ.
by natural gifts I mean such as these; in the mind, the best wit or memory
and such like faculties, better then ever were in any man, I except not Adam
himself. in the body, most fair form and a divine face: his very countenance
did express a divinity in him. The very temperament also of his body was
such as nothing could be better tempered or more exce^lent as being formed by
the holy Ghost.

His supernatural gifts were either in body or mind: in body, as that he
could with his eye pierce the heavens and see there what he would, for Stephen
could see into heaven as is recorded Act. 7. much more must we believe of our
Savior, for in Stephen there was but a small parcel of divine light. Now I
say, those gifts were above nature in Christ, but yet not against nature (...)
non (...).
, In mind there was in him exceeding holiness, goodness, wisdom, and all the
gifts of the spirit.

But all these supernatural gifts both in soul and body must be considered in
Christ two ways. 1. In the state of humiliation. 2. In the state of
exaltation. Such gifts as he received in the state of humiliation, were
properly the effects of this union, the other were given in respect of his
obedience unto death.

Of the first sort I propound these, 1. In the whole soul so great holiness
as can be imagined to be fall a creature. 2. In the mind, most exquisite
wisdom. 3. In the heart, such bowels of charity, love and compassion, as was
never in any man or Angel; in the whole man, wonderful power.

Now amongst all these I only consider of his wisdom and power.

A twofold wisdom in Christ.

A threefold created wisdom in Christ


There was a twofold wisdom in Christ. Increate, and that was only in his
divine nature; and create, and that was in his humane. This created wisdom in
Christ was threefold. 1. Knowledge by immediate vision Mat. 11.27
. 2. Knowledge by heavenly habites infused Esaias. 11
. 3. Knowledge gotten by experience Luk 2.^2.
. By the first knowledge he knows immediately the word or God, to which his
humane nature is united, and in God as in a glass he sees all other things.
Thus he sees God face to face, and this is a certain created light in the
soul by participation of divine light.

Concerning this first sort of knowledge in Christ, strange things are said by
Divines, but the sum of all is this. 1. That the soul of Christ by this
^reated light and vision sees God, and that first, Whole: secondly, Perfectly.
2. That in this vision he sees all things.

Object. Then might some one say the knowledge of Christ in his humane nature
is made equal to his divine.

Solut. Not so. For first, though he see God whole yet he sees him not wholly
(...), not (...).
, that is, not so much a^ can be seen by God himself, though more then any
Creature can attain unto. 2. Though he know the things that are and shall be,
yet, he knows not such things as shall not be, and yet God can do them. 3.
What he does know by this finite light he knows not so plainly as the word
does. 4. It sees not things at one view or altogether, but one thing after
another. Thus of his immediate or blessed knowledge.

The second kind of knowledge is habitual or infused knowledge. By this
knowledge, he knows all that can be known of man or Angels, yea of all of
them together, of this he speaks Esaias. 11.3. There are four words to
express it, wisdom, understanding, knowledge, and counsel; by the first he
understands celestial and divine things; by the second things separate from
matter, as the Angels; by the third things natural; and by the last things to
be done. But this knowledge is much inferior to the former, for thus he knows
not the divine essence. Of experimental knowledge the holy Ghost spoke Luke
2.52. when he said Jesus increased in wisdom, and that must needs be in such
knowledge as he got by observation by degrees in the world. Thus of the
wisdom of Christ.

Of the power of Christ.
Concerning the power of Christ many things are controuerted in other Churches:
and I have spoken of it before, more then men of wrangling natures and corrupt
and envious minds did well take, though no more then what is ordinary in the
writings of learned men: I shall not need therefore to say much of it in this
place. The power of Christ is twofold, increate and create. Increated power, is
the power of his divine nature, and so he is omnipotent. Created power is an
admirable force in the humane nature of Christ, above man or angels, to
accomplish that unto which it is directed. By his divine power, Christ works
divine things, and by his humane power, he works humane things* thus is he
powerful above all creatures, in understanding, memory, will, and in acting
whatsoever the law of God can will.

Hitherto of the power of Christ: and so of the gifts in the state of
humiliation.

In the state of exaltation; there befell Christ 4. things. 1. a wonderful
excellency of glory. 2. the grace of adoration with the divine nature. 3. the
power of administration of all things in heaven and earth Matthew. 28.
. 4. a iudiciarie power, viz. to be the Judge of the whole world Acts 17.30.
.

Thus of the second effect.

The third effect of this union in Christ, was his mediatorship, as remaining
perfect God he became man; so without any mutation of himself, he is by this
union become perfect mediator between God and man, the true high priest, and
the only head of the Church.

The fourth and last effect of this union, is the communion of the effects:
there are diverse operations of both natures, yet they meet in one work done f:
the worker is the person; the fountains of operation, are the two natures
according to their properties: the actions are some proper to the divine
nature, some to the humane, yet the outward fact or thing effected is the work
of both natures. Thus of the effects of this union in Christ.

Now the effects that flow to us from hence, are either in Christ for us, or in
us by Christ. In Christ for us, there are two effects, expiation and
reconciliation to the father. In us by Christ are three effects, justification,
sanctification and glorification.

In all fullnes]

The vbiquitaries do abuse this place, for they allege that this place
proves, that the essential proprieties of the divine nature are communicated
really to the humane, and so they say Christ is in his humane nature
omnipotent, every where present and omniscient: this they fall upon to
establish his real presence in the sacrament. But that this place cannot fit
their turns, may appear by these reasons, 1. He says, in whom, that is, in
which person the Godhead dwells etc. now it is not doubted by any, but that the
person of Christ i^ omnipotent, every where present etc. 2. Be it, in which
body the Godhead dwells etc. yet this proves nothing for them, for so he
dwells in the Saints, and yet they do not say, they are every where present.
3. When he says, all fullnes, this fullnes notes the essence as well as the
proprieties: now I hope they will not say the essence is wholly communicated to
the body of Christ. 4. All fullnes imports all attributes as well as some, now
all attributes are not communicated: as for example, the body of Christ was
not eternal. Lastly, the same was cleared before, the fullnes of the Godhead
is there as the light is in the sun.

From the consideration of all which doctrine, Uses.
we may see cause to be abased and confounded in our selves, that we should not
more admire the wonderful glory of the person of Christ: and for the time to
come, we should heartily strive with God by prayer, and the use of all good
means, that he would be pleased to reveal his son in us, and show this
rich mystery of God manifested in the flesh. Lastly, this should confirm us
in the faith of all the good things promised in the Messiah, seeing hence we
know how infinitel^ complete he is in himself. Thus of the 9. verse.

VERSE. 10. And ye are complete in him who is the head of all principality and
power.


The third reason of the dehortation is taken from our perfection in Christ: we
need not go to traditions, or philosophy, or ceremonies, seeing we are so
complete in our selves as we are in Christ.

Observe in the first words, 1. the persons, ye. 2. the time, are. 3. the
benefit communicated, complete. 4. the author, Christ. 5 the limitation, in
him: In general we may observe, that Christ does derive of his fullnes to his
member^, of his fullnes have we all received grace for grace Ioh. ^.16.
: out of his fullnes he fills all in all Ephesians. 1.23
: he ascended far above all heavens that he might fill all things Ephesians. 4 10.
.

Now if any ask wherein Christians are complete, or what it is Christ does
derive unto Christians out of his fullnes? I answer, he makes them complete,
or fills them out of his fullnes, with knowledge Mat. 11.2^. Romans 15.14.
, grace and truth Ioh. 1.16.
, peace, power Acts 6.8
, joy and righteousness Romans 14.17.
, strength against temptations and death Hebr. 2.
, abundance of blessings in the Gospel Romans 15.29.
, and he supplieth all their necessities out of the riches of his glory, but
especially they are complete in the imputation of his most perfect righteousness.

Thus of the Author and the benefit. Where he says, ye are complete, he
teaches them that there must be a particular application of this fullnes of
Christ: Though there be water enough in the sea, or in the river or fountain,
yet it helps not us, unless it be derived to us by conduits, etc. though there
be food enough in the market, yet we are not filled with it, unless it be
bought and dressed and taken by us.

Now for the time, when he says, ye are complete, he shows that it is not
enough that men's hearts have been full of Christ, but they must be so still

Quest How can they be said to be already filled and complete in Christ, seeing
many things for their perfection are not yet given, and there is a difference
of fullnes in the children of God? Answ: That this point may be more clearly
understood, I consider of this compleatnesse more exactly, both in what it is,
and what it ought to be, for they may be said to be complete, in that they
ought to labor after it.

The faithful are complete or impleat rather, either comparatively or
positiuely: comparatively in this sense, Christians are complete both
comparatively and positiuely.
because they are in the absolutest estate that any kind of people are in, and
far more happy then all the world beside, for the earth is cursed to all
other men, the felicity they would desire cannot be had, or if it were, yet
the wrath of God for their sins, lies like fire in the mids of all, and who
knows when it will burn? how can there be any compleatnesse in their estate,
seeing the unregenerate heart cannot be filled, and the things they can get,
serve but for the flesh and bodily life? thus they are comparatively complete.
Now positiuely they are so 4. ways. 1. In respect of the fulness of the body
mystical, it is a glorious well co^pacted co^pleat body Ephesians. 1.23. and 4.16.
, and so the Church is the fullnes of Christ. 2. In respect of justification,
and that 2. ways: for every child of God has whole Christ given him, and his
whole righteousness imputed: and besides he has forgiveness of all sorts of
sins, original, actual, of infirmity or presumption, etc. 3. In respect of
sanctification. 4. In respect of glorification.

Now for glory, we must understand, that though they are not yet in heaven, yet
they have it in respect of promise Heb. ^ 15.
, and in hope Heb. 6.14.
, and in the means 2. Tim. 3 16.
, and in the beginning of it Ioh. 17.3.
: and for sanctification and grace, it must be considered according to the
threefold degrees of it. 1. in inchoation. 2. in ripe age. 3. in perfect
consummation in heaven.

Now for the first, The compleatnes of the weak Christian.
even the weakest babes and infants in grace are complete 4. ways. 1. They
have complete and perfect promises even of compleatnes it self Ezekiel 36. Ier.
42.39.
. 2. They are complete in respect of the means of sanctification, for first
they have full liberty to use them as they have opportunity, and they may make
their best profit of them: besides the respect of the efficacy of the means,
their God is the holy one of Israel, Christ is the head in all fullnes of
virtue etc. they may pray for what they will and be heard, and the word is the
arm and power of God to salvation. 3. They are complete in respect of the
parts sanctified, they have grace in every part though not in every degree 4.
They are complete in their desire and respect to all Gods commandments.

Thus of weak Christians and their compleatnesse.

Now the strong Christians compleatnesse may be considered negatiuely: The
compleatnesse of strong Christians.
and so they are not complete, that are not full of knowledge, that cannot
bear hard sayings, that has not a plerophorie of assurance, that is not
filled with contentation, that cannot live by faith, or is not filled with the
fruits of righteousness.

The last thing is the limitation, in him.

In him] Nothing will be had by Christ till we be in Christ, 1. Ioh. 5.20.
Things are said to be in Christ 1. in respect of creation, all things were
created in him Col. 1.16.
. 2. In respect of preservation, all things consist in him Col. 1.17.
. 3. In respect of the mystical union, and so the Church only is in him.

In him we are elected Ephesians. 1.4.
, in him the righteousness of God is revealed from heaven Romans 1.17. 1. Cor.
5.21.
. in him all promises are yea and amen 2. Cor. 1.20.
. in him we are made rich 1. Cor. 1.5.
. in him Jews and Gentiles are made one Ephesians 2.^6.
. in him the building is coupled together and grows Ephesians. 2.20.
. in him we have life 1. Ioh. 5.11.
.

Now men may know whether they be in Christ, if they examine themselves whether
they be new creatures 2. Cor. 5.17.
or no, and whether they have the spirit of Christ Romans 8.9.
, and whether they love the appearing of Christ 2. Tim. 4.8. 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. 2.
Pet. 3.12.
, whether the world hate them I^h. 15 18.20
, whether they love the brethren 1. Ioh. 3.14. Ephesians. 4.16.17.
, and whether they walk in the light in all desire of holy conversation 1.
Ioh. 1.6. Hebr. 9.14. 1. Ioh. 3.6.
.

Who is the head of all principality and power] It is true that Magistrates be
in great place on earth and have principality and power, and may be so called
justly, but that is not meant here. These principalities and powers are the
Angels, and so these words contain the fourth reason: Christ is the head of
Angels, therefore whatsoever they have they have it from Christ, and
therefore, what should we do to go to Angels to help us, when Christ the
head is given to be our Mediator?

The Angels are diversely called in Scripture: they are called spirits to
express their nature, and angels to express their office, as messengers sent
of God: they are called sons of God Job 38.
: they are called Cherubyms Genes. 3.
from the form they appeared, viz. like youths: they are called Seraphims
Esaias 6.
for their order and fierceness in the execution of Gods anger: they be called
stars of the morning Job 38 7.
from their brightness of nature: they are called watchmen Dan. 4.10
, they are in heaven as a watchtower, and they keep the world: they are called
flaming fire Psalm. 104.
, because God uses their help to destroy the wicked: here they be called
principalities and powers, which are words of greatest excellency amongst men,
and are used here to shadow out the glory of those heavenly creatures. Angels
are most spiritual creatures without bodies: they move like the wind
irresistably, easily without molestation, and in an vnperceiuable time: and for
their number, I am not of their fond opinion that think they are meant in the
parable of the 99. sheep, as if they were so infinite beyond the number of
mankind: yet without question, their number is exceeding great and almost
incomprehensible, and cannot be known of us in this world Dan. 7.10. Hosea
12.24. Math. 26.53.
. They wonderfully excel in knowledge, and that natural, and supernatural,
and experimental. But to speak a little more expressly, I consider in the
Angels, 1. What they are in themselves, here called principallities and powers.
2. What they are in relation to Christ, who is said here to be their head. 3.
What they be in reference to the body of Christ.

The Angels in themselves are principalities, for their excellency of nature
and estate. They are called powers for their wonderful force they have over
other creatures at Gods appointment. The words do not import any hierarchy
among the Angels, for howsoever we are not to think there is any Ataxie among
those glorious creatures; so it has been bold presumption in those either
Jews or Scholemen or Papists that have traveled in it to describe a
fantastical number of orders amongst them. For their excellency of nature, as
they are here called principalities, so else where they are called, stars of
the morning* sons of God, yea Gods Elohim.
. And for their power it is exceeding great over the creatures: as when an
Angel could destroy all the first borne of Egypt, and to overthrow so many
thousand in Senacharibs army: an Angel set Peter out of prison, an Angel
carried Philip in an instant, they can strangely wind themselves into men's
imaginations, so as they can appear to men in their dreams Math. 1.
. As evil Angels can suggest tentations, so do good Angels holy motions. They
have power over the Devils to restrain them, but work miracles they cannot but
by the power of God; the Angel in the 8. of John could move the waters, but he
could not of himself cure the sick. Thus of Angels in themselves.

In relation to Christ so they are implied to be of the body, and Christ to be
their head. Now we may not marvel at it that Christ should be the head of
Angels, for there be diverse distinct benefits which Angels from thence do
receive, The benefits Angels have by Christ.
which by natural creation they had not. It is a benefit that they are
vouchsafed a place in the mystical body under Christ that they might be
received, as it were into the new order in Christ. 2. A peace is made between
them and man in Christ. 3. The rooms of Angels fallen are supplied by the
elect, the society of Angels being much maimed by their fall. 4. They are
refreshed with singular joy for the conversion of the elect; besides the
enlarging of their knowledge, that they are vouchsafed the understanding of the
secrets of the Gospel. 5. They receive from Christ confirming grace, and so
assurance that they shall never fall: which is their chief benefit. 6 Their
obedience in it own nature is imperfect Job. 4.
, though not sinful, and therefore may need to be covered by Christ's
perfections.

What the Angels do for the body of Christ.
Thus of the relation to Christ. Now if any ask what relation they have to the
body of Christ, and what they do unto it: I answer, by propounding both what
service they do to the body, and in what manner. For the first, they are like
Masters and Tutors to whom the great King of heaven sends out his children to
nurse. God out of the rabble of best men does adopt children to himself and
after commit them to be kept by those most noble citizens of heaven Psalm. 34.
; Besides they execute judgment upon the enemies of the Church. They attend us
at the hour of death and carry our souls to heaven Luke 16.
. They shall gather our bodies together at the last day Math. 24.
. Lastly for the accomplishment of all designments for our good they stand
always looking on the face of God to receive commandments Math. 18.10.
. Now for the manner in the old Testament they are reported to have sometimes
appeared unto men, sometimes in their dreams, sometimes in visions, the
Prophets being ravished, into an ecstasy, without true bodies, but not without
the form of bodies. Sometimes they appeared in true bodies, either such as
were for the time created of nothing, or else formed for the service of some
preexisting matter, or else they used the bodies of some living creatures: for
if the Devil could speak in the Serpent, why might not some good Angel use
other Creatures: as some think the Angel spoke in Balaams Ass. But for this
kind of declaring themselves to men in the new Testament it is ceased,
especially since the primitive times, so as now we cannot describe how the
Angels do perform their service to the Church.

Now for the use of the whole, in as much Christ is the head of principality,
and powers, we may comfort our selves diverse ways. If Christ fill the Angels,
how much more can he out of his fullness fill us, in the supply of all our
wants? again, shall we not rejoice in the grace here is done to us, in that
we are united into communion with Angels under our head? yea and that such
glorious creatures, are appointed to be our attendants, why should we fear
when Christ and his Angels will be so ready about us? further this may also
instruct us, we need not be ashamed of Christ's service, seeing the very Angels
follow him and depend upon him. A prince that kept great princes to be his
domestical servants, were like to be much sought to for preferment of such as
would follow him? Oh how should we long after Christ who is head over such
glorious creatures as the Angels are?

VERSE. 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision
of Christ.


Here is the fifth reason, and is peculiarly addressed against those Christians
of the Jews which joined the Law with the Gospel as necessary to salvation.
By circumcision they were initiated to the Law of Moses: and if circumcision
can add nothing to us nor perfect us any way in Christ, then neither can the
Law it self. We have that in Christ of which circumcision, and the law were
signs, we are circumcised in the spirit and therefore need not to be
circumcised in the flesh, and in Christ we have the accomplishment of what was
shadowed in the law.

Might some one say the consequence is strange: we are circumcised in spirit
therefore we need not be circumcised in the flesh. Ob.
Why Abraham was circumcised in spirit as well as we, yet he needed to be
circumcised also in the flesh. Sol.
For answer hereunto, we must know that in the time of the old Testament this
consequence was of no force: yet now in the new it is exceeding strong. For now
we have not only accomplished what was signified by circumcision, but Christ
has appointed another sign in steed of it, viz. Baptism, especially this is
clear amongst the Gentiles, which never were circumcised in the flesh.

There is imported unto us in this verse a twofold circumcision. A twofold
circumcision.
1. The circumcision made with hands (...).
. 2. The circumcision made without hands (...). of circumcision in the flesh.
. The one external, in the flesh, by Moses. The other internal, in the
spirit, by Christ.

Concerning circumcision made in the flesh, there is an observation of a
fourefold time. 1. There was a time wherein it was not, viz. from the creation
till Abraham's days. 2. There was a time wherein it was necessary, viz. from
Abraham till Christ. 3. There was a time wherein it was tolerable, viz. for
some few years after Christ. 4. There was a time wherein it was intolerable,
and utterly unlawful, viz. since the Apostles times to the end of the world
Gal. 5.2.
.

Circumcision had a double signification, What circumcision signified.
for partly it looked to Christ, and partly to the members of Christ. As it
looked to Christ it signified 1. That they should have a Savior that was
circumcised, that is free from all sin. 2. That he should come of the seed
of Abraham. 3. That he should satisfy for sin by effusion of blood, for all
blood in the old testament was tipicall. Now as it looked to man, it signified.
1. That by carnal generation we were unclean, and out of covenant with God.
2. That the faithful have interest in the blessed seed. 3. That our hearts
must be circumcised, by the painful mortification of sin, and the
painful casting away of sin, as a wretched foreskin: and that we should
suffer affliction of spirit for sin, till our hearts were as sore, as were the
Shechemites bodies. 4 That we are adopted into Gods favor and communion with
Saints, and distinguished from all other men. 5. That all holiness of life and
forgiveness of sin must be had in society with the seed of Abraham. 6.
That through bearing the cross the first fruits or our blood should be
ready to be offered for him that died for us.

The end of circumcision.
The ends why circumcision was appointed were, 1. To teach them by signification
the things before mentioned. 2. To be as a sacrament initiatorie to let them
into the Church. 3. To be a partition wall between them and the Gentiles, and
as fetters to restrain them from society with them. 4. To bind them to keep
the whole law Gal. 5.3.
. 5. To be a seal both of the righteousness of faith Romans 4.11.
and of their right and possession of the land of Canaan as a tipe of heaven
Genesis 17.7.
.

There were three sorts of citizens in the old Church of the Jews, Isralites,
proselites and religious men. Isralites were of the seed of Abraham, those
were bound to circumcision necessarily Genesis 17.12.14.
. Proselites, were Gentiles converted to the Jewish religion, those for the
strengthening of their faith did subject themselves also to circumcision and the
ceremonial law. Now there were certain religious men of the Gentiles
converted, and embraced the covenant of God, but were not subject to
circumcision: such were Naaman, and the Eunuch and others.

Why it was abolished.
Now this circumcision after the coming of Christ was abolished. 1. Because all
effusion of blood must cease when Christ's blood was shed. 2. The partition wall
was now taken down, and therefore there needed no sign of difference. 3. The
priesthood was changed, and therefore the rites belonging to it also. Object.
But Christ himself is said to be the minister of circumcision Romans 15.
. Solut. That was true. 1. As he was given to the Jews by expiation to
perform what was promised to their fathers. 2. He was a minister not of the
law (which he abolished and fulfilled in his coming) but of the Jews among
whom he was conversant: for he preached not to the Gentiles. He was a minister
of circumcision, that is, he was a Preacher among the Jews, as Peter was the
Apostle of circumcision. Thus of circumcision made with hands.

Now concerning circumcision made without hands, 5. things in this verse may be
noted. 1. The persons circumcised, ye. 2. The time, are. 3. The manner
negatiuely set down, without hands. 4. The form of it, putting of the body
of sins of the flesh. 5. The efficient cause, the circumcision of Christ.

Note
In general we may note that the case of the Gentiles is not worse then the
Jews, we want sacrifices, types, oracles, circumcision etc. but we have the
thing signified; before the law they had the shadow, under the law they had
the Image, Reasons why there be such hard phrases and kinds of speech in
Scripture.
after the law we have the body.

Quest. But what should be the reason that the holy Ghost in this place and in
diverse others uses such hard phrases and dark kinds of speech.

Answ. The Lord of himself in many places of Scripture does use allegories or
dark sayings. 1. Thereby to execute upon wicked men a strange and secret
curse: He speaks to them in parables Math. 13. Esaias. 6.
. 2. The majesty of the matter sometimes denies to be expressed in more
ordinary terms. 3. In allegories the holy Ghost does not only tell the thing,
but explicate it by comparisons, as here. 4. The hard places of Scripture are
Gods chests, wherein he hides his treasure from wicked men. 5. God hereby
prouides for the constant nourishment of the faithful, that though now they
find a sweet relish in the word, yet if they come again to the same word,
there is such depths in it, they may find more food in it. 6. God somewhat
aims at the humbling of the proud heart of man, and will hereby make him see
his wants, and many ways buffet him. 7. To excite in us so much the more
diligence. 8. Some parts of Scripture are for an appointed time Hebr. 2.3.
, and till then they are sealed up. so a veil is yet drawn over some parts of
the Revelation in things not yet accomplished; so it was in Daniels time Dan.
12.8.
. Thus in general.

Circumcision without hands is a wonderful work of the spirit of grace, What
circumcision without hands is.
wrought by the word upon the members of Christ, upon their receiving into the
mystical body, by which corruption of nature is wounded, beloved sins cast
away with sorrow, and the sinner received into an everlasting communion with
God and his Saints. Now that there is such a work as this in every child of
God, is apparent by these places of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 10.16. and 30.6. Ier. 4.4.
Romans 2.26. and this text.

The first thing here to be considered is the persons both in themselves, ye,
and in their relation to Christ, in whom, and to other gifts mentioned before,
and imported in the word also.

Ye] What graces we hear to be in Christ members, we must look to it, that
they be in us: it was no comfort to the Colossians that others were circumcised
with circumcision without hands, unless it might be truly so said of them
also. which serves for great reproof of many that neglect the power of all
doctrine, which is the application of it to themselves* but this comes to pass
either for want of faith Heb. 2.1.
, or through prejudice Psalm. 2.3. 2. King. 9.11. Ier. 29.26.
, or the slumbring of the spirit, or the love of secret sin; yea many lose
the power of the doctrine, by wandering observation how it may suit unto others.

In whom] Circumcision without hands is only found in such as are actually in
Christ, they only wound corruption of nature, and cast away beloved sinne^ with
sorrow, this is the difference between temporary faith and justifying faith.
There are three sorts of hearers in the City; Some wholly profane, such as
will mend nothing, nor like to hear of mending. Some openly sincere,
professing constantly this circumcision without hands. A third sort, partaking
of the properties of both the former: for they agree with the best in these
things: 1. In the love of the ministry and Ministers that preach faithfully.
2. In the taste of the powers of the life to come, finding the word often of
singular power, so as they receive it with joy and great admiration. 3. In the
defense of the truth they seem as forward as any: these are near the kingdom
of God, as the Scribe was; these are more then half persuaded, as Agrippa was;
these are fired with desire many times to know what to do to be saved, as the
young man in the Gospel was; but alas all this brings them within the compass
of none of Gods promises: and if they look not to it, fearful apostacy will
be the end of all this, and they may prove most spiteful adversaries of the
same ministry they admired, and proud contemners of the same remorse, with
which themselves were often smitten, and so their latter end be ten times worse
then their beginning.

Quest. But what do these men want, or what are their defects, that they
should not be right for all this, having such great affection to the word, yea
even when it is most sincerely taught?

Answ: Alas there are diverse things too apparent in their estate. For first,
they join not themselves with such as fear God in fellowship in the Gospel.
2. They shun by all means the cross for righteousness sake. 3. They
respect not all Gods commandments: there are some sins they will not leave:
there are some corruptions they are so engaged unto, that they will at no hand
leave them. 4. Some of them forsake not the very sins they seem to detest and
sometimes to cry out against; they cry out upon swearing, and yet (vile beasts
as they are) they will swear still, yea and that most fearfully, yea after
many remorses of conscience for it. 5. They will not be persuaded to use all
Gods ordinances: indeed they hear constantly, and to any man's thinking, with
great attention, but they pray not in their families, they will not use the
help of conference, they read not the scriptures with any order or conscience,
etc. 6. You see they are not careful of their company, they neither shun the
appearance nor the occasions of evil, they give not over their going, nor
their resort unto ungodly company. 7. They have not been truly humbled by
godly sorrow for their sin. Lastly, they have sincerity in respect of
persons; in some they like it, in others they do not like it. they love not
all the Saints.

Also] This also leads us to the former privileges in Christ, and imports that
the circumcision without hands here mentioned is to be accounted a marvelous
grace of God. and worthily; for our judging of our selves, frees us from the
condemnation of the world; and our days of mortification, as it were the
wedding days of the soul; and godly sorrow is accompanied with the spirit of
prayer; and a fountain of grace is opened, when our hearts are opened with
true contrition. Thus of the persons.

Are] This word designs the time of this spiritual circumcision; the time for
the putting away and cutting off of our beloved sins is in this life, it must
be now done or never done. besides till this be done, we can feel no profit or
benefit for Christ.

The time of circumcision without hands.
Quest. The Jews in the Law did know directly when they should be circumcised
in the flesh: may not we also guess at the time of the circumcision without
hands, when God would have us go about it, beyond which time it may not be
deferred without singular danger? Answ. There is a time and it may be known,
and it is wonderful dangerous to stand out that time: in general, the time to
humble our selves by mortification for our sins, and so to set about this
spiritual circumcision, is, when God grants us the means of salvation Luk
14.17.
: more specially when we are pressed with Gods judgments Joel. 2 12.
: or when the mouths of Gods servants are in a special manner opened unto us,
and their hearts made large 2. Cor. 6.2.
: or when God dispenses other graces, as temporary faith, love to the word,
and joy 2. Cor. 6.2.
etc. or when we are smitten with the axe of Gods word, and remorse for sin
is wrought in us Matthew. 3.10.
: or when hearing has kindled in us a desire and thirst after the best things
Esaias 55.1.6.
: or lastly, when we first set out to make profession of our being in Christ
Ioh. 15.2.
.

Quest. But may not any man repent at any time. Answ: No. 1. A man may tarry
so long till he commit the sin against the holy Ghost. 2. Men that go not so
far, may yet by obstinate impenitencie provoke God to cast them into a
reprobate sense Romans 1. and 11.8.9.10. Esaias 6. Math. 13.13.
. we see by experience that the most men that pretend to mend afterward, yet
do not, but troops of men that forget God go into hell Psalm. 9.
.

Object. But the Scripture says, At what time soever a sinner repents him of
his sin from the bottom of his heart, God will forgive him, etc. Solut. 1.
Mark the words, they have a limitation, thou must repent from the bottom of
thy heart, or else they comfort not thee. 2. For the extent of the time, in so
many precise words; the text in Ezekiel is not at what time soever, but in the
day that a sinner repents, which is not so universal, but that it may admit
the exceptions before, and though some men may and do repent at their latter
end, yet neither all nor the most.

Object. But yet the Theife repented on the cross. Sol. Shall one example make
thee presume? why thou may know that worlds of people when they came to die
did not repent as he did, why should not thou more fear the example of so
many not repenting: what is one to thousands. 2. Thou read that the other
Theife upon the same cross died without repentance. 3. Thou must know that an
ordinary rule cannot be drawn from an extraordinary instance: his conversion
was miraculous, one of the 7. wonders wrought by Christ in his death. Christ
made Peter walk on the sea, will he make thee do so to? will he for thy
pleasure darken the sun, or shake the earth, or cleave the rocks etc. Thus
of the time.

Without hands] 2. Things may here be noted.

1. That, that is not circumcision which is outward, made with the hand of man,
but that is true circumcision which is inward. Hence there is two sorts of
Isralites: the one is a carnal Isralite, one outward; the other is a true
Isralite, for he is one inward in his spirit. As it was then so it is now, the
carnal Isralite has the name of Israel, and the sign of true circumcision;
as then the circumcision in the flesh, so now baptism: and besides they
profess to be the seed of Abraham, The defects of the carnal Isralite.
and they speak fair of God and heaven. Q. But what are the principal
defects of the carnal Isralite? Answ. 1. He rests in the work done, he bears
himself upon the external work of holiness: he served God, for he was at
Church: he is regenerated, for he was baptized; he has prayed to God, for he
stretched out his hands. 2. His praise is of men and not of God. 3. He wholly
neglects the power of godliness and the exercises thereof. 4 He is disordered
in his life laden with iniquity. 5 He is senseless or incorrigible under
public judgments. 6. He usually opposes and persueth him that is borne
after the spirit.

2. We may note here that God is not tied to means, he can work without
hands. What is then the estate of wicked men? no hands of men or angels can
make them happy, it is a work done without hands. Oh how honorable is the
work of mortification of a sinner? it was a glorious work to make those huge
heavens, and this mighty earth without hands: such is the glory of our
spiritual circumcision: we see also here how little beholding the kingdom of
Christ is to this world: their hands will not be gotten to set it up, God must
do it without hands. Lastly we should learn in all estates to live by faith
and rest upon God, whether in affliction or tentation or mortification of
sin, though we see not means, yet let this comfort us God can help us
without hands. And thus of the instrument of circumcision, as it is here set
down negatiuely.

Putting of the body of the sins of the flesh] Here is the form of this
circumcision without hands: it lies in the mortification of the body of sins
that are in the flesh. Where note 1. the matter to be mortified, the body of
sins. 2. The manner, it must be put of.

The flesh]

The flesh is one of the three great enemies of God and man's salvation, it is a
treacherous domestical enemy. The practices of the flesh.
As it is treacherous, so it is tyrannical, it will not be pleased unless it
reign. A most secret enemy for she sits at the fountain and poisoneth all:
most falsely she lets in the Devil, and permits him to set up his holds and
fortifications in the minds of men: and is never quiet till it bring the soul
into actual high treason against God. It is the flesh that causes whoredoms,
murder, drunkenness, and all disorders. She opposes all the ways of goodness,
both by obiecting against them, and by making evil present, she savors not
the things of God, nor can understand them. It is she that makes the Law
impossible to us: what with her veil of ignorance, and the slownesse and
hardness she diffuseth upon our hearts and spirits, she makes the service of
God to seem almost always evil unto us. Yea if she get into her throne she
dare exalt herself against God, and judge even God himself, and his will,
counsel, providence, and people; her very wisdom is enmity against God. And
so infectiously vile is she, that she diffuseth her poison to our very
posterity, so as we beget a very race of rebels: and in all this, she
fortifies her self by all advantages, from evil example, or by riches, and
worldly greatness, or carnal wisdom, or success in sinning, yea rather
then she will be subdued or much pursued, she will entrench her self under
the very colors of Christ, making her pretense of following him in words, that
she may the more securely follow her own lusts in deed. This she does, and
thus spoils the image of God in us, and makes us most filthy and loathsome, and
so opens the door of our soul unto Satan, that our hearts are made a very
sly for unclean spirits to dwell in, and thus she will do if she be not
mortified, till she bring men to hell and eternal condemnation there.

Courses for taming the flesh. Esaias. 40. 1. Pet. 1.2.4. 1. Cor. 1.
Now for the taming of the flesh God has taken diverse excellent courses, 1. He
has laid a necessity of mortality upon it, all flesh must know it is but
grass. 2. To cross the glory of the fleshly, the Lord of purpose when he
chooses heirs of salvation, will not take many of those the flesh commends for
mightiness, or nobleness, or wisdom, or the like. 3. God has set a
standing curse upon the chief things desired by the flesh, so as they cannot
be used, but with a kind of experience of their vanity, and loathing, and
vexation of the spirit. Eccles.
4. He has enacted terrible decres against such as walk after the flesh, and
gives proclamation that he will certainly judge men for all the practices of
the flesh. 2. Pet. 2.9.10.
5. He places his spirit within us to lust against the flesh. 6. He sent his
son to take the similitude of sinful flesh, that in the flesh he might
subdue the flesh. Eccles. 11.9.
Lastly, he has showed us ways, what we must do that we might tame and subdue
the flesh: as when he tells us, first, that we must be sober, that is,
moderate in meat and drink, and recreation and apparel, Romans 8 3.
and what else may hamper the flesh. 2. That we must put no confidence in the
flesh. 3. That we must mortify it, by confession of sin, and godly sorrow,
with strong cries calling upon God for help against it. 4. That we must search
the records of Gods promises, and by faith lay hold upon him. For till we can
show a better draught of happiness then the flesh does, we do in vain go
about to charm it. 5. We must silence it: not suffer it to object, or excuse,
or extenuate, or deny.

Hitherto in general of the flesh and the mortification of it. Now more
specially we must consider here, 1. the matter to be mortified, viz. the body
of sins. 2. The manner, in the words put of.

Sinnes] Two things may be here noted; the one is implied, the other is
expressed: that which is implied is, that God does not require this circumcision
in other things but only in sins. 1. Regeneration does not oppose the flesh
in the substance of it: we are not required to cut off any parts of the body,
nor to destroy any faculties of the soul; and the same I say of the complexion
or constitution of the body, it does not require the melancholy man should be
made sanguin. 2. This circumcision reaches not to the natural desires of the
flesh, I mean such as are needful to the being of nature, as to eat, sleep
etc. 3. Nor to the morrall proiects. 4. Nor to the remainders of spiritual
light, as sparkles of Gods Image. 5. Nor to the outward necessary helps of
life, as horse, land, friends etc. only it restraines those when they are
hindrances to godliness. The use is therefore wisely to discern between the
mere natural defects arising from the constitution of our bodies, and the
sins and disorders of our souls: for this spiritual circumcision will not
cure men's bodies, but only sanctifies men's minds.

Again, we should learn of God here how to deal with our enemies: he
distinguishes between nature and the sin of nature: so should we; we should
oppose their sins, but love their persons.

The second thing here to be noted, is, that our sins are from the flesh: yea
if the flesh did not by defect, action, approbation or consent, give way to
sin, the devil and the world could fasten no sin upon us. Diverse persons
should be informed herein: when they fall into grievous evil, they cry out of
their ill luck, or of ill council, or ill company, or of the devil; but
they should indeed cry out of their own ill nature, for the rest could not
have hurt them, but by the wickedness of their own disposition: and we should
all grow suspicious of the flesh and his motions, reasons, desires, etc. and in
time to mortify her with all her lusts.

Body of sinnes] He says not only that there are sins in the flesh, but a
body of sins: that is, a huge mass or lump of sins, linked together as
the members of our body are. The sins of the fleshly may be called a body in
diverse respects.

1. In respect of that harmony and union of sins one with another in
practice, so as if one sin be practiced, many will accompany it: as in Adams
sin, the sin was to eat the forbidden fruit; but that would not be alone,
but was attended with doubting of Gods word, with faith in the devil, with
most in ordinate pride or desire to be like God, with coffeehouse with their
present condition, with vile ingratitude, with apostacy from all
righteousness, with profanation of the sacrament, with wilful murder of all
their posterity, and evil concupiscence. Cain was angry that God did not
accept his profane sacrifice: but would this sin be alone? no, for there
follows it the hatred of his brother, the falling of his countenance, the
rejecting of Gods admonition, colored hypocrisy, murder, and blasphemy.
When desire of gain infects the hearts of Tradesmen, we see by experience, it
will not be alone, a number of transgressions grows with it, as love of the
world more then God, neglect of sincerity in the use of Gods ordinances,
swearing, breach of Sabbath, rigorous dealing with inferiors, vnmercifulne^ to
the poor, selling by false weights and measures, usury, if not otherwise yet
in selling time, deceit, lying, oppression by engrossing of wares or
incroaching upon the trades of others.

2. In respect of union in continuance after they are committed, thy sins
committed vanish not, but by adding sin unto sin, thou make up a very
body of sin, and so in Gods sight they stand compacted together as the very
limbs of a monster.

3. These sins may be called a body, because they are committed by the
body, as the external means of them.

4. The mass of sin in the fleshly man may be called a body of sins, for
that it has many things like unto the body of man: or many comparisons may be
taken from the body of a man to express the sins of the flesh. As the body
of man is a fair substance made of base matter: Similes.
so sin in it self is most vile, though it be colored over by the devil or
the world with the fair proportion of profit or pleasure. And as there be many
members in the body, so there are in the sin of the fleshly man: as some
members in the body are outward, some inward, so are our sins. As men would be
ashamed of their bodies, were it not for their clothing, especially if there be
any deformity: so would men of their sins, were it not for their great
places, or fair excuses, and wretched shifts they have to hide their
deformities. And as the body of the prisoner in a dungeon is alike a true
body, with his that sits on the throne: so sins that are secret, that are
never so closely committed, are sins, as well as such as are openly done. As
his body is a true body, that yet wants a leg or an arm: so it is in some,
though they be not murderers or adulterers, yet they may have a body of sin
in them. As the natural body cannot live, if you take away food and clothing:
so neither would sin, if we did not love it, approve it, defend it, excuse
it, and if we take away carnal reason and ill company. And as the body of
Princes is better clad, then the bodies of poor men, yet it is alike, a body
of clay and corruption: so are the sins of great men, though men do not
speak so openly of them.

Uses.
Now for use of all. First, here we may see a difference between the sins of
the regenerate, and the sins of the unregenerate: in the godly after calling,
there is not a body of sins, the nest of sin is scattered, sin is not in
his full strength, he does not give his members as servants to unrighteousness.

Secondly, here men may try the truth of their repentance, that is not true
repentance, that mortifies some one or few sins, but that which mortifieth a
whole body of sins.

Thirdly, this shows the greatness of Gods mercies, that can forgive or take
away a whole body of sins and transgressions.

Lastly, this may be a great comfort to afflicted consciences, that cry out of
the multitude of their sins: if thy sins were as many as the joints of thy
body, and as strong as the body of Goliath, yet the Lord can forgive, and true
repentance will pull them down. This is the matter to be mortified, the manner
follows.

How sin must be put off.
Put off] Sin must be put off as the beggar puts off his rags, and as the
Master puts off his false servant, and as the porter puts off his burden, and
as the husband puts off his vicious wife, and as the serpent puts off his skin.

4. Things in mortification.
There are four things in mortification distinct. The first is the dislike of
sin: the second is the confession of sin: the third is the godly sorrow for
sin: the fourth is forsaking of sin; this last is here meant, by putting
off of sin: and this the Lord stands upon, as a thing he will never dispense
with the want of it: as these places show, Prou. 28.13. Esaias 55.8. Ier. 7.3.4.
Esaias 1.16.17. Psalm. 119.9. Ephesians. 4.22. etc. 1. Pet. 4.1.2.3.4. Ezech. 18. and
33. and there are exceeding comfortable promises made to such as are upright in
he desire and endeavor hereof. Prou. 28.13. Esaias 55.8. and 27.9. Joel 2.12.13.
Esaias 1.18.

Quest. But can the flesh be so mortified, and sin so put off, that it shall
cease to be any more in this life? What the flesh does in the godly.
Answ. No, for even in the children of God, the flesh will raise infirmities,
it will let the understanding, it will be framing evil thoughts, it will lust
against the spirit, it will not always allow what good is done, or to be done;
it will present evil, when good is to be done; it will rebel against the law
of the mind, yea sometimes the soul of the poor sinner is led captive for a
time, by his imperious flesh.

Q. But how can it then be said to be put away? Answ. Sin is put away, first
if it reign not, When sin is put off.
nor hold a constant dominion over us: it may be put away, even when it leads
us captive, if it be an unwilling captivity, if the power of it seem unto us,
as a most base servitude. It is put away, if men take no care to fulfill the
lusts of it. Secondly, if there be a constant combat in some degree against it:
if we find a striving, and constant fighting against the corruptions of our
nature: if we pray against it, judge our selves for it, and mourn over it,
with an unfeigned desire to forsake it: this desire to be put off, is one true
degree of forsaking of sin.

Sin is put off five ways.
That this may yet be better understood, we must know that sin is put off five
ways even in this life. 1. Sacramentally, in the sign, covenant, and seal,
that is in baptism. 2. In the guilt of it, though not in the act of it; thus
God puts off, by not imputing. 3. In act too, by inchoation, though not
perfectly. 4. Perfectly, though not in us, yet in Christ our head it is already
put away, in his person, though not in ours. 5. It is put away in hope, in that
we do by hope wait for an absolute and full redemption from all sin and
misery. Thus of the form of this circumcision: the efficient cause follows.

By the circumcision of Christ] There is a twofold circumcision of Christ. A
twofold circumcision of Christ.
First, that which he suffered in himself. Secondly, that which he works in
us; the virtue of the first is a great cause of the second.

Quest. But why was Christ circumcised, Why Christ was circumcised.
seeing there was no cause of circumcision in Christ: for nothing could be
signified by it, seeing he was the Messiah himself, perfect God and man, nor
was there any impuritie in him, the amputation whereof should thereby be
signified, he was a Lamb without spot, a high Priest separate from sinners,
the covenant of the promised seed was in himfulfilled, and he came to abolish
circumcision: and lastly, it is he that circumciseth the hearts of others?

Answ. 1. Christ was circumcised, thereby to show himself to be true man. 2.
thereby to honor the institution of circumcision, as he had done other parts
of the Law. 3. that the Jews might not cavil, and say, they would not receive
an uncircumcised Christ. 4. to commend the virtue of obedience by his example.
5. that he might bear the burdens of them, that being under the law, were not
able to bear the burdens of the law: God by this sign as by an imitating
rite, did subject him to the law, he hereby professing himself a servant to
the law to make us free. 6. he was circumcised and baptized to signify his
union with both Churches, both of the old and new Testament, and that he came
of t^^aine to make one. 7. to ratify and sanctify the circumcision of the
Fathers, as his baptism now sanctifies ours. 8. to signify the cleansing of
our natures, especially by bearing of the imputation of our impurities. 9. he
did in his circumcision begin to satisfy God, by those first fruits of his
blood, it was as an earnest or pledge of his blood, to be more plentifully
powered out: it was a part of his humiliation, and of the price of our sins.
Lastly, he was circumcised, that our hearts, by the virtue of it, might be
circumcised: for as his death kills sin in us, and his resurrection raises
us up to newness of life, so does his circumcision, circumcise our hearts.

Hence we may gather comfort against the difficulties of mortification, for
Christ will be pleased to derive virtue from his own circumcision: yea it is a
pledge to assure us, that as certainly as he was circumcised himself, so he
will see to it, that our hearts be circumcised: if we will cast our selves
upon him, and by faith come unto him, there is no sin so linked, but in
Christ we may have some deliverance from it. On the other side, it shows the
misery of all such, as live in the love of their sins, and mind not
mortification: this shows they are not in Christ yet, for they cannot be in
Christ, except they be circumcised. Lastly, it may serve for instruction at
once to all that hope for freedom in Jesus Christ, to show the proof of their
interest by their circumcision spiritually; and to speak distinctly of it, we
must understand that the Lord, that requires this circumcision of us, extends
his precept, both to the heart Ier. 4.4.
, and the ears Ier. 6.10. and 7.51.
, and the tongue: and contrariwise complains of uncircumcised both heart, and
ears and lips Exodus 6. The sins in the heart to be circumcised. Sins in
the ears to be circumcised. Sins in the tongue to be circumcised.
: in the heart we must especially look to the circumcision, or mortification,
1. of ignorance. 2. of wicked thoughts. 3. immoderate ear. 4. prophanenes in
God service, in a wretched security, or a neglect of inward worship. 5.
disordered affections, as lust, anger, suspicion. 6. discontent with our
estate. 7. unbelief. Now for our ears, they must be circumcised, 1. in the
vnpreparednes, or want of attention in hearing the word. 2. in receiving tales.
3. in communicating with the sins of others, by a willing hearing of their
wickedness. Lastly, look to the circumcision of the tongue, and that in the
care to avoid, 1. the polluting of Gods name, either by swearing or
blasphemy. 2. rash censuring. 3. rotten speech. 4. lying. 5. bitter and
furious words, and the spirit of contradiction. 6. flattery. 7. tale-bearing.
8. idle and vain words. And thus much now of the spiritual circumcision, and
of the 11. verse.

VERSE. 12. In that ye are buried with him through baptism, in whom ye are
also raised up together through the faith of the operation of God, which raised
him from the dead.


In the former verse the Apostle has laid down the first reason, and directed
it principally against Iudaisme: we have spiritual circumcision in Christ, and
therefore we need not carnal circumcision, and so by consequent none of the
ceremonial law. Now in this verse he meets with objections.

Ob: 1. The reason seems not to follow, they were spiritually circumcised,
therefore needed not the outward, for so was Abraham, yet he received outward
circumcision. Answ. The reason is of no force now in the new Testament, because
Christ has appointed another sacrament in steed of it, for we are buried with
Christ by baptism.

Ob: 2. But was not Circumcision a more lively sign? Answ. It was not; which
he shows to be true, both in respect of mortification, and in respect of
vivification, baptism lively representing and sealing unto both.

Quest. But have all that are baptized, these things signified by baptism?

Answ. They are offered to all, but they are inioyed only by such as have faith
in the operation of God.

Quest. But how may our faith be supported in believing those things shadowed
out in baptism? Answ. Two ways: First, if we consider Gods operation:
Secondly, if we consider Christ's resurrection. This is the brief order and
dependence of this verse; so that here he entreats of baptism, both by the
effects, and by the causes: the effects are spiritual burial, and spiritual
resurrection: the causes are three, faith, the operation of God, and the
resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Buried together with him] Three things may here be noted. 1. the burial of
Christ. 2. the burial of the Christian. 3. the union of both. For the first,
that Christ was buried, was storied by the Evangelist Ioh 19.
, and fore-signified by Jonas as a type Matthew. 12.39.40.
, and fore-prophecied of by Esaias the Prophet Esaias 53.9.
: he was buried in Jerusalem, the place where the dying sacrifices had given
warning of his death, but it was without the City, both to answer the type,
Leuit. 16. and to signify that his sufferings belonged to Gentiles, as well as
to Jews: He was buried in Caluarie, the place commonly appointed for
condemned men (and not in Hebron, where some think Adam was buried) to note
that his death was to be available for the condemned men of Adam, as well as
for Adam himself. He was buried in another man's grave, to signify that he
died for other men's sins.

Now for the second, viz. the burial of Christians; they may be said to be
buried even whiles they live (for of the burial of the body he cannot mean
here) in diverse respects.

1. In respect of disgrace and reproach: the throats of wicked men are often an
open sepulcher Psalm. 5.
, into which if the names of the godly fall, they are buried for the extremity
of disgrace and reproach with which they cover them.

2. In respect of abnegation, or the denial of the love and care for earthly
things: and so we are buried to the world, when like dead men we care not for
it, but deuote our selves to the contemplation of heavenly things.

3. In respect of mortification of our sins: the scripture by diverse
metaphors expresses the diverse degrees of mortification. For first there is
the wounding of sin, when the sinner is pricked with remorse by the law.
Secondly, the condemning of sin, when the sinner keeping a spiritual assise,
does examine, confess, and judge himself guilty before the Lord. Thirdly,
the crucifying of sins, when the sinner racks his own soul by godly sorrow,
driving in the nails of Gods threatenings, with acknowledgment of his own
deserts, and restraining his flesh through a spiritual revenge, not caring to
expose himself to the shame of the world, so that in Christ he may find
atonement for his sins. Fourthly, the killing of sin, when the sinner puts
off the body of sins, and forsakes his evil ways. Now then after this
follows the last degree, Of the burial of sin.
and that is here the burial of sins. Certainly there remains even after
true repentance in the very godly, a great deal of hidden corruption of
nature, inward wa^drings, and distractions after the world, sudden evil
propositions against God, or his word, or providence, or presence, or promises,
or peoplei; mpatience, secret pride, and sometimes hypocrisy; a frequent
rebellion within against good duties, unthankfulness, frequent omissions, e^ther
of holy duties, or the care of the power of them, hastines, or anger, impure
desires, thoughts of revenge, besides a great deal of disorder he may find in
desires, thoughts of revenge, besides a great deal of disorder he may find in
himself both at home and abroad. Now it is not enough, nor may he rest in the
former repentance, but he must proceed even to the remoouing of these
remainders of corruption: death commonly arises out of the disease of someone
part, but burial couers all. The work of reformation and repentance, many
times begins at the care of some few principal sins: but we must never be
quiet, till we bury the whole old man with his works; so that in one sense,
the burial of sins, is nothing else, but the progress of mortification.
Again, after we have forsaken our sins, to bury them, is to keep a diligent
watch over our nature, and to take down our flesh, yea sometimes with
refraining of lawful delights or pleasures. Further the burial of sin, it
may import our care, after we have left our sins, to remove them out of
sight; both out of Gods sight, by suing out our pardon, and out of the sight of
our consciences, by quieting them in the application of the blood of Christ,
and the promises of grace, and out of the sight of others (so far as our
sins were scandalous also) by showing forth our repentance, and care to
avoid all appearance and occasions of like sinning. Their privileges that
have attained to the burial of sin.
Great is the glory and happiness of Christians, that have attained to this
burial of sin, for these serve God in a near acquaintance with him, these
have overcome the world, these can stand before death and judgment vnapalled,
these are mighty in the power of Gods ordinance, these know the secrets of the
kingdom of God, these are without the reach of the Law, and feel not the
sting of crosses, these are had in singular honor with God, and the holy
Angels of heaven, and the providence of God is usually eminent toward these.
Now for the third, might someone say, How our spiritual burial depends upon
Christ.
what has the Christians burial to do with Christ, how is there any relation
between them? Answ. Our spiritual burial in the progress of mortification
depends upon Christ diverse ways. 1. In that he has required and made gracious
promises to it. 2. In that the efficacy of the means by which it is wrought,
comes from Christ. 3. In that it is accepted of God only for Christ and
through his intercession. 4. In respect of example, he was buried as well as
we. But chiefly in respect of virtue, our burial of sin is wrought by a
virtue arising from Christ's burial in the grave.

The Uses of all this follows. Uses.
First for information; The state of such as neglect mortification.
here we may see how God stands upon mortification: and that men must not
think always they have done enough, when they have left their faults; and
withal we may see how dangerous a course they take, that so soon give over
the exercises of mortification: for by this means we cause the old sins many
times to break out again, and their consolations are small, and seldom;
crosses daily trouble them, and the heart is often grieved and griped with
fear and terrible doubts, or else they are quickly ouergrowne with a spirit of
slumber.

Secondly for instruction, to be careful to bury our sins: but here take
heed of the dissimilitude, Dissimilitude in two things.
for in some things the comparison cannot hold: as here in two things; for
first when we bury the bodies of our friends, we bury them in hope they shall
rise again And secondly we mourn because we must part with them: but both
these must be denied here. It is the property of the wicked, to part with
their sins with sorrow, because they must leave them: or else with hope that
at length they may return to them again. But let all such as fear God be
otherwise minded: Note this rule
especially let us learn from this comparison of burial to advantage our
selves in what we may in mortification: if the master be buried, we know all
his servants will attend the funeral: so is it with us in the mortification of
sins, Similitudes.
if we light upon the master sins and drag them to the grave, we shall be sure
of all the attendants, they will follow to the funeral. The Jews manner was
to bury with odours: so should we, our odours and sweet smelling pra^ers
offered up in the mediation of Christ. And howsoever this work may seem
difficult, yet God many times strangely releiues our infirmities. After Iezabel
was cast down and dead, ^hey had not been long within, but sending out to bury
her, they found nothing but the skull and her feet, and the palms of her
hands: so many times would it be with us, if we cast down the Iezabels our
sins, when we come ^o fin^sh our mortification, we may by the strange help
of God find the body of the master gone we know not how, so as we shall not be
troubled, vn^esse it be with some skull or feet, or palm of sin. But
certainly though ^his kind of burial be somewhat difficult, yet it is the
true burial place of Kings: the most noble funeral that can be.

Thus of the first effect. The second is in the next words

In whom ye are raised up together] Christ is said to raise men up diverse
ways. 1. How many ways Christ ruseth men up.
When he awaketh men out of their natural Lithargie, or spiritual sleepiness
and security in matters of religion, thus Ephesians. 5.14. 2. When he brings
forth the mind of man out of the dungeons of ignorance, and shows them the
light, Esaias. 60.1.2. 3. When he cures men of discouragements and ^iscomforts
under their crosses, Psalm. 41.10.6. 4. When he recouers the Church from
security or relapses either ordinary or extraordinary, Cant. 2.10.11. etc.
and 5.3.5. Pro. 24.15.16. 5. When he incourageth men to holy duties, Cant.
7.12. but principally there is a fourefold resurrection. The first is out of
desperate crosses, A fourefold resurrection.
Esaias. 26.19. The second is the lifting of men up to some special callings in
the Church, Math. 11. The third is the resurrection of our bodies at the last
day. And the last is the resurrection of the soul unto holy graces and duties:
this is called the first resurrection, and is meant here in this place, and
Romans 6.4. but most usually we say there is a twofold resurrection: the one
from the corruption of the flesh, the other from the corruption of sin; this
latter is here meant, and this belongs to vivification.

Now this first resurrection must be considered, either in it self, or in the
union or relation of it. In it self, and so there is a double resurrection.
First the resurrection of graces: The resurrection of graces
secondly the resurrection of duties. For the first, there are certain graces,
which are not in the heart of man by nature, which by the mighty power of
Christ, A resurrection of 13. graces in a child of God.
are wrought in the hearts of such as are truly converted, and are actuallie
the members of Christ: As first a holy inquiry after God, Hos. 3.5. Ier. 50.4.
Secondly a holy wisdom in spiritual things. Iam. 3.17. Thirdly a lively
(...) in the favor of God in Christ. Fourthly a holy delight, and meditation
in the word of God, Psalm. 119.10.11.128. and 27.4. Fifthly a lively hope of an
eternal inheritance, 1. Pet. 1.3. Sixthly a holy love of Gods children, 1. Ioh.
3.14. such as is required Romans 12.9.10.11. Seventhly godly sorrow for sin, 2.
Cor. 7.10. Eighthly unspeakable and glorious joy even in affliction. Romans 5.2.
1. Pet. 1.7.8. Ninthly a holy contempt of the world, and sin, and sinful
persons, Psalm. 15.4. 1. Ioh. 2.19. Tenthly a holy reverence and fear of God
and his goodness, Hos. 3.5. Eleuenthly a holy zeal and feruencie of
affections, especially in the service and worship of God. Twelfthly a holy love
even of enemies. And lastly a holy desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. Now for the effecting of these, the spirit of Christ is called in
respect of his wonderful working, the spirit of God, and of glory 1. Pet. 4.14.
, the spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind 2. Tim. 1.7.
. The spirit of prayer or deprecations Zach. 12.12
. And the spirit of revelation Ephesians. 1.18. The resurrection of duties in a
child of God of diverse sorts in which he differs from the wicked.
. Thus of resurrection of graces. Now concerning resurrection of duties.

We must know that there are diverse duties which the natural man will never be
brought unto, in which lies the very power of godliness, and the experience
of all sound and saving consolation. Now these duties may be three ways
considered. 1. As they respect holy life in general. 2. As they respect piety
to God. 3. As they respect righteousness to men. For the first, there are
four things wherein the lives of Gods children differ from all others. 1. In
the manner. 2. In the matter. 3. In the means. 4. In the ends of holy life.
For the manner. 3. Things are eminent. 1. That they a^e devoted and consecrated
to holiness Revel. 12.1.
. 2. That they delight and love to be Gods servants Esaias. 56.
. 3. That they have their conversation in simplicity and godly pureness Cor.
1.12. and 11.3.
.

For the matter, they have respect to all Gods commandments Psalm. 1 19.31.
; and do endeavor after inward holiness Math. 5.6.
, as well as outward: besides they live by faith Romans 1.16.
in some measure, which is a way of holiness altogether unknown in the
practice of wicked men. And for the means of holiness, the godly have a
recourse to athreefold fountain of sanctity with such a sincerity and
constancy, as no wicked man can attain it: viz. the Word Psalm. 1.2. Luk 8.15.
. Prayer Gal. 4.6.
, and the Sabbath Esaias. 56.
. And for the end of their obedience, their praise is of God and not of men
Romans 2.26.
; having a maine respect always to exercise themselves, so as, they may have a
conscience void of offense, toward God, or toward men Act. 24.16.
. Thus of holiness of life in general.

Now in respect of piety to God, it is a very resurrection through the power
of Christ, to bring a man to acknowledge God, and his truth, and glory, against
reason, profit, or pleasure; to make a man walk with God, setting the Lord
always before him: to bring the will of man to a holy subjection to Gods will,
in crosses, temptations, wants etc. But especially to create in man that
sincerity of worshipping God in spirit and truth without hypocrisy.

And as for righteousness, in that part of it, that concerns either men's own
souls, or the souls of others, how is all the unregenerate mankind dead? it
is the work of a godly man only to serve the brethren by love. Only the
members of Christ, can in their calling deny profit and pleasure, and make the
particular calling serve the general: but especially in the combat against
concupiscence, only the godly do make conscience of it.

And howsoever in the matter of holy duties, there are strange imperfections in
the very godly, yet their desire, prayer, purpose, and endeavor, is to approve
themselves to God herein, and they do attain to it, in some comfortable
beginnings, and they go on with a holy increase, both of strength and desire.
Whereas it is evident by diverse Scriptures, that wicked men are dead men in the
former respects, as would appear if we should examine particularly: for they
seek not God Psalm. 14.1.
. They respect not the word of God aright Ier. 6.10.
; Nor can they love the brethren Ioh. 15.19.
. Though they be smitten, yet they will not sorrow after God Ier. 5.2
. And for the most part, they are lukewarm without true zeal Revel. 3.
. Their minds are covered with a veil Esaias. 25.8.
. They are without hope Ephesians. 2.12.
. Neither have all these men faith 2. These. 3.2.
. And for the want of holy duties, It usually seems evil unto them to serve
the Lord. They are strangers from the life of God Ephesians. 4.17.
. They call not upon the name of God Psalm. 14.4.
with a pure heart: neither take they heed of Gods sabbaths. But it were too
long to run to particulars in matters of duty, seeing the scripture every
where paints out the ill lives of all wicked men.

In whom] Doctr. The virtue by which Christians are raised is from Christ.

Quest. But what is there in Christ which distinctly causes this resurrection
in the Christian, or plucketh up his heart to the care of holy graces or duties?

Answ. 1. The virtue of Christ. 2. The spirit of Christ. 3. The example of
Christ. 4. The intercession of Christ. 5. The loving inuitations and
allurements of Christ. And 6. The resurrection of Christ. And lastly, the
second coming of Christ is like a loadstone to pluck up the desires and
affections of Christians unto the study of heavenly things.

Thus of the Doctrine of the Christians resurrection.

1. Hence may presumptuous secure wilful sinners gather secret terror and
anguish: Use.
where is thy spiritual burial in this life? where is the first resurrection?
It is most certain, For terror.
if this work, this strange work, be not wrought in thee, thou art in the
power of the second death, without God, without Christ, without hope. And here
thou may see the vanity of all thy shifts: for do thou say, thou see no
such wretchedness in thy sinful course? why this doctrine tells thou art
dead whiles thou live* and how can thou discern thine own wretchedness?
do thou think that this will serve thy turn, that thou intendest to mend
hereafter? consider what is here implied, the work of true amendment, is a
true, but spiritual resurrection. It Is then like that resurrection, that shall
be of our bodies: and thou know when God shall raise our bodies, at the last
day, when the trump shall blow, it will be a silly pretense to say, Oh let me
alone now, I will rise hereafter. So is it with thee; the trumpet of grace now
blows, Christ is now coming in the spirit, the dead in sin must now be
raised, Christ's voice still reaches unto thee, now if thou confirm thy self
in that spiritual grave of sin, do thou think thou have reason to
believe, that Christ will tarry thy leisure, and to put off till thou appoint
the time?

For comfort to afflicted consciences.
2. Here is singular comfort for such of Gods children as are afflicted in
spirit, especially about the greatness of the power of sin, and the
difficulties of well doing: they should here consider, not only that it is
Christ's work to make them holy, but that he is pleased to resemble it to the
resurrection of the body: and can it be a harder thing to put down thy sin,
or to quicken thee in all well doing, then to raise thy body out of the dust
of the earth? Neither ought their terrors to amaze them: for it is Christ's
manner, to bring us down to the grave, that he may raise us up: the fear of
hell now afflicts thee, that thou may not be hurt hereafter. Besides, sin
does so cleave to us, that it will almost kill us, before we kill it. Object.
But I do not see, either the graces, or duties mentioned, to be wrought in this
resurrection. Answ. 1. There may be grace, though thou see it not. 2. If one
saving grace be in a man's heart, it is a sign the rest be there, though not so
easily discerned. 3. The spiritual age of a Christian must be distinguished,
thou must not think that the graces of Gods spirit, or the power of holy
duties, will appear so freshly, or so strongly in thee, whiles thou art but an
infant in grace, as they will do when thou come to be of riper years.
Lastly, thy endeavor in Christ and desire, is accepted and taken for the deed:
what graces thou unfeignedly desire, and constantly use the means to
attain, thou have; so the sin thou striuest against, thou have not.

Thus of these effects, as they are in themselves: now as they are in their
sign, which is here called baptism.

By baptisme] Baptism is a holy memorial of Christ baptized in the seas of
Gods wrath for us. The ends of baptism.
It is a badge of distinction from unbelievers. It is a certain initiating
rite by which we enter into the visible Church. It is a seal of the
righteousness of faith. It is a sign to teach us by representation, both our
deliverance and sanctification.

Quest. Three ways baptism respects mortification, and vivification.
But what has baptism to do here with our mortification, and vivification,
or spiritual burial and resurrection? Answ. Baptism stands in a threefold
relation, or respect unto them. 1. In signification, baptism does represent
them unto us, setting out our dying to sin, and rising to newness of life.
2. By seal, for baptism is a seal of Gods covenant, assuring us that in
Christ, we shall be buried to our sins, and raised up with him. 3. It is a
band, it ties us to the desires and endeavors, after the beginning and
finishing of these.

There are many other benefits signified and assured unto us by baptism, The
benefits signified in baptism.
then these here mentioned: for baptism does signify and seal unto us, 1.
Our deliverance from the seas of Gods wrath Math. 3.8. 1. Pet. 3.21.
. 2. The resurrection of our bodies 1. Cor. 15.
. 3. Our communion with the whole Trinity Math. 28.
. 4. Our adoption Gal. 3.27.
. 5. Our communion with the Saints 1. Cor. 12.13.
. 6. Remission of all sins Act. 2.38.39
.

Baptism is available for these respects; when we amend our lives, and
confess our sins Math. 3.38.
, and gladly receive the word Cant. 2.41.
, and lay hold upon the promises of grace Mar. 16.16.
, especially when the conscience makes request unto God 1. Pet. 3.21.
, for the application and fruition of the things signified by baptism.
Hitherto of the effects. The causes follow. 1. Faith. 2. The operation of God.
3. Christ's resurrection.

Through the faith of the operation of God] The faith that is mighty through
God, to make baptism effectual, and to raise us up after the burial of
sin, is neither historical, nor temporary, nor of miracles, but that which
is in scriptures called the faith of Gods elect, and by Divines justifying
faith. Nor is it enough to bring hither the persuasion of Gods mercy in Christ,
which is the first and chief act of justifying faith: but we must believe the
power of God in the particular success of the means for effecting both of
mortification and vivification, What faith does in baptism.
which as I suppose is here meant, where he calls it the faith of the
operation of God. Quest. But show us how faith has to do in baptism or in
sanctification. Answ. In baptism faith is needful, not only the faith of
explication, but also the faith of appllication: for we are bound not only to
believe that those things there shadowed out, are so as they import, but that
also they are fulfilled, not only to the faithful in general, but to my own
soul in particular.

And for sanctification faith must needs be of great use, The use of faith
about sanctification.
for without faith, nothing we do can please God Heb. 11.6.
. And by faith Christ lives in us Gal. 5.20.
. It quenches the sierie darts of the Devil Ephesians. ^.16.
. It lightneth our darkness Ioh. 12.46.
. It purifieth the heart Act. 15.9.
. It ouercomes the world 1. Ioh. 5.4.
. It breeds joy and consolation Rom 5.2.
. And love to Gods children Gal. 6.
. It makes the Scripture available to salvation 2. Tim. 3.15
. And lastly our prayers to be such, as God cannot deny Mat. 21.22. How we may
come to bel^eue the effects of baptism.
. Quest. How may we attain to it, to believe that baptism does signify and
assure these things to us?

Answ. 1. Labor to express that which on thy part is required, that is set up
the confession of thy sins and amendment of thy life. 2. Then go unto God,
and let thy conscience make request for the answer of the spirit of adoption,
by which the Lord may assure thee, that in the mediation of Jesus Christ thy
baptism is given to thee, as a particular seal of Gods covenant and grace.

Quest. But how may I do to be assured, that my sins shall be subdued, and
that I shall be raised up in holy graces and duties? Answ: 1. Acquaint thy
self with Gods promises of this kind, and grow skillful in them. 2. Cry
strongly to God for the testimony of Jesus in thy heart, that by his spirit
he would settle thee in this persuasion. 3. Wait upon the word and prayer
till God do effect it. 4. Strengthen thy self, both by the experience of
others, as also with due observation of success in the subduing of any sin,
or the exercise of any graces or duties.

Uses.
The uses may be diverse. First for information; we may here see how vain the
common faith of the common Protestant is: show me thy faith by thy fruits; how
can thou believe aright, and yet thy sins not mortified, and thy heart and
life unsanctified? Again, we see we have not comfort of our baptism, till the
power of holiness in some measure appear in our lives.

Secondly, for instruction: we should all examine our selves whether we have
faith or no; and whiles we have means of assurance, make use of all advantages
to settle our hearts in the faith: and to this end we should deliver up our
souls to be nursed up in the words of faith and wholesome doctrine.

Lastly, we might here be greatly comforted, if we had true faith; we see God
can deny nothing unto faith: it should be to us, in the sacraments, in
mortification, Rules if we would reason for Gods power to the effect.
and in graces and duties, according to our faith.

Of the operation of God.] The doctrine of Gods power and working, is of
singular use in the Church; great is the interest of Gods servants in his
power, and therefore great cause they have to rest upon it. The elect only can
reason for Gods power to the effect: he is able to do it, therefore he will
do it: but then these three things must be noted.

1. They must be believers, that look for this privilege. 2. They must bring
a particular faith, to draw out this power of God into operation. 3. It will
not be set a work about euerything, but such things for which there is promise
or meet examples in the scriptures.

In what things we may bear our selves upon Gods power.
Now it is a matter of singular weight, to know in what things we may have
warrant to bear our selves upon the power of God. The power of God is engaged
for operation in four things for the benefit of the faithful. First, in their
afflictions. Secondly, in their temptations. Thirdly, in the difficulties of
holy life. Fourthly, in his ordinances.

In afflictions, God has bound himself to show his power, 1. In giving
strength to endure them Phil. 4.13. Esaias 41.10.
. 2. In moderating the afflictions to their strength Esaias 27.7.
. 3. In guiding them to the right ends Job 36.22. Esaias 27.11. Zach. 13.9.
. 4. In deliverance out of them Psalm. 71.20. Esaias 43.
. If we look upon the enemie^ of the godly in particular, God shows his
power, 1. In restraining or disappointing them Job 12 16. Esaias 54.16.17
. 2. In rewarding and overthrowing them Ex^d. 15.6.7 Esaias 42.13. and 41.15.
.

So likewise in temptations, the power of God though it be secret, yet it is
wonderful in dissoluing the works of the devil, and in upholding his
servants, and destroying the strong holds, and fortifications of Satan 1. Cor.
10.12. 2. Cor. 12.9. Esaias 27.1.
.

Thirdly, in the difficulties of holy life, the Lord uses his power, 1. In
making his servants able to walk in his ways, both by giving them power and
strength Ezech. 36.28 Esaias 26 12.
, and by relieuing and reviving their strength daily, and renewing it Esaias
40.29. vlt. etc. Esaias 57.15.
. 2. In keeping them from evil 2. Tim 4.18.
. 3. In establishing them that they may persevere and hold out Phil 1.6. ^^de
24. 1. Pet 1.5. 1. Sam. 2.9.
.

Lastly, Gods operation is wonderful in the use of his ordinances; and this is
that is meant in this place. In respect of this the Psalmist faith, God is
greatly to be reverenced in the assembly, by all them that are round about him:
O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong God like unto thee Psalm. 8.9.7.8.
? Thus the Lord is mighty through the ministry of his servants Gal. 2.8.
Col. 1. vlt.
. Thus the Lord performs the counsel of his messengers Esaias 44.26.
, his word returns not to him in vain Esaias 55.11.
: yea his ordinances are his power unto salvation Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.18.
: they are all mighty through God 2. Cor. 10.4.
. Thus it is in particular in the sacraments: though for their outward show
they do not promise much, yet by the maruellou^ operation of God, they are
available in effect for all that is promised in them, only if we could get
this faith in this operation of God here mentioned.

The use of all is, Uses.
First for information; we may here take notice of the difference between
hypocrites and the godly: in matter of godliness, they can know know nothing
but the form of it, the other have experience of the singular power of God in
all the passages of holy life, both in the use of the means, and in his
preservation.

Secondly, for instruction, we should observe and seek out the working of the
Lord Psalm. 111.2.
: and daily ascribe power unto God, and pray for the experience of it, and that
he would establish that which he has wrought in us Psalm. 68.28.33.45.
.

Again, it may teach us not to despise the weak Christian, for the Lord is
able through his operation to make him stand. And it should encourage us all to
the works of righteousness Heb. 11.35.
, seeing Gods operation is so ready to be found, and for hereafter in the use
of all the means our faith should be in the power of God 1. Cor 2.5.
. Thus of the operation of God.

Through the resurrection of Jesus Christ] Many are the benefits which we
reap from the resurrection of Jesus Christ. As first, the resurrection of our
bodies 1. Cor 15.16.20
. Secondly, the accomplishment of the promises made unto the Fathers Act. 13.33.
. Thirdly, justification and forgiveness of sins Romans 4 vlt.
. Fourthly, a secret virtue unto the ordinances of God 1. Pet. 3.21.
. Fifthly, regeneration. Sixthly, lively hope of an immortal inheritance 1.
Cor. 15.14. 1. Pet 1.3.4.
. Seventhly, the power of vivification and raising of us up to new obedience.
And this last is acknowledged in this place.

VERSE. 13. And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of the
flesh has he quickened together with him, forgiving you all your trespasses.


The sixth reason of the dehortation is contained in this verse, and it stands
thus; That which cannot help us when we are in misery, nor further us to
happiness when we want it, is not to be followed nor rested upon; but such
things are philosophy, traditions, and ceremonies, they cannot heal the
corruption of our natures, nor raise us out of the graves of sin, nor any way
procure us the pardon of our transgressions; or thus, If in Christ we be
delivered from the power of our sins by his quickening grace, and from the
guilt of them, by the free pardon which is to be had by his means, then we
need not go any whither else, neither to philosophy nor traditions, etc. but
so it is, and so the very Colossians found it in their case, as the words of
the text express, Ergo.

The words in themselves express the twofold estate of Christians in this
world, what they are by nature in their unregenerate estate, and what they are
by grace in the state of grace.

In the state of corruption two things are true of them, and are true of all
men, 1. They were dead in actual sins. 2. They were then in the
uncircumcision of the flesh, and likewise dead in it. In their estate of grace
he puts them in mind of two benefits, 1. Regeneration. 2. Remission of sins.

Thus of the coherence and order of the words.

Diverse things may be noted in the general.

1. We may from hence be informed of the fruitlesnes of philosophy, traditions
or ceremonies, of Moses, they cannot make a miserable man happy, they cannot
infuse the least spark of spiritual life into any.

2. We see the Apostle thinks it meet to put men often in mind of their
misery by nature, and great reason, for it exalts the praise of the riches of
Gods grace in Christ: And it may serve to humble men for their falls after
calling, and to keep them still suspicious and watchful over a nature, that
has been so prone to sin and security in sinning; it may serve to eat down
the pronenesse of our nature to vain boasting, and confidence in the flesh;
and it should much excite men to the love and care of godliness and piety,
with all life and power, seeing they have been so long slaves to sin.

And lastly, the Apostle rips up this matter of purpose to withdraw their
minds from traditions, and philosophical dreams.

Dead in sinnes] They were dead in sins, both if you respected their public
estate, or each particular person. If you look upon public states before they
are framed and reformed by the word, what are they but heaps of men dead in the
graves of sin, and senseless in their sinful courses? and thus it is with
every particular person, the words import that he is guilty of many sins,
The swarms of sins in unregenerate men.
and he is dead in them also. Naturally every man is guilty of secret
atheistical conceits, of unbelief, of ignorance, of hardness of heart, of
swarms of evil thoughts and affections, of hurtful passions and lusts,
besides his defects of the knowledge of God, and that warmth of the holy
affections of love, fear, trust, and joy in God. Who can sufficiently rip open
the unthankfulness, lukewarmenes, hypocrisy, inconstancy, and presumptuous
profaneness, that is in our hearts by nature, in matters of Gods service? how
do men daily offend, either by not calling upon the name of God, or by taking
it up in vain? who can number the oaths, lies, reproaches, curses, flatteries,
and filthy communication has and did daily infect the mouths of men? Oh the
world of sins we are actually guilty of against God, or men, or our own
selves, public, private, secret, open, inward, outward, in prosperity and
adversity, in the Church or family, or abroad in men's conversation. Alas we
can discern but a glimpse of that sin and guiltiness that is in us by
nature, and this is the increase of their misery in all their sins, they are
dead in them.

A fourefold death.
Dead] There is a fourefold death; temporal, corporal, spiritual, eternal:
The state of man being in misery, he is dead temporally Esaias 26.19.
; The body of man being in the grave, he is dead corporally; The soul of man
lying in sin, is dead spiritually; And both soul and body being cast into
hell, are dead eternally.

Death to sin, for sin, and in sin.
The Colossians were dead spiritually; there is a death to sin, and a death
for sin, and a death in sin; a death to sin, and so the godly die by
mortification; a death for sin, and so malefactors die by execution; and a
death in sin, and so every natural man kills himself by enliuing his sin.

What spiritual death in sin is.
The spiritual death in sin is an unutterable loss of the life of God, by
which the sinner is senseless, and careless in extremity of misery, unto
his own everlasting ruin, if the Lord prevent it not by regeneration. Now
that men are in this case by nature, these Scriptures prove, Ephesians. 2.1.2. Math
8.22. Ioh. 8.25. Romans 8.10. Luke 15.32. Revel. 3 2. Iud. 12. 1. Tim. 5.6.
Neither let any deceive themselves, about their estate, for a man may be dead
in sin, and yet be alive in the flesh: yea thou may be a wise man in the
flesh Rom 8.7.
, or a prince of this world 1. Cor. 2.9.14.
; yea thou may have a name that thou live spiritually Revel. 3.2.
, and yet be stark dead.

Now this spiritual senselesnes is called a death, because it is a privation
of spiritual life from the soul, as the natural death is from the body. 2.
because it tends to eternal death.

The use may be fourefold. 1. For information; No wonder wicked men can come
and go from the word of God, and not be touched, alas they are dead men: and
so is it with them in respect of the judgments of God; alas if thou could
roll a mountain, upon a dead man, he would not feel, so is it with a man
dead in sin; and further we may here observe, that to live yea to die
quietly, is no sign of a man in a happy case: for if this death in sin be not
cured, thousands of people may die quietly, because they die senseleslie; they
feel no more of the fear of hell, or judgment, or Gods anger, then if they
were already dead in their bodies, they would feel outward extremities: I know
that God many times can lay terror upon the flesh of wicked men, and make their
spirits drink in, of the bitter anguish arising from the feruencie of Gods
burning displeasure; but I say if God let them alone, usually the most would
die in a wretched senselesnes, and inconsideration, being neither able nor
willing to entertain the thoughts of what must presently and necessarily
befall them.

2. This may serve for confutation; and so 1. of the Papists about their
freewill. How can there be this free will in a dead soul? we are dead in sin,
and therefore of our selves move not unto life, till God quicken us by his
word and spirit. 2. Of the carnal Protestant, that bears himself so strongly
upon his supposed covenant with death and hel^, his agreement must be
disanulled, nay his very security imports his unavoidable destruction, if it
be not removed by the power of Christ.

3. For instruction; art thou a man that hear this, that have lived all thy
time without remorse for thy sins, and never yet entertained the care of
reformation of thy life, be here warned of thy misery, let it be enough thou
have been dead in sin, do not lie still rotting in the graves of iniquity,
but rise so soon as thou hear the trumpet of the Gospel, the voice of
Christ sounding in thine ears, and pierce thy heart.

4. Lastly, here is consolation implied unto weak Christians; If thou can
feel thy misery, and struggle in any measure, of true constancy, against the
corruption of nature, and the transgressions of thy heart and life, thou art
not dead: there is some breath of life in thee, there is motion and therefore
life.

Thus of their actual sins.

Their misery in respect of original sin, is expressed in these words, And in
the uncircumcision of the flesh.]

These words be diversely interpreted; some thus, In the uncircumcision of the
flesh, that is, in the flesh which is uncircumcision, that is a thing hateful
unto God. Some make these words to be the sign of their death in sin: as if
he would say, your very uncircumcision that is in your flesh (which are
Gentiles) is a token that you are strangers from the life of God. Some thus;
And you has he quickened, which were dead in respect of your sins and
carnal life, which ye live in the uncircumcision, that is, in your estate of
gentilisme. Some make these words express the cause of their death in sin:
Thus in the uncircumcision of the flesh, that is, for your fleshly vices which
caused that death in sin. But I think with those that understand by the
flesh original sin, and by the uncircumcision, their misery in respect of
it, implied in the allusion to the circumcision literally taken.

Original sin is called flesh, Why original sin is called flesh.
because the flesh is the instrument by which it is propagated. 2. Because it
is the subject in which it is. 3. Because it is the end it drives us to, viz.
to satisfy the flesh and to seek fleshly things.

This original sin here called flesh, What original sin is.
is a spiritual kind of disease, gall, leaven and poison, which daily
diffuseth it self throughout the whole man, and still infecteth it: though
this be not the whole nature of the sin; for to speak distinctly, Things in
original sin.
in original sin there are three things, 1. The guiltines of Adams fact,
derived unto us by just imputation. 2. The want of that original justice was
in us in the creation. 3. The deprauation and corrupt disposition of our
natures. Our misery in respect of original sin


Here the word uncircumcision imports our misery in respect of our very
corruption of nature, for it imports 1. That we are hateful to God, children
of wrath. 2. That we have no portion in the heavenly Canaan. 3. That we have no
fellowship in the communion of Saints. 4. That we have no part in the promised
Messiah, for all these were shadowed out by the want of circumcision in the
time of the Law.

Uses.
The uses follow; First from hence we may inform our selves in diverse things;
as first we may see, why the fair works of wicked men, as their alms,
prayers, tears, sacrifices, prophecyings, preaching, fasting, and professing,
are not accepted of God: for the fountain is poisoned, the flesh infects all;
it puts to, either ill ends, or ill effects, or ill means, besides that it
keeps the person still loathsome to God. Oh what cause have civil honest men
to know, that though they come to Church, and pay every man his own, and be no
drunkards nor adulterers etc. yet their case cannot be good, for though they
lived never so honestly outwardly, yet the very uncircumcision of the flesh,
makes them miserable; the inward corruption of nature, is an abomination to
God, who searches the heart and reins: yea what cause have all men to be
humbled and abased in themselves, considering how unclean a beginning they
have? how can men be so quiet, and yet be so diseased, with so filthy a
leprosy, as is original sin? if this disease were in the body as it is in
the soul, how would men lament their distress?

Hence also may we see what a woeful estate all wicked men are in, that take
care for the lusts of this leprous flesh, and sow to it. What should I say? may
we not see hence the necessity of regeneration? assuredly except we be borne
again, we can never enter into the kingdom of heaven: this impure poisoned
nature of ours, may not enter into Gods holy place.

Secondly, we may here discern the fountain of all actual transgressions:
when we fall into evil courses, we must not cry out of our ill fortune, or of
ill company, or of the devil only, but especially we must lay the fault upon
our ill natures, it was thy wicked disposition made thee so to sin.

Lastly, from hence we may learn to know our selves, and accordingly to keep a
narrow watch over our wretched natures, and daily strive and struggle against
this infectious corruption and disease that hangs so fast upon us Heb. 12 1.
: yea we should by confession and contrition endeavor the daily crucifying of
our wicked flesh, with the lusts thereof Gal. 5.
, condemning our selves by a daily verdict and sentence, as we are men
according to the flesh 1 Pet. 4.6.
, so suffering in the flesh that we may cease from sin 1. Pet. 4.1.
: yea we should learn constantly to deny our selves, and not to give way to
the reasons, or objections, or desires, or excuses, or delays of the flesh:
yea and to this end we should be willing to suffer afflictions, and to endure
any hardship rather then the flesh should prevail in us.

You has he quickned] Hitherto of man's misery and the state of corruption:
now of Gods mercy in the state of grace. In two things is their happiness here
described. 1. In their quickening. 2. In their forgiveness.

We are three ways quickened.
We are quickened two ways. 1. In Christ. 2. In ourselves; when our head Christ
Jesus was raised from the grave, we were quickened in him. In our selves we were
quickened three ways, 1. Sacramentally, in baptism. 2. By inchoation, in our
conversion. 3. Perfectly, by hope of perfection in heaven; by baptism, by
conversion, by hope. The quickening he here speaks of, is the quickening of
conversion, when we are begotten to God.

This life is called, the life of God Ephesians. 4.17.
, the life of grace, the life of Jesus 1. Cor. 4.16.
, the life of immortality.

It is begotten in us by the whole Trinity; the Father calls up these
generations Isai. 41.
; the Son gives this life Heb. 7.16.
, so does the Spirit quicken also Ioh. 6.
.

The author, means, necessity, titles, and privileges of spiritual
quickening.
The means by which we are quickened is ordinarily only the word, and that
preached also, which is therefore called the word of life, Psalm. 19.8. 1. Pet.
1.22. Phil. 2.15. Ioh. 5.

The necessity of this quickening is such as without it we cannot possibly
enter into the kingdom of heaven, Ioh. 3.5.

They that are thus quickened and converted, are styled by diverse names or
titles, they are called the holy seed Esaias. 6.
, the called of Jesus Romans 1.6.
, the children of the most high Luke 6.
, the brood of immortality, they that follow Christ in the regeneration Math.
19.
, and the heirs of eternal life Tit. 3.7.
.

Many are the singular prerogatives of such as are converted and quickened in
Jesus Christ; godliness in general has the promises of this life and the
life to come. Prerogatives.
In special, first, great is the honor of their birth, greater then if they
were borne of the greatest bloods of men Job. 1.13.
. These prolong the days of Christ upon earth, being gotten by the travel of
his soul Esaias. 53.
. 2. They are sweetly comforted and tenderly used in the healing of all their
sorrows, Ier. 31.25. Hos. 14.5. Esaias. 57.15.16. and 61.1.2.3. Micha. 7.18.
Ezec. 11.19. Esaias. 50.4. Act. 3.19. 3. All their sins are forgiven, as the
coherence shows, and these scriptures further confirm, Esaias. 44 22. Ephesians. 1
7 6. Romans 3.25. 1. Cor. 6.11. Heb. 8.12. 1. Ioh. 1.7. 4. They are in great
account with God Esaias. 43.4. Rom 1.7.
. 5. They are delivered from this present evil world Gal. 1.4.
: even from bondage under the custom of it; from the practice of the vices of
it, from the fellowship with the men of it, and from the plagues that belong
unto it. 6. They are blessed with the seeds of all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things Ephesians. 1.3. Esaias. 61.10.
. 7. They are happy in their heavenly relations, to God, to Jesus the
mediator, to the Angels of God, to the spirits of the just, and to the
faithful every where Heb. 12.22.
. 8. They are assured of the success of all the means of salvation, Esaias.
12.3. and 65.15.23. and 56. 1. Cor. 3.21.22.23. Esaias. 55.6 9. They have great
promises of comfort, audience, protection, and deliverance out of all their
troubles, Esaias. 4.5.6. Romans 8.17. etc. 2. Cor. 1.3.4 Esaias. 41.12. and 42.13.
and 49.14. 10. The spirit of God is powered upon them to assure them of Gods
loving presence Ezech. 39. vlt
. To bring them forth into liberty 2. Cor. 3.^^.
. To enlighten them 2 Cor. 3.18.
. To sanctify them Romans ^.3.
. To make intercession, and that by making them pray Gal. 4.6
. And by producing mighty success in prayer R^m 8.26. Hos. 12.5.6.
. And to make them fruitful both in graces and duties Ezech. 36.27
. And to be their seal, and earnest of the inheritance purchased 2. Cor. 1.22.
Ephesians. 1.14.15.
. Lastly, they have an assurance of a most glorious inheritance, reserved from
them in heaven, prepared from the foundation of the world 1 Pet. 1.3 4. Signs
of the new birth.
. Gal. 5.22.


Now if any enamoured with these privileges ask how we may know whether we be
converted and quickened or not? I answer it may be known by diverse signs: of
these signs some ageee to the weak Christian, and some to the strong
Christian. The first sign, that usually breaks out in a convert is affliction
of conscience, which is such an inward pricking in the heart Act. 2.41.
, as causes him voluntarily to remember his evil ways Eze. 20.43.
, and judge himself daily for it Esaias. 4.4.
, mourning for his sinful life Esaias. 61.2.3.
, and confounded in himself for his ways, which were not good. The second, is
affection to the word; such an affection it is as esteems the word above all
treasure Math. 13.
, and longs daily after it Job. 23.
: it makes them fly as the dove to Gods house, and as doves to the windows
Esaias. 60.8.
: yea their affections to it are such as heaven suffers violence Math. 11.
. They feel a savor of life in the word ^ Cor. 2.14.
. Christ's words to them are spirit and life Ioh. 6.
. Yea such is their affection to the word they can be content to receive it
with patience, and much afflictions 1. These. 1.6.
. And if they obtain a sanctuary of God, they will endeavor their own daily
sanctification by it Ezech. 37. vlt
. They will practice the word and be exercised by it.

The third sign that discouers it self in them, is their love to such as
fear God 1 Ioh. 3.14.
, which they show by their admiration of them Isay 61.7.
, and by their delight in their fellowship Phil. 1.5.
, Act. 16.14.15. Heb. 6 9.10. Esaias. 23. vlt.
and by a willing communicating to them in all ready service, and well-doing.

The fourth sign is their ceasing from sin, even their daily endeavor to
subdue and forsake all sorts of sins, inward as well as outward, secret as well
as open, lesser as well as greater; yea not sparing their most pleasing,
gainful or beloved sins 2. Tim. 2.19. Psalm. 14.6.4. Esaias. 55.8. Math. 18.8.
. The fifth sign is a holy constant desire Esaias. 55.1.
after Gods favor and remission of sins, as the greatest happiness,
reioicing in all the hopes and signs of it. The sixth, is that they can love
and forgive their enemies e. Math. 5.6.


Now there are other signs in stronger Christians, such as these. 1. A full
assurance of faith in Jesus Christ. 2. A longing and constant desire of death,
and love to the appearing of Jesus Christ, in a sensible and ardent measure,
and that in prosperity. 3. A great conquest and victory in ouercomming the
world and the flesh. 4. The spirit of prayer, and such like.

Uses.
The use of this point concerning the quickening of the godly, by true conversion
to God, is diverse: First, since this is the first and common work, without
which we can never get out of our natural misery, here may the cursed and
damnable waiwardnesse of the most be reproved, who live snorting in sin, as
if they needed no conversion to God. How has a very spirit of spiritual
fornication intoxicated men, and besotted them that they cannot mind to
return Hos. 5.4.
?

Three sorts of men greiuously trangresse against this doctrine.

1. The careless that freeze in their dregs, and consider not whether God
will do good or evil. 2. The inconstant, whose righteousness is as the
morning dew, that by flashes and fits only think of turning to God. 3. The
profane scoffer, that speaks evil of the good way of God, and reprocheth by
consequent the very blood of Christ, without which he can never be saved.

2. Here is an excellent comfort to weak Christians; note that the text says
quickened, Note
nor borne: to assure the weak that though their strength be but as the child's
when it lies in the womb, and is first quickened, and not so much as the
strength of a child newborn, yet they are accepted with God. The first
springings in the womb of grace, is precious before God, though every thing be
not yet so clearly performed, yet if grace be but conceived in them, God
knows them, and owes them, and will not deny his own works, but annexeth
here forgiveness of sins, even to this first sprouting and forming of true
grace.

3 How should the consideration of this work and the glorious privileges
belonging to it, even compel all men to awake and stand up from the dead,
(...) never give over till Christ be formed in them? laboring above all things
to be made new creatures; resolving to beg this quickening at Gods hands, till
by his word he be pleased to beget it, in them.

Lastly, how should they walk in newness of life that are borne again of
God? there is a path and it is called holy and they must walk in it Esaias. 35.8.
, seeing this grace has appeared, how should they deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, for ever resolving to live soberly and godly and righteously in
this present world Tit. 2.12.
. And they should give all diligence to make up their assurance of their holy
calling and election 2. Pet. 1.10. Heb. 6.12.
, Girding up the loins of their minds, that they might trust perfectly on the
grace that is brought unto them, in the revelation of Jesus Christ 1. Pet. 1.13.
.

And since they are in so happy an estate, they should always rejoice, and
let their moderation of mind be known to all men, being in nothing careful,
but in all things making request unto God, with prayers and supplications, and
giving of thanks; so should the peace of God that passes all understanding
keep their hearts and minds Phil. 46.47.
.

And for our carriage toward others; first, we should for ever in all places,
acknowledge such as are borne again of God 1. Cor. 16.10. 2. Cor. 1.14.
. Secondly, we should exhort one an other, and provoke one another to love and
goodworkes, and not forsake the fellowship of the Saints Heb. 10.24.25.26.
: praying one for another, that God would fulfill the good pleasure of his
will, and the work of our faith with power, that we might abound in love, and
be established in holiness before God, in the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
with all the saints 1. These. 3.12.13.
.

Thus of our quickening; only we may observe, that he says, we are quickened
together with him; which is true diverse ways: men are quickened together (...)
Christ, 1. Because we are quickened as well as he. 2. Because being quickened we
are united unto him. 3. Because we are quickened by the same spirit* and power,
that raised him from the dead. All which may increase our consolation in this
gracious work, and confirm us unto the end.

Forgiving you all your trespasses.]

First for the meaning of the words; (...).
the word forgiving as it is in the original, signifies to acquit them
gratis, and as a free gift of his grace, to send them the news of their
pardon: (...).
the word rendered trespasses, usually is understood of actual sins. But yet we
must not think that original sin is not forg^^en, for either it is a
Senecdoche, and so one sort of sins is named in steed of all* or else he
speaks according to the feeling of many of the godly, who (...) after
forgiveness are maruellously troubled with the flesh, and the wicked ^^oanesse
to daily sins.

But for the matter it self, we may here note.

1. That God does certainly forgive men their sins, when he gives them
^^pentance, and conuerts them by his word.

2. That where God forgiues our sins, he heales our natures too, therefore
quickening and forgiving are here joined together; and herein Gods pardons
differs from all the pardons of Kings. Men may forgive the treason or felony,
but they cannot give a nature that will offend no more, but now it God forgive
a man, he will certainly give his good spirit to mend his nature, and cleanse
him from his sin.

3 That howsoever justification go before sanctification, yet it is
sanctification first appears, therefore quickening first named.

4. That it is a singular happiness to obtain of God the forgiveness of our
sins.

5. That if we were used according to our deserts, God must never forgive us,
it is his free grace.

The use of all may be first for great reproof of the general carelessenes of
the most men, that will take no pains at all to get the pardon of their
sins, but wholly neglect the seeking of the assurance of it. Now this
monstrous neglect of so admirable a benefit comes first from ignorance: men
know not their woeful misery in respect of their sins. 2. From the hardness
of man's heart, and their hearts in this point of neglect of remission of sins
are hardened both by the effectual working of Satan, and by the example of the
car^l^sse multitude, and by the entertainment of false opinions about it, as
that it need not be sought, or cannot be known, or hereafter will be time
enough to inquire: or else men are conceited in false acquittances; either they
rest in this, that Christ died for them, or that God makes promises of
forgiveness in scripture, or that their civil course of life, or their works
of mercy, or pie^ie, will make God amends etc. Again, this neglect arises
from the forgetfulness of man's latter end, if men knew the time of the day of
the Lord, they would get their pardon confirmed if it were possible, least it
should come upon them unawares. Lastly, this comes from the love of sin, men
are loath to leave their sins, and therefore not careful to seek
forgiveness of them.

2 Here is a confutation of merit of works, for if we pay the debt, then it is
not forgiven us; and if it be forgiven us, then certainly we pay it not:
besides the word notes that it is freely done, as has been showed before.

What we must do to obtain forgiveness of sins.
3 Shall we not be stirred up to seek forgiveness of sins? Quest. What should
we do that we might be confirmed in the assurance to obtain forgiveness of
sins? Answ. 1. Thou must forgive men their trespasses Math. 6.16.
. 2. Thou must acknowledge thy sins 1. Ioh. 1.9.
. 3. Thou must pray, and get others to pray for the forgiveness of thy sins
Iam. 5.16.
. 4. Thou must often receive the sacrament of the Lords supper, for this is
Gods seal of forgiveness of sins Math. 26.
. 5. Thou must bewail thy sins Zach. 12.12.13 and 13.1.
, and beg the witness of the spirit of adoption in the intercession of Jesus
Christ, till those unspeakable joys of the holy Ghost fall upon thee, and
seal thee up unto the day of redemption.

And thus far of the thirtenth verse.

VERSE. 14. Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances, that was against us,
which was contrary to us and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross.


This Verse and the next contain the seventh reason of the dehortation, it is
laid down in this verse and amplified in the next. The argument may stand
thus: If the ceremonies were a Chyrographe or handwriting against us, when
they were in force, and if now Christ have cancelled that writing, then we
ought not to use them again; but such they were, for they were a handwriting
against us, and Christ has removed them by fastening them upon the cross,
therefore we ought not to revive them again: or thus, it the debt be paid and
the obligation cancelled, then is it a fond course to cause the obligation
wilfully to be of force again.

Hand-writing] This handwriting is by diverse diversely referred, for some
think it is to be referred to the covenant with Adam; all mankind in him was
bound to God, this obligation he brake and so the forfeiture, lay still upon
our necks till Christ paid the debt, and cancelled the obligation. Some refer
it to the law of Moses in general, and say the people did bind themselves
unto it, Exodus 14 by the rites there used. This bond was forfeited by the Jews
and lay upon them. Some refer it to the morrall law in special, and therein
we did enter into bond which was called the covenant of works: the rigor and
curse of this law lies upon all mankind, and when God sues out this bond men
are carried to prison, even to the prison of hell. Some refer it to the
conscience of men, and say that an evil conscience is a Chyrographe, a bill of
debt, and it accuses by ordinances, that is, it takes conclusions from the
law of God to arrest, or condemn the sinner. But most usually it is referred
to the ceremonial law, by some of them men did enter into bond, as by
circumcision, so says the Apostle, he that is circumcised is bound to keep
the whole law, Gal. 5.5. By others of them men made bills of debt, circumcision
confesses corruption of nature by propagation. The washings were open
confessions of the foulness of our lives; in the sacrifices men subscribed to
their own death and damnation: for they confessed they had deserved to die in
steed of the beast.

The words may be true of all, but most principally of the ceremonial law. In
general he here entreats of deliuer^nce from the ceremonies of Moses, then,
two things may in particular be noted, 1. What the ceremonies were in
themselves. 2. The manner or means how the Church was discharged of them. For
the 1. if we require what they were? They were 1. for honor, ordinances of God.
2. for use, hand-writings. 3. for effect they were against us, or contrary to
us.

Ordinances] Some read for ordinances, some read by ordinances, some with
ordinances, and some of ordinances. They that read for ordinances, say the
handwriting was for ordinances, that is, either in favor of the decrees that
were against us, or for the better assureing of the keeping of the ordinances;
it was by ordinances viz. evangelical, for they say the decrees of Christ did
euacuate the laws of Moses. They that read with ordinances, say that the
handwriting was the debt of death which Christ took away with the ordinance;
that is the external rites and rudiments of Moses. But I think the sense is
clear as it is here rendered of ordinances.

And so the point to be observed is, that the ceremonies imposed upon the Jews
were Gods ordinances, which may show us that God did take upon him the right to
bind the conscience, of men, by ceremonies. 2. Seeing Christians are freed
from them by God himself, therefore the Apostle would have them stand to their
liberty. 3. This should exalt the praise of the morrall law; if they were
bound to observe the very ceremonies because they were Gods ordinances, then
much more should we be careful to keep the morrall.

Hand-writings] This word notes their use, because men are by nature wonderful
slow to acknowledge their misery, therefore the Lord in all ages did drive men
under their hands as it were openly to make profession of their own
sin-guiltinesse and fall, that so Gods justice might be clered: Therefore were
the sacrifices required presently after the fall; and baptism now is of like
nature to show us our natural uncleanness, that need to be washed.

Against vs] In effect they were against us. The ceremonies were against us,
that is against the Jews 4. ways, 1. As they were bills of debt. 2. As they
told the longing wife that her husband was long after to come. 3. As they
proclaimed God infinitely hating sin, so as he must have atonement in blood
and that daily. 4. As they were transgressed in respect of the right manner of
observing them.

Now though these ceremonies belong not to us Christians, yet we are in the
same debt by nature, that they were, though we have not that way of expressing
our debt.

Quest. But how could that which God commanded them to do be against them?
Answ. Many ways, 1. When they failed in the matter, as when they offered
strange fire or sacrificed their sons. 2. When they did anger God by
omissions, or delays, as when Moses tri^led out the circumcision of his son.
3. When they did it for wrong ends, as when the whore would sacrifice to color
her whoredoms, Pro. 5. or when men did think thereby to make amends for their
sins, Ier. 7. or when they used them for the hurt of Gods children, as Balaam
used his sacrifice. 4. When they mingle their own inventions with Gods
ordinances; and their fear toward God was taught by the precepts of men. 5.
When they did use them, as a burden, and it was a weariness to them. Lastly,
when they that used them were wicked men, and did use them without knowledge,
or faith, or repentance for their sins, or the care of the due manner, as
many places of scripture show. And thus may the very law of God be against us
still, as well as against them.

The use of all this chiefly may be to show, the misery of every impenitent
sinner, his sins are upon record, there is the handwriting against him, let
him look upon sacrificing Jews, and there he may behold man daily in effect
saying thus. Thus must it be done to the man that repents not of his sins,
the obligation lies forfeited, and the Lord may call upon him for his debt of
10000. talents when he has not a farthing to pay, and then he will be cast
into prison.

Again when he says [ vs] he shows that this is the estate of all men by
nature, there was a handwriting against the very Apostle himself, and such as
were in the visible Church, therefore he says against us. Thus of what the
ceremonies were in themselves. Now of the discharge from them, there two things
may be noted, 1. The manner, Christ put them out, took them away, fastened
them. 2. The means, viz. the Cross. The sum is, that Christ Jesus by his
sufferings on the Cross, paid our debt, and freed us from the handwriting
that was against us; the anger of God conceived against us, for the forfeiture,
was thereon by the blood of Christ appeased Rom 5.9.
, and forgiveness of sins and debts, therein merited 1. Ioh. 1.7.
; And by the blood of Jesus, the faithful overcome the devil Revel. 12.11.
Heb. 11.28.
, that had power to destroy, by reason of the forfeiture; and because none of
the former agreements would serve by reason of man's weakness, therefore God
makes a new covenant, and seals it by the blood of Christ upon the Cross Zach
9.11. Heb. 9.18.
; and if we would be assured of our release, in particular, First, for the
forfeiture in Paradise, we receive an atonement in the blood of Christ Romans 5
11.12.17.
; And he that from the curse in Paradise had power over death, was now by
Christ destroyed Heb. 2.15.
. And for the law of Moses, we are by Christ delivered both from the rigor of
it, and from the curse of it, his own sacrifice being the propitiatory, to
still the cry of the Law, and to hide it from the eyes of Gods justice h; and
as for the writing of the conscience, the blood of Christ cleanses it from
dead works Heb 9.14.
, and quieteth it in the declaration of forgiveness Ephesians. 1.7.8.
, and it makes intercession for sin Heb. 12.14.
after calling to keep it quiet; and as for the ceremonial hand-writings they
were both fulfilled Col. 2 17.
and abolished in the sacrifice of Christ on the cross, he himself saying,
It was finished. And the more to assure us, of our safety, from these
forfeitures, he uses those diverse phrases, of putting out, taking out of the
way, and fastening it to the Cross.

Uses.
The use of all is, 1. For information; we may see what a case sin sets us in
by nature, and how hateful the nature of sin is: if we have any thing to
do with God, why our sins lie like so many blocks in our way, and Christ
Jesus only can lift them out of the way; and can our wretched hearts delight in
sin, seeing they nailed Christ to the Cross? It is an easy thing to rent an
obligation amongst men, but it was not so easy, to get ours cancelled, it
could be rent in no place, but on the Cross, Christ Jesus himself must be
fastened to the tree, that he might fasten our cancelled handwriting thereto:
and if God spared not his own Son, when he came about this business of
cancelling the handwriting, what think we shall be the case of all wicked
men, that die in their sins, and must suffer the whole forfeiture to fall on
their necks? if what Christ endured on the Cross were so painful, they must
not think to escape. Hence also we may see what wonderful cause we have to
love the Lord Jesus, that has done all this for us, Oh how precious should his
memory be amongst us? Finally, here the faithful should gather singular
comfort against the law, sin, death and hell, seeing here they may be
informed all these were nailed upon the cross, and Christ has openly declared
that he has cancelled whatsoever might be to show against us, for any
forfeiture or debt of ours whatsoever; And shall not we take heed of running
in debt again, by sinning, after the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ?
or shall we wretchedly bind our selves to the law again, by pleading our
justification before God by the works of the law?

VERSE. 15. And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them in it.


These words are an amplification of the former, wherein he shows that not
only the Bill in which we were made infinitely indebted, was cancelled; but the
devils also (who had power to serve executions upon us, and proof from the
ceremonial Law, as is before declared) mightily conquered by Christ; and
therefore to revive again the ceremonies, was to renew the bond, and to stand
still in danger of the devils executions.

The words are a most portly and deep allegory, and they carry news of a
remarkable victory: the battle was fierce, cruel, prodigiously difficult,
bloody on the best side, and if Christ had been a jot less then he was,
there had been no remedy, News of a strange victory.
nor hope. The battle was first fought between Satan and man, with a depth of
fraud and cruelty and hellish invisible spite: the day was lost, man with the
woeful issues of the conquest, was either cast down wallowing in blood, or
scattered with pursuing cruelty: no sooner sprouting in the life of nature,
but smitten with the venom of spiritual infection, plagued with the bondage
of more then cruel servitude, not pitied, not helped: more forfeitures laid
upon him then he could find words to acknowledge. Now one man comes into the
field in the right of millions, (that could not stand in their own quarrel)
challenges the victors, with singular compassion calls back the scattered,
raises a mighty expectation, exposes himself to the danger, with incredible
fury is encountered, one with millions or legions of devils, of
incomprehensible rage, and long beaten experience, and the infinite anger of
God, was kindled against this one man as a surety for the rest.

Now in this text is a report of the happy success of the battle; news of a
most victorious conquest: the devils spoiled, the elect restored, with
unutterable hymns attend the conquest; the wretched spirits are in chains,
exposed to infinite shame, and dragged after the chariot of triumph, as he
ascended into the new Jerusalem.

In general two things may be observed: First, that Christ is God; he was
brought in before, quickening, pardoning, filling, circumcising the heart, now
here spoiling the devils, and triumphing over them.

2. We may here comfort our selves with this, that the devil shall never have
success against Christ, and his kingdom, God has cursed all his ways: and
yet we find by experience, the devil will not give over, though he has never
so ill success from day to day: which may awaken many wicked men, who are
herein like the devil, no ill success can make them give over, their ill
courses. Again, would we not be spoiled and crossed in the success of that we
take in hand, and be made like the devil in ill success, then let us take
heed of his qualities, be not like him in cruelty, in fraud, in lying, in
accusing, or envying the children of God: for if thou be, thou art sure with
the devil, to be accursed and rebuked of God.

Now for the particular opening of these words, we must understand that they
have been three ways interpreted. First, some Papists say this battle was
fought in hell, when Christ fetched the Fathers out of Limbus: This
interpretation I reject, not only as a fond conceit obtruded upon the world,
but because the most popis^ writers could see no such thing in this place, but
expound it otherwise.

Secondly, some orthodox writers say this battle and triumph was both begun
and ended before Christ's death. The devils encountered Christ two ways upon
the cross: visiblie and invisiblie. Visiblie, by inspiring wicked men with
vile prouocations to vex him, and molest him; as the impenitent thief Luke
23.38.
, the Rulers of the Jews Luk 23.38.
, and the soldiers Luke 23.37.
. Invisiblie, the devils themselves, with all might, fury, malice, and
slight encountered him upon the cross, in the sight of God and the holy
Angels.

The victory i^ described in this verse, and it is said first he spoiled them,
which is diversely read and referred; For some understand it, he spoiled the
devils: some of the Fathers put in a word, and read it, after he had spoiled
himself of his flesh, and so it is a comparison borrowed from wrestlers, or
runners, that first put off all might hinder them; and so Christ that he might
overcome, first laid down his flesh, upon the cross. And where the text
says, he made a show of them openly, the Holy Ghost alludeth to the trophies
of great Victors: their manner was, in the place where they did overcome,
either to cut down the arms of great trees, and thereupon hanged the spoils
or weapons, of the vanquished: or else they built some stately pillars, and
there painted or wrote upon, the conquest with other monuments of victory; So
did Christ openly serve the devils, openly before God, Angels, and the world
he defeateth them, and by a new way, by suffering, gave occasion to all to see
the shaking of the hellish kingdom; where he is said to triumph over them,
therein is an allusion to the third degree of victory, they were won: to lead
their captives after the chariot of triumph into the City with great pomp:
thus did Christ to the wicked spirits, either upon the cross, or in his
resurrection.

Quest. But might some one say, what appearance was there of any victory, when
Christ suffered? Christ's victory
Answ. Great every way: for if we observe it in every branch of the process,
there is evident signs of victory; For do they attach him? why first the
officers are smitten to the ground, with a very word, In his attachment.
and Judas the chief leader is made to go and hang himself: the ear of
Malchus was miraculously cured, and they are suffered to do no jot more then
will fulfill the scriptures Mat. 26.26.
. Will they arraigne him in the Consistory? why there sits a high Priest that
was made whether he would or no to prophecy, In his arraignment.
of Christ's death for the people Io^. 11.50. with 18.4.
; and Christ casts a spirit of giddiness upon the witnesses, so as their
testimonies could not agree: yea he there foretells them of his most glorious
and terrible second coming in the clouds of heaven, and then miraculous
recouers Peter a lapsed sinner. Will they arraigne in the common hall? why
there he ouercomes by patience, no indignities could stir him, and the Judges
wife from a dream, gives warning that he was a just man, yea the Judge
himself was compelled to pronounce him innocent. Upon the cross.
Will they have him to the cross? there are wonders of victory, a thief
without means saved, the veil of the Temple rent, signs in heaven and earth,
and a title of victory superscribed by his very adversaries, This is the King
of the Jews; besides his incorruption in the grave, and glorious resurrection,
and visible ascension to heaven.

All this being considered, where is the ignominy of the cross, seeing the
devils erected a cross for themselves, when they plotted to crucify Christ?
And why should we be afraid of sufferings, seeing the cross is Christ's triumph?
and let us resolve also to overcome by sufferings Romans 8.34.
; It Is an excellent and lofty praise, to overcome by suffering.

Lastly, let us never judge of Christ or Christians by their outward show:
great things may be done in the kingdom of Christ, which are not discerned by
carnal reason; Here we see a great ado, trophies, triumphs, yet the world
took no notice of it: so is there incomparable glory even in this world in the
souls and lives of Christians, which the blind multitude never takes notice
of. And thus much of the second interpretation.

The third and last interpretation, is of those that limit not the time of this
victory to the cross, but consider it generally, and in steed of the words [
upon the same crosse] read [ in himselfe] and thus do the most Interpreters
new and old read it; And so this victory is understood not so much of what
Christ did attain in his person, as what he does in us: by the conversion of
sinners, by the Gospel, he daily spoils principalities and powers, and
triumphs over them, etc. and so these words are a consequent of the putting out
of the handwriting mentioned in the former verse.

Four things are in these words to be considered: who, whom, what, and by what
means. For the first, it is the second Adam that undertakes this battle, he
that is God and man, he of whom the prophecies ran, he that by a voice from
heaven, at his baptism was acknowledged the only champion, it was he that sent
the challenge by his forerunner John Baptist, he it is that foiled Satan in
many Monomachies, this is he that now comes forth in the Gospel in the
several ages of the Church to spoil these principalities and powers.

Now for the second, the spoiled are called principalities and powers.

Principalities and Powers] These terms are given to the good Angels, Ephesians.
3.10. and to great Magistrates and Princes on earth, Ephesians. 1.23. In effect they
are given to Christ, Esaias 9.6.7. but usually they are restrained to evil
angels, and so they are called either considering them as they were before
their fall, or as it is usually conceived, it notes their estate even since
their fall.

The two words note two things in the evil Angels, Excellency and Ability;
Excellency, so they are principalities; Ability, so they are powers. Their
excellency is two ways to be considered, 1. in themselves. 2. their
sovereignty over the world. In themselves and their own nature, ever since
their horrible fall, they are creatures of wonderful knowledge, swiftnes,
discerning, and such like.

And in respect of the unregenerate world they have a principality: hence
called worldly rulers Ephesians. 6.
, the prince of this world Ioh. 12.
, yea and the god of this world 2. Cor. 4.4.
. We may observe here in the holy Ghost a wonderful pattern of candor, he
praises what is praiseworthy even in his enemies; and it may wonderfully
comfort Gods children in their acceptance with God, for if God can yield these
titles and acknowledge that is yet good in the very devils, sure then it
cannot be he should not like what he finds good in his own Saints, though
they have many wants and sins, seeing they sin not of malicious wickedness, as
the devils do.

As they are called principalities, so for their ability and force of working,
they are called powers. The power of the devils both in the world and in the
Church.
The wonderful power the devils have may be considered either in the world or
in the Church.

In the first race of men before the flood, how soon had they drawn away
Cains race into apostacy, and not long after Sethes, till they had chased the
light of sincerity within the walls of one house, and not all sound there
neither? After the flood, the world is no sooner filled again, but together
with the building of Babel, a most dreadful confusion was wrought by the
devils, even the beginning of a general falling away into gentilisme and
idolatry (which will never be utterly recovered again while the world stands)
all the families making apostacy in the beginning of the Babilonish Monarchy,
and such an apostacy, as they continued in for many hundred years in the
generality of them: so as there was only a little light left in the race of
Sem.

Now leaving the whole world lying under this powerful wickedness, come to
Abraham, (a brand taken out of the fire of the Chaldeans) in whom the light
shined with great glory, see the power of these wicked spirits over his race:
the Ismalites went quickly of to gentilisme: then the Edomits were easily
gained after: then in Egypt the light that did remain was almost put out, the
bondage of the Isralites being as great in soul Ezech. 20.
, as it was in body.

In Moses time the light was diffused in that people all abroad again, and a
kingdom of Priests was raised up to God: this light held with various increases
and decreases, till the captivity, after which time it waxed dimmer and
dimmer, till Christ the day star arose, and filled heaven and earth with the
brightness of his coming.

After in the very first hundreds of years, these cursed spirits not only
persecuted religion by incredible tyranny, but infected it with the tares of
strange errors, and prodigious superstitions and heresies, till all grew
together in one body in Antichrist.

Under Antichrist all sincerity was again almost universally put out, the
face of religion corrupted, and idolatry brought into the Churches 1260.
years. Lastly, in our own days when the prophecies were accomplished, and
the everlasting Gospel published again, alas yet consider the state of the
world; one part of the world lies in Paganism, another in Turcisme, an other
in Iudaisme, an other in Papisme; and in all these four these wicked spirits
reign, and hold the world captive at their pleasure.

Come we to the visible assemblies, of the true Churches of Jesus Christ, and
consider there their power, how mightily it extends, for there they have secret
Atheists, Church-papists, persons excommunicate, witches, and such like
diabolical practisers, Hipocrites, Apostataes, the unmerciful, troops of the
ignorant, besides the swarms of vicious livers, and profane persons, such as
are swearers, drunkards, filthy persons of all kinds, liers, usurers, railers,
and such like workers of iniquity.

Why Satan's working is not perceived by wicked men.
It is true worlds of men feel not this power of theirs: but alas this war is
spiritual, these enemies are invisible, their sleights are of infinite depth,
their souls are already in their possession, and all is covered with gross
darkness, and done in a spiritual night, and wicked men are like dead men in
their sinful courses, senseless and secure.

Uses.
The use is to show the misery of all impenitent sinners, though they go in
brave clothes, dwell in fair houses, possessed of large revenues, abound in
all pleasures, of life etc. yet alas, alas, for their woeful estate with all
this: Oh the devils, the devils, are their masters, and rule over them as
effectually as ever did tyrant over his slave: Oh if men have ears let them
hear, and awake and stand up from the dead, and not da^e to continue in so
woeful a condition, and let the righteous leap and sing for true joy of heart,
whatsoever their outward estate be, in the world; Oh let them praise the rich
grace of God, that has translated them out of this kingdom of darkness, and
given them a lot among the Saints.

The third thing is the victory, expressed in three degrees.

He spoiled them] This is to be understood in the behalf of the faithful, for
whose sake, he has and does daily smite them with his great sword Esaias. 27.1.
. He reproves them and rebukes them Zach. 3.1.2.3.
: he casts them down like lightning Luke 10.20.
: He breaks their head Genesis 3.15.
: yea and sometimes treades them down under the feet of his saints Romans 16.20.
: making them in many tentations and tribulations more then conquerors Rom 8.34.
: pulling down their strong holds, which they had within 2. Cor. 10.4.
, when they compass the righteous with their tentations, he ever opens a
door for issue, and delivers the righteous 2. Pet. 2 9.
, sending succors Heb. 2.18.
, and making his servants often to lead Satan captive.

He spoiled them by taking from them the souls Act. 26.18.
of the righteous, which they possessed as their booty: he spoiled them by
loosing the works of Satan 1. Ioh. 3.8.
: he spoiled them by taking from them altogether the power they had over death
Heb. 2.14.
, so far as concerns the righteous. He has so far spoiled them, that they
are not only judged by the word of the saints in this life Ioh. 16.11.
, but the saints shall also sit upon them, to judge them at the last day 1.
Cor. 6.3.
.

And all this may serve for constant comfort unto all the godly, each word
being a well of consolation if we wisely apply it. Uses.
And withal it may encourage them against the remainder of the power of evil
spirits; it is true they accuse still, they hinder the word what they can
still, they will steal the seed still, they will raise trouble and
oppositions still, they sow tares still, they will be casting their snares
still, they buffet them by tentations still: but yet the same God and our Lord
Jesus Christ that has thus far subdued them, will prosper his own work,
and make us stand in all the evil days, so as we will put on the whole
armor of God.

Now whereas he says he has spoiled him, it is true of the time past, 1. In
the person of Christ himself. 2. In the merit of our victory. 3. In our
justification, he is perfectly foiled. 4. In our sanctification he is spoiled
by inchoation.

And made a show of them openly] These words contain the second degree of
victory, and are true in a double sense: For first he has made a show of
them, in that he has discovered them and made them known to the Church. This
is a dragging of them out of their cells of darkness in the light of
observation, by showing their natures, and practices, by unmasking them to the
view of the soul: thus are they displaied in the doctrine of the gospel, and
the souls of the righteous behold this detection of Satan from day to day by
the word, with as much admiration as ever the Romans did behold any great
rebel, or barbarous rebel or monster, subdued, and in triumph brought into
Rome: Neither may this detection of Satan seem to be the least part of
Christ's victory: for it is certain it is a work that evil men or evil
angels never bear but vanquished. There is a hot opposition in all places
before Satan will abide this.

Secondly, (...).
he made a show of them, that is, as some think, he made them to be for
examples, and that three ways. 1. In shame, making detestation to be their
portion. 2. In confusion, and an inexplicable kind of astonishment, and
benummednes, and blindness. 3. In torments and punishments, 2. Pet. 4.5. Iud. 9.

The use may be for increase of consolation: Use.
we see Christ will never cease till he has finished this victory. Why should
we then fail through unbelief, or faint in the resisting of the devil, the
Lord will more and more make a show of them, and give us increase of experience
of the power of his word and presence herein. Here also men's waiwardnesse may
be reproved, that cannot abide it to hear talk of the devil or his courses:
this is but a work of Satan in them to hinder their salvation, for to make an
open show of them is one part of Christ's victory.

The word rendered openly signifies sometimes eminently Ioh. 7.4.
, sometimes without authority Act. 4.29.
, sometimes with confidence, and undaunted resolution, with assurance or
plerophorie 1 Ioh. 5.14
, sometimes with plainness and evidence Ioh. 16.25.29.
, sometimes with liberty 1. Tim. 3.13.
. But I rest in the word openly here used.

And triumphed over them] Here is the third part of the victory. This triumph
was first begun in the resurection and ascension of Christ Ephesians. 4.7.
. 2. It was continued in the publication of the gospel 2. Cor. 2.14.
, (which is news of victory) and in the life of Christians, for what is the
life of every Christian, but the show of a brand taken out of the fire, or of a
soul preserved out of darkness? The soul is mounted in the chariot of the
word, prayer and holy living; this chariot is followed with the applause of
Angels, and the approbation of the Saints; the place is in the new Jerusalem
on earth, in the temple of their God. The chariot is drawn with white steeds,
sincere teachers; it is provoked and driven on by the spirit of God: and the
effect of all is a heart inspired with heavenly ioies and refreshings. 3. As it
begun in Christ, and is continued in the life of a Christian, so this triumph
shall be perfitted in death, and consummate in the resurrection to the eternal
dissolution and confusion of all wicked men and devils.

Now for use of this; Use.
what lust cause is thereto take up bitter lamentations for the wonderful
frowardness of the natures of the most men: who had rather be miserable and
serve the devil still, then be made glorious by conquest in repentance for
their sins: they had rather be his prisoners, then such princes: rather
slaves to Satan, then sons to God: rather dragged into captivity with the
devil, then carried in the chariot of triumph with the Saints.

2. If such honors be done to Christians, and such joys had in a Christian
estate, Oh then let it be the prayer of every godly man daily to God, as Psalm.
106.4. Remember me O Lord, with the favor of thy people, visit me with thy
salvation, etc.

Lastly, how should it excite in us a desire to walk worthy of such a victory?
yea how should it inspire us with spiritual magnanimity to resist Satan, and
with a holy scorn to disdain his filthy tentations, and in all estates to
demean our selves so as might become men that know and believe that Christ
has spoiled principallities and powers for us etc.

4. For the means of this victory, it is added in these words,

In himselfe] So it is read in the greek, and in the most interpreters; and
his in himself, either it notes his mystical body, or else it notes Christ
himself alone, and in this latter sense it is continually taken: and so we may
here learn, that it is the Lord Jesus Christ alone, even himself alone that
has wrought this victory for us; there was none other able to stand in the
field against the adversary: there is no name else under heaven by which we
can be saved: and therefore we should give all the glory to Christ alone, and
not to any man or Angels, for they never fought for us, nor were they able to
^and in this battle of our redemption.

VERSE. 16. Let no man therefore condemn you in meat or drink, or in respect
of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days.

17. Which are but a shadow of things to come, but the body is in Christ.


Hitherto of the seven reasons of the dehortation. The conclusion follows in
these words and the rest to the end of the chapter: and it has three branches;
For 1. he concludes against Iudaisme in these words. 2. Against philosophy,
verse. 18.19. 3. Against traditions, verse. 20. to the end.

In these words is contained both the conclusion it self verse. 16. and the
reason verse. 17. and the drift is to show that the ceremonies of Moses are
abolished, and therefore they should not receive them, or hold themselves bound
unto them. This was foretold Dan. 9.17. it was signified by the renting of the
veil; and these ceremonies were solemnly and publickelie laid down, in the
first council, which was held by the Apostles, at Jerusalem, Act. 15. And they
were then so laid down that the Apostle after gives order to the Church that
those ceremonie^ should never be used, nor any other devises, but such as might
be to edification, order and decency, and were without offense.

The ceremonies named in the text, are the difference of meats and drinks,
and the observation of times, concerning which he writes more sharply, Gal.
3.1.3. and 4.10. and 5.9. and 6.12.

In the law there were three sorts of meats that legallie were required, 1.
The meat offerings. 2. The show bread. 3. The clean beasts. The meat offering
was a type of Christ our nourishment. The show bread was a type of the Church
in her mystical union. And the clean beasts (known by chewing the end, and
dividing the hoof) were types of the Christians both meditation and
discretion, in the means of his holy conversation. And for the confirmation of
this place, the Apostle elsewhere shows evidently that the difference of
meats is taken away, 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.4.

The difference of times in the law is here said to be threefold; of days, of
months, of Sabbaths.

In respect of an holy day] The original and most translations word for word
have it thus, in part of an holy day; but in diverse senses: some say in part of
an holy day: First, in partition of a festival day from a not festival day,
as well in days, as in months, or Sabbathes. Some say, in part, for they could
not observe all ceremonies, being absent from Jerusalem. Therefore the Apostle
would have them to receive none at all, seeing they could not receive them all.
Some say in part of an holy day, that is in that part of them which concerns
days etc. but it is more plainly as it is here rendered.

Or of the new moone] They did observe the Calends, or first days of every
month.

Or of Sabbath daies] There were diverse sorts of Sabbathes, of days, of
years* or seuens of years, The Sabbathes of days were either morrall, viz.
the seventh day, which God did choose; or ceremonial: the ceremonial Sabbathes
were either more solemn, such as were the three great feasts, passover,
pentecost, and tabernacles; or less solemn, such as were the feasts of
blowing the trumpets Leuit. 23.24
, and the feast of expiation Leuit. 16.32 33.34.
. The Sabbath of years, was every seventh year Leuit. 25.4.5.6. to 11.
. The Sabbath of seuens of years, was the Iubile, which returned every fifty
years. We see here then that the Apostle shows that we are delivered from the
bondage of the observation as before of meats, so now of Sabbathes.

Object. But is the Sabbath day that was morrall abrogated? Sol. No, the
Apostle speaks here of the ceremonial law, not of the morrall, and of
ceremonial Sabbathes, not of the morrall Sabbath, the word is in the plural
number.

The manner of propounding the conclusion is to be observed.

Let no man condemn you] These words may be referred either to Gods children
or to false teachers; in the first sense it is thus: let none condemn you,
that is, do not show such love to these ceremonies, hereafter, that thereby
you incu^re justly the blame and censure of Gods children. And if they be
referred to false teachers, then it is thus: let no man whatsoever persuade you
that you are condemned, or judged of God for omitting the observation of the
ceremonies; care not for their censures, never trouble your consciences about
it.

Which are shadows of things to come] Here the Apostle with full sail drives
into the haven, by shutting up with this unavoidable argument. These cerenies
are but shadows of that substance which now we have, and therefore it is a
foolish thing, to strive about the shadow when we have the substance.

Ceremonies were shadows in diverse respects, Ceremonies were shadows in
diverse respects.
1. In respect of certainty of signification: the shadow is a sure sign of the
body; so was this of Christ to come. 2. In respect of causation; the body
causes the shadow, so is Christ the cause of all ceremonies. 3. In respect of
the obscurity of signification: a shadow is dark so were the ceremonies. 4.
In respect of cessation, a shadow is quickly gone, so were the ceremonies,
they were not to last for any long time. Lastly, they were shadows as they
were types, so the lamb was a shadow of Christ, and the arc of the Church
etc. They were shadows not given to justify, but to show justification by
Christ.

It is added of things to come] to keep off the blow from our sacraments,
which are no shadows of things to come, but of things past.

But the body is in Christ] The words are diversely interpreted: some refer
the words to the next verse, but without reason: some supply a word body, and
read, but the body is the body of Christ: but the plain meaning is, that the
truth and substance of all the ceremonies is now inioyed by the Church in and
by Christ, in whom all is now fulfilled, and therefore heaven should now suffer
violence, and the children of Sion should now rejoice in their King; and
Christians should stand fast in the liberty that is brought unto them in
Christ Jesus.

VERSE. 18. Let no man bear rule over you by humblenes of mind, and
worshipping of Angels; advancing himself in those things he^ never saw: rashly
puffed up with his fleshly mind.

19. And holds not the head, whereof all the body furnished and knit
together, by ioints and bands, increases with the increasing of God.


In these two verses he concludes against philosophy, and therein specially
against Angell-worship, a devise like the old doctrine of the Platonists,
concerning their daemones tutelares. The Divines also that first broached this
apostaticall doctrine, in the primitue Church were Philosophers: and if the
Papists will persist in Angell-worship, they must bear it to be accounted
better Philosophers then Divines.

The Apostle makes four observations upon these that bring in this worship of
Angels. 1. That they attribute that to themselves, which is proper to God;
namely to bear rule over the consciences of men in matters of religion, though
they pretend to bring in those things, because they would have men think
humbly of themselves. 2. That they thrust in for oracles, not things they have
seen and heard, but devised of themselves. 3. That those things were founded
on no other foundation then the opinions of men immoderately pleasing
themselves in their own devises. 4. That this course tends to the high
derogation of the honor of Christ, who only deserves all glory, and by whom
alone all the suits of the Church are dispatched. The men then that urge these
things are, 1. Hypocrites, they pretend one thing and intend an other. 2. They
are ignorant persons. 3. They are proud and insolent in self-conceit. 4. They
are profane without Christ.

(...).
Let no man bear rule over you] The original word, has troubled
Interpreters: but is for the most part, rendered, either bear rule over you,
and so play the part of a judge or rector; or else, defraud you of your prize,
it is granted by all, to be a word taken from the manners, in the olympiads or
other-where, who ran for prizes: among whom there was one they called
Brabeutes, that is, one that by appointment did sit as judge, and gave the
prize to the winner.

If it be taken in the first sense, viz let no man bear rule over you; then
the Apostles meaning is to warn them for the reasons above rehearsed, and
herewith adjoined, not to suffer their teachers to lord it over them in their
consciences; as before he had charged them, not to let them carry away their
souls as a prey verse. 18. or to condemn them verse. 19. This may teach the
ministers of the Gospel, to know and keep their bounds, and the people
likewise, not to suffer any to bear rule over their consciences, with their
own devises. It condemns also the hellish pride, and imperiousnes of the
popish clergy, in playing the judges over men's consciences at their own
pleasures: seeing we have no judge nor lawgiver but only Jesus Christ to whom
the father has given all power.

Quest. But have not the Ministers of the Gospel power upon observation of the
runners to be as judges to assign the crown to them that run well*

Answ. They have, and therefore are called the disposers of Gods secrets, and
watchmen, and overseers: but yet they must be true ministers, and they must
give judgment by warrant from the word.

Let no man defraude you of your prize] That is seeing you have begun to
run so well, and have run so long, let no man now beguile you of your
prize, the crown of glory.

The Church is like a field, the race is Christian religion, the runners are
Christians: the feet are faith and love; the goall or mark is death in
Christ, the brabium or prize is the possession of eternal life. Now the
doctrine hence implied is.

Doct. That men may run and come near the goall, and yet loose the prize.
Many run yet one obtains 1. Cor. 9.24
. Many receive the grace of God in vain 1. Cor. 6.1.
. Many come near the kingdom of God with the Scribe, and yet loose Mark. 12.34
. Many loose what they have wrought 2. Ioh. 10.
. Hence that exhortation, let no man take away your crown Revel. 3.11.
.

The use may be first for reproof of such as do wrong (either the judges or
standers by) by a wrong applause, such as give away the honors of Gods children
to such as never ran in the race, or not aright, and give the titles of the
Church and Christianity to wicked men: but especially this reproves those men
that having run well Gal. 5.7.
for a time, suffer themselves to be hindered, and so loose the prize. Lets in
running.
Many are the ways the devil has to hinder men in running; sometimes by
raising up adversaries Phil. 1.29.
, and outward molestations Revel. 2.10.
; sometimes he casts shame in their way, and names of reproach 1 Thessalonians. 2.2.
Act. 18.
; sometimes he iniects tentations Iam. 1.12.
; sometimes he leauens them Gal. 5.7.9.
by keeping them in bondage, to the defense or love of some lesser
superstitions or smaller sins, as the world accounts; sometimes he hinders them
by the domestical enemy the sin that hangs so fast on Heb. 12.1.
; sometimes he casts men into a dead sleep, and they lie all along in the
middle of the race. What we must shun in running.


2. This may serve for instruction to teach us with all heedfulnesse to look
to our selves after we set out in the race of Christian profession, that no man
take our crown; and to this end we must consider, both what to shun, and
what to follow. If we would not loose our crown, we must shun, 1. The sin
that hangs on so fast Heb. 12.1.
. 2. Profane bablings and opositions of science falsely so called 1. Tim. 6.20.
. 3. Scandal Phil. 2.15 16
. 4. The profits and pleasures of the world, so as our hearts be not set upon
them 1. Cor 9.25.
. 5. Self-love and trust in our own judgment, when we think our selves wise
enough to order our race without advice Gal. 2.2
. 6. Uncertain running 1. Cor. 9.26.
. Now for the second, that we may run successefully, diverse rules must be
observed, 1. We must watchfully stop the beginnings of sin, What we must
observe.
and when we feel our selves begin to halt, we must seek an healing, least
we be turned out of the way Heb. 12.13.
. 2. We must follow peace with all men, so far as may stand with godliness
Heb. 12.14.
. 3. We must keep the faith. 4. We must labor for the love of the appearing
of Christ. 5. We must continue and resolve not to give over till we have
finished our course. These three rules may be gathered out of 2. Tim. 4.8.9. 6.
We must pray that the Gospel may run more freely 2. These. 3.1.
; for that like a mighty wind helps wonderfully in the race. 7. We must
order riches so as they be no hindrances 2. Tim. 6.18.
. 8. We must use the advice of the best that can be had for skill or experience
Gal. 2.2.
. 9. We must faithfully discharge the duties of our calling 1. Pet. 5.4.
. We must so resolve upon the race, that we labor to be undaunted and every
way resolved against all afflictions and trials whatsoever, that may befall us,
accounting it all happiness to fulfill our course with joy Act. 20.24.
, arming our selves with this mind that we will take up our cross, and endure
any hardship 2. Tim. 2.5. Iam. 1.11.
.

At their pleasures] This is added as an aggrauation; (...).
the word notes they did it not ignorantly, or by frailty, but they did wrong
the conscience of men, with desire, willingly, wilfully; it does greatly
increase the guilt of sin, when men do it willingly and wilfully, where men
do it because they will do it. So some men go to law because they will go to
law Math. 5.40.
; so some will be great Math. 20.26
; Some will do the lusts of their father the devil Ioh. 8.44.
. Thus are men daily doing the wills of the flesh Ephesians. 2.3.
. The like way wardnesse may be observed in the negative. Men will not be
gathered Mat. 23.37
. Men will not come to the wedding Math 22.3.
. In some things they willingly knew them not 2. Pet. 3.5.
; and it is charged upon the idle they will not work 2 Thessalonians. 3 10
. Hence those conditional speeches, if ye will receive it Mat. 11.14.
; and if any man will save his soul Mat. 16 15.
.

The use may be for terror to stubborn offenders, God takes notice of it that
they sin at their pleasures, they sin because they will sin, and
therefore let them be assured he will be froward with the froward Psalm. 18.
, and therefore he will have his will upon them irresistably. Hence these
threatenings, he will take accounts Mat. 15.23
, he will quicken whom he will Job. 5.21.
. he will give to the last as to the first Math 20.14.
; It shall not be after the wills of the flesh Ioh. 1.13.
, the spirit shall blow where he will Ioh. 3.8.
, the mystery shall be made known to whom he will Col. 1.27.
, and he will not have sacrifice Heb. 10.5.
.

Secondly, comfort is here implied; for if there be so much infection in a will
to sin, then there is hope God will accept a will to be and do good, he will
accept of the will in prayer Ioh. 15.7.
, and the will to resist corruption of nature Romans 7.15.16.17.
, and of the will to live honestly Heb. 13.18. Ioh. 7.17.
.

Hitherto the Apostle has charged them generally, now in the words that
follow, he inforceth his speech more particularly, both for matter, pointing
out Angell-worship, as the doctrine he would conclude against, and for manner
noting four things in those that brought in that worship. 1. That they brought
it in hypocritically, pretending humblenes of mind. 2. That they did it
ignorantly, advancing themselves in things they never saw. 3. That they did it
proudly, rashly puffed up etc. 4. That they did it dangerously, not holding the
head, etc.

Worshipping of Angells] The maine matter the Apostle strives to beat down,
is the worship of Angels: as a philosophical dream, as a superstition that
defrauds men of heaven, as an hypocritical and ignorant worship, charging them
to be proud and fleshly persons that use it; yea he avouches they cannot hold
the head which is Christ, if they maintain or practice such a worship. All
these reasons are in the text and coherence against it.

Which may serve for confutation of Papists, who at this day still maintain
it, not only without commandment or any approved example, in scripture, but
directly against the prohibition of the scriptures, as in this place, and so
Revel. 19. the Angel forbids John to do it.

The Papists offend three ways about their Saints and Angels.
The Papists offend in their doctrine about Saints ad Angels three ways. 1. In
giving unto them what may be attributed only to Christ and to God. 2. In
adoring them. 3. In inuocating and praying to them; and all three contrary to
scripture.

For the first, they attribute unto them, 1. Intercession. 2. The knowledge of
all things that concern us; they rob Christ of his intercession, and God of
his omniscience; now in all this we have a sure word of God to trust to. For,
for intercession it is plain, we have none in heaven with him Psalm. 73.25.
; there is one mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ 1. Tim. 2.
; we offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ 1. Pet.
2.5.
; Let us therefore says the Apostle by him offer the sacrifices of praise
always Heb. 13.15.
. Note the words, by him and always. And whereas they object the Angel,
Revel. 8. that offered the prayers of the Saints; we answer, that Angel was
Christ, who only has the golden censer, and who only is meet to bring
incense to offer upon the golden altar; the endeavor of Peter for their good
after his decease, was performed while he lived, as is apparent by comparing
the 13. verse, with the 15. of 2. Pet. 1.

And whereas they give the knowledge of all things unto them, they rob God of
his glory, who only is the knower of the hearts of men, 2. Chron. 6.30. and it
is granted Isai: 63.16 that Abraham knew them not, and Israel was ignorant of
them. And whereas they object that Abraham in the 16. of Luke, is said to know
that they had Moses and the Prophets books, we answer that that is spoken
parabolically not historically; they may as well say that Lazarus had fingers,
and Dives a tongue, etc. but were that granted, yet it follows not, that
because the doctrine of the Church was revealed unto him, therefore he knew all
things.

The second thing they give is adoration, contrary to the flat prohibition of
the Angel himself, in the Revelation, who charge worship me not, Revel.
19.10. and without all example in scripture, or the least syllable of warrant
for it; besides we see here Angell-worship in express words condemned.

The third thing is invocation, praying to them, which likewise is contrary to
scripture, for how shall we call on them on whom we have not believed Romans
10.14.
; and we are exhorted to go boldly to the throne of grace, with the help of our
high Priest, to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need Heb.
4.16.
; for Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world 1. Ioh. 2.2.
, why then should we give his glory to any other? and invocation is a part of
the forbidden worship of Angels, as well as adoration.

In humblenes of minde] It was the practice of Satan and pretense of false
Teachers, to thrust in this corruption of Angell-worship under this color,
that it tended to keep men in humility, and to make men to know their duties
to the great majesty of God, and to acknowledge their gratitude to the Angels
for their service: this has been the devils wont to hide foul sins, under
fair pretenses, and vice under the colors of virtue.

This may serve notably for the confutation of the Papists, about their Saint
and Angell-worship; for is not this their smoothest pretense, to tell us by
comparison, that men will not go to great Princes directly with their suites,
but will use the mediation of some Courtiers, and so they say they must do to
God. This you see was the old deceit in the primitive Church, and therefore
worthily we may say to the people, let none of the popish rabble defraud you,
through humblenes of mind.

Again, is the devil ashamed to show sin in his own colors? does he mask
it under the color of virtue? Then where shall those monsters appear that
declare their sins as Sodom, and are not ashamed of open villainies and
filthiness? Such are they that will constantly to the alehouse, and never be
ashamed of it: such are our damned swearers: such are those filthy persons,
that know they are known to live in whoredom, and yet never blush at it, nor
learn to repent: such are these in this City that live in open contention,
who care not against apparent right to maintain continual suits and
wranglings, though they know all men detest almost the very sight of them for
their wicked profanesse, and unjust contentions: yea though the hand of God be
apparently upon them, and they know not how soon the Lord may turn them into
hell. Such also are the open and wilful Sabbath breakers, and many more of all
sorts of presumptuous offenders.

Again, if vice masked in virtues colors can so please, and allure men, how
much should virtue it self ravish us? If counterfeit humility can be so
plausible, how should true humility win to the admiration and imitation of
it?

Lastly, this may warn men to avoid counterfeit gestures, and all pretended
insinuating shows of devotion, such as are open lifting up of the eyes to
heaven, sighing and all pretended tricks that are used only to pretend what is
not. And thus of their hypocrisy, their ignorance follows.

Advancing themselves in things they never saw] Two things are here to be
noted. First, Their ignorance in things they never saw. And secondly,
vainglorious selfe-liking, which the word (...) expresses.

For the first, there are some things cannot be seen with mortal eyes, while
we are on earth; as the nature of God, Angels, and what is done in heaven. 2.
There are some things, we ought not to see though we might: and therefore he
prayed, Lord turn away mine eyes, from seeing vanity. 3. There are some
things we may and ought to see, as the glory of God in his works. 4. There are
some things we may and so ought to see, as it is a great curse if we see them
not, as the favor of God and spiritual things: in respect of which to be
blinded in heart is a miserable judgment; Esaias 6.10
of the first sort are the things done in heaven.

There is a contrary waywardnes in the nature of wicked men; sometimes, men are
wilful and will not be persuaded, even in the things which yet they see;
sometimes, men are stiff hearted and will not be removed in opinions about
things which they never saw, and so here.

Ignorance is of diverse kinds. There is a natural ignorance, and that is of
two sorts. For there is an ignorance of mere negation, and so Christ knew not
the day of judgment, and so it is no sin in an Husbandman, if he be ignorant
of Astronomy or Physic, etc. There is a natural ignorance which is of
corrupt disposition: as to be blind in our judgments in spiritual things from
our birth; this is sinful, but not here meant.

There is a profitable ignorance, and that is likewise of two sorts. For it is
either profitable absolutely and simply, or but only in some respects. It had
been simply profitable and good for the Jews, if they had never known the
fashions of the Gentiles; so it had been good for Sampson if he had never
known Dalilah. But it had been profitable for the Pharisees but in some
respects, not to have seen or to have had so much knowledge. I^h. 9.41. 2.
Pet. 2 21.
So the Apostle Peter says it had been good for Apostataes if they had never
known the way of truth. etc.

There is a willing ignorance, and that is of two sorts; of frailty, or of
presumption. Of frailty, when men neglect the means by which they should
know, either in part or in some respects. Thus men fail that see a wide door
set open for comfort and direction, and yet through carelesnes, or willing
slacknes, neglect great riches of knowledge, which might have been attained if
they had made use of oportunities. Presumptuous ignorance, is when men not
wittingly only but wilfully contemn true knowledge, They will none of the
knowledge of Gods ways.

Job 21.14.
Presumptuous ignorance, is likewise of two sorts. 1. When men refuse to know
Gods revealed will needful to their salvation Prou. 29.30. Luke 19 41.
. 2. When men wilfully embrace fancies, and superstitions in opinion,
especially in such things as they neither do nor can understand; and such is
the ignorance here condemned.

Doctrine.
But the maine doctrine is, That it is a great sin and a hateful vice to be
rash and aduenturous, to venture upon opinions in matters of Religion, either
that concern worship or practice, where men are not first well informed in
judgment by true grounds of knowledge. Hence men are advised to take heed how
they hear, and to try the spirits, and to be wise to sobriety Romans 12.3.
, and to beware of fables 2. Tim. 2.16.23. and 4.3 4. 1. Tim. 1.4. and 4.6.7.
and 6.20. Tit. 1.14. and 3.9. 2. Pet. 1.16.
. This condemns the strange coining of opinions without all warrant of the
word, in the Papists, that so confidently tell us of the rooms in hell, and of
the Queen of heaven, and how many orders there be of Angels, etc. And withal
it may restrain such as profess the fear of God, and reformation of life, to
be well advised in their opinions, and not pitch resolutely upon opinions, in
things the word does not warrant. Blind zeal has no more allowance then
superstition has to coin opinions to tie men's consciences withal.

(...).
Advancing himselfe] The word signifies to take possession, and to go
proudly, and to search hidden things with deep insight: as it is here applied,
it may note in their sin three things. 1. A deep insight or out-reaching into a
thing beyond ordinary knowledge. 2. A mighty approbation, or very posses^ing
of a man's self in a peculiar content arising from his own invention. 3. An
external advancing or vain glorious priding of a man's self in hi^ fancy.
There is a strange corruption in the nature of all sorts of men, a secret
inclination to devises, and reaches both in opinion and life; the scripture
gives warning of the doctrines of men Math. 15.9.
; of opposition of science 1. Tim. 6.20.
, of the deepnesse of Satan Reu. 2.24.
, of transformation in evil Ministers, into Ministers of light 2. Cor. 11.14
, etc. And thus are men in their practice: though they commit the same foul
evils they condemn in others, yet they have such devises with which they
please themselves, that they are called counsels Psalm. 5.10.
, and they are said to seek deep to hide their counsels, etc. They have
their turning of devises Esaias 29.15.
. Every man almost thinks he has some conceit which others have not, etc. such
as these: Either they may do it though others might not, or the manner is
different, or the issues will not be alike, or he will repent at such a time
when he has tried so far, or he will make amends, or it shall not be known,
or God is merciful, or his fault is not so great as others, or the Scripture
does not condemn it in express words. These and such like conceits in
themselves are dull and silly. But where the love of sin has warmed the
heart, and the devil has put life into them, it is incredible to conceive,
how miserably pertinacious men will show themselves to be; and so do men
approve of their own devices, that usually there is no error or sin so vile,
but men can bless themselves against any terror, or threatening, and if men
find their devises to have any entertainment, they will advance themselves
wonderfully, and not only swell in great thoughts of themselves, but outwardly
vainglory will ouerspread their carriage, words, and actions.

The consideration hereof should teach us to trust more in God, and less in
men Psalm. 92.8.9.
, and to labor for plainness of heart, and simplicity Prou 12.5. and 21.8.
, and to long to hear God speak, and show us the secrets of his wisdom Job
11.56.
, and to suspect our selves when we feel a selfe-liking or an inclination to
boast of our device: especially we should pray that the Lord would keep us from
desire of vainglory t, and accordingly we should endeavor to do nothing
through strife or vainglory u, but rather set our glory and boasting in
knowing God *, and in the cross of Christ x, and in the hope of the glory of
the sons of God y, daily examining our selves, and proving our own works,
lest we think our selves something when we are nothing z. Thus of their
ignorance.

R^shly puffed vp] These words are a taxation of their swelling pride,
described 1. by the nature of it, puffed up. 2. by the effect, in vain, or
rashly. 3. by the cause, in the mind of their flesh.

Puffed vp] What is pride but a wind? a wind to fill, and a wind to torment.
Men may be spiritually swelled both in life and opinion. There is a swelling
for abundance of riches a, there is a swelling behavior in men's cariages b,
there is a swelling in sin, but here is a swelling for opinions c. Oh that
we could learn to abhor pride and swelling, by considering how much the Lord
abhors it, as many Scriptures show, Prou. 8.13. and 16.5.19. Job 40.6. Hab.
2.5. Mal. 4.1. and many such like. Oh that we could be in love with a meek
and quiet spirit in the hid man of the heart. But let us observe the effects of
pride.

Rashly] The word is (...), and it signifies either rashly, or, in vain. Sure
it is a great fault to be rash, light, sudden, in opinion or practice. It is a
great fault to be rash in reproving, in praising, in dispraising, or taking or
mistaking doctrine, in judging or censuring; and we should pray that the Lord
would gives us astayed spirit, and a mind not easily hurried into distemper.

Pride is in vain in three respects.
If we read it in vain, it notes fitly that pride always is in vain. In vain
I say, First, In respect of God who resists it, Iam. 4.7. Luke 1.51.
Secondly, In respect of other men who will not regard it, Proverb. 11.2. Psalm.
101.5. Thirdly, In respect of themselves, who inherit nothing by it but folly,
Prou: 14.18. 1. Tim. 6.4. Our hearts desire then should be that the Lord would
hide our pride, and mortify our natural corruption herein.

In the mind of the flesh] Here he shows whence all this stuff and swelling
comes, it came from the mind of the flesh, even from the fairest part of the
soul. The mind of the flesh is that acumen, that sharpnes of wit, that
perspicacie that is in men, and so we may see that wit, sharpnes of
understanding, carnal reason, is in vain, (whatsoever men savor of
themselves,) a mere puff of wind, a very vanity, whether it be in opinion
or in life; the very wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God, our own very
minds are so defiled and corrupt. Which should teach us to gird up the loins
of our minds, and restrain that self-conceit might arise from the pride of
our own minds or carnal reason, we should as the Apostle shows, become
fools that we might be truly wise 1. Cor. 3.18.
. Again, it should teach us not to rest upon the wisdom of men, nor to think
of any above what is written, or be puffed up one against another e.

Thus of the third thing.

VERSE. 19. And not holding the head whereof all the body furnished and knit
together by joints and bands, increases with the increase of God.


These words note the fourth thing, viz. their danger; they did it not only
hypocritically, and ignorantly, and proudly, but also dangerously. Their danger
is both laid down and amplified in this verse; it is laid down in these
words, not holding the head: and amplified by a digression into the praises of
the mystical body of Jesus Christ for the union and increase thereof.

Not holding the head] These words show that they that believe and practice
such things are themselves out of Christ, and by this kind of worship they
draw men from Christ. Four things may from hence be observed.

1. That Angell-worship razeth the foundation, so that the Churches that
practice it fall from Christ, and are not the true Churches of Christ, and this
evidently proves the Church of Rome to be no true Church, because besides many
other here heresies and idolatries, they maintain the worshipping of Saints
and Angels. 2. That hypocrisy, ignorance, and pride are inseparable
companions of apostacy from Christ. 3. That there is a difference between
sin and sin, error and error, every sin or every error does not cut us
off from Christ; there be some sins be sins of infirmity Gal 6.1.
; Some sins be such as there remains no more sacrifice for them Heb. 6.
; There be some ceremonies may be borne withal Rom 14.
; Some ceremonies that abolish from Christ Gal. 5 3.
; There be some errors of mere frailty and ignorance Psalm. 19.
; Some errors that altogether corrupt the mind, and make men destitute of the
truth 1. Tim 6.4.
. And therefore we should learn with all discerning to put a difference. Iud.
24.
4. That it is an utter misery not to be joined unto Christ; which imports a
singular feeblenes in the hearts of men, that cannot be stirred with all
heedfulnes to make sure their union with Christ.
Head] The dream of Catharinus, that the Pope should be here meant, is to be
scorned not confuted. The words notes the relation that is between Christ and
the Church.

The creature stands in relation to Christ, Note
1. More generally in existence, and ^o all things are in him, Col. 1.16. more
specially in union, and so man only is joined to Christ, but this union is
threefold, for it is either natural, or sacramental, or mystical; in the
union of nature all men are joined to Christ. In the union of Sacrament or
sign all in the visible Church are joined to Christ. In the mystical union in
one body, only the faithful are joined to Christ, and this is here meant.

And so we have here occasion again to take notice of this truth that the
Church of Christ is joined unto Christ, in a most near union, even to Christ,
as her head. The Doctrine has been largely handled in the former chapter,
only from the renewing of the meditation of it, we may gather both comfort and
instruction; comfort if we consider the love, presence, simpathie, influence,
and communication of dignity with which Christ does honor us as our head:
instruction also, for this may teach us to be careful to obey Christ willingly
as the member does the head, and to carry our selves so godly and discreetly,
that we dishonor not our head.

From which all the body etc.] Hitherto of the danger as it is laid down, now
follows the aggrauation by a digression into the praises of the Church the
mystical body of Christ; in general three things may be observed.

1. That by nature we are wonderful blind in the contemplation of the glory
of the mystical body of Christ, and therefore we had need to be often put in
mind of it. 2. That one way to set out the fearfulness of sin, is by the
fairness of the blessings lost by it; the fairness of the body of Christ
shows the foulness of lumpes of profaneness and apostacy. 3. Digressions
are not always, Note
and absolutely unlawful, Gods spirit sometimes draws aside the doctrine, to
satisfy some soul which the teacher knows not, and sparingly used it
quickneth attention; but I forbear to plead much for it: because though God
may force it, yet man should not frame it, and it is a most happy ability to
speak punctually, directly to the point.
But in particular in these words the Church which is the body of Christ is
praised for four things. 1. For her original or dependence upon Christ, of
whom. 2. For ornament, furnished. 3. For union which is amplified, 1. by the
parts knit together, 2. by the means iointes and bands. 4. For her growth
increasing with the increase of God.

Of whom] Doct. All the praise of the Church is from her head, for of her self
she is black Cant. 1.
, she is but the daughter of Pharoe Psalm. 45.
, she was in her blood when Christ first found her Ezech. 16.
, she needed to be washed from her spots and wrinkles Ephesians. 5.
, and therefore we should deny our selves and do all in the name of Christ,
who is our praise.

All the bodie] Doct. The care of Christ extends it self to every member
as well as any; observe these ph^ases in scripture, every one that asks Math.
7.8.
, every one that hears these words Math. 7.24
, every one that confesses Christ Mat. 10.32.
, every one that is weary and heavy laden Mat. 11 29.
, every one that the father has given him Ioh. 6.36.
, every one that calls on the name of God 1. Cor. 1.2.
, and the like.

Use is first for comfort, let not the Eunuch say I am a dry tree, or the
stranger say the Lord has separated me from his people Esaias. 56.
. Nor let the foot say I am not the eye 1. Cor. 12.
etc. And secondly, we must learn of Christ to extend our love also to all
Saints.

Body] It were to no purpose to tell that there are diverse bodies,
terrestrial, celestial, natural, spiritual, a body of sin, a body of
death; it is Christ's body is here spoken of: Christ has a body natural, and a
body sacramental, and a body mystical: it is the mystical body is here meant.
The mystical body of Christ is the company of faithful men, who by an
unutterable union are everlastingly joined to Christ, though they are dispersed
up and down the world, yet in a spiritual relation they are as near together
as the members of the body are; if we be faithful, there can be no separation
from Christ and Christians, whatsoever become of us in our outward estate.

This body of Christ is commended for three things, ornament, union, and
growth, and well are all put together, for not one can be without the other,
especially the first and the third, cannot be without the second: it is no
wonder Christians cannot grow nor be furnished, if they be not knit to Christ,
they may be near the body but not of the body. There is great difference
between our best garments, and our meanest members; the worst member of the
body will grow, yet the best raiment though it sit never so near will not, so
is not between wicked men professing Christ, and the godly that are members
of Christ indeed.

Of these three, union is of the essence of the body, the other two are
adjuncts; the one needful to the being, the other to the wel-being of the
Church. First therefore of this union.

This union is two ways here set forth, 1. that it is, in these words, knit
together. 2. How it is, in these words, by iointes and bands.

Knit together] The faithful are knit together, 1. with Christ, 2. with
Christians.

The privileges flowing from our union with Christ.
Great is the glory of Christians knit to Christ, for from that union with him
flows many excellent privileges, such are these,

1. The communication of names; the body is called sometimes by the name of the
head, viz. Christ 1. Cor. 12.
: and the head by the name of the body, viz. Israel Esaias. 49.
.

2. The influence of the virtue of the death and resurrection of Christ Romans 6.
. 3. The inhabitation of the spirit of Christ Romans 8.
. 4. Intercession 1. Ioh. 2.2.
. 5. The communication of the secrets of Christ 1. Cor. 2.16.
. 6. The testimony of Jesus 1. Cor. 1.5.
. 7. Expiation as he is the sacrifice, and passover offered for us 1. Cor. 5.7.
. 8. Consolation in affliction 2. Cor. 1.5.
. 9. Power against tentations 2. Cor. 11.9.
. 10. The anointing or power of office to be Prophets, Kings, and Priests,
unto God 2. Cor. 1.21.
. 11. Universal grace, not in respect of persons, that it reaches to all the
members only, but in respect of parts, that he being the fullness that
fills all in all things Ephesians. 1.27.
. 12. Sympathy in all miseries Heb. 2.15.
. 13. The sanctification of all occurrents in life or death Phil. 1.21.
. 14. Theresurrection of the body, both for matter Romans 8.11.^
, and prioritie 1. These. 4.16.
. Lastly, the opening of heaven Heb. 10.24.
, a lease whereof is granted and sealed and earnest given in this life Ephesians.
1.14.
. Thus of union with Christ.

From their knitting with Christians, also arise excellent advantages and
prerogatives; for hereby they have right to the external privileges, of Sion:
they stand in relation to all Saints, they receive the benefit of the prayers
of the whole body, and from the known Saints they have the light of example,
fellowship in the Gospel, outward blessings for their sakes, assistance in the
fight against the world, simpathie in afflictions, the profit of spiritual
mercy, counsel, consolation, admonition etc. and lastly a part in their lot.

By joints and bondes] The meaning is that Gods servants are tied together, by
as near certain and sure means, as any member in the body, can be joined to
the rest by joints and bands.

We are tied to Christ, both by his spirit, and by faith, and hope, and holy
desires; we are tied to the Church, in one spirit, in one head, in the freedom
and use of his ordinances, the word and sacraments, in affection, in
subordination of callings, and in the covenant of grace, and in the same lot of
inheritance.

The uses of all follow. First if we be thus tied to Christ by ioints and
bands, then they are to be reproved that like it so well to be still chained
in the bonds of iniquity, and seek not this holy union, let them take heed
they be not reserved unto everlasting bonds. But especially the meditation
hereof should work in us a hatred of fornication, and that filthy coupling
with an harlot 1. Cor. 6.15.
, and we should take heed of offending, wounding or wronging the brethren, for
thereby men sin against Christ himself to whom they are united 1. Cor.
8.11.12.
, and it should separate us from sinners 2 Cor. 6.15.
, and cause us to strive to show our selves new creatures 2. Cor. 5.17.
, and to seek those things that are above where our head and savior is Col.
3.1.
. Here also is great comfort, for our union with Christ may assure us that we
shall not be destitute of any heavenly gift, needful for this life or the
appearing of Christ, for present sanctification or future preservation, for God
is faithful who has called us to this fellowship with his son. And seeing
we are tied with such ioints and bands, who shall separate us from the love of
Christ Romans 8.
.

Again are we united to Christians and knit together as fellow members? then
we should be faithful in the use of our own gifts, and diligent in our
callings for the common good Romans 12.6.7 8
, to all weldoing, to do it with love, sincerity, and brotherly affection v.
9.10.
, yielding honor to the places and gifts of others v. 10.
, with all vprightnes, diligence, and respect of Gods glory v. 11.
, with hope, patience, prayer v. 12.
, with mercy, Sympathy and humility. Thus of union: ornament, follows.

Furnished] The Church is furnished with unsearchable riches Ephesians 2.9.
, v. 13.15.16.
with all sorts of spiritual blessings in heavenly things Ephesians. 1 3.
, she is cleansed by the blood of Christ Heb. 9.14.
, Christ is her wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption 1.
Cor. 1.3.
, she is not destitute of any heavenly gift 2. Cor. 1.6.
, and this he took order for when he ascended on high and led captivity
captive Ephesians 4.7.
. Oh then that the love of Christ could constrain us, and that the spirit of
Christ would inlighten us to see the riches of our calling, and the glorious
inheritance of the Saints? Thus of ornament: growth follows.

Increasing with the increase of God] Growth is a marvelous glory to
Christians.

The body of Christ grows, Wherein the Church grows.
1. In the number of parts or members, men being added daily to the Church. 2.
In the powerful use of the means, of salvation. 3. In grace 2. Pet. 3. vlt.
, as knowledge, and the like. 4. In practice of holy duties Phil. 1.11.
. Col. 1.9 10.11
5. In the strength of Christ Ephesians 3.16. Lets of growth.
.

There are many lets of the growth of grace and holiness in Christians, some
are secret some open; the secret are 1. Want of the true grace. 2. A profession
advanced for ill ends, inward hypocrisy. 3. Errors and wicked opinions, either
concerning the doctrine of godliness, or the practice of it 2. Pet. 3.17.18.
. 4. Want of knowledge how to perform holy duties, and faith to believe Gods
acceptance. 5. Strong affections 1. Cor. 3.3. Ephesians. 4.30.31.
. 6. Spiritual pride 2 Cor. 12.6.7
. 7. Love of ease, or loathnesse to endure, either the labor or the trouble of
the power of godliness. 8. Want of internal order, in digesting the comforts
or directions of God, and vnsettlednesse in assurance. And lastly, some secret
corruptions which they favor and will not forgo.

The open and external lets are, 1. Want of public powerful means Ephesians.
4.12. etc.
. 2. Discord with the members of Christ Ephesians. 4 16.
. 3. Neglect of private means. 4. Want of order of life Col. 2.6.5.
. 5. Unfaithfulness in other bonds 1 Pet. 3.7.
. 6. Secret detractors and backbiters. 7. Ungodly company. 8. Living without a
particular calling, or not diligently in it. 9. Worldliness as in Demas.
Lastly, resisting of counsel and admonition.

There are diverse motives even in this text which may persuade us to strive
after increase, 1. It will be a sign thou art far from fundamental errors,
in opinion or worship, and from pride and hypocrisy. 2. Thou should do it
for thine heads sake, dishonor not thine head by thy not increasing. 3.
Increase for the good and glory of the body. Lastly, it is the increasing of
God and so it is four ways, It is the increasing of God in four respects.
1. In respect of kind, it is not a thriuing in estate or temporal things,
but in the things of God. 2. As he is the efficient cause of it, God only is
the author of all holy increase. 3. In regard of the worth of the matter, it is
a divine thing to increase. 4. In respect of the end, it tends to Gods glory.

Three things that make men grow.
That we may increase we must look to three things, 1. That we often purge our
hearts by godly sorrow, and humiliation for our sins. 2. That we love
brotherly fellowship. 3. That we willingly resign our selves to the ministry
of the gospel, to be subject, and obey it in all things.

And thus far of the conclusion against Philosophy the last branch of the
conclusion follows.

VERSE. 20. Wherefore if we be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the
world, why as though ye lived in the world are ye burdened with traditions.

21. As touch not, taste not, handle not.

22. Which all perish with the using, and are after the commandments and
doctrines of men.

23. Which things indeed have a show of wisdom in voluntary religion, and
humblenes of mind and not sparing the body, which are things of no value,
since they appertain to filling of the flesh.


In these words is contained the third branch of the conclusion, and it is
enforced against traditions: here I observe both the manner of propounding, and
the matter. For the first, it is to be observed, that whereas he condemned the
former by way of advise, he condemns these by bitter and tart expostulation,
why are ye burdened with traditions, as if he should say, were there not a
singular proannesse of nature to corruption, could they be so blinded, as to
suffer false Teachers, to impose traditions upon them?

In the matter consider first what he condemns, viz. traditions explicated in
the kinds, v. 21. 2. The reasons why he condemns them and these, are 6.
First ye are dead with Christ, and therefore ye ought not to be subject to
traditions, of the force of this reason afterward. 2. You are dead from the
rudiments of the world, that is, from the ceremonial laws of Moses, which yet
were are rudiments or ways of instructing the world in the principles of the
Kingdom of God, and therefore much more should you now give over traditions? 3.
They are burdens, and the greater by how much the less sense you have of
them. 4. The matter of them is light, and vain, and idle, v. 21. 5. They are
all corruptible and perish with the using. 6. They are after the counts and
doctrines of men. ver. 22. Ob. But there seems to be a depth in these
traditions. Sol. v. 23. He confesses that they have a show of wisdom, and
that in three things. 1. In voluntary religion (...).
. 2. In humbleness of mind (...).
. 3. In not sparing the body (...).
, which he censures two ways.

1. It is but a show or flourish, no true substance, either of worship or
sanctity, 2. It with-hoolds the honor due to the body.

Now that the whole may be better understood, we must distinctly consider what
he means by tradition, which will appear if it be considered negatiuely,
with comparison with the two former.

1. They are not things required by Scripture any way: For all such were
condemned under the first kind, viz. ceremonies, which though now abrogated,
were once required. 2. They are not such rites besides Scripture, as are
practiced with opinion of worship, for they are condemned under the second
kind, viz. philosophy.
So then the traditions here condemned, are such rites, customs, or
observations, as men bind their consciences to, to observe or practice in the
civil life of man. Besides the instances in the text, such are the observation
of evil days, or hours to be borne in, or to marry in, or to set out on a
journey in; the rules observed about infants unbaptized, as that they must not
be washed, or they must lie in a sieue, or such like about weomen that lie in.
Such is the not marrying with kindred at the font, as they call it, such are
the observation of signs of ill luck, or of death gathered from the crying of
birds, or the running of beasts; such is praying at the lighting up of
candles, and the burning of candles over the dead corpse, or the naming of
children with names that agree to men and women, to make them live the longer;
such is, not burying in the north side of the Church, and the like silly trash,
with which simple people, abound more then is ordinarily observed.

Thus of the general.

Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ] In these words diverse things may be
observed.

1. Here we see the necessity of our union with Christ, the Apostle will not a
done with it, he remembers it still.

2. When he says, if ye be dead, it implies that men may make a fair show,
and profess long, and live in true visible Churches, and yet it is a question
whether they be in Christor no, If ye be dead with Christ.

3. Note here the praise of a mortified life, for when he says, if ye be
dead in Christ, it imports that to be so, is an excellent condition: to be
truly mortified with Christ, is a rare happiness; to die with Christ, is
better then to live with the world.

4. Penitent sinners have life and death, joys and sorrows etc. common with
Christ.

5. In special they have death common with Christ. They die with Christ 1.
Because Christ's death was theirs: when Christ died they died, because his death
was for their sakes, and for their benefit. 2. Because when their bodies die
they die in union with Christ. 3. Because the virtue of Christ's death is
derived to their souls: whence flows, death to the law, that is, a release
from the rigor and curse of it. 2. Death to sin, that is, a power to
mortify sin, conueiued in the ordinances of Christ, and applied by the spirit
of Christ. 3. The presence of Christ in all the duties of mortification, though
they be done never so secretly, yet Christ is with them.

The use may be both for trial and comfort. For trial, art thou not dead with
Christ in respect of the mortification of thy corruptions? then art thou not in
Christ. For comfort to the mortified, thou art in Christ, and he will never
leave thee nor forsake thee, till he has raised thy body and cured thy soul.
Thus of the words in themselves; they are also to be considered as they are
here used against traditions, and so they are two ways.

Christ is dead, and in his death ye are freed from all bondage of soul to any
thing but the will of God, and therefore it is a dishonor to Christ's death and
the freedom purchased in it, to make our selves servants to traditions.

2. You are dead with Christ, that is, you are mortified persons, and these
things are too light for any grave and penitent persons, to take up his
thoughts or cares about them; fleshly persons are only capable of this trash,
mortified persons without teaching suspect them.

Thus of the first reason.

From the rudiments of the world] The second reason stands thus, if by the
death of Christ, ye be freed from the ceremonies of Moses, which were then
rudiments, or as it were the first grounds of instruction, then much more are
you freed from traditions, which are but beggarly observations, that no body
can tell whence they came, or what good they do. This should be of force to
prevail, with us against the multitudes of idle traditions that reign amongst
the people.

Why as though ye lived in the world are ye burdened etc]

Quest. Do not the faithful live in the world, that he says with such a salt
interrogation, as though ye lived in the world?

Answ. They live in the world corporally, yet not in the world in respect of
their profession of spiritual and celestial life: So Christ's kingdom was not
of this world. 2. In respect of subjection to all the frame of rites and
observations of the world: they live not as men that are tied and vowed to the
service of the world in whatsoever observations it shall propound.

Burthened] Traditions are a greiuous burden to the soul, and the worse, the
less they are felt, men will not willingly suffer unjust impositions, in their
free-holds in the world, nor should men suffer the world to impose burden upon
their souls.

The world also notes the audacious liberty of the imposers, before they
pestred the Church with the ceremonies of Moses, then they corrupted Gods
worship with philosophical dreams, such as was the worship of Angels, now
they proceed further, they clogge the civil life of man and his private
affairs with imperious observations.

Thus of the third reason.

As touch not, taste not, handle not] These words must be understood to be
uttered mimetic^s in a kind of scorn, see the wicked subtilitie of the
Devil, he turns himself into all forms to ruin us. Once he destroyed the
world by tempting man to eat, now he goes about to poison men's souls, with
restraining them from eating.

Some observe that the have of the words without copulatiues, notes their
eagerness in pressing these things, and persuading men, to the care of them;
sure it is, men of corrupt minds are more eager about these then about
waightier matters.

Some learned, render touch not, by eat not, and so note a gradation, First
they would not have them eat, then not so much as taste, and when they had
gotten them to that, then not so much as to handle: Ambrose runs against the
stream of all interpreters, to understand these words, to be the commandment
of the Apostle. Thus of the fourth reason.

Which all perish with the vsing] These words are two ways interpreted.

1. They bring destruction to the users, they are a doctrine of devils, and
make men the children of hell. This is true, but not the truth of this place.

2. They are of a perishable nature, and therefore men ought not to load their
consciences with necessity of observing them.

This is the nature of all outward things thy perish with the using, all is
vanity, the glory of the flesh is but as the flower of the field Esaias. 40.
, rust or moth does corrupt them Math. 6.
, even crowns are corruptible 1. Cor. 4.24.
, here we see a clear difference between earthly things and spiritual.
Earthly things not only in the abuse, but in the very use, are either worn
out or less regarded, or have less vigor, fairness, power, etc. but clean
contrary with spiritual things? why should we not then moderate our love to
these outward things? why should we not strive to use this world as if we used
it not, no more trusting in uncertain riches. This should also stir up to
the care of spiritual graces and duties, that never perish, that we may attain
that incorruptible crown of righteousness, which God will give to all that love
his appearing: The very daily perishing of food and raiment, are types of thine
own perishing also. Thus of the 5. reason.

And are after the commandments and doctrines of men] The reason stands thus,
whatsoever has no better warrant then the commandment and doctrines of men,
is to be rejected as a burdensome tradition: But these things are such,
therefore why are ye burdened? See the wretched disposition of men's natures,
how ready men are to prescribe, and how easy men are to be lead on in these
foolish vanities. But are the commandments of God so easily obeyed? are the
doctrines of Gods word so willingly embraced? Alas, alas, men's examples, or
counsel will easily pass for laws, but the Lord is as if he were not worthy
to be heard in the practice of the most.

Thus of the six reasons.

Now follows the objections. Though these things were not commanded in the
word, yet they were wisely devised by our fathers, and therefore are to be
observed. Sol. v. 23. The Apostle grants that there were 3. things alleged to
approve the discretion of the founders of these things, and instanceth in one
kind, viz. abstinence or fasting, for that he confesses that had a show of
voluntary, nor coacted or forced religion. 2. Of humbleness of mind. 3. Of
the taming of the body, but when he has granted this, he does dash all as it
were with thunder and lightning, when he says. 1. This was but a show of
wisdom. 2. This sparing did with hold the honor due unto the body.

Observe here that it is a fair property to use candor and ingenious enquiry
after the truth, and willingly to acknowledge what they see in the reasons of
the adversaries, we see the Apostle fairly yeeldes the full of the reasons, not
mangling them, but setting them out distinctly, and then* confutes them. It
were happy if there were this fair dealing in all reasonings public and
private, in print or by word of mouth, in all that profess to love the truth
especially.

Show of wisdome] There is a wisdom only in appearance, and in men's account
in name only. Some men have wisdom, other have the praise of wisdom. But in
matters of conscience and religion, it is dangerous for man to lift up himself
in his wisdom, or to admit the varnish of carnal reason. The wisest worldly
men are not always the holiest, and most religious men, Oh that there were an
heart in us, indeed to acknowledge and to seek the true wisdom that is from
above.

The colors cast upon their traditions were three. 1. Voluntary religion. 2.
Humbleness of mind. 3. The taming of the body: All these as base varnish, to
smeire over men's insolent wickedness, are he rejected. Which may confirm us
in the detestation of popery, even in that wherein it makes the greatest show,
what are their works of supererrogation, their vows of single life, their
canonical obedience, their wilful poverty, and the like, what can be said or
showed in their praise, which was not pretended for these traditions, for or
are all of these; three are the chief arguments of their defense. The Apostle
here gives warning, let not men be deceived, these fair pretenses of our
Papists, are but the old objections of the false Apostles, new varnished over
again by the Pope, and his vassals; Oh that our seduced multitude would
consider this? then would they not be thus led to hell with their fair shows.

The last thing in this verse is the Apostles reason against these colors.

They have it not in estimation to satisfy the body or flesh] That is, The
body is to be honored for many reasons.
they yield not due honor to the body: the body of man is to be honored; for
first the son of God (as the fathers say) made it with his own hands in the
likeness of the body he assumed. 2. The soul a divine thing is kept in it,
and helped by it in great imploiments. 3. The son of God took the body of a
man into the unity of his person. 4. He redeemed the body by his blood, and
feeds it with the sacramental body. 5. The body is the temple of the holy
Ghost. 6. It is consecrate to God in baptism. 7. It is a part of the mystical
body of Christ. Lastly, it shall be gloriously raised at the last day. Then let
men know, they must give account that dishonor their bodies, and if these
superstitious persons must reckon for it, that punish their bodies without
commandment from God, where shall these beasts appear that sin against
their bodies by gluttony, and drunkenness, and lust and whoredom, and
cruelty and murder? Oh the condemnation that abides these impenitent men,
that glory in their shame, and mind only to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Thus of the dehortation.
Thus also of matters of faith.
Thus also of the second Chapter.
THE LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF the third CHAPTER.
HItherto the Apostle has entreated of matters of faith: now he entreats in
these two Chapters of matters of life: prescribing rules for conversation.

These rules are either general or particular. The general are from verse 1.
to 18. The particular are from v. 18. of this Chapter to v. 2. of the fourth
Chapter.

The general rules concern, first, the meditation of heavenly things, v. 1.
to 5. secondly, the mortification of vice, verse. 5. to 10. thirdly, the
renouation of life, v. 10. to 18.

The exhortation to the care and study of heavenly things is propounded, Verse
1.
v. 1. illustrated, v. 2. confirmed by reasons, v. 3.4.

In the proposition of this exhortation to the study of heavenly things, two
things are to be observed: 1. the duty required, seek those things that are
above. 2. the reasons, which are four. 1. Ye are risen with Christ. 2. These
things are above. 3. Christ is above. 4 Christ is exalted there and sits at
Gods right hand.

This exhortation is illustrated, v. 2. Verse 2.
First by repitition in these words, set your affections on things which are
above. Secondly, by the contrary, and not on things that are on earth.

The confirmation is set down by two motives: the one from the condition of
the faithful in this world: the other from their glory in the end of the
world.

In this world two things should incite them. Verse 3.
1. Their distress, they are dead. 2. Their hiding of the happiness they
have, their life is hid with Christ in God, v. 3.

In the end of the world: Verse 4.
they shall appear in glory when Christ shall appear, v. 4. Thus of the
meditation of heavenly things.

The mortification of evil follows; Verse 5.6.7.
and so he entreats, first of the mortification of vices that concern our
selves most, verse. 5.6.7. Secondly, Verse 8.9.
of the mortification of injuries, v. 8.9.

In the first there is both the matter to be mortified, and the reasons.

In the first there is two things: 1. the proposition of mortification,
Mortify therefore your members that are on earth. 2. The catalogue of vices to
be mortified, which are either against the seventh Commandment, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection: or against the tenth Commandment, evil
concupiscence: or against the first Commandment, covetousness which is
Idolatry.

Verse 6.
The reasons are taken, first from the evil effect, which is the wrath of God,
amplified by the persons on whom it falls, the children of disobedience, Verse
7.
v. 6. Secondly, from experience, in which ye also walked when ye lived in
them, v. 7.

Thus of the mortification of vices.

The mortification of injuries follows: where observe, 1. the exhortation it
self. 2. the reasons of it.

In the exhortation there is two things: 1. The charge in general, put away
all these things. 2. The catalogue of injuries to be put away are either the
sins of the heart, or the sins of the tongue: the sins of the heart, are
anger, wrath, malice: the sins of the tongue, are cursed speaking, filthy
speaking, lying.

Verse 9.
The reasons are three: First, Ye have put off the old man and his works, v. 9.
Secondly, Ye are renewed: which is explicated by showing that this new birth is
in general, Verse 10.
the putting on of the new man: in particular, it is the renewing of the mind
with knowledge, and of the whole man, Verse 11.
with the image of Christ, v. 10. Thirdly, God is no accepter of persons,
without grace he will respect none, and with it he will disregard none, for
with him there is neither Grecian nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
barbarian, scythian, bond, free, Christ is all in all things, v. 11.

Hitherto of the second thing needful to holy life: viz. the mortification of
vices. The third follows, viz. the exercise of holy graces and duties, from v.
12. to 18. and here the rules concern either 1. the matter of holiness, v.
12. to 16. or the means of holiness, v. 16. or the end of holiness, v. 17.

For the first he gives in charge nine graces: but first proposes three
motives. 1. the election of God, as the elect of God. 2. their sanctification,
holy. 3. the love of God to them, and beloved.

Verse 12.13.
The graces are of three sorts: some of them have their greatest praise in
prosperity, viz. mercy, kindness, meekness, humblenes of mind: some of them
concern the times of adversity principally, viz. long-suffering and clemency
in forbearing and forgiving, v. 12.13.

Verse 14.
Some of these graces ought to reign at all times, and these are three.

First, Love, which is set out both by the dignity of it, above all put on
love: and by the use of it, it is the bond of perfectness, v. 14.

Verse 15.
Secondly, Peace, amplified by the author, of God: by the power of it, let it
rule: and by the seat of it, in your hearts. to which he exhorts by two
reasons: 1. from their vocation, to which ye are called: 2. from their mutual
relation, as members of one body, v. 15.

The third is thankfulness or amiablenesse, v. 15.

Thus of the matter of holiness.

The means follows, which is the word.

The exhortation to the use of the word, 1. concerns the word in general. 2.
the Psalms in special. For the first he propounds three things: 1. the
author of it, the word of Christ. 2. the manner of entertaining the word, let
it dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom. 3. the end or use it should be put
to, viz. to teach in what we know not, and to admonish in what we do not.

The second part concerns the Psalms in particular, Verse 16.
where he sets down the sorts, Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs: and the
right manner of singing of Psalms, singing with grace in your hearts to the
Lord. Thus of the means of holiness, v. 16.

The third thing is the end, Verse 17.
which is considered two ways: First, as the end of intention, that we aim
at, and so he exhorts to it in these words, whatsoever ye do in word or
deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. 2. as the end of consummation,
that finisheth our works, and so they must give thanks to God even the Father
by him.

And thus of the rules of holy life, that concern all men as they are
Christians.

Now follow particular rules fitted for particular callings, and that in the
family. In the family there are three couples: Wives and Husbands, Children
and Parents, Servants and Masters: and to these he gives rules distinctly.

First, Verse 18.
The Wives duty is laid down and enlarged: laid down in these words, Wives
be subject to your Husbands: enlarged, first by a reason, it is comely. 2. a
limitation, in the Lord, v. 18.

Secondly, Verse 19.
The Husbands duty is propounded, 1. by exhortation, Husbands love your Wives.
2. by dehortation, be not bitter to them, v. 19.

Thirdly, Verse 20.
The duty of Children, is laid down, in these words, Children obey your
Parents: and amplified, 1. by the extent, in all things. 2. by reason, for this
is well-pleasing to the Lord, v. 20.

Fourthly, Verse 21.
The duty of Parents is expressed by dehortation, in these words, Parents
provoke not your Children to anger: and confirmed by a reason taken from the
ill effect, lest they be discouraged.

Fifthly, Verse 22.23.24 25.
In setting down the duty of Servants, there is first the exhortation, v.
22.23. the reasons, v. 24.25. The exhortation is both briefly laid down in
these words, Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters: and
explicated, 1. by prouisoes about their obedience. 2. the manner how they must
obey.

The prouisoes are two: one restraines Masters, they are their servants but
according to the flesh: the other extends the duty of servants, they must obey
in all things.

The manner how they must obey is set down, first negatiuely, not with
eye-seruice, not as men-pleasers: secondly, affirmatively, and so they must
obey, 1. with singlenes of heart. 2. with fear of God. 3. heartily as to the
Lord.

The reasons are two: first, from the certain hope of reward from God, v. 24.
Secondly, from the certain vengeance of God upon them that do wrong.

THE METAPHRASE upon the third CHAPTER.
VERSE I. IF ye then be risen with CHRIST, seek those things that are above,
where CHRIST sits at the right hand of GOD.
HItherto you have been taught, exhorted, and dehorted in matters that concern
faith and opinions. Now it follows that I should stir you in such things as
concern your carriage both general as you are Christians, and particular as
you are of several conditions of life. And the first thing you should be
careful of in the right order of your lives, is to raise up your thoughts and
affections to the study and contemplation of heavenly things; for hereby you
do effectually prove that you are risen up in the first resurrection with
JESUS CHRIST. And heavenly things are above, and therefore for their worthiness
fitting your contemplation; and for their difficulty, they cannot be reached
without seeking, and diligent study, and inquiry. Besides is not CHRIST
above, your Head and Savior, and where should your hearts be, but where your
treasure is? yea where CHRIST is there in singular glory, advanced above all
men and Angels; next in glory and power to GOD himself? o then how should
your minds run upon him: and to contemplate of these things is to ascend after
him.

Verse 2 Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things which
are on the earth.
And when I exhort you to seek the things that are above, my meaning is that
you should study about them, and with all wisdom raise up not your thoughts
only, but your affections also to the love of heavenly things; and this you
cannot do unless you withdraw your affections from things on earth, whether
they be traditions, or worldly things, or the works of the flesh.

Verse 3. For ye are dead and your life is hid with CHRIST in GOD.
Now there are excellent reasons by which I may briefly stir you up hereunto;
both from the consideration of your present estate in this world, and from the
meditation of your future condition in the day of CHRIST. In this world two
things should much move you. First, that ye are but dead men; for both you
profess the forsaking of the world, and the world accounts of you but as dead
men: and your afflictions drown and ouerwhelm you many times. Secondly, the
spiritual happiness which you have, which is the life of your life, is hid,
always from wicked men, who have no judgment in or discerning in spiritual
things: and sometimes by the violence of tentation, your selves discern not
your own happiness. Yet be not discouraged, it was so with CHRIST while he
lived; Verse 4. When CHRIST, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory.
and though it be hid, yet is it hid with GOD, it is in him, it is in his
power, and he will preserve it.

But especially if you think of the coming of JESUS CHRIST you should be
stirred to the love and study of heavenly things: for then shall there be an
end of all earthly felicities, then shall men make accounts of all their
actions and studies, then will not riches avail in that day of wrath, then
will the incomparable gain and glory of godliness be discovered: Oh the
inualuable dignity of heavenly minded Christians in that day. And thus of the
meditation of heavenly things.

The second maine part of my exhortation, Verse 5. Mortify therefore your
members which are on earth, fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, wc is idolatry.
shall concern the mortification both of vices and crimes. First, I would
hence observe those special sins which are most hateful to God in your
former course of life, and then have been most prone to. When I say mortify, I
mean that you should use all the means indefinitely that serve to kill the
power and practice of those sins, never giving over confession and godly
sorrow till you find the power of them abated and deaded. And this I would
have you do not only in outward sins, but any sin, though they were as
dear to you as the very members of your bodies yet you must cut them off. Now
some of the sins that I would have you studious to avoid or mortify are
these: first, look to the filthiness condemned in the seventh Commandment,
not only avoid whoredom, but all kinds of wicked fleshly filthiness and
uncleanness; yea look to, that internal burning or the flames of lust within,
that habitual effeminatenesse; and passions of lust: and more then all this
see that you make conscience of evil thoughts, and that contemplative
wickedness, which may be in your minds without consent of the will to
practice it: for even those thoughts are filthy in GODS sight. Now the last
sin I will name is covetousness, which is a kind of vile Idolatry in GODS
sight.

For these and such like sins, Verse 6. For the which things sake the wrath
of GOD comes upon the children of disobedience.
bring down the fearful judgments of GOD upon the offenders; and they
wonderfully vex GOD: and besides to live in these sins and love them, and
continue in them, is a manifest sign, that they are but wicked men, children
of disobedience, whatsoever they seem to be, or what shows or profession
soever they make.

And the rather should you be for ever careful to keep your selves from these
evils and the like, Verse 7. In which ye also walked sometime when ye lived in
them.
or speedily to subdue them and forsake, seeing you have felt by experience in
your unregenerate estate what it is to have sin like a Monster to live and
reign in the heart or life.

You must also make conscience of injurious dealing with others, Verse 8. But
now put ye away even all these things, anger, wrath, malice, cursed speaking,
filthy speaking out of your mouth.
and that not only of the gross acts of injuries, but of doing wrong in your
very words, yea in the passions of your heart: yea to approve that now ye walk
not in sin, show your uprightness, by putting away even every thing that
might tend to the injury of others. To express my meaning I will instance in
diverse sins, the unregenerate would make no conscience of. And first in the
heart, Verse 9. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old
man with his wo^kes.

Verse 10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the
Image of him that created him


there is inward fretting, and that passion that discouers it self by outward
signs, and that inueterate anger called malice: these you must make conscience
of. Besides in the tongue there are three vices you must also avoid, viz.
cursed speaking, filthy speaking, and lying.

There are three weighty considerations should move you thereunto. First, when
you repent of sin, you profess to put off the old man and his works, this old
man is the old Tempter of your natures, and his works are such as these
sore-mentioned passions, and distempers in the tongue.

Secondly, you are now in the state of grace, you are new men, and therefore
must not live after the old manner: you are renewed in knowledge to discern
these things to be evil, and therefore ought to show it in your practice: and
you are renewed after the Image of CHRIST, now there was no guile found in his
mouth, nor any of these wretched perturbations in his heart, and therefore how
suitable soever they be to the harmony of the most men, yet for that reason you
must keep your selves far from them.

Verse 11. Where is neither Grecian nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond, free, but CHRIST is all in all things.
Thirdly, GOD is impartially righteous and just; if men will not be reformed of
those old corruptions he cares not for them, though they were Jews,
circumcised, free, and contrariwise if men strive after that holiness they see
in CHRIST, and mortify these corruptions that abound in the world, ^he will
accept them, though they were Graecians, Scythians, bounden. Thus of the second
maine thing needful to holy life, viz. the mortification of vices and injuries.

Verse 12. Therefore as the elect of GOD holy and beloved, put on bowels of
mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meekness, long-suffering.
The third thing you must be careful of is the exercise of holy graces and
duties; and here I shall put you in mind of three things: the matter, the
means, and the end. For the first there are nine graces, should principally be
remembered in your practice: and that you may be quickened thereunto, be much in
the meditation of three things, 1. GODS election. 2. Your own sanctification.
3. The love of GOD to you.

The graces are, 1. Tenderness in all sorts of injuries. 2. Courtesy. 3. True
and hearty humility and lowliness. 4. Quietness and meekness, and
tranquillity of heart. 5. Long suffering in respect of crosses.

Verse 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any have a
quarrel to another, even as CHRIST forgave you, even so do ye.

Verse 14. And above all these put on Love which is the bond of perfectness.

Verse 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts to the which also ye are
called in one body: and be thankful.

Verse 16. Let the word of CHRIST dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching,
and admonishing one another, in Psalms, and Hymmes, and spiritual songs,
singing with grace in your hearts to the LORD.


And sixthly, Clemency which stands in two things, in forbearing, and forgiving.
Forbearing in respect of wrongs and infirmities, and forgiving freely one
another. And this forgiving must be extended to every man, and it must be as
Christ forgave us, and that is though they be our inferiors, and though they
have done us great wrong, and so as we forget as well as forgive.

But seventhly above all other be sure you cloth your selves with love, for
this will knit us together perfectly, and by this all the Saints and all the
graces of the Saints tend unto perfection.

Eighthly, Get the peace, that peace I mean that GOD only gives, and let it
rule and prevail with you* and if you cannot be at peace in your life, yet let
it be in your hearts still, how unreasonable soever men be, and the rather
should you be careful hereof, both because you are called of GOD to it, and
besides you are all members of the same body. Lastly, add unto all these
amiablenes and thankfulness, one to another. And thus of the matter of holiness.

Now I must also stir you up to a due respect of the means of holiness which
is the word. And so both the word in general and the Psalms in special. For
the word in general, you must remember it is the word of CHRIST, both as the
subject and the cause of it: and you should never be satisfied till you grow
familiar and plentiful in it, through the daily use of it, both in your hearts
and houses also, and that with all judgment and discretion; not seeking or
using it, coldly, peruersly, carnally or indiscreetlie: and this word you must
employ both to teach you and one another, what you know not, and to admonish
you and other for what you do not. And in special be careful of the Psalms,
remembering that they also are the word of CHRIST, and the rather considering
the exquisite variety of sweet matter in them, but in singing observe these
rules, First, exercise the graces of the heart according to the matter of the
Psalm. Secondly, do it with attention and understanding. Thirdly, respect GODS
glory in it and his holy presence.

Lastly, be careful of the end of all your actions, Verse 17. And whatsoever
ye shall do in word or deed, do all in the name of the LORD JESUS: giving
thanks to GOD even the Father by him.

Verse 18. Wives submit your selves to your Husbands as it is comely, in the
LORD.


both that all be done to the glory of GOD in CHRIST (all I say both in word
and deed) beginning with calling on the name of CHRIST, and ending with the
sacrifice of thanksgiving, which must be offered unto GOD in the mediation of
CHRIST as well as your prayers. Thus I have briefly laid before you the rules
that concern holiness as you are Christians in the general.

Now I think it meet to propound some duties that are more particular: and I
will only instance in the family: and there I begin with Wives, whose word
is, be subject, an epitome of their duty and a thing GOD most stands upon, and
which Women most fail in. And great reason, for here lies the true
comeliness and beauty of a Wife, it is not in her face and garments, but in her
subjection to her Husband. Verse 19. Husbands love your Wives and be not bitter
unto them.

Verse 20. Children, obey your Parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing
to the LORD.

Verse 21. Fathers provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged.

Verse 22. Servants be obedient unto them that are ^our Masters according to
the flesh, in all things, not with eye service as men pleasurs, but in
singleness of heart, fearing GOD.

Verse 23. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the LORD, and not unto
men.

Verse 24. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ.

Verse 25. But he that does wrong, shall receive* for the wrong that he has
done: and there is no respect of persons.


And the rather should you be subject, because GOD has provided, you shall not
be pressed, but in the LORD, not in any thing against the word.

Now for Husbands their word is love, as that GOD most stends upon and they
most fail in. And in particular I give them warning to look to one vice above
many, and that is, that they be not bitter to their Wives.

And for children their word is obedience, and they must know that GOD so
inioines it, that he will have it done thoroughly, they must obey in all things,
and submit their wills and desires to their parents. For this is a thing that
will not only keep and increase their parents love to them, but it is also
wondrous well-pleasing to GOD himself.

Parents also must take heed they sin not against their children, not only, by
two much indulgence, but also by provoking them, and that not only to sin, but
to passion, by unjust precepts, or contumelies and disgraces, or hard usage, or
immoderate correction: and that as for other reasons so least they be
discouraged either from love of weldoing, or of obeying them.

You that are Servants must also with great care attend your duties, your word
also is obedience: and the rather because your Masters have authority, but
only over your flesh, not over your consciences; but in your obedience see to
it, it be in all things that concern the subjection of the outward man. But let
not your service be only when your Masters look on, or fitted only to please
men, but obey even in the singleness of your hearts, as in GODS presence,
where you should fear to displease.

Neither let what you do be done out of a slavish fear, but from the heart
with all willingness, as doing therein service to GOD, and not to men only.

Knowing infallibly that if men would not reward you for your pains and
faithfulness, yet GOD will, who will not use you as servants, but provide for
you as sons and heirs to him. For in all this labor GOD accounts you as the
servants of Christ, and will reward all as if all had bin done to him.

And contrariwise he that does wrong be he Master or Servant shall receive of
the LORD for the wrong that he has done: for GOD is no accepter of persons.

CERTAIN OF THE choicest and chiefest points handled in the third CHAPTER.
A Threefold resurrection. fol. 2. How a man may know whether he be risen with
Christ. 3. It Is as easy to revive a dead man, as persuade a carnal man. fol.
4. Eight sorts of things that are above. fol. 4. A fourefold presence of
Christ. 6. Of Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father. 6. Three
benefits come by tender affections. 8. Three sorts of things called things on
earth. 8. Eight reasons in general to dissuade from affecting earthly things.
9. Solomon's reasons against the love of earthly things. 10.11. Christ's reasons.
12. The faithful are dead three ways. 13. The life of Christians is hid in
diverse respects. 14. Who may say Christ is their life. 16. Of the appearing of
Christ. 16. Six appearings of Christ. 16. Threefold judgment. 16. Who shall
judge, who shall be judged, where the judgment shall be, and when. 17. The
signs of the second coming of Christ. 18. The form of the last judgment: the
preparation of the Judge: the citation, resurrection, collection, and
separation of the judged: the law and evidence by which men shall be judged:
and the sentence, and the five consequents of the judgment, with the uses. fol.
19. to 22. What we must do that we might be assured of the glory of heaven.
26. How long we must continue our sorrows in mortification. 29. Why sins are
called members. 30. Reasons against whoredom. 31. Seven kinds of uncleanness
besides whoredom. 33. Remedies against uncleanness. 34. The causes and
occasions of lust. 35. What covetousness is and the effects of it. fol. 36.37.
the signs of it. 38. remedies against it. 39. Gods wrath upon unclean
persons. 41. Justice in God considered four ways. 42. The fearefulnes of Gods
wrath set out. 43. The signs of Gods wrath: the means to pacify Gods anger:
and how we may know that God is pacified. 44.45.46. The marks of a child of
disobedience. 47. Difference between Gods anger toward the godly and the
wicked. 48. The profit of remembering our natural misery. 49. A fourefold
life. fol. 51. How we may know when sin is alive, and when it is dead. 51. A
man never truly repents till be endeavor to be rid of all sin* and motives.
53. Anger, indifferent, laudable, vicious. 54. Degrees of vicious anger:
reasons and remedies against it. 55.56. Malice, and the degrees and kinds of
it. 57. Reasons and remedies against it. 57.58. Of blasphemy: the kinds of
it: and reasons against it. 59.60. Against filthy speaking. 61. Of lying:
reasons against it, and questions answered. 61.62. What the old man signifies:
and why corruption is called the man, and why the old man. 63.64. and what the
works of the old man are. the old man is put off six ways. 64. The necessity
of the new birth. 66. Of the renouation of the creature in four things: and of
the obedience in three things. 66. Rules for attaining of true knowledge. 67.
Of the image of God in Christ, in the Angels, and in man. 68. with their
difference at large. 68.69. How Christ is all in all, and the comfort of it.
72.73. The kinds and signs of election. 74. How many ways the elect are
holy. 75. Five properties of Gods love. 76. The kinds of mercy. 77. Motives
to mercy. Rules how to show mercy. 78. True Christian courtesy. 79 What
humblenes of mind is negatiuely and affirmatively. 80. Motives to humblenes of
mind, and of diverse sorts of pride. 80.81. Of Christian meeknes. 81. Of
Long-suffering. 81.82. Of forbearance, the kinds and motives, and rules for
the practice of it. 82.83. Of forgiving: diverse questions. 84. To forgive as
Christ forgiues, has five things in it. 85. How love is above all virtues. 85.
The sorts and signs of love. 86. Love is the bond of perfection three ways.
87. Of Peace: it is threefold. 87. How it is of God: and when it rules: and
what we must do to get it. 88. What is required in performing thankefulnes to
men, and what in receiving it. 90. The Scripture is the word of Christ in four
respects. 92. Men sin against the word six ways. 92. Women must seek
knowledge as well as men. 94. The use of Scripture in our houses. 94. Of the
wise use of the word. 95. What we must do that the word may dwell plenteously
in us: and how we may know it does. 98. Who may admonish or be admonished. 99.
Rules to be observed in admonition. 100. What meant by Psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs: and rules in singing of Psalms. 101. Unto the goodness of the
action, the goodness of the end is required. 102. Things are done in the name of
Christ four ways. 103. Six reasons why Gods children should be more careful
of their words and deeds then others. 104. Of giving thanks to God. 105. Of the
government of a family, the authority, antiquity, and utility of it.
107.108. Four things in a holy living together in a family. 108. Six things
in household piety. 108. Five things required in the labors of a family. 109.
The duty of Wives. 110.111.112.113. Why subjection is rather named in the
Wives duty. 111. Five things in the Wives subjection. 111. Six ways Wives
must honor their Husbands. 111. Four ways Wives shame their Husbands. 112.
Fine ways Wives show faithfulness. 112. Six ways Wives show fear. 112. Six
rules for Wives works. 112.113. What Wives are not bound to. 113. What they
must do that they may perform subjection. 113. The Wives comeliness in three
things. 114. Husbands show their love four ways. 116. Six ways Husbands
honor their Wives. 116. Seven reasons why men must love their Wives. 117.
Husbands objections answered. 117. Causes why men love not their Wives. 117. Of
bitter Husbands. 118. Four rules for curing this bitterness. 118. The duty of
children. 121. Childrens objections answered. 122. Reasons of their obedience.
123. The duty of Parents. 124.125. How Parents provoke their Children. 126.
Servants duty. 128.129.130.etc. Five faults in Servants. 128. Four things in
the manner of Servants obedience. 129. Six ways to know singlenes of heart.
132. Twelve signs of a single hearted man. 133. Eight signs of a single
hearted Servant. 133. Of the fear of God in servants. 134. What Masters must
do to get the fear of God into their Servants. 134. Eight objections of
Servants answered. 135.
CHAPTER III.
VERSE I. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above;
where Christ sits at the right hand of God.


HITHERTO of christian doctrine, The Coherence.
now follows christian life. The Apostle has before discoursed of matters of
faith: now he intends to entreat of matters of life: The division of the
Chapter.
and to prescribe rules of conversation. And these rules belong either to our
general calling as we are Christians or to our particular callings as we are
people of such or such condition or state of life.

The general rules are set down from the first verse of this Chapter to the
eighteenth and the particular rules begin at the eighteenth verse and continue
to the second verse of the next Chapter.

The rules of the first kind may be referred to three heads, The subdiuisions.
for either they concern, first the meditation of heavenly things, or secondly
the mortification of vice, or thirdly the renouation of life. The meditation of
heavenly things is urged from v. 1. to the fifth, the mortification of vice is
urged from v. 5. to the tenth. Renouation of life is generally laid down v.
10.11. and more specially opened v. 12 to the eighteenth.

The exhortation to the care and study of heavenly things is thus digested.
First it is expounded v. 1. Secondly it is illustrated v. 2. Thirdly it is
confirmed by motives and reason, v. 3.4. And thus for the order of the whole
Chapter, and the general frame of this first part.

Before I open the words more particularly there are diverse things may be
noted from the coherence and dependence of these words, Doctrine from coherence
with former chapters.
with the Chapter before, and the matter following in this Chapter.

From the coherence with the former Chapter I observe these things-First, that
there can be no holiness of life without faith: and therefore the Apostle
first instructs them in matters of faith. It is a true rule, whatsoever is
not of faith, is sin, and may be extended further then things indifferent,
while we are out of Gods favor, Romans 14.23.
and know not our reconciliation and justification in Christ, our best actions
are but fair sins. For without faith it is impossible to please God Heb.
11.6.
.

Secondly, that the terrestrial blessedness of man is in respect of sin,
two ways principally assaulted First with errors in opinion. Secondly, with
corruptions in manners. And against both we should learn from the Apostle in
the latter part of the former Chapter and the first part of this, to be armed
and furnished with holy directions, and meditations.

Thirdly, that these men that are so superstitiouslie earnest and so zealouslie
forward for ceremonies and the traditions and observations of men, Doctrines
from the coherence in this Chapter.
whatsoever they protest or pretend or seem to be, are indeed void of true
devotion, and fervent affection to heavenly thingsc.

Fourthly, that he that is by faith made a new creature, must resolve to be at
Gods appointment for his whole carriage in his general and particular calling
Ephesians. 2.10.
. Doctr. 1.


Thus of the coherence with the former Chapters. From the order of doctrine in
this Chapter two things may be noted. 2


First, that before a man can be good in his particular calling, he must first
be good in his general: thou may be painful* and diligent, but thou can
not be every way a faithful and sound hearted, 3
husband, wife, servant, child, etc. till thou be a good man or good woman, in
respect of grace and godliness. And therefore we should first seek the
righteousness of Gods kingdom, and it may serve for direction, unto such as
choose wives or servants, or the like: 4
if they be not faithful to God, how can thou be assured they will prove
faithful to thee? moreover would thou have thy servants or children to be
amended, then bring them to the powerful preaching of the word, and call upon
them to get into the fellowship of the godly, that they may learn to be good
abroad in matters of religion, and then thou may hope to find them by proof
and daily experience, trusty and faithful in thy business, Doctr. 2.
finally this reprooues both the sinfulness and folly of many carnal
pa^ents and masters they never care so their servants do their work, though
they altogether neglect Gods work. And many times they restrain their
servants and children, and will not let them hear sermons or come into godly
company, as if that were the way to make them idle and careless: whereas we
see the clean contrary to be true.

Secondly, that men are never likely to hold out and prove sound in the
reformation and new obedience of their lives, till they fall in love with
heavenly things, and grow in some measure weary of the world and the things
thereof.

(...)
Thus of the general observations from the twofold coherence. Now follows the
particular opening of the words.

In the proposition of the exhortation to the study of heavenly things, laid
down in this verse, two things are to be considered; first what: or the duty
required, viz. seek those things which are above? secondly, why: or the
reasons to enforce the duty, and they are four. First, ye are risen with
Christ in the first resurrection. Secondly, these things are above, and not
attained without seeking or study. Thirdly, Christ is above in his bodily
presence. Fourthly, Christ sits at the right hand of God, exalted in the glory
of his father, each of these strongly conclude the exhortation, as will further
appear in the particular handling of them.

If ye be risen with Christ.

A threefold resurrection.
There may be conceived to be, a threefold resurrection of a christian. The
first is sacramental. And thus we rise again in baptism. The second is
corporal, and so we shall rise again in the day of Jesus Christ, in our
bodies out of the dust of the earth. The third is spiritual, and so we must
rise in this life, in soul, from the death of sin, or else we shall never be
delivered from the second death, of this spiritual resurrection, (called
elsewhere the first resurrection Revel. 2.9 0 What the first resurrection is.
) he here entreats. And it is a work of the spirit of grace, delivering us
from the power of sin, by which we are quickened to the heavenly desires and
endeavors of holy life, by the virtue of the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
applied unto us by faith, in the effectual use of Gods ordinances. It is a
work by which we grow conformable to Christ b^ing risen again Romans 6.4.5.
, by which also we taste of the powers of the life to come, and are borne again
to a lively hope of an eternal and incorruptible inheritance 1. Pet. 1.3.4.
: the earnest of which we have received and shall shortly receive the whole
possession purchased, Ephesians. 1.14.
though for a time we be absent from the Lord. This first resurrection carries
with it a similitude or resemblance of Christ rising again, so as every
Christian in this work bears the Image of Christ, and in him Christ rises
before our eyes, not only because the Lord Jesus does in this gracious work
give us a daily and fresh remembrance of his resurrection, by renewing such
fruits of it, but also because he imprinteth a secret kind of heavenly
mindedness, the Christian in someweake measure, living as Christ did in the
interim between his resurrection and ascension, waiting always for his
exaltation into heaven.

Now the consideration of this work is here used by the Apostle to persuade
unto the meditation of heavenly things: and that fitly: for if we be risen as
Christ was, then we must be minded as he was: now we know that after he was
risen again, he was not encumbered with this world, nor did he converse with
the men of this world, but lived with the Lord as it were immediately, in a
heavenly manner, waiting for Heaven: so should a Christian do: he should every
day be striving to get up his heart, by faith and prayer and meditation, and
voluntary abnegation, by all means begging and seeking the virtue of Christ's
resurrection, that being enabled to forsake the world and the unnecessary
society with worldly men, he might have his heart and conversation in heaven,
every day waiting when the time of his changing should come.

Q. How may a man know whether he be risen with Christ? How a man may know
whether they be risen with Christ.

Who are not risen with Christ.


Ans. This question may be resolved both negatiuely and affirmatively. For
first, they are not risen with Christ, that are in bondage to traditions, as
the coherence with the latter end of the former chapter shows: nor they that
are drowned and made senseless, with the cares of this life or the pleasures
of voluptuous living Luke 21.34.
, nor they that confirming themselves in a dead presumptuous common hope, plead
the abounding of Gods grace, to avouch their continuance in sin Romans 6.1 4.5.
1 Pet. 1 3.
for the Apostle in the epistle to the Romans uses a reason taken from our
conformity to the resurrection of Christ, to confute this vicious and profane
plea of careless men. Further, they that worship the Beast (the great
Antichrist of Rome) and receive his mark upon their foreheads or their hands,
are reckoned among the dead men, that have not their part in this first
resurrection Reu. 20.4.5.6
. Also the Prophet Esaias seems to say that such men as will not see Gods high
hand of Judgment, nor will learn to do uprightly in the land of
uprightness, nor can be allured to godliness, though mercy be showed them,
are to be accounted among the dead men that shall not live Esa. 26.9.10 14
. Lastly they are not risen with Christ that do not believe in Christ Ioh.
11.25.
. Now for the affirmative. They may have comfort in the first resurection, that
have felt a divine power in the voice of Christ, quickening their hearts, with
effectual desire and endeavor to rise out of the graves of sin Ioh. 5.25.
, and to stand up from the world of the dead Ephesians. 5.14.
. 2 That are constantly affected with a holy estimation of the knowledge of
Christ crucified and risen again (an effectual knowledge I mean) valuing the
means and signs of it, above all earthly things Phil. 3.9.10
. 3 That find their hearts changed from the cares and delights of this life.
to a constant desire of the second coming of Christ, to translate them to the
presence of glory in heaven. 4 That show a daily care to walk in newnes of
life, yielding their members as weapons of righteousness, striving to crucify
the old man, and destroy the body of sin as they that are alive unto God
Romans 6.4.5.6 13.
.

2 Again in that the Apostle says, if ye be risen again with Christ seek
those things that are above, we may note, that it is as hard a thing to get up
the heart of men to the study of heavenly things, as to lift up a massy corpse
out of the grave and to inspire it with the desire of life: As easy to revive
a dead man as persuade a carnal man.
there is need of the spirit and power of Jesus to do it. And therefore we
should not wonder to see natural men so heartlesse: nor should we attribute it
to any inefficacy in the means, if carnal men be not persuaded: for a man may
long persuade a dead man to rise be fore he will get up: and it should touch us
with all thankfulness to acknowledge Gods mercy if he have given us a mind to
heavenly things, to desire them and delight in them.

3
Thirdly in that he says, if ye be risen, speaking not only conditionally but
doubtfully, it imports that one should be exceeding careful to search and
try whether they have their part as yet in this first resurrection: and
withal implies, that many a man may seem to himself and others to be
delivered from the kingdom of darkness, and yet lie buried still in the
graves of sin.

Seek those things which are aboue] Here the Apostle enters upon the
proposition of the first maine exhortation, or rule of new life. Now before I
bring in the Apostle urging this duty, imagine with thy self, how far the
Christian (thus now to be instructed for order of life) has already proceeded
by faith; The preparations of ^aith before a man can be capable of directions
of life.
for before a man can be truly capable of direction of life, there be diverse
things requisite in the preparations of faith. And these things are necessarily
to be presupposed. 1 That faith has plucked him out of the world of sinners or
dead men: so that he is already withdrawn from the society of the wicked. 2
It has showed him Gods favor and joined him ear never heard, nor his
natural eye never nor his natural heart, never conceived 1. Cor. 29.
. 4 It has joined him to the living Saints: so as he now with great desire and
delight conuerseth with them. suffer in the flesh for his sins, and withal
has refreshed fountain and spring of grace within him, even in his bowels
Ioh. 7 38.39.
. 7 It has raised depart from any thing the Lord shall command, all the days
of his life.

Now presupposing the Christian to be thus far proceeded: the Apostle comes
in, and to begin his institutions of manners, he first charge him with this
rule. Seek those that are above? teaching us, that the first maine thing to be
labored after in the reducing of our lives into a holy order, Doct.
is to strive by all means to get up our hearts to a constant seeking and
minding of heavenly things: Mat. 6 33. Eight sorts of things that are above.
according to that serious charge of our Savior Christ, first seek the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof.

Thus this rule may be more clearly understood, and more carefully practiced,
it will be profitable to consider distinctly, what things are above, and how
they are to be sought. And so the things that are above may be distinguished
into eight sorts. First God is above: for he dwelles in the high and holy place
Esa 57.15.
and he must be sought H^s. 3.5.
and if you ask what we must seek in God, I answer we must seek the true
knowledge of his nature Psalm. 14.1.2.
. We must seek his favor, and the pacification of his just anger for our
sins. Zeph. 2.3.
We must seek his face, and presence. Psalm 24.6. Psalm. 27.8.
We must seek his honor and glory. Ioh. 44.
And we must seek his salvation. H^s. 5. vlt.
Psalm. 105.4. and 70.4.
and if you ask how we must seek God, I answer we must seek God, with
acknowlegdement of our faults, with weeping and repentance for our sins, I^r.
^0.4. Esaias. 21 2.
with the desire of our hearts, ^sa^ ^6.7.
with prayer and supplication, Mat. 7.7.
with fear of his mercies, ^os. 3.1. ^ep^. 2.2.3.
with meekness Psalm. 24 4 5.
and in the way of holy life.

Secondly Christ is above: for so he says to the Jews, ye are from beneath, I
am from above, (...).
ye are of this world, I am not of this world Ioh. 8.23.
, and he is the Lord whom every Christian ought to seek Mal. 3.1.
, now Christ is two ways sought principally. First in the sincere and constant
use of all his ordinances both public and private, that by them we might find
his presence of grace on earth. And thus the Church sought him in the
Canticles. Cant. 3.1. etc
Secondly, in the desires, prayers, and preparations for our own dissolution
and his appearing Phil. 1.21. Reu. 21.20. 2 Timothy 4.8. 2. Pet. 3.12.
.

Thirdly the new Jerusalem is above. for so the Apostle to the Galathians
expressly says. Gal. 4.26.
Even that heavenly society of glorious spirits in illustrious splendour. And
these are to be sought two ways. 1 By the constant desire of their presence
and to be gathered to them. 2 By the imitation of their graces and virtues
which they showed when they were on earth.

Fourthly Heaven is above. 4
For it is the price of our calling that is above (...). Phil. 3.14.
, and the glory of that eternal and immortal honor is to be sought Romans 2.7.
, and that five ways. 1 By prayer for preparation and that daily: for so our
Savior has taught us in the second petition of his prayer Matthew. 6.10.
. 2 By seeking the assurance of faith and hope, and the pledges and earnest of
it Heb. 11.1. Ephesians. 1.14.
. 3 By meditation and contemplation striving to express our desires and sighs
after it 2. Cor. 5.2.
. 4 By carrying our selves, as strangers and pilgrims in this world, weaning
our hearts and retiring our lives from the world, confessing and professing our
travails toward a better country that is above Heb. 11.13.14.16.
. 5 By continuing in well-doing Romans 2.7.
, striving to live a Citizen like life here (...). Phil. 3.20.
, in all things provident, to send our works and prayers to Heaven before us,
as our provision and treasure Matthew. 6.14.
.

Fifthly, holy graces are above: for S. James says, Every good giving and every
perfect gift is from above, 5
and comes down from the father of lights Iam. 1.17.
. And it is apparent, that they are a part of the Kingdom of Heaven, and they
tend to Heaven and therefore the Prophet Esaias calls grace by the name of glory
Esaias. 4.5.
, and they come down from Heaven, which will also appear in the particulars.
Wisdom is from above Iam. 3.17.
, so is zeal, for it is the zeal of Gods house Psalm. 69.9.
, so is lowliness, so is faith, so is peace and joy and all the rest. And that
these are to be sought, many Scriptures evidently prove 1. Cor. 14.1. Zeph.
2.3. 2. Cor. 13.5. Romans 14 17.18
* and if you ask how they are to be sought it is shortly answered, by prayer
and the use of the means, which the Lord has appointed as holy vessels and
instruments, and as it were wombes, to conceive, convey, and derive grace unto
us.

Sixthly the means of salvation themselves are things above, 6
for they are called the Kingdom of Heaven Matthew. 3.2.
: and the Kingdom of Heaven is said to be taken away when the means is taken
away, Mat. 21.43.
and these we must seek, Esaias. 41.17.18.
though it cost us much travail, if there be a famine Amos 8.
, or much cost, if the Lord give us to find such pearls of instruction or
comfort, in the field of any Church or congregation? Mat. 13.45.


Seventhly, 7
holy duties are many of them from above, for the Wise man says, the way of
life is on high to the prudent, to avoid from hell beneath Pr^u. 15.24.
, and that because both the will that enioynes them, and the power to do them,
and the succes or effects of them, are all from God above. And therefore the
Author to the Hebrews when he would discourse of doing of Gods will, quoting the
place in the Psalms, seems to intimate that the true speech of such duties,
is to speak from above (...). Heb. 10.8.9.
, and these good things are to be sought Prou. 11.27.
, we must seek the old and good way Ier. 6.17.
we must seek Judgment and Righteousness Esaias 1.17.
.

Eighthly many of the privileges of Christians are from above as the
righteousness of Gods Kingdom Mat. 6.33.
, forgiveness of sins 1. Ioh. 1.7.
deliverance from this present evil world Gal. 1.4.
(both in respect of the contagions and punishments of the same) all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things, Ephesians. 1.3.
the revelation of hid mysteries 1. Cor. 2.9. Col. 1.26.
the spirit of the son Gal. 4.6.7.
, the influence of Christ's death and resurrection Phil. 3.9.10.
the word with all the treasure of it Psalm. 119.94.
and the honor which is above Ioh. 5.44.
and all these are to be sought. Thus of the particular things that are above
and we must seek.

Use.
The consideration of all this, may much abase and humble us, for our deadness
of spirit, and egregious slownesse of heart, in these things that so greatly
concern us. The Devil takes more pains in seeking to destroy us 1. Pet. 5.8.
, then we either do take or are willing to take to save our own souls, by
seeking these things all of them so worthy to be sought. The worldly man is
more industrious to seek riches, and the ambitious man more to seek honor, and
the luxurious man to seek his sport, lust or pleasure, then Christians are to
seek those things that are above, though never any truly sought but did find,
Mat. 7.7
and never less was found, then either the evidence or the possession of a
kingdom Luke 12.32*
, and that of God. Nay, nay, how have every one of us sought out all ways and
all inventions, while we lived in the service of the flesh, and had no fruit or
wages, but that of which we are now ashamed, Romans 6.21.
and yet are seldom or never weary of such unprofitable and shameful labor.
But I refer the urging of motives till I come to the next verse: it follows.

Where Christ sits at the right hand of God) These words contain the later
reasons, and comprehend a principal part of Christ's exaltation: the meditation
whereof is here used, to excite us to the love of heavenly things, seeing our
Savior Christ that so entirely loves us, not only is in heaven, but is there
in great favor, and honor and majesty and power.

There is a four fold presence of Christ, For first he is every where as God.
A fourefold presence of Christ.
Secondly, he is in the hearts of the faithful only, by his spirit of grace
and regeneration. Thirdly he is by representation in the sacrament. Fourthly he
is bodily in heaven.

Que. Ans.
Que. But is not Christ with his Church on earth still. Ans. he is as God but
not as man. I say not as man locally, for else he is present in his members
that bear the image of his true humane nature, and his very body is present
sacramentallie: he is present by the imputation of righteousness, and by
mystical union.

The right hand of God, has diverse signification in scripture: sometimes it
signifies the power and help of God Psalm. 44.3. Act 2.33.
. The acceptations of the words.
Sometimes the place of eternal rest in heaven Psalm. 16.11.
. Sometimes it notes the majesty and authority and sovereignty of God Psalm.
110.1. Heb. 1.3.
. To sit, signifies to abide or dwell Luke 14.49.
, and to govern 1. King. 1.30. Prou. 20.8. Isay. 16.5.
. Here to sit at Gods right hand comprehends three things. First, an exceeding
glory above all creatures, even the very Angels. Heb 1.13. Act. 7.55.
Secondly, full power of government Ephesians. 1.20.
. Thirdly, an equality in majesty and sovereignty, even with God the father, in
his person Phil. 2. 6.7.9.
.

Ob. But Stephen says he saw him standing at Gods right hand. Act. 7.75.
Sol. Diverse gestures for our capacity are attributed for diverse ends. First,
he stands, to show his watchful eagernes and readiness to take notice of
wrongs to his members, to come to their succors. Secondly, He sits, to note
majesty and sovereignty.

Ob. But to sit at Gods right hand, seems to import the real communication of
divine attributes to the humane nature: so as in his very body he is every
where, Ob.
etc. Sol. It does not. Christ's human nature is here reckoned under the name of
things above. Sol.
And besides in the Epistle to the Ephesians the Apostle says expressly, he
sits at Gods right hand in heavenly places Ephesians. 1.20.
.

The use of Christ's sitting at Gods right hand follow. And first it may be a
notable terror to wicked men if they do but consider that he whom they daily
pierce by their sins Ren^l. 1.7.
, Use 1.
and despise, by contemning his ordinances, by which he would rule them Luk
19.14.
, is exalted to such glory, that he has all power to subdue his enemies under
his feet? but sure it is if they will not now fear and repent, Psalm. 110.1.
the time shall come, when all they that said, this man shall not rule over us,
shall see him sitting at the right hand of the power of God Mat. 26.64.
, and coming in the clouds to render vengeance on all those his adversaries,
that would not obey his Gospel 2. These. 1.8.
, but strive to break his yoke and cast his cords from them Psalm. 2.2.3.
.

Secondly, it may serve for singular comfort to all God servants. For from his
session at Gods right hand, Use. 2.
flow unto them many singular blessings, as the places of Scripture quoted in
the margent will show. First, the casting out of all accusations of satan Romans
8.34. Ephesians. 1.20.
. Secondly, the filling of the Church with all needful fullness of grace and
blessings Heb. 1.13.14.
. Thirdly, the service of Angels ministering to the heirs of salvation,
Fourthly speed in all suits 1. Pet 3.22.
. Fifthly, the providing of a place for us Ioh. 14.2.
. Sixthly, Intercession Heb. 7.26.
. Seventhly, power to subdue our enemies Psalm. 110.1
. As the consideration of the several places of scipture alleged will
manifestly show. Yea his exaltation may be our comfort, because in a sort we
sit together with him Ephesians. 2.6.
. not only because this honor is done to our nature in his flesh, but also
because by our mystical union, it is done to our head, and moreover he does in
part communicate this honor to us, for as Christ is at the right hand of the
father, so is the Church at the right hand of Christ Psalm. 45.10*
, Finally in the second coming of Christ this glory shallbe more fully and
openly communicated, when all the faithull shall be set on his right hand Mat.
25.33.
, to hear that most gracious sentence, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you before the foundations of the world.

Thirdly, the session of Christ at Gods right hand, may teach us: first, to
mind a spiritual worship, seeing he has taken his body out of the way.
Secondly, to go boldly to the throne of grace to seek help in time of need
Heb. 4. vlt.
, seeing we have so sure a friend, to procure both audience, acceptance, and
success: thirdly, to wait with patience, under all sorts of wrongs, for it is
sure that he that shall come will come in his due time and will not tarry, and
then he will make all his enemies to be his foot stool^ Heb. 10.12.13
. Lastly the Apostle here uses the consideration of this doctrine as a motive
to stir us up to mind heavenly things. And surely if we do seriously weigh
it, it should continually draw up our thoughts to think of heaven, whither so
loving and so glorious a Savior is gone before. Yea it should do us good to
look up toward these visible heavens, remembering that one day we shall be
carried to that blessed place of rest and holy joys, that is above them, even
to the heaven of heavens, to reign with Christ for evermore. And thus of the
proposition.

Verse. 2. Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things
which are on the earth.


The exhortation in the former verse propounded, is in this verse illustrated,
and expounded, first, by repetition, secondly, by the contrary. The repetition
is in these words; Set your affections on things which are above. The contrary
from which he does dehort, is in these words, and not on things which are on
earth.

Repetitions in scripture are not without their use. The use of repetitions in
Scripture.
For thereby the holy ghost usually imports our slownesse and dullness of
capacity in conceiving and backwardness in practice, and besides thereby
inforceth both the necessity and the excellency of the matter so repeated. And
surely, all three may be applied to this repetition. For the contemplation and
desire after heavenly things is a most gracious ornament to a religious life,
and without some measure of holy affections, it is impossible to get rid of the
power of sin, or to practice with any success or acceptance, the duty of a
renewed life: and if in any thing we are backward, or wanting, or decaying, or
languishing, it is in this rule here given by the Apostle.

Set your affections. (...).
The original word, varieth in signification. Sometimes it is rendered, to
study: and it is out of question, our duty to study and contemplate of
heavenly things. Sometimes it signifies, to try by tasting and it is sure
that if carnal people had but once tasted of the sweetness of godliness, and
religious duties, they would not so securely neglect the provision for
eternity: but especially they would see, that they have spoken evil of what
they knew not. Sometimes it is translated, to be wise about a thing, and
certainly, a Christian should be wise in the matters of his religion and
profession, and show it, by forecast and diligence to compass what may be
gotten of this true treasure, and by serpentine discretion in the manner and
circumstances of weldoing, and by staydnesse in a Christian course, void of
passion rash zeal and fickle inconstancy, growing more and more skillful and
cunning in the soundness of knowledge, how with more power and spiritual
advantage to practice every duty, or exercise every grace. Sometimes it
signifies, to savor of a thing, and it is true that all the carriage and
dealings of Christians should savor of the things above; but I take it as it
is here rendered. Set your affections] and so it manifestly teaches us that
we must get not minds or thoughts only, Uses.
but sound affections to heavenly lukewarmenesse of the most Reu. 3.19.
, and of the dangerous loss of first love in the better sort R^uel. 2.
. For comfort, for it is certain if thou can Three benefits of tender
affections.
thou may be assured of three things. 1 That God will accept thy will for the
deed. He will bear with many wants and weaknesses where he tenderly affected.
2 That thou art not in danger of falling away: for Apostasy never discouers it
self to hurt us, or endanger us, till it has that thou have, Matthew. 13.
more is and shall be given: as thy affections grow and continue, so does true
knowledge grace and godliness grow also. And thus of the repetition.

And not on the things that are on earth] from the coherence and general
consideration of these words three things may be observed.

Obs. 1.
1 That a man cannot both at once seek and affect earth and heaven. for they
are here disioyned and opposed, Matthew. 6.
a man cannot serve God and mammon, the love of the world is the enmity of
God. but this is thus to be understood, if the world be sought in the first
place and with chief affection and care. Iam. 4.4.


Obs. 2.
2 Nay more this dehortation implies, that it is hard for a man to deal with
the world, but a man's affection will too much run after it: it is hard to be
much employed about profits and recreations, Note
but a man shall love them too much. Not that it is simply unlawful to use the
world, but that we should be very jealous of our selves to watch our own
hearts, that our affections be not set on the world.

Obs. 3.
3 To be crucified unto the world, able to neglect and contemn the glory and
pleasure of it, is a notable sign, that one is risen with Christ. Thus in
general.

Three sorts of things on earth.
The things on earth] The things on earth here meant by the Apostle, are either
traditions, mentioned in the former Chapter, or worldly things in themselves
lawful, or the works of the flesh, simply in themselves unlawful.

Traditions ^e for three reasons called things on earth.
Traditions and man's inventions which the Apostle has before taxed, may well
be called things on earth. 1 Because they spring from the earth and earthly
minded men, they were never inspired from God, nor devised by heavenly minded
men. 2 Because they hinder them that are devoted to them, from looking up, or
attaining any insight in things that are above. 3 Because these by effect make
men more earthly and sensual: but of these in the former chapter.

The works of the flesh, and the corruptions of life to be avoided, and not
affected, are the third sort of things on earth: but of that also afterward in
the second part of the general duties; especially in the fifth verse. So that
the second sort of things on earth remains to be more largely considered,
those are profits, honors, pleasures, friends, health, and long life.

There be eight reasons to persuade not to affect earthly things. Eight
general reasons to dis^wade from affecting things on earth.


The first may be taken from the condition of man on earth. For we are here
but pilgrims and strangers Heb. 11.13.
. and therefore being but in a strange place to what purpose, should we trouble
our selves with more then what will serve our present need, and the rather
knowing that when we come into our own country these things will serve us for
no use. Besides our present lot lies not in those things: but the Kingdom of
God and righteousness is our portion even in this life, all other things are
but cast upon us, as additaments.

The second may be taken from the disability of earthly things. For first they
cannot so much as fill or satisfy a man's heart. 2 They cannot fence a man
against any of the trials of God, when the hour of tentation comes Reu. 3.10.
. 3 they cannot all of them redeem on soul Psalm. 49.
.

The third reason may be taken from the inconveniences that follow the the
cares of the world choke the word, that it can never prosper Math. 13.
. 2 They breed excuses and shifts in man's minds and alienate by degrees a
man's heart from the use of the means Luke 14 17.
. 3 To seek after the world is to sorrow after the world: for to the most the
world is a cause of much sorrow and vexation. 4 The amity of the world, as the
Apostle says, is the enmity of God Iam. 4.4. 1 Ioh. 2 15.
, and that both actiuely and passiuely: for it both makes us hate God, and it
makes God hate us. Fifthly, the lust after worldly things fills the world with
corruptions and sins 2. Pet. 1 4.
, Sixthly, these earthly things thus sinisterly affected, may one day witness
against us Iam. 5.1. etc.
. Seventhly many a man is damned and gone to hell, for minding earthly things
Phil. 3.18.
.

The fourth reason may be taken from the sovereignty that God has over Psalm.
24.1. Mat. 28.18.
, now why should we turmoile our selves with care about these, seeing they are
in Gods hand in Christ, to have them and dispose of them as may be for his
glory and our good.

The fifth reason may be taken from the baseness of the nature of all these
things: for they are not only on the earth, but of the earth: and if they be
Matthew. 16.
it is no profit to win the whole world and lose a man's own soul: and
besides if the whole world laid on one heap would have been a sufficient
sacrifice for the redemption of the soul, the Lord Jesus would never have
abased himself to such a suretiship. But because there could not be found
neither in heaven nor earth any other name or nature by which we could be
saved, Phil. 2.
therefore he humbled himself, and took upon him the form of a servant, and
was obedient unto the death even the death of the cross.

The sixth reason may be taken from the example of the Lords worthies, tried
with all kind of trials: Heb. 11.
and wandered up and down, in sheepeskinnes and goatskinnes, being destitute,
afflicted and tormented, wandering up and down in wildernesses, mountains and
dens and caves of the earth, whom the world was not worthy of: all these
seeking another country, and willingly professing, that they expected no
abiding place here.

Seventhly it is somewhat to persuade us, that our Savor Christ professes, of
purpose to hinder and interrupt, our rest and ease in the use of those things:
when he says that he came not to send peace: as knowing that much peace and
liking of earthly things was unprofitable for us.

Lastly we may be moved by the consideration of the fleeting condition of all
earthly things: riches have wings Prou.
, and the fashion of this world passes away 1 Cor. 7.31. 1 Ioh. 2.17.
, yea heaven and earth shall pass, the earth with the works thereof shall be
burnt up 2. Pet. 3.10.
.

But that we may be the more deeply affected, with the contempt of the world,
I will further add these reasons

1 Of Solomon, the wisest of all sinful men. 2 Of Christ the wisest of all
men.
Solomon in his book of Ecclesiastes is exceeding plentiful, and indeed not
without cause: Solomon^ rea^ons against ^^e love of earthly things
for such is the strength of the rooted love of earthly things in many men,
that they had need to be incountred with an army of reasons and if I single
out some of the cheifest out of diverse chapters, I hope it will appear tedious
to none, but such as will hear no reason.

In the first chapter, among other things, these may be noted. 1 That after a
man has travailed to get what he can, how small a portion in comparison of the
whole, has he atchiued? so as he may say to himself when he has done, What
now remains to me of all my travel which I have suffered under the sun? 2
If a man could get never so much, yet he cannot live to enjoy it long. Ecel.
1.3.
For the elements of which man was made, are more durable then man himself:
for, one generation passes and another comes, but the earth remains still
v. 4.5.6.
. The like may be showed of the air and water. 3 All things are full of labor
no man can utter it v. 8.
. And certainly many times earthly things gained, answer not the labor spent
about them. 4 Earthly things possessed, will not satisfy, The eye will not be
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing v. 8.
. 5 A man can compass nothing that is new, for there is nothing new under the
sun v. 9.10.
. Is there any thing of which one may say behold this is new, and never was
before? they have been already in the old time that was before us. 6 The Lord
in wonderful wisdom and righteousness, permits in the nature of man, those
cares that they may be travels to humble and break the heart of man v. 13.
. 7 The best of these, will not make a crooked thing straight v. 15.
: they will not mend the perverse manners of men, a man may be and continue
vicious for all these things, or for ought they will do unto him.

In the second chapter we may observe these reasons. First, let a man procure
unto himself the fullest and fairest use of all sorts of earthly things:
pleasure, Chapter 2.1. and 12.
laughter, great houses, gardens, orchards, waters, fruit trees, woods,
servants, cattle, silver and gold, treasures and music, yet all these will
not deliver a man from s^tiety, loathing and vexation of spirit. So as he may
truly say, there is no profit in them. 2 In these things there is one
condition to all: it befalls to the w^se man as it does to the fool v. 14.15.
. 3 Let a man excel never so much, yet within a short time all will be
forgotten. For all that, that now is, in the days to come shall all be
forgotten v. 16.
. Fourthly, when thou have gotten all thou can together, thou know not
whether he shall be a wise man or a fool, that shall enjoy them after thee v.
19.
. Fifthly to attain those things men usually spend their days in sorrow,
travail and grief, and their hearts take no rest in the night v. 23.
.

In the third chapter these further reasons may be noted. First, all things are
swayed with the swinge of their seasons and times. Chapter 3. v. 1 and 9.
So as nothing is steady, though be borne, and now plant and build, and laugh
and dance, and embrace and sow and love and live in peace: yet there will be
a time to pluck up, and break down, and weep, and mourn, and cast away,
and hate; and mourn, and die to. Secondly, though the Lord should set the
world in a man's heart, yet he might spend all his days and never know the full
nature of these things v. 11.
. Thirdly, all things are subject to Gods unavoidable disposing. Let man get
what he can, yet God will have the disposing of it: and whatsoever God shall
do, it shall abide, to it can no man add, and from it can none diminish. And
this God will do that man may fear him v. 14.
. Fourthly, such is the state of the children of men, that they may loose all
they have at the very place of judgment v. 16.
. Fifthly, yea the very state of mortified men, in the reason of carnal men,
because of these oppressions and uncertainties, seems little better, then the
state of beasts v. 18.
.

In the fourth Chapter note, Chapter 4.1.2.3
first that when a man has set his heart upon these earthly things, if ever he
loose them, he is filled almost with vnmedicinable tears and sorrow, so as he
would praise the dead above the living, and wish he had never been borne.
Secondly, they are occasions of a man's envy v. 4.
. Thirdly, the eying of these things, infatuats many a man's heart: so as we may
see many a man that has neither son nor daughter, nor brother, and yet there
is no end of his travel, and he has not the judgment, to say with himself,
for whom do I travail, and defraud my self of pleasure. v. 8.
Fourthly, a man may get much with sore travail, and live to see himself
despised of him for whom he provides them: so as they that shall come after
him will not rejoice in him. v 15.16.


In the fifth chapter there are also seven other reasons. First, these earthly
things lead the greatest men into bondage, by dependence. For the King cannot
consist without the tilling of the field. Secondly, he that loves silver shall
not be satssified with silver, Chap. 5.8.
and he that loves riches shall be without the fruit thereof v. 9.
. Thirdly, when goods increase, they are increased also that eat them, and
what good comes to the owners thereof, but the beholding of them with their
eyes. v. 10.
Fourthly, many times the servant sleeps, when the master can get no sleep
v. 11.
. Fifthly, there is an evil sickness often seen under the sun, that riches
are kept for the owners ruin v. 12.
. Sixthly, or else they will perish while the master looks on v. 13. v.
13.14.15.
. Seventhly, but certain it is, he can carry nothing out of the world when he
goes, but must leave them where he found them.

In the sixth Chapter there are these reasons. Chap. 6.1. to 7.
First, a man may have all abundance and yet not have a heart to use them and
so be worse then an untimely fruit. Secondly, what needs all this ado: for all
is but for the mouth and nature is content with a little. And therefore to have
a soul so unsatiably greedy of having, is a prodigious madness v. 7.
. Thirdly, the having of all these things makes not a wise man better then a
fool: and what wants a poor man, v. 8.
if he know how to carry himself with the wise. Fourthly, all cannot make
thee cease to be mortal. For it is known man cannot strive with him that is
stronger than he v. vlt.
.

In the seventh Chapter there is this reason. A man may spend all his days
before he can come soundly to know (after many trialls) what is the best use to
put these earthly things to.

And for honor, in the eighth Chapter three things are worthy noting. First, a
man is not Lord of his own spirit, to keep himself alive in his honor Chap.
8.8.
. Secondly, many men rule to their own ruin v. 9.
. Thirdly, men after death are quickly forgotten. They that come back from the
holy place remembers them not long. Yea a man may be quickly forgotten in the
City where he has done right v. 10.
.

And in the ninth Chapter, Chap. 9.1.
two reasons more are added. First, no man can know the love or hatred of God
by these things. Secondly, they are not gotten always, by help of means. For
the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor riches
to men of understanding, nor favor to the wise: which makes the Atheist and
Epicure conclude, that time and chance comes to all things.

The sum of all that Solomon can say is, vanity of vanities all is vanity.
And now that we have heard Solomon, let us in the next place hear a greater
than Solomon.

Our Savior Christ in the sixth of Matthew, diuides the care of earthly things
into two sorts. Our Saviors reasons.
For either men are greedily transported with the desire of getting treasures,
that is abundance and superfluities: or else they toil their hearts with
distrustful and distracting cares, about necessaries, as what they shall eat,
and what they shall put on. From the first kind of care, he disswades with
four reasons. First, all treasures are subject either to vanity or violence.
Four reasons against the care for superfluities.
Either the moth will eat them, or the thief will steal them Mat. 6.19.20
. Secondly, these things bewitch and steal away men's hearts v. 21.
. Thirdly, the minding of these things, darkneth the eye of the soul, with
greater darkness then can be expressed v 22.23.
. Fourthly, a man cannot serve God and riches v. 24.
.

From the second kind of care he dehorts with eight reasons. First, the life is
more worth then meat, and the body than raiment v. 25.
. And if the lord have given the greater why should he not be trusted for the
less? Eight reasons against distracting cares for necessaries
Secondly, God provides for the very fowls that have not such means as man
has: and will he not provide for man v. 26.
? Thirdly, all thy care will not add one cubit to thy stature v. 27.
, but if thou would swelt thy heart out, it is God only must increase thy
strength or health. Fourthly, this care is a sign of little faith v. 30.
. Fifthly, it is for Gentiles that know not God nor the covenant of his grace and
mercy in Christ, to seek after these things v. 32.
. It Is a gross shame for any Christian to be so heathenish. Sixthly, does not
your heavenly father know all that you need v. 32.
. If he be a father, has he not will? and if he be in heaven, has he not
power to help? Seventhly, you have a flat promise that if you seek the
kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof (which should take up your
chiefest care) all these things without such carking, so far as is needful
shall be cast upon you v. 33.
. Lastly, has not every day his evil? and is not the grief of the day great
enough? why then do thou distract thy self for to morrow assure thy self
the time to come, v. vlt.
will afford thee matter of grief and trouble enough, thou needst not disquiet
thy self before hand.

Use.
The consideration of all this, as it may be a comfort against all wants and
crosses about these base earthly things: so it may greatly reprove those that
bury their talents in this earth, that is, spend al their gifts about earthly
matters. But especially we may hence learn diverse lessons. And first since we
have heard Salomons opinion after long discourse, that all is vanity, we should
learn of the same Solomon therefore, to fear God and keep his commandments
for this is the whole of man: and the end of all Eccles. 12.13.
: Secondly, let the place of the sanctuary Ier. 17.11.12
(where we may get the best things for our souls) be as glorious throne
exalted. Thirdly, let us use this world as if we used it not. Let them that
rejoice be as if they reioiced not, and they that weep as if they wept not,
and they that buy as though they possessed not 1. Cor. 7.30.31.
. Fourthly, if the lord give us but a little portion in these things, let us
esteem his mercy and live with contentedness, resolving that better is a
handful with quietness, then two handfulls with labor and vexation of spirit
Eccles. 4.6.
. And fifthly, we may hence be confirmed to take the more liberty to use these
earthly things for our own joy and refreshing, they are none of the things the
Lord would have us with such a do keep: but he allows us To eat and drink
and delight our selves with the profit of our labors Eccles. 1.24. Eccles.
3.12.
. Lastly, we should improve them, and use them as means to do what good we
can with them in this life. I know (says the wise man) there is nothing good
in them but to rejoice and do good in his life. And to this end we should cast
our bread even upon the waters for after many days we may find it: and give
our portion to seven and also to eight. E^cles. 11.1.2.
The best use of these riches, is to be rich in doing good with them.

Thus of the illustration. The confirmation follows.

Verse. 3. For ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God.


In this verse and the next the exhortation is confirmed by two motives. The
one taken from the condition of the faithful in this world: the other taken
from the consideration of their estate in the revelation of the glory of Christ
in the last day. The first is in this verse, the later in the next verse.

There are two things in the condition of the faithful on earth which should
make them little to mind earthly things or desire to continue long in the world.

First that in respect of distresses, they are as dead men while they live
Secondly, that the happiness they have (which is the life of their lives) does
not appear, but is hid with God in Christ.

For ye are dead] The faithful are dead three ways while they live. The
faithful de^d three ways.
For first they are dead to sin in respect of mortification. Secondly they
are dead to the law, by the body of Christ Romans 7.4. Gal. 2.19.
, in respect of justification: so as now the faithful do no longer wait upon
the law for righteousness but upon a second marriage they have it from him
that was raised from the dead for them.

They are dead to the world, and that in three respects. First, in respect of
their own voluntary forsaking of the world, and their mortifying of earthly
desires, joined with a sense of their own mortality: so was Paul as a man
crucified to the world Gal. 6.14.
Secondly, in respect of the worlds account of them. For so soon as men get
any true grace and retire themselves from the excesses of the time they are
neglected and forgotten as dead men out of mind. Thirdly, in respect of the
multitude of afflictions which do many times ouerwhelme and drown Christians.
It is not unusual in scripture to say of men in desperate crosses they are
dead men. The Prophet Esaias calls the people in captivity dead men, when he
says, thy dead m^n shall live Esaias 26.19.
. The Apostle Paul says thus. If we be dead with him we shall live with him 2.
Tim. 2.11.
. Which he seems to explane in the next verse thus, If we suffer with him we
shall also reign with him. Thus David says, He was as a broken vessel,
forgotten as a dead man out of mind Psalm. 31.12.
. And in another place he says, He was brought to the dust of the earth Psalm.
22.15
. And in the 88. Psalm he says, his soul was full of evils, he was counted
among them that go down to the pit, free among the dead, like the slain
lying in the grave yea he was laid in the lowest pit, in the darkness, in the
grave etc Psalm. 88.4.5.6
. I spare to allege other scriptures.

The use may be, to teach us as to observe hence what may befall the best man,
Uses.
so in the consideration of our own estate, to say within our selves as Job
did, If I have done wickedlie, woe unto me, and if I have done righteouslie, I
will not lift up my head, being full of confusion, because I see mine
affliction Job 10.15.
. For though the Lord has not yet thus overwhelmed thee with distress yet in
as much as he may do it to thee, as well as to others his dear servants, it
should cause thee to walk humbly before God, and to learn to die to the
world, before the world be dead to thee.

Again, has misery broken in upon thee, and prevailed over thee, so as thou
seem to be laid in darkness, as they that have been dead long ago: let not
thy spirit be in perplexity in thee: Psalm. 143.
no strange thing is befallen thee: Gods children are but dead men in this
world. Remember the time past, and meditate of gods works of old: stretch
forth thy hand unto God, and let thy soul desire after him: if he show thee
his loving kindness thou have enough: hide thee with the Lord by daily and
secret prayer, and he will teach thee his will, and his spirit shall lead thee,
and if he see it meet he will bring thy soul out of adversity, and execute
his righteous judgment upon all those that have oppressed thee. It Is the Lord
that quickneth the dead, Romans 4.
and calls things that are not as if they were. Lastly, has the Lord
delivered thee out of desperate and deadly crosses, then let. the vows of God
be upon thee and render thou his praise, and confess his name before the
sons of men Psalm. 56.12.13
.

Your life is hid]

The happiness and spiritual felicity of Christians is hid. And that usually
from the men of the world, Doct.
and many times from the faithful.

Their life is hid, from the men of this world. First because God (who is their
life Deuteronomy. 30. vlt.
) is hid from them. First, the life of Christians is hid from the world.
Secondly, because the glory of their natural life is many times buried in the
gulphe of outward trouble 2. Cor. 6.9.
. Thirdly, because the life of grace (which is only brought to light by the
Gospel 2. Tim. 1.10.
) is hid from the perceiving of the natural man, whom the God of this world
has blinded 2. Cor. 4 4.
. Fourthly, because the way of holy conversation is hid from them. For carnal
men are all strangers from the life of God Ephesians. 4.17.
. It is a narrow way and few there be that find it. Mat. 7.14.
Fifthly, because many of the privileges of a gracious life are hid from them.
As first, the inrolling of a Christian in the book of life. Esaias 4 4.3.
Secondly, the seal of the spirit of promise 2. Cor. 1.22.
. Thirdly, pardon of sin. Wicked men perhaps know the faults of Gods
children, but not the forgiveness of those faults. Fourthly, the power of the
means. The word is a savor of life 2. Cor. 2.14.
, and has spirit and life in it Ioh 6.
, Yet it is as a treasure hid in the field, or a little leaven hid in three
peckes of meal Mat. 13.
. Fifthly, comfort in their affliction. Wicked men know their afflictions but
not their consolations 2. Cor. 2.9.
, they sildome or never mark the glorious issue, and how God compasses them
about with joyful deliverance* And generally we may burst out with the
Psalmist, and say, How great is the goodness thou have laid up for them that
trust in thee Psalm. 31.19.
. It is great goodness, but yet note that he says it is laid up. Lastly, in
respect of the life of glory the world knows not Christians. 1. Ioh. 3.12.
For it does not yet appear what they shallbe.

Seeing this is so, that the life of Christians is hid from the world: as it
should infer the Apostles former exhortation, so it should further teach us,
not to respect nor care for the judgment, counsel, censures, etc. of carnal
men, in the whole or any part of Christian life. For it is hid from them, and
they know not of what they speak.

Nay in the second place, sometimes the life of a Christian may be hid from
christians also themselves. Yea the life of christians is hid many times from
themselves.
So as they cannot discern their own happiness, especially in some fits of
tentation, and sildom or never do they fully discern in this world, so much as
the glory of their present estate. David thought he was cast out of Gods sight
Psalm. 31.22. Psalm. 77.
. And he most mournfully makes his moan in the 77 Psalm, as if he were almost
resolved that the Lord would not be merciful to him. Jacob cries out, my way
is hid from the Lord Esaias. 40.27.
, and the people somewhat vehemently say, verily thou O God hidest thy self; O
God the savior of Israel Esaias 46.15.
. Which should comfort afflicted christians* since they may here see that it
has been an usual distress of Gods dear servants, Use.
to have their life hid in God. And withal it may warn us, let him that now
stands in the refreshings of the comforts of Gods presence, take heed least
he fall. But especially it should quicken us to a desire to be gone and to be
in heaven that we might be past all danger.

But least Christians should be discouraged he adds two comforts. First, it
is with Christ. Christ's life was hid, and in what respects.
Secondly it is in God.

With Christ.] The life of Christ also was hid, while he lived. For first the
glory of his divinity was covered as it were with a veil in his flesh.
Secondly his outward glory of his life amongst men, was obscured by the many
crosses he sustained for our sins Esa. 53.7.
, so as the world did not own him, and he was without form and despised among
men. Thirdly, his life was hid in the grave. Fourthly, it was hid in respect of
the horrors he felt in his soul, the Lord as it were hiding his loving
countenance from him for the time. Fifthly, his glory in Heaven is hid from the
world, and the Saints on earth have but a glimpse of it. All this may comfort
us, seeing nothing can befall us but what has befallen our head, and if the
world will not acknowledge our glory, and the beauty of the profession of
sincerity, it matters not, it could not see the excellency of Christ, when he
was on earth.

In God] our life is hid in God either in respect of object, Obiectiue.
Causaliter.
because it principally consists in the vision of God, or causally as God is
the first cause to beget it, and still to preserve it: or else with Christ in
God, that is, with Christ who incomprehensibly rests in the bosom of the
Father. Or lastly, in God that is apud Deum, in the power of God, to dispose of
it at his pleasure, which should comfort us seeing none has power over our
life but God, and teach us to commend our spirits into his hands.

Ver. 4. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory.


These words contain the second motive to persuade to the meditation of
heavenly things: The second motive is taken from the consideration of the
appearance of Christ and the glory of heavenly minded Christians, at the day of
Iudge^ent.
if men would consider of the certain and glorious appearance of the Lord
Jesus Christ, when he shall come to take account of all the actions of all
men, and put an end to all the earthly felicities which man has with so many
inventions sought: and withal but think how vnauailable all earthly things
will be at that day, either to deliver from the terror of the Judgment, or the
horror of the everlasting misery will certainly follow (if men be not more
careful to provide for their souls beforehand, by following the study of
better things) but especially if men would consider the great gain and profit,
that godliness at that day will bring, and the incomparable glory that all
heavenly minded Christians shall then be exalted unto. The thought of these
things daily and truly laid unto men's hearts would much excite and stir up
to a constant care of preparing our selves against that day: and would greatly
weane us from the cares and delights in these transitory and earthly things
here below, that will so little avail the owners in they day of death: and
will be of so little use, in that immortal estate, unto which after this
Judgment, the godly shall be translated. So that these words offer two things
to be entreated of. First, the glorious appearance of Christ. Secondly the
glorious appearance of the Christian in the day of Christ.

But before I enter upon the particular and full discourse of those two
glorious appearances, some things may be briefly and generally noted.

1 That the knowledge of those last things, Obs. 1.
is not a curious or unprofitable knowledge, but contrariwise ought to be
searched after, as exceeding useful in the life of man. Obs. 2.


2 That the doctrine of the glory of Christ and Christians in that last day,
The Devil, sensuality and guiltiness, make many men have little mind to
think of the day of Judgment.
is now but little known or discerned: and that the word appear, imports: so
as the fullness of Christ's Majesty, or of the Christians glory will not appear
till the very Judgment day: the better sort know but in part: and the worser
sort are so blinded by the devil, and besotted with sensuality and the love of
earthly things. and withal are so conscious to themselves of the evils they
are guilty of, that they have no desire to discern, or to be taught to know,
the doctrine of Christ's coming. Obs. 3.


3 Those words ( which is) (...). Christ is our life.
yo^ are not to be altogether passed over, they plainly a^^irme that Christ
is our life, and this is an honor that the Lord challenges to himself: and
therefore as he would be acknowledged to be the way and the truth so also he
adds, I am the life Ioh. 14 6.
, and to to this end he came that men in him might have life Ioh. 10.10.
. And with great reason, is Christ said to be our life, for he formed us at
first when we were not: and quickened us when we were dead, and has provided a
better life for us, and does preserve us unto eternal life and daily renew
life and power in the hearts of his people, and will raise our bodies at the
last day. Uses.
The consideration hereof may both teach us and try us, it may teach us, as
to acknowledge that we have received life from Christ, so to dedicate what
remains of our life to the honor and service of him, that is the Author and
sole Lord of our lives: and withal to run unto him for the daily
preservation and renewing of life and loveliness in us. And it may try too.
For till we can truly say out of feeling and experience, Christ is the life of
our lives, Who may truly say and profess, that Christ is their life.
we shall hardly find reason of comfortable hope in our appearance before him
at the last day. And they only may truly profess that Christ is their life,
that first can live by the faith of Christ, accounting themselves to have
enough if they may see comfort in Gods promises

Now I come to the appearance of Christ. I have not here to do with the
appearance of Christ as it is considered in the fore ordination of God before
the foundation of the world: 1. Pet. 1.20.
but of the accomplishment of it, and so christ's appearance is of diverse
kinds. Six appearances of Christ.
For first, he has appeared unto the whole world: as the true light, that made
the world, and lightneth every man that comes into the world Ioh. 1.9.10.
, and thus he appeared in the light of nature. Secondly he appears to the
whole Church, consisting both of good and bad, by the genenerall light of
doctrine and Scripture, but many receive not his testimony Ioh. 3.31.32.
. Thirdly he has appeared corporally, in the days of his flesh, once in the
end of the world to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself Heb. 9.26. 1.
Ioh. 3.5.
, and to dissolve the work of the devil 1. Ioh 3.8.
then was fulfilled that great mystery, God was manifested in the flesh 1. Tim.
3.16.
. Fourthly, he has and does daily appear in the hearts of all the faithful,
by the manifestation of the spirit of grace, 1. Cor. 12.7.
whereby he does not only shine, but also dwell in them Ephesians. 3.16.17.
. Fifthly he has and does appear, in the day of death, by the ministry of his
angels, to translate the blessed souls to their place of peace, rest and joy.
And lastly he shall appear in the end of the world in glorious Majesty, to
judge all men and Angels, and this is the appearance here mentioned. Threefold
judgment.


There is noted to be a threefold Judgment. The first Judgment and that was
accomplished on man and Angels at their first fall, then there is a middle
Judgment: The doctrine of the last Judgment has been always urged.
and so God judges the wicked and the righteous every day. And there is a last
Judgment, and that is this Judgment about which Christ is here said, to
appear.

The doctrine of the last Judgment is in a manner only to be found in the
Church. They were dark and uncertain things, the Philosopher could see by the
light of nature. And the Lords messengers have in all ages from the first
beginning till now, mightily urged the terror of this day, to awaken the secure
world. Henoch prophesied of it Iud. 15.
, so did Moses Deuteronomy. 32.
and David Psalm. 50.
and Solomon Eccl. 11.9.
and Daniel Dan. 7.13.
, and Joel Joel. 3.
, (...) ^^lachie Mal. 4.
, so did Christ himself Matthew. 24.
, and Paul 2. These. 1.
, and Peter 2. Pet. 3.
, and John Revel.
, and Jude Iud. 6.
. Neither is the assurance of the Judgment to come waranted by the words of
Gods servants, only but the Lord has left many works of his own, as pledges
that he will once at length for all judge the whole world for sin. The drowning
of the old world, the burning of Sodom, the destruction of Jerusalem Mat. 24.
were assured foretokens, that the Lord would not put up the infinite
iniquities of the world, but will most severely punish for sin: the pleading
of the conscience Romans 2.15.16.
foretells a judgment to come, the sentence of death pronounced in Paradise,
and renewed with such terror on Sinay, did evidently assure that God meant to
call men to an account. The lesser Judgments in this life, are but foretypes
of that last and greatest Judgment to come. And lastly, the dragging of men
out of the world by death is nothing else but an Alarm to Judgment

Yet as there is a necessary use of the knowledge of this dreadful and
glorious doctrine. Be wise to sobriety.
So there is a restraint to be laid upon us: this is one of the things wherein
we must be wise to sobriety R^m. 12.3.
. We must repress the itching of our ears, and be content to be ignorant of
what is not revealed, this is a doctrine to be inquired into more for use of
life, then to feed the curiosity of contemplation.

Concerning the Judgment to come, Who shall judge.
if any ask Who shall judge? I answer, that in respect of authority, the whole
trinity shall Judge: but in respect of the execution of that Authority, Christ
only shall judge, and that as man Act. 17.31.
, it is true that the Apostles and the Saints are said to judge the tribes of
Israel and the world: but they any judge as assessors, that is, they shall sit
as it were on the bench with our Savior Christ, when he judges.

And if any ask in the second place, Who shall be judged?
Whom Christ shall judge? I answer: he shall judge the evil Angels: for they
are reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day. Iud. 6. 2. Pet. 2.4.
He shall judge also the man of sin, even the great Antichrist, that has
made such havoc in the Church, and seduced the nations with the wine of his
fornications: even him shall he consume with the brightness of his coming 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
. He shall judge also all reprobates, men women and children, of all ages
nations and conditions: for though he shall not know them Mat. 7 22. and 25.12.
in respect of approbation, yet he shall judge them, and make them understand
he knew their transgressions. Further he shall judge the very Elect, though it
shall be with a different Judgment. For we must all appear before the
tribunal seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things which are done
in his body 2. Cor. 5.10.
. Lastly, in some sense it may be said, he shall judge the whole world: for the
heavens and the earth that now are, are kept (by the word of God) and reserved
unto fire against the day of condemnation, and of the destruction of ungodly
men 2. Pet. 3.
, and the Apostle Paul says, that the fervent desire of the creature (made
subject to vanity by man) waits for this revelation of the sons of God at
the last judgment: for they are subdued under hope and shall at that day by
the sentence of Christ, be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God Romans 8.19.20.21.
.

Thirdly, Where shall it be?
if any ask where this judgment shall be? I answer, that seeing the Lord has
not determined it, it is curious to enquire, and more curious to assign the
very place: as some have that wrote it, should be in the valley of Iehoshaphat:
or as others would have it, on Mount Sion, whence he ascended. This we know it
shall be near the earth, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
in the clouds of Heaven, where Christ's throne shall be set, and further then
this we need not enquire.

There have been also many opinions about the time when it should be. When
shall the day of Judgment be?
Some thought, that as the world was six days in creating and then the
Sabbath of rest came. So the world should last 6000. years (reckoning a 1000.
years as one day) and then should come the eternal Saboath. Others distribute
the times thus, 2000. year before the Law, 2000. years under the law, and
2000. years after the law, and then comes the judgment. Others thought the
world would last after Christ, so long as it was to the flood from the
creation, and that was as they say, 1656. years. Others thought it should be as
long to the judgment after Christ, as it was from Moses to Christ, and that
should be 1582. years. this experience has proved false. Other say Christ
lived 33. years, and the world should continue for 33. Iubilies after Christ.
What can be said of all or the most of these opinions and such like, but even
this, that they are the blind fancies of men. For is there not a plain
restraint laid upon men, in this question, when the Lord Jesus said, it is not
for you to know the times and seasons, which the father has put in his own
power Act. 1.7.
. And of that day and hour knows no man no not the Angels of heaven: but my
father only Mat. 24.36. Mark. 13.32.
. And the Evangelist S. Mark adds, that the son of man himself knows
not the day and hour. Not that simply Christ is ignorant of the time of the
last judgment, How it is that the son is said to be ignorant of the day of
judgment.
but he was said not to know, because he kept it from our knowledge. Or else he
knew it not as he was man, or rather in his estate of humiliation, and in his
humane nature, he did not precisely know it. But that hinders not but that in
his estate of exaltation, as he is now in heaven, and has all power and
judgment committed unto him, he may and does fully understand it.

But letting these things pass, the principal things for us to be informed in
is concerning the day of judgment, and this last appearance of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, are these three. First the signs of his coming.
Secondly, how or the form of the judgment it self, The signs of the day of
judgment.
when he does come. And lastly, the use we should in the mean while make of
the doctrine of the last judgment.

For our better remembrance, the signs of Christ's coming to judgment, may be
briefly reduced into this Catalogue.

Some signs go before, and are fulfilled before he appear. Some signs are
conioined with his appearing. The signs going before, are more remote or more
near. The more remote signs are these. First, the universal preaching of the
Gospel, to all nations, Gentiles as well as Jews. Before the end come says
our Savior, This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached throughout the
whole world for a witness to all nations. Mat. 24.14.
Secondly, most cruel persecution: Even such tribulation as was not from the
beginning of the world Mat. 24.9.10.21.9.
. Thirdly, a general falling away or apostasy of the Churches in Antichrist 2
These. 2.2.3.
. Fourthly, wars and rumors of wars famine, pestilence, and earthquakes in
diverse places. Fifthly, false Prophets and false Christ's, which shall deceive
many Mat. 24.11.24
. The signs more near are, First the preaching again of the everlasting
Gospel. Revel. 14.6.
Secondly, the detection and fall of Antichrist, and the spiritual Babell
Revel. 14.8.
. Thirdly, the calling of the Jews, after the fullness of the Gentiles is come
in. Romans 11.25 26
Fourthly, coldness and security in the world, as in the days of Noah Mat.
24.37.
. Fifthly, the shaking of the powers of heaven, the darkning of the Sun and
Moon, and the falling of the stars, etc Mark 13.14
. The signs conioined, are especially two. First, the wailing of all the
kindreds of the earth. Secondly, the sign of the son of man Mat. 24 30.
. Which what it shall be I cannot describe.

And thus we are come to the very time and execution of the judgment. And
therein consider. The form of the judgment.
First, the preparation. Secondly, the judgment it self. Thirdly, the
consequents of the judgment.

The preparation is two fold. First, of the Judge. Secondly, of the judged.
Unto the preparation of the Judge, The preparation of the Judge.
may be reserred these things. First, his commission or that singular power
given him of the father to execute judgment upon all the world Ioh. 5.22. Mat.
24.30.
. And this shall be then made manifest to all men. Secondly, the clothing of
the humane nature with a most peculiar and unsearchable majesty and glory, most
lively expressing and resembling the form and brightness of the father Mat.
16. vlt.
. Thirdly, the attendance of thousand thousands of holy Angels, in the
perfections of their splendour Dan. 7.10. Mat. 25.31. Revel. 20.11.
. Fourthly, the^ choice of a place in the clouds of heaven where he will sit.
Fifthly, the erecting of a most glorious white throne* which what it shall be
who can utter? yet without question it shall visibly then appear. And thus of
the preparation of the Judge.

The Judged, The preparation of the judged. First, by citation.
shall be prepared four wai^^ First, by citation. Secondly, by resurrection.
Thirdly, by collection. Fourthly, by separation. First they shall be cited to
appear. The word is three times cited. First, by the Prophets and fathers
before Christ. Secondly, by the Apostles, and ministers of the Gospel since
Christ. And the last summons is this here meant, which shall be performed by a
shoute from heaven, and the voice of the last trumpe. And this shall be the
voice of Christ the Archangell of God, and ministered by Angels. For that it
shall be Christ's voice is plain, the dead shall hear his voice, as he says
in John Ioh. 5.28.
. And the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shoute, with the voice
of the Archangell, and with the trumpe of God 1. These. 4.16.
. That the ministry of Angels shall be used, is manifest by the Evangelist S.
Matthew, who reports Christ's words thus. And he shall send his Angels with a
great sound of a trumpet Mat. 24.31.
.

Secondly, Secondly, by resurrection.
upon this voice shall a resurrection follow which may be two ways
considered. First, every man in his own body, whether he has done good or
evil, shall revive, and rise up out of the grave, or other places of the earth
or sea or air, Revel. 20.13.
without any loss of any part, that so every man may in his very body receive
what he has done, whether good or evil? Secondly, the living shall be all
changed in a moment, 2. Cor. 5.13.
in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet 1 Cor. 15.52.
. And this change shall be in stead of death, and a kind of resurrection. Not a
change of substance but of qualities. Our corruptible shall put on incorruption.

Thirdly, 1. Cor. 15.53.
then shall the Angels gather and collect and bring into one place, from the
four winds of heaven, that is from all the four parts of the world, Thirdly,
by collection.
all that are quick or dead, now raised or changed elect, Mat. 24.31.
or reprobate Mat. 25.32.
and such is the^r power, that they will be able to drive in, the mightiest,
wickedest, vnwillingest, yea though they were never so many millions of them.

Lastly, when they are thus brought together, there shall be made a separation.
For the sheep, Fourthly, by separation.
Gods elect, shall all be put on Christ's right hand. And the reprobate or
goats, shall be compelled to his left hand Mat. 25.32.
. And thus of the preparation. The judgment it self follows.

In the judgment it self I consider three things. The judgment it self.
First, by what law man shall be tried and judged. Secondly, by what evidence.
Thirdly, what the sentence shall be.

For the first the Gentiles shall be judged by the law of nature. First, by
what law man shall be tried.
The unbelieving Christians in the visible Church shall be judged by the word
or law, writ, or preached to them. According to that of the Apostle: they that
have sinned without the law shall perish without the law: and they that have
sinned under the law, shall be judged by the law Romans 2.12.
. And our savior says, He that refuses me and receives not my words, has
one that judges him: the word that I have spoken it shall judge him in the
last day Ioh. 12 48.
. And the faithful shall be judged by the Gospel even by all those comforts
and promises contained in, or belonging to the covenant of grace, applied to
them in this life, and must fully then be confirmed, and accomplished. For the
sentence at the last day shall be but a more manifest declaration of that
judgment the Lord in this life, Secondly, by what evidence man shall be judged.
most an end by his word has past upon man.

For the second, the evidence shall be given in principally by the opening of
three books. The one is the book of conscience, and the other the book of
life Revel. 20.12.
, and the third the book of Gods remembrance Mal. 3.16.
. The book of conscience Revel. 20.12.
, is that word which is kept within every man, of all sorts of actions. And
that conscience may at that day give in fuller evidence, it is certain that
after the resurrection, it shall be almost infinitely extended by the power of
God to express this last testimony both in the good and in the evil. The
book of life is Gods sacred and eternal record of all those persons that were
foreordained into life, of all ages and nations. The book of remembrance will
exactly express without all failing or mistaking, all the inclinations,
thoughts, affections, words and deeds, with all circumstances, or occasions and
whatsoever else, may illustrate either the goodness of good men, or the
transgression of the wicked.

What the sentence will contain.
For the third. The sentence will be upon either the godly or the wicked. The
sentence upon the godly will contain, first, the opening of Gods eternal
counsel, and his unsearchable love, wherein he has resolved and begun to
declare his will, to bless every one of the elect Mat. 25.34.
. Secondly, a manifestation of all the righteousness, desired, thought upon,
spoken or done, by the godly 2. Cor. 5.10.
and that with such feruency of affection in Christ, that he will see and
remember nothing but goodness in good men Mat. 5.34. to 41.
. Thirdly, a final and general absoluing and redeeming of them, from the
guilt and power of all sin, from the beginning of the world, 1. Cor. 1.30.
in Adam or themselves. So as there shall never be either sin in them, or
accusation of sin against them. Fourthly, ordination to glory, by appointing
every one of them to inherit the kingdom prepared for them before the
foundation of the world. Contrariwise the sentence of the wicked shall
contain. First, a declaration of Gods eternal and just hatred of them Mat.
25.41.
. Secondly, a full manifestation and ripping up, before all men and Angels, of
all their sins both of nature and action, both against God or men, or their
own bodies and souls, secret and open of what kind soever Romans 2.15.
. Thirdly, a most terrible denunciation of Gods eternal curse and horrible
ordination to those eternal torments prepared for them, 2. Cor. 5.10.
together with the devil and his Angels.

Hitherto of the judgment it self. The consequents of the judgment follow.
And they are five. First, the firing of the world: that is the dissolution of
the world by a wonderful fire that shall enclose all, so as the world shall
not appear, till it be renewed again, and come out of that fire as out of a
furnace, for as the Apostle Peter says. The heavens being on fire shall pass
away and be dissolved with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and
the earth with the works thereof shall be burnt up. And there shall be then, new
heavens, and new earth, that is as it were a new refined Romans 2.15.
. And the Apostle John says, the heavens and the earth shall fly away from
the face of him that sits on the throne 2. Pet. 3.10.12
.

The second consequent shall be the chasing of the wicked to hell: execution
being speedily and fearfully done upon them, with all horror and have by the
Angels.

The third shall be the liberty of the creatures. I mean the rest of the
creatures besides men and Angels. Romans 8.19. to 23.
But because this is a point somewhat obscure, I will endeavor in a few words
to resolve a doubt or two. Que. First, how are the creatures now in bondage
that they shall need then any liberty. Que. 1.
Ans. They are in bondage in diverse respects. Ans.
For first they are frail and corruptible, and so in bondage to corruption.
The creatures in bondage in seven respects.
Secondly, they are subject to confusions and inconstancy: as may appear by
the almost infinite mutations, in the air, earth, seas, fire. Thirdly, they are
now forced to serve wicked men. The sun all their labor, and this is a
bondage to be tied to teach such as will not learn. Fifthly, the creature is
made not only the instrument, but many times the subject of man's punishment
for his sins. As the earth is made iron, and the heavens brass for man's
sake, and this is a great bondage. Sixthly, the creature intends immortality,
which while it fails of in the dying or expiring of the particulars of every
sort, it would supply for the preservation at least of the kinds, by a
perenniall substitution of new particulars in every kind: and yet loses all
this labor, because all things must be dissolved, and must be restored by
another way known to God and not now to nature. But especially the creatures
may be said to be in bondage, because since the fall, the more illustrious
instincts and vigors of the most of the creatures are darkened, decayed, Ob. Sol.
dulled and distempred in them. Oh but might some one say, how can this bondage
be ascribed unto the heavens? Sol. The heavens are not so perfect but they may
admit enlargement of their excellency. Besides they serve now promiscuously to
the use of bad as well as good, neither are the very heavens without their
feebleness, and the manifest effects of fainting old age. And therefore by a
prosopopaeia they may be said to groan together with the rest of the creatures
under the common burden and vanity unto which they are subdued. It is observed
that since the days of Ptolomey the sun runs nearer the earth by 9976.
Germane miles, and therefore the heavens have not kept their first perfection.

Ob. But how can this vanity or bondage be in any sense ascribed to the
Angels. Ob. Sol,
Sol. There is no necessity to include the Angels in the number of the groaning
creatures. And yet it will be easy to show that they sustain a kind of
bondage: for they are now made to serve earthly things, men have their Angels
to attend on them. And it is thought they have a kind of regency or presidency
either over nations or in moving the orbs of Heaven. Besides they are put to
inflict punishments on wicked men as on Sodom. Further they perform service
sometimes not attaining their own ends. And lastly comparatively, at least
their felicity in the creation was not so absolute as it shall be in Christ:
for if his coming add not unto them a more excellent condition of nature, yet
out of all question it adds a fuller measure both of knowledge and joy.

Q. 2. Q. 2.
But what shall the creatures have in the day of Christ they have not now. Answ.
Answ. First, they shall have freed once from all the former bondage and
vanity. Secondly, they shall be delivered into the liberty of the sons of
God: that is they shall have a most excellent estate, when the children of God
are glorified. Wherein the Lord shows his Justice, in that the creature shall
have restitution for what is lost by man. Ob.
Ob. But shall there be a resurrection of creatures as well as men. Sol.
Sol. No, for this restitution shall be made in specie, not in indiuiduo. 1.
Not to every particular of every kind or sort: But to the sort or kind of all
creatures: and that shall be done to the creatures then found in their several
sorts.

The fourth consequent of the Judgment, shall be the possession of the glory
of Christians appointed by the sentence of the Judge but of this afterward in
the end of this verse.

The fifth consequent of Judgment, shall be the delivering up of the Kingdom
to the Father: and so the laying down of Christ's office. For when Christ has
finally and fully subdued Satan, death and wicked men, and has fully
reconciled the elect to God, then will there be no word of any such government
in Heaven as was on earth. He shall not need any longer to rule them, either
by civil Magistrates, or by his need and discipline, or by any other way,
which only did agree to the times of the Churches warfare and pilgrimage: but
he shall never cease to live and triumph with them, in all Perfections of happy
contentment and glory. Thus of the consequents of Judgment. And thus also of
the doctrine of Christ's last appearance. The uses follow.

The consideration of the doctrine of the last Judgment, may serve for three
principal uses, The uses.
First, for terror. Secondly, for comfort. Thirdly, for instruction.

First this is justly a wonderful terrible doctrine to wicked men, that heap
up wrath against this day of wrath, and by their wilful impenitency provoke
this glorious Judge. How can it but be terrible? when the holy Ghost gives
warning that the Lord Jesus will then show himself from Heaven, with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire to render vengeance on all those that know not
God and have not obeyed the Gospel: How can it be but terrible? when wicked
men shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power? how can it but be terrible? when they
shall feel their conscience exquisitly griping them, and gnawing upon them,
and when they shall see the devils to torment them, and hell to devour them:
when they shall see the world burning about them, and the good Angels forcing
them away, and all both men and Angels applauding their Judgment, and knowing
all their sins: they must not think that the Judge will deal then as he
does now. Now he judges them secretly every day, but it is many times
insensibly, or with lesser plagues: but then he will most openly pour upon
them the full vials of his wrath. Here they are judged that they may be
amended, but there their judgment shall be that they may be confounded: for
there will be no place of repentance. Deceive not thy self, Christ will not
come the second time as he came the first: he came then to be judged, but now
to judge, he shall then be seen with terror that was before looked upon with
contempt: he showed his patience in his first coming, but now he will show his
power: he appeared then in the form of a servant, but now he will appear in
the form of a King, greater then all kings. Then he professed not to judge
any man, but now he proclaims he will judge all men. It was commonly
thought if any man saw God he should die: alas, alas, how then shall these
woeful wretches do, that must see him in the unutterable fierceness of his
irefull indignation? if the powers of heaven shall be shaken at his pleasure,
oh how shall the miserable heart of the guilty sinner be rent into a 1000.
pieces, with vnmedicinable sorrows? if Foelix tremble to hear tell of
judgment, what will poor Foelix do, when he must feel judgment, both in the
sentence and execution? if the word of Christ on earth had such power as it had
in the garden, to strike stubborn hearted men to the earth, what power (think
we) will it have when he speaks as the Lord from Heaven? When Ezechiel,
Daniel, and the Apostle John, and others saw but one Angel, in a lesser
manifestation of his glory, coming as a Messenger of good tidings, they fall
down, and are full of singular fear: if the sight of one Angel be so
terrible, what will the sight of all the thousand thousands of Angels be?
especially when they come clothed with all their brightness of glory? and if
good men that had good consciences were so frighted, what shall become of evil
men with their evil consciences? and if the messengers of good tidings do so
amaze, how shall the executioners of a most terrible sentence, compass them
about with confusion both of face and heart? if the drowning of the old world,
the burning of Sodom, the opening of the earth to swallow up Dathan and
Abiram, and such like judgments, have so much horror in them: how then can any
tongue express or heart now conceive, the horror of this day when all the
millions of wicked men shall be delivered up to those eternal and remediless
torments? if it be such a shame to do penance for one fault, in one
congregation, where men will pray for the offendour. What a shame will it be
when all thy faults, shall be discovered, before all the whole world, without
all hope of pity or help?

Nor is it possible for them to escape this fearful Judgment; the Judge will
not be unconstant, nor will he take reward, he will not be ouerlayd with
confusion of businesses, he will no way be corrupted in judgment. Not to
appear is impossible and to appear is intolerable. here will be no respect
of persons, nor will the Judge care how it be taken, nor will he be deceived
with colors and circumstances. He has tarried so long, he cannot be charged
with rashness, nor can there be a hiding of any particulars from him. Every
inclination, thought, desire, word and work shall surely come to Judgment.
And lastly, there can be no impediment to hinder execution.

But here a question may arise, Que. 1.
Viz. Who are they that are in danger heerof? I answer: Ans.
All impenitent sinners. But yet there are some kind of sinners that are
expressly named in Scripture. and therefore if thou be any of that number,
prevent thine own ruin by repentance, or else thou shall certainly perish. I
undertake not to reckon all: it shall suffice to mention some of the chief
sinners, that Christ will be sure to remember at that day. The Beast and the
false Prophet and all that worship his Image and renew his mark, shall then be
cast alive into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone Reu. 20 21.
. False teachers which privily bring in damnable heresies, or speak evil of
the way of truth, have their condemnation long since determined and agreed upon
2. Pet. 2.1 2.3
. All Atheists that make a mock of religion and the coming of Christ, shall
have a principal portion of the fierce fury of Christ 2. Pet. 3.3. etc.
. All covetous worldlings, and greedy rich men, shall then be in a woeful case.
For the very rust of their cankerd gold and silver shall witness against them,
and shall eat their flesh as it were fire Iam. 5.13.
. All merciless men, shall then have judgment without mercy Iam. 2.13.
. All whoremongers and adulterers and all that defile the flesh God will be
sure to judge Heb. 13.4.
. a fearful looking for of Judgment and violent fire shall devour all those
Apostataes, that sin willingly after they have received and acknowledged the
truth Heb. 10.27.
. How sure do ye suppose shall his punishment be that does despite the spirit
of grace by which he was sanctified Heb. 10.29.
, all those that have troubled Gods servants shall bear their condemnation
whosoever they be Gal. 5.10.
, O man thou art inexcusable that iudgest another man, wherein thou art guilty
thy self, For the Judgment of God must needs be in truth against such as
commit such things Romans 2.1.2.3
, especially if men grow masterlike in censuring, it will increase to greater
condemnation Iam. 3.1.
. all gotes, or unruly Christians, that will not be kept within Gods fence,
that is will not be ruled by Gods ordinances and ministers, shall be separate
in that day from Gods sheep, and as a people accursed to be cast into an
unavoidable fellowship with the devil and his angels Mat. 25.
, all hypocrites, that say and do not, or do all their work to be seen of
men; and take Gods covenant into their mouths and hate to be reformed how
shall they escape the damnation to come? Psalm. 50. Mat. 6. and 23.
all wicked men with their scant measure and deceitful waights, and wicked
balances, shall never be justified in the day of the Lord. Mich. 6.10.11.
what shall I say, it were too long to proceed to reckon all: and it is a
short labor to conclude with the Apostle: no wantons, nor drunkards nor
railers, nor extortioners, nor thieves, nor wrathful persons, nor gluttons,
nor idolaters, nor iesters, nor filthy talkers, nor fearful persons nor liers,
nor any that louelies, shall be able to stand in the day of Christ, but shall
be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, and cast into the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone. And thus of the use for terror.

Secondly, upon the meditation of this last judgment diverse lessons for our
instruction are enforced. Use 2.
First, it should restrain uncharitable judging and censuring one of another,
for less matters especially for things indifferent. Who art thou that iudgest
another man's servant? he stands or falls to his own master. Christ is the
Lord of quick and dead. And therefore why do thou condemn thy brother? or
why do thou despise thy brother? for we shall all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ'. In as much as the Lord Jesus Christ, will judge the
secrets of all hearts, and give a just trial to the actions of all men, why
should we forestall his judgment, or in doubtful matters, 1. Cor. 4.5.
arrogate to our selves this honor of Christ? if we could consider that we
shall then every one give accounts unto God for himself Romans 14.12.13
, we should find work enough to do to look to our own score. Let us not
therefore brethren judge one another any more. Secondly, are there any matters
of difference amongst us? let the saints judge them and end them 1. Cor. 6.2.
: God will be contented to put his cause to them, at the last day ( for we know
the Saints shall judge the world) and therefore why should we refuse their
arbitration? Thirdly, it should order and moderate our sorrows for our dead
friends. We should not sorrow as people without hope: seeing we believe that
all that sleep in Jesus, God will bring with him 1 These 4.13.14.17.18.
. We shall meet together again in that day, and afterward live with the Lord
together for ever. And therefore we should comfort one another with these
words. Fourthly, this summons to judgment, gives a dreadful warning and
admonition to the world, even to all men every where to repent. Inasmuch as God
has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, by the
man whom he has appointed, whereof he has given an assurance in that he raised
him from the dead Act. 17.32.
: Woe will be unto us, if that day come upon us unawares, before we have made
our peace, and humbled our selves before God, and by unfeigned repentance turned
from all our evil ways. It is an unsearchable compassion, that God shows,
when he offers us this mercy, that if we will judge our selves we shall not be
judged of the Lord in that day 1. Cor. 11.34.
: And it will on the other side excessiuely incense his wrath, when having such
grace offered, we neglect it, and death and judgment find our sins, both
vnremitted on Gods part, and unrepented on ours. Fifthly, Seeing all these
things must be dissolved, how should it fire us, and daily quicken our dead and
drowsy spirits, to a constant care of all possible holy conversation and
godliness 2. Pet. 3.12.
, unless we would discover our selves either to be Atheists, that mock at the
judgment to come, or men given to a spirit of slumber, that in soul sleep it
out, and will not consider our latter end.

Seeing we are all Gods stewards, let us arm our selves as they that must then
give accounts of our stewardship. And since we have all received some of Gods
talents, and gifts in our several places, let us be careful to approve our
selves to be good servants and faithful, such as can return them with
advantage, least the portion of the servant that hid his masters talents in the
earth, fall upon us. Lastly since the day of judgment is the day of our full
and final redemption, and since he shall come as a thief in the night, even
in the hour that we think not: let us therefore watch Mat. 24.44.
, and be ready, always careful and diligent, sighing and groaning, longing
and praying Revel. 22.
, hasting to and looking for 2. Pet. 3.
this glorious appearance and revelation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, this may be a singular comfort to all mortified and penitent
christians: they may lift up their heads, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious. Use 3.
For the Lord shall then come to be glorified in his saints and made marvelous
in all them that believe 2. These. 1.10.
. Ob.
Ob. But the terror of the day may amaze a christian. Sol. Sol.
There is no spark of terror in this doctrine to a godly mind. For what should
he fear? if he either consider the favor of the judge or the manner of the
judgment. For the Judge is he that has been all this while their advocate 1.
Ioh. 2.1.
, to plead their suits by making intercession for them. And therefore when he
comes to sit in judgment, he cannot go against his own pleading. He is their
brother, and caries a most brotherly affection: and will he condemn his own
brethren? he is their head, and has performed all the offices of a head unto
them, and can he then fail them, when they have most need of him? nay it is he
that has been judged for us on earth, and will he judge against us in heaven?
what shall I say: he died for us to show his undoubted love, even that he might
redeem us as a peculiar people to God, and will he fail us in the last act,
when he should once for all accomplish his redemption for us? besides he has
already promised to acquit us in that day, and it has been often confirmed
both in the word and the sacraments and prayer: he has left many pledges of
his love with us, and therefore it were shameful unbelief to doubt his
terror. What though he be terrible to wicked men? yet by judging in severity he
has not nor cannot loose the goodness of his own mercy: what should we fear
him judging in his power, when we have felt salvation in his name? besides the
manner of the judgment shall be in all righteousness and mercy. Thou shall not
be wronged by false witnesses, nor shall thou be judged by common fame or
outward appearance: the judge will not be transported with passion or spleen,
nor will he condemn thee to satisfy the people: and besides there shall be
nothing remembered but what good thou have sought or done. And not the least
goodness but it shall be found to honor and praise at that day. And if it were
such a favor to a base subject if the King should take notice of him to love
him and should in an open Parliament before all the Lords and commons make a
long speech in the particular praises of such a subject: what shall it be, when
the Lord Jesus, in a greater assembly then ever was since the world stood,
shall particularly declare Gods everlasting love to them, and recite the
praises (with his own mouth) of all that has been good, in thy thoughts,
affections, words or works throughout all thy life, or in thy death? especially
if thou add the singular glory he will then adiudge thee too, by an
irreuocable sentence. And so we come to the second appearance, viz. the
appearance of christians in glory.

Then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

The glory that shall then be conferred upon Christians may be considered
either in their bodies or in their souls or both. The glory of Christians,
first in their bodies.
The glory of their bodies after the resurrection is threefold. For first they
shall be immortal, that is in such a condition as they can never die again or
return to dust. For this mortal then shall put on immortality 1. Cor. 15.53.
Secondly, they shall be incorruptible. That is not only free from
putrefaction, but also from all weakness, both of infirmity and deformity.
For though it be sown in weakness, yet it shall be raised in power, though
it be sown in dishonor and corruption yet it shall be raised in honor and
incorruption 1. Cor. 15.42 43.
. Thirdly, they shall be spiritual not that our bodies shall vanish into
ghosts or spirits: but because they shall be at that day so admirablie
glorified and perfected, that by the mighty working of Gods spirit, they shall
be as able to live without sleep, meat, marriage or the like, as now the Angels
in heaven are: and besides they shall be so admirably light and agile, and
swift, that they shall be able to go abroad with inconceivable speed, in the
air or heavens, as now they can go surely on the earth 1. Cor. 15.44.
. The glory upon the soul, shall be the wonderful perfection of Gods image in
all the faculties of it. Then shall we know the secrets of heaven and earth.
And then shall our memories will and affections be after an vnexpresseable
manner, made conformable unto God. The glory upon both soul and body, shall be
those rivers of ioies and pleasures for ever more. And thus shall the man be
glorified that fears the Lord.

The consideration of this glory, may serve for diverse uses. First let us all
pray unto God, upon the knees of our hearts, from day to day, that as he is the
father of glory, so he would give unto us the spirit of revelation, that the
eyes of our understanding might be enlightened, to know in some comfortable
measure, and that we might be able with more life and affection, to meditate of
the exceeding riches of this glory Ephesians. 1.17.18.
and inheritance to come. Our hearts are naturally herein exceeding both dull
and blind: marvelous unable with delight and constancy to think of these
eternal felicities: and this comes to pass by the spiritual working of
satan, and the deceitfulness of sin, and too much emploiment and care about
earthly things. But a christian that has so high a calling, and hopes for such
a glorious end, should not allow himself in that deadness of heart: but as he
gains sense by prayer in other gifts of grace, so should he strive with
importunity and constancy, wrestling with God, without intermission, so as no
day should pass him, but he would remember this suit unto God, till he could
get some comfortable ability, to meditate of this excelling estate of endless
glory. Secondly, this should make us to be patient in tribulation Romans 5.2.3.4.
, and without murmuring or grieuing, to endure hardness 2. Tim. 2.3.
, and temptations in this world. For they are but for a season, 1. Pet. 1.6.
though they be never so manifold or great: and the afflictions of this present
life are not worthy of the glory to be revealed Romans 8.18.
. though we might be dismayed while we look upon our crosses, and reproaches,
and manifold trialls, yet if the Lord let us have access unto this grace Romans
5.2.
, to be able soundly to think of the glory to come, we may stand with
confidence, vnapalled, and with unutterable joy, look up to the glory we shall
shortly enjoy, when the trial of our faith being more precious then the gold
that perishes shall be found unto honor and praise through the revelation of
Jesus Christ 1. Pet. 1.7.
. Yea what were it to loose, (not some of our credits, or our goods) but even
our lives seeing we are sure to find them again with more then a hundred fold
advantage, at the time when Christ shall come in the glory of his father, to
give unto all men according to their deeds. Besides we must know that there is
no talking of sitting at Christ's hand, Mat. 16.24. vlt.
in glory, till we have asked our selves this question, whether we can drink
of the cup he drank of, and be baptized with the baptism he is baptized with
Mark 10.37. etc.
. And then if we can suffer with him we shall reign with him: 2. Tim. 2.12.
and shall be glad and rejoice with exceeding joy when his glory shall appear.
And in the mean while the spirit of glory and of God rests on you 1. Pet.
4.13.14
.

Thirdly, seeing Christ will receive Christians into such glory, it should
teach us to receive one another Romans 15.7.
, into both our hearts and houses. Why should thou be ashamed or think it
much with all love and bounty, and bowels of affection to entertain and
welcome, the heirs of such eternal glory? Oh if thou could but now see but
for a moment, how Christ does use the souls of the righteous in heaven, or
will use both body and soul at the last day, thou would for ever, honor them
whom Christ does so glorify, and make them now thy only companions, whom thou
should see to be appointed to live in such felicity for ever.

Fourthly, the thought of this glory, should win us to a care to be such as may
be capable of it. Qu. What must we do that we may have comfort, that we are
the men shall partake of this glory, What we must do that we may be assured of
the glory of heaven.
and speed well in the day of Jesus Christ? Ans. First, Every one that would
have this hope must purge himself as Christ is pure: 1. Ioh. 3.3.
we must be much in the duties of mortification. For no unclean person can
enter into the kingdom ^f glory. And unclean we are all, till we be washed in
the blood of Christ by justification, and bathed in tears of true repentance
by mortification. It has been observed before, that if we would not have the
Lord to judge us, we must judge our selves 1. Cor. 11.34.
. And if we would not have Christ to take unto him words against our souls, we
must take unto us words Hos. 14.3.
against our sins to confess and bewail them in secret. Secondly, we must
labor for the assurance of faith. It Is faith that is the evidence of the things
not seen Heb. 11.1.
. It Is faith that shall be found to honor and praise in the revelation of Jesus
Christ 1. Pet. 1.7.
, It is faith to which the promise of eternal life is made Job. 3.18.
. Thirdly, we should labor to get unto our selves the benefit of a powerful
preaching ministry, for thereby our hearts may be wonderfully stirred up to
see the glory of sincerity on earth, and it will open a wide door to behold as
in a mirror the glory to come with an open face, changing us into the same
image from glory to glory by the spirit of God. I say not that this is of
absolute necessity as the former are, but it is of wonderful expediency.
Fourthly, we must be circumspect and watchful, in special manner attending to
our own hearts that we be not at any time oppressed with the cares of this
life, or voluptuous living Luk 21.34.36.
, if ever we would be able to stand in the day of judgment, and escape the
fearful things that are to come: especially we must look to our selves in
these things least that day come upon us at unawares. Fifthly, Do we look for
the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ into eternal life? then we must (as the
Apostle Jude shows) edify our selves in our most holy faith, praiyng in the
holy Ghost, and keep our selves in the love of God, Iud. 20.21.
we must be afraid of whatsoever may estrange the Lord from us, or any way
darken the sense of his love. For we may be assured, if we have his favor and
walk before him in the sense of it, we shall have glory when we die. Likewise,
praying in the holy Ghost, with constancy and frequency does maruellouslie
enrich a Christian, both with the first fruits of glory, even glorious joy on
earth, and with the assurance of fullness of glory in heaven. Sixthly, the
Apostle John seems to say if love be perfect in us, we shall have boldness in
the day of judgment 1. Ioh. 4.17.
. As if he would import, that to be inwardly and affectionately acquainted with
Christians on earth, is a notable means to procure us gracious entertainment
with Christ in heaven: especially if we perfect our love, and grow to some
Christian ripeness in the practice of the duties of love in a profitable
fellowship in the Gospel. It is good discretion, to grow as great as we can
with Christians, that so we may win the favor of Christ. Lastly, the Apostle
Paul shows in the second to the Romans, that they that seek glory and honor
and immortality, and everlasting life, must be patient in well doing. For they
shall be rewarded according to their works. And to every man that does good,
shall be honor and glory, and power, to the Jew first and also to the Grecian
Romans 2.6.7.10.
. For all that have any tidings of salvation in the Gospel, or look for that
blessed hope and appearing of that glory of the mighty God, must live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world Tit. 2.11.12.13.
. Without holiness no man shall see God Heb. 12.14.
. And therefore we should be abundant in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as
we know, that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord 1. Cor. 15. vlt.
. And thus far of the glorious appearance both of Christ and Christians. And
thus also of the first rule of life, namely the meditation of heavenly things.

Verse 5. Mortify therefore your members which are on earth, fornication,
uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is idolatry.


Th^se words with those that follow to the tenth verse, The division of this
part of the Chapter.
contain the second principal rule of holy life, and that is the
mortification of evil. These evils to be mortified are of two sorts, for
either they are vices that concern our selves most, or else they are injuries,
that concern the hurt of others also. Of the mortification of vices he
entreats v. 5.6.7. of the mortification of injuries he entreats, v. 8.9.

In the first part viz. the exhortation to the mortifying of vices, I consider
first, the matter about which he deals, and the reasons. The matter is in
verse 5. and the reasons v. 6.7.

In the fifth verse there are two things. Division of the verse.
First the preposition of mortification, in these words mortify therefore your
members that are on earth. Secondly, a catalogue of vices to be mortified, or
the enumeration of certain special sins a Christian should be careful to
keep himself from, viz. fornication, uncleanness, etc.

The necessity of mortification.
The general consideration of the whole exhortation to mortification, should
imprint this deeply in our hearts, that unless we do repent of those sins
have been in our natures and lives and be careful to flee from the corruptions
that are in the world, we shall never have comfort that we are accepted with
God. We should bring to the particular opening of all the verses, a mind
resolved of the general. And to quicken us a little the more, to the respect
of this doctrine, and to enforce the care of parting with our sins, I will
briefly touch by the way some few reasons, why we should be willing to
entertain Gal. 5.19.
when we are inclined or tempted to vice: we should say within our selves, this
evil proceeds not from any thing that might declare greatness, or true spirit
in a man: what is passion or lust or covetousness, but the base work of the
filthy degenerated flesh? Secondly, sin can defile Mat. 15.19.
: and bring that which is true contempt. Thirdly, the bond and forfeiture of
the law or covenant of works lies upon the back of every man that lives in
sin without repentance. For the law is given to the lawless and disobedient
(as the Apostle shows) to ungodly and sinners, to whoremongers, and liers, and
to all that live in any sin contrary to wholesome doctrine 1. Tim. 1.9.10
. Fourthly, are not strange punishments to the workers of iniquity? is not
destruction to the wicked? Ioh 31 2.3.
what portion can they have of God from above? and what inheritance from the
almighty from on hie? the hearts of holy men that have considered the fearful
terrors of God denounced in scripture against the vices of men, have even broke
within them, and their bones have shaken, for the presence of the Lord, and for
his holy word. Ier. 23.9.
Fifthly, Christ will be a swift witness Mal. 3.7.
against all fearelesse and careless men, that being guilty of these vices or
the like, make not speed to break them of by repentance. Lastly, know ye not
that the unrighteous shall not enter in to the kingdom of heaven? 1. Cor. 6.9.
be not deceived for these things the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience. Ephesians. 5.6.
Now I come to the words particularly.

Therefore] This word caries this exhortation to something before. If it be
referred to our rising with Christ, v. 1. then it notes that we can never have
our part in Christ's resurrection, till we feel the virtue of his death killing
sin in us. If it be referred to the meditation of heavenly things, then it
notes that we can never set our affections on things that are above, till we
have mortified our members that are on earth. The corruption of our natures and
lives are the cause of such disability to contemplate of or affect heavenly
things. And as any are more sinful they are more unable thereunto. If the word
be referred to the appearance of Christ in the former verse, then it imports
that mortification is of great necessity unto our preparation to the last
judgment, and will be of great request in the day of Christ.

Mortifi^] To mortify is to kill, or to apply that which will make dead. The
Lord works in matters of grace, God works by contraries.
in the judgment of flesh and blood by contraries. Men must be poor, if they
would have a kingdom, Mat. 5.3.4.
men must sorrow if they would be comforted. Men must serve if they would be
free Ioh 8.
. And here, men must die if they would live. Gods thoughts are not as man's, but
his ways are higher than man's ways, as the heavens are higher than the earth
Esaias 55.10.
. Which may teach us as to live by faith, so not to trust the judgment of the
world or the flesh in the things of God.

But the manifest doctrine from this word is this, that true repentance has in
it the mortification of sin. And so it implies diverse things. First, that we
must not let sin alone till it die it self, Note
but we must kill sin while it might yet live. It is no repentance to leave
sin when it leaves us: or to give it over when we can commit it no longer.
Secondly, that true repentance makes a great alteration in a man. Thirdly, that
it has in it, pain and sorrow. men use not to die ordinarily without much
pain, and sure it is sin, has a strong heart, Note.
it is not soon killed: it is one thing to sleep, another thing to die: many
men with less ado get sin asleep, that it does not so stir in them, but
alas, there must be more ado to get it dead, by true mortification. Fourthly,
true repentance extinguisheth the power of sin and the vigor of it. It makes
it like a dead corpse, that neither it stirs it self, nor will be stirred, by
occasions, persuasions commandments or st^oaks. It is a wonderful testimony
of sound mortification when we have gotten our old corruption to this pass:
and constancy in prayer and hearing and daily confession and sorrow for sin
will bring it to be thus with us: especially if we strive with God and be
earnest with spiritual importunity, watching the way of our own hearts, to
wound sin so soon as we see it begin to stir. Yet I would not be
mistaken as if I meant that a Christian could attain such a victory over
sin, that it should not be in him at all, nor that he should ever be
stirred with the temptations or entisements or occasions of evil. But my
meaning is, that in some measure and in the most sins a Christian does find
it so, and in every sin his desire and endeavor is daily to have it so. And
his desire is not without some happy success, so as sin dies or lies a
dying every day.

But here a question may arise: Que.
Did not the Apostle grant they were dead before, and if they were dead to the
world, they were without question dead to sin also, how then does he speak
to them to mortify sin, does it not imply they had not been mortified
before? I answer, the Apostle may well use this exhortation for diverse
reasons. Ans.
First, many of them perhaps were dead but in appearance: they professed
mortification but were not mortified. Secondly, it might be some of them had
begun to use some exercises of mortification, but had not finished their
mortification: sure it is, and we may see it by daily experience, that many
being won by the word, and smitten with remorse, have sometimes the pangs of
sorrow for their sins, but quickly are a weary of seeking sorrow in secret
for sin: they give over, before they have soundly and sufficiently humbled
their souls. But may some one say, how long should we continue our sorrows,
Que. Ans.
or how long should we judge our selves in secret for our sins? I answer:
thou must not give over thy sorrows. First, We must continue sorrowing till
we find four things. Romans ^.
till the body of sin be destroyed. That is till that general frame of
sinfulness be dissolved till I say thou have set some order in thy heart and
life, so as the most sins thou did before live in, be reformed. Secondly,
it were expedient thou should still seek to humble thy soul, till thou
could get as much tenderness in bewailing thy sins, as thou were wont to
have in grieuing for crosses, till thou could mourn as freshly for peircing
Gods son as for losing thine own son Zach. 12.10.
. Thirdly, thou must sorrow till thou find the power of the most beloved and
rooted sins to be in some measure weakened and abated. Fourthly, thou do
not well to give thy sorrows over, till thou find the testimony of Jesus in
thy heart, that is till God answer thy mournful requests of pardon, with some
joys in the holy Ghost, and the dewes of heavenly refreshings. Que.
But will some one say, must we lay all aside and do nothing else bu^ sorrow
till we can find all those things. Ans.
Ans. I mean not that men should neglect their callings all this while, or
that they should carry an outward countenance of sorrowing before others, or
that they should all this while afflict their hearts with coffeehouse or the
like. For when the Apostle, wills men to pray always, he means not that they
should do nothing but pray. But he would have them to keep a set course of
praying every day and besides to watch to all the extraordinary occasions or
opportunities of prayer, which being done a Christian may be truly said to
pray continually: though otherwise he follow his calling diligently. The like I
say of sorrowing always. But that I may express my meaning distinctly. I
think, till thou can attain the former things thou must observe these
rules. What it is to sorrow continually?
First, thou must lay aside thy recreations and carnal reioicings, for this
the Apostle James imports when he says, Let your laughter be turned into
heaviness, and your joy into mourning Iam. 4.9.
. Secondly, thou must beg sorrow at Gods hand every day constantly in the
times set apart for prayer, till the Lord give thee rest to thy soul by
granting the things before mentioned. Thirdly, thou must not neglect the times
of special fasting and humiliation, if the Lord call thereunto Esa. 22.12.
. Lastly thou must use special sobriety in the restraint of thy liberty in
earthly things, and be watchful to make use of all opportunities of softning
thy heart. These things being observed thou may seem unto men not to sorrow,
and may follow thy calling seriously, and yet be truly said to sorrow
always. Thus of the second reason why the Apostle exhorts still to
mortification.

Thirdly, the dearest and humblest servants of God, may be called upon to
mortify their members that are on earth, though they have truly and soundly
repented of sin before, by reason of the evils of every day, with daily and a
fresh even after calling break out in their hear^s and lives: and for which
they must still renew their repentance. For their first repentance only
delivers them from sins past: they must renew their mortification, as their
corruptions are renewed.

Why sins are called members?
Members] It is certain by members on earth, the Apostle means sin, and
that fitly. For first, actual sins in relation to original sin, are as
so many members that grow from it. Secondly, by a Metonimie of the subject,
sin may be called our members, because it is brought into action by the help
and service of our members. Thirdly, if the Apostle had spoken to wicked men,
he might well have called sin their members, because they love sin as they
love their members: and therefore to take away their sin, is to pull out
their eyes, or to cut of their hand or feet, as our Savior shows Mat. 5.29.
etc.
. Fourthly, sins in the Colossians and so in all the faithful, may be here
called members comparatively, with the body of sin mentioned Col. 2.12. as
if the Apostle should say, the body of sin is already cast off and destroyed
in you by your former repentance, but yet there remains some limbs of sin,
some members of it, these resist: and in this sense we may here note a lively
difference between sin in wicked men and sin in godly men. Difference
between sin in the godly and in the wicked.
For in wicked men there is the whole body of sins, that is all their sin,
vnremitted and unrepented. But in godly men, the body of sin, even the
greater number of their sins they have abandoned: only some few members of
their sins remain, which every day molest them. But before I pass from these
words, two things are further to be noted. First, that he says, your members.
Secondly, he adds which are on earth.

Your] the Apostle says well your members: for indeed properly our sins are
our own, and nothing else.

Which are on earth] they are also well said to be on earth: because they are
signs of the earthly man, and because they tend only to earthly pleasures and
contentments, and because men with these unrepented of, are not admitted into
Heaven.

Thus of the general proposition. Now follows the catalogue of sins to be
mortified: before I enter upon the particular consideration of them, something
may be learned from the Apostles order, First, he teaches men to reform their
own personal vices and then orders them for mortifications of injuries to
other men: Vicious persons will be injurious persons.
sure it is, that every filthy person, will be an injurious person: and till
men repent of their lusts and other such like personal corruptions they will
never cease to be injurious to other men. And ordinarily, men that are notable
for malice, or blasphemy that is cursed speaking, and such like sins as the
Apostle after names, they are exceeding vicious persons otherwise. Instance
but in such as reproach Gods servants: Note.
mark it both in city and country, who are they that raise and vent all
slanders and strange reports, concerning such as preach or profess the Gospel
of Jesus Christ in the truth and sincerity of it: I say mark them
particularly: for my own part, in my little observation, I have found them
always, either to be papists or superstitious persons, or drunkards, or
notable whore-masters and filthy persons, or people guilty of other notable
crimes, indeed sometimes their abominations are not so commonly and publicly
discoursed of, because either they are men of greater place, or else their
vices are more covered over and gilded with cunning pretenses: yet seldom falls
it out, but their wickedness is commonly known: and many times Gods children
that are unjustly touched, could upon sufficient grounds detect strange
abominations in their adversaries, and this was unto David usually a strong
argument of comfort, that his adversaries were men whom he knew to be workers
of iniquity. And thus much from the order of these catalogues.

The sins here reckoned up, are sins either against the seventh
commandment, Viz. fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, or
against the tenth commandment, evil concupiscence: or against the first
commandment covetousness which is idolatry.

First of the sins against the seventh commandment: I might here observe,
in that they are placed in the first place, that God would have Christians to
be especially careful to preserve their chastity. For this is one thing
principal in the will of God concerning our sanctification, that we should
abstain from fornications 1. These. 4.34.
, and that every one should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and
honor. And to this end has the Lord given us so many precious promises, that
we might resolve to cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and
spirit 2. Cor. 7.1.
, now in the handling of these sins against the seventh commandment here
mentioned I will keep this order. First, I will particularly entreat of the
nature and effects of each of these three sins, and generally make use of all
together, and therein show the remedies against all sins of uncleanness.

Fornication] There is fornication in title only, as when victualers were
called by the name of Harlots. Secondly, there is a metaphorical kind of
fornication, or allegorical. So wicked men are said to be bastards Heb. 12.
, and the Jews were borne of fornication Hos. 1.
, Thirdly, there is spiritual fornication: and so idolatry is fornication, and
so usually termed, both by the Prophet Hosea, and the Apostle in the
Revelation. Lastly, there is corporal fornication: and that sometimes notes
whoredom in the general, and sometimes it notes that filthiness that is
committed actually by unmarried persons: and this later kind of filthiness
was exceeding common among the Gentiles, in all nations, especially where it
was committed, with such as professed to be whores. And so it was an effect of
that horrible blindness into which the nations fell, upon their idolatry: But
I suppose it may be here taken for all Adultery and whoredom. And then I
come to the reasons which may be collected against this sin, Reasons against
whoredom.
out of several Scriptures: and generally it is worthy the noting, that ever
the more the world lessens the hatefulness of this sin, the more the holy
Ghost aggrauates it it: as here it is set in the forefront that the first and
greatest blows of confession and prayer might light upon it. But I come to the
particular reasons against fornication.

3. It defiles a man Mat. 15.
worse then any leprosy: it is filthiness in a high degree of hatefulness.

2. It makes a man or woman, unmeet and unworthy all Christian society. as the
Apostle shows, if any that is called a brother be a fornicator, with such a
one eat not Cor. 5.9.
.

3. It is one of the manifest works of the flesh Gal. 5.
.

Ephesians. 5.4.
4. It is so hateful that it ought not once to be named among Christians.

5. It brings with it horrible dishonor. If a thief steal to satisfy his
soul, because he is hungry, men do not so despise him: but he that commits
adultery with a woman is destitute of understanding: He shall find a wound
and dishonor and his reproach shall never be put away Prou. 6.33.
. It is better be buried in a deep ditch, then to live with a whore Prou.
23.27.
.

6. It utterly makes shipwreck of innocence and honesty. A man may as well
take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt: or go upon coals and
his feet not be burnt, as go into his neighbors wife, and be innocent Prou.
6.27.29
, the strange woman, increases transgressors amongst men Prou. 23.28.
. It Is impossible to be adulterous and honest.

7. It Is a sin of which a man or woman can hardly repent, for whoredom and
wine as the Prophet notes take away their heart Hos. 4.11.
. The guests of the strange woman are the most of them in hell Prou. 9. vlt.
, for the wise man further avouches, surely her house tends to death and her
paths unto the dead Prou. 18.
.

8. It will bring Gods curse upon a man's estate: many a man is brought to a
morsel of bread by it Prou. 6.26.
. Yea it may bring a man into almost all evil in the midst of the congregation
Prou. 6.26.
, for fornication is a fire that will devour to destruction Hos. 4.11.
, and root out all a man's increase Ioh. 31.11.12
, and therefore to be accounted a wickedness and iniquity to be condemned.

9. By this sin a man may make his house a very stews: the Lord may justly
plague his filthiness, in his terrible wrath, suffering his wife, children, or
servants also to defile his house with like abominations.

19. If it were not otherwise hateful, yet this is sure it will destroy a man's
soul Prou. 6.32.
.

Lastly the Apostle Paul in the first Epistle to the Corinthians and the sixth
chapter, has diverse reasons against this sin 1. Cor. 6.
. First, the body was made for the Lord as well as the soul v. 13.
. Secondly, the body shall be raised at the last day to an incorruptible estate
v. 14.
. Thirdly, our bodies are the members of Christ v. 15.
. Fourthly, he that coupleth himself with an Harlot, is one body with an
Harlot v. 16.
. Fifthly, this is a sin in a special sense against our own bodies v. 18.
. Sixthly, the body is the temple of the holy Ghost v. 19.
. Finally, the body is bought with a price and therefore is not our own.

These reasons should effectually persuade with Christian minds, to abhor
and avoid this wretched sin: and those that are guilty of it, should make
haste by sound repentance to seek forgiveness, having their souls washed in
the blood of Christ: for howsouer for the present they live securely through
the methods of Satan, and the deceitfulness of sin, yet may they be brought
into the midst almost of all evils before they be aware Prou. 5.14.
. Let them assure themselves that the and will be bitter as wormwood, and
sharp as a two edged sword Prou. 5.4.
, for he that follows a strange woman, is as an ox that goes to the
slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks for correction: till a dart strike
through his liver, as a bird hastes to to the snare, not knowing that he is in
danger Pro. 7.22.23.
, for if the filthy person could escape all manner of Judgment from men, yet
it is certain that whoremongers and adulterers God will judge Heb. 13.4.
, but because God for a time holds his tongue, therefore they think God is
like them: but certainly the time hastes, when the Lord will set all their
filthiness in order before them, and if they consider not, he will cease upon
them when no man shall deliver them Psa. 50 21.22
: especially they are assured to lose the Kingdom of Heaven, and to feel the
smart of Gods eternal wrath, in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone
1. Cor 6.9. Ephesians. 5.5. Reu. 21.8. and 22.15.
: neither let them applaud themselves in their secrecy, for God can detect
them, and bring upon them the terrors of the shadow of death, when they see
they are known Job. 24.15.17
, the heavens may declare their wickedness, and the earth rise against them.
Job. 20.26.
and the fire not blown may devour them.

Neither let any nurse themselves in security in this sin, under pretense
that they purpose to repent hereafter: for they that go to a strange woman
seldom return again: neither take they hold of the way of life Prou. 2.18.
, for whoredom takes away their heart Hos. 4.11.
. If they reply that David did commit adultery and yet did return? I answer,
it is true, of many thousand adulterers, one David did return, but why may
thou not fear thou should perish with the multitude, did not return?
besides when thou can show once David's exquisite sorrows and tears, I will
believe thy interest in the application of David's example.

Vncleannesse] by uncleanness here I suppose is meant all external
pollutions or filthinesses, Seven kinds of uncleanness, besides whoredom.
besides whoredom. As first with devils, and that either sleeping, by filthy
dreams, or waking as is reported of some witches. Secondly with beasts and this
is buggery. Thirdly, with men, and that is Sodomitrie. Fourthly, with our own
kindred, and that is incest. Fifthly, with more wives then one and that is
Poligamie. Sixthly with ones own wife, by the intemperate or intempestiue use
of the marriage bed, as in the time of separation. Seventhly, with a man's own
self, as was Onans sin, or in like filthiness, though not for the same end.
These as the Gentiles walk in the vanity of their minds, Ephesians. 4.17. R^m.
1.24.26.27 29. etc.
their cogitations are darkened, they are strangers from the life of God,
through their ignorance and hardness of heart, being for the most part, past
feeling, and many of them delivered up to a reprobate sense, as ascourge of
other sins and and foul vices, which abound in them, these are the shame of
our assemblies: and many times visited with secret and horrible Judgments.

Inordinate affection] the original word, (...).
notes internal uncleanness especially the burning and flaming of lust though
it never come to action, or the daily passions of lust, which arise out of such
a softness or effeminatenesse of mind, as is carried and fired with every
occasion, or temptation: this is the lust of concupiscence 1 Thessalonians. 4.5.
, and howsoever the world little cares for this evil, yet let true Christians
strive to keep their hearts pure and clean from it, for they were as good have
a burning fire in them 1. Cor 7.9.
. Secondly, those lusts fight against the soul 1. Pet. 2.12.
, they wound and pierce the conscience. Thirdly, the devil begins the frame
of his work in these: he desires no more liberty, then to be allowed to beget
these lusts in the heart. He is not called the father of lusts Job. 8.44.
, for nothing: he can by these inordinate thoughts and affections, erect unto
himself such strong holds, 2. Cor. 10.5.
was nothing but the mighty power of God, can cast down. Fourthly, the Apostle
says, lust is foolish, and noisome and drownes men in perdition Tim. 6.9.
. Fifthly, they hinder the efficacy of the word: that's the reason why diverse men
and women, are ever learning and are never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth? even this, they are carried about with diverse lusts. Sixthly, they
greatly purge upon faith and hope: they hinder or weaken the trust on the grace
of God brought us by Jesus Christ: and therefore the Apostle Peter counsels
Christians not to fashion themselves according to the lusts of their former
ignorance 1. Pet. 1.13.14.
. Seventhly those monstrous crimes mentioned in the first to the Romans, grow
originally from these lusts Romans 1.24.
.

The uses of all these together, now follow. And first we may hence see great
cause of thankfulness, Uses.
if the Lord have delivered us and kept us from these monstrous abominations,
and especially if the Lord have made us sincere to look to and pray against,
and in some happy measure to get victory over those base lusts of the heart and
evil thoughts: if there were nothing else to break the pride of our natures,
this should, to consider seriously what monstrous devilish filthiness, Satan
has wrought others too, and if God should leave us, might bring the best of us
to. But especially this should teach us to use all possible remedies against
these or any of these vncleanesses.

Remedies against uncleanness. The first sort of remedies.
The remedies are of two sorts. First, for such as have been guilty of any of
the former vncleanesses. Secondly, for such as would preserve themselves
against them, that they might not be defiled with them. There are two
principal remedies for the unclean person. The first is marriage or the right
use of it, if it be in single persons, they must remember the Apostles words,
it is better to marry then to burn 1. Cor. 7.9.
, and if they be married, they must know, that the love of their husbands or
wives, is the special help to drive away these impure pollutions: for such is
the counsel of the holy Ghost in the fifth of the Proverbs to them that are
infected with these vicious and predominant inclinations Prou. 5.15. and 21.
, and if they find (as it is certain every unclean person does find) want
of love to their own husbands or wives, then must they beg affection of God
by daily and earnest prayer. But in the second place unclean persons must know
that marriage alone will not serve turn, but they must add repentance: for
lamentable experience shows, that marriage without repentance abates not the
power of lust. And therefore such as would deliver their souls from the
vengeance to come due unto them, for uncleanness whether inward or outward,
must seek to God and with many prayers and tears beg pardon: they must be
washed from filthiness by the blood of Christ, and the tears of true
repentance. Neither let men deceive themselves a little sorrow will not serve
turn for these pollutions, and therefore the Apostle uses the word washed 1.
Cor. 6.9.11.
, to note the repentance of the Corinthians from these and such like sins.
Now there can be no washing without water, neither will a drop or two serve
turn.

The second sort of remedies.
Secondly, that those that are not guilty may be preserved against uncleanness,
these things are of great use and profit. First, the word of God and the sound
knowledge of it, for says the Lord in the second of Proverbs: If thou will
receive my words, and hide my commandments within thee: if thou call after
knowledge and criest for understanding if thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for treasures, then shall counsel and understanding
preserve thee, and deliver thee from the evil way and from the strange woman,
Prou. 2.1.3.4.11.12.16.17.
which flattereth with her words, and forsakes the guide of her youth, and
forgets the covenant of her God. and heereunto agrees David: for
propounding this question, by what means a young man might cleanse his heart,
he answers, by taking heed to the word Psalm. 119.9.
. So Saint John speaking to the young men, says, the word of God abides in
you, and ye have overcome the wicked one 1. Ioh. 2.14.
.

Secondly, meditation is another great preservative: would thou remove
wickedness from thy flesh, even all the vanities of youth? then thou must
remember thy creator in the days of thy youth Eccl. 11. vlt. with 12.1.
. Thou must much and often think of the Lord God, that made thee, not that thou
should wallow in the mire of these swinish pollutions. Besides it is
profitable to force thy heart to the often meditation of thine own mortallity:
that the thoughts of thy death, may be a kind of death to thy lusts: this the
Apostle Peter implies, when he says, as strangers and pilgrims abstain from
fleshly lusts: manifestly importing, that if we did seriously think that we
are here but strangers and pilgrims, it would tame the violence of these
hateful lusts. Also we should much ponder upon the examples of such as have
sinned, and the Lord has fearfully visited them both for and in their sin,
for all those things came unto them for ensamples and were written to admonish
us upon whom the ends of the world are come 1. Cor. 10.6.8.11.
.

The third preservative, is daily, earnest and constant prayer unto God against
them. And if we feel the beginning to rise in us, we should labor for
special sorrows, even, with grief of heart to rack and crucify them. Lust
will not usually out of the soul if it get any footing, till it be fired out
with confession and godly sorrow. And therefore the Apostle uses the phrase of
crucifying the lusts of the flesh Gal. 5.24.
. And that prayer is a remedy the Apostles ownly practice shows, for when
satan buffeted him, he prayed unto God, and that thrice, that he might get the
temptation to depart from him 2. Cor. 12.9.9.
.

The fourth preservative, is to walk in love. I mean christian love to Gods
children: and such a love, as has both affection and society, and spiritual
imploiment in the furtherance of the Gospel. When the Apostle would charge the
Ephesians to avoid fornication and all uncleanness, he does first advise them,
and that seriously, to walk in love? as knowing that the exercise of true
christian love, Ephesians. 5.2.3.
breeds such contentment, and desire of holiness, that it mightily fenceth the
heart against all base lusts whatsoever. For they cannot stand together: and
usually such as are withdrawn by concupiscence are likewise withdrawn from
all profitable fellowship with Gods children.

The fifth preservative is, watchfulness, in the daily observing of the first
motions of lust, and in carfulness in directing the heart into Gods presence,
deuoting in our covenants and desires our thoughts and affections to God. Thus
Solomon, when he would give direction against the whorish woman, advises My
son give me thy heart and let thine eyes delight in my ways Prou. 23.26.27.
.

The last preservative is, The causes and occasions of lust.
to avoid the causes and occasions of lust and uncleanness. The first is
idleness. This was one of the causes of the detested uncleanness of Sodom, as
the Prophet Ezechiel shows Ezech. 46.49
. And contrariwise diligence in our callings is a notable help to keep out
inordinate desires, and vain thoughts, and commonly persons overtaken with
uncleanness abound with idleness. The second is, fullness of bread, that is,
by a synechdoche, excess in meats and drinks, either for the measure or
daintiness of them. And contrariwise, to beat down down our bodies 1. Cor.
9.27.
, either by abstinence, or sobriety in the use of the creatures, is a notable
means to quench and abate those flames if they be risen, and to keep them also
from that special aptness to rise. The third is, the high estimation of
earthly things, and the too great liking of them: for this love secretly brings
in lust. Thus the Apostle to Timothy says, that the love of money and riches,
breeds noisome lusts, which in short time drown man in perdition. 1. Tim. 6.9.
The like may be said of the estimation and too much viewing of apparel,
beauty, etc. The fourth is ignorance and hardness of heart. For thus it was in
those the Apostle mentions in the fourth to the Ephesians Ephesians. 4.17.18.
. That greediness to defile themselves with all sorts of uncleanness arose
and increased in them by reason of the insensiblenesse of the heart, and the
blindness and emptiness of their minds. And on the other side lust cannot get
such a head, so long as any sound measure of knowledge is stirring in the mind,
or tenderness remains in the heart, lust desires both a dark house and a
dark mind. The fifth is evil company. And therefore the holy Ghost gives this
rule to those that would not be ensnared with the strange woman, walk thou in
the way of good men and keep the way of the righteous. Prou. 1.20.
The last is care for the flesh. It is the liberty men take not only to feed
themselves in contemplative wickedness, but also to plod and cast about how to
satisfy and fulfill their lusts, that does so much confirm them in the custom
of uncleanness. And therefore the Apostles counsel is, Romans 13.14.
take not care to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Thus far of the sins of the seventh commandment. The sin against the
tenth commandment follows.

Evil concupiscence] This vice contains all sorts of evil thoughts and
inclinations and desires, How evil concupisce^ce differs from inordinate
affection.
after any kind of pleasure, profit, honor, but especially lustful
inclinations or thoughts. And it differs from inordinate affection, because
inordinate affection has in it principally the burning of lust and a kind of
effeminatenesse, the soul being overcome and inthralled with the power of
lust. Now I think this concupiscence notes, lust as it is in inclination or
evil motion, before it come to that high degree of flaming, or consent: and it
is well called evil concupiscence for there is a good concupiscence, both
natural and civil and spiritual. There is a threefold good concupiscence.
Natural, after meat, sleep, procreation, etc. civil, which is an ordinate
desire after lawful profits and pleasures. Spiritual, and that is a lust for
and after heavenly things. And so the spirit lusts against the flesh.

Now that we may know the Apostle has great reason, to counsel men to
mortify evil thoughts though they never come to consent: these reasons may
show. First, concupiscence in the very inclination and first thoughts is a
breeder, it is the mother of all sorts of wickedness, if it be not betimes
killed in the conception. Iam. 1.14 15.
The Apostle James shows, that concupiscence will be quickly enticed, yea it
will entice and draw away a man, though from without it be allured with no
object. And when it has drawn a man aside, it will conceive, and breed with
very contemplative pleasures, and when it has conceived, and lien in the womb
of the mind, and lain there nourished from time to time, unless God show the
greater mercy, it will bring forth bring forth I say a birth of some notable
external evil action, and when it has gone so far, like an impudent beldame,
it will egg on still unto the finiishing of sin, by custom in the practice,
and so indeed (of it self) it will never leave, till it has brought forth
(as a second birth) death, and that both spiritual and eternal death, and
sometimes a temporll death too. Secondly, if these lusts go no further then the
inward man, yet sin may reign even in these. There may be a world of
wickedness in a man, though he never speak filthy words, or commit filthy
action. There is a conuersing with the very inward lusts of the flesh Ephesians. 2.3.
, which may prove a man to be merely carnal and without grace, as well as
outward evil life. Thirdly, this secret concupiscence may be a notable
hinderance to all holy duty. Romans 7.
This was that the Apostle so bitterly cries out against in the seventh to the
Romans. This was it, that rebelled so against the law of his mind: and when he
would do any good, it would be present to hinder it. This is it whereby the
flesh makes war and daily sights against the spirit Gal. 5.17.
, it is the lust after other things, that enters into man's heart and choakes the
word and makes it unfruitful Mark. 4.19. I^^s. 4.1.3.4.
. What is the reason why many pray and speed not? is it not by reason of their
lusts that sight in their members? Qu, But is there any man that is wholly
freed from these? Ans. There is not. Every man has in him diverse kinds of
evil thoughts: but yet there is great difference: for then is a man's estate
dangerous, when these lusts and evil thoughts, are obeyed Romans 6.11.
, served Tit. 3.3.
, fulfilled Ephesians. 2.3.
, and cared for Romans 13.13.
. For those are the terms by which the power of them in wicked men, are
expressed, but so they are not in a child of God, that walks before God in
uprightness. The consideration of all this may break the hearts of civil
honest men. For hence they may see that god means to take account of their
inward evil thoughts. And that if very concupiscence be not mortified, it may
destroy their souls: though they be never so free from outward enormities of
life. Paul while he was carnal, was unrebukable for outward conuer,+sation,
but when the law showed him his lusts and evil thoughts, Romans 7.7.
he then sawall was in vain.

And covetousness which is idolatry] Now follows the sin against the first
commandment. And it is described both in it self and in relation to God. In
it self it is covetousness: and in relation to God, it is idolatry.

Covetousness is a spiritual disease in the heart of man, flowing from
nature, corrupted, What covetousness is.
and ensnared by satan, and the world, inclining the soul to an immoderate
and confident (yet vain) care after earthly things, for our own private good,
to the singular detriment of the soul. Covetousness I call a disease: for it
is such a privation of good, as has not only want of virtue and happiness,
but a position of evil in it, to be shunned more then any disease for as the
text says, it is an evil sickness. And this disease is spiritual; and
therefore it is hard to be cured. No medicine can help it, but the blood of
Christ. It is not felt by the most, but hated only in the name of it. The
subject where this disease is, is the heart of man. For there is the seat or
palace of this vice. And therefore S. Mark Mark. 7.22.
adds covetousness to those vices Saint Matthew had said did defile a man. The
internal efficient moving cause of this evil, is nature corrupted. It Is a
sin every man had need to look too: for man's nature is stirred with it.
Psalm. 4.7.
It is an universal quaere, who will show us any good? and yet I say corrupted
nature, for nature of it self is content with a little: it is corruption that
has bred this disease. The external efficient causes, are the devil snaring
and the world tempting. The form of this evil is, an inclination to the
immoderate and confident care of earthly things. I say inclining the soul, to
take in the lowest degree of covetousness. For some have their hearts
exercised in it, and wholly taken up with it: their eyes and their hearts, and
their tongues, are full of it. Now others are only secretly drawn away with
it, and daily infected with the inclinations to it. I add, moderate and
confident care because honest labor or some desire after earthly things are
not condemned. Only two things constitute this vice. First, want of moderation,
either in the matter, when nothing will be enough to satisfy their having, or
in the measure of the care, when it is a distracting, vexing continual care,
that engrosseth in a manner all the thoughts and desires of a man. Secondly,
carnal confidence, when man places his felicity and chiefest stay and trust
in the things he either possesses or hops for. I add, yet vain, because
let the covetous person, bestow never so much care, or attain to never so much
success of his cares, yet as Solomon says, He that loves silver shall not be
satisfied with silver, and he that loves riches, shall be without the fruit
thereof Eccles. 5.9.
. And after all his travail, his riches may perish whiles he looks on, or if
they were more sure to continue, yet he shall not continue with them himself.
For as he came forth of his mothers belly he shall return naked, to go as he
came, and shall bear nothing away of his labor, which he has caused to pass
by his hand. In all points as he came so shall he go, and then what profit
has he that he has travailed for the wind. earthly things. For if it were a
covetousness 1. Cor. 14.1. The effects of covetousness.
. These words for his own private good, note the end of the covetous man's
care. For if all this care for earthly things, were for Gods glory or the good
of the Church, it might be allowed. And I say for his good, because that he
propounds to himself, though many times, when he has gotten much together,
the Lord will not let him have the use of it. Note the best thing in the
description, is the effect of covetousness, and that is the singular detriment
of the soul, which may appear diversely. For first covetousness does
infatuate and besot the mind of man, that it cannot understand. The Prophet
Esaias says of those dumb and greedy dogs, that they could not understand: and
he gives the reason. For (says he) they all look to their own way, every
one for his advantage and for his own purpose and profit Esaias 56.11.12.
. And Solomon seems to say that if covetousness be in the heart of a Prince,
it will make him destitute of understanding Prou. 28.16.
. And it is certain (mark it) worldly minded persons are the most dull, and
incapable persons in spiritual things, almost of all other sorts of men. For
though they would get a little understanding while they are hearing, yet the
cares of life presently choakes all. Secondly, covetousness pierces the soul
through with many a sorrow 1. Tim. 6.10
. The covetous person is seldom or never free, from one notable vexation or
other. His heart is troubled, and he will trouble his house also. As Solomon
says he that is greedy of gain troubles his own house Prou. 15.27.
. All is continually in a tumult, of have and hurry, what with labor, and what
with passion and contention, the covetous man and his household never live at
hearts ease and rest. Thirdly, covetousness and the desire to be rich bring
into the soul, a wonderful number of temptations and noisome lusts, enough to
damn him, if he had no other sins 1. Tim. 6.9.
. Fourthly, it is here added that covetousness is idolatry: it makes a man an
idolater. Mammon is the idol, and the worldling is the Priest that sacrifices
to mammon. Now the covetous man serves his mammon, with a twofold worship. For
with inward worship, he loves, desires, delights in, and trusts in his wealth.
And for his outward service, he spends all his time upon his idol, either in
gathering or keeping, or increasing, or honoring it. Lastly what should I
number particulars? covetousness? why the Apostle says, it is the root of all
evils. For there is almost no kind of sin but the sap of covetousness will
nourish it. If the Lord had but the ripping up of the heart and life of a
covetous person, and would describe his vices before us, oh what swarm of all
sorts of evils could the Lord find out? well, let us be assured of this
general, that howsoever covetous persons may color matters yet indeed they
are wonderful vicious persons. Neither are their sins the fewer or lesser,
because they discern them not: for the dust of earthly profits, has put out
their eyes, they cannot see nor discern, as was before showed.

Qu. But who is covetous? for all men while they cry out against the sin,
deny that they are covetous. The signs of a covetous man.
It Is rare to find any covetous person, that will confess that he is covetous.
And therefore for answer hereunto, it will not be amiss out of the word of God
to show the signs of a covetous man.

The first sign of a covetous man, is the desire to have the sabbath over,
that he might be at his worldly affairs. A covetous man thinks all the time
set apart for Gods service exceeding tedious and long. And he has a great
inward boiling of desire to have such times and imploiments past. The sabbath
is wonderful burdensome to a worldly mind, especially if he be restrained
from worldly imploiments. The Prophet Amos brings in the covetous man of his
time, saying thus in the coffeehouse of their hearts, when will the new
Moon be gone that we may sell corn, and the sabbath that we may set forth
wheat?

Prou. 28.16. 1. These. 4.6.
The second sign of covetousness, is oppression and fraud. When men to
compass gain, care not how they vex and rack the poor or such as live under
them: or in buying or selling (out of greediness of gain) circumuent and
pill, and defraud others, by customary lying, or false waights, measures, or
balances, or any other fraudulent course: This is an evil covetousness.
Usury also, that is a desire to increase riches by interest, is a palpable
sign of covetousness, especially in these times, when the sin of usury is
so universally condemned: for if men were not besotted with the love of riches,
they would not dare to live in such a damned sin, but I think all men easily
know that usurers are covetous and therefore I need not prove it.

The third sign of covetousness, is greedy, and distracting care. I mean
such a care as deuoures a man's thoughts, that every day will keep possession
in a man's soul and run in his mind continually, both sleeping and waking.
Plodding and carking cares, and this may be discerned by comparing these cares
with our care for eternal things. When we have more care for this world then
for heaven, we need go no further, but resolve upon it, covetousness has
deceived us. Neither do I mean that they only are covetous, that immoderately
disquiet themselves with continual cares for getting of treasures and the
superfluities of abundance. For it is sure that covetousness may be in us in a
high degree, though our cares be but about things that are necessary, as about
the things we must eat or put on. As the comparing of the 15, verse of Luke 12.
with v. 21.22. will show. Luke 12.15.21.22.
Now the care for necessaries, is not simply forbidden, because we are bound to
use the means with diligence and carfulness: but the care that is a sign of
covetousness, may be discerned by the very terms the Evangelist Saint Luke
uses to describe it by. For in the 22 verse, v. 22.
our savior says, take no thought for your life, etc. and by taking thought
he notes a perplexed inward sorrowful and fearful care about life and the
things thereof. v. 26.
And verse 26. he says, why take ye thought for the raiment? as if he would
have us note that it is a property of covetous cares, to be deeply drowned in
perplexity, even about trifles, and small matters: and surely we may observe
worldly minded people, and one would wonder to see how they vex and disquiet
themselves* about every mean occasion, especial if there be the least color
of any profit or loss toward. Again, our Savior vpbraideth those that are
carried with those cares, v. 28.
that they have but a little faith: whereby he shows that then our cares are
faulty and arise from the infection of covetousness, when they are raised by
unbelief and mistrustfulnesse of Gods providence, or promise. Lastly in the
29. verse, our Savior says thus, Therefore ask not what ye shall eat or
what ye shall drink, v. 29. (...).
neither stand in doubt, or as you may see it rendered in the margent, neither
make discourses in the air: and by these last words he notes another property
of a covetous person, and that is when he has his head tossed with cares or
fears, either about the compassing of his profits or preventing of losses,
etc. he is so full of words and many questions, what he shall do, and how he
shall avoid such and such a loss, that he has never done either moning
himself, or consulting to no purpose, in things that either cannot be done, or
not otherwise, etc. Or it may note this endless framing of proiects for the
compassing of his desires. Thus of the signs. Yet notwithstanding these
signs, I must needs confess that covetousness it not easily discerned, both
because it is an inward distrust in the spirit of a man, and also because their
comes to this vice usually fained words 2. Pet. 2.3.
, to hide it from the view of others, or subtle thoughts and euasions to
blindfold the conscience within, and besides it is the nature of this sin
quickly to darken the discerning of the mind, and therefore I think
covetousness in the most, may be well called colored covetousness 1. These.
2.5.
it is so on both sides masked.

The use of all should be to teach us, as the author to the Hebrews says, to
have our conversation without covetousness, and to be content with the things
we have, resting steadfastly upon the promise of God, I will not fail thee nor
forsake thee Heb. 13.5. (...) Not without money but without the love of it.
. And to this end we should pray as David did, that God would incline our
hearts to his testimonies and not to covetousness Psalm. 119.
. Preservative or remedies against cuuetousnesse.

Qu. But what are the best remedies or preservatives against covetousness.
Ans. There are these things among the rest that are of great use to preserve us
from covetousness, or to weaken the power of it.

The first is that which I mentioned before, viz. prayer to God daily that he
would incline our hearts to his testimonies, that so we might have our minds
drawn away from the cares of covetousness.

The second is meditation. And there are diverse things which being seriously
willingly confessed themselves to be strangers and pilgrims, looking for a
city in another country, having a foundation whose builder and maker is God
Heb. 11.9.10
, or else of wicked men. For it is so base a vice that it should be found in
none but Gentiles Math. 6.
, that know neither Gods promise nor providence: and sure it is found in none
but ungodly men, that are strangers from the covenants of promise. Terra a
terendo.
Secondly, the nature of man. For consider, the soul of man is a celestial
thing and divine, and has nothing from the earth. And the body of man is
erected, with a face toward heaven and the whole earth is under man's feet, and
has its name from treading upon it; to note that man should walk on it with
his feet, not dote on it with his heart. Thirdly the nature of covetousness:
it will never be satisfied, and how should it? for the desire of the covetous
is not natural, but against nature. Natural desires are finite, but
unnatural desires find no end. And therefore cannot be filled with the finite
things of the world. Non plus satiabitur cor hominis auro quam corpus aura.
Besides earthly things are vain and empty. Now the vessel that is only full
of wind is empty still for all that. So is the mind of the covetous. His heart
will be no more filled or satisfied with gold then his body with wind. Hereupon
it is that a covetous man is always poor, and has not what he has. But has
his wealth as the prisoner has his fetters, viz. to inthrall him. Fourthly,
the nature promise and providence of God. He is a heavenly father Luke 12.30.
, is he a father? why then do we doubt of his willingness to help us? and is
he a heavenly father? why then do we question his all sufficiency to provide
what we need? besides has he given us life and and will he not give us food to
preserve life? does he daily provide for thousand thousands of fowls, that are
base creatures? and will he not provide for man, whom he created after his own
image, and made him Lord of all creatures? does he cloth the grass of the
field, which is to day and to morrow is cut down, and will he not cloth man?
oh the weakness of our faith. Besides is not the Lord engaged by promise,
never to leave us nor forsake us? Fifthly, the condition of the covetous. All
his care cannot add a cubit to his stature. And besides the poor and the
usurer meet together, Prou. 29.33.
in many things. One God made them both. One sun lights them both. One heaven
couers them both, and one grave of earth shall hold them both. Sixthly, the
gain of godliness, it is better thrist to covet after godliness. For it has
the promises of this life and the life to come 1. Tim. 6.8.
. And who can count the gain of godliness? seeing God is the godly man's
portion Psalm. 16.
, and his exceeding great reward Genesis 15.1.
.

The third preservative is the daily practice of piety. If we would seek the
kingdom of God first, both in the first part of our life, and in the first
part of every day of our life, as well in our houses as in Gods house, these
religious duties constantly performed, would be a great and continual help
against worldly cares: they would cleanse our hearts of them, and daily prepare
our hearts against them. But how can it be otherwise with a man then it is?
they must neeeds live and die the drudges of the world, seeing they have no
more care of holy duties at home or abroad, they live like swine without all
care of any thing, but rooting in the earth.

The fourth preservative, is the due preparation for Christ's second coming.
For when our savior Christ had dehorted men from the cares of this life, he
adioines this exhortation: let your loins be girded about: and your lights
burning, and ye your selves like unto them that wait for their master, when he
will return from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks they may open
unto him immediately: blessed are those servants whom the Lord when he comes
shall find waking, etc. One great reason why covetous men do so securely
continue in the immoderate cares for this world, is because they do so little
think of death and judgment. Whereas on the other side Christians do with
some ease withdraw their hearts from the world, when they have inured
themselves to die daily by the constant remembrance of their latter end, and by
holding fast the evidence of faith and hope, waiting when Christ will call for
them.

The fifth preservative, is to shun the means and occasions of covetousness
And to this end it is good not to converse much with covetous persons, or to
get our selves liberty to conceive the hope of any long prosperity, and rest in
the world: and generally we should labor to observe our own hearts and other
men's lives and what we find to be a means to kindle or inflame covetous
desires, that we should avoid and betimes set against it, or mortify it. And
thus far of covetousness, and thus also of the catalogue of sins from
which he does dissuade. The reasons follow.

Ver. 6. For the which things sake the wrath of God comes on the the children
of disobedience.

Ver. 7. Wherein ye also walked once when he lived in them.


These words contain two reasons to enforce the exhortation in the former
verse. The One is taken from the evil effects of the former sins. ver. 6. The
other is taken from their own experience, while they lived in the estate of
corruption ver. 7. in laying down the reason from the effect, two things are
to be noted. First, what sin brings, viz. the wrath of God. Secondly, upon
whom, viz. upon the children of disobedience. Before I come to entreat of the
wrath of God a part, I consider of it as it stands in coherence with the former
reason. For in these words we are assured that man living and continuing in
filthiness, and covetousness shall not escape Gods wrath. For they incur
both his hatred and his plagues, both which are signified by the word wrath.
Gods wrath upon unclean persons.
And if any ask what plagues filthy persons and covetous persons shall feel?
I answer briefly and distinctly, that neither of them shall escape Gods wrath,
as the Scriptures plentifully show. The filthy person brings upon himself Gods
curse temporal, corporal, spiritual and eternal: temporal, for whoredom
and any kind of uncleanness, brings upon men many temporal plagues in their
estate, the fire of Gods judgments consuming many times their whole increase
as has been showed before. Corporal, for God many times meets with the
sins of the body, by judgments upon the body: so that many filthy persons
after they have consumed their flesh and their body, by loathsome diseases
which follow this sin, in the end, say with the foolish young man, Oh how
have I hated instruction, and despised correction Prou. 5.11.12.
? now I am brought almost into all evil in the midst of the assembly.
Spiritual, for uncleanness breeds in many a reprobate sense Romans 1.24.29.
etc.
and final impenitency. Many also for their filthiness are pursued with
secret and fearful terrors of conscience, and sometimes frenzy, and
desperate perturbations. Eternal, for the adulterer destroys his own soul,
and is shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven. As has been also before declared.

Neither let the covetous person, think he shall speed any better. For God
hates him wonderfully: and therefore the Prophet Ezechiel says, that the Lord
smites his fists Ezech. 22.13.
at the covetous: which is a borrowed phrase to express most bitter and sharp
threatenings. Now least the people should object that those were but great
words, the Lord would not do so, they would deal well enough with the Lord. v.
14.
He preuenteth it, and says, can thy heart endure or can thine hands be strong
in the days that I shall have to do with them? I the Lord have spoken it, and
will do it. Let covetous persons, without further enquiry assure themselves
that covetousness is a maine cause of all the evils are upon them or theirs,
and besides they may be assertained, that all the service they do to God is
abhorred and mere lost labor: it were to no purpose if they would bring him
incense from Sheba, and sweet calamus from a far country: their burnt
offerings would not be pleasant, nor their sacrifices sweet unto him Ier.
6.13.20.
. Ob. But covetous persons are of most men so well furnished, that there is not
that means to bring them to any great hurt. Sol. The Prophet shows that God
can lay a stumbling block before them, and father and son together mayfall
upon it, and neighbor and friend may perish together Ier. 6.21.
. The Lord means enough when men little think of it, to bring down rebellious
sinners. Ob. But we see covetous persons and wealthy worldlings escape the best
and longest of many others. Sol. The Prophet Amos says, Amos. 8.5.6.7.
the Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, will never forget any of
their works. Though the Lord may defer, yet certainly he will never forget:
and therefore they are not a jot the better for scaping so long. But howsoever
they might escape outward judgments, yet they may be infallibly sure they have
sinned against their own souls ^ab. 2.10.
, and that they shall know in the day of their death: their riches shall not
then profit them, when the Lord takes away their soul Job. 27.8.
, he that is a great oppressor shall not prolong his days Prou. 18.16.
, for he that gets riches and not by right shall leave them in the midst of
his days, and at his end shall be a fool Ier. 17.11.
. How horrible then shall that voice be, Thou fool this night shall thy soul
be taken from thee Luke 12.16.
? and thus far of these words as they concern the coherence with the former
words, now I consider them as they are in themselves. And first of the wrath of
God.

Justice in God considered 4. ways.
Wrath of God] It is apparent that wrath in God, belongs to his Justice. And
Justice may be considered as it flows from God four ways. First, as he is a
free Lord of all. And so his decrees are just Romans 9.13.14.
. Secondly, as he is God of all: and so the common works of preserving both
good and bad, are just 1. Tim. 4 14. Mat. 5.45.
. Thirdly, as a father in Christ: and so by an excellency, he is the God of
believers: and thus he is just, in performing his promises, and infusing his
grace, and in bestowing the Justice of his son. Fourthly, as Judge of the
world, and so his Justice is not only distributive, but correctiue. And unto
this Justice, does wrath belong.

Anger is properly in Go^.
Anger in man, is a perturbation or passion in his heart: and therefore it has
troubled Divines to conceive how anger should be in the most pure happy and
bountiful nature of God, And the rather seeing affections are not properly in
God. Neither is their declaration full enough, that say it is given to God
improperly and by anthropopathie: for I am of their opinion that think anger
is properly in God. First, in such a manner as agrees to the nature of God that
is in a manner to us inconceivable. Secondly, in such a sense as is revealed
in Scripture.

Wrath diversely interpreted
The wrath of God in Scripture is taken, sometimes for his just decree and
purpose to revenge Job. 3. vlt.
, sometimes for commination or threatening to punish. So some think it is to be
taken in those words of the Prophet Hosea. I will not do according to the
siercones of my wrath Hos. 11.9.
that is according to my grievous threatenings. Sometimes it is taken for the
effects or punishments themselves, as in the Epistle to the Romans, is God
unrighteous which brings wrath? Romans 3.5.
it is well rendered, which punishes.

The wrath of God is distinguished, by diverse degrees, and so has diverse
names: for there is wrath present, and wrath to come. Present wrath, is the
anger of God in this present life, Ioh. 3. vl^.
and is either impendent or powered out, wrath impendent, is the anger of God
hanging over men's heads, ready to be manifested in his judgments: and so
wrath hangs in the nature of God, and in the threatenings of his word, and in
the possibilities of the creatures. Wrath powered ^^t is the judgment of God
fallen upon men for their sins by which they provoked God, and so there was
great wrath upon the people Luke 21.23.
in the destruction of Jerusalem: and thus he reuealeth his wrath from Heaven
upon the unrighteousness of men Romans 1.17.
. Wrath to come Mat. 3.7. Romans 2.5.
is that fearful misery to be declared upon the soul of the impenitent at
his death and upon soul and body at the day of judgment, in the everlasting
perdition of both:

But that we may be yet more profitable touched with the meditation of this
point, I propound six things concerning Gods wrath further to be considered.
First, the fearfulness of it. Secondly, what it is that works or brings this
wrath upon us. Thirdly, the signs to know Gods wrath. Fourthly, the means to
pacify it, Fistly, the signs of wrath pacified. And lastly, the uses of all.
The fearful greatness of Gods wrath showed.


For the first. The fearfulness and greatness of Gods wrath or anger for
sin, may appear three ways. First, by Scripture. Secondly, by similitude.
Thirdly, by example. That Gods anger for sin is exceeding terrible and
fearful, I will show by one place of Scripture only, and that is the first
of Nahum the Prophet: First by Scripture. Nahum. 1.2.3.4.5.6.
for he says, God is jealous, and the Lord reuengeth, the Lord reuengeth:
where the repetition shows the certainty of it, that God will be as sure to
revenge as ever the sinner was to sin: but this is more confirmed, when he
says, he is the Lord of anger: as if he would impart that his anger is his
essence, as if he were all made of anger: and that he is the author of all the
just anger that is in the world: and if the drops of anger in great men have
such terror in it, what is the maine Ocean of anger which is in God himself?
and to assure us yet further of the terror of his wrath, he adds, the Lord
will take vengeance on his adversaries, Ob. Sol.
which signifies that the Lord will account of impenitent sinners, as a man
accounts of his worst enemies, and therefore the Lord will show his displeasure
to the uttermost of their deserts and his Justice. And therefore if any do
object, that they see it otherwise for the plagues of wicked men are not so
many nor so great as their sins, he answers that and says* that the Lord,
reserueth wrath for his enemies: he has not inflicted upon them all they shall
have: there is the greatest part behind: the full vials of his fury are not
yet poured out. Ob. Sol.
And if any should reply, that they have observed, that wicked men have
prospered long and escaped for a great while, without any punishments to speak
of, The Prophet answers that, and says that the Lord is slow to anger, that
is he is many times long before he manifests his great displeasure, but he is
great in power, that is he is of singular fiercenes and vnresistablenes, when
he does enter into Judgment, he will not fail, nor be hindered, and if any
would hope that God would change his mind, that also is prevented, the Prophet
auouching it confidently, that he will not surely clear the wicked. Ob. Sol.
And this is the more certain, because of the dreadful means that the Lord
has to declare his anger. His way is in the whirlewinde and in the storm, and
the clouds are the dust of his feet, the meaning is, that God has ways to
execute his Judgment, ways I say that are irresistable (for who can stay a
whirlewinde) and terrible, like the storm, plagues falling thick and
threefold, like the drops of the tempest, and in the means the Lord can run
like a Giant, running feircely and raising the dust with his feet. And to this
give all the creatures witness. He rebukes the sea and it dries. Bashanis
wasted and Carmell and the flower of Lebanon is wasted. The mountains tremble
before him and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at his sight, yea the
world and all that dwell therein. And therefore who can stand before his wrath?
or who can abide the fierceness of his wrath? his wrath is powered out like
fire and the rocks are broken by him.

The wrath of God (to show the exquisite and intolerable, Secondly by
similitude.
and remediless pain that wicked men feel when they bear it) is compared to
a consuming fire, and to note the infiniteness of it, God himself is said to
be a consuming sire Heb. 12.29. Deuteronomy. 4.24.
. Moses also says that the fire that is kindled in Gods wrath, shall burn to
the bottom of hell, and it were able to consume the earth with her increase,
and set on fire the foundation of the mountains Deuteronomy. 32.22. Thirdly by
example.


Thirdly who can think the anger of God, not to be infinitely terrible, that
can but seriously consider these examples and presidents of it. First, Gods
reprobating, or foredamning of millions of men. Secondly, the sin of Adam,
pursued with such inconceivable judgments upon him and his name. Thirdly the
drowning of the old world, the burning of Sodom, the opening of the earth to
swallow up the rebellious, the sea swallowing up Pharaoh and his host.
Fourthly, the forlorn estate of the Gentiles, not looked after, for many
hundred years. Fifthly, the Jews (sometimes the only people to whom the Lord
drew near) now made a curse, and astonishment, and a hissing, throughout the
earth. Sixthly, the torments which Christ himself endured, when he was but
surety for sinners. Seventhly, what are wars, famines, pestilences, diseases,
seditions, heresies, and the infinite molestations in the life of man, but so
many evident proofs of wonderful anger in God. Eighthly, the testimonies of
afflicted consciences be lively in this point. When but a drop of anger lights
upon the soul of man in this world, how unable is he to sustain his spirit?
what floods of tears flow from his wounded heart? Lastly, the burning of the
world and the flames of hell shall one day make full proof of Gods anger. And
thus of the first point.

How wrath is brought upon us.
For the second, wrath is wrought or brought upon us four ways. First, the Law
works wrath: for being transgressed, it breeds displeasure, pleads for
judgment, records sin, and presents it in Gods sight. Secondly, Christ in
the ministry of the word, applies wrath, or discouers Gods indignation: and so
he is said to smite and slay the wicked Reu. 19.15. Esaias. 11.3. Ex (...), Romans
13.4.
. Thirdly, the Magistrate is a revenger in executing Gods wrath. Fourthly,
wrath is brought upon us, by Gods army: the creatures are Gods warriors: they
fight for the Lord against sinners: and are speedily and irresistably armed
when God is pleased to raise them.

The signs of Gods anger.
Thirdly concerning the signs of Gods anger: we must understand, that Gods
eternal anger toward other men in particular, cannot be known, nor his
temporal anger by any ordinary way of certainty, except it be extraordinarily
by revelation as to the Prophets or Apostles. For by outward things we cannot
know Gods love or hatred to particular persons, only Gods public anger to
public states may be known: and so may his private anger to our selves in
special.

Signs of public anger.
There are three signs to know Gods public anger. 1. The prediction of his
Ministers: as extraordinarily the Prophets from vision or revelation did
foretell the Judgments to ensue: and ordinarily wrath may be known by the
comminations of faithful Preachers: for when upon observation of threatenings
in the Law made to such sins as then abound, they do with one consent in
many places, with instance and confidence give warning of plagues to ensue: it
is time for the world to awaken: for the Lords secrets are with his servants.
And he will make good their righteous threatenings. Secondly, The signs in
Heaven or earth or sea: prodigious sights, or signs in the sun or moon or
commets, or strange birthes, or the extraordinary raging of the seas and such
like. Thirdly, public plagues are both signs of wrath present, and withal
they give warning of greater wrath to come if we do not repent. Such are
famine, war, pestilence, and other raging diseases, the death of great
Princes, and the sudden and common death of the best men, these all foretell
evil to come, as we may know fire, so may we know Gods anger: we know fire,
either by the report of men worthy to be credited, or by the smoke, or by the
flame beginning to break out. And so may discern Gods wrath: either by the
relation of his Ambassadors that are faithful men, or by the smoke of
prodigies or wonders in Heaven and earth. or else by the flame of Judgments
already begun, and thus of the signs of Gods public anger.

Signs of private anger.
The signs of Gods anger to a particular man are such as these. Fist, if a man
have not the marks of a child of God upon him: for whom God loves and is not
angry with, they are marked with peculiar graces as indelibly as they were
marked in Ezechiel with the letter pau Ezech. 9.
. Secondly, if he find himself directly under the threatenings of Gods word.
Thirdly, if there be no effectual working of the spirit of grace in the use
of the means, it is a plain sign of Gods anger, when a man hears the word
powerfully preached, and reads and prays, without all affection or life, and
is so constantly. For if the Lord were pleased, he would show himself in the
use of the means of communion with him. Fourthly, a man may gather something
by his crosses: for if he find a^sting in them that God fights against him in
them, so as they pierce and vex and disquiet his soul with perplexity, but
especially, if he find his heart also closed with hardness, so as he do not
call when the Lord binds him, this is in ali likelihood, not only a sign of
wrath, but that the wrath increases Job. 36.13.
this is the rod of indignation. Fifthly, if a man live in some sins, they are
manifest signs of wrath, as persecution 1. These. 2.16.
, whoredom Prou. 22.14.
, hatred of the brethren 1. John.
, with holding the truth in unrighteousness Romans 1.18.
, covetousness and uncleanness Ephesians. 5.35.
, and generally all sins contained in any of the catalogues, against which
the Lord denounces his Judgments in several Scriptures. Lastly, sometimes
Gods anger is felt in the terrors and pain of the conscience, the Lord making
some men to feel the edge of his axe, and fighting against them with his
terrors. Now wheresoever these are felt by a soul that has not been truly
humbled for sin, they are assured pledges and beginnings of Gods wrath from
Heaven.

Hitherto of the greatness, How public wrath is pacified.
means, and signs of Gods anger. Now of the way to pacify Gods anger when it
is perceived. Gods Public anger is pacified and stayed: First, by the prayers
and fastings of the righteous. And therefore it is the Prophet Ioels counsel,
that if they would have the Lord, repent him of the evil and return and leave
a blessing behind him, they must sanctify a fast and call a solemn assembly
Joel. 2.13.14. etc.
. Secondly, by the severe execution of Justice by Magistrates, upon notorious
offenders, and thus Phinehas stayed the plague Number. 25.1.
. Thirdly, by the general repentance of the people, and thus Gods anger
toward Nineuie was pacified I^nah. 3.
. Fourthly, and especially, by the intercession of Christ entreating for a
city or nation. So was Jerusalem delivered out of captivity, Zach. 1.12. How
private wrath is pacified.
as the Prophet Zachary declares. Zach. 1.12.

Concerning the pacifying of Gods anger to particular persons, I will first
consider what will not pacify it, and then what will pacify it. For the
first, no multitude of gifts can deliver thee Ioh. 36.18.
, and the most mighty helps cannot cause the the Lord to withdraw his anger
Job. 36.18.
, it will not avail thee to come before the Lord with burnt offerings and with
calves of a year old: The Lord will not be pleased with thousands of rams or
with ten thousand rivers of oil. Nor will the son of thy body make an
atonement from the sins of thy soul Mich. 6.6.7.
, to cry Lord, Lord, at home Matthew. 7.
, or the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord Ier. 7.
abroad, will not a whit abate of his fierce anger, and as little will it
avail to build Churches, mend high ways, erect tombs for dead Prophets, or
the like works of labor or cost.

Now for the affirmative, if we speak properly, nothing will quench Gods anger
but the blood of Christ. For he is the propitiation for our sin Ioh. 2.1.
Romans 5.9.
. Yet in some respects, and as means the Lord does appoint unto us, that we
might be capable of reconciliation, these things are auailable. First, the
duties of mortification, as confession of sin, and judging of our selves, and
examining of our hearts and lives. If we acknowledge our sins he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins 1. Ioh. 1.9.
, and if we judge our selves the Lord will give over judging us 1. Cor. 11.34.
, if disobedient Israel will return and know his iniquities, the Lord will not
let his wrath fall upon him Ier. 3.12.13.
, godly sorrow also is very auailable to quench wrath. If Jerusalem will wash
her heart she shall be saved Ier. 4.14.
, the Lord will hear the voice of our weeping Psalm. 6.8.
. prayer also is of great use and force, for the Lord is a God that hears
prayer Psalm. 65.2.
, and the Prophet Zephanie shows that if the people can learn a language
once, to call upon the name of the Lord Zeph. 3.9.
in the sincerity of their hearts he will not pour upon them that fierce
wrath, which shall certeinely fall upon all the families that call not upon his
name.

Secondly, faith in the blood of Christ, procures reconciliation and
forgiveness of the sins that are past through the patience of God Romans 3.25.
, especially the work of faith, whereby a Christian perceiving Gods anger, and
encouraged with the support of Gods covenant and promise in Christ, does in all
tenderness of heart, importune Gods free mercy, and wrestle and strive with
importunity, casting himself upon Christ for shelter, and seriously setting
himself against every iniquity, even because there is hope.

How we may know that God is pacified?
Finally, we may discern that God is pacified diverse ways. First, by
induction from the practice of the former rules: for if we do what God
requires, we may conclude and infer, we shall receive what God promises.
Secondly, it may be perceived by Gods presence in the means. If we find our
hearts unloosed, and the passages of the means again opened, that is a
comfortatable testimony that the Lord is returned. Thirdly, it may be
perceived by the witness of the spirit of Adoption, speaking peace Psalm. 85.8.
to our consciences, and with unutterable joys quie^ing and satisfying our
hearts.

Uses.
The use follows. And first the doctrine of Gods wrath may greatly humble and
astonish impenitent sinners. Is the anger of the Lord kindled against thee? how
long then will thou be without innocence? Hos. 8.5.
be not a mocker least thy bonds increase Esaias. 28.22.
art thou an unclean person, a railer, a drunkard, an usurer, a swearer, a
lier, a profaner of Gods Saboa^hes, a voluptuous epicure, a carnal worldling,
or the like, be not deceived, nor let any deceive thee with vain words, crying
peace, peace, dawbing with untempered mortar, for assuredly, the wrath of God
for these things comes upon the children of disobedience. And who knows the
power of his wrath? Psalm. 90.12.
Secondly seeing Gods wrath is so exceeding terrible and fierce, blessed are
all they that are delivered from it in Jesus Christ. We should be stirred up
to constant thankfulness, because the Lord has forgiven us the punishment of
our sins, so as now there is no condemnation to us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8.9. Heb.
3.11.12.
being in Christ Jesus. Lastly, seeing the Lords anger is so dreadful we
should all learn to walk before him, in all uprightness and fear and
trembling, fencing our selves with the breast plate of faith and the helmet of
hope, being in all things sober and watchful, taking heed to our selves that
we be not hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. And thus of the wrath
of God.

The children of disobedience.
The second maine thing in this verse to be considered of, is the persons upon
whom it falls, viz. the children of disobedience] And by children of
disobedience he means generally wicked and unregenerate men. Now wicked men
are of two sorts. Some are clearly out of the Church: and have been branded
in several ages with several terms of distinction: as now the infidels, and
before, all the uncircumcised Gentiles. Before the flood they were called
sons of men. Disobedient men.
Now others are in the Church: and are children of God, by creation, general
vocation, and external profession: but indeed are wicked and profane Esaus.
Disobedient children.
The former sort, were disobedient men: and the later are disobedient children.
And these disobient children in the Church are of two sorts. For some will not
be tied to live in their fathers house: but that they may the more securly
sin and wallowe in all filthy abominations, they shun Gods house for the
most part, and live without any conscionable subjection to any ministry. Such
was the prodigal son, and such are our common swearers, drunkards, and
unclean persons: nay they go further, for they speak evil of their fathers
house, and slander their own mothers sons. Now the other sort, live in their
fathers, they come to hear, and receive the sacraments, they are there at bed
and board, but yet they will do what they list. Filij insu^sibilitati^.

Filij incredulitatis.

Filij inobedienti^.


They will not be persuaded by the word, spirit, or servants of God. And so
they are children of vnperswadablenesse, they will not believe their fathers
threatenings or promises, and so they are children of incredulity: they will not
conform themselves to their fathers will and so are called children of
disobedience.

Now the estate of both these sorts of disobedient children, is, that the
fearful wrath of God is upon them: no father can so plague and cast off a
wicked son as they are sure to be plagued and cast off of God. As they are
children of disobedience by their own stubbornness, so are they children of
wrath by Gods justice. And if they continue thus, they may prove children of
perdition.

Qu. Que. Ans.
But how may the children of disobedience be known? Ans. We may gather signs
either from the consideration of these words or from other scriptures. The
marks of a child of disobedience.
From these words two ways: first he is a child of disobedience, that is led
and ruled, and has all his thoughts and affections and his actions, as it were
framed and begotten and nursed up, by the corruption of his nature arising from
the disobedience of the first man, or by the temptations of satan the Prince
of all darkness and disobedience. It is one thing to sin by infirmity, to
fall by occasion into a sin, and another thing to be led and ruled, and to
frame ones life and imploiment after the rules and proiects that are hatched by
the flesh or satan. To be a child to sin, that is to be ruled and mastred
and led by it, to be as it were at the command of lust and corruption, that is
not in a child of God standing in uprightness. (...).
Secondly, the word here rendered disobedience, imports vnteachablenesse: such a
disobedience as is wilful: when a man sins and will sin, and will not be
persuaded either by Gods words or Gods spirit, or Gods people, that would
advise or admonish him. To be of an incurable or inteachable disposition, is a
rank sign of a child of disobedience.

Further if we mark the coherence, in the second Chapter of the Epistle to the
Ephesians, v. 2. compared with the first, we may easily discern, that a child
of disobedience is dead in trespasses and sins. His soul can he at rest,
though he be guilty of never so many sins. Cast a mountain on a dead man and
he will not complain or aile any thing: and sure it is a notable sign of a
child of disobedience, to be guilty of a multitude of sins and yet to be
senseless under them: to be able to go from day to day and week to week, and
month to month, and never to aile any thing, for any sound remorse he finds for
his sin. Especially when men are at that pass that the Prophet Jeremy
complained of, that though God strike them yet they are not grieved: yea though
the Lord consume them, they refuse to receive correction, and make their faces
harder then a rock, refusing to return Ier. 5.3.
.

Qu. But may not the wrath of God come upon his own children. Is God never
angry with his own servants? Whether wrath may not come upon Gods children as
well as the children of disobedience.
Ans. God may be angry with his own people. For when the Prophet David says,
his anger endures but a moment Psalm. 30.5.
, he implies that God then will be angry. And in the 89. Psalm, though the
Lord says he will not take away his goodness and his mercy, yet if they keep
not his law, he says expressly, he will visit their transgression with the rod,
and their iniquity with stripes Psa. 89.32.33
. And thus he is angry with them sometimes for their covetousness Esaias 55.17.
, sometimes for their careless worship, Esaias 64.5.7.
sometimes for unworthy receiving, 1. Cor. 11.
sometimes for their loss of their first love Reu. 2.
, but generally every gross sin angers God, by whomsoever it be committed.
But yet there is great difference between Gods anger toward his own children,
and that wrath that comes upon the children of disobedience, and that
principally in three things. First, wrath coming upon the faithful is not
eternal, but temporary and in this life only. For they are delivered from the
wrath to come 1. These. 1. vlt.
, for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, they are
already past from death to life. But so are not wicked men. For God is so angry
with them in this life, that his anger may continue for ever, and not be
extinguished in their very death. And not only so, but Gods anger with his own
children even in this life is not for all their days, but only a very short
time of their life. For as David says, his anger endures but a moment:
weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning Psalm. 30.5.
. And in another place he says he will not always chide, neither will he keep
his anger for ever Psalm. 103.9.
. And the Lord witnesses by the Prophet Esaias, that he forsakes but for a
small moment, he hides his face in a little wrath, but he has mercy with
everlasting kindness Esaias 54.7.8.
. When a child of God falls he is sure he shall rise Mich. 7.8.
* but it is not so with the ungodly. Secondly, as Gods wrath differs in the
continuance, so it differs in the measure: it is milder toward his children,
then it is toward the children of disobedience. Which appears to be so two
ways. For first Gods anger as it is manifested in outward judgments upon his
own people, is ever proportioned to their strength: he does not consider what
their sin deserves, but what their spirits are able to sustain. He will not
suffer them to be tempted above that which they are able, but will give issue
with the temptation that they may be able to bear it 1. Cor. 10.13.
. And the Prophet Esaias shows that the Lord has great care least by
contending over long with his people, the spirit should fail, and the soul
which he has made Isay 57.16.
. And the Prophet David shows, that God deals not with his people after their
sins nor rewards them after their iniquities. But as a father pittieth his
children so the Lord pittieth them that fear him Psalm. 103.10.14.
. But now with the wicked it is much otherwise, For the Lord never asks what
strength they have to hear it, or how they will take it, but what sin they
have committed, and how they have deserved it. Besides the affections of Gods
children are sweetened with many mercies: for though the Lord be angry for their
sin, yet if they will seek God, and work righteousness, they may hold out
to bear the cross, for the Lord will meet them in the use of the means, to
the great ease and joy of their hearts. Esaias 64.5.
Excellently speaks the Prophet David unto the Lord acknowledging this point,
when he said, Thou answerest them O Lord, our God thou wast a God that
forgauest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions Psalm. 99.8.
. And the Prophet Micah seems to say, that while Gods people sit in darkness
yet the Lord can be a light unto them Mich. 7.7.8.
. For their God will hear them. And herein also the Lord reserueth his mercies
from the wicked. So as when they fall, they have no assurance of rising, nor is
the Lord careful to lighten their darkness: I mean they have no promise for
it. For if the Lord show them favor, if they repent not, it will make them
more inexcusable, and their judgment the heavier. Thirdly it differs in the
end. For the end of Gods wrath on his own servants, is their good and
salvation. They are judged that they might not perish with the world 1. Cor.
11.32.
. And they are whipped by the father of spirits that they may bring forth the
quiet fruit of righteousness Heb. 12.11.
In a word Gods judgments are as medicines to heal them. But on the other
side wicked men are vessels of wrath, and all tends to the ^itting of them to
destruction. The Lord comes not to them to try, but to consume, not to better
them, but for their wilful impenitency, to declare his justice upon them. All
these their differences are notably expressed by the prophet Esaias, in his 27. and
28. Chapter. For he shows that the Lord is a careful and wi^e husbandman,
and the husbandman in nature has this discretion, that he should not plow all
day to sow Isay 21.24.
? so is it with the Lord, he does not continue still plowing with long
furrows upon the backs of the righteous. When he has plowed up the fallow
ground of their hearts, he will not still go over them, to break the clods
that remain: but having once made himself a furrow, he will sow and not plow.
And for the second, the Prophet seriously expostulateth with such as should any
way incline to think, that the wicked and the godly were smitten alike. Has he
smitten him (says the Prophet) as he smote those that smote him Esaias 27.7.
? as if he should ask, has the Lord plagued Israel, as he plagued those that
were enemies unto Israel? and then he shows this difference: that when the
Lord came to visit Israel, he contended with him, v. 8.
in measure, and smote him in his bunches: whereas when God smites at a wicked
man, he smites at the root, and after many blows he will continuly have him
down. And for the least difference, the Prophet shows further, that by this
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all fruit, to take away his
sin Verse. 9.
: As if he would plainly affirm, that God meant so to cast Israel into the
furnace, as nothing should be left, but the dross, his purpose was therefore
to afflict him that he might medicine him against his sin. And thus of the
sixth verse.

Verse 7. In which ye also walked sometime when ye lived in them.


These words contain the second reason to enforce the mortification of vice,
and it is taken from their own experience: as if he would say, ye have lived a
long time in these corruptions and sins, and therefore it is sufficient that
you have spent the time past in these lusts of the Gentiles, it is high time
now to abandon them: besides you should remember the misery you lived in by
reason of sin, and from thence learn to confirm your selves in a constant
course of resisting and striving against the occasions and beginnings of those
sins.

From the coherence and the general consideration of the whole verse diverse
things may be briefly noted. Observations from the coherence.
First, that the knowledge and meditation of a man's misery by nature is a good
medicine to kill lust and covetousness: The Apostle like a wise physician,
uses here the counsel hereunto as a principal part of his direction. For in
that he puts them in mind of it, it shows that they should mind it by
themselves much more. For not only it will show that these sins did then
abound, but the very thought of such a woeful estate will beat down and kill
by degrees the vicious inclinations of nature unto such sins. Secondly, in
that the Colossians can bear it to be told of their sins past, it gives us
ocasion to take notice of this for a truth: that where a man has soundly
repented of any sin, he can easily bear it, to be touched with the
remembrance of it, and with lowliness does endure the needful discourse
concerning i^. It is a notable testimony that a man has not truly repented of
sin, when he is so impatient and unquiet in the mention or remembrance of
sin. Simile.
If a man have a wounded arm, while it is uncured, the least touch of it,
makes a man start and cry out: but when it is whole, you may gripe it hard and
yet he aileth nothing at all. So is it with our consciences in matters of
sin. They are but in a miserable case that rage and fre^ and revile when the
sins they have lived in are by public doctrine disgraced, or threatened. But
may some one say, The profit of remembering* our misery by nature.
to what end does the Apostle so often put them in mind of their sinfulness
and misery past? I answer, he does it for great reasons. For the more men
think of their misery by nature, the more it quickneth to a sense and
admiration of Gods mercy that has drawn them out of such a wretched estate.
Besides it is a notable means to keep a Christian humble, and to make him
watchful over a nature that by lamentable experience has been so prone to
sin: and it serves to stir up Christians to a more eager desire and diligence
in using the means to advantage them in knowledge and grace. It Is now time, to
redeem the time, that has been so long lost. And it will make a child of God
industrious in Gods work, seeing he has spent so much time in the service of
the devil, the world and the flesh And further it helps a man to some measure
of patience and meekness and compassion, in dealing with the sins of other
men, considering that he himself has been unwise, disobedient, serving the
lusts and diverse pleasures, etc. And lastly (as was before noted) it serves to
kill the daily lusts that may bud and sprout out after calling. How far
private men may meddle with the former sins of others.


Now concerning the remembering of the sins of others, we must know the
Apostle had a warrant by his calling and commission to rehearse the sins of
others. For Gods ministers are enioined to show Gods people their sins. But a
like liberty is not lawful to every private man. Private men may remember
others of their estate past, if it may stir them up to thankfulness, or if it
may further them in humiliation for new offenses, or they may exhort one
another, least any be deceived by sin, and so for prevention of corruptions
unto which they are by nature prone: or in some special cases to clear Gods
justice against hard hearted sinners otherwise it is a vile and sinful course
to be raking into the lives of others: but especially to be grating upon the
faults past of penitent sinners. Where God has pardoned, what has man to do
to impute? And thus of the coherence and general consideration of the words.

This verse contains two specialties of their misery by nature. First, their
continuance in sin, in that he says ye walked. Secondly, their delight in
sin, in that he says ye lived in them, that is it was the life of your life.

(...)
In which] That is in which sins: and so it teaches us, that we should be
more troubled for sin then for crosses. For he does not say, in which
miseries or judgments but in which sins and corruptions. As any are more
spiritual, sin is their greatest sorrow: and as any are more carnal they
are more troubled with crosses.

Ye] A man can never be soundly and profitably humbled, till he mind his own
sins. The knowledge of sin that is transient is dangerous, as we may see in
the Pharisie. The more he knows by the Publican, the prouder he is in
himself, but the knowledge that is reflexed is profitable. And therefore the
publican that troubled himself about his own sin, went home more justified
than the other. And therefore the Apostle here tells not of the misery of other
men, but expressly guides them to the consideration of their own misery. This
should teach us without shifting or delay to search and try our own ways,
and to grow skillful in recounting the evils of our own lives. The true
knowledge of our selves, is a great step in a holy life. It Is that the most of
us never attain to. And yet it is of singular use; it would make us humble in
our selves, compassionate toward others, easy to be admonished, tender
hearted in Gods worship, more apt to godly sorrow, and of great ripeness and
dexterity of knowledge in cases of conscience.

Also] Sin is a poison that ouerflowes all sorts of men. This also takes in
rich men and great men, and learned men, and old men, and the ciuiller sort of
men. There is no estate calling or condition of men, nor sex, or nation, but
they have been infected with this plague. It has run over the whole earth.
And therefore it should humble rich men, and learned men, and all sorts of men.
Look not at thy wealth, or thy wit, or thy learning, or thy nobility, or thy
fame amongst men, look at thy filthy nature: thou have now, or thou have had
the plague upon thy soul: and as wise and learned and rich and civil and
noble, as thou, have died of this sickness, and are in hell

Walked] This word, notes not only inclination to sin, but action: not only
words but practice and in practice, not only a falling by infirmity, but
continuance and progress in sin. To walk in sin, is to proceed in sin
from one kind to another, and from one sin to another, and to lie and dwell
in sin. And this is the wretched condition and thraldom of every one by
nature, thus hard is it to give over sin, and were it not for the great mercy
of God, thus would all men continue.

Why men live so long in sin.
Qu. But what should be the reason that men continue so long in sin, and are so
loath to get out of this miserable path? Ans. The soul by nature is dead in
sin Ephesians. 1.2.
. And all flesh is covered with a veil of blindness Esaias. 25.8.
. And satan the Prince of darkness, works effectually in the children of
disobedience: besides the course and custom of the world, that lies in
wickedness 1. Ioh. 5.18. Ephesians. 2.2.
, much hardens and confirms the sinner, and the mind and will of the flesh is
stubborn. And withal every wicked man is a great student. He deuiseth and
imagines and forecasteth how to find out ways, to set himself in a way that
is not good. And many times God in his fearful judgment, delivers many a man
up to a spiritual lethargy and slumber, and reprobate mind, that hearing he
may hear, and not understand, and seeing he may see and not perceive, having
his heart false, and his ears dull, and his eyes closed up, least he should be
converted and humbled Act: 28.27.
.

The use may be to teach us to enlarge our hearts in the sense of Gods
goodness that has delivered us from an estate that was in it self so
fearful. Especially it may comfort us against our infirmities: that howsoever
we fail by occasion, yet by Gods mercy we do not walk in sin. We proceed
not from degree to degree, and from sin to sin: it is a happy time with a
Christian, when he gets victory over his sins, so as at least by degrees
he gets down the power of them. And on the other side they are in a woeful
estate, that have their corruptions growing upon them both for power and number
and continuance. O woe will be unto them when the master shall come and find
them so doing. And thus of the first specialty.

The second is, Ye lived in them.] That is ye set the delight of your hearts
upon them. The wickedest men many times most lively.
Sin was the life of your lives. None many times more lively and in greater
iollity, then such as are in greatest danger of Gods wrath: and so cursedly
vile is man's evil disposition, that as many men are the more sinful they are
the more secure, and full of caruall liveliness. Who more frollicke, then our
drunkard swaggerers, swearers, abominable filthy person? (yea, they carry
themselves, as if they had found out a life of excellency and contentment above
all other men: and yet are buried in the ditches of monstrous wickedness, and
are descending swiftly to their own place, hasting to the vengeance to come.
Many times the holiest men are most pensive, and the vilest men, most lively.

Liued] There is a fourefold life of men. a fourefold life.
The life of nature, the life of corruption, the life of grace, and the life of
glory. The first life Adam lived before his fall. The last, the blessed live in
heaven. The third the godly live after their conversion on earth, and the
second, is the life of all the unregenerate. Sin is alive. It has a living
being in the unconverted sinner. It is a monster engendered in the heart of man,
by conjunction with satan; seating his several limbs in the several
faculties of the soul. Now it will not be amiss to consider how we may know
when this monster is alive and when he is dead. Sin may be known to be
alive, How we may know when sin is alive,
first by the flaming desires of the heart and thoughts of the mind,
inordinately bent upon things forbidden. Secondly, by the command and authority
it holds over all the faculties and powers of the soul* and body, using them
as servants and executioners of the lusts of the flesh. Thirdly, by the
contentment men place in known evils. Fourthly, by customary practice. And
lastly, if this monster by the deceitful working of Satan should live still
for a time, (as many times it does even in the worst men) yet there is a way to
try whether it be a live or no. For bring it to the law, and it will presently
revive. If it be pricked and pierced with the terrors and reproves of a sound
application, it will show it self, by unquietness, and unruly distempers. and
when it is dead.
And on the other side it is certain sin is dead, if thy flaming desires to
evil, be quenched. Secondly, if the command over the faculties of the soul,
be ceased. Thirdly, if a man seek and place his chief contentment in
spiritual things. Fourthly, if the customarie practice of evil be broken of
and dissolved, and lastly if the heart will abide the searching and sound
application of the law.

In them] So wretchedly is the unregenerate heart of man composed, that he does
not only live and sin, but he lives in sin, and with sin, and by sin
too. He lives in sin, because he is drowned under the power and guilt of
sin. He lives, with sin because he is not a guest only, but a soiourner
also with his sin. Sin keeps the house and the ^inne is at bed and board
there. And he lives by sin to, for most sinners cannot contriue how to live
without them. The letcher cannot live without his mistress, and the usurer
cannot live without his gain, and so of the rest. All these are woeful
circumstances of evil, and do maruellously decipher out a soul that feels
not the life of Jesus Christ in him, and they impart also a further misery. It
is easy to commit sin, but it is not easy to be rid of sin, a man may
also quickly forget his sin, but he shall not so quickly forgo his sin,
for howsoever by Gods singular patience, he lives, for all his sin, yet by
the singular wretchedness of his condition, all his sins, will live with
him, they are not transient, but so long as he lives, his sin will live with
him, yea it will go with him too when he dies, if it be not prevented with
speedy repentance.

The use also of all this may be to teach converted Christians, that are
delivered from this woeful misery, to walk as children of the light: having
their fruit in all goodness and righteousness and truth: having no further
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, seeing all is now made
manifest by the light: Ephesians. 5.8.9.11.13.
yea they should strive to express as much life of contentment in the works of
new life and light, as before they ever felt in the paths of sin and
darkness, and if wicked men walk on with such unwearied resolutions and
endeauours in such a dangerous estate, how should Christians be stird to all
possible constancy in weldoing, seeing they are sure that all that walk
uprightly walk safely. Thus of the seventh verse.

Ver. 8. But now put ye away even all these things, anger, wrath, malice,
cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of your mouth.


Hitherto of the mortification of vices especially against a man's self. Now
follows the mortification of Injuries. And therein I consider, first the
exhortation it self in the eighth verse and a part of the ninth. Secondly, the
reasons ver. 9.10.11. in the exhortation I consider: first the charge, put away
even all these things, secondly the catalogue of injuries, to be put away and
mortified, anger, wrath, malice etc.

From the coherence, in that the Apostle fastens this branch of the exhortation
upon the remembrance of their misery in the former verse, it shows, that the
meditation of our misery is as good to kill or beat down the power of rage and
strong passions and distempers as it has been showed to be good to kill lust
and covetousness. When you see men or women of heedy passions and violent
affections, fall into affliction of conscience, then imagine they will hurl
off their natures, and grow more calm and me^ke, but till then seldom do any
mend, or not for any long time.

Now] That is in the time of grace: and so it gives us occasion to consider
that grace yields no liberty to sin. Now that thou have received the true
grace of God, there is no time left, for passion, fretting, cursed speaking, or
filthy speaking or lying or any such injurious evils. Grace enioines us to
take leave of our old affections and our own perverse courses. Many such
things as before thy conversion might in some respects been more borne
withal, must now be left: for the converted Christian must live circumspectly,
and precisely, Iud. 4. How sin is put away.
watching in all things, and walking wisely both at home and abroad, he must
part with his old humors and perverse qualities, and therefore their
condemnation sleeps not, Math. 7.18.19.
that turn the grace of God into wantonness.

Put away] Sin is not truly repented of till it be put away. Now sin is
put away two ways. First, by Justification, and so God puts away our sins
for when God pardons iniquity, he casts it away and never sees it or
remembers it more Mich. 7.18.19
. Secondly, by sanctification, and so we must put away our sins. We must put
away or pull down sin as the rebel puts down his weapons, when he seeks
the service of his Prince, or we must deal with our sins as God deals with
the mighty, that is we must put them down from their seats: if we cannot
destroy them from living, yet we may disturb them sitting, or reigning, or
resting in us, or we must put them away as the wronged husband does his filthy
wife. We must divorce our sins that by covenant they should never be ours
more. We will never love them, and let them sleep in our bosom, and dwell with
us, and be familiar with our natures, as they have been. Now we put away sin
three ways; First by confessing them to God. Secondly, by godly sorrow,
washing the stain and filth of them from off our hearts. Thirdly, by renouncing
and forsaking the practice of them, all are here intended, but the last
principally, and this we must know will not be done with ease, if it be truly
and soundly done. The Prophet Micah means something when he says of the Lord,
he will subdue our iniquities; and then after says, he will cast them away
into the depthes of the sea Mich. 7.19.
.Must God subdue if he cast away: then man must be sure of it, that he must
labor seriously the subduing of h^s sin before he can have any comfort or
success in putting them away. Sins are like an army of rebels, that will not
be vanquished without some ado.

All these things] In the original it may be read, (...).
all things: it is true that God many times puts his servants to it, even to
deny and put away all things, they must deny themselves Luk 9.24.
, and their credits, yea and their lives too Math: 10.39.
if need be, they must deny the world, and their profits and pleasures 1. Job.
2.16.17
. Yea they must deny and forsake, and (which is more) rather then leave Christ
and the sincerity of the Gospel, A man never truly repents, till he endeavor
to be rid of all sin.
they must hate father and mother, wife and children, and brethren and sisters,
or else they cannot be Christ's disciples. But I restrain the sense as it is
hereunto sins only. And so it notes that every man that will truly repent,
must resolve to part with all sins as well as one: he must desire and endeavor
to hate and put away every sin, as well the sins have been named as the
sins are to be named. As we would have God to receive us graciously, and take
away all iniquity Hos. 14.3.
as well as one, so we must resolve sincerely to put away every sin as well as
one. If the Lord should leave one sin vnforgiuen, it might be enough to
condemn us, and so if we leave but one sin, that we have no desire nor will
to repent of, that one sin would plead against us, that we had not truly
repented of the rest. If we mark the true catalogue of sins, which here
follows, it shows that we must forsake all sorts of sins as well as one.
For we must forsake and put away inward sins as well as outward, for he says
put away anger and wrath: we must put away lesser sins as well as greater,
for he says put away filthy speaking, as well as before he had said mortify
fornication and uncleanness. Motives.
Now that we may be encouraged to this sincerity in forsaking all sin as well
as one, we may consider diverse motives. First, Christ suffered, for all
sins as well as one: and therefore we should arm our selves with the same
mind, in suffering in our flesh to cease from sin 1. Pet. 4.1.
indefinitely, that is from all sin. Secondly, we should have God grant all
our requests and not leave one out. Nay we have a promise that we shall obtain
whatsoever we ask in Christ's name Mark. 11.24.
, and therefore it is reason, when God calls for the repentance of all our
sins, we should do it, and not leave one out. Thirdly, Christ is all in all
things, and ^illeth all in all things, Col: 3.11. Ephesians. 1.23.
and therefore it is as easy for thee if thy heart be right to receive and
procure from Christ, virtue and strength against every sin as well as against
any sin. 4. This is all fruit Esaias 27.11.
, even the taking away of every sin, what pleasure or profit soever they
might bring to us. When God looks for signs and marks of truth and
uprightness, this fruit of true desire to repent, is all finite: it is
wonderfully liked of God, and if he may find this heart and desire in us, he
accounts it in steed of all other things. 5. Christians are made partakers of
every heavenly gift, even every spiritual blessing in heavenly things 1. Cor.
1.7. Ephesians. 1.3.
. Men as they would put on every grace, so they must put of every sin.
Lastly, God will show us all his good Exodus 33.19. and 34.6.7.
, he will withold from us nothing that may be good for us Psalm. 84.11.
, even till he give us proof of his glory in every divine attribute. And why
then should not we by serious and sound confession strive even to show him all
our evil, that we might obtain pardon for them and strength against them? but
if none of these reasons may persuade with us to be upright and sincere, then
let us know, that though we favor and hide and extenuate our sins, yet the
time will come when all shall be naked and manifest before God, even all the
sins that are found upon us. And therefore it were better to confess them
now, that God might not charge them upon us then, and to forsake them now, that
being washed from them by repentance, and justified from them by the spirit of
the Lord Jesus, we may then be accepted as if we had never committed them.
Ques.
Q. But can a Christian put away all his sins in this life. Answ.
Answ. He may, and I will show you how by a distribution. 1. Unwilling defects,
as belonging to original sins are pardoned the first moment of conversion.
2. Sins of ignorance are removed by general repentance, and by the daily
sacrifice. 3. Sins not loved, nor rooted are done away, by an absolute
forsaking of them. He that will continue any longer in sins that bring him no
profit nor pleasure, and such evils as he has power to leave if he will, if
these be not given absolutely over it is to no purpose for a man to talk of
repentance. 4. Particular sins that a man has greatly loved, they are put
away by serious and distinct labor in prayer, and sencible sorrow and grief
of heart for them. For less then this will not suffice for particular beloved
sins. Now lastly there will remain certain remnants of some sins, that have
roots in our corrupted dispositions, even after the first repentance. Now
these are said in Gods acceptance to be put away, when a man prays against
them and mournes over them, and daily judges himself for them: and so they
may be in his nature and yet be truly, though not perfitly put away. And thus
of the general charge. The catalogue follows. And the sins are either
sins of the heart or sins of the tongue. The sins of the heart are anger
wrath, malice. The sins of the tongue are, blaspheming or cursed speaking,
filthy speaking and lying. First of the sins of the heart.

Anger wrath] I suppose these words express one and the same sin: it may be
the two words import two degrees of anger. For there is inward fretting,
without words or signs: and there is open anger a signified passion, that
discouers it self by outward shows. both are justly condemned.

Anger indifferent.
Anger may be considered, 1. as indifferent. 2. As laudable. 3. As a vice. Anger
is a natural passion, and so in it self neither good nor evil, as it is a
sense with dislike of injury. So Adam might have conceived anger against the
serpent. The reason of the stoics, that condemn anger as a natural passion,
for evil, because it is a perturbation, is without reason. For all
perturbation is not evil, but unjust perturbation only: for Christ was angry
and vexed, and grieuouslie troubled, as at the death of Lazarus: and yet he was
without sin.

Laudable anger. Ira per zelun. Ira per vicium.
Now for the second, anger may be considered as laudable and good: for that
there is such an anger I will not stand upon the distinction of the schoolmen,
that there is anger of zeal and anger of vice: the Scripture manifestly shows
there may be good anger. The Apostle says, be angry and sin not Ephesians. 4.26.
. And Solomon says, Anger is better then laughter Eccles. 7.3.
, and the Evangelist says our Savior looked about upon them angerly Mark 3.5.
, and Saint Matthew says, he that is angry with his brother, without a cause
(...), Math. 5.22.
, as if he would acknowledge a just anger, What good ang^r is.
when there was a just cause of anger. Now this good anger, is a godly passion
of just zeal, of justice, conceived against sin in our selves or others,
that desires just revenge, to the saving of the person, appeasing of Gods
anger, or the promoting of the kingdom of Christ. I say, it is a godly
passion. For there are two sorts of natural passions. Some are so evil they
can never be good, as envy. Some are so natural, as they may be either good
or evil as they agree or disagree with the law of God, and such is anger. I
say just zeal, for I know that every zeal has not always either good cause
or good effect. I add against sin, because it must not be our indignation at
the person. And we may be angry and vexed at our own sins as Paul was
Rem. 7.
as well as at the sins of others. And revenge also is the end of anger: for
so may a Christian be revenged on himself as a fruit of godly sorrow 2. Cor.
7.10.
, as also he may desire the just revenge of the magistrate upon others, the end
must be to save the person, not to express our spleenes, and to appoint Gods
anger, as Phineas did, and others of Gods servants, and lastly to promote
Christ's kingdom, by saving a soul from sin Iam. 5. vlt.
. But it is vicious anger is here meant.

Vicious anger, Vicious angor (...).
has her degrees. For there is 1. the offense a grief of the heart, it may be
this is that the Apostle has Ephesians. 4.31. and is translated, bitterness. 2.
Inflamed anger, or the inward working of this bitterness, or vexation, or
offense or grief. 3. Outward rage, neither are all men of one fit in their
anger. For some are quickly angry and quickly appeased: some are slow to anger
and slow from anger. Some are quickly inflamed, but slowly pacified. The best
is, slowly to kindle and quickly to be satisfied, but all are naught.

Now concerning vicious anger, I propound 2. things principally to be
considered. 1. Reasons. 2. Remedies against it. Now for the first, There are
diverse things might persuade a Christian to make conscience of the
mortification of anger and frowardness. 1. The commandment of God, which is
express, be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, as Solomon records it in
the 7. of Ecclesiastes Eccles. 7.11.
, 2. The praises the Lord gives to men that can bridle their anger, and the
disgraces the holy Ghost casts upon impatient persons, As Proverb. 14.29. He
that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but he that is has^i^ of
spirit exalts folly. And again, Proverb. 19.11. It is the discretion of a
man to defer his anger, it is his glory to pass over a transgression. And
again Proverb. 12.8. A man shall be commended according to his wisdom, but
he that is of a perverse heart shall be despised. And in the place of
Ecclesiastes before alleged, he says, Anger rests in the bosom of fools.
3. The nature of evil anger. What is anger, but the fury of the unclean
spirit, the madness of the soul, the unrest of all the faculties, a very
beast, within the heart of man, 4. The effects of anger, Which may be
considered, either more generally or more particularly. And the particular
evil effects are either internal or external. The internal effects are such
as these. 1. It blindes the mind, the just anger troubles the mind, but
unjust anger blindes it. 2. It loses the bowels of pity, and mercy,
especially from the persons. A man has no affections neither for duties of
piety nor of mercy. 3. It greiues the spirit of God Ephesians. 4.30.31.
. 4. It lets in the Devil into a man's heart Ephesians. 4.17.
. The external effects are these. 1. It will interrupt prayer, as the Apostle
Peter intimat^, if there be frowardness through indiscretion or contempt in
the family, that will interrupt prayer, and work a negligence in Gods worship
1. Pet. 3.7.
. And therefore it is one thing the Apostle Paul expressly requires, we
should look to concerning prayer, namely, That men pray as without doubling,
so without wrath 1. Tim. 2.8.
. 2. It is a great hinderance to the profit of hearing, and therefore it is one
of the Apostle James his rules, that if we would profit by the word, we should
be slow to wrath Iam. 1.19.20
. 3. It does notably shame a man, and discover and blaze abroad his folly, for
as Solomon observes, he that is of a hasty mind exalts folly Pro: 14.29.
: and in the 12. chapter and 16. verse, he says, a fool in a day may be
known by his anger. 4. Anger disables a man for society: for it is Gods
commandment, or advise, that we should make no friendship with an angry man,
nor go with a furious man: and as for other reasons, least we learn his
ways, and receive destruction to our own souls Pro: 22.24.25.
. And in general, anger is the door or gate of vice, and therefore David in
the 37. Psalm, says, Cease from anger, leave of wrath, fret not thy self
also to do evil Psalm. 37.8.
, as if he would imply, that to abound in anger, is to abound in sin: and it
cannot be, but a man must be guilty of much sin, that lives in fretting and
passion, and inward unrest; and Solomon says plainly, that a furious man
abounds in transgressions Pro: 29.22.
. besides anger brings Gods curse upon a man, as it is in Job, anger slays
the foolish Job 5.2.
, it brings many times great and sudden judgments, and as Solomon observes, a
man of great wrath, shall suffer punishment, and if thou deliver him, yet thou
must do it again Pro: 19.19.
. Hence it is, that our Savior Christ, denounces judgment both temporal and
eternal against unadvised anger in the fifth of Matthew Math. 5.22.
. And this of the reasons.

The remedies against anger are of two sorts. I. there are remedies for anger
in our selves. II. there are remedies for anger in others.

There are diverse things are good to repress and subdue, and mortify anger in
our selves. 1. from the coherence of these words with the former verse, it
appears, that the serious and frequent meditation of our misery, is a good
means to cut down the power and unruliness of our passions. 2. Saving
knowledge will make a man peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated Iam: 3.17.
, and the true reason why there is so much passion many times in the heart, is,
because their is so little knowledge in the head. for passion and folly are
twins.

Thirdly, to prevent anger, or to restrain it, it is good to take heed of
meddling with the strife that belongs not to us. But carefully to mind and
meddle with our own business Prou. 26.7.
, especially we should take heed of meddling with foolish and indiscreet
persons, for he that contendeth with the foolish, whether he rage or laugh,
there is no rest Pro: 29 9.
. Fourthly, we must not give place to wrathc, nor let it have a vent by sudden,
and unadvised words, or by suffering our affections to increase in swelling and
desire of revenge: we should silence our passions, and resolve to suspect and
restrain our words. Anger smothered will languish, but let out will flame unto
further mischief. Fifthly, we should divert the course of our anger, and spend
the heat of our affections upon our own sins, and it were good to get into
our heads a catalogue of some of our chiefest corruptions, that if we be
suddenly tempted to anger, we might presently think of those sins, and
spend our zeal upon them. Sixthly, we should consider him that prouokes us to
anger. That he is the instrument of God to try our patience: and that if he
do it wilfully it is a brand of his folly. Lastly, the meditation of the
passion of Christ is an excellent remedy to kill anger and to crucify it And
thus of anger in ourselves.

Now the remedies for anger in others are such as these. First, silence. Unto
many natures, to answer again is to put fuel to the fire. For anger is fire,
and words are fuel. Secondly, if thy silence will be interpreted to be
sullenness, or contempt (for some think they are despised, if they be not
answered) then the next remedy is a soft answer Prou: 15.1.
. And thirdly, it seems that a gift in secret, is good to pacify anger. For so
Solomon thinks Prou. 21.14. But fourthly, if this will not serve, then it is
good to give place to it Rom: 12.19.
, I mean to go away from the angry person, till his anger be over. But
especially take heed that thou provoke not anger, for the forcing of wrath
brings out strife as the churning of milk brings forth butter, and the
wringing of the nose brings forth blood Prou. 30.33.
.

The use of all this may be to humble every one of us. We may lay our hands
upon our mouths, and repent of our foolishness, in our passions Prou: 30.32.
. And we should for hereafter be careful, in all companies, but especially in
our families to avoid the customary sins of passion. Peevishness and this
daily fretting and chasing, is a cause of much sin and disorder, and a
notable let of piety: and an extreme affliction to others that are troubled
with it. It is better dwell in the corner of a house top then with a brawling
woman in a wide house Prou: 21.6.
. For a continual dropping in a rainy day, and a contentious woman are alike
Prou: 27.15.
. Thus of anger and wrath. Malice follows.

Malice] The word (...) is diversely taken. Sometimes for evil of punishment, or
grief for crosses Math. 6.34.
. Sometimes for wickedness in general, or the evil habit opposed to virtue
Acts 8.22.
. Sometimes for malice or hatred. And so it is taken, Romans 1.29. 1. Cor. 5.8.
and so it is to be taken here. And this malice is nothing else, but anger
inueterate.

Malice has diverse degrees. For it begins in the base estimation and loathing
of the heart Leuit: 19.17.
: and then it proceeds to a desire, that plods and waits for every opportunity
of revenge. And so it is grudge. Afterward it becomes open, and shows it
self, by inflation, which is, when a man goes so as he thinks his neighbor
not worthy to be looked upon. Secondly, by strife and contention, suits and
brawles. Thirdly, by bitterness and gaul, in censuring and judging and lastly
by wilfulness, and a resolution not to be entreated.

Again, malice is varied by the persons in whom it is. There is public malice
and private malice: public malice is in public estates, and is showed by
factions and divisions: private malice is varied by the objects, for there is a
malice in wicked men against Gods servants. Thus they have hated them that
rebuke in the gate Amos 5.10.
: Thus all the members of Christ are hated of the world 1. Ioh. 3 15.
: and this hatred of goodness is exceeding ill interpreted of the Lord, he
accounts it as manslaughter 1. Ioh. 3.11.
, and will accordingly judge it Psalm. 129.5.6.7.
.

There is also domestical malice between husband and wife, brethren and
sisters, servants and masters, etc. This domestical grudge or malice is
exceeding hateful to God, and hurtful to the family: besides, it is
desperate, for a brother offended is harder to win then a strong castle Pro:
18.19.
: and the Lord hates all that have any hand in it; for he that sows discord
among brethren Pro: 6.19.
, is one of the six things the Lord hates.

There is also malice abroad, between man and man in controuersing: and that
kind of malice is principally here mentioned: now this kind of malice is not
always open and professed, for he that hates, as the Wiseman says, many
times dissembleth with his lips and lays up deceit within him. there may be
seven abominations in his heart, though he speak fair Pro: 26.24.25.
. and in another place, he says, hatred may be hidden with lying lips Pro:
10.18.
. but of what kind soever it be, it is exceeding naught, and to be avoided.
Now concerning this sin, I further propound two things: first, reasons. 2.
remedies against it, and then I will touch some use of all.

And the first reason may be taken from the vile nature of it. It is a vice so
transcendent, that it passes other vices; it has been usually said, that to
be angry is humane, but to persevere in anger (which is this malice) is
deuilish: and therefore it is reckoned in the first of the Romans, amongst the
monstrous sins, which the monstrous Gentiles fell into: besides, to hate and
be hateful, is a dangerous sign of vnregeneracie Tit: 3.3.
, even that a man was never truly converted, for he that says he is in the
light and hates his brother, is in darkness even till now 1. Ioh. 2.9.
. Thirdly, it is worthy to be repented of and carefully shunned, even for the
ill effects of it, for it is like leaven 1. Cor. 5.8.
, it will sour and spoil whatsoever praiseworthy qualities were in a man
before: and it is a great let both to the word and prayer; and thence it is
that the Apostle Peter exhorts, that if we would grow by the word in affection
and practice, we must then lay aside all malice and envy 1. Pet. 2.1.2.
: and the Apostle James shows in his 4th chapter Iam. 4.1.2.3.
, that many desire and ask and have not, and he implies that (among other
things) their warring, and fighting, and iangling contentions were the cause of
it. But our Savior Christ is expressly plain, that if men's stomachs be so big,
they will not forgive, the Lord will not forgive them, though they be never so
importunate Math: 6.14.
. and besides, men that in their passionate grudges* are so hasty to strife,
are many times brought to those straits in the end, that they know not what to
do, when they are put to shame by their adversaries Pro: 25.8.
. Further, Solomon observes that men that think to hide their grudge and
hatred, have their wickedness, many times, showed before the whole
congregation Pro: 26.26.
: and they that dig pits in their spite for others, by the just providence
fall into the same themselves Pro: 26.27.
. Few malicious persons prosper; he that by his malice is carried into
contention, knows not what he does, for he is as he that lets out the
water Pro: 17.14.
: a whole flood of mischief may break in upon him, that he dreams not of,
for he that hates his brother, as Saint John says, walks in darkness, and
knows not whether he goes, for the darkness of malice has blinded his eyes
1. Ioh. 2.11.
. Finally, let such as will not be reconciled, nor agree with the adversary
quickly, fear that prison, that is threatened by our Savior, even the prison
of hell, into the which, if they be cast, they shall not come out till they
have paid the uttermost farthing Math: 5.
. and on the other side, it is a singular praise to be ready and forward to be
reconciled, and lay aside malice and discord, and a crown of reward shall be
given to such, as seek peace and agreement: yea a double crown, one, because
he will be reconciled,
and another, because he seeks it, and asks peace first.

The remedies against malice in our selves.
The remedies against malice follow: and they are of two sorts. For malice is to
be medicined in our own hearts, or avoided, or it is to be compounded, or
prevented in others. Now to take order that malice might not infect us, these
rules are to be observed. First, we must take heed of the causes of malice, and
they are either within us or without us; within us there is pride Pro: 13.10.
, and impatience, and envy, and in some nature a very lust to contend, a kind
of petulancy, and a very spirit of contradiction; now unless we keep out or
subdue these, it cannot be, but grudge and malicious discords will transport
us. Again, without us, there is the talebearer and scorner, and the froward
person, and the busie-body, called the man of imaginations, all these must be
shun^ned, and avoided, if we would live without malice or contention: for where
no wood is, there the fire goes out, and so where there is no talebearer
strife cease Pro: 26.20.
. and the like may be said of contentious and froward persons, for as coals are
to burning coals, so is a contentious man to kindle strife Pro: 26.21.
. If a man find himself apt to grudge or strife, it is his best way, to keep
out of the way of froward persons, that may soon fire him. The like counsel
must be given concerning the scorner, for, says the Wiseman, cast out the
scorner and contention shall go out Pro: 22.10.
: and it is sure, that he that would not be infected with hatred, his best way
will be to hate the busie-body. Now if this direction will not serve the
turn, then in the second place, thou must mortify thy rising malice, and
confess it with grief unto God, till by prayer thou get some victory over it.
Thirdly, much malice and grudge would be avoided, if we did but observe that
counsel, Leuit. 19.17. namely, that when we did conceive dislike of any thing
in our brother, for which we did fear we should hate him, we should go to him,
and reprove him, rebuking him plainly for his sin: many times a seasonable
reproof draws out the poison of beginning grudge and malice. Fourthly, it is
good to meditate upon the passion of Christ, and of his readiness to forgive
even upon the cross great wrongs, and worser enemies: we should lay a
necessity upon our selves, to be advised before we would admit contention, or
the resolution to contend, for as Solomon says, by pride comes contention,
but with the well-aduised is wisdom Pro: 13.10.
, even this wisdom to forbear contention. Finally, in the fourth to the
Ephesians the Apostle before he says, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and
malice, etc. be put away, had said in the verse before, grieve not the holy
spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of redemption Ephesians. 4.30.31
: as if he would import, that a man might be induced to put away malice, and
the rest of the vices there named, with great ease and readiness, if he would
obey the motions of the Spirit, and busy himself seriously about the
assurance of his full and final Redemption, daily thinking of the time when
he shall be rid of all wants, and sins, and wrongs too: if we could oftener
think of Gods judgments, and the great day of revenge and recompense, it would
cause us to have less stomach, to be our own judges and reuengers. And if
the spirit of God might rule us, our flesh would have little heart to busy it
self about the works of malice.

Now for malice in others, Remedy for malice in others.
it must be considered either as it is to be compounded, or as it is to be
avoided; and for the compounding of it* observe these rule^ First, if thou will
not do good for evil, (which yet is required Pro: 25.21.
) yet be sure, thou render not evil for evil Rom: 12.17.
. Secondly, if thy brother have ought against thee, so as thou be privy to thy
self that thou have done him any wrong, or given him any cause so to conceive,
then go thou and seek reconciliation, tender it and ask it of him. Thirdly,
if the contention be yet secret, follow Salomons counsel, say nothing of it to
others, but debate thy cause with thy neighbor himself, and discover not thy
secret to another Pro: 25.4.
: peace might soon be made with many men, if the discord were not made so
public. Now for avoiding of contention and malicious discords, there are
diverse rules of great use. I. Meddle not with the strife that belongs not to
thee Pro: 26.17.
. II. Contend not with fools: thou shall never have done if thou meddle with
foolish persons, for whether they rage or laugh, there is no rest Pro: 29.9.
. III. Let nothing be done through vainglory Phil. 2.3.
. IV. Speak evil of no man Tit: 3.2.
. V. Be courteous and tenderhearted Ephesians. 4.31.32.
. VI. Wrong no man, but follow that which is good both amongst your selves and
toward all men These. 5.11.
. Lastly, pray for a covering love, for hatred stirs up strife, but love
covers all sin Pro: 10.12.
.

The use of all this, may be both for reproof and for instruction. For
reproof of many men, that are fearfully soured with this leaven, they do not
only let the Sun go down upon their wrath, but they let the Sun go his
whole course, and can find no time from the one end of the year unto the
other, to compound and lay aside their discords. Nay so has malice seated it
self in some dogged and spightfull natures, that it seems to proclaim, it
will never loose possession, till the devil the father of malice has full
possession both of soul and body. But let every godly mind be persuaded to
avoid this monstrous sin, yea let us strive to avoid the very beginning of
it, or if nature have such corruption, that for the present we cannot get our
hearts rid of all secret poison of dislike, let us be sure we be but children
in malitiousnesse: it is a monstrous wickedness to have a head that is
exercised to strife, and a heart that has a kind of sinful dexterity, in
framing and plodding for malicious courses. And thus much of malice.

Cursed speaking] The word in the original, is (...), blasphemy. Now
blasphemy or cursed speaking, it is a sin either against piety, or against
righteousness. As it is against piety, it is blasphemy to reproach, or reason
against the person or nature of God: or against the providence and works of
God: or against the worship of God and the means thereof, and so it is cursed
speaking and a kind of blasphemy to repine at Gods works 1 Cor 10.10.
: to reproach Gods sabothes Lamen. 1.
, or messengers 2. Cor. 36.16*
, or his word. Also there is a cursed speakinge which is against righteousness
in the second table, and thus it is cursed speaking. When Subjects curse the
king Eccles 10. vl^
. When Masters threaten their servants Ephesians. 6 9
. When Parents provoke their children Ephesians. 6.4.
. When Husbands are bitter to their wives Col^. 3.19.
. When wives braule and chide with their Husbands Pro. 25.24.
. When great men lord it over the poor Pro. 13.8.
, and the like. Cursed speaking is either before the face, and so it is strife
of words, or behind the back and so it is backbiting or whispering 2. Cor.
12.20.
. It is cursed speaking, to mock and scorn, it is cursed speaking to judge
and censure, it is cursed speaking to slander and disgrace, it is cursed
speaking to be ever complaining in all places. Finally it is cursed speaking
when men speak evil of any man, and there is a special kind of it in
speaking evil of godly men, and this properly is blasphemy in the second
table, for the Lord for the honor he bears to his people, is pleased to afford
the name of blasphemy to their reproaches, as importing, that he takes it as if
he were reproched himself.

We should all of us take heed of cursed speaking of what kind soever, for it
arises of ill causes, as envy or malice, and it has effects, for it is
certain thou werest as good pierce others with a sword as smite them with thy
tongue. And therefore a bitter and cursed tongue is often compared in the
Scripture, to the stinge of adders, and to a sword* yea a sharp sword* to a
razar, and to arrows, and the like* besides the hurt ^t does to thy self* for
if thou bite and devour, take heed thou be not devoured Gal. 5.15.
. And it is just with God thou should be judged and censured that accus^omes
thy sel^^ (...) judge and censure Math. 7.1*
. And though thou speak evil never so secretly, ye^ ^od does many times
wonderfully discover the shame of it before others, and if man would not judge
thee for thy evil tongue, yet it is certain God will Iam. 5.9.
. And it is many times seen that men and women of distempered and spightfull
tongues are made a very abomination amongst men Pro. 24.
* so as all men are weary of them and shun them. Lastly scornful and
cursed speaking proves a notable hinderance to the success of the word 1. Pet.
2.1.2.
, and that these kind of people might observe when they come to hear they
receive not a blessing, and why? But because blessing is so far from their
lips, as they loved cursing so it comes to them.

The use of all may be to exhort us to put away far from us a froward mouth and
perverse lips Pro. 4 24.
, and that nothing be done through strife, but rather that all things be done
without murmuring or reasonings, or brawlings, or reuilings. And herein such as
fear God, should strive to give good example, seeing they are as lights in the
midst of ^rooked and perverse people. Ques.
Q. But what are the remedies of cursed speak^ng. Answ.
Answ. If we have sinned through bitterness, we should observe two rules.
Remedies.
1. Let thy own words greiue thee Psalm. 56.5.
, that is, labor by prayer and godly sorrow to beat down the power of thy
perverseness, without defending, excusing or extenuating of thy frowardness.
2. Keep thy heart with all diligence Pro. 23.24.
, Look to the first risings of thy passions. For bitterness is first in the
heart before it can come into the tongue. Now for preventing of evil speaking
in others, the only rule is to give them no occasion, either by words or
injurious and wicked life. Object.
Ob. But they will rail and revile without a cause. Answ.
Answ. Then observe these rules. 1. Betake thy self to prayer, so did David
Psalm. 104.2.3.4
. 2. It is good oft-times to be as a dumb man that hears not Psalm. 38.13.14.
. 3. Be sure thou be careful thou wrong not the names of others, else though
thou be innocent in the things imputed, yet thou art justly scourged with the
like evil Math. 17.1.
. 4. The constantest and surest medicine for railing, is a holy continuance in
godly conversation: for though for the present it seem not to profit the
railer, yet in time to come it may Phil. 2.15.
. I add also Salomons rule, namely, with an angry countenance to drive away a
backbiting biting tongue. For that is many times the bellows to kindle the
fire of bitterness and fierce speaking.

Filthy speaking] This is another of the wretched vices of the tongue, Reasons
against filthy speaking.
to be with all care and conscience avoided by a Christian. And therefore* the
Apostle in the fifth to the Ephesians also, as well as here puts it into the
Catalogue of evils he would most seriously diswade them from: and out of that
Chapter, we may gather diverse reasons against it. 1. We are dear unto God and
therefore should follow him as dear children. Now of all things we never saw
any color of this in God. Angry speaking indeed is sometimes for our
capacity given to God: but never filthy speaking, or any the least glimpse of
it. 2. Our love should be as Christ's was. Now his was to profit not to infect,
and it was pleasing to God, not as hatred, as this filth of words must needs
be. 3. It is a shame, and uncomeliness, and dishonor to a Christian. 4. If any
would object it is but a small matter, the Apostle would soon answer, men
ought not to be deceived with vain words for it is sure that because of this
and such like things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. 5. This is a froth of filthiness that should only be found in
unregenerate men that lie in darkness, and it is a work of darkness, to
speak filthily as well as to do filthily. 6. If we be children of the light we
should show it by our fearfulness to speak or do any thing that were
unpleasing to God. And we should show it by reproouing such filthiness in
others: for such filth if it be not reproved is not regarded, but a Christian
reproof will make manifest in some measure that it is not good nor agreeing to
truth and righteousness, and goodness. 7. Men are in some degree of a lethargy
that use this sin. 8. A Christian ought to walk exactly, strictly, precisely
or circumspectly, it is no more then he is bound to do, to make conscience of
the least filthy word as well as of filthy actions, and therein to take notice
of Gods will. And this of the second vice of the tongue.

Verse. 9. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put of the old man with
his works.


Lie not one to another] This is the last vice in the Catalogue, lying is given
oftentimes to the dumb creatures: and so Images lie, and teach lies, and so
the wonders of Antichrist are lying wonders 2 These: 2:11.
. But it is most usually and properly ascribed to man, and so he lies either in
nature, or in work, or in word. In nature, and so the Prophet David says men
of high degree are a lie Psalm: 62:9
. In work, and so men lie either through hypocrisy, or deceit. Hypocrisy is
lying, whether it be in worship to God Esaias 59.13.
, or carriage toward men Revel. 2.9.
. Deceit is lying, and therefore the bread of deceit is called bread of lying,
Proverb. 20.17. But most properly a lie is in word, and so there is a lie in
doctrine when men teach falsehood, or apply truths to wrong persons or for
wrong ends. The Devil is a lying spirit in the mouth of many Teachers. Men lie
also in false witness bearing, so do they in slaundering and flattering. But
most strictly, lying is in the report of things untrue in conuersing with men
whether at home or abroad.

There are many reasons why a Christian should take heed of lying. Reasons
against lying.
First if we consider the cause of lying it is the Devil, he is the father of
lies Ioh 8.44.
. Secondly if we consider the nature of a lie, it is most shameful and
hateful: and therefore the liar denies his lie, because he is a shamed to be
taken with it.

And our Swaggerers hold the lie so disgraceful that they will revenge it many
times with blood. Riches cannot add so much grace to a man as lying will bring
him disgrace, and therefore Solomon says: A poor man walking in his
integrity, is better then a rich man which is a liarf. And the Lord uses to
reckon lying with the most monstrous sins, to make us the more to hate it:
as we may see in the Catalogues of the Revelation, Reu. 21.8.22.15.
and in other places of Scripture. Thirdly on the contrary to speak the truth
is to show righteousness Prou. 12.17.
. A mouth without guile is a mark of Gods redeemed Revel. 14.5.
, and the remnant of Israel, as ingenerall they will do no iniquity, so in
special they will not speak lies Zeph 3 13.
. Fourthly in the Epistle to the Ephesians the Apostle reasons thus, Put away
lying; speak every man truth to his neighbor for we are members one of an
other Ephesians 4 25.
. It were most unnatural for the head to lie to the hand, or one member to be
false to an other: so unnatural is it for Christians to lie one to an other.
For they are (or profess to be) members one of an other. Fifthly, if we
consider the effects or consequents of lying, for it makes us abominable to
God, as they that do truly are Gods delight, so lying lips are abomination
to the Lord Pr^. 12.22.
, and a liars tongue is one of the 7. abominable things which Solomon
reckons up Pro. 6.17.
. The law also is given to liars among the rest, as the Apostle to Timothy
affirms 1. Tim. 1.10.
. It is one of the sins that bringes upon a man's soul and body, the
forfeiture of the law. If lying be not restrained in time thou may get such
a habit of lying that thou can hardly tell any thing but thou will mix some
falsehood with it, and that will both increase thy sin and the guilt of it.
Besides thou will loose thy credit, so that thou will hardly be believed if
thou speak the truth. Sixthly, know that God will enter into judgment with
all liars Hosea 4, 2.
, sometimes by ordinary judgments, sometimes by extraordinary, as he did with
Ananiah and Saphirah Acts 5.
. Now the holy Ghost says: he that speaks lies shall not escape Prou. 19.5.
, but God will destroy them that speak leasings Psalm. 5.6.
, or if we could escape in this world, yet the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone is prepared for them that speak or love lies. Revel. 22.15.


Use.
The Use may be for reproof and humiliation to such as find themselves
overtaken with this sin, especially if it reign in them, but more especially
they are in a cursed condition that seek lies Psalm. 4.4.
, and teach their tongues to lie Jeremy 9, 5.
, neither let men please themselves that they can do it covertly. For liars are
for the most part easily found out, there is among the rest. 3. signs of a
liar and in one of the three he usually discouers himself. Three signs of a
liar.
1. To vary incontinently Prou, 12:19
. 2. To hearken to a false tongue Prou. 17.4.
. 3. To love lies Revel. 22.15
. But let every one that fears God obey this counsel of the Apostle, to put
lying in the Catalogue of sins he would daily watch against. And because by
nature we are all prone unto this sin, we should remember it even in our
prayers to God, that he would remove far from us vanity and lies Prou. 3.8.
. Before I pass from this vice, there are certain questions to be answered,
Quest.
as first whether all lying be sin or no. Answ.
That this may be understood men use to divide lies into three sorts. There is
an ossicious, and a pernicious, and a jesting lie. All men condemn the
pernicious lie, many excuse the lie in jest, and some commend the officious
lie, but the truth is, all are naught. And therefore the Apostle says, lie not
at all, for he speaks indefinitely. But it will be objected that the
midwiues and Rahab and Micholl did lie, but it must be answered, that their
zeal and piety was to be praised, Object.
but the means they used was not to be imitated. If any object that the
Patriarchs used lying, they must know that diverse speeches of theirs, which to
some seem to be lies, indeed were not. For Sarah was Abraham's sister, and
Jacob was Isacks first borne by divine dispensation and prophetically, and so
Paul's speech about the high Priest may be excused, when he says he knew not
that he was the high Priest. For from the death of Christ the right of the
Priesthood ceased. If it be further objected that of two evils the less is to
be chosen. Object.
I answer, that, that rule is to be understood of evils of inconvenience, Answ.
not of evils of sin. Now that it may further appear that it is not lawful
to lie, no though it were to save others from great danger. These reasons may
be weied. First we may not do evil that good may come of it Rom: 3.
. 2ly Peter was rebuked for dissembling, though it were, as he conceived, to a
good end, even to avoid offense and scandal Gal: 2.
. 3ly nay it is not lawful to him, though it were to defend Gods cause, or to
prevent his dishonor: therefore Job says earnestly and in great heat, will ye
speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him, will ye accept his
person Job 13.7.8.9.
etc. 4ly If we might lie to save others out of danger, then we might lie to
save our selves also: for we are not more bound to care for the safety of
others, then our own: but we may not lie to save our selves, for then Peter
had not sinned by denying his Master, keeping his faith and his heart, seeing
it was to save his own life. Lastly, we might as well commit fornication with
the Moabite; to draw them to our religion, or steal from rich men to give to
the poor, as to lie to profit.

Quest. But is it not lawful to suppress the truth sometimes? Quest:


Answ. Truth is either religious or political. Ans:
For religious truth, being asked of our faith, we are ingenuously to profess
it. Now political truth is to be considered, either as it is required in
judgment, or as it is to be used in cases out of judgment. As for the truth
before a Judge, it may not be concealed, when thou art called to answer the
truth; but in private conuersing, we are not always bound to reveal all the
truth: for the precept, Speak every man the truth Ephesians: 4.15.
, is an affirmative precept, and so does not bind always, and at all times,
and in all places Besides charity binds us to conceal and cover many
infirmities, and a wise man keeps in, some part till afterward; and besides it
is apparent, men are not bound to discover their secret sins to all men.
Samuel also is taught to conceal a part of the truth, when he went to anoint
David. And thus of the catologue of Injuries.

Seeing you have put off the old man with his works.] In these words with the
verses that follow to the 12th is contained three reasons to enforce the
mortification of injuries.

I. They are the works of the old man: verse: 10.
and they have by profession put off the old man, and so they should do his
works. II. They are now in the state of grace, verse: 11.
they are new men, and therefore have new manners: they are by the means
renewed in knowledge, and therefore ought to grow in practice, even in the
mortification of what remains of corruption, they are renewed after the image
of Christ, and Christ's image is the pattern of all holiness, and they must
therefore leave those sins, because how like soever they be to the humors
and dispositions of the most men, yet they are not found in the Image of
Christ. III. God is impartially righteous and just: if men mind not
mortification, he cares not for them, though they were Jews, circumcised,
freemen* and contrariwise, if they do conscionably strive after the holiness
of Christ, and the mortification of sins, he will accept them, though they
were Graecians, Scythians, bond, etc.
In these words is heedfully to be noted, the matter to be avoided: both the
old man and his works. 2. the manner employed in the metaphor ( put off) with
the time, have, and the persons, ye.

The old man is by some taken to be their old condition of life in the time of
Idolatry; What the old man signifies
by others, to be their custom and habit in sin: but it is generally by the
most taken to be the corruption of nature, and inborne prauitie, that vicious
humor and ill disposition that naturally is in every one of us, it is the image
of the first Adam in our hearts.

This corruption is here said to be, the man: Why corruption is called the man.
because it is seated in every part of man, and because it rules and frames a
man, and because it lives in man, so as sin only seems to be alive and the
man dead, and because God will take notice of nothing in the sinner, but his
sin.

2 The old man. partly in respect of the first Adam, whose sin is ours by
propagation, and why it is called the old man.
and who is called old, to distinguish him from the second Adam 1 Cor: 15.4.5.
: and partly in respect of our state of corruption, which in the renewed estate
we change so, that our condition after calling is said to be new, and our
disposition before calling said to be old. This corruption may be said to be
old also by the effects, for in godly men it waxes old and withers more and
more daily by the power of Christ in them: and in wicked men, it spends the
strength and vigor and power of the faculties of the soul, and makes him more
and more withered and deformed in Gods sight, and withal it hasten^ old age,
and death upon their bodies. also in some men, sin may be said to be old in
repect of continuance, this is most fearful; age in any corruption is a most
grievous circumstance of aggrauation; it is best not to sin at all, and the
next, to get quickly out of it.

What are the works of the old man.
Thus of his nature: now of his works. The works of the old man are in
general, works of darkness, of iniquity, of the flesh, vain, unfruitful,
corrupt, abominable, deceivable, shameful, and tend to death. And now
particularly, if we would know what he does, and how he is employed, we must
understand, that he gives laws to the members against the law of God and the
mind; that he frames objections and lets against all holy duties; that he
strives to br^ng the soul into bondage and captivity under imperious lusts;
that he inflames the desires of the heart against the spirit: that he infects
our vain generation, and works both sin and wrath for our posterity; but
more especially, his works are either inward or outward: inwardly he works
Atheism, impatience, contempt, carnal considence, hypocrisy: he forges and
frames continually, and multiplies evil thoughts: he works lusts of all sorts,
he works anger, rage, malice, grief, evil suspicions, and the like.
Outwardly, he works all sorts of disorders, impieties, unrighteousness, and
intemperance. A catalogue of his outward works are set down, in the Epistle to
the Galathian Gal: 5.22.23
. he is here in the coherence, described to be covetous, filthy, wrathful,
cursed and lying: and all these are well called his works, because he rests not
in evil dispositions, but will burst out into action: besides, it is his trade
^o sin, and they are well called his works, because they are properly a man's
own, for till a man repent, he has nothing his own but his sin, and it is
to be observed, that his works indefinitely must be put away: as if the holy
ghost would imply, that all his works were naught: for his best works are
infected with the viciousness of his person, or else they are not warranted in
the word, or they are not finished, or the end was not good, or the manner not
good, or they were wrought too late, or being out of Christ, they were not
presented by Christ unto God, in whom only they can be accepted.

Thus of the matter to be reformed, the manner follows. Put off] The
faithful are said to put of the old man six ways. 1 In signification, or
sacramentally, and so in baptism. 2 In profession, or outward acknowledgment:
and so we profess to leave off the practice of sin. 3ly by Justification, and
so the guilt of sin is put off. 4ly by relation, and so in our head Christ
Jesus he is every way already perfitly put off. 5ly by Hope, and so we believe
he shall be wholly removed at the last day. 6ly by Sanctification, and so he is
put off but in part, and inchoatiuely: the last way is here principally meant.

Now in respect of Sanctification, the old man and his works are put away,
first, in the word, for so Christians are said to be clean by the word Ioh:
15.3.
, and to be sanctified by the word Ioh: 17.17.
. The word, first, begins the work of reformation, it informs, renewes,
chaseth away the affections and lusts of sin, etc. and then secondly, the
Christian at home puts him away by confession, and godly sorrow, and the
divorce of daily practice of reformation* this is in effect that which is
signified in the other metaphor, of crucifying the old man Rom: 6.6.
: for to crucify him, is to lift him up on the cross of Christ, and to nail
him with the application of Gods threatenings, which causes the pains of godly
sorrow.

Haue] Q. Can men put of the old man in this life. Ans. They may by inchoation
not perfectly. Q. But when may we have the comfort of it, that the old man is
put of and crucified in us. Ans: When he is so subdued that he reigns not, for
(to take the benefit of the word, crucified) to crucify is not absolutely and
outright to kill: and therefore it is said in the Creed, Christ was dead, after
he had said, he was crucified, to note a further degree. Now then, (as I
conceive of it) sin is crucified, when we make our natures smart for it, so
repenting of our sin, as we allow no sin: for to crucify a man, is to
leave no member free: provided that we be sure, that the old man be so
pierced, that he will dye of it, though he be not presently dead.

Yee] The persons are indefinitely set down, to note that it is a duty
required of all sorts of men, to put of the old man, and this work it is
required of great men, of learned men, of wise men, of young men, in a word, of
all men without exception. The uses follow.

And first we may here inform our selves concerning the necessity of
mortification, Use.
there is in us such corruption of nature, and such works of corruption, as if
they be not mortified, they will certainly mortify us. Secondly, here may be
collected, matter of confutation, and that of Popish antiquity: for every man
carries that about with him, that may prove that a thing may be ancient and
yet vile. Thirdly, how can the most of us escape, but the reproves of God,
must needs fall upon us, for every man looks to the mending of his house, and
his lands, and his apparel, etc. but who looks to the mending of his nature?
every man has courage to put away an evil servant, and ^n adulterous wife,
but where are the people that will resolutely set upon the divorce of sin?
men may be deceived, but the truth of God will remain unchangeable, if we have
not put of the old man with his deceivable affections and works, we have not
after all this hearing learned Christ as the truth is in him Ephesians: 4 22.23.
: but when I speak of putting of, I mean not that sin should be put of, as
men put of their garments, with a purpose to put them on again, after a
certain time.

Verse. 10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the
Image of him that created him.


In this verse is contained the second reason to enforce mortification, taken
from their new estate in grace. The reason in it self entreats of the new
birth, and describes it, by showing what it is, 1. in general, it is the
putting on of the new man. 2. in particular, it is the renewing of the mind
with knowledge, and of the whole man, after the image of God and Christ.

The maine general doctrine of the verse is, that all that are accepted of God
in Jesus Christ, have put on the new man, or are made new creatures. And for
the further opening of this great point, I consider three things. First, the
necessity of the new birth. 2. what it has in it. 3. the manner by which it
is effected* and then I come to the use.

For the first, The necessity of the new birth.
those places of Scripture most evidently prove it is of absolute necessity.
The Apost: to the Galat: says, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails any thing, but a new creature Gal: 6.15.
: and to the Ephesians: Ephesians: 4.21.24
he shows, that if we be taught as the truth is in Christ Jesus, then to put
of the old man, and to put on the new, are as the maine principles of all
saving doctrine* and to the Corinthians he says, If any man be in Christ
Jesus, let him be a new creature 2 Cor: 5.17.
* and our Savior Christ in the 3. of John is peremptory, except a man be borne
again, he can never enter into the kingdom of heaven John 3.5.
.

His nature is new, in four things.
Now for the second. Whosoever is a new creature, or has put on the new man, it
is certain he is new. 1. in his nature. 2. in his obedience. He is new in his
nature, and that will appear after sound trial in four things* for, first,
he has new gifts, as the gifts of knowledge Math. 13.11
or discerning, the gift of prayer, or as the Prophet calls it, of
supplications Zach: 12.12.
, the gift of uprightness, or a spirit without guile Psalm: 32.2.
, yea the Apostle says, they were not destitute of any heavenly gift 1 Cor:
1.6.
. 2 He has new delights, for he feels the joys of the holy ghost Rom: 14.17.
, and that in new things, in which he was never wont to delight before* as in
the law of God Psalm: 1.12.
, in prayer, in the sacraments, etc. and also in new persons, for now all his
delight is in the excellent ones Psalm: 16.3.
, that truly fear God, and no more in carnal persons: yea and in new times
too, for he was never wont to rejoice in the time of affliction, but now he
finds marvelous joy even in tribulation Rom: 5.3.4.
. 3. He has new sorrows: also they are not now so much for losses, shame,
sickness, or the like, as for sin, or Gods spiritual judgments, or the
afflictions of Gods children. 4 He has new desires also, as after purity of
nature Psalm: 51.2.
, pardon of sin Math: 5.6*
, softness of heart Esaias 63.17.
, the presence of God Psalm: 42.
, success of the means, audience in prayer, and the coming of Christ 1 Timothy:
4.8.
, and the salvation of Israel Rom: 9 The trial of his obedience in three
things.
, and the like.

And as he is new in his nature, so is he new in his obedience also, and that
if we respect either manner, or the matter, or the end: if we respect the
manner, or the matter, or the end; if we respect the manner of his doing Gods
work, it is first with consecration of his soul and body to Gods service Rom:
12.1.
. 2. It is with delight, he loves to be Gods servant Esaias 5.6.
. 3. It is in Christian simplicity, and harmlesnesse, and godly pureness, and
strictness 2 Co^ 1.12. and 11.3. Ephesians: 5.15.
. Now secondly, if we respect the matter of his obedience, he is exceedingly
changed and renewed: for now he has respect not to one or two commandments,
but to all Gods commandments Psalm: 119.
, he would be sanctified throughout 1 Thessalonians: 5.23.
, he labors for inward holiness as well as outward 2 Cor: 7.1. Psalm. 24.4.5.
, and as he is altered in his service of God, so is he in his calling too: for
he walks more conscionably toward all men, and has learned to practice his
general calling in his particular. And thirdly, for the ends of his obedience,
his praise is not now of men but of God Rom: 2.16.
, his desire is to approve himself to God, without respect of the world, how
men will take it, and he will constantly profess and practice, though it be
against his ease, credit, pleasure or profit.

The third thing propounded, was the means of the new birth: and howsoever the
most men stand affected, yet the truth of God is certain and unchangeable, the
ordinary outward means to convert a soul to God, or make us new creatures,
is the word preached, we are borne again by this immortal seed of the word,
as the Apostle 1 Pet: 1.23.
Peter says: and the Apostle Paulis peremptory in the epistle to the Romans,
how can a man believe except it be by hearing of the word preached Rom:
10.14.17.
: the inward means is the spirit of Christ: which in respect of his working
herein is called the spirit of revelation Ephesians: 1.18.
, of glory 1 Pet: 4.14.
, of love, of power, and of a sound mind 2 Timothy: 1.7.
.

The uses follow. And first all Gods servants that have felt the power of the
word renewing them, may greatly rejoice in the mercies of God to them, and the
rather if they further consider the privilege of their new estate; for art
thou a new creature, then thou have the benefit of a new covenant Ier: 31.33.
, thou have a new name upon thee Esaias 62.2. R^^: 3.5.
, and a new spirit within thee Ezekiel: 36.27.
, to comfort thee John 14.
, to direct thee, to confirm thee, and to make intercession for thee: thou
have new aliance, a new father, even God the Father: and new kindred with all
the Saints both Jews and Gentiles Ephesians: 2.14.
: a new Prince and minister Esaias 55.6.
, even Jesus Christ: new attendants, the very Angels of God Heb: 1.14.
: new wages and new work Esaias 62.11.
: a new commandment, the rigor and curse of the Law being taken away: new
food, even Manna from heaven, the word of life: new signs and helps, to guide
thee in the way Ier. 31.21.
. And when thou shall die a new death, (not die as other men) and a new grave
or tomb wherein no carnal man lay, thy grave being perfumed by the body of
Christ: a new way to heaven Heb. 10*
, and a new Mansion in heaven 2. Cor. 5.8.
, what shall I say, but conclude with the Apostle, if thou be a new creature
thou shall have all things new 2. Cor. 5 17
. And therefore let all the holy seed, the blessed of the Lord sing new songs
of praise to God.

Secondly the consideration of the doctrine of the new birth, may serve greatly
for reproof of the fearful security of multitudes of people, that are sunk
so deep in rebellion that they cannot consider nor seriously mind their own
conversion. They look not vpwardes to behold the angry countenance of God,
nor to the times past to consider the millions of men that have perished for
want of the new birth, nor within them, to see the Image of God def^ced, and
the Devil entrenched in strong holds (for tentations) and the conscience:
either awake, and then the fire of hell is within them, or a sleep, and then
they are in danger every moment when it will awake: nor do they consider the
time to come, or think of those last things, death, judgment, and hell. Oh:
the spirit of fornication that does inchaunt men that they cannot so much as
mind to return. Now if any profane spirit should ask me, where are any
such men as I have before described to be new creatures? I would answer him
they are not to be found in Tauerns* Alehouses, play houses, cocke-pits,
beare-baits or such like, but blessed be God there is a remnant, a tenth, one
of a City, and two of a tribe, that are such as the Lord does describe and
will be accepted of in Jesus Christ.

Renewed in knowledge] Knowledge is a chief part of the new grace of a
Christian, without it the mind cannot be good Pro. 19.2..
, it is a singular gift of God, to the elect, to reveal unto them the
mysteries of the Kingdom Math. 13.11
, it is the beginning of eternal life on earth Ioh. 17.3.
, but we must understand that this knowledge here meant, is neither natural,
nor sensual, nor civil, nor moral, nor historical, What true knowledge is.
nor a general Theological knowledge, but a religious saving knowledge, it is
a knowledge by which a Christian sees in a mirror, he stands and wonders: it
is a knowledge that will transform a man 2. Cor. 3.18.
, it is the experimental knowledge of the virtue of Christ's death and
resurrection Phil. 3.10.
, it is a knowledge will keep a man from the evil way Proverb. 2.
, it is a knowledge will encounter every thought and affection Esaias. 11.8.10
that exalts it self against the obedience of Christ, it is a knowledge that
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without judging and without hypocrisy Iam. 3.17. Rules for
attaining of true knowledge.


The use is, to teach us, that as we would be assured we are new creatures, so
we should labor to be possessed of sound knowledge, and to this end, 1. We
must stand up from the dead, and withdraw from wicked society, else Christ
will never give us light Ephesians. 5.14.
. 2. We must consecrate our selves to holy life and seek the fear of God, for
that is the beginning of this wisdom Rom 12.1. Proverb. 1.
. 3. We must deny our carnal wisdom and become fools that we may be wise
2. Cor. 3.18.
. 4. We must walk with the wise Pro. 13.20.
. 5. We must beg of God a lowly and an humble heart, for with the lowly is
knowledge Pro. 11.3.
. Lastly we must study the Scripture, and attend upon daily hearing and
reading, for they are the only fountains of true knowledge and wisdom 2.
Tim. 3.16.
.

Renewed] The knowledge of the faithful in this life, even after calling
needs to be daily renewed. For sin makes a breach both in the heart and
mind. And Satan plants daily temptations and objects against the doctrine of
God, against which the mind needs new stoore of provision out of the word,
for defense. And our affections are wonderful apt to loose sense and feeling,
and then there is no other way to recover sense but by renewing contemplation.
And besides in as much as faith and repentance must be daily renewed, therefore
also must examination of life, and meditation of Gods promise and grace, be
renewed also. Finally we know but in part and successively, and therefore ought
continually to be growing and adding to the measure of the knowledge received.

Use.
This may serve, 1. for information. For here we may know the necessity of daily
teaching, since we need daily to be renewed in knowledge. 2. For great
reproof of that negligence is every where to be found, in omission of hearing
or reading the scripture, or using of other private helps for knowledge. 3.
For instruction, for it should teach us to be constant in the use of all the
helps God has commanded or afforded us. And we should bear infirmities in
others, since our own knowledge is imperfect. And we should learn to be wise
to sobriety, and not think our selves able to judge of every doctrine or
work of God. The Lord has laid a restraint upon us, and in this life we
cannot attain a full knowledge, and therefore we should repress the itching
curiosity of our natures, thirsting after forbidden knowledge. Lastly we should
resolve of the need we have to be admonished, instructed, directed, or
rebuked, and therefore rejoice in it, if any will show us that mercy to smite
us with rebukes, or guide us in the way.

After the Image of him that created him. How Christ is the Image of God.
Gods Image is in Christ, in the Angels, and in man, Christ is the Image of God
in two respects, because he is the eternal son, begotten of his substance:
and therefore called the character of his person or substance Heb. 1.3.
, The Image of the invisible God Col. 1.16.
, and so he has most perfitly the nature of the father in him. 2. Because he
was manifested in the flesh, for in Christ, made visible by the flesh, the
perfection and as it were the face of the father is now seen. And therefore
our Savior says, he that sees me has seen the father Ioh. 14.9.
, for the fullness of the godhead which was in the son being united and as it
were imprinted on the flesh bodily Col. 2.9.
, he did resemble and as it were express h^s own and his fathers nature after
diverse manners, and by diverse works or actions.

The Angels are Gods Image, and therefore called the sons of God because they
resemble him, How the Angels are Gods Image.
as they are spiritual, and incorporeall, and immortal substances. And
secondly as they are created holy, just, and full of all wisdom and divine
perfections in their kind.

Amongst the visible creatures man only bears the Image of God. And so he
does, How man is Gods Image.
1. By creation Genesis 1.26.
. 2. By regeneration Ephesians. 4.24.
. He was created in it. And then faling from God by sin, he recouers the
renewing of the Image of God, by grace and effectual calling in Jesus Christ,
that this may be more fully understood, we must know that man is the Image of
God, either considered more strictly as a superior, or more generally as man.
As a Superior man is said to be Gods Image in Scripture two ways chiefly, 1.
As a husband and so in the family the Apostle calls him, the Image and glory
of God 1. Cor. 11.7.
. 2. As a Magistrate, and so Princes and Rulers are called gods Psalm. 82.
on earth, but neither of these are meant here. For this Image of God here
mentioned, is that likeness of God, which by the spirit of grace is wrought in
every one of the faithful after their calling.

Howsoever the perfect understanding of Gods Image, belongs to God himself and
to the vision of heaven, yet in some measure we may conceive of it, as it is
revealed in the word, and imprinted in the nature and obedience of man. Two
things I principally propound to be here considered more distinctly, 1.
Wherein man is the Image of God. 2. The differences of the Image of God in man,
either from that which is in Christ, and the Angels, or as it is to be
considered in the several estates of man, and then I come to the use of all.

For the first, man is said to bear the similitude of God, or to have in or
upon him the Image of God in 5. respects. First in that in conceiving of God
man begets a kind of Image in his mind. For whatsoever we think of, there
arises in the mind some likeness of it, now if we conceive of God amiss,
then we commit horrible Idolatry, and whatsoever service is done to the
likeness we so conceive off is done to an Idol. But now when Christians
taught out of the word conceive of God according to the descriptions of the
word, that is not after the likeness of any creature, but in a way of
apprehending of God in the humane nature of Christ, or otherwise according to
his nature or properties, in some true measure, this Idaea or form of God, as
I may so call it, in the mind of the faithful is a kind of the Image of God.
For to conceive a likeness of God is not unlawful, but to conceive him to be
like any creature in heaven and earth that is prohibited and unlawful.
Secondly Man is after the Image of God in his substance, and therefore we are
well enough said to be Gods offspring Act. 17.28.
. Now man is Gods Image both in his soul and in his body. The soul is the
Image of God, as it is spiritual and simple, and as it is invisible, and as it
is immortal, and as it is an understanding essence having power to know all
sort of things, and to will freely. And some think it is Gods Image as there
is in it a purtraiture as it were of the Trinity, for as there is in God
distinct persons and yet every person has the whole essence, so there is in
the soul distinct faculties, and yet every faculty has in it the whole soul,
yea is the whole soul. Now that the body also is Gods Image these reasons may
prove. 1. Man is said to be made after Gods Image in the first creation. Man I
say, not the soul of Man only. 2. Gods Image was in Christ's body: for he
says, he that sees me sees the father. He says not he that sees my
soul, nor indeed could the soul be seen. 3. When the Lord prohibiteth the
shedding of man's blood, he yields this reason, for in the Image of God made
he man, now it is manifest the soul cannot be killed, therefore man's body is
after Gods Image. Now that God has any body, but in three respects. 1. As man's
body is a little world, and so the example of the world which was in God from
all eternity, is as it were briefly and summarily expressed by God in man's body.
2. There is none of our members almost, but they are attributed to God in
Scripture, and so there is a double use of our members, the one that they might
serve the offices of the soul, and the other that they might be as it were
certain types or resemblances of some of the perfections of God. 3. Because
the gifts of the mind do cause the body to shine as the candle does the horn
in the lantern.

Thirdly man is after Gods Image in the qualities of the soul: such as are
wisdom, love zeal, patience, meekness, and the rest: for in these he
resembles in some manner those glorious and blessed attributes of God. 4. Man
is after Gods Image, in respect of sanctity of actions, in that he is holy as
he is holy, and in that he resembles God in his works, as in loving and
hating where God loves and hates, and in knowing and approving of things as God
approues or knows of them, it is plain man resembles God in loving and
showing kindness to his enemies Mat. 5.
but generally by holiness of carriage man does resemble God, I mean in the
creation did so, and by grace the faithful begin to do so. Lastly man bears
the Image of God in his sovereignty of dominion, and that both over himself
and as he is Gods vicegerent over the living creatures and the earth, and thus
of the first point.

Now for the differences of Gods Image, first that Image of God in man and the
Image of God in Christ differs in two things. 1. Christ was the substantial
Image of the father, as he was God, and we are his Image but by similitude. 2.
Christ as man by reason of the personal union is filled with almost infinite
perfections above measure which are in no man else besides.

Again it differs from the Image of God in Angels in three respects. 1.
Because they excel in nature, for they are wholly spiritual, and in action,
they perform Gods will with greater glory and power. 2. They are free from all
humane necessities ever since their creation. 3. They enjoy the vision of glory
in the presence of glory in heaven, in a manner peculiar to their place and
natures.

Now for the differences of the image of God in man according to the different
estates of man, we must know the image of God according to the threefold estate
of man, is likewise threefold. 1. there is the image of nature, which Adam had.
2. the Image of grace, which the Saints now have* and thirdly, the Image of
glory, which the blessed have in heaven.

The Image of God in Adam had distinct specialties, Adam was a perfect Divine,
and a perfect Philosopher, even in an instant, he knew the nature of all things
in the instant of his creation, which now is attained unto with extreme
labor, and singular weakness. 2. he had an immortal nature, free from
infirmities, diseases, death. 3. he should have propagated an immortal seed,
after the image of God, whereas now grace will not be propagated. 4. his
obedience was charged with the observation of the tree of life and of good and
evil.

Uses.
The image of grace has these specialties; 1. faith. 2. godly sorrow. 3. the
cohabitation of the flesh. 4. a feebleness and defect in the measure of grace.
5. a peculiar kind of inhabitation of the spirit of Christ.

Lastly, the image of glory has these differences; a freedom like the Angels
from all terrene necessities. 2. an utter abolishing of the sinful flesh, and
of the very natural disposition to dye. 3. a full perfection of all graces. 4.
a loss of faith and sorrow, and all the works of repentance. 5. a special
unutterable communion with God and good Angels in glory.

The consideration of this doctrine of gods image, should serve, to teach us to
love and admire all that fear god, since the Lord has graced them with this
honor to be like god: it is a greater favor, then if they had resembled the
noblest Princes that ever were on earth, no all the carnal men on earth in all
their glory, cannot reach to that absoluteness of excellency, that is in one
of the poorest of gods servants. 2. since the seat of this glorious resemblance
of god is in the heart, it should teach us especially to look to our hearts,
and keep them with all diligence Prou: 4.
, even to be conscionably careful to see to it, what thoughts and affections
are lodged there: the devil desires no more advantage, then to have liberty to
erect in the heart, houlds for evil thoughts and sensual desires. 3. If it
should be our glory to be fashioned after the image of god, then it condemns
the abominable security of the most men, that are so mindlesse of the repair
of the loss of this divine gift, and in stead thereof with so much care
fashion themselves after this world Rom: 12.2.
, or after the lusts of their own and old Ignorance 1 Pet: 1.14.
, or after the wills and humors of men 1 Pet: 4.2.
3. how are we bound unto god for this unsearchable love, that is pleased to
restore unto us this divine gift through the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Thus in general of gods image.

But before I pass from these words, there is further to be considered, first,
the form of speech, in that he says not, his Image, but after his Image. 2.
the efficient cause, noted in those words, of him that created him. For the
first, we must understand, that to say, man is the Image of God, and man is
after the Image of God, Imago ad Imaginem.
is not all one: for man is said to be the Image of God, because he is truly
so: and he is said to be after his Image, because he is not perfectly so;
Christ only resembles God in full perfection.

Now for the efficient cause of Gods Image, he is described here by a
Periphrasis, he that created him. Man was two ways created; first in respect
of being, and so God created him. 2. in respect of new being, and so Christ
created him Eph^s: 2:10 1 Cor: 8:6.
; neither of these senses can be well excluded. And if the words be understood
of the first creation, then these things may be observed; that Adam was not to
be considered as a singular man, but as he sustained the person of all
mankind, else how could we be said to be created after Gods image; and as in
him we received this image, so by him we lost it. 2. That the interest we have
now to creation, is not sufficient to salvation: and therefore they are
grossly deceived, that think God must needs save them, because he made the^.
3. That the Lord would have the doctrine of the work of Creation to be
remembered, and much thought upon by converted Christians: and the rather
because it serves for great use in our regeneration* for it furthers both
repen^ance and faith, and therefore in diverse places of Scripture, where the
holy ghost entreats of doctrine, of repentance, and faith, the word Create is
metaphorically used, to assure us that God will perform his promise, though it
were as hard a work as to create all things at first. Thus he has promised to
create a clean heart Psalm 5 1.
, and to create the fruit of the lips to be peace Esaias 57:19.
, and to create upon every place of Mount Sion, and upon the assemblies
thereof, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night,
that upon all the glory may be a defense Esaias 4.5.
, and to create light Esaias 45:7.
, and deliverance out of afflictions. Besides the doctrine of the creation,
teaches us the fear of that dreadful majesty, that was able to work so
wonderfully Psalm 33.7. and 8:9.
, and it inforceth humility, by showing that we are made of the dust in
respect of our bodies, and that our souls were given us of God, with all the
gifts we have in our minds: as also by giving us occasion to consider the
image of God that we have lost: and thus of creation as it is referred to God.

Secondly, it may be referred to Christ, and so be understood of our
regeneration, which is as it were a re-creation, or a new creation: and in this
sense it shows that we should conform our selves to the likeness of him that
does regenerate us by his word and spirit. But may some one say, is there any
difference betwixt the image of God in us, and the image of Christ in us? I
answer, that to be fashioned after the image of Christ, has two things in it
more then is properly in conformity to Gods image, for we must be like him in
sufferings Rom: 8:19.
. and secondly, in the impressions of the virtue of his death and resurrection
Romans 6. Phil. 3.
. And thus of the 10. verse.

Verse. 11. Where is neither Grecian nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision
Barbarian, Scythian, bond, free, but Christ is all in all things.


This Verse may contain another reason to persuade to mortification and holy
life. And the reason may be taken from the great respect God has of true grace
in Christ, and the little love or care he has for any thing else, a Barbarian,
a Scythian, a bondman, if he have grace shall be accepted: whereas a Grecian,
a Jew, a freeman, without grace, is without respect with God, Christ is all.
It may be the Apostle here meets with the false Apostles, that so much urged
the observation of Jewish rites, and stand so much upon it to divert the people
from the sound care of reformation of life, by filling their heads with
questions and vain wranglings about the law, whereas the Apostle shows men
may be absolute and complete in these outward obseruances, and yet their
circumcision auailes them nothing before God. Here are then evidently two
things in this verse: first, what it is God stands not upon. 2. what it is, is*
all in all with him.

Where there is neither Grecian nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
Barbabarian, nor Scythian, bond nor free.] Out of these words these two things
may be observed.

Nothing will avail without Christ*
I. That nothing without Christ can make us truly happy. The image of God, or
felicity of man, stands not in birth, freedom, natural parts, or outward
obseruances, for he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, nor is that liberty
that is only in the flesh, nor is that wisdom that is only in learned men,
such as were the Graecians. Dives was a rich man, Goliath was a strong man,
Achitophell was a wise man, Absolon was a fair man, Esau was circumcised, and
Cain was well borne, and yet all these are in hell. II. That in Christ there is
no difference, all is one, whether thou be poor or rich, Jew or Gentile, bond
or free, male or female Gal. 3.28.
, with God there is no respect of persons. In the power of his ordinances (as
by name) in the preaching of the Gospel, he extends his mercy both to Jews
and Gentiles Romans 1.16.
: so in the disposing of his gifts 1. Cor. 12.13
, he bestows knowledge and other graces, upon people of all sorts, and for
acceptance, whosoever fears him and does righteousness, he is accepted, of
what nation or state soever he be Act. 10.34.
, and all this will more fully appear, when he shall judge every man without
respect of persons, according to his works, at the last day Romans 1.10.
.
The consideration hereof may teach us diverse things; 1. to fear God and
forsake our sins, Uses.
since he is a God so terrible, that will not be swayed with outward respects
Deuteronomy. 10.16.17. Acts 10.34. 1. Pet. 1.17.
. 2. not to stand upon outward birth or greatness in the world, nor to pride
our selves in our wits, or rest our selves upon our outward serving of God: for
the Lord accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich, more than
the poor, or the learned more then the unlearned, for they are all the work of
his hands John 34:19.
. 3. to be industrious in well-doing, seeing he that does good shall be
accepted, whether he be bond or free, grecian, barbarian, one or other R^m.
2.8.9.10.
: for the same God is Lord over all, and rich unto all that call upon him Romans
10.11.
, and endeavor by well-doing, to approve themselves in his sight. 4. not to
despise poor Christians, seeing God accepts of them, and has made them rich
in faith, and heirs of a kingdom Iam. 2.1.5.
. 5. not to give titles to men Job. 32.21.22.
, and by servile flattery or fears, to be so much taken up, with their mere
outward praises, or places. Lastly, Magistrates in the administration of
Justice, should resemble this absoluteness of God, so as no respect of
persons, poor or rich, friends or foes, strangers or home-borne should carry
them besides the just regard of the cause Deuteronomy. 1.17. 2. Chron 19.6. How Christ
is all in all.
.

But Christ is all in all.] And so he is, 1. in respect of the union of the
mystical body, as it is he in whom every one that is a new creature is
considered to be and consist. Every convert, is created in Christ Jesus Ephesians:
2:10.
. 2. in respect of sufficiency, a man needs no more then Christ, he only may
suffice, the whole compleatnesse of salvation is in Christ. 3. in respect of
efficiencie: if we look upon the benefits conferred upon all Christians by
Christ, he makes a means for all wants, he is in stead of liberty to the
servant* and in stead of birth and honor to the Scithian and Barbarian* he is
the substance of all shadows, to the uncircumcised: what shall I say, he is
righteousness Dan: 9:29:
, and riches Col. 1.27.
, and wisdom 1. Cor. 1.30.
, sanctification, and freedom 2. Cor. 3.17.
, and a rec^mpence Esaias 40.9.
to Christians, yea in him all things are theirs 1. Cor. 3.21.
, and as the pledge of all they have received the spirit of the son into
their hearts Gal. 4.6. Uses.
.

The use of all this may be diverse; 1. Unto us therefore there should be one
Lord, even the Lord Jesus Christ 1 Cor 8.6. The Uses.
. 2. All sorts of men should strive by all means to set out and show Christ
only. Ministers should teach Christ only. Magistrates should chiefly intend
the glory of Christ: nay all sorts of men should seek Christ, in choosing
callings, wives, servants, places of abode* etc. Christ should be all in all
with us, yea in those we have to deal withal, we should bear with many
wants and weaknesses, so they have Christ, for that is all in all. 3. We should
learn to be satisfied with Christ, though we want health, or liberty, or
wealth, or worldly friends, or great wits, or strong memories, etc. Christ
makes amends for all, he is enough: if the Lord have given us Christ, he has
done enough for us, though it be sure that with him he will give us all things
also. 4. This may greatly reprove the wonderful stupiditie of men, that are
so taken up with admiration of these outward privileges, when as we see how
all is vain without Christ, what shall it profit a man if he had all honor
and riches, and countenance of friends, and the pleasures of life, if when he
came into Gods sight he might have no acceptance for his soul? Excellent
consolation in Christ.
If Christ be all things, then without Christ, all things else are nothing,
but especially this doctrine serves for singular comfort to Gods children in
all their distresses, and that will better appear if we consider the
particulars. For first, are they afflicted in conscience, under the sense of
Gods anger, and their own sins? Why, he is the propitiation for their
sins, Romans 3.25.
he is the end of the Law for them, Romans 10.4.
yea all that the Law can require of them: he will be their witness and their
testimony Esaias 55.6. 1. Cor. 1.6.
. He gives them promises and faith to believe them Gal. 3.22.
, and it is his blood that perfectly cures and cleanses them from all their
wounds and sins 1. Ioh. 1.7.
. Secondly, are they distressed under the power of Satan's temptations, or
accusations: why, he sits at the right hand of God, to see that nothing be
laid to their charge, he makes intercession for them, Zac. 3.1.2.3. Romans 8.33.
and for the stings of this old serpent, he is a continual brazen serpent,
John 3.
they may but look upon him and be healed. Yea he was tempted himself that
he might succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18.
and his power dwells in them, to be manifested in their weakness, 2. Cor.
12.9.
and he came into the world of purpose, to dissolve the work of the Devil. 1
John 3.7.
Thirdly, are they dismayed with the sense of their own weaknesses and
ignorance? why, they have such an high Priest as is touched with their
infirmities, Heb. 4.15.
and knows how to have compassion on the ignorant, Heb. 5.1.
he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax Esaias
42.2.3.
. Fourthly, are they pressed with outward troubles? Why, Christ is the merit of
their deliverance from this present evil world, Gal. 1.4.
he is the sanctification of their crosses, so as all shall work together for
the best to them that love God Romans 8.28.
, yea he will be their consolation, so that as their sufferings abounds, his
comforts shall abound also, 2. Cor. 1.5.
or if he do not deliver, then he makes a supply, by giving them better
things, out of the riches of his glory. He is a husband to the widow, and a
father to the fatherless, and as the shadow of the rock in a weary land,
Esaias. 33.2.
to them that are persecuted and driven to and fro, by the hot rage of evil
men. Lastly, are they in the fear, or in the danger of death? Why, Christ is
all in all here also, for he has overcome death for them, H^s^. 13.14.
he has opened the way to heaven, Heb. 10.19
he has destroyed him that had power over death, Heb. 2.14.
, he has freed them from the wrath to come, 1. These. 1. Ila.
he has begotten in them a lively hope 1. Pet. 1.3.
of a happy issue from the passage of death, he is the first borne of the dead,
Colos. 1.17.
and he will be the resurrection and the life unto them John 11.
. What shall I say, but conclude with the Apostle, Christ is in life and death
advantage Phil. 1.
, only that Christ may be all in all to us, we must hear him, we must believe
in him, we must deny ourselves, and take up our cross and follow him, and
finally we must live to him, and die in him.

And thus of this eleventh verse, and so of the second part of the general
exhortation.

VER. 12.13. Therefore as the elect of God holy and beloved, put on bowels of
mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering. Forbearing
one another and forgiving one another* if any have a quarrel against another:
even as Christ forgave you, so also do you.


There are three things requisite to holy life. First, the meditation of
heavenly things. The division of this part of the text.
Secondly, the mortification of vice. Thirdly, the exercise of holy graces and
duties. Of the first the Apostle has entreated from verse 1. to verse 5. Of
the second from verse the 5. hitherto. Now in these words, and those that
follow to the 18. verse he entreats of the third, for he gives rules for the
obedience of the new man, and those rules are more special, or more general.
The more special rules are from the 11. verse to the sixteenth. The more
general are in the 16. and 17. verses: the one concerning the means of holy
life, verse. 16. and the other concerning the end of holy life, ver. 17.

The special rules give in charge the exercise of nine graces, and in the
setting down of these rules I observe. 1. The Motives to persuade to the
observation of them, and they are three; the one taken from their election, the
other from their sanctification, the third from the love of God to them. And
these are briefly thrust together in a parenthesis in the beginning of the
twelfth verse. 2. The manner how they be charged with these graces, and that is
noted in the Metaphor put on. 3. The graces themselves, and they are in number
nine. Some of them have their greatest praise in prosperity principally, as
mercy, kindness, meekness, humbleness of mind, some of them concern the
times of adversity principally, as long suffering and clemency in forbearing
and forgiving. Some indifferently belong to all times, as love, peace,
thankfulness, or amiablenesse. ver. 14.15.

Observation from coherence.
Now from the coherence imported in the word ( therefore) diverse things may be
noted.

1 In that he prescribes the mortification of vices, before the exercise of
graces, it shows that till vice be mortified, grace will not grow nor prosper,
the true reason why many men thrive no better in the gift of Gods spirit, is
because they are so little and so sleighty in confessing and bewailing of their
corruptions of heart and life.

2 In that he rests not in the reformation of vices, but prescribes also rules
of new obedience, it shows that it is not enough to leave sin, but we must
be exercised in doing good. It will not serve turn for the husbandman, that
his fruit trees bear no evil fruit, but he will cut them down if they bring
not forth good fruit, barrennes is cause great enough of hewing down.

3 Men that are truly renewed after the Image of Christ are willing to be
appointed and prescribed, for the attaining and exercise of every holy
needful grace and duty, he that has true experience of the beginning of any
true grace, has a true desire, and a willing endeavor, and a just estimation
of all grace. For as he that repents of one sin loves no sin, so he that
travels in the birth of any grace desires all grace, so far as in conscience
he knows them to be required, of God, and in some degree, except it be in the
time of violent temptations, or that the loss of the means occasion any
deadness or faintness, in the desires of the heart, or that there be a
relapse into some presumptuous sin after calling.

4 If this therefore carry us to the former verse, then we are informed, that
our endeavor after mercy, meekness, patience, love, peace or the rest, will
never want acceptance with God. And withal we may take comfort if we would
seriously set about the practice of these, though we found many lets, and
doubts, and difficulties, yet Christ will be all in all to help us, and give
good success.

Thus of the coherence. Of Election. Two kinds of Election.
The motives follow, and first of Election.

Elect] Gods servants are Gods elect, and that both in respect of election
before time, and also in respect of election in time, for the Lord has in his
eternal counsel chose them in Christ, to the obteining of salvation to the
praise of his grace Ephesians. 1.4.5. Romans 8.19.
. And besides at sometime in their life, the Lord does select, and separate
them, from out of the world, and worldly courses, to the profession of
sincerity, having sanctified them by the spirit.

The doctrine of Election has both consolation and instruction in it, Uses.
it is full of comfort, if we consider the privileges of Gods chosen, even
those great favors he shows them, when he begins once to discover his
everlasting choice of them, the Lord does ever after avouch them for his
peculiar people, to make them high in praise and in honor Deuteronomy. 26.15.16
. The men of their strife shall surely p^rish and come to nothing Isa.
41.8.11.12.
. The Lord will help them and comfort them in all strife, he will be a wall of
fire round about them, and the glory in the midst of them, the Lord will
own them as his portion that he has taken to himself out of the whole earth
Zach. 11.5.12.
. He will use them as his friends, he will hear their prayers, and
communicate his secrets unto them John. 15.19.
. But who can count their privileges, no tongue of men or Angels are able to
do it, which since it is so, we should take unto us continually the words of
the Psalmist, and say every one of us, Remember me o Lord with the favor of
thy people, and visit me with thy salvation, that I may see the felicity of
thy chosen, and rejoice in the Joy of thy people, and glory with thine
inheritance Psa. 106.4 5.
. Especially we should labor to make our calling and election sure 2 Pet.
1.10.
, for then we shall be safe, in as much as thereby an entrance is ministered
unto us, into the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Now if any shall ask who they are that may be sure of their election? Who may
be sure they are elect.
I answer, First with the Apostle Paul, They that receive the Gospel in power
and much assurance, with joy in the holy Ghost though it should be with much
affliction 1 These. 5.6.
. And with the Apostle Peter, such as to whom God has given precious promises,
and such as fly the corruptions of the world through lust, that join virtue
with their faith, and knowledge, and temperance, and patience, and godliness,
and brotherly kindness and love 2 Pet. 1.4.5.6.7.10.
. Lastly if we be comforted in our election, we should then labor to inflame
our hearts out of the sense of this everlasting goodness of God, even to set
up the Lord, and to fear him and walk in his ways, and particularly by the
Apostles direction to be very careful, of these holy graces that follow.

Thus of the first motive.

Holie] They are holy diverse ways; How many ways the elect are holy.
For they are holy, first in the head. 2. In their laws. 3. In their
Sacraments, in respect of which they are sacramentally holy. 4. By imputation.
5. By hope Gal. 5.6.
, of that consummate are holiness in heaven. 6. In their calling, so they are
Saints by calling 2. Cor. 1.1.
. 7. As they are Temples of the holy Ghost. But the holiness of sanctification
is here meant, and so they are holy by inchoation.

Holiness is essential to a child of God, Gods elect are holy, this is every
where proved in Scripture Deuteronomy. 7.6. Isa. 4 4.
, I will not stand upon it, only for instruction, let us from hence observe.
That if ever we would have comfort of our election, we must labor to be holy,
and that both in body and in spirit 2. Cor. 7.1. Ephesians. 5.3.
, we see they are here joined and we must not separate them; But may some one
say, seeing no man is without his thousands of sins, Quest:
and infirmities, what must we do that we may have comfort, that we are holy
in Gods account, being so many ways faulty in our natures and actions? Ans.
For answer hereunto, we must know that there be four things which if a man
do attain unto, 4 Signs of a holy man.
though he has otherwise many infirmities, yet he is holy in Gods account, yea
in the holiness of sanctification. The first is this, if a man can so far
forth subdue his corruptions, that sin reigns not in him; so long as it is
in him but as a rebel, it does not frustrate his comfort in his
sanctification. 2. If a man's prayers, desires, and endeavors be to respect all
Gods commandments as well as one; Justice as well as Piety, holy times as well
as holy things, inward obedience as well as outward, secret obedience as well
as open, avoiding lesser sins as well as greater. 3. If a man be sincere in
the use of the means that make a man holy, preparing his heart to seek God in
them, esteem them as his appointed food, mourning for want of success
desired, endeavoring to profit by every ordinance of God, and that at all
times as well as sometimes, at home as well as at Church. Lastly if a man can
find comfort in the pardon of his sins, he needs not doubt of his
acceptance to be holy.

Five properties of Gods love.
Beloued] In this word is lodged the third Motive, which is taken for Gods
love, as if the Apostle would affirm that if Christians did seriously consider
what it is to be loved of God, they would find full encouragement to all grace
and duty: now this may be better opened, if we consider but the properties of
Gods love, wherein it wonderfully excells. As first, if God love them it is
with a free love, Hosea 14.5.
he stands not upon thy desert or worthiness. Again, he loves first, p he
loves before he be loved, he loved us when we hated him, he chose us when we
did not choose him. 3. Gods love is wonderful tender, which will appear if we
consider that he is not only gracious, but merciful, slow to anger, of much
kindness, and repents him of the evil Joel 2.13.
. 4. Gods love is natural, not forced, and therefore he is said to quiet
himself in his Zeph. 3.17.
love, and himself loves mercy Mich. 7.18.
. Lastly, his love is an everlasting love Ier. 31.3.
, where he loves, he loves to the end John 13:1.
. And therefore we should labor to know the love of God to our selves, Uses.
even to be particularly assured that we are Gods beloved or else this could
not be a motive to holiness, as here it is. And besides the meditation of
Gods love to us should encourage us against all crosses, for God will give his
beloved rest Psalm. 127.2.
. They shall be blessed, and it shall be well with them. They shall be
delivered, for he will help with his right hand Psalm. 60.5.
. But especially it should harten us against the scorns of the world, and the
hate of wicked men: if God love us, it mattereth not greatly who hate us: And
in special, the meditation of this love of God should teach us to tire our
selves with these worthy graces, as so many ornaments; for thus should the
beloved of God be decked. And does the Lord love us, and shall not we strive
to show our love to him again? Even by loving his word, glory, children,
presence and commandments. Lastly; we may here learn how to love: for God
loves; First, those that are holy. Secondly, those whom he had chosen: so it
should be with us; first we should choose for holiness, and then love for our
choice. This may teach the people how to love their Magistrates and Ministers,
and so wives and servants. And contrariwise.

Thus of the motives, the manner follows.

Put on] viz: as men do their garments, it is true that these graces for the
worth of them are royal, and so must be put on as the King does his crown, or
the Prince elected his robes, it is also true that for safety these graces are
as armor to defend us against the allurements of the world, or the reproaches
of evil men, and so many be put on as the soldier does his armor. Besides
these graces are required in us as the ornaments of a renewed estate, and so
are to be put on as the new baptized was said to put on his new garments. But I
think the metaphor is taken generally from the putting on of raiment.

Obseru. 1.
Diverse things may be here noted. 1. It is apparent that these graces are not
natural the shadows and pictures of them may be in natural men. And what
wicked men can get is but by the restraining spirit, or by reason of natural
defect, Note.
or for ill ends. It is certain a man may be said to be borne, as well with
clothes on his back, Obseru. 2
as with grace in his heart.

2 How should the hearts of many smite them, to think of it, how they neglect
this clothing of their souls with graces: They every day remember to put on
apparel on their backs, but scarce any day think of putting on virtue for
their hearts? Oh when thou see thy naked body clothed, should thou not
remember that thy soul in it self more naked then thy body, had need of
clothing also? Oh the judgment that abides many a man and woman, how
excessiuely careful are they to trim the body, and yet are excessiuely
careless of trimming their souls, that have so many gowns for their backs,
that they have never a grace for their hearts: yea the better sort may be
humbled if they search their hearts seriously: for either they want diverse
parcels of this holy raiment, or else they are not well fitted on them, they
hang so loose many times, there is little comeliness or warmth by their
wearing of these graces. But let us all be instructed to remember these graces,
and by prayer and practice to exercise our selves in them, and daily to be
assaying how we can put them on, till by constant use of all good means, we
can grow spiritually skillful in wearing of them, and expressing the power of
them in conversation, as plainly as we show the garments on our backs,
resolving that these virtues will be our best ornaments, and that they are best
clad that are clothed with these godly graces in their hearts.

Thus of the manner, the enumeration of the graces follow.

Bowell^ of mercy.] From the Coherence I note two things concerning mercy:
First that it is not natural, we are exhorted to put it on naturally we are
hateful and hate one another Esaias. 11.
: which should teach us to observe and discern the defects of our hearts
herein, James. 3.17.19.
and by prayer to strive with God for the repair of our natures, and in all
wrongs from wicked men, to be less moved, Tit. 3.3.
as resolving it is natural with them.

2 We may note here that mercy is as it were the door of virtue. It stands
here in the forefront, and leads in and out all the rest, it lets in
humility, meekness, patience, etc.

Now in these words themselves I observe 3. things.

1 That mercy is of more sorts then one, More sorts of mercy than one. Luke 6.
Matthew: 25.
therefore he says mercies, one mercy will nor serve the turn, he that has
true mercy has many mercies, or ways to show mercy: many miseries in man's
life needs many sorts of mercy.

There is mercy corporal, and mercy spiritual, it is corporal mercy to lend,
Corporal and Spiritual mercy.
to give, to visit; to cloth, to feed, to protect from violence: hospitality
to strangers, and the burial of the dead are also corporal mercies.
Spiritual mercies are not all of a sort, for we may show mercy sometimes in
things wherein no man can help, as by praying unto God for help: now in things
wherein man can help, the mercy to be showed respects either the ignorance or
other distresses of other men. The mercy to the ignorant is either instruction
in the things they should know, or council in the things they should do. Now
his other distresses arise either from his actions, or from his passions: his
actions are either against thee, and so thy mercy is to forgive, or against
others, and so thy mercy is to admonish or correct. Thy mercy toward him, in
respect of his passions or sufferings, is either in words and so it is
consolation, or in deeds, and so it is confirmation. What shall I say? there is
the mercy of the Minister, and the mercy of the Magistrate, and also the mercy
of the private man.

2 Mercies, notes that it is not enough to be merciful once or seldom, but we
must be much in the works of mercy, seldom mercy will be no better accepted
with God, then seldom prayer, we are bound to watch to the opportunity of
mercy: and we shall reap not only according to the matter, but according to
the measure of mercy Hosea 10.12 What is bowels of mercy.
.

3 It is not enough to be merciful, but we must put on the bowels of mercies,
and this has in it diverse things. For it imports: 1 That our mercies must be
from the heart, not in hypocrisy or for a show, it must be true and unfeigned
mercy. 2 That there should be in us the affections of mercy, we should love
mercy, and show it with all cheerfulness and zeal Micha* 6.8. Rom: 22.8. 2.
Cor. 9.7.25. v. 8.3.4.
. 3 That there should be a Sympathy and fellow-feeling in the distresses of
others. These bowels were in Christ, in Moses and Paul. 4 That our mercy
should be extended to the highest degree we can get our hearts to; That was
imported by the phrase of pouring out our souls to the needy Isa. 58.10.
.


Use.
The use of this doctrine of mercy may be first for instruction, to teach us to
make conscience of this holy grace, and to be sure we be always clad with it
according to the occasions and opportunities of mercy. And to this end we
should labor to stir up our selves by the meditation of the motives unto
mercy, Motives to mercy.
such as these God has commanded it Zach: 7*6. Hosea 12, 10.
. They are our own flesh, that need our mercy Esaias 58.
, Our heavenly Father is merciful, yea his mercy is above all his works Luke.
6.33. Psalm 86.
, yea he is Father of all mercies 2. Cor. 1.3.
, Mercy will prove that we are righteous Psalm. 37.21
and blessed Micha. 5.7.
, and that the love of God is in us 1 John 3.17.
, and that our profession of religion is sincere Iam. 1.27.
, and that our knowledge is from above Iam: 3:17.
, and that we are true neighbors and the right Samaritans. God wonderfully
accepts of mercy above many other thing Mich. 6.8. Hosea 6.5.
, and accounts what is that way done to be done as it were to himself Prou,
14:31 and 19.17.
. Besides, what is mercifully bestowed is safest kept, the surest chest to
keep our goods in, is the bosom of the poor, the house of the widow, and
the mouths of the orphans. What shall I say? mercy rewards our own souls
Prou. 11.17.
, assures us of forgiveness of sins Prou. 16.6.
, makes the heart cheerful and steadfast 1 Cor. 15.58.
, It shows us life, righteousness, and glory Prou. 21.21.
; and we shall reap after the measure of mercies, both in this life, and at
the last day Hosea 10.12 Rules in showing mercy.
.

Only in showing mercy we must look to diverse rules, it must be holy mercy,
not foolish pity, as Magistrates must not spare where God will punish, for
this is every where a monstrous wickedness in careless Magistrates, under the
pretense of mercy they spare the punishment of drunkenness, whoredom, but
especially blood, and the profanation of the Sabbath. It is a wonder that many
Magistrates should ever go to heaven, they are guilty of so much blood and
wickedness, by not executing the Judgment of God, and the King, upon such
villainies. And it is not mercy under pretense of housekeeping, to entertain
disordered persons, swaggerers, drunkards, swearers, gamesters, and the like,
he that will show mercy must have a good eye Prou. 22 9
to consider where, and to whom, and how he shows mercy, the true merciful
man does measure his affairs by judgment Psalm. 112.5.
. 2. Thy mercy must be speedy mercy, thou must not say go and come again to
morrow, if thou can do it now Pro. 3.28.
. 3. It must be of goods well gotten, God hates robbery for burnt offering Esaias
6^.8.
. 4. We must look to our ends, for that mercy is lost that is showed to win
the praise of men, or for any other carnal respect.

2 The consideration of the doctrine of mercy may serve for the great reproof
of the want of mercy in men, and that monstrous unmercifulness that every
where abounds amongst men, we may complain that merciful men are perished, or
if mercy get into the hearts of some it is like the morning dew, it is quickly
dried up. But the world is full of usury and cruelty, and oppression, the world
has almost as many wild beasts and monsters, as it has Landlords in diverse
places. And shall nothing be said think we in the day of Christ to unmerciful
ministers, and Church Governors also. Oh the bloud-guiltines of many monsters
rather then ministers that feed not, or not with wholesome food, the souls of
the people. And is there not tithing of Mint, and Cummin, and Annis, while the
waightier things of the Law are let alone? It is no mercy to spare idle and
scandalous and Idoll-shepheards. What should I speak of particulars? there is
unmercifulness even in the lender, there is no borrowing unless thou will be
a servant to him that lends. Prou. 22.7.
Oh what sums of money are spent upon hawks, hounds, cocks, bears,
players, whores, (for I may well join them together) gaming, drinking,
apparel, feasting, etc. which should be profitably spent upon the necessities
of the poor. But let men repent of their unmercifulness, for the curse of God
is upon them, Prou: 14, 21. and 20.21.
and the Lord takes the wrong as done unto himself, Prou: 14:31
their cry shall not be heard, Prou. 21.13.
nor their fasting nor sacrifice accepted, Esaias 5.8. Hosea 6.5.
and God will spoil their souls, Prou. 22.23.
and judgment merciless shall be to them that show no mercy Iam. 2.13.
.

Thirdly, this doctrine is exceeding comfortable too, for here is implied
great comfort to all Gods children, for if God require such tender mercy in me,
he will certainly show mercy himself. And again, poor men may be much
encouraged to consider how careful God is of them, and how much mercy he
requires to be showed them; yea it is a comfort to them if they be godly
poor, that there being so many kinds of mercy, they may show mercy themselves,
even to their richest benefactors, by spiritual mercy. And this also must
needs be comfortable to merciful men, for as God requires mercy, so it is sure
he will reward mercy Psalm. 112:4. Esaias 58.7. etc (...)* True Christian courtesy.
.

Thus of mercy.

Kindness.] The word is courtesy or goodness, comitas. It is sure the Lord
requires this Christian courtesy, or goodness of disposition and carriage in
every convert Ephesians. 4.32. Gal. 5.2^.
; and kindness is one of the things we should approve our selves by. 2 Cor:
6:6.
Now Christian courtesy or goodness has in it these things. 1. It salutes
willingly 1 Pet: 5, 14. Ruth 2* 4. Iud. 6.12. Matthew: 11:4.
. 2. It is fair and amiable in conuersing, not harsh, sullen, crabbed,
intractable, clownish, desperate, scornful, hard to please, churlish, or
stately. 3. In matters of offense, it is easy to be entreated, kind to
enemies, it qualifies the speeches of the angry with good interpretations, and
sometimes it yields to their affections, it will sometimes part with right for
peace sake, it will forgive Iam. 3.17. Luke 6:35. Ephesians: 4:32.
. 4. In the praises or happiness of others it is without envy. 5. It is easy
to liberality 1 Pet. 2.5. Romans 2.4.
and preuents. 6. It loves brotherly fellowship.

The use may be both to humble and to teach. Certainly the failings of the
best of us may much abase us, and the knowledge of it that God requires it
should teach us to make conscience of it by prayer and holy striving with our
natures to endeavor to express this fairness and kind conuersing, Use.
since religion requires courtesy as well as piety, we should labor to be
unrebukable therein also, especially we should put on this virtue in using
means to win others to the truth.

Here also we may see the vanity of their aspersion that say religion will
make men stoicall and uncivil.

Yet least any should mistake, What courtesy has not in it.
we must know that courtesy has not in it the honoring of evil men, or the
rejoicing at the evils of any man, or a promiscuous respect of all both good
and bad alike, no nor of all good alike in the measure of manifestation, nor
has it an opennes in unadvised communicating of secrets to all, nor a
lightness of familiarity in contracting an inward friendship, without due
respect of the disposition and conversation of the parties.

Thus of kindness. Matthew. 11.29. Rom: 12:16: 1 Pet. 5 5.


Humbleness of mind.] I shall not need to show that humility, or this
humbleness of mind is required. For it is plain in the text, but rather I
would consider what it is, and then make use of it. And first I consider of it
negatiuely, by showing what it is not. What humbleness of mind is negatiuely
and affirmatively.
It is not silliness, arising out of the ignorance of a man's place or gifts,
nor is it any careless disregard of a man's self, nor every abasing of a man's
self, for wicked men to compass their ends can humble themselves to hell. p
Esaias 5.7 10.
Nor is it a will worship when a man by voluntary religion lays hard things
upon his body; thus it was no humility, to forbear touching, tasting,
handling, or upon pretense of unworthiness to employ the Kings son, to bring
in mediation of Angels or Saints, as inferiors in the court 18.23.
. Nor is it complementall courtesy, for we see that may be in greater
exactness in men, and yet monstrous pride and malice be lodged in men's
hearts. Nor is it any counterfeit submissiuenesse, as when some men scorn to
refuse offices, and yet fret afterward when they go without them, or else
refuse of purpose to be the more importuned. Nor is it humbleness of mind to
be (with fretting) complaining of our wants, out of emulation of others; nor is
it only to be humbled, for humiliation and humility differ.

Now that the nature of this grace may be found out, we must consider that
usually it is begotten in a man by the power of the word, and follows the
breaking of the heart by mortification, r and declares it self both inwardly
and outwardly. Inwardly humbleness of mind has in it a sight and sense, and
digested opinion of our own great unworthiness, and is not easily stirred to
great thoughts with vain applauses. It has in it a tender sense of
tentations, a hatred of hypocrisy, and a willingness to suffer afflictions,
and a contentation in some measur, in what estate soever, it pleases God to
bring a man to. Outwardly it expresses it self both toward God and men;
toward God it keeps a man lowly in the use of the means, and has a
continued fear and awful sense of Gods presence Mich. 6.8.
and stands not at it to be accounted vile for the service of God. 2. Sam.
6.22.
In carriage toward men, it is not affected in words or gestures, it is not
censorious, nor arrogant Psalm. 131.1.2.3.
, nor contentious Phil: 2:3.
. It desires not open and public places: it is not swelled with praises, nor
it affects not the vain praises of it self: but contrariwise, it makes a man
go before in giving honor, and not to think much to equal himself with
them of the lower sort Romans 12.
, reioicing in the love of a poor Christian, as well as of a great man. It
will make a man subject to, and thankful for, admonitions, and willing to
embrace the truth, though it be found in the possession of others. Finally, it
is ioifull upon the doing of any good, and thankful for lesser favors.

Uses.
The use is as for humiliation under the sense of our wants in expressing the
practice of this grace: so for instruction, to teach us to labor after it, as
a most praiseworthy virtue, we should seek lowliness as the Prophet speaks
Zeph, 2:3. Motives.
. And to this end we should contemplate of the motives heereunto. For
humility is one of the graces we are especially charged to imitate in Christ
Mat: 11.29
. It is a grace that God highly accounts of, he holds us worthy of our
vocation, if he may see this in us, Ephesians: 4*1.2.
the Lord himself will in his special reviving presence dwell with the
contrite, and humble soul Isa. 57.15. Psalm. 34.18.
. He will not despise their prayers Psalm. 102.7.
. Wisdom is with the lowly Pro^. 11.3.
. The Lord will heal them, and create the fruit of the lips to be peace.
Esaias 57 15.29.
Howsoever it may go with the humble otherwise, yet the Lord will be sure to
give grace to the humble 1. Pet. 5.5.6.
. Lastly humility goes before honor, the Lord will exalt us if we abase our
selves, and we are most precious in his eyes, when we are most vile in our own
eyes. And contrariwise this may show us the hatefulness of pride, etc. the
more the Lord stands upon humbleness of mind, the more it imports he abhorres
pride: And that the nature and praise of true humility may the better appear,
it will not be amiss to set out the sorts of Pride.

Generally, pride is expressed, either in things that concern God, or in
things that concern man. The sorts of pride.
In the things that concern God: there is the pride of the Atheist, whereby he
strives to remove the sense of the being of God. And the pride of the
Heretic, when he assaults the attributes of God, or his persons. And the
pride of the Papist, who will claim by his merits. And the pride of the
Curious, who will search into things not revealed. And the pride of the
Persecutor who will pursue by slanders or violence, the power of Gods
ordinances. And the pride of the Impenitent, that dares live and die in his
sins without care of Gods threatenings. And toward men pride is discovered
diverse ways, as by oppugning the fame of the best men, by the singularity of
conceit of worth above others, either for place or gifts, by bragging and
boasting by vain ioies, by new fanglenesse in apparel, by striving for
Offices, and highest places, yea, there is a spiritual pride in very grace and
holiness. Now contrary heereunto is that humility God requires in this place.

And thas of humbleness of mind.

Meekenesse] Christian meekness has in it, What Christian meekenes has in
it.
as I conceive, these things. First, a quietness of heart in the freedom from
passion, by which one is slow to anger, and not easily provoked. Secondly, a
teachablenesse and tractablenesse, or being easy to be persuaded Esai 11 Iam.
3.17
. Thirdly, a childlike confidence in Gods care and providence, becoming in
that respect as a little child Mat. 18
. Fourthly, it is not swelled with prosperity. Fifthly, It thinks not much of
the yoke of Christ, Mat. 11.30
In what measure a man is truly meek, in the same measure he accounts Gods
service, a reasonable and easy service. Sixthly, in conuersing it has two
principal properties; the first is fear 1 Pet. 3.2.3.
, as it is opposed unto boldness, conceitednesse, roughheartednesse: the 2.
is an Evangelical harmlesenesse, or simplicity. 2 Cor. 11.3.


The consideration hereof may much humble the best of us, if we consider how
passion does ouer-master us, and how success does swell us, Use.
and how stiff our hearts are after an inconceivable manner against the power
of the means, and how unquiet we are for want of confidence in God. Oh where
is this conversation with fear to be found? And for the simplicity that is in
Christ Jesus, how is it mixed in some, and wanted in others, and lost in many,
who are beguiled of the Serpent? Yet inasmuch as this grace is indispensibly
required that it should be put on, let us stir up our hearts as to seek
righteousness, so to seek meekness with it. And to this end, we should
avoid what does encounter it: As namely, we should take heed of lust, and
malice, and covetousness, and contention: For these things will wonderfully
dis^u^be the heart, and fill it maruellously with perturbations; and also we
should meditate of the encouragements to this grace; For meekness would much
avail us in the profit and power of the word Iam. 1.21.22 Isai. 29.19 Math.
11: 29
, and God has promised to water this grace with secret ioies, and easefull
refreshings. n Besides God does in special manner undertake their protection
as the places in the Margent will show. Psalm. 76.1. to 9. and 147.5.6. and 149.4
For meekness in the hid man of the heart is a thing much set by 1 Pet: 3.4
he will guide them in judgment and teach them his way Psalm. 25 9 What long
suffering has in it.
.

Long suffering] By Long-suffering is meant, as I take it, First, an unwearied
firmness of heart, holding out under all crosses, tentations, oppositions
etc. The mind not being easily broken, put out, confounded, discouraged,
distempered, or unquieted with any kind of passion. And so indeed it is
nothing else but the perseverance of patience. Secondly, there is a
long-suffering which is a spiritual perseverance of hope, under the promise,
with an expectation of the performance of it. Heb. 6.12.15.
There is a long-suffering in our carriage toward others, in regard of their
reformation, and so we should suffer long in hope of the conversion of the
wicked: 2 Timothy 4.25
and in expecting the reformation of infirmities in Gods children, whom we
love and admonish. 1 These. 5.14
And this is the praise of Christian love, that it does suffer long 1 Cor. 13
Motives.
.

This long-suffering is an excellent grace and a worthy ornament, meet to be
put on, as well as any of the rest, and would wonderfully grace the lives of
Christians. And the rather should we love it, and long after it, because it is
so eminent a praise in God himself, Romans 9.22 Luke 18.7
and in Christ 1 King. 1.17
; yea as any have excelled in the Church, so have they been approved in the
trial of this grace, as were the Apostles. But it is enough to commend it, it
is an excellent fruit of the sanctifying spirit Gal. 5.22.
. Only we must know there is great difference between enduring long and
long-suffering; for true Christian long-suffering is accompanied not only with
patience, but with diligence, Heb. 6.12. Col. 1.11. 1 Timothy 4.5.
and ioyfulnesse, and watching in all things, but especially with the renewing
of faith in Gods promise and providence.

Verse. 13 Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel to another, even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.


There are 2. virtues in conuersing that concern adversity. 1. Long-suffering
under crosses, and clemency under injuries.

Of Long-suffering before. 1. Of Clemency in this verse, where two things may
be noted: 1. the duty required: 2. the reason rendered for the urging of the
duty. The duty is propounded in the two principal parts of it, viz. to
forbear, and to forgive; and amplified by the supposition of a case, If any
man have a quarrel to another. The reason is from the example of Christ
forgiving us

Forbearing] The original word is rendered, sometimes to maintain, Act. 18.14
sometimes to suffer, to endure, 1 Cor. 4.12 2 These. 1.4 2 Timothy 4.4 Heb 13: 22.
sometimes not only to endure, but forbear also, 2 Cor. 11.1:
sometimes to support Ephesians. 4.1 What it is to forbear.
. In the two last senses it may be well taken here.

Now if we would distinctly know what it is to forbear one another, as it
here imports a maine part of Christian clemency; we must understand, that it is
not an omission of holy duties to others, nor a refusing to satisfy others in
their griefs or offenses, nor a shunning of their company, nor yet a swallowing
down of all sorts of injuries committed with an high hand, without
acknowledgement or satisfaction. But out of clemency to forbear others, has
in it such things as these. 1. A freedom from the thirst of revenge. 2 A
bearing with the infirmities of others, which may be performed two ways;
First, by covering them, and not blazing them abroad, if they be secret. And
secondly, by silence, in not reproving them when they fail merely in frailty.
Thirdly, it has in it not only a bearing with them, but a bearing of them,
Gal 6.2
and that I think may be two ways also. First, in not stirring or provoking
their infirmities. Secondly, by pleasing our neighbors humor in that which is
good to edification R^m 15.1.2
. Fourthly, there is a forbearance in matters of wrong to us, and thus to
forbear, is not to prosecute every wrong, either by answers or by suits. And
this forbearance is to be practiced, when we are able to revenge, else it is no
thanks to us to forbear, when we want either power or opportunity to to do
it, 2. it is forbearance not to meet wrong with wrong.

Or thus, there is a threefold forbearance: First, in judgment, when in
doubtful cases we suspend our opinions or censures. Secondly, in words which
consists either in not answering, or in giving soft answers. Thirdly, in deeds
when we render not evil for evil.

Again, forbearance is varied from the consideration of time, for in some
things we must forbear ever, never taking notice of the infirmities or wrongs
as in some weakness that are by mere oversight, or ignorance, and in some
things we must forbear for a time, that is, till there be a ^it opportunity,
to admonish or correct, etc.

The consideration thereof serves greatly for the reproof of that wretched
distemper in many that profess the same faith and hope, Uses.
provoking one another, and consuming one another, and by frowardness,
disquieting the rest and content of others. Is it not here an express charge
that we should forbear one another? Motives.
Have we not here the example of Christ who did so, who might have had a 1000.
fold more just reason to vpbraid, censure, or find fault, then we have, or can
have. Besides this distempered peevishness, and froward misconceiuing and
censuring, it is bred of ill causes, for it comes eiof malice or ignorance. Of
malice, for love covers a multitude of sins, especially it suspendeth
doubtful actions. Of ignorance, for it is certain a wise man will keep in
till afterward, or hold it his glory to be able to pass by an offense.
Further, this sin may be aggrauated by the relations that are mutually
between Christians. Are they not fellow members, coheires, fellow-citizens,
partakers of the same afflictions, are they not brethren, etc. Besides is not
this also a constant justice, that they that judge, are judged; they that
censure, are censured; and does not this envying, and iangling, give occasion
of reioicing to adversaries? Does it not many times so transform Christians,
that it makes them very like wicked men, when they grow so distempered that
they revile their own mothers sons Psalm. 50 20 Gal. 5.9.10.11.12.13.15.
? In the fifth to the Galathians the Apostle urges this reproof by diverse
reasons, such as this. A little of the leaven of these distempers, will sour
the whole lump: and those courses tend not to any good, but to the disquieting
of Gods people, and it is not a small matter to trouble and vex them. Besides
inasmuch as Christians have trouble enough otherways, it does not become their
brethren to trouble them: and we should be so far from troubling our
brethren, as we should rather serve them by love, and if men will needs bite
one another, let them take heed lest they be devoured one of another. Lastly,
if men will not be warned, then let them know the Judge stands at the door
Iam. 5.9. Rules for the practice of forbearance.
. Now that we may attain this forbearing, even to be rightly ordered toward
the infirmities, or wrongs of others, we must labor to get more Christian love
of others; for that will endure all things, and believe all things, and make us
able to bear, and it will drive out suspicion, which like a wretched Beldame
is the mother and nurse of all murmurings, and vain ianglings: and besides,
we must get a greater knowledge of our own selves, and our own ignorance and
corruptions; for when we seem to our selves, to be something deceiving our
selves, we are ready with intempera^ce, to apprehend supposed indignities when
none are offered Gal. 6.1.2.3
. Or if thou must needs speak, then speak the words of admonition, even Gods
words, if thou be sure they have sinned, insteade of thine own vain, and
passionate vpbraidings, or reproaches, or censures.

One another] Observe, that usually where there is any contention or quarrel,
both sides are guilty, though one principally do the wrong, yet few men are
so temperate, but they do wrong again, either in words, or deeds, or
affections: and therefore thou should forbear, seeing thou art privy to
thy self, that in this business, thou have not been such as thou should
be.

Forgiving) The word signifies sometimes to give 1 Cor. 2.12 Phil. 1.29
, sometimes to give freely Luk 7.21 Act. 27.24. Romans 8.32 Gal. 3.8 Philem. 22.
, sometimes to remit freely the punishments Act. 3.14
, sometimes to deliver up for favor, or to pleasure others Act. 15.11.16
, sometimes to forgive and so here.

Quest. But can any man forgive sin to an other.

Answ: Man may forgive the trespass, though not the sin. 2. Man may forgive
the punishment that by man might be inflicted, so as not to require it. 3. man
may pray to God to forgive it.

Object: Obiecti. Sol.
But it is said, no man can forgive sin but God. Sol. True, no man can remit
the eternal punishment, or the curse of the Law, or take away the guilt of
sin before God. But man may forgive it as far as concerns himself.

Object.
Now others may object contrariwise, that 2 Cor. 2.7. They are willed to
forgive, Sol.
and yet the sin of the incestious person was not so much a trespass that
concerned them, as a sin against God. Sol. This sin also was a trespass
against them. 1. As it was a scandal: 2. As it might cause them and their
profession to be evil spoken off, for his sake: again, to forgive in that
place, may be taken in a large sense, for to be reconciled to him.

Quest.
Quest: Is reconciliation necessarily comprehended under forgiveness?

Answ.
Answ: We are tied to seek it, and desire it, and to use all humble and just,
and discreet courses to attain it. But if it will not be had we are discharged
if we forgive. Neither unto obstinate offenders, that will not acknowledge
their sin, are we bound to remit the punishment, or sometimes to notify the
pardon of the fault.

If any man have a quarrel to an other] When he says here (if any man) it
imports, that such Christians might be, as there should be no iarres amongst
them. Discords might wonderfully be prevented if there were care and
discretion in men.

(...).
The word rendered quarrel, signifies a complaint, certainly it is a great
weakness, to be upon every occasion complaining of the wrongs are done us,
and making report of them to others. And it shows too, that we should for
bear and forgive even in such things as these.

And where he says (any man) it shows no men are exempted from the practice
of clemency: That it is here required of one is required of all, no
greatness of gifts or place can privilege any.

As Christ forgave you, so do you] 1. Examples in all rules of practice move
much.

2 As here the head of the Church is an example to all his members, so should
those that are heads of the common wealth, or family, carry themselves so, as
by their examples to direct as well as by their precept, not only show what to
do by commanding, but how to do it also by example.

3 Especially, in forbearing and forgiving, example in great persons, does
wonderfully affect the common people; and therefore because there are so few on
earth, here is one from heaven.

Ques.
Quest: But why is there added reason to this virtue, and not so to each of the
former?

Answ.
Answ: Because the conscience is soon persuaded in the general, that the rest
are good, as humility, meekness, etc. But now we are wonderfully hardly
persuaded to forgive. Secondly, the Lord may well add reasons to persuade to
forgive, because of the special danger of not forgiving; for if a man do not
forgive, there is express threatenings that he shall not be forgiven Mat.
6.14. and 18.25. How Christ is said to forgive.
.

Quest: But how is Christ said to forgive. Answ: Remission of sins is
attributed to Christ: 1. As the meritorious cause of forgiveness. 2. Because
he applies it. 3. Because the Christian in his name sues out the pardon of his
sins, and by him procures forgiveness. Certainly it may be a singular
comfort to all distressed souls if they consider, that he that is their
brother, head, Savior, even he that shed his blood for them, is he that
disposes of all pardons, What actions in Christ are Imitable.
and applies remission of sins; sure it is no hard matter to get a pardon
from him, that is so engaged in his love to us.

Here also we see that the action of Christ is the instruction of the
Christistian, Christ forgave, so must he; we must remember the distinctions
of Christ's actions, some were miraculous, as fasting 40. days, raising the
dead, etc. These are not to be imitated, because they cannot; some are
peculiar actions belonging to his office, as to redeem, or make intercession,
etc. these also are proper to him only: Now some are mortal, these last are
only imitable. Orthus, some actions of Christ he did as God, some as Mediator,
some as man. The last only bind us to follow.

Again, To forgive as Christ forgave has 5. things in it.
in that we are bound to forgive, as he forgave, it not only teaches, that we
must do it as well as he. But for the manner of it as he did. And how was
that? First, Christ forgave his inferiors. Secondly, Christ forgave great
faults as well as less, yea all sorts of faults, yea though they were often
fallen into. Thirdly, nothing was to dear to Christ to merit or confirm his
forgiveness, therefore he shed his own blood, he stood not upon his profit
or his ease. Fourthly, Christ uses all means to prevent offending. Fifthly,
Where Christ forgive: he forgets. Sixthly, Christ forgiues 2. ways. First,
upon the Cross before men did repent. Secondly, by the Gospel, publishing his
pardon upon man's repentance, he did not carry them grudge till they repented
and all these ways should we imitate Christ.

Lastly, observe here the certainty of assurance; For if a man did not
certainly, and infallibly know, that Christ did forgive him, how could that be
made a reason, if he did not know it to be.

And thus of clemency, and so of the two first sorts of graces.

Verse. 14 And above all these put on love which is the bond of perfectness.


The virtues that ought to reign at all times are love, peace, and
thankfulness.

Of love in this verse, which the Apostle sets out as the most noble, ample,
and profitable of all the virtues. Two things are here to be considered: First
the dignity of love, where he says, Above all put on love, etc. Secondly, the
use of it, it is the bond of perfectness.

Above all these] Some read with all these. Some read for all these, meaning
that all the former do flow from this, and therefore we should get love that
we might be merciful, humble, etc. And so it would import that we should get
love, that we might approve our selves, that these are not mere complements,
or dissembled offices, or things taken up for wrong ends.

But most properly and commonly it is read as here, How love is above all
virtues.
Above all these. And so notes the dignity of love above all other virtues,
for it is indeed more excellent, both in respect of causation, as they say in
Schools, because it begets the rest as the efficient cause, and for the
preservation of it other virtues are practiced, or the final cause of them: as
also it is above the rest in acceptance, whether we respect God or men. And
thirdly it is above the rest in respect of continuance 1 Cor. 13.8.
. And this may serve to reprove our great neglect of so noble a grace: and it
may teach us in our prayers to remember to pray for this, and in our practice
to provoke unto love Heb. 10.24.
.

A Cavil of the Papists must be avoided here; For they absurdly reason thus:
Object.
If love be above all virtues, then it is love that makes us just in Gods sight.

But for answer we may easily satisfy our selves with this, Sol.
that before men, and in conuersing with men, love is above all. But before God
faith is above all, love is above faith only in some respects, as in
continuance, but faith is above love in justification.

Put on] Love is not natural, it is a virtue that in in the truth of it is
wonderderfull rare in the world, for man is unto man naturally a wolf, a fox,
a bear, a tigre, a lion, yea a very devil; and that is the reason why men are
so constant in malice, it is natural with them, and this is the reason why
unity and loving concord is found in no calling amongst men.

Loue] Love is of diverse kinds, there is natural civil, moral and religious
love; it is natural love for a man to love himself, his parents, kindred,
etc. This civil love that is framed in us by the Laws of men, by authority
from God, whereby we are brought not to violate the rules of Justice, or
society. In moral love, that love of friends is of eminent respect, but it is
religious or Christian love is meant here.

Christian love is carried both toward God and toward men, and both may be
here meant; For the very love of God may be required as needful in our
conuersing with men, because we can never love men aright, till we first love
God, and besides we are bound in our carriage, to show our love to God, by
zeal for his glory, and avoiding sin in our callings, for the love we bear
to him.

Sure it is that the true love of God is exceeding needful to be put on, as a
most royal robe, I say the true love of God, and therefore I advise all sorts
of men as to labor for it, so to try themselves whether this love of God be
right in them, if we love God, we receive them that come in his name, John
5.42.
and the love of the world does not reign in us, 1. John. 2.15.17
and we are much in thinking of God and godliness, for we often think of
what we love, and we love the word of God, John. 14.27. Signs of the love of
God.
and in adversity we run first to God for help, denying our selves to bring
glory to God, subiecting our wills to his will, glorying in the hope of his
mercy, and it is certain also if we love God aright, we desire his presence,
both of grace and glory. And this love will compel us to holiness, 2 Cor.
5.14.
causing us to hate what he hates, and to obey his commandments, John 14. What
it is to love our enemies.
and besides kindnesses from God will wonderfully inflame us and content us.

The love to men is love of enemies, or brotherly love of Gods children,
Christians are bound to love their very enemies, and this kind of love must be
put on as well as the other, only let us advisedly consider what the love of
enemies has in it. When God requires us to love our enemies, he does not
require us to love their vices, or to hold needless society with their
persons, or to further them in such kindnesses as might make them more wicked,
or to relinquish the defense of our just cause, but to love is not to return
evil for evil, Romans 12.
neither in words 1. Pet. 3.8.9.
or deeds, and to pray for them, Matthew. 5.
and to supply their necessities as we have occasion, Romans 12.19. Exodus 23.4.
2. Chron. 28.8.9.13.15. 2. Kings 6 22. Love of brethren.
ouercomming their evil with goodness, and in some cases to be
extraordinarily humbled for them Psalm. 38.13.
.

But I think the love of brethren is principally here meant: this is a fire
kindled by the sanctifying spirit of God, 2. Tim. 1.7.
this was intended in our election, Ephesians. 1.14.
this proves our faith, Gal. 5.6.
this nourishes the mystical body of Christ, Ephesians: 4.17.
this love is without dissimulation, Romans 12 9. 2. Cor. 6.6.
it is diligent and laboring love, 1. These. 1.3. Heb. 6.10.
it is harmeles and in offensive, Romans 13.10.
it wounds not by suspicious prouocations or scandalls, Romans 14.15.
it is not mercenary, for as God is not to be loved for reward, though he be
not loved without reward: so we must love men, not for their good turns they
do us, but for the good graces God has given them. And we should show our love
in using our gifts for the best good of the body, Romans 12.6.7.
and manifest our compassion and fellow feeling by counsel and admonitions, 2
Cor. 2.4:
and consolations, Phil. 1.7.
and always of edification, 1. Cor. 8.1.
and by works of mercy, 2. Cor. 8.24.
avoiding contention, Phil. 2:3.
and covering the infirmities one of another 1. Pet. 4.8. Love is the bond of
perfection three ways.
.

Thus of the dignity and nature of love: the use of it follows, which is

The bond of perfection] Love is said to be the bond of perfection 3. ways. 1.
Because it is a most perfect bond, and so it is an Hebraisme; for all virtues
are not as it were collected in love, all other virtues will soon be unloosed,
unless they be fastened in love, neither does it only tie virtues together,
but it gives them their perfection, moving them, and perfecting them, and
making them accepted. And it is most perfect because it is most principal
among virtues, nothing is in this life well composed that is not directed
hither.

But let none mistake, he does not show here how we be made perfect before
God, but how we might converse perfectly amongst men. And so the sum of this
sense is, that all should be well with us, in living one with another, if love
flourish amongst us, perfection consists in love by way of bond.

Secondly, it is a bond of perfection, because it is the bond that ties
together the Church which is the beauty and perfection of the whole world.

Thirdly, it is a bond of perfection as it leads us to God who is perfection
it self, yea by love God is joined to man, and dwells in him.

The use of all is, Use.
seeing love is of this nature, use dignity and perfection, therefore we should
labor to be rooted in love, even every way firmly settled in it. And to this
end we should labor more to mortify our own self-love, and the care for our
own ease, profit, credit, etc.

And this may wonderfully also shame us for those defects are found in us. It
may greatly reprove in us that coldness of affection, that is even in the
better sort, and those frequent ianglings and discords, and that fearful
neglect of fellowship in the Gospel in many places, and all those evil fruits
that arise from the want of the exercise of this grace, such as are suspicions,
blind censures, etc.

And thus of love.

Verse. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts to the which also ye
are called in one body: and be thankful.


In this Verse he exhorts unto the two last virtues, Peace and thankfulness.
In the exhortation to peace, there is the duty and the reason. The duty in
these words, let the peace of God rule in your hearts, where I consider the
nature of the virtue, peace, the author of it, God: the power of it, let it
rule: the seat or subject of it in your hearts: the reason of it is double,
first from their vocation, to the which ye are called. Secondly from their
mutual relation, as members of one body.

Peace] Peace is threefold, Threefold peace.
internal, external, and eternal. Internal peace is the tranquillity of the
mind and conscience in God, satisfied in the sense of his goodness. Romans 14.17
External peace is the quiet and concord in our outward estate, and carriage,
Ephesians. 4.3.
Eternal is the blessed rest of the Saints in heaven, Esaias 57.2.
the last is not here meant.

Of God] Peace is said to be of God in diverse respects. 1. Because our peace
should be such as may stand with the glory of God, so we should seek the
truth and peace Za^h. 8. vlt.
. 2. It may be said to be of God because he commands it. 1. Cor. 14.31.
3. Because he gives it, he is the author of it, hence peace is said to be a
fruit of the spirit Gal. 5.22.
: and God is said to be the God of peace 2. Cor. 13.11 1 These. 5.23. Heb.
13.20. (...)
. In this last sense I think it is meant here.

Let it rule] The original word is a term borrowed from running at race, and
it imports; Let peace be the Judge, let it sit and ouer-see, and moderate all
the affections of the heart, seeing we are in a continual strife, whereas our
affections would carry us to contentions, discords, brawlings, grudges, and
divisions, etc. Let the victory be in the power of peace. Let peace give the
applause, and finally determine the matter.

Thus of the explication of the sense of the words.

How peace is of God.
Now all these words may be first understood of internal peace with God, and
then God may be said to be the author of it in diverse respects.

1 It may be said to be of God, because he sent his son to merit it. Hence
Christ is said to be our peace, Ephesians. 2.14.17
Prince of peace, Esaias 9.6.
Lord of peace, 2 These. 3.16
Secondly because he sends his messengers to proclaim it, and inuit men to
it. ^say 52.7.
Thirdly because he sends his spirit to work it Gal. 5.22. How it rules.
.

Now this peace of God is said to rule.

1. When it ouerswayes doubts and tentations, establishing the heart in the
confidence of the assurance of Gods love in Christ, which is when a man can say
as the Apostle did, I am persuaded neither principalities nor powers, neither
heights nor depths, things present nor things to come, shall ever be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. Catharinus a very
Papist could gather certainty out of this place. 2. When in our carriage we
continually fear to offend God, or do any thing that might disturb the peace
of our consciences. 3. When in adversity we can deny our selves, and rather
choose to suffer affliction then forgo the peace of Christ in our hearts John
16.33.
.
Now when the holy Ghost ads in your hearts, it implies that true peace with God
will encounter both presumption and hypocrisy, and diffidence. Presumption,
for it will rule in our hearts, it will not abide hardness of hear^, and the
spiritual slumber. It will not rest till there be affections of godliness as
well as common profession of it. Hypocrisy, for it notes that it will not
(...) only by keeping justice in a man's life, but it will rule within a man's
thoughts and affections. Diffidence, and so these words excellently encounter a
fear in weak Christians. John. 14.17.
Oh I shall loose my peace, and that rest I have: now this is answered here,
thy peace is in thine heart, and therefore who can take it from thee? it is not
like thy money and credit, etc. for these may be taken away: But peace can no
man nor Devil take away without thine own consent; it is in a Chest where no
hands can come but Gods and thine own.

The use of this may serve for reproof of that lamentable security that is in
most men about their inward peace with God, Uses.
not only that most men wretchedly procrastinate through the hardness of
their hearts, refuse peace in the season when God offers peace, and beseeches
them to be reconciled, but also for that the most men conform themselves in
this presumption, that they are in Gods favor, when indeed they are not. It was
the fault of some Prophets Ier. 23.17.18
, and is too common a fault of many ministers to cry peace, peace, when there
is no peace, by reason of the sins men live in without repentance. The holy
ghost in many places complains that such is the state of the most men, that
they have not known the ways of peace Psalm 14. Rom 3.17.
. And the day of Judgment shall find many that cry peace and safety, while
they are ready suddenly to perish 1. These. 5.3.
, Iehu could say, what peace so long as the whoredoms and witchcrafts of their
mother Iesabell remain? So may not we say, what peace can there be unto men,
(though the world struggle and gainesay) so long as lippe-seruice, swearing,
profanation of the Sabbath, What we must do to get peace.
blood, drunkenness, whoredom, contempt of the word etc. do so much abound
without amendment?

Secondly, hence we may learn by all means to seek the peace of God into
our hearts. And to this end we must be Gods people, Psalm. 85.8.
and get an humble and contrite heart, Isa. 57.15.19 Psalm. 37.11.
and soundly labor our justification by faith, R^^. 5.1.
we must be good and true in our hearts, Psa. 12 5. vlt.
and work righteousness, Isa. 32:17. Romans 2.10. Gal. 6.16.
and study the Scriptures, waiting upon the word preached Isa. 57.19. (...)
10.6.
.

Thirdly, it may serve for comfort to all Gods servants that seek true peace,
the Lord would have them to have peace, and to have plenty of it that it may
rule in them. Oh but I have many and great afflictions in the world. Solu. What
though, in Christ thou may have peace John 16.33.
. Oh but I cannot see which way I should have any peace. Sol. He will create
peace Isa. 57.19.
. Oh but the Devil is very violent in tempting. Sol. The God of peace will
tread the Devil down shortly Romans 16.20.
. Oh but the peace we have, neither is, nor here will be perfect. Sol. Peace
shall come Esaias. 57.2.
. Oh, but I am afraid least my peace with God break, and so hold not. Sol.
The mountains may fall, but Gods covenant of peace shall not fall Esaias. 54.10.
.

Thus of internal peace, external peace follows; And it is either
domestical or Ecclesiastical, or polliticall. Peace should rule our houses,
and show it self by freedom from bitterness, and chiding, and brawling, and
absurd peevish passions.

And for Church peace (to write a word or two of that) it is not only a rest
from persecution, but also from discords within, this is a marvelous blessing.
This peace has not in it a confusion of al sorts of men, joined together in
one universal amity, though they be never so wicked. For Christ came not to
send such peace, and the word is a fan that will make a division. The world
will hate, and darkness will not mix with light, the children of the prophets
will be as signs and wonders even in Israel. But this peace is a holy amity
and heavenly concord, in the true members of the mystical body, both in
consent and doctrine. This peace in the Church is of singular worth and
occasions unspeakable joy and growth in the Church: this is to be sought and
prayed for of every Christian, but especially it should be the care of
Church-gouernours. And certainly there would be more peace if they would more
and more love goodness, and honor good men; and more carefully prevent and
severely purge out the leaven of corrupt doctrine, and wicked life, and so
tithe mint and cummin, as not neglect the waightier things of the law,
especially if they would more disgrace flatterers and slanderers, that employ
their whole might to make the breach worse.

Political peace either private, and so it is a rest from suites and quarrels.
Or public, and so it is a rest from wars, and rebellions, and tumults.

But I think by external peace here is meant in general concord, and a
quiet, harmless, peaceable course of conuersing with men in all our carriage.
Now God is said to be the author of it, in that it is his gift, and special
providence, to work it amongst men, and it is said to rule when we can
prefer public peace before our private respects. And when we can seek it,
and not stay till it be sought of us, and when we can forbear and forgive,
notwithstanding any inequality, Now this peace may be said to rule in the
heart, though it be external, because if corrupt passions be killed in thee,
(as envy, rage, malice, desire of revenge, etc.) men would easily agree in
life, bind the heart to the good abearing, and the hands will bind themselves.

The use may be both for reproof of the perverse dispositions of the most men
that will not live in peace, but with all falsehood and sin, nourish debate
and vain contentions, as also it may inform and inflame men to desire peace,
to seek it, yea to follow after it, Ps. 34.13.14 Romans 14.18. Heb. 12.14
But that men might attain peace, they must have salt in themselves, Mark 9 50.
that is by mortification season, tame, and purge their own hearts; yea they
must use the salt of discretion, and to that end pray God to make them wise in
their conversation, yet men must ever remember so to seek peace as to retain
truth too Zach. 8.19. Heb. 12.14. Iam. 3.18.
peace without holiness is but profane rest.

Thus of the duty the reasons follow.

To the which ye are called] We are called to peace not only by men, who by
their laws require peace, but chiefly by God, and that two ways. First in the
general precepts of the words which are set down in diverse places. Secondly
in special manner, in the word of reconciliation, that word that conuerts us
and reconciles us does at the very first show us the very necessity and worth
of peace, as the sense of our need of Gods mercy, makes us merciful to men;
so the sense of our need of Peace with God, makes us peaceable with men.

This confutes their folly that say forwardness in religion makes men
turbulent, most wretchedly do profane men sin against Gods people in that
aspersion. For they are called to peace, and are the most peaceable people in
the world. But let all that fear God, even show the fruit of their holy
calling, by approving themselves to belouers of peace.

In one body] The second reason is taken from their mutual relation amongst
themselves, they are members of one body, and as it is unnatural and unseemly
to see a man tear his own flesh, so is it most unnatural and unseemly for
Christians to bite and devour one another, by iarring, and complaining, and
wrangling one with another: and we should hence learn to speak all one
thing, and have all one faith, and one heart, and so live in peace that the God
of love and peace may be with us. But of this mystical union in the former
Chapter.

Thus of Peace. Thankfulness follows.

And be ye thankefull] Thankfulness is either to God or men. It Is the latter
here is meant; Thankfulness to men must be considered in it self, and in the
amiable performance of it, for the word is by some rendered amiable. And it may
be it notes but the right manner of affecting in giving or receiving thanks.

This thankefulnes has in it principally gratitude, that is, thanks in words
yet it may contain also gratuities, that is, tokens of good will, whereby we
endeavor indeed to recompense good for good.

Thankfulness is sometimes in desire, sometimes in deed, it is true
thankfulness unfeignedly to desire opportunity to show it.

Thankfulness may be due, not only to godly men, but also to wicked men, yea
such as turn to be our enemies, we should watch to the opportunities of doing
them good, though they be evil.

Now the Amiablenesse required, is either in him that must perform
thankfulness, or in him that must receive it.

What is required in performing thankefulnes.
In performing thankfulness we must observe these rules. First, it must be
wholly. 2. It must be in all places. 3. It must be without flattery, or in
sinuation to beg new favors. 4. It must be without the favoring of the
vices of others.

What is required in receiving thanks
In receiving thanks there are these three rules.

1 That he intend not to bring into bondage by showing of kindness, for so to
receive kindness were to lose a man liberty. 2 That out of pride he wax not
conceited by complaining of unthankfulness, for the mere want of manner or
measure he expects, where he might see it comes not of ingratitude or a will
not to give thanks, but merely out of natural defect or want of skill, or
will to complement it. 3 That he water what he has sowed, that is, labor to
keep kindness a foot by nourishing it, at fit occasions and opportunities of
doing good.
Verse. 16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you Richly in all wisdom, teaching,
and admonishing one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual songs,
singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.


Hitherto of the special rules of holy conuersing with men: The general rules
follow, Verse 16.17. and they concern.

1 The means of holy lfe, Verse. 16. viz. the word.

2 The end of holy life, Verse. 17. viz. the glory of Christ.

The 16. Verse conceiues an exhortation to the careful, and plentiful, and
frequent use of the word.

Doctrine from Coherence.

The Word is the principal means, The word make men not only more religious,
but also more just.
not only to make us religious and holy in our behavior toward God, but
also to make us righteous, just, and amiable in our carriage toward men. It is
the Word that makes us 1. New creatures 1 Pet. 1.23. Iam. 1.18.
2. Humble Esai. 66.2.
3. Meek, Psalm. 45.4. where it is called the word of meekness, not because
it requires it, and contains discourse of the praises of it, but by effect,
because it makes men so. 4. Patient and long suffering Revel. 3.10. The word of
my patience. It begets patience, yea, such patience as Christ will own, yea
such as by influence comes from Christ, by means of the word. 5. Clement, able
to for bear, and forgive Iam. 3.17.
. 6. Loving, able to express in carriage the affections and duties of love
Phil. 1.9. and 2.14.16.
. 7. Peaceable, Esai. 2. 2.4. The word shall judge all strife, so as men shall
not only lay aside the effects and means of contention and hostility, but
become by the power of the word, willing to serve one another in love, yea to
abide the labor of love, noted by mattockes and sithes. No work so base, or
laborious, but godly men persuaded by the word, will undertake them for the
good and peace of the Church, and their brethren. I might instance in the rest
of the virtues, but these shall suffice.

This should inform us concerning the causes of the viciousness of the lives
of the most: Use.
it is because they so stubornly rebel against the Word; either refusing to
hear it, or hardening their heart against the working of it. And secondly, if
we find our corruptions in our selves to get head, and make us not only a
burden to our selves, but an offense to our brethren, we should come to the
word, and to Christ's Ministers, for there we may find help if we will be
advised: and if our servant and children in their carriage be disordered, we
should bring them to Gods house, that there they may be framed to a greater
care of their behavior in our house.

Thus of the Coherence.

This verse in it self contains an exhortation concerning the word of God:
and thus he exhorts to the right use; First, of the word in general. Secondly,
of one part of the word which is the Psalms. Concerning the word in general,
here is to be considered. First, the Author of it, Word of Christ. Secondly
the manner of entertainment of the word, Let it dwell in you plenteously in
all wisdom. Thirdly, the end or use of it should be put too: First, to teach
in what we know not. Secondly to admonish in what we do not.

Word of Christ] (...) the Word is taken sometimes for Christ himself, John
1.1. And so it is true that we should labor that the word Christ should dwell
in us. Sometimes for Preaching, Act. 20.7. and so it is true that we should
grow so careful and skillful in remembering the Sermons we hear, that our
hearts should be stored with riches of that kind. Sometimes for memorable
sayings, Act. 2.22. and 20.35. 1 Timothy 4.9. 2 Timothy 2.11. 1 Titus 3.6. Heb. 7.28.
Romans 13.9. And so it is true that a Christian should be so familiarlie
acquainted with Scriptures, that all the memorable sayings in them should be
ready in their memories.

But to come nearer, by the word of Christ, some understand the counsels and
exhortations of Christ, concerning the contemning of the world, to the intent
to deuote our selves to the contemplation of heavenly things. Some understand
the promises in Scripture concerning Christ, or to be had in him. Some
understand that part of the Scripture which Chist by his own mouth uttered. It
is true, that in every of these a Christian should be exceeding rich.

But I take it, that all these senses are too strait and narrow for this
place. By the word of Chirst, therefore I understand, the whole word of God
contained in both the old and new Testament. And this is said to be the word of
Christ four ways.

The Scripture is the word of Christ in 4. respects.
First, as Christ is the subject of it. the sum of the word is Christ.
Secondly, as it is the proper inheritance and riches of the body of Christ, the
dowry he has bestowed upon his Church. Thirdly, as he is the conseruing cause
of it. Fourthly, as he is the Author of it: and so I take it here principally
to be meant.

Christ is the Author of the word: First, in respect of inspiration 2 Pet. 1.
vlt.
. Secondly, in respect of Commission to his Ambassadors Tit. 1.3.
, he does not only indite the Embassage, but gives Commission to the
Ambassadors. Thirdly, in respect of confirmation Mar. 16. vlt.
externally, by the signs that follow it, and internallie, by the seal of the
spirit Ephesians. 1.13
. Fourthly, in respect of personal promulgation of it in that, in the old
Testament in humane shape he appeared to declare it to Adam, Abraham, Jacob,
and the Patriarchs, and also by visions to the Prophets, and in the new
Testament by incarnation, taking truly our nature, did by lively voice in his
own person preach the Gospel to men. Fifthly, in respect of energie, or the
power and efficacy of the word which wholly depends upon Christ, and is showed
by the growing of the word notwithstanding all oppositions, and that it cannot
be bound, though the Ministers of it suffer 2 Timothy 2.9
, and in the difference of power between Christ's Ministers and hirelings; yea,
hence it is so lively and mighty in operation, that it discernes and discouers
the very secrets of men, and tells tales of the hearers Heb. 4.12.13
.

Use.
The use is either more general, or more special; more general, either for
information to satisfy us concerning the hard sayings in Scripture, and the
experience of the truth of that, John 8.43. viz. that wicked men cannot hear
the words of Christ. It comes from the sovereign majesty, and secret
excellency of the word, and the spiritual nature of it (as the word of
Christ) removed from the sense of the carnal reason and fleshly affections of
unregenerate men. And also this serves for instruction and that either
negatiuely, or affirmatively. Men sin against the word 6. ways


Negatiuely the use is, therefore take heed of sinning against the word of
Christ, and as men sin against the Word many ways, so principally six ways.

First, by contemning of it Ioh. 12 48. Heb. 2.2
. Secondly, by betraying it to Satan, letting him steal it out of our hearts
Mat. 13.20
. Thirdly, by choking it with cares and lusts Math. 13.21.
. Fourthly, by making it of none effect (...)
by Traditions. Fifthly, by a proud challenging of the knowledge of it to our
selves 1 Cor. 14.36
. Sixthly, by being ashamed of our obedience or profession of the words of
Christ, when we are amongst sinful and wicked men Mar. 8.38
.

Affirmatively, it may teach us four things.

1 To receive the word of God with all humility and meekness Act. 13.48
2 To receive it with faith Iam. 1.21
. 3 To glorify the word of God Heb. 4.2
, which we do; First, when we ascribe the praise not to men, but to Christ.
Secondly, when we esteem it more then the words of the greatest men. 4 To be
careful of our carriage and practice, that so the word of Christ which we
profess, be not evil spoken of Titus 2.5.
, for the blame of our evil life will be laid upon the word: they will say,
this is their gadding to Sermons.
In special, seeing the word is the word of Christ, it should teach: First
Ministers, four things.

1 To teach it with boldness (...) Act. 5.31
, not fearing the face of any man. 2 To attend upon the word only, and not
meddle with civil business, is it mere to leave the word of Christ to serve
tables Act. 6.2.
? 3 To humble themselves to walk with God in so good a function. Who is
sufficient for these things? We speak not our own words, or the words of men,
for then wit, reading, learning, and direction might perfect us, but we speak
the words of Christ, and therefore our fitness and sufficiency to speak to
men's consciences, comes of the immediate blessing and assistance of Christ. 4
To deliver the word with all faithfulness, studying to approve themselue, as
the workmen of God (seeing they deliver the word of God) Dividing the word
aright 2 Timothy 2.15
holding fast the faithful word of doctrine Tit. 1.9.
: not making Merchandise of the word, but as of sincerity, and as of God, in
the sight of God, speaking in Christ 2 Cor. 2. vlt.
. Casting from them the cloak of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor
handling the word deceitfully, but in declaring the truth, approving themselves
to every man's cons^ience in the sight of God 2. Cor. 4.2.
.
Secondly, the People, to embrace the word, press to it, never be ashamed of
it, nor give it over, but receive it constantly with joy, though it cost them
much pains, and many crosses and disgraces 2 These. 1.5
. For this constant receiving of, and cleaning to the word, makes them
exceeding dear to Christ, as dear as his mother, and his brethren: This is
the choosing of the best part Luke 10.42
, this is a sign that they are the Disciples of Christ Io. 8.31.
: that they love Christ indeed Io. 14.23.24
, that they be in Christ 1 Ioh. 2.5.
: She said well, that said of Christ, blessed was the womb that bare thee,
and the breasts that gave thee suck. But Christ adds, that they are more
blessed that hear the word of Christ and keep it Luke 11.28
. The blessed virgin was more happy in that she conceived Christ in her heart,
then that she bare him in her womb.

Thus of the Author of the word.

The entertainment of the word follows: and here the Apostle designs;
First, the subject, persons: You. Secondly, the measure, Dwell plenteously.
Thirdly, the manner, in all wisdom.

First, I consider of the expositions of all the words, which are very full of
senses, and then make use of altogether.

In you] These words note unto us two things: First, the persons who must
intertaine. Secondly, the place where, in you, 3.1. in your hearts.

First, for the persons: the Apostle would have us know, that not only Clergy
men ( Epaphras and Archippus) but lay men of all sorts are tied to the study of
Scriptures.

I distribute the sorts:

First, Young men as well as the gray heirs 1 Ioh. 2.12
for the word helps them to overcome the Devil, even all tentations to lust,
and ungodliness whatsoever, yea by the blessing of God many times it makes
them wiser then the ancient Psa. 119.100
.

Secondly, distressed men, as well as such as live at ease, and prosperity, and
abound in leisure. I say, such as have many cares and troubles, distressed,
either by crosses Psalm. 119 92
, or by persecutions Psalm. 119.87
, or by contempt Ps. 119.141
.

Thirdly, Ignorant men, as well as learned men, such as are simple in respect
of natural parts, or untaught in respect of education, are tied as well as
others, they may not say, they were not brought up to learning, for many times
simple and unlearned People in the very entrance ineo the word Psalm. 119
129.130.
: when they bring good and holy desires with them, get more light of the
wonders of Gods Law in few weeks, then many great learned men do in all their
days, for sound saving knowledge.

Fourthly, Women as well as men are bound hereunto Prou. 31.26. and 1.8. Yea,
such women as are full of business and cares, not good women or wives, but
good huswiues also are tied, Women must seek knowledge as well as men.
yea not only to learn the word, but to teach it as the places show.

Thus of the Persons.

Secondly, in you: Notes the place that the word must be entertained in, In
you, that is, in your minds, for contemplation; in your hearts, for holy
desires, and affections; in your consciences to guide them to a holy manner of
giving sentence, etc. This is that which is promised to all the faithful in
the covenant of grace, Ierem. 31.33. and noted as the sign of the righteous
Psalm. 37 21.

Dwell] A Metaphor borrowed from household intertainement, and notes 3. things
unto us.

1 That the word should be familiar to us and known of us readily, and we so
acquainted with it as with our brethren, or sisters. Say unto wisdom, thou art
my sister, etc. Pro. 7.4. To note, that as in nature he is accounted a singular
Ideote that knows not his own brothers or sisters: So in religion, in Gods
account is extreme simplicity, and blindness, not to be familiarly acquainted
with the grounds of behavior and comfort, as they are contained in the word.

The Scriptures in our houses.
2 That it should be domestical, we must get it into our houses, as well as our
Churches: and that three ways: First, when we come home from Gods house we
should keep the word taught, a foot by repetitions of it, and by talking of it
upon all occasions, that the life of the doctrine be not lost. Secondly, there
is required a familiar teaching, and plain and familiar instructing of
servants, distilling of the principles, and profitable precepts of the law as
they are able. God gave his testimonies to Israel, not that the Clergy men
should have them in the Temple and Synagogue, but that Parents should have them
in their several dwellings, to instruct their children, and their childrens
children Ps. 78.5.6 Deuteronomy. 6.
. Thirdly, the admonitions, rebukes, counsels, and encouragements used in the
family should be grounded on the word: for conscience only is the fountain of
all right subjection, and obedience^ the bonds of nature because he came out of
thy loins) or the bonds of policy (because he is thy hired servant) are too
weak to enforce (of themselves) a constant, and cheerful, and just
subjection. The true reason why men speed so ill in their servants and children
is because they nurture them with their own words, but distill not into their
consciences the words of Christ.

The use of Scripture in our houses.
Quest: But to what end should their need all this ado about the Scriptures
in our houses, what good comes of it?

Answ: If it be not intimated sufficiently before: yet plainly understand,
that the word is to be exercised in our houses: First as a refuge against
affliction and domestical crosses, both to direct and comfort us, Psalm.
119.143. 147.165. Secondly, as a means of instruction to our ignorant children
and servants. Thirdly, as a means of the sanctification of the creatures, and
our callings, 1. Tim. 4.4. Lastly, seeing Satan will tempt us, and our natures
will be vicious, not only in Gods house, but in our own houses, we have
reason to carry the Medicine to the sore, and to bring the sword of the
Spirit, which is the word of God, home with us, and draw it there, seeing the
Devil will cast his fiery darts there, he that is in danger of a subtle and
furious enemy, always must look unto two things: First, that he has on all
his Armor. Secondly, that he be ready at all times, in all places, when his
adversary will encounter with him. A malicious and skillful adversary desires
but to find his enemy unarmed in one part of his body, or in one place: so is
it with us, for because men have no sword of the Spirit at home, therefore it
comes to pass that men that have good affections in Gods house have base and
vile affections in their own houses. Thirdly, it notes that the word must be
constantly entertained and exercised in our houses, for they are not said to
dwell with men that lodge there only for a night or a day or two. Ps. 119.112.
So the sudden and passionate use of the word now and then will not serve it.

Plenteously] the original word notes two things. 1. The measure, and so it is
well rendered; (...)
plenteously. 2. The worth of the knowledge of the word, and so it is by some
rendered, richly. In the first sense it teaches us that we should labor by
all means to abound in the knowledge and use of the word. It should be, not in
a scant and sparing measure, or in some parts of it, but we should grow from
measure to measure, and from knowledge to knowledge. In the second sense it
teaches us, that the knowledge of the word is the Christians riches, so he
says, 1. Cor. 1.5. rich in all speech and knowledge. Christians should account
their utterance in holy and profitable speeches and conferences, and the inward
notions of saving knowledge, as their best wealth, so as they should never
think themselves poor so long as they may have plenty of knowledge in the use
of the means. Thus David reckons of his wealth. Gods statutes more dear to
him then thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 119.72
and that knowledge he can get from the word out of Gods treasury, manger the
malice and power of the Devil or evil men, he accounts more worth then rich
spoils Ps. 119.162
, this may appear in the contrary in the case of the Laodiceans Reu. 3.18.18
.

In all wisedome] wisdom is sometimes taken for virtue as folly is for sin,
but here I take it for knowledge, and that not as the gaining of heavenly
wisdom is the end of the entertainment of the word, Of the wise use and
entertainment of the word.
but as it notes the manner how we should entertain the word, this wise manner
of entertaining the word, I consider both negatiuely and affirmatively:
Negatiuely to handle the word wisely is not to handle or use it: First; coldly,
fruitlesly, or unaptly: Secondly; peruesly in wresting the word to ill ends, to
nourish curiosity, ambition or sin. Thirdly, carnally as the Capernaites,
that know no flesh of Christ, but the flesh of his body, nor any eating but
carnal. Fourthly; not indiscreetly when we come abroad into company, we should
so profess and use the word, as that we dishonor it not by Indiscretion, by
not heeding places, times, occasions, etc.

Affirmatively to use the word wisely, is in the general, especially to teach
our selves. And to this end: First, to understand it. Secondly, to seek
profitable things, not curious and pleasing things only. Thirdly, so to try all
things as to keep that which is good. Good I say particularly and for our own
use, there be some things in hearing, reading, etc. that do exceedingly; not
only affect us, but are in special manner fitting us: now it is a special
wisdom to keep these things whatsoever else we lose. Fourthly, to wait upon
all the opportunities of getting profit by the word, to know our seasons Ier.
8.7.
. Fifthly, in carriage abroad, not to be so indiscreetly open in the discovery
of our minds and knowledge, and opinions, as to be catched by the fraud of any,
and to this end, not to trust all that feign themselves to be just men Luke
20.20.
.

In all wisedome] All for measure, all for diversity of the things known, all
for sincerity in the observation of the rules of wisdom, in the manner of
entertaining the word, all wisdom, that is, all necessary to salvation.

Thus of the explication.

The uses follow, The uses general and special.
and those are either general from all their words, or special from each of
them. The general uses are for reproof, information, instruction or
consolation.

1 For reproof, if it must be thus of all entertained, how great a sin is
it, to neglect or contemn the word, and in as much as this is a great and
common sin, it is required, and requited by God with four singular curses.
The first Judgment upon the contemners of the word is, that all the comforts
of the word, are unto them as a sealed book: so as that word which is to the
faithful a wellhead of all true and sound joy, Judgments upon contemners of
the word.
unto them is of no taste nor power, they can find some savor in any profits
and sports; etc. but none in the word. The second judgment is* that when they
do for fashion or for fear, and other ill ends come to hear the preaching of
the word, Esaias 29.11.
they are many times slain by the words of Gods mouth, and the Prophets even
mow down scores, hundreds, and thousands of them, so as they are pierced and
galled, smitten and buffeted, with the terrors of the word, (which is only
open to rebuke them) and they see that threatening many times comprehends under
it multitudes of men.

Obiecti.
Ob. But this comes only of the severity of the teachers, that set themselves
to preach damnation and to utter terrible things.

Sol.
Ans. This was the objection in the Prophet Micha his time, and uttered by such
as bare the name of Jacob: to whom all the promises did belong, and they were
answered by the Prophet, that for resolving of their doubt, they should ask 2.
questions of their own consciences. The first was, whether they thought their
works were like the works of Jacob, and the rest of the ancient Saints, to
whom such comforts did belong, or whether such vile prophanenes and wickedness
were found in Jacob, as was apparently found in them. The second question was,
whether they did not see that the words of God were always good to such as
walk uprightly. In all which he shows that it is not the uncharitable
severity of Gods servants (for the doctrine is good to good men) but the vile
prophanenes and contempt of the word in the people that made them liable to
such terrors in the word. Micha. 2.7.


The third judgment is, that all civil praises in men that contemn the
wisdom of God in the word, are singularly vile in Gods sight, Ier. 8.8.9. and
he instructed in wisdom.

Lastly, salvation is far from the wicked, because they seek not Gods
statutes, the evidence of the hope of a better life is removed from them, Ps.
119.155.
so as speaking from their own sense, they avouch it that no man can be sure
of eternal life to himself, and if in the general, the profane neglect of
the word be thus sought out and judged of God: then surely those persons must
needs be in great danger, that never opened their doors to the word, never
taught their children and servants, scarce ever had a bible in their houses:
but especially such as shun the word, as a true rock of offense. Yea many of
Gods Children may be justly rebuked in this, that they are so far from
showing that the word has dwelt plenteously in them, that whereas for time and
the plenty and power of the means, they might have been teachers, they have
need again to be taught the very principles. Heb. 5.13.12.
And they show it in that they are so inexpert and unskillful in the word of
righteousness.

The second general use is for information. See the admirable largeness of
the word and the perfectnes above all other things under the sun, it is good
for worship in the temple, Ps. 119 96.
it is good for our affairs in the family, it is of use in prosperity and in
adversity, it fits for the profit of all sorts of men, at all times, and in all
places, and so does nothing else in the world.

The third general use is for instruction. The meditation of the
intertainement of the word in all these words required, should teach us to
open our Churches, open our houses, yea our hearts and all for the word. And to
this end to consecrate our selves to the study of the word in all the means
both public and private.

Object.
Ob. But if I should, it will be in vain I have such an ill memory, etc.

Sol.
Ans. The beginning of the word is truth, and men should find by experience the
contrary to their fears, Psalm. 119.160
if they in sincerity fought unto God in the word, and as for ill memory we
must know, that a good memory is the gift of God as well as a good heart, and
no man has it naturally, wicked men may have large memories, but not
sanctified to contain holy things: and therefore if men would seek to God in
uprightness of desire: whatsoever they lost, yet the judgment or answer of
God in the word preached, or by reading or conference, (which resolves their
doubts, points at the means to redress their corruptions, etc.) should not
be wholly forgotten. The judgments of his righteousness endure for ever, that
part of knowledge that particularly answers their desires, or the experience of
their want in themselves, this shall be deeply imprinted in them by God, so as
the virtue thereof shall never be lost. To conclude seeing the holy Ghost
requires all careful intertainement of the word, we should do that unto it
that we would do for the entertaining of some great man into our houses. 1.
make clean the room of our hearts: purge our hypocrisy, malice, etc. 2. When
the word is come in molest it not, take heed of strange affections, passions
and lusts. 3. Receive it with joy and express all the signs of joy.

The last general use is for consolation unto all such as love the word. They
should encourage themselves and say with David, thy statutes shall be my song,
so long as I continue in the house of my Pilgrimage. Ob. Object.
But our inward desires and delights in the word are mixed with outward
disgraces and scorns of men: Sol.
we are reproched, slandered, rebuked, etc. Ans. Hearken unto me ye that know
righteousness (not ye that talk of it, Esaias 51.7.
or hear them that teach it, but ye that know indeed what sincerity means)
and ye of the people in whose hearts are my laws: as if God would wish them to
look up and see the great reward of their well doing. Ob. But they might say
we are tanted and threatened, and disgraced. Object.
Ans. Fear not the reproach of men, nor be afraid of their rebukes. Ob. Sol.
But we see that wicked scorners escape unpunished and are in better credit
doing ill, Obiecti.
then we doing well. Ans. though God do not by sudden judgments destroy them
all at once, Sol.
yet he promises that his curse shall secretly and insensibly eat them as the
moth. God does daily judge them though we see it not, Isay. 51.7.8.
and for the faithful their righteousness shall never be taken away by the
reproaches of men, but it will endure for ever, etc.

Thus of the uses in general

From the particular consideration of each of the words, diverse special uses
may be made.

Dwell] First, if the word must dwell with us it should teach us to practice
what we are here exhorted, get the word into our houses, let it so dwell with
us that nothing sound more in a Christian house then the word: that is to live
comfortably. This is to live in the shadow of the almighty, Psalm. 91.1.
in the very light of Gods countenance. Psalm. 140.
A house without the word is a very dungeon of darkness to exercise our selves
in the Law, it will give our hearts rest in the days of evil. The Fathers
commandment and the mothers instruction would lead our children and servants
when they walk, Psalm. 94.12.
it would watch for them when they sleep, and when they wake it would talk
with them, it would be a lantern, and the very way of life to them. It would
keep them from the strange Woman Prou. 9.20. 10 25.
, there would not be such filthiness in many houses as now commonly appears to
be. What can better preserve Jacob from confusion, or his face from being pale,
then if he might see his children the work of Gods hand, framed and fitted by
the word in regeneration, and the duties of new obedience, this would make
religious parents to sanctify Gods name, even to sanctify the holy one, and
with singular encouragement from the God of Israel, Isa. 29.22.23.

In you] Secondly, in that the People are made the subject persons to be
exhorted heereunto, it plainly confutes the opinion and practice of the
Papists, that either hide the word in a strange tongue, or prohibit private
men, from the domestical and daily use of it. But the Apostle does not envy it
in the Lord people, that the word should dwell plenteously in them as well as
in Clergy men.

Plenteously] 3. In that he requires the word should not only dwell with us
but for measure, be plenteously there, it should teach us in practice to
endeavor it: but for explication of this use, I consider of two questions to
answer them.

Quest.
Quest. 1. What must we do that the word might be in us plenteously, and the
knowledge of it abound?

Answ.
Ans. Six things are to practiced. 1. We must walk at liberty, freeing our
heads from worldly cares, lusts, and delights Psalm. 119.45
. 2. We must avoid evil company, and say with David, away from me all ye
wicked, for I seek Gods statutes Ps. 119.115.
. 3. We must strive to take away the lettes of the practice of what we do know:
this David calls the lifting up of his hands to Gods law Psa. 119.48
. 4. We must exercise our selves in the word day and night, in reading,
hearing, meditating, conference, propounding of doubts, and comparing of
places, and all times, by all ways, turning our selves into all forms to
gain knowledge. 5. We should by prayer beseech God to do two things for us:
first, to give us the spirit of revelation Ephesians. 1.18.
: secondly, to give us larger hearts Psa. 119.32.
. 6. We must be thankful for what knowledge we do get by the means Ps.
119.171.
.

Quest.
Quest. 2. But how may we know whether the word do dwell plenteously in us?

Answ.
Ans. It may be tried and discovered seven ways. 1. By our growth in true
humility and meekness. Psalm. 15.9.
2. By the confirmation of the testimony of Jesus in our hearts 1. Cor. 1.5.4.
. 3. By the measure of our growth in the love of God and his people, yea and
thus we may try our declining in the vigor of knowledge (for knowledge had in
abundance, may be blasted and grow singularly dull and feeble) for as our
affections to the means, and to Gods children is, so is the vigor of our
knowledge: he must not say he knows God, that hates his brother, yea and so
will it serve for trial to every one in the degrees of ascending or
declination even in Gods children. 4. By the desires and secret muses of our
hearts, for then we grow in knowledge, and have store of it, when we can say as
David does, I have remembered thy name Psa. 119.35
O Lord in the night. And as the Church says, the desires of our souls is to
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee, and our spirits within us seek after
thee Isay 26 9.
. 5. By our confidence in it; a man that has gotten a great deal of wealth,
money or lands, enlarges his heart to a great confidence in it. So a Christian
has gotten a great deal of saving knowledge, when he is able to make it his
portion in all estates whatsoever befalls him: Psa. 119.57.
it shows men have but a little of the word in them, when every cross can
dissolve their rest and confidence. 6. By our measure of liberty from the power
and bondage of special corruptions Ioh 8.31.32
. 7. By our ability in admonishing, they are full of goodness and knowledge
that are able to admonish Romans 15.14.^
.

Richly] 4. In that the word must dwell in us richly, it may serve 1. for
reproof, and that two ways. First of men's worldliness, that think any other
riches would serve the turn, but to be rich in God they never desire it, but
all in vain as the Parable shows, Luke 12. Secondly, of men's hypocrisy, they
say are rich when they are not, Revel. 3.18. Secondly for instruction,
therefore let heaven suffer violence, a Christian should be no more a weary of
his pains in seeking this riches of the word, then carnal men are of their
worldly profits, yea we should pray God so to quicken us, that we may keep his
testimonies as we would keep treasure Psalm. 119.11.88 72
.

Lastly, in that he ads in all wisedome] it should teach us, first to pray to
God with David, that he would teach us good judgment and knowledge, Psa. 119
66.
and secondly to make conscience, as to get understanding of the word, so to
use wisdom and discretion, both in the bettering of our knowledge, and in
practice the same Scripture that binds us to a plentiful use of the word,
binds us to a wise use of it.

Thus of the second thing, viz. the intertainment we must give to the word. The
end or use the word should be put to follows.

Teaching and admonishing your selves or one another: viz. your fellow members
and partakers with you of the same promises and hope.

These words may be referred either to the general exhortation before, or to
the particular charge concerning Psalms or Himnes afterward. I principally
consider them as referred to the general exhortation before, and so I note,
that though there be many good effects of the word, or many uses it should be
put to, yet Teaching: (about things not known) and admonishing (about things
known and not practiced) are chief.

Ob. Object.
It seems this place favors the opinion of such as hold that Christian
neighbors met together upon the Lords day or at other times, when there is no
public exercise, may labor to edify themselves by instructing one another
out of the word privately?

Ans. It is not unlawful so to do, and this place does approve of it: Sol.
so as they keep themselves within their bounds, viz. that the matter taught
be not against Piety the true peace of Sion, and that the manner be plain
and familiar, as family instruction should be by keeping a foot public
doctrine, by conference, propounding of doubts, or instructing of the ignorant
out of such places as they do undoubtedly understand.

Concerning teaching, we must know that God does teach by his spirit, Neh. 9.20.
by his rod, Esaias 26 9.
and by his word, so here, but that which we are here to note is, that the
word is to be used by every Christian, even for instruction, this is the end
why the Law was given Exodus 24.12.
, a wise man having gotten knowledge into his head, must by his lips spread
it abroad Prou. 15.7.
. Qu. But whom must we teach. Ans. Principally our selves, so as we consider
our own ways to turn our feet into Gods testimonies Psalm. 119.59.
, yet also we are to teach one another, when we spy our brethren to be
ignorant, so should not only ministers do, but masters of families, and
every Christian in conuersing with others.

Admonishing] Man is admonished. 1. by the rebukes of the Law Iam. 2.9.
. 2. by the example of Scripture 1. Cor. 10.11
. 3. by the spirit of God Esaias. 30.21.
. 4. by the conscience, in wicked men many times. 5. men are rebuked by their
own words Job 15.6.
. 6. by the words of other men especially, as admonition is grounded on the
words of God. So here.

Concerning admonition I propound four things, Who may admonish.
1. who may admonish, 2. who are to be admonished, 3. how. 4. the uses.

Quest. 1. Who may admonish. Ans. Ministers may, 2. Tim. 4.12
Parents may, Ephesians. 6.4.
yea men ought ^ot to reject the admonitions of their wives, Genesis 21.12.
nay which is more they may not despise the judgment of their servants Job.
31.13.
. Quest. 2. Who are to be admonished. Ans. I consider it; 1. Negatiuely. not 1.
They that sin against the holy Ghost. Who are to admonish.
2. Heretical men, after once or twice warning. Tit. 3.10. 3. Not stubborn,
wilful, scornful profane persons. Not dogs and swine. Math. 7. Not the
scorner, Prou. 9.8. 4. If it be about wrongs and abuses offered to us, either
by hypocritical Friends, or open enemies, it is a godly man's part at some
times and in some places, to be deaf and dumb, as if they understood not, or
as men in whose mouths are no reproof. Psalm. 38.14.


2 Affirmatively, in general every man, Act. 20.31. In particular, I instance
only in some sorts of men, we must admonish unruly professors, 1. These. 5.14.
besides, ordinary wicked men that appear not to be scorners, not only may,
but ought to be admonished, that the light may manifest their works, Ephesians. 5.11.
that they may become sounder in the faith Tit. 1.13.
, and though this be not amongst men for the time, any whit pleasing, yet the
blessing of goodness shall come upon them, whilst they that flatter men in
their sins, and say to the wicked, thou art righteous, shall be cursed and
hated of the multitude Prou. 24.24
. Yea, none are so wise and godly, but they may be admonished Pro. 9.9.
such as are full of goodness and knowledge able to admonish others Rom 15.14
, but it should be our most usual and principal labor, to admonish our own
souls, and reprove our ways in Gods sight Job 23.15.
, for it is a special way by which a wise man may be profitable to himself
Job 22.2.
.

Quest: 3 What rules are to be observed in admonition?

Answ: In admonition we must consider: First, how to perform it. Secondly, how
to receive it. What rules are to be observed in admonition.
In performing admonition, we must especially look to two things: First, that
the ground of admonition be out of the word of God, being the words of Christ,
not our own words; to this end we should store our selves, and hold fast the
faithful word according to doctrine: First, we should be constantly stored
with grounds out of the word, both for matters of opinion, and against the
corruptions of man's life, and for performance of holy duties, that as we have
occasion we may rebuke, etc. Tit. 1.9.
Secondly, we must see that the manner of admonition be right. Admomonition is
to be performed: First, with Inocency we must not be faulty our selves, or if
we have been we must plainly acknowledge it, before we admonish. Secondly,
with discretion which must be showed in 3. things. First, that we be sure
that they have offended, not led to it by suspicion of our own hearts, or by
hearesay or by outward appearance, not judge by the hearing of our ears, and
sight of our eyes Esai. 11.3.
. Secondly, that if we know it to be an offense, we must consider whether it
be not of the number of those offenses, a wise man must hold his glory to pass
by Pro. 25.11.
. Thirdly, that it be done seasonably, with love admonishing as a brother 2
These. 3.15.
. Fourthly, with meekness Gal. 6.1.
. Fifthly with secrecy Mat. 18.15 Prou. 25.9.
. Sixthly, with plainness, spare no words to satisfy them Leu. 19.17.
. Seventhly, with compassion and tenderness 2 Cor. 24.
. Eighthly, with perseverance Prou. 13.19.
, we must not be weary and discouraged, but accomplish it. Ninthly, with all
authority Tit. 2. vlt.
, that neither our selves nor Gods ordinances be despised.

In receiving admonition we must look to four things, we must receive
admonition: First, with love and holy estimation 1 These. 5.12. Psalm. 141.7.
. Secondly, with all humility, readily inclined to suspect our selves, knowing
that we have cause to say, and think of our selves, as that worthy man did, I
am more foolish then any man, and have not the understanding of a man in me
Prou. 30.2.3
, etc. Thirdly, with subjection and direct acknowledgement, giving glory to
God. Fourthly, with reformation, else all is in vain.

The uses are, first, to teach us therefore to stir up our selves, to
perform this mercy in admonishing: for a wise man, even Salomons wise man,
that is, a religious wise man may learn wisdom by it Prou. 9.9.
. Yea it is as a golden earing to the wise and obedient ear Prou. 25.12
. And he that rebukes shall find more favor at the length then he that
flattereth with his tongue Prou. 18 23.
. Men are said to be pulled out of the fire by admonition Iud. 22.23.
. Secondly, we must take heed of sinning against admonition. Now men sin
against admonition, three ways. First, in not performing it, this has very
ill effects such as these, not admonishing breeds dwelling suspicions,
suspicions breed a very habit of misinterpretation: misinterpretation begets a
loathnes to come unto the light to show the reasons of dislike, this loathnesse
begets a very separation in heart: separation begets a decay of Love to the
means; decay of respect to the means, begets a decay of zeal and gifts, and
from hence there is a high way to internal or external Apostacy, or some
great judgments of God.

Secondly, in not performing it aright, as when men make their wrath to fall
upon the fatherless, or dig pits for their friends Job 6.27
, or when men respect Gods person Job. 13.8.9
, and make the pretense of Gods cause, glory, name, etc. to be the color for
the venting of their own particular envy and dislike; or when men never have
done, but grow impudent, and reproach men ten times, and are not ashamed Job
19.3
. To conclude, when men fail in the manner before described, want innocence,
discretion, meekness, love, etc.

Thirdly, in not receiving admonition: and thus men fail diversely, when men
shift, excuse, deny, extenuate, etc. and yet in heart be convinced, or when
men fall into passion, or grudging, or traducing afterward; or when men would
feign make the admonisher to sin in the word, and lay snares for him that
rebukes Esai. 29.21
. But there are some are worse then any of these, for they are such as none
dares declare their way unto their face: Men dare not, they are so passionate
and haughty, but God will lay them in the slimy valley where are many already
like them, and innumerable more shall come after them Job 21.31.32
. Many are the ill effects of resisting admonition: It is a sign of a scorner
Prou. 13.1. and 15.12.
, and that men are out of the way Prou. 15.10.
, it brings temporal judgments and shame upon them Prou. 13.18. Hos. 4.4.5.
, men may also come to that horrible condition by resisting admonition, that
they being perverted shall go about damned of their own souls Tit. 3.10.11.
.

Thus of the general exhortation.

The special exhortation concerns one part of the word, and that is the
Psalms. Which are here to be considered.

1 In respect of matter, Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual songs. 2 In respect of
the manner, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.
The matter is here three ways to be considered: What meant by Psalms,
Hymns, and Spiritual songs.
First, in the ground, foundation, or authority of the Psalms we use, viz.
they must be the word of Christ, that is contained in the Scriptures. Secondly
in the kinds of Psalms, there are many sort of Psalms in Scripture. The
Psalms of Moses, David, Solomon, and other Prophets: but all are here
referred to three heads; they are either Psalms, specially so called, or
Hymns, or Songs, great ado there is among Interpreters, to find a difference
in these; some would have Psalms to be the songs of men, and Hymns of Angels:
some think they differ, especially, in the manner of Music. Some are sung by
voice, some played upon instruments; but the plausiblest opinion is not to
distinguish them, by the persons that use them, or by the kind of music, but
by the matter, and so they say Psalms contain exhortation to manners or holy
life. Hymns contain praises to God in the commemoration of his benefits.
Songs contain doctrine of the chief good, or man's eternal felicity. But I
think there needs not any curious distinction: it may suffice us that there is
variety of Psalms in Scripture and God allows us the use of every kind.
Thirdly, the property of the Psalms, they are Spiritual, both because they
are indicted by the spirit, and because they make us more spiritual in the due
use of them.

From hence then we may learn these things.

1 That singing of Psalms is Gods ordinance, binding all sorts of men: Ephesians.
6.19. Iam. 5.13. Psalm. 66.1.2. and 92.1. and 135.3. a part of our goodness,
and a most comely thing. 2 That a Christian should chiefly recreate himself
in singing of Psalms, Iam. 5.13. God does not allow us other recreations to
shoulder out this, as the most do. 3 That we should sing Psalms in our houses
as well as our Churches both for daily exercise, Psalm. 101.1.2. and when
Christians meet together: 1 Cor. 14.26. Ephesians. 5.19.
The manner follows; Rules in singing of Psalms.
there are four things required of us in singing of Psalms: First, we should
teach and admonish in the use of them, and that either our selves, by
considering the matter, or others, as the Ministers in appointing of Psalms
for the Congregation, or the Master of the Family, or when Christians meet,
there should be choice of such Psalms, as may instruct or comfort, or rebuke
according to the occasion: there is edifying even in appointing of Psalms, 1
Cor. 14.26. Secondly, we must sing with grace, this is diuersely interpreted;
some understand it of the dexterity that should be used in singing, to affect
our selves or others: some take it to be that inward comeliness, right order,
reverence, or delight of the heart in singing: some would have it signify
thanksgiving. But I think, to sing with grace is to exercise the graces of
the heart in singing: we must sing with holy joy Psalm. 9.2.
, with trust in Gods mercies Psalm. 13.5
, with a holy commemoration of Gods benefits Psalm. 47.6
, yea with the prayer and desires of our hearts, that our words in singing may
be acceptable Psalm 104.33 34
. Thirdly, we must sing with our hearts: not with our tongues only outwardly
for ostentation; to sing with our hearts is to sing with understanding Psalm.
47.7 1 Cor. 14.14
, with sense and feeling. Hence we are said to prepare our hearts before we
sing Psalm. 57.7
, and it is to be observed that David bids his tongue awake Psalm. 57.8
, noting that he observed in men a lethargy, not a hoarsnesse of voice, but a
slumber in heart when they used the voice. Fourthly we must sing to the Lord
Ephesians. 5.19
, that is both to Gods glory, and in sense of Gods presence, and upon a holy
remembrance of Gods blessings. This is to sing to his name.

The use is first for instruction when we are merry, to sing Psalms Iam. 5.13
, yea to account this as heavenly melody Ephesians. 5.19
; a precious perfume for our Chambers, a holy homage to God, the calves of our
lipes; yea we should resolve against all the profane contempt of the world, to
praise God thus while we live Palm. 156.2. and 104.33
, and to this end we should strive against the objections and backwardness
of our own natures: for the flesh will object against singing of Psalms,
as well as against praying reading, etc. Secondly, for reproof of such as set
their delight in fleshly lusts and sports, in dancing, gaming, etc. in singing
of carolles, ballads, filthy rimes, etc. all which delights are so far from
being spiritual, that they make our hearts far more fleshly and carnal, yea
it reproues the best of us, for want of the right manner in the use of singing,
in all the four things before, which we should be humbled for, as for any
other our sins.

Thus of the 16. Verse.

Verse. 17 And whatsoever ye shall do in word or deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus: giving thanks to God even the Father by him.


This Verse contains the 2. general rule to be observed in our conversation,
and it is an exhortation to the minding of the right end in all our actions, in
the former verse he took order for the means of holy life, here he takes
order for the end of it.

d: In general: unto the goodness of the action, a good end is essentially
required, Unto goodness of the action, the goodness of the end is required.
for though a good intention make not the action good, yet without a good
intention, the action cannot be accepted as good in Gods sight. It is a good
thing to hear and follow Christ, but not good in the Capernaits that follow
for the loaves; Or in the Pharisees, that hear to carpe, or carry tales, and
inform against him. It is a good action to use our knowledge, but cease to
be good in us, when it puffs up, and is done for vain ostentation. It is
good to receive the Sacraments, but yet Circumcision was not good, either as
the sons of Jacob required it, nor as the King and his Sons received it.
Works of holy and religious services are good, but when men come to Church on
the Sabbaths, to make amends for their sins on the week days, it cease to
be good to them. It is good to honor Gods Ministers, but where men honor them
either to keep their own credit with the people, as Saul honored Samuel, or
that they may excuse them, as in the Parable Luke 14.19
, such honor is not good. Works of mercy are good, but being done for praise
of men, or to merit by them, they come under a negative precept, give not your
Alms. It is good to forbear on another, but not good in such men as forbear
only for want of power or opportunity to revenge, Mat. 6.
and therefore we should inform our selves better, and as we would have God to
accept or bless us, to get Gods end to our actions.

Thus of the general.

In this verse, the end of well-doing is two ways considered: First, as it is
the end of intention, that is, that we should propound and aim at, as the
motive and mark of our endeavors, and that is ordered and required in these
words, Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus. Secondly, as it is the end of consummation, 1. that by which we finish
our works, and that is required in these words, giving thanks to God, even
the Father by him: In short, the end of intention is the glory of God in
Christ, the end of consummation, is the giving of thanks when we have done
our endeavors.

In the first part I consider: 1 What should be the maine end of our actions:
Do all in the name of Christ. 2 How we are tied to it: First, for persons:
Ye. Secondly, for kinds of imploiment, in word and deed. Thirdly, for extent,
whatsoever ye do: Do all.


Do all in the name of the Lord Iesus] Here four things are required of us.
Things are done in the name of Christ, four ways. Ephesians. 6


First, that all be done in the assurance of the love of Christ, that we be
sure that we know Christ, as we know a man by his name; that when we go to to
do Gods work, we be first sure of Christ's reward: this is to be shodde with
the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

Secondly, that all be done in the name: that is, by the authority of Christ,
and his warrant in his word: not in the name of Moses for Ceremony, or in the
name of Angels, or Saints, for intercession, nay, in all we do, our
conscience should be tied only properly by the command of Christ, not because
such great men would have it so, or I did it to please my parents or kindred,
etc for then thou do it in the name of men and not of Christ.

Thirdly, that all be done with invocation or calling upon God in the name of
Christ, all should be consecrate and begun with prayer.

Fourthly, and principally, that all be done to the glory of God in Christ,
this should be the scope of all our actions 1 Cor. 10.31.
all should breath and savor of Christ.

In word] d: God requires to be glorified by the very words of Christians, and
contrariwise holds himself many times dishonored by their words, he that
keeps his tongue keeps his life, Pro. 13.3.
the honor and dishonor of the tongue is largely explicated, Iam. 3. but the
use is for instruction to teach us, 1. to take heed of dishonouring Christ by
our words, but in special we should take heed of words of disgrace and slander
to the members of Christ, of vain words, Ephesians. 5.6.
that boulster men up in presumption against repentance and faith in Christ, of
passionate and bitter words, Job 6.3
of words of deceit, Psalm. 36.3.
of the words that come from, or tend to the strange woman, filthy words Col. 3
8.
, yea take heed of high words, for high talk, or the lips of excellency
becomes not a fool, Prou. 17.7
for evil words greatly provoke God, and call for stripes, bring many a
cross upon a man, and are snares to men's souls. Prou. 18.6.7
Secondly, it should teach us to endeavor to bring glory to God by our words,
to this end we should for matter learn to speak the words of clemency, 2.
Chr. 10.17.
words of wisdom Prou.
, words of sobriety and truth; Acts 26.
words of righteousness Job. 6.25.
, wholesome words, 2. Tim. 1.13
words of eternal life John 6.
; and to this end we should observe diverse rules.

1 That our words be not many, for in a multitude of words cannot but be sin,
we are not able to weld aright many words. 2 That we know and not forget Gods
ten words, the ignorance of Gods ten laws, causes that men know not how
they offend in their tongues, but in the ten words of God is an absolute
pattern of all uprightness, both of heart, speech and life. 3 That we be much
and often in taking unto us the words of confession and prayer, Hose. 14 3.
Zeph. 3.9.
our speech is purified, and God much glorified by often confession and prayer,
this is to speak a pure language. 4 Our ear must seek learning Prou. 18.11.
, we must be swift to hear; and slow to speak Iam. 1.
, and be contented to be taught as well how to speak as how to live. Lastly,
we must tame our tongues, make conscience of mortification for our sins in
word, as well as for evil deed, set a watch before the door of our lips,
and pray God to open them.
Or deedes] d: God will have deeds as well as words, our hands must be bound
to good behavior, and that our labors and works may be done to Gods glory
they must be done. Mal. 7.21. 1 Ioh. 3.18. Prou. 14* 23.
1. with prayer, Psalm 9. last. 2. with warrant from the word. 3. with faith in
Gods promise for the success: For whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. 4. With
perseverance, they are not good works, till they be finished and accomplished.

Whatsoeuer] this word is a note either of universality or perfection: Of
perfection I say in this sense. Whatsoever ye do or settle about, do it all,
that is, let it be complete and perfectly done, but I take it here as a note
of universality.

d: We are bound to glorify God not only in word and deed, but in all our
words, and all our deeds; we are tied to every good work, to respect all Gods
commandments, we are bound to glorify God not only in actions of worship,
2. Tim. 3.3. vlt. Psalm. 119.
but of righteousness too. Not only in religious businesses, but in civil
offices, not only in our general calling, but in our particular. Not only
abroad, but at home: making conscience not only of filthy deeds, but of
filthy speaking, not only of great and crying sins, but of lesser sins: not
only of our open deeds, but of our carriage in secret. Use is for reproof,
men discover their unsoundness of heart in this respect exceedingly: many will
not forswear that will swear at every word, at least by less oaths, as by
the mass, faith, troth, truth, etc. many shopkeepers will not bear false
witness in a Court, that will lie daily in selling their wares. Many will
look to their carriage abroad, that care not how to order themselves at home.
Many will not do their own work by keeping shop, or traveling on the
Sabbath, that never stick at it to speak their own words on the Sabbath: but
if the case of such like men as these be to be suspected, how fearfully bad is
their case that are so far from making conscience of every word and deed,
as they are to every good Work reprobate; that are neither good at home, nor
abroad, 6. Reasons why Gods children should be more careful o^ their words and
deeds then others.
neither in worship nor life, neither to others nor to themselves. Tit. 1. vlt.

Yee] d: They that have comfort in their election, and Gods love, they that
have begun to make Conscience of their ways, and to love the word, they
that make a profession of the name of Christ above all others are exactly to
look to themselves, to every word, and every deed. 1. Because they are nearer
the courts of the great King, they live always in the presence chamber. 2.
Because God has bestowed upon them more blessings, and therefore as he gives
more wages, requires more work. 3. Because they are more observed then any
other. A loose word is more noted in them then execrable blasphemy in others,
they are more talked of for seeing a vain sight then others for haunting of
lewd plays. 4. Because their hearts are made pure by the blood of Christ: and
fine white linen is sooner and deeper stained then course rags. 5. They are
trusted with more glorious riches. A little sin in them much greeues Gods
spirit, whereas a great sin troubles not a wicked man that has no spirit of
God in him. 6. They are sure to have a recompense of reward for every good
word and work, and therefore to further their own reckoning and glory,
should be abundant in the work of the Lord.

Use therefore, to quicken us, to a desire to walk precisely, circumspectly,
exactly, Ephesians. 5.15. striving to redeem the time that has been lost in the
service of sin and the world.

Giving thanks to God even the Father by him:]

These words are diversely considered.

Some think the former words are an explication of these, as if he should say
be careful in all things to glorify God, for this is right thanking of God*
when men do not only praise God in words but in obedience.

Some think in these words is lodged a reason of the former, as if he should
say, glorify God in all your actions, and seek to God by prayer in the name
of Christ, and ye shall be sure of singular blessings and grace and comforts
from God: and in the assurance thereof, when ye provide to pray or practice,
provide thanks ready also* for God will not fail in the success.

Some think these words to be an enlarging of the former rule by wishing
them, whatsoever falls out to be thankful, so as neither prosperity puff
them up, nor adversity deiect them, but I take it to be a distinct rule from
the former, and so here is to be noted.

1 The duty required, viz. Give thanks: 2 The explication of it: 1 By the
object, to God even the Father 2 By the efficient cause, by him.

Giving thankes] Concerning our thankfulness to God, I consider 1. the
necessity of it, Why.
God will not dispense with it, therefore in Ephesians. 5.20. the former rule
being omitted, this is specially urged, and 1. These. 5.18. this is charged
upon us, For what.
as the will of God in Christ Jesus. Secondly, for what we must give thanks,
Eucharist.
viz. for Christ as the fountain of all favor, hence the Sacrament ordained
to that end, for all the comforts of Gods election and love, for all graces and
means of grace. coher. for our liberty in Christ, even unto outward things 1.
Cor. 10.30.
for any success or victory over our corruptions of nature Romans 7.25.
, in short for all things whatsoever 2. Cor. 4.15. 1 These. 5.18.
.

3. How? viz. not like the Pharisie, with pride of heart and selfe-liking: with
opinion of merit, How. 1. Cor. 14*16.
or with ostentation, but with observation of 4. rules, 1. If we bless we must
bless in the spirit. 1. With understanding and feeling in our hearts. 2. When
we give thanks we should do it with such tenderness, that our praises should
awake the graces of Gods spirit to make them get life and grow. Our praises
should stir up faith in Gods promise, love to Gods glory, fear of Gods
presence, hatred of our sins, joy in the holy Ghost 2. Cor. 4.15.
; 3. With a deep sense of our own unworthiness, and thus the 24. Elders are
said to cast down their crowns and fall on their face, when they praised God,
Revelations 4.9.10. and 7.12. Luke 17. 4. By all means. We must praise God by
Psalms, prayer, celebration of the Sacrament, works of mercy and obedience.

How long.
4 How long? that is answered, Ephesians. 5.20. Revel. 7.12. always, if we must pray
always, then we must praise always, we may no more neglect thanksgiving
then prayer. Nay when prayer shall cease, because all mortal infirmities and
wants shall cease, yet thanksgiving must go with us within the veil, and live
with us for ever in heaven.

Use 1. to inflame us to the holy practice of thankfulness daily, and always
watching heereunto, preserving sense, not forgetting Gods mercies, even making
it our daily sacrifise. 2. To humble us under our unthankfulness for grace,
knowledge, the word, fellowship in the Gospel, and al kinds of blessings, yea
we sin greatly in not giving thanks for our success in our callings, yea
many are not yet instructed to give thanks for their food. Let those remember
that men are said then to eat to God, when they give thanks, Romans 14.6. to
whom then do they eat that give not thanks? certainly not to the Lord.
Finally if the poor Gentiles were so punished, for unthankfulness, Romans 1.
21. that had but the glimmering light of nature to guide them, and read their
lessons only in the book of Gods works, what shall become of us in the day
of the Lord, that have the light of Scripture, of the Gospel, of the Spirit,
of the Sacraments, and so many incomparable favors bestowed upon us, unless
we repent of our unthankfulness, we shall perish with a worse destruction
then Tirus and Sidon: or Sodom and Gomorrah.

To God even the Father:] These words are to be understood, not diuidedly, but
conioynedly, and so declare who is our God, even he that has proved himself
a Father in Christ, loving us in him, and accepting of us, and heaping many
blessings upon us, two sweet words. He is a God, there is his majesty: he is a
Father, there is his love, and therefore great encouragement to go to him with
all suites and praises. With all suites, he is God, and therefore able to help;
and Father, and therefore willing to help. With all praises, he is God, and
therefore meet to be worshipped, he is a Father, and therefore will accept the
calves of our lips, not according to what we bring, but according to what we
desire to bring, and all this should make us both to hate it, to praise men or
Angels, or sacrifice to our nets, and also to honor him with the affection
of children, and with the fear of creatures.

By him:] these words may be referred.

1. To singing of Psalms in the former verse, and so they note that all joy is
vain without Christ, yea these spiritual and better sorts of delight are
vain unless Christ be ours. How miserable art thou when thy tongue sings
Psalms and Christ dwells not in thine heart? many men sing the word of Christ
that have no part in the word Christ.

2. To the word Father next before, to note that God has showed himself a
Father in bestowing many mercies upon us by Christ, and so the consideration of
Gods mercies by Christ, should breed thankfulness.

3. To the word thanksgiving, and so they note the efficient helping cause, and
teach us, that as Christ brings down Gods graces and blessings to us, so he
carries up our praises to God, and as we must pray in his name, so our praises
will not be accepted unless they be made in his name, and presented in his
intercession.

Thus of the general rule.

Hitherto also of the first maine part of the information of holy life, viz.
the information of our life in general. Hitherto the Apostle has taught us
what to do in our general calling as Christians: now from ver. 18. to v. 2. of
the next Chapter, he shows us what we must be in our particular standings, or
thus: hitherto he has given moral precepts, now he gives oiconomicall: or
rather thus. hitherto he has set down the duties belonging to all Christians,
now he informs us in the duties special, as they are wives, husbands,
parents, etc.

Verse. 18. Wives submit your selves to you Husbands as it is comely, in the
Lord.

Verse. 19. Husbands love your wives and be not bitter unto them.


Before I come to the particular consideration of these words, I must observe
some thing from the coherence and general consideration of all the verses
together.

d: It is plain that men are to be taught how to govern themselves in their
houses, as well as in the duties of their general calling: this is meet to be
noted, because some men's either ignorance, or wilfulness and profaneness is
such, that they think Ministers should not meddle to tell them how to live at
home, or how to carry themselves in their shops.

d: 2. From coherence, that we may live comfortably, and blessedly in our
Families, and particular callings, we must labor in the daily and constant
use of the means to be sincere in the general. The study of the word to frame
men, to be good men and women in Gods sight, would make men good husbands,
servants, children, wives, etc. First, get to be a good man and then thou will
the easier prove a good husband, etc.

Use. First, for reproof of such as cannot abide to see their children, or
servants to hear Sermons, study the Scriptures, labor for grace, etc.
whereas nothing would more fit them to all pleasing in their carriage at home.
Secondly, for trial, if religion and the profession of it, make thee not a
better wife, husband, or servant. Suspect thy self that all is not right, but
that thou art an hypocrite, repent and amend. Thirdly, for instruction, if men
find such stubburnesse in their wives, or children, or servants, the best way
is to give them more liberty to the means, and to drive them into Gods house
to hear the word, to call upon them to read the Scriptures, and to use such
like holy exercises, for if this will not mende them nothing in the world will.
3 Before I consider of the particular members of a Family, Of the government
of a Family.
I must entreat generally of the whole: and concerning the government of a
Family by the rules of Gods word: I consider 4. things.

1 The authority of it; 1. The authority of it.
there is a way how to walk in uprightness, even in our houses, so as God
will come to us, if our families be rightly ordered Psalm. 101.2.
. There is a wisdom or saving knowledge how to erect and found a holy Family,
and how to order and establish it Prou. 24.3.
, there are many administrations, as the administration of a Church, of a
City, or Common wealth, so likewise the administration of a Family, yet but
one Lord, 1 Cor. 12. Yea, the governing of a house honestly, or in holy
comeliness, is manifestly expressed, 1. Tim. 3.5. 2 The antiquity of it, 2.
The antiquity of it.
it is the most ancienst of all governments, yea, out of which all the rest
sprang: the Church was bred and cherished by this government in Families for
many hundreds of years, in the beginning of the world, even till the People
came out of Egypt. 3 The utility of it, 3. The utility of it.
it is called a perfect way Psalm. 101.2.
, and that in three respects: First, as opposed to hypocrisy, it shows a man's
way is not hipocriticall, when a man will not only look to his feet when he
goes into Gods house, but is careful how to walk uprightly in his own house.
Secondly, as it is the ground and field of practice; knowledge is never perfect
till it be practiced, and the must ordinary way of practice is at home.
Thirdly, as it perfects us in blessedness, in that it brings Gods promise into
execution, besides the Family is the Seminary both of Church and common
wealth, Genesis 18.19.
for it brings forth, and brings up a seed, it preserues the common wealth,
and as it frames by education a holy seed, it preserues the charge. 4. What is
necessary to the well-being of it.
4 What things are necessary and requisite unto the blessed being of a Family.
Answ: For the erecting and establishing of a blessed Family: 3. things are
principally necessary. First, a holy coming together. Secondly, a holy living
together. Thirdly, a special fitness in the head of the Family. For the
first, it is greatly material to the perpetual well being of a Family, that
all heedefulnesse be observed in the first erecting of it: for as many order
the matter, they so provoke God by the first entering upon the Family, that the
Family travels ever after under the burden of Gods anger, or great
inconvenience and cannot prosper, and thus men fault.

Foul faults in the first erecting of Families.
Either by ventring without a calling, or means to live, or by ouerleaping Gods
ordinance of Contract, or by ventring upon marriage with persons that have
foul diseases, as the Leprosy, french pox, etc. but especially when:

First, more wives then one are brought in. Secondly, there is not sufficient
distance in blood, but the marriage is incestuous. Thirdly, another man's wife
is brought in, either the betrothed wife, or the unjustly divorced wife of
another man. Fourthly, there is not consent of parties, but the marriage is
forced. Fifthly, there is not consent of parents. Sixthly, an infamous or
scandalous person is chosen to be a yoake-fellow. Seventhly, there is not
equality, either for religion (but a believer is matched with an unbeliever) or
age, or estate, or disposition.

And a like dangerous disorder there is in taking into the Family of
disordered servants, such as are swearers, filthy and scandalous persons,
against which sins there lies known threatenings of God: and so with their
sins they bring in Gods curse.

4. Things in a holy living together in a Family.
The second thing that makes a family blessed, is a holy living together, and
there are four things that are requisite, especially to the good estate of the
house: First, the constant practice of piety and private worship. Secondly,
the right order of imploiment in the mutual labors of the family. Thirdly,
household discipline or reformation. 6. Things in holshold piety.
Fourthly, hospitality, or a right respect of strangers. For the first, the
piety that is to be practiced stands of 6. parts: First, prayer and
thanksgiving to God. Men must pray every where 1 Timothy 2.8.
, our meats and callings must be sanctified by the word, and by prayer 1 Timothy
4.4.
: thus David prayed morning, and evening, and at noone Psalm. 55.18.
, so Daniel: Yea it is a brand of profane and abominable persons, they call
not upon God Psalm 14.4
. Yea, those families are in great danger of his wrath, that call not upon his
names Ierem. 20.
. Secondly, holy conference betwixt the members of the Family, as between
husband and wife 1 Pet. 3.7.
, and between father and children Deu. 6.21.22
. Thirdly, singing of Psalms Colos. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.20.
. Fourthly, repetition of Doctrine publicly taught, examining it by the
Scriptures alleged, as did the Bereans Act. 17.
. Fifthly, fasting upon extraordinary occasion, is very plain, Zach. 12.16.
Lastly, the parents instruction, Psalm. 78.2.3.4. Deuteronomy. 6.6.

Quest: But what things may be taught in the Family?

What things may be taught in the family.
Answ: First, the common grounds of Gods service and worship, this is to teach
them to fear God. Secondly, the meaning of the Sacraments Exodus 12.25.26. and
^3.14.
. Thirdly, the Law Deuteronomy. 6.6.
, that is the common grounds of honesty, and vice, teaching to love such and
such virtues, and hate such and such vices. Fourthly, the use and consideration
of Gods great judgments: therefore God will tell Abraham of the destruction of
Sodom, because he will make use of it in his Family. Fifthly, the report of
Gods great works of old Psa. 78.23.
. Sixthly, to hope in God, acquainting them with their natural miseries, and
training them up, by warning them to take heed of the common presumptions of
the wicked, and by distilling into them the grounds of practice and promise,
concerning Gods mercy to their souls; and their last salvation. Seventhly, we
should acquaint our households with the general course of the Scriptures: thus
Timothy knew the Scriptures of a child 2. Tim. 3.15.
: for an exact knowledge of all Scriptures was impossible for a child to
attain. Lastly, the things received by public doctrine should be enforced and
kept a foot in the family, if any pass these bonds they intrude upon the
Ministers office, and ought to fear Vzzahs curse, and therefore as men should
instruct, and so avoid the common profaneness of the world in neglecting Gods
ordinance, so they should be wise to sobriety, and keep themselves in all
fear and humility within their own line and measure.

Thus of Piety.

The second thing required is a holy order of imploiment in all the members of
the family, in their mutual labors for the good of the outward estate of it
Genesis 3.19. 1 Cor. 7.20.
, unto the orderly performance of the Labors of a Family, the five things are
required. Things required in the labors of a Family.


First, diligence. Secondly, peace, else all sacrifice is in vain, Prou. 17.1.
Thirdly, providence, it is not the hand of the diligent, but his thoughts that
bring abundance: care is required, not the care for success (for that is
condemned Matthew. 6.) but the care for the duty, Prou. 21.5. Fourthly,
retyrednesse. They must keep at home. Servants must not be stealing out of the
Family without leave: nor Masters leave their standings. Keep thy foot from
thy neighbors house, Prou. 25.17. If a man cannot be found in the place of his
labor, he is like a bird that wandreth from his nest. Prou. 27.19. Fifthly,
frugalitie, in living within their compass, and not spending above their
means, they must make their Lambs serve for clothing, and the Goats for
rent or hire of the field, and the milk of the goats must be sufficient for
them, and families, and for the sustenance of the maids, Prou. 27. vlt. It is
not a good rule to make reason judge of their needs, or to propound unto
themselves, I will spend no more but what I need, but they must look to their
means to spend according to that, for ordinarily their is not so little
coming in, but God can make it suffice, or will himself send them supply.

The third thing required is domestical discipline: Thus Jacob searches his
house, purges it of all Idols, and superstitious monuments, admonishes his
people of the fear of God, Genesis 35.2.3. Thus Job sacrifices for his children,
Job 1.5. Thus David will rid his house of slanderers, liars, apostates, etc.
And so should we see to the reformation of abuses, by admonition, rebukes,
correction, or complaints to the Magistrate, or Elders of the Church, the
Father in his house is the keeper of both Tables.

The fourth thing is the right order of hospitality, and respect of strangers,
and it stands in two things: First, in seeking by all means to bring Gods
Ministers or servants into one house Heb. 13.2. 1 Pet. 18.
, that they might help us, and as as it were, bless and perfume our houses,
by their prayers, counsel, comforts, admonitions, etc. Romans 1.11. Secondly, in
providing that no strangers be admitted, or permitted that will hinder Gods
worship, or any way the good of the family, they must not be within our gates,
that will not join with us to sanctify the Sabbath in our dwellings, Exodus
20. Yea, if they be disordered persons we should use them as the false
Prophet; That they may say, thus was I wounded in the house of my friend, Zach.
13.

The Use is: First, against the Papists and that principally two ways: First,
in that they forbid marriage, and so hinder the erecting of families to God.
Secondly, in that they forbid knowledge to Lay people, and so hinder the good
government of the Family.

Secondly, against, great abuses even amongst us. There is that open
profaneness in the most houses, that if they searched with lights, there
would no prayer, reading of Scripture, holy conference, singing of Psalms, or
instruction be found there, but without light men may find their houses, full
of swearing, deceit, lying, false measures, and waights, and all kind of
filthiness, to the singular detriment of the family: for hence it is that
many families, do in vain rise early, and go to bed late, and eat the
bread of painfulness and sorrow, for God for these sins will not build the
house. Sometimes this is plagued by open judgments, sometimes Gods curse
secretly like a moath cats down the prosperity of the house. But always all
such families are very hateful to God, even like the dens or cages of wild
beasts. Secondly, It may humble the best of us, if we search into our neglects,
ignorances, and omissions, of the many duties we should perform in our houses.

Thirdly, for instruction to teach us by prayer to seek a way of God for us,
and our houses, and to beseech God to build us an house, 2 Samuel 2.7.11.25.
27.29. and by all means to labor to live godly at home in the practice of
piety, this is to bring salvation to our houses. Thus our families would
become as little Churches, Romans 16. 1. Cor. 16. Yea, wonderful has been the
success of this holy order in some families. Thus the house of David has
become as the house of God, Zach. 12.8. Yea, if we were thus careful, God
would hedge us and our families round about, and all that we have, that Satan
could not touch us, he cannot break Gods fence, without Gods leave, Job 1.10.
Our Tabernacles would then flourish and stand long: Prou. 12.7. and 14.11.

Thus in general of household government or the order generally belonging to
the good estate of all the members.
Now, I come to consider each member in the Family, and the Apostle deuides
them into three couples: The wife and the husband, the child and parents, the
servant and master.

Doctr: There are two reasons why the husbands and wives are charged in the
first place, viz. First, because that in this order they were thus instituted
of God, he first made man and wife, and in the order of nature these first
found the Family, and so the Apostle keeps the order of nature, and the first
institution. Secondly, because the good behavior of the inferiors in the
Families, lies much in the good example of the husband and wife: if they be
filthy, wastefull, or blasphemers, usually their children and servants are so,
and many times it holds in the contrary, for their good example, either maks
the family in imitation grow like them, or at least it restraines much evil.

Qu: But why is the wife first appointed to her duty, before the husband.

Answ: Because in the order of the Family she must first mend before the
husband (howsoever before Gods judgment seat they shall be tried equally) in
domestical behavior, if she would have her husband reformed of wickedness,
or ill dealing, she must first mend her self

Thus of the general consideration.

Wives be subject to your husbands as is comely in the Lord.]

In these words the Wives duty, is first laid down, Wives submit to your
husbands. Secondly, It is is enlarged or confirmed: First, by a reason: It is
comely. Secondly, by a limitation in the Lord.

In laying down the duty I consider: First, who are charged, Wives. Secondly,
with what, be subject. Thirdly, to whom, to your Husbands.

Wiues] Doctrine. All wives generally and indefinitly are tied to a holy order
of subjection to their husbands without distinction of years, the elder women
and the younger, Tit. 2.8. and without distinction of estate, poor men's wives
must be subject as well as Citizens wives, or Gentiles, a great fault in the
baser sort: Their houses in respect of rudeness, are as void of righteousness
as they are of riches. Great men's wives also must be subject, Pharaohs daughter
and Vashti the Empress; yea though there be inequality of means as if the
wife were a Lady, and the Husband but a meaner man, yet she must be subject,
and he not wait upon her.

Use 1. For comfort of wives, nothing is required of one, but what is required
of all. 2. Of Husbands, in respect no means of estate, or alteration in their
condition can loose them their honor in the subjection of their wives. And
thirdly, every woman should learn to do her duty, seeing all are bound to it.

Be subject:] Here I consider. 1. What is required viz. be subject. 2. In what
manner it is required, that is in the indefinite propounding of it without
exception of time or place, etc.

In the first I consider: first, that it is: secondly, I answer a question:
thirdly what it is.

1. That subjection in women is required without dispensation by God as his
ordinance is plain by these Scriptures, Genes. 3.19. Ephesians. 5.24. Titus. 3.5.
1. Pet. 3.1.

2 The Question is why the Apostle only propounds here the wives subjection,
Why subjection is only named in the wives duty.
without mentioning any other duty?

Ans. I might say it is the wisdom of God to scatter directions and comforts,
that we may not find them all in one place, to stir us up to the more
diligence in study of the Scriptures, and with great good success many times,
for while they are seeking to learn to be good wives, they meet also with those
directions that make them good women too. God many times when we seek one
blessing causes us to find many.

2. I may say that it is the wisdom of God to Epitomize and draw things into
a short sum, that we may be more familiarly acquainted with his will, Thus
when he would propound his eternal rules of all righteousness in the Law, he
chooses to give them in ten words, that men might grow to be as familiarly
acquainted with them, as with any ordinary matter, that they might always have
them before their eyes, and bind them to the fringe of their garments: so God
gives women their duties in one word, that it might be engraven in their
hearts, and sowed down before their eyes in capital letters upon their
cushions, be subject should never be out of their minds.

3. Because of the necessity of it, if God may not have this duty, he will not
accept of the rest, though they be fair, rich, wise, provident, diligent etc.
yet if they be not subject, they are not regarded of God.

4. Because women most fail in this, the special duty of the husband is
love, and of the wife subjection, the man most fails in love, and the woman in
subjection.

3 I consider what this subjection is, and here: first, what it is: secondly,
what it is not: thirdly, the means that women are to use that they may be
subject.

For the first in the right discharge of their subjection, wives are tied to
five things: Things in the wives subjection.
first, honor: secondly, faithfulness: thirdly, fear: fourthly, labor:
fifthly, submission.

To be subject, is first to honor them; to be faithful, to fear them, to be
diligent in labor for them and the family, and to submit to them.

1 They must honor their husbands as their superior, Wives must honor their
husbands six ways.
and heads, 1. Cor. 11.3. and this they must do; first, by giving reverent
titles to them, 1. Pet. 3.6.

2 By striving to resemble the very properties and praise worthy qualities of
the husband, she should be his image, or his glory. And thus also in his
absence she should resemble his authority over the family, women should choose
such husbands, as they would not only live with and love, but such as they
would live by, even such as they would set before them as patterns of their
natures and lives.

3 By living without suspicion, making the best interpretation of their
doubtful actions. Micholl is made a president of contempt and suspicion, when
she so sinfully taunts and misinterprets David's dancing before the arc, in
presence of the maids of Israel.

4 By leaving to him the secrets of his public employment, and keeping her to
her own measure in caring for domestical matters, she may not be of an
inquisitiue humor, to lay a necessity upon the husband to reveal to her all
occurrents, especially when the husband is either Magistrate or minister.

5 By yielding him due benevolence, 1. Cor. 7.3. she may not without calling or
consent, refuse her husbands bed.

Wives shame their husbands four ways.
6 By striving to advance her husbands credit, she must not shame her husband,
Pro. 12.4. wives shame their husbands. 1. When their feet will not keep in
their own house, Prou. 7.11. 2. When they blaze abroad his infirmities. 3.
When they neglect the care of his children, either for manners, apparel, or
employment, Tit. 3.5. 4. By living in any scandalous sin, as when they be
false accusers, given to much wine, intemperate, etc. Tit. 2.3. or
busybodies, 1. Tim. 5.13.14.

Wives must show faithfulness in five things.
The second part of subjection is faithfulness, they must show all
faithfulness. 1. In respect of the marriage bed, Prou. 2.17. 2. In respect of
expense, ^he must not be wastfull, for this is to pull down the house with her
own hands, and ever the more secretly, the more sinfully, Prou. 14.1. she
should save and not spend without consent. 3. In respect of the business of
the family, she should be such as her husbands heart may trust in her, it is a
great sin in wives when they must be told, not only what to do, but when
they are charged with the care of such and such things, they must need to be
continually told, and yet be careless still. 4. In the secrets of the family,
not disclosing them to strangers, but so taking notice of them, as not to
discover them without the consent of the husband, as the faults of Sion must
not be told at Gath. 5. In entertainment, that none be admitted that are
suspected or disliked by the husband.

Wives should show their fear 6. ways.
The third thing is fear, Ephesians. 5.33. 1. Pet. 3.1.2. They should show the fear
of their Husbands. 1. By reverent behavior to him, not rude audacious bold.
2. By striving to be inoffensiue, avoiding or preventing what might stir him
to anger, or dislike or grief. 3. By giving soft answers when he is angry,
Prou. 15. 4. By forbearing passion, or frowardness, even with others in his
sight. 5. Making him her covering when they are abroad, but many women are so
intemperate and wilful, that a man might as soon hide the wind with his
fist, or oil in his hand, as cover the infirmities of his wife Proverbs
27.15.16. 6. By living quietly without contention, she must not disquiet him.

Fourthly, her labor, her labor is of 2. sorts; first to appoint unto the
family, and ouersee their ways; Prou. 31.27. Secondly, she must labor with her
own hands, Proverbs. 13.27.19. and this labor of her hands is prescribed with
six rules.

Six rules for wives work.
1 She must not spend months or years in staying from some employment she could
like to make a calling, but she must presently seek by all means to find out
labor, she seeks wool and flax. 2 She must not stand upon finer works,
as scorning baser employment, but be content to set her hands to any labor
that is meet, thus she spinneth and seeks wool and flax. Pro. 31.13.19. 3
She must not spend her time in working of toys or curious things, good for
nothing but to show skill and wear out time, but about profitable things for
the family, as carpets, verse. 22. sheets, verse. 24. the clothing of her
family, her husband and her children, verse. 21.23. 4 She must not lie a bed
till nine or ten a clock, but she must rise while it is yet night, verse. 15.
and her candle is not to be put out by night. verse. 18. 5 She must not be
fickle and unconstant, to change from work to work, to no profit, beginning
many things, and finishing little or nothing, but against all wearines or other
impediments, she must gird her loins with strength and strengthen her arms. 6
Lastly, all must be done cheerfully, not grudgingly, verse. 13.
The fifth thing is, Submission, Ephesians. 5.22. and she must submit her self;

1 To her husbands directions, and live by the Laws prescribed her by her
husband, Ephesians. 5.23. as the Church does teach and live by the word of Christ,
else no true Church. Thus the woman asks leave to go to the Prophet, 2. Kin.
4.22. And the wife is charged not to feast without consent, 1. Cor. 7.4. And
thus also she must receive directions for the affairs of the family.

2 To his restraints, so as she be contented to be restrained of her ease,
will, desires, delights, etc. Thy desires shall be subject to thy husband. Genesis
3.19. Thus the Church must deny her own reason, profit, pleasure, etc. and
submit her self to Christ, Ephesians. 5.23. Thus must the wife cast about how to
please her husband, 1. Cor. 7.34.

Thus of what it is.

2 I consider what it is not, What wives are not bound to.
or what the wife is not bound to, though she must be subject. In general
their subjection does not lead them into bondage and make them slaves and
vassalls to them, they remain still their companions and yoake-fellowes.

In particular there are some things spiritual, some things domestical, some
things in her civil carriage, from which she is not restrained by her
subjection.

In matters of religion she cannot be forced to neglect the means to save her
soul, the unbelieving husband cannot compel the wife to forsake her faith and
religion, and the means thereof, to please him. Again, though her sex bar
her from instruction in the Church, and her husbands authority bar her from
sole instruction in the family, yet notwithstanding under her husband she may
instruct her children, Pro. 6.20. and family, Pro. 31.26. Besides though her
husband were never so great, wise, Lordly, etc. yet she may admonish him, and
he ought to be crossed of his own course and will by her, as Abraham by Sarah:
at Gods appointment, who charged him to hear her in what she said, to do it.
Genesis 21.12.

In domestical matters, she is not subjected to his tyranny and blows, nor is
she bound to bear with or consent to, or conceal his whoredoms, she is not
bound to imitate his example, or obey his will, to do that that is ill. And
lastly her subjection does not bind her to deliver her body when she is apart
for her disease, Leuit. 18.19. Ezech. 8.6.

In civil matters I instance in one; She is not utterly barred out from works
of mercy, for though she may not take of his substance to spend it, no not in
works of piety and mercy, yet of her own labors she may take to give to the
poor, or for pious uses, Pro. 31.20.

Thus of what not.

3 That women may perform this subjection. 1. They must keep home. 2. They
must seek this ability of God, for he gives the graces of the wife; Nature
makes her a woman, election a wife, but to be prudent and subject is of the
Lord, Prou. 19.14. and there she must seek it of God. 3. They must preserve
and keep warm in their hearts the love of their husbands, for all
disobedience arises of want of love. Lastly, they must consider the reasons
and encouragements to subjection.

1 He is thy head and therefore be subject, 1. Cor. 11.3. 2. If the shame of
men will not move thee to be subject, yet have power on thine head, because
of the Angels, 1. Corinthians. 11.10. but especially consider the encouragements.

It should weigh much with them that God has imposed such a free and ingenuous
subjection. It is not boundless, when they may be still companions. 2. That
God that requires them to be subject, charge husbands to use them well, and
kindly to accept their obedience. 3. God has valued the price of a good wife,
and set the rate to be above pearls, Prou. 31, 10. Finally their labor in the
Lord shall not be lost, for they are much set by of God. 1. Pet. 3.4. he will
bless them with the fruit of their womb, Psalm. 113.9. and 127.3 yea the
salvation of their souls may be furthered by the right performance of family
duties.

Thus of the things required, viz: be subject.

The manner how it is required follows) Be subject indefinitely, and so
shows that they must be subject. 1. Not outwardly; but in spirit. Mal. 2.15.
2. Not abroad only, but at home. 3. Not sometimes but constantly always. 4.
Not in some things, but in every thing. Ephesians. 5.24. 5. Not for fear or shame,
but for conscience sake, and voluntarily. Here I may take in the distinction;
subjection is twofold. 1. by Gods institution* and so wives are subject, in
that they are commanded to be so, and God has taken pre-eminence from them.
2. By will, or the conscience cheerfully yielding obedience to Gods will, and
thus only good wives are subject.

Thus of the duty charged upon them.

3 The persons to whom it is due follows.

To your husbands:] These words may be considered exclusiuely and inclusiuely,
they exclude all others, she is not to be subject to her servants or children,
or the strange woman brought in by the husband, and so also they include all
husbands, they must be subject to their husbands, not the wise only but the
foolish, not the courteous only, but the froward, not the rich only, but the
poor also.

Thus of the laying down of the duty.

It is amplified, first by a reason, it is comely: secondly by a limitation, in
the Lord.

As is comely] (...) The original word is rendered three ways.

1 As ye ought vt oportet, and so it is a reason from Gods institution, ye
must do it, God indispensably requires it.

2 As is meet, vt conuenit, it is meet especially two ways. 1 God has given
power over all in the family but one, and therefore great reason and equity ye
be appointed subject unto him, and it is not meet ye should rule so many if you
will not obey one. Again ye are professors and have given your names to
Christ, and therefore it is meet that you especially strive to be good wives,
and better then any others, least the word be evil spoken of.

The wives comelines in three things.
3 As is comely, vt decet: so it is here translated.

The wives comeliness is not in beauty, Prou. 11.22. and 31.30. nor in the
gorgeousness of apparel, 1. Pet. 3.3. But a wives comeliness is especially.

1 In her wisdom, Prou. 14.1. and that to be showed in two things: first, in
her skill to please her husband, neither offending him with chiding words, nor
sullenness, puling or crying, which is found to vex some men more then words.
Secondly, in her skill to manage the businesses of the house, both
seasonablie, discreetlie, and with providence.

2 In her meekenes it is exceeding comely, where the hid man of the heart is
incorrupt with a meek and quiet spirit, this is better then al apparel. 1. Pet.
3.3.4.

Thirdly, Here it is in her subjection; for as it is an uncomely thing to see
the body above the head, so is it to see a wife that will rule and not be
subject to her husband.

And if the wife labor to adorn her self thus, she shall appear comely to
God: 1 Pet. 3.4. to men in the gate, Prou. 31.23.31. to her husband and
children, Prou. 31.28 Yea, she is an ornament to sincerity and holiness it
self. Tit. 2.3.

In the Lord:] 1. These words are expounded diversely.

First, in the Lord, that is, in the fear of God, as unto the Lord in
obedience to his ordinance, for Gods sake, because God requires this at your
hands.

In this sense it may serve for two uses: First, for terror to wicked wives,
they must answer it before God, he will avenge their not subiecting of
themselves, he will certainly account with them, if they be whorish,
contentious, idle, careless, or wastefull, etc.

2. It is a great comfort unto a godly woman, her subjection is in the Lord, it
is in Gods account, even as a sacrifice to him, he takes it as done to
himself, God honors her obedience in the Family, as if it were piety in the
Temple: and this may the more support them, if their husbands be unkind.

Secondly, in the Lord, that is, so far as they command in the Lord; they
must so love their husbands as they cease not to love God, and so be subject to
them, as they leave not their subjection to God. Their covenant with their
husband no way inferres the breach of this covenant with God, and thus it is
principally here meant.

Thus of the Wives duty.

The Husbands duty follows in the 19. verse.

Husbands love your Wives and be not bitter unto them.]

Doctr: In general; Husbands must be told their duties as well as Wives, as
they would have them mend, so they must mend themselves, and as they would have
comfort by living with them, so they must make conscience to practice their
duty to them: it is not the having of wives or husbands, that breeds
contentment, but the holy performance of duties mutually.

The duty of the Husband is propounded here: First, by exhortation, Husbands
love your Wives. Secondly, by dehortation, Be not bitter unto them.

In the exhortation, there is the persons exhorted ( Husbands) the duty ( love)
the persons to whom they owe it ( your Wives.)

Husbands] This indefinite propounding of it shows, that all sorts of Husbands
are bound to show this duty, poor and rich, learned and unlearned, yongue and
old.

Loue] Concerning the husbands duty as it is here expressed; I consider six
things. First, that it is indispensably required. Secondly, why this duty
only is named. Thirdly, how he must show his love. Fourthly, Reasons why.
Fifthly, I answer certain objections. Sixthly, the lets of performance of love.

First, it is required: Genesis 2.24. Ephesians. 5.25. Tit. 2.2.

Secondly, the Apostle names this duty in this one word, either because the
Lord of purpose, would have them study the whole Scriptures, that while they
seek for directions to make them good husbands, they may find also counsel
to make them good men.

Or else in this word is comprehended their duty, that so this being their
word, they might write it in their hearts, and have it ever in their eyes to
do it; or else it is because this is most necessary, and as women fail in
subjection, so do men in love.

For the third, viz. how he must show his love, we must understand, that the
husband owes the wife: First, natural or civil love as a married man.
Secondly, spiritual love, as a Christian married man.

Husbands show their love 4. ways.
For the first the love of the husband is to be showed 4. ways.

1 By cohabitation, 1 Pet. 3.7. He must dwell with her, not wander from his
wife, nor depart without calling and consent, nor dwell with drunkards, whores,
or gamesters, dwell, I say, in his own house, not in the Alehouse, etc.

2 By Chastity: and that, first, by avoiding unfaithfulness to her bed, not
follow the strange woman. This sin of Whoredom, it consumes men's strength,
wastes men's substance, compasses men with all evil, in the midst of the
congregation, is worse then theft, exceeding hateful in Gods sight, and
disgraceful amongst men, destroies the soul both by making men without
understanding, and sending them to hell. Prouer. 5.19. and 6.25. and 9. 17. Job
31.7.8. etc.

Secondly, by yielding her due benevolence, not departing from her bed without
consent.

Husbands honor their wives 6. ways
3 By honoring her, 1 Pet. 3.7. The Husband must show that he honors her.

First, by suffering himself to be admonished by her, Genesis 21.12.

Secondly, by using her as his companion, not lording over her as his slave.

Thirdly, by trusting her with disposing of such things in the Family as she is
fit for and faithful in, by giving her imploiment according to her gifts.

Fourthly, by not disgracing her before others, but choosing a fit time in
secret to find fault with her.

Fifthly, by not speaking when she is in passion, but forcing both her and
himself in all matters of difference to speak when they are both out of
passion.

Sixthly, by yielding a free and just testimony of her praises, Prou. 31.28.

4 By cheerishing her, Ephesians. 5.28. And this he performs.

First, by providing her maintenance according to his ability, and that in
laboring so in his calling, as he may provide for her while he lives, and
leave her some means when he dies.

And for manner, doing it cheerfully, not stay till it be wrung from him, as
from churlish Naball. Thus do not they that spend at Alehouse, upon Whores, or
sports, Bear baits, plays, gaming or apparel, that should serve for
maintenance of wives and children at home.

Secondly, by protecting and rescuing her from wrongs and dangers: 1. Sam. 30.5.

Thirdly, by delighting in her love; yea, not erring or wandering in his love
continually, Prou. 5.19.

Secondly, he owes her spiritual love as well as natural, so Christ loved his
Church, not only to enrich it but to sanctify it, Ephesians. 5.25.26. They must
dwell with them as men of knowledge to help them, not only by labor, but by
knowledge also, 1 Pet. 3.7. This religious love he must show.

1 By forgiving her offenses upon her repentance, this is one way whereby Christ
makes his Church holy.

2 By edifying her by counsel, exhortation, admonition, consolation, etc.

7. Reasons why men must love their wives.
4 The reasons why he must love her, are 1 Because God requires it. 2 God so
requires it, as a man must leave his father and mother to cleave unto his Wife
Genesis 2.24. 3 The example of Christ should enforce it. Ephesians. 5.25. 4 She is his
own flesh, and no man ever hated his own flesh: Ephesians. 5.29. 5 Lest prayer be
interrupted. 1. Pet. 3.17. 6 Thus he shall show himself a member of Christ,
and to be like his head. Ephesians. 1.30. 7 It will preserve a man from the
temptations, and inticements of the strange woman: Prou. 5.19.20. Yea, and from
all evil company and unthriftiness.


Fifthly, The Objections follow.

Object: 1 She was of mean birth, Men's objections answered.
condition, or portion, when I married her.

Answ: So, and much worse was the Church before Christ married her, and yet
Christ loves her.

Object: 2 But since marriage, she is idle, froward, wastefull, etc.

Answ: This is a reason to move thee to pray for her, and to watch over her
ways to admonish and instruct her, but this is no reason to move thee not to
love her. For the Church sins after calling, and yet Christ loves her, and
shows it by his intercession for her in heaven, and by laboring to cleanse her
by his spirit and word in earth.

Object: But she is a carnal and unregenerate woman, a mere wicked woman,
that neither does, nor will fear God, and Christ does not love heretics or
hypocrites, or profane persons, and pagans.

Answ: Though this reason from Christ's example does not hold, yet the reason
from Gods institution binds thee, thou must love her, not because she deserves
it, but because God requires it.

Quest: Is a man bound to esteem his wife above all women?

Answ: In respect of the affection and practice of the things essentially
necessary to conjugal duties, he is, but not in opinion of his praises, for
that is the commendation of the good wife, not of every wife. Prou. 31.30.

Thus of the Objections.

Sixthly, the lets follow: How comes it to pass that men do not perform this
duty. Answ. It is in some by reason of their sinful coming together, as in
sudden marriages, The causes why men love not their wives.
when they are done before there be a calling or affection in the heart. So
when men have ill ends, as those men that marry their wives not for grace or
favor, but for wealth, when they are possessed of both, they will love their
wealth, and hate their wives.

2 Corruption of nature is the cause of want of love, they are wicked men,
therefore wicked husbands.

3 It comes to pass, because men do not by prayer seek love of God, neglect
of prayer and mortification is the cause.

4 Men love the strange woman, and therefore love not their wives, or they love
other men's wives.

5 It comes to pass by the untowardness of the wife, for though that be no
just reason to the husband (because he should love her, because God commands
him) yet it is a just judgment of God upon her.

Thus of what is required.

Loue] viz: Indefinitely; First in heart as well as in word, Mal. 2.15.
Secondly, not before others only, but privately. Thirdly, not sometimes, or
the first week, month, or year, but for ever constantly. Fourthly, for
conscience sake, and not for shame or respect of her friends, or while her
means do last.

Your Wiues] This is added; First to exclude all others, all others I say, not
from Christian love in the general, but from conjugal love. Secondly, to
include all wives, though poor, less wise, or frugal, froward, etc.

Thus of the exhortation.

The dehortation follows, be not bitter unto them.] In these words the
Apostle does mollify the authority of the husband, and prouides that it pass
not into tyranny. Here I consider four things. First, what it hatth not in
it. Secondly, how men show themselves bitter to their wives. Thirdly, the
means to cure this bitterness. Fourthly the reasons to move thereunto.



1 To love their vices; they may know them to be the weaker vessel, yea take
notice of the weakness of the vessel.

2 To loose his own authority by lightness and vain behavior.

3 To omit the performance of holy duties to please her humor.

4 To give her a license to do what she list, and live how she will.

5 From finding fault and reproouing, so as they use not their own words but
Gods.

Lastly, distinguish their natures, wives of soft and gentle natures must be
used with all gentleness, but that lets not but that wilful and stubborn
wives may be held down to a meet subjection.

Of bitter husbands.
or deformities, or when they grow quarrellous, finding fault with every thing,
or grow into passion upon every occasion. 2 Indeed by using them
discourteously, or by unjust restraint. Or lastly by blows. But many men have
little growing in their furrows but wormwood, they have a true gall of
bitterness in them, they may be compared to the star in the Revelations,
8.11. for as that made the third part of the waters bitter, so are more then
three parts of the words of many husbands bittet words, yea as if their
natural frowardnes were not enough, some men will sharpen and whet their
tongues to sound out cursed words like swords or arrows, yea some are so
unappeasable, their anger is like the fools wrath, Proverbs 27, 3. these are
a brood of Caldeans, a bitter, a furious nation.

4 Rules for curing of this bitterness in men.
1 Men must pray God to cast something into their fountain to sweeten it. 2
They must turn the course of this humor, and spend it upon their sins, in the
practice of the duties of mortification. 3 Eat Gods book, for that will enable
men to to godly sorrow, (by being bitter in their bellies, and will sweeten
their mouths. 4 Look to the roots of bittrrnesse, stay the spring of it in
the beginning, take heed of a custom in frowardness, for then only custom
in the use of the means will cure thee, again it will cost them daily
sorrows, before they can get their natures thoroughly healed.




Reasons against bitterness.
1 It is a wise man's glory and discretion to pass by infirmities, Proverbs
19.10. 2 She is not his footstool but his helper. 3 Seeing we are heirs of
blessing, let us bless and not curse, if God has sweetened our hearts with
grace, let not our fountains send forth bitter waters and sweet. 4 The Apostle
requires that all bitterness be put away, all for degrees (it is not enough we
are not so bad as some be) and in all persons. 5 Lastly, it is a part of our
good works, and holy conversation to mortify bitterness, and envy, and
strife, hereby we must show that we have the wisdom that is far above: for
if our knowledge be right, it will make us peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, On the other side, if men sharpen their tongues to cursed and bitter
speaking, they may not boast of their knowledge. For such wisdom is carnal
sensual and devilish, and they are liars against the word. Iam. 3.13.17.
Use is for instruction to all husbands that fear God, to approve themselves
unto God, in their sincere and loving behavior toward their wives, especially
they should take notice of this vice of bitterness, or if they have failed
this way, they should recover themselves, repent and amend, and not be like
those wretched persons that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and call bitter
sweet, it is ill to fault this way, but worse to excuse, defend, or deny it.

Thus of the husbands duties.
The next couple in the family, is parents and children.

The duties of children is set down first, because the inferiors are charged
first, and chiefly to mend and perform their duties.

Verse. 20. Children, obey your Parents in all things, for this is well
pleasing to the Lord.


The exhortation has in it two things. First, their duty. Secondly, the reason
of it. Their duty has in it four things. First, who are charged ( children)
Secondly, what is charged upon them, ( Obey). Thirdly, to whom they owe it (
your Parents). Fourthly, the extent how far forth ( in all things). The
reason is, because though it were not grateful and pleasing to the parents by
reason of their waywardness, yet it is well pleasing to God.

Children] viz: All children, without difference of sex, both sons and
daughters, or of age, not only infants, but children grown and of riper and
full years of condition; the children both of poor and rich.

Obey] The obedience of Children must be considered.

More specially at some times, and so they must obey.

1 In the choice of their callings. The obedience of children considered of,
more especially or more generally.


2 In the election and disposing of their marriages, it must be with consent of
parents, Thus did Isaac, Genesis 24. Thus even Ismael, Genesis 21.21. Thus
Iakob. Genesis 27.46. and 28.9. Thus Sampson, Judges 14.2. And this power has
every Father over his Virgin, 1. Cor. 7.36.37.

More generally here I consider. 1. That they must obey not in some things, at
some times, but always throughout the course of their lives, this is plain
here, and likewise charged, Ephesians. 6.2.

2. How they must obey, children must perform obedience.

1. With reverence internal, and external, internally they must conceive a
holy estimation, and tenderness of respect, and honor and observance of their
parents. And externally they must show it by all reverent behavior, as by
rising up before them, by giving them the honor to speak first, etc. 2. With
readiness to receive and hear instruction, Pro. 1.8.
3. With endeavor to fulfill their desires, by their labors or otherwise.

4. With submission, first to their rebukes, Prou. 13.1. secondly, to their
restraints in diet, apparel, recreations, etc. thirdly, to their corrections.

5. With piety, praying for them; for if they must do it for all men, much more
for them, and if for all in authority then for parents, 1. Tim. 2.1.

6. With all meekness of love showed three ways.

1 By obeying, without inquiring, discoursing, murmuring or contending. 2 By
bearing their infirmities, either of body, age or mind, obey though aged,
diseased, crabbed, etc. 3 Obeying without respect of profit, some children are
obsequious, so long as any thing is to be had from their parents, but when they
have all they must have, then their forwardness to please is neglected: this
is a base and mercenary obedience.
7 With all thankfulness and gratitude, a great part of which is to
recompense their Parents kindness, by releeuing their wants, if they fall into
wants. 1 Timothy 5*4.

Your Parents] Viz: Both your parents, not your father only, but your mother
also, Leuit. 19.3. Prou. 15.20.

In all things] Quest: But must they be obeyed in sin.

Answ: No, you must so obey your earthly Father, as you disobey not your
heavenly Father, therefore in the Lord is added, Ephesians. 6.1. But else we must
obey in all things, that are not apparent to be sinful, though against our
ease, profit, credit, etc.

Or more plainly thus, All things are of three sorts: First, some things are
simply good, this must be done though the Parents forbid, because God commands.
Secondly, some things are simply evil, these things must not be done, though
Parents command, because God forbids. Thirdly, some things are indifferent, in
these children must obey, though their Parents require things never so unmeet,
for things may be unmeet that are not unlawful.

Thus of the Doctrine of their obedience.

Childrens objection answered.
Against this Doctrine children object many things.

Object: 1 I am now in better estate, in higher place, of better gifts, or such
like, then my Parents.

Answ: This is no reason to withhold obedience and reverence, for Joseph was a
Prince in Egypt, and Jacob in great want; Solomon sits in his throne of
Majesty, and yet when his Mother comes to him, he yielded all reverence, the
throne did not make her cease to be a Mother: yea, our Savior Christ
infinitely excelled his Parents, and yet he was subject unto them. Luke 1.51.

Object: But our Savior says, call not men Father on earth* Mat. 23.9.

Answ: The words are not to be understood simply but comparatively, and that,
either to God, or to the Pharisees, call no man Father as thou call God
Father: but so give titles to men, as all honor and sacred estimation of Gods
Fatherly care be preserved, and call no man Father, as the Pharisees
ambitiously desire to be called; give not trust and childlike honor to men of
what profession soever, that you should only trust in them, and by performing
honor, or obedience, or recompense to them, grow careless of the duties you
owe to your own parents, as the Pharisees taught, Mat. 15.5.

Object: But my Parents require base things, and such as cast a kind of
discredit upon me in the world.

Answ: Consider not the things required, but Gods ordination, besides God the
Father required of Christ to bear the Cross, spitting in the face, etc. yet
he willingly obeyed.

Object: But my Parents are disordered persons, and foolish, etc.

Answ: Pray for them, but despise them nor, besides God knows what is good for
thee, and therefore has caused them to come out of the loins of such Parents,
and required subjection of thee.

Object: They are not my natural Parents, but my step-father or stepmother.

Answ: Yet they must be obeyed, so Ruth obeyed Naomi, and Moses, Iethro: Exodus
18.19.

Object: They are not Parents at all, but my kindred only as my uncle, aunt,
etc. with whom I am left in trust.

Answ: Thou must be ruled by them, so was Hester by Mordechai.

Use. This condemns the doctrine and practice of Papists, that defend the
vows of solitary and single life of children without consent of parents; and
it meets with the doctrine of the Pharisees that would dispense with childrens
releeuing of their Parents, so they would bestow it upon them. Mat. 15.

2 This may serve for reproof of stubborn and ungracious children that
forsake their Parents instruction, Prou. 1.8. but especially such monsters as
despise their Parents when they are old, or mock them, or curse them, or chase
them, or rob them, etc. the cursed estate of such children is set down in
these Scriptures: Prou. 15.20. and 19.26. and 23.22. and 20.20. and 28.24. and
30.11.17.

Thus of the duty, the reason follows

There are many reasons why they should obey.

1 Children have their substance from them, Reasons why children should obey
their parents.
even their life and their education, their Parents then took care of them
when they had no ragge to cover their nakedness, no morsel to put into their
mouths, and what can children render equivalent heereunto? 2 Christ himself
was obedient to his Parents, Luke 2.51. 3 This is the purity and uprightness
of children, and hereby they must be tried, and tried whether their work be
pure, Prou. 20.11. 4 The consideration of Gods judgments upon wicked children
should much move, such as were Cham, Esau, Absolon, Abimelech, etc. 5 If thou
obey not thy Parents, thou may live to be requited by thy children. 6 In
the sixth of Ephesians. 1.2.3.4. There are many reasons why children should obey.
First, it is in the Lord, that is, their obedience is both commanded by God,
and it is for God, and besides it is no further urged then as may stand with
faith and piety to the Lord.

Secondly, this is right, it is children justice.

Thirdly, this commandment that requires this, is the first commandment with
promise, for this had a promise in the very first promulgation of it in the
Tables, written by the finger of God, whereas all the rest had their promises
annexed afterward by the ministry of Moses.

Object: But the second Commandment had promise in the first promulgation of
the Law.

Answ: Some answer the words of the second Commandment are a proposition, not
a promise, but this answer satisfies not. Some say the promises mentioned in
that commandment, belong to the whole Law, and not to that Commandment alone;
but I think the plainest answer is: the fifth Commandment is the first
Commandment with promise, viz: in the second Table. A fourth reason is,
children must obey, for so it shall go well with them; they shall get good and
contentment, and Gods grace and blessing by so doing. Fifthly, they shall live
long on earth to enjoy the blessing of God.

Object: Wicked children live long.

Answ: Their life is a death, and it is not well with them: Esaias 65.20.

Object: Gods children do not live long.

Answ: For the most part they do. 2 I say, if God perform not this promise
absolutely in the letter, yet he performs this blessing by commutation into a
better, as when he gives them eternal life for long life.

But the reason why children should obey is here mentioned in the Text.

It is well pleasing to the Lord:] Some leave out ( to the Lord) and so the
argument is more general, for obedience is exceeding pleasing to their
Parents, Prou. 10.1. and 15.20. and 19.13. and 13.16. and besides it is
pleasing to God, but I see no reason to leave out the words.

Some render ((...)) in the Lord, and so here is; First, a limitation, they
must obey, but in the Lord. Secondly, they must obey, not because nature and
civility requires it, but for conscience sake, as Gods institution.

But I take it as it is here rendered, to the Lord.

Well-pleasing to the Lord] From the consideration of these words, I observe
four things.

First, that it is not enough to serve God, but we must so serve as we please
him. Heb. 12.28.

Secondly that there is a way how to please God even in Family duties, and
these external and ordinary things at home, and this serves; First, to show
Gods great love to man, in that he frames himself to men's condition, and
likes what may like them, will be pleased himself with what pleases them:
obedience and service to men he accounts a service to himself. Secondly, it is
a great encouragement to diligence* and conscience in these Family duties, in
as much as they will not only please man, but God. Thirdly, it reproues
hypocrites, that care to be good no where but in Gods house, but God will have
obedience and not sacrifice, yea, here he will be served with obedience to men.

Thirdly, that even children are bound to make conscience of their ways, and
to learn to please God in their youth. First, God requires it, Eccle. 12.1.
Psalm. 148.12. There is Scripture for babes and young men as well as old men.
Secondly, there are worthy examples to excite them recorded in Scripture, as
the examples of Joseph, Samuel, David, Josiah, Jeremy, Daniel, and Timothy,
yea, this was a great praise in Ierobohams young and dying son, 1 King. 14.3.
Thirdly, a conscionable care in children to please God is much praised in
Scripture, they are blessed that bear the yoke in their youth, and the
workmanship of grace and obedience in the hearts and lives of children, is
like the grauing of a Kings Palace, Psalm. 144.12. A happy thing when the young
men see visions, as well as old men dream dreams, Joel 2. Then does the
Church flourish when the Son marries the mother, Isai. 62.5.

Use 1 This should teach parents to begin betimes to teach their children the
trade of their way, Prou. 22.6. and to bring them up in the instruction and
admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4.

2 Parents should learn also to be content that their children serve and
please God as well as them; some Parents are so bad that they neither will
instruct their children themselves, nor abide it, that they should hear
Sermons, read the Scriptures, seek the company of such as fear God, or
Sanctify Gods Sabbaths.

4 This should teach all to repent even for the sins of their youth, Psa. 25.
For they were then tied to please God as well as afterward.

4 That God will be pleased and will accept the endeavors and conscionable
cares and obedience, even of children, this is a comfort to children that
though they cannot please wayward parents, yet they shall please God; and
again, it reproues froward parents; Is God pleased and art thou displeased?
Does God love and like the desires and endeauours of this child and do thou
dislike?

Thus of childrens duty, the Parents duty follows.

Fathers provoke not your children to anger, least they be discouraged.]

Doctrine From the coherence; Parents must perform their duty to their
children, it is not an easy thing to be a Father and Mother in performance of
fatherly and motherly duties.

Provoke not] D. Men are in general here to learn, that it is not enough to
abstain from sin, but they must abstain from al prouocations to sin; It is
not enough to abstain from whoredom, but men must abstain from wanton
attire, from suspected places, from filthy speeches, from cha^bering and
wantonness, not enough to abstain from murder, but men must abstain from
bitter and provoking words. It is not enough to abstain from Idolatry, but men
must abstain from all the monuments and occasions of Idolatry, and therefore
men must abstain from all marriage with Papists, and from making of images of
the trinity, etc. If men would avoid perjury, they must take heed of common
swearing. So ministers must not only call for peace and unity, but they must
take heed of prouocations to discord, when all is at peace.

Thus of the general.

The words of this verse are a dehortation, and therein is: First, the duty of
parents: Secondly, the reason of it.

Parents] All Parents are tied to perform their duties to their children, By
Fathers he means both parents.
none are too good to do it. Use for reproof of such women as think
themselves too good to nurse their own children, and of such Fathers as turn
the Care of their children wholly to others.

Provoke to wrath] Here I note the manner of setting down their duty and the
matter.

The duty of parents is negatiuely set down, to teach that parents must not
think only of their sins against God and abroad to others; but they may be
guilty of much sin in trespassing against their own children, if parents
were otherwise never so honest or religious, yet the careless discharge of
their duty to their children may much provoke God, and will certainly be found
on their score if they repent not.

Quest. But why is the duty of parents in this place so sparingly set down
but in one branch of it and that negatiuely?

Ans. It is not to allow Parents to be less careful, but it may be the
Apostle spares them here, because in respect of other relations they are
charged before and after as husbands and masters. Again, it may be the
Apostle would have children to know they have not that liberty to inquire into
their parents faults, or to reckon it as a part of their skill to find them
out: parents shall account to God but not to their children. Thus of the manner
of setting their duty down, the matter follows.

Provoke not] Parents fault two ways, either by too much severity, or by too
much indulgence, the former is here restrained. Again, the provocation is
twofold, either to sin or to passion, it is a most cursed thing for parents
to provoke their children to sin by counselling them to evil ways, or
encouraging them to lewd courses. This the Apostle holds too horrible vile, for
any professing religion, or the fear of God, and therefore mentions
provocation to anger.

Concerning this provocation to anger I consider three things. First, how
parents provoke their children. Secondly, what they must do that they be not
provoked. Thirdly, what is not forbidden in these words.

Parents provoke their children; first, by word; secondly, by deed.

1. By word three ways. First, by burthening them with unjust and unmeet
precepts. How parents provoke their children both by words and deeds.
Secondly, by pursuing them with contumelious words, especially when they be
always chiding and rating of them. Thirdly, by disgracing of them to others
before their face, or behind their backs.

2 By deeds five ways.

First, by careless education, for though children find not fault with this at
first, yet when they come to be of years, and find their own unfitness for
calling or society, etc then they fret against their parents neglect.

Secondly, by discourtesies and unkind usage of them when they be grown to be
of years.

Thirdly, by unjust dealing about their marriage, when either they restrain
them of marriage, when they have a calling to it, and a liking of meet person,
and thus they provoke them to incontinency, or when they compel them to marry
when they have no calling nor liking, and thus they provoke them to discontent.

Fourthly, by indiscreet and immoderate passion and severity in correcting them.

Fifthly, by unjust restraints either of present necessaries of food and
raiment, Matthew. 7.9.10. 1. Tim. 5.8. Prou. 13.22. or in not laying up for them,
1. Cor. 12.14.

Secondly, that parents may not provoke their children. 1. they must begin
betimes to teach them their duties, for ignorance is waiward. 2. they must sow
the seeds of piety and godliness in their hearts, as they draw out reason by
degrees, so there is a conscience even in child^en as well as reason if it were
informed, and conscience would make them not only religious to God, but
dutiful to parents. 3. they must not give their children too much liberty at
the first, for if they do, then will just restraint afterward be
provocation. 4. they must pray for them to God, many pray for children, and so
for their being, that afterward never pray to God to guide their hearts, and so
for their well being. 5 They must in general strive to teach or guide them by
encouragements and allurements, correction is not as diet, but as Physic, and
thus recreation is not to be denied them. Zach. 85. 6. If nothing else will
restrain passion in children, they must impose silence upon them, he that
imposes silence on a fool mittigateth anger, Prou. v. 26.

3 This dehortation hinders not but that parents may: 1 Rebuke their Children.
2 Correct them. Prou. 13.24. and 22.15. and 29.15.17. and 23.13. and 25.14. and
19.18.19.


Thus of the duty.

Children] viz: All children, sons and daughters in law as well as natural
children; and these are provoked.

1 By groundless iealousies and suspicions testified by secret listening,
questioning and enquiring enuiously after every thing they do or say. 2 By
suffering servants to vex or molest them. 3 By evil reports of them. 4 By
giving evil counsel, or reporting of faults to the Son against his wife, or
to the daughter against her husband to make debate is ill in any but much worse
in parents.
This of the parties to whom they owe this duty.

Lest they be discouraged] the reason follows.

There are many reasons why parents should be careful by all means to keep
anger out of their Children. 7. Reasons to prevent anger in children.
1. Wise men and godly men can scarce govern this affection without sinning,
Psalm. 4. much less children. 2. Anger is a great prouoker of Gods anger, it
breeds a guiltiness of Gods anger, Math. 6. 3. It lets in the Devil, Ephesians.
4.26. and usually Satan in the times of these passions, sowes the most hellish
seeds and stirs most impious thoughts in them. 4. It may bring them into
great mischief in time, Proverbs. 28.18. 5. It is a great let to sound
instruction and knowledge, Eccles. 7.11. Proverbs. 14.29. 6. The angry person
is usually suspicious, and so unfit for society with men Prou. 1.22.24. yea it
is a great hinderance both to the profit of the word. James. 1.21. and the
power and success of prayer. 1 Timothy 2.8. 7. Sometimes this rage in young
persons is not to be cooled but with blood as in Caine.

But to omit the reasons, here parents must not provoke their children lest
they be discouraged.

Concerning discouragement in general, we must know that it is a great sin to
discourage others, and a great hurt to be discouraged, the people must not
discourage their teachers, Hebr. 13.17. those that are in authority must not
discourage such as are faithful and desirous to approve their fear of God,
and to discharge their duties. Governors in the family must not discourage
servants or children in their good beginnings and desires after good things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
again this is a Christian mercy and compassion, to comfort and encourage the
feeble, and lastly Gods fainting children should be admonished to be of good
comfort, and to strengthen their weary knees. 2. Cor. 13.11. Esaias. 36.3.4.

Concerning the discouragement of children, christian parents should be
careful: for they may be discouraged.

1 From the service of God when they shall see carnal men use their children
better then they that make such a profession of piety.

2 From the capacity and desire after the undertaking of the knowledge or
exercise of great things, discouragement breaks their spirits, and makes them
pusillanimous.

3 From the hope to please and so from the confidence of the parents love, and
then at length from the very means of pleasing either by honor or obedience.
This of the duty of parents and children.

The third couple in the family are servants and masters.

The duty of servants is set down verse. 22.23.24.25.

Verse 22. Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the
flesh in all things.


In all the words that concern the duty of servants I observe, 1 An
exhortation, verse 22.23. 2 Reasons. verse. 24.25.


The exhortation is two ways to be considered: first as it is breefly set
down, here is first the parties exhorted ( Servants): secondly, the duty
wherewith they are charged ( be obedient): thirdly, the persons to whom, to
your masters.

2 Secondly, as it is explicated in the explication, I consider 1 The promises
about their obedience 2 The form or manner how they must obey.


The prouisoes are either for limitation to curb masters, they are to obey
according to the flesh, the souls and consciences are not in bondage to men,
or for extent to servants, they must obey in all things.

The manner how they must obey is set down, 1 Negatiuelie, not with eye
service: 2. not as men pleasers 2 Affirmatively, with singlenes of heart: 2.
with fear of God: 3. heartily as to the Lord. The reasons are, 1. from hope of
reward and wages from God, v. 24. 2. from the certain vengeance of God upon
them that do wrong, v. 25.


This is the order of the words.

From the general consideration of all the words I observe 6. things.

1 That servants are to be instructed out of the word, Six things generally
observed.
which reprooues masters that restrain servants from hearing the word in Gods
house, and open not the book of God to them in their own houses.

2 A question may here be moved, why should the duty of servants be thus
largely in so many words set down.

Answ. 1 Because usually men show less compassion to servants: therefore God
takes the more care of them, many men will have some care of their children, to
see them taught in some manner, but their servants they wholly neglect.
Therefore God who is a Father to servants as well as children, prouides large
instruction and comforts for servants, if they will come to his book to be
taught.

2 The careful Apostle saw that in the first conversion of men from Gentilisme
to Christianity, there was greatest danger of disorder and scandal in
servants, partly out of weariness of their bondage and servile condition,
partly because men would less spare to tell of their faults, therefore the
Apostle as most fearful of them spends many words in the teaching and
encouraging of them.

3 We may note here the candor of the Apostle, he does freely deliver his mind
in the behalf of servants with a full vent of words, with great care without
holding back anything that belongs unto them. He was not of the mind of most
Preachers now adays, that hold the discourse of family duties, especially of
servants, too base a subject for their wits and learning to be employed in,
neither was the Apostle of the humor of Lawyers, that seldom speak much but
for great men, or when they may have great gifts, the Apostle speaks as much
for a servant that could do nothing for him as for the Masters.

4 In laying down his speech to servants, he both teaches and comfort
them, but for order he first teaches them, and as any is more ignorant, this
course is more needful to be held, the common people should be in this manner
dealt withal, they must first be rebuked, convinced, exhorted, taught, and
then meet comforts to be applied, and not before.

Lastly, the scope and drift of the Apostle in all these words to keep
Servants in order, and that first to hold servants in obedience, that none
under color of liberty in Christ should break up their subjection to their
Master, he was no Anabaptist. Secondly, to meet with the faulty obedience of
such servants as were resolved to stay in service. He meets here with five
faults in servants.

Five faults in servants.
1 The first fault in servants is half service, or to obey in what they list,
this he corrects, when he says (in all things) 2 The second fault is eye
service. 3 The third fault is prophanenes, most servants never respect piety
and Gods fear, but only to please their Masters, this he meets with when
he says, not as men pleasers, but fearing God. 4 The fourth fault is
hypocritical service, this he meets when he adds in singleness of heart.
5 The fifth fault is baseness of mind and discouragement, this he would
prevent in the two last verses.
Thus of the general.

Seruants] The Servants in the Apostles time were for the most part bondslaues,
bought and sold as beasts, and their Masters were infidels and cruel to them;
and yet many of these Servants were converted to the faith of Christ. Where we
may learn, that men's slaves may be Gods servants, he has his elect among
these; the dear children of God in this world may be abased to most vile
misery, and a most servile condition.

The Uses are: First, to show that felicity is not in outward things, for Gods
servants that had attained the chief good, yet were in most base condition, in
respect of the things of this life.

Secondly, to teach us patience in lesser crosses, whatsoever thou art, yet
thou art not a bondslaue, therefore be patient; such as have been dear in
Gods sight have been worse used then thou art.

Thirdly, to teach us compassion to the baser sort of men, for Gods elect may
be among these.

Lastly, this is a great comfort to the abject.

But howsoever bought servants were most usual in the Apostles time, yet hired
servants were used then too, and are here meant, as well as the other, yea, all
servants though they were nobles serving in Princes Courts, are tied ^o the
duties generally here required.

And as any servants have more knowledge and do profess sincerity in
religion, they are the more tied to be careful servants to men, they should
not only be better men and women, but better servants also.

Thus of the parties exhorted.

Be obedient] Here I consider 2. things.

1 That they must obey, they must approve themselves to their Masters not by
wearing their cloth, or cognizance, or by words and complements, but by
painful and careful obedience. 2 How they must obey, 4. Things in the manner
of servants obedience.
and that may be opened thus.
First, with reverence, with all honor, 1 Timothy 6.1. both internal, with high
account and estimation of their Masters, and external, with reverent words and
behavior.

Secondly, with all fear, 1 Pet. 2.18. Ephesians. 6.5. and this they should show,
first, by avoiding what might offend. Secondly, by not answering again.
Thirdly, by a holy endeavor to please them. Tit. 2.9.

Thirdly, with subjection, to rebukes, 1 Pet. 2.18. 2. to correction, 1 Pet.
19.20. 3. to their restraints: first, in respect of diet, they must not be
their own caruers. Secondly, in respect of place, they must keep the bounds
of the Family, and not at their pleasure be gadding out either by night or day
upon any pretense without leave. Thirdly, in respect of company, they must
bring none into the Family, that are lewd persons, or of what sort soever
against the liking of the Master, nor may they keep company abroad to the just
offense of their Masters. Fourthly, in respect of apparel, though they have
never so good means, yet they must be attired as becomes Servants.

And this subjection also they should show in a ready acknowledgement of their
fault when they understand it. It is a great fault in Servants that though they
understand, yet they will not answer. First acknowledge and give glory to
God, and submit themselves to their masters, Prou. 29.19.

4 With all good faithfulness, Titus 2.10. this faithfulness is required.

1 In respect of the goods of the family, and thus they must show their
faithfulness in not da^ing to purloyne the least penny from their Masters:
no pickers, Tit. 2.10. 2. It is not enough that they are true, but they must be
thriftily careful to see that nothing be spoiled or lost, or miscarry any way
by their default and negligence, this was the great testimony of Jacobs
faithfulness, Genesis 31.36.

2 In respect of secrets, they must keep the secrets of the Master, and of the
family, yea and of the trade and calling to.

3 In respect of the business of the family, and here their faithfulness
stands in two things.

1 In diligence of labor, he is not a faithful servant that eats the bread of
Idleness, as many serving men do, that can tell of no calling but attendance.
2 In trustiness, and in this servants must be faithful two ways: first in
their care to see their Masters directions executed in the family, as if they
had been present: secondly, in their speedy dispatch of business abroad, a
sloathfull messenger is an exceeding provocation to them that send him, and it
is a wretched fault in servants, when they are sent forth of the family about
business they cannot find the way in again in any due time.
Thus of the duty to which they are exhorted.

To them that are your Masters] They must be subject and obedient to all
Masters, indefinitely without difference of Sex (and so to the wife or widow,
1. Tim. 5.14. Prou. 31.) or of condition they must be obedient to the poorest
as well as the rich.

Thus of the laying down of the exhortation. The explication follows, and
first of the premises. According to the flesh.]

These words may be referred to masters, and then the sense is this, that
servants must be obedient even to such masters as are fleshly, and carnal men,
they must obey though their masters be Ethnikes or profane persons; it is a
great praise for a servant to men, to be Gods servant also, but it is a
greater praise to be a religious servant of an irreligious master, to fear God
in a profane house.

2 To servants, and so they are a limitation, they are subject only in respect
of their flesh and bodies, and so here is two things to be observed.

The one expressed: the bodies of servants are in the power, and at the disposing
of the masters, and therefore servants must learn to subject their flesh to
their masters, both commands, restraints, and corrections.

The other implied: the souls of servants are not in the power and at the
disposing of Masters, their spirits are free, nor Master nor King can command
the conscience.

Use is, first, for reprofe of such servants as give more to their masters then
is due, thou ought to be of the same calling, trade, labor, etc. that thy
master is of, but thou art not bound to be of the same religion, or humor with
thy Master. It is a great fault not to give the body to thy Master, but a
great fault also, to give both body and soul to be at his disposing, both are
extremes.

Secondly, should servants fear their masters because they have power over the
flesh? how much more should we fear God, that has power to destroy both soul
and flesh in hell, Math. 10.

Thirdly, this may be a great comfort to a servant, thy soul is as free as the
soul of him that sits on a throne, thy service in the flesh derogates nothing
from the liberty of Christ in thy heart. Thy best part is free.

In all things] Servants must obey in all things, even in things that be
against their credit, profit, liking, ease, etc. There is a great sturdinesse
in many servants, either they will not do some things required, or not at the
time when they are bidden, or not in the manner, but as they list, these
courses are vile, and here condemned.

Object.
Object: But unlawful and unmeet things are required.

Sol.
I answer, that in cases of this nature, three rules are to be observed by
inferiors.

First, If the matter required be only inexpedient, and unmeet, thou must
obey: neither does this rule let, but that servants or inferiors may use all
humble and lawful means to prevent unmeet things.

Secondly, thou must be sure it be sin that thou refusest, thou must not
disobey upon conceit, or conjecture, nor upon thine own humor and opinion, but
it must appear by the word of God to be a sin, or else thy conjectures are
no ground of disobedience, if thou must needs doubt on both sides it is better
doubt and obey, then doubt and disobey.

Thirdly, when it is apparent to be impious and sinful that is required, yet
thou must look to the manner of disobedience, thou must yield thy self to
obey by suffering; yea, it is a wretched fault in servants or inferiors, that
are urged to unlawful things, to refuse with sturdie, and insolent, and
provoking words, or behavior, God frees thee from obedience in act, but he
frees thee not from reverence, and from an holy estimation and humble demeanor.

The use is for great reproof of servants, both indiscretion and stubbernes,
and withal it charge masters; they must not require their servants to lie
and swear in their shops only to please and profit them, nor may they make
their servants break Gods Sabbaths to satisfy their wills.

Object: But are they not required to obey in all things.

Answ: They are, but before he says, according to the flesh, in labor not in
sin, and after he says, they must so please men as they fear God too.

Thus of the prouisoes.

The form of their obedience is set down: First, negatiuely, not with
eye-seruice] not as men-pleasers.] Secondly, affirmatively. 1. With singleness
of heart. 2. Fearing God. 3. Heartily.

Eye-seruice. (...).
] Some take it thus, not with outward service, not only do the Labor of the
body, but bring the care, providence, affection of the heart: or thus, be
obedient to your masters, and let not your eye be only upon your masters, but
upon God the great Master of all Masters and men. But I think the proper
meaning of the word is, not with eie-seruice, that is, not only in the
presence of your Masters, not only when their eye is upon them: so that he
meets with the wretched faultiness of such servants as when their masters
backs are turned, neglect their labor, fall to loitering, or get them out of
the doors, or which is worse, fall to wantonness, drunkenness, filching,
smiting of their fellows, and quarrelling, these servants shall have their
portion at the day of Christ: Matthew. 14.48. and if eie-seruice be condemned,
what shall become of such servants as are not good, no not so long as their
masters are by them.

Not as men-pleasing: (...).
] Object: Is it a fault for servants to please their Masters?

Answ: No, it is not, for they are commanded to please in all things: Tit. 2.9.
But two things are here condemned. First, so to please men, as never to care
for pleasing God; so to attend a corporal service as not to care for the
saving health of their souls, this is profaneness. Secondly, such servants are
here taxed, as seek by all means to please their masters, but not to profit
them, such are they that are flattering soothing persons, that serve their
Masters only with fair words, but else are empty persons; such (or rather
worse) are they that apply themselves to their Masters humors, to feed them
with tales, or praising their ill courses and counsels, or executing their
sinful minds: these servants are many times the firebrands of contention,
alienate parents from their children, friend from friend, and keep malice on
perpetual foot: these are here rebuked. But let us consider further, is this
such a fault in poor servants (that can pretend many things) to be
men-pleasers, how foul a vice is it in freemen that are in no wants or
restraint, how hurtful is it to be a man-pleaser in the Courts of Princes, and
in the houses of Nobles? how detested a vice is it in such as are Magistrates
and public states? And is it naught in the Court and Country, certainly it
is much more vile in the Pulpit, and in Churchmen, and even the greater they
are, the worse and more abominable is their soothing and daubing.

Thus of the negative.

In the affirmative are three things, and the first is singleness of heart.

In singleness of heart:] Concerning singleness of heart, I consider it two
ways.

1 In the general, as it is in Gods Servants. 2 In special, as it is in men's
servants.
Singleness or sincerity of heart as it is in Gods servants, I consider of in
two things.

1 In the nature of it. 2 In the signs of it.
Singleness of heart may be discerned by the contrary to which it is opposed.

1 As it is opposed to hypocrisy, a sincere hearted man is no hipocrite, and
shows it three ways.

How to know singlenes of heart by 6. things to which it is opposed.
First, he had rather be good then seem so, as in case of alms, Romans 12.8.
compared with Math. 6.2. so in the practice of piety, he had rather have grace
and sound knowledge then an empty show of it.

Secondly, he will serve God at all times as well as at one time: it is a note
of an hypocrite that he will not pray at all times, he will serve God when he
is sick, but not when he is well, Job. 27.7.8.9. So it is vile hypocrisy to
come to Church in Lent to hear Sermons, but never come there, or but seldom
all the year after.

Thirdly, he minds inward secret domestical holiness and piety, as well as
outward open and Church holiness, he is an hypocrite that kneeles down when
he comes into the Church and never prays in his family at home. It is vile
hypocrisy and palpable, in such men as have knees of prayer when they first
come up into the pulpit, and no words of prayer when they are risen up to
speak for or to Gods people.

2. As it is opposed to fleshly wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.12. There is a threefold
wisdom of the flesh that batters and keeps out singleness and sincerity of
heart.

1 The first is a reaching after private ends in public employments, as
preaching for gain, 2. Cor. 2.17.

2 The second is a cunningnesse in committing or hiding sin. It is sincerity
to be wise to do good, and simple concerning evil to be a bungler in acting
it, and to have nothing to say in defense of it when it is done, Romans 16.19.

3 The third is fraud, shifting, subtilty, and guilefull and deceitful dealing
in men's course for the things of this life. Thus Esau is a wild and cunning
man, able by reason of his craft and subtilty to live in a wilderness, but
Iakob is a plain man, a single hearted man, he can make no shift to help
himself in earthly things by fraud or craft, but is open and plain in all his
dealings for the world; but a man of great reach for matters of his soul. This
is a pattern of true singleness, simplicity and sincerity: 3. as it is
opposed to a double heart, opposed I say to a heart and a heart, and a double
heart is either a wavering heart, or a divided heart: men have a double heart
that waver and are tossed with uncertainties, such as are now for God and
godliness, and shortly after for sin and the flesh; now are resolved to
leave such a fault, as persuaded it is a fault, and by and by they will to it
again, as persuaded it is not a fault: here is no singleness of heart. And
thus the heart is double in respect of times, it is double also, as divided in
respect of objects; I instance in two things: first in matter of worship, the
people that came to inhabit Samaria had a divided heart, for they feared the
God of the Country, because of the Lions and they feared the Gods of the
nations also, 2. Kings 17.33. Such are they that fear Gods threatenings in his
word, and fear the signs of heaven too. Secondly, our Savior instances in
matters of the world. The mind which is the eye of the soul cannot be said to
be single, when it is distracted, men cannot serve God and Mammon. Math.
6.21.22.23.24.

4 As it is opposed to spiritual pride, a single heart is an humble heart as
Job shows, Job. 9.15.16. and shows it self in two things: First, that if
God send crosses, it will not answer or justify it self, but make
supplication, and so acknowledge Gods love, as withal it will confess that
God does judge them for their corruptions. Secondly, if the sincere hearted man
pray to God and the Lord be pleased to answer him by unutterable feelings, even
by the witness of the spirit of adoption, yet he will be so far from
spiritual pride and conceitednesse, that fearing before Gods mercies, he will
be as if he believed not that God had heard his voice.

5 As opposed to perturbation and disquietnes of the heart, arising either from
the cloudinesse and muddinesse of the Judgment, not able to discern things
that differ, (...)
Phil. 1.10. or from the unrest of the conscience showed by hourly or frequent
checkings, 2 Cor. 1.12. or from the infidelity or grudging or distrustfulnesse
of the heart, Act. 2.46.

6 As opposed to offensiuenesse, and so the single hearted man is neither
offensive by wrongs nor by scandalls; in respect of wrongs he is innocent as
the dove, (...)
he is no horned beast to pelt and gore others, Math. 10.16. and in respect of
scandalls, he is desirous to live without blame, from those that are without,
or grief to the Faithful. Phil. 2.15. and 1.10.

Out of this may be gathered, the signs or properties of a single or sincere
hearted man. 12. Signs of a single hearted man.
1. He had rather be good then seem to be so. 2. He strives to be good in
secret at home, in heart as well as openly and abroad. 3. He serves not God by
flashes or fits, but is constant, and will pray and serve God at all times. 4
He is a plain man without fraud and guile in matters of the world, he loves
plainenes and open dealing, yet he is not simple, for in matters of his soul
he is of great reach and forecast and discretion, etc. 5. He is a bungler in
sin, he knows not the method of Satan. 6. He dotes not upon the world, he
can use it as though he used it not, he is not tossed with distracting cares.
7. He cannot abide mixtures in the worship of his God, he is neither
Idolatrous, nor superstitious, nor humorous. 8. Good success in grace and
innocence, makes him more humble and fit to grieve for sin, and feel the
weight of it, he struggles as much against spiritual pride as against other
sins. 9. He does not allow himself to murmr nor repine, either through
infidelity at God, or through grudging envy at men, or distress himself with
vain fear about how he shall do hereafter. 10. He is harmless, desirous
so to live as he may wrong none in worldly matters, nor offend any in matters
of religion. 11. He makes conscience of lesser sins as well as greater, this
is his godly pureness. 12. He is blessed of God after some progress in piety
with two singular favors: First he discerns things that differ: Secondly, he
has the power, quietness and joy of a good conscience.

Here also may be gathered negative signs, they are not single hearted;
First, that are hypocrites taken up about the gilding of the outside: Secondly,
that will serve God but at some times. 3. That are skillful in sin, to
commend it, or impudent to defend, deny or extenuate it. Fourthly, that are of
a guilefull and fraudulent disposition. Fifthly, that are eaten up with worldly
cares. Sixthly, that are scandalous, yea some of Gods children may hang down
their heads under the fear that their hearts are not so single as were mere
by reason of their spiritual pride, the raging muddinesse of judgment and the
unrest of the heart and conscience.

Thus of singleness of heart in Gods servants.

Men's servants shall approve themselves to be single hearted. 8. Signs of a
single hearted servant.


1 If they can honor and obey poor Masters as well as rich. 2 If they can be
careful to serve, and profit with all heedfulnesse, and love froward masters
as well as the courteous. 3 If they can obey for conscience of Gods command,
though they have no hope of reward from men, or conceit, nor fear of shame or
punishment 4 If they be as good within as without, serve with pure intention. 5
If they will be diligent in the Masters absence, as well as in his presence. 6
If they will be true in the least penny, not touch their masters goods to
purloine it, though they might secretly help themselves. 7 If they will labor
when they might be at rest. 8 If they will restore what they have ill gotten,
or if they be not able will humble themselves by acknowledgement though none
were able to accuse them.
Use is for encouragement to all servants and journey men to get and express
this uprightness and singleness of heart, for better is the poor that
walks in his singleness of heart, then he that abuses his lips and is a
fool, Prou. 19.1. Yea, we should all take heed that Satan beguile us not from
the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus.

This of singleness of heart.

Fearing God] The second thing required in the manner of their obedience is the
fear of God.

Of the fear of God in servants.
The fear of God in a Servant must have four things in it.

First, a not guiltiness of the common vices of servants, as swearing,
whooring, stealing, gaming, etc.

Secondly, they must fear Gods presence, even do their business faithfully,
not because the eye of their Master, but of God is upon them, this is one part
of their fear of God.

Thirdly, they must pray daily to God for their Masters, and the Family, and
for good success upon their own labors, this proved that Abraham's servant
feared God. Genesis 24.

Fourthly, they must be religious in the general duties of piety to God, as
well as in the particular duties of service to their Masters, they must so
serve men as they fear God also.

Uses. First for Servants, and then for Masters. Servants must learn to do
all their labor, fearing God, even that God, 1. That set them in that calling.
2. Whose eyes always behold how they discharge their duty in their calling,
and inasmuch as the fear of God is made the ground here of other duties, they
should learn to be the better servants to men because they fear God. Masters
also must learn, first, what servants to choose, not such only as will do
their work, but such as fear God also, and if they have failed in that, they
should labor now to beget and nurse the fear of God in the servants they
have, for Gods fear would make their servants more dutiful to them, besides
the reason why their servants fall to whoring, stealing, unthriftiness, etc.
is because the fear of God is not in them.

What masters must do to get the fear of God into their servants.
Quest: But what should Masters do that their servants might fear God?

Answ: Four things: First, they should pray and read the Scriptures in their
houses, and Chatechise their servants. Secondly, they should bring them to the
public preaching of the word. Thirdly, they should give them good example
themselves. Fourthly, they should restrain them from profane company, and
encourage them, and allow them liberty at convenient times to converse with
such as fear God.

Thus of the fear of God.

Verse 23.] The third thing required in their obedience is that they do it
heartily, in this Verse is the manner of the duty, and the inducement thereunto.

Hartilie] Ex animo. The obedience of Servants should be a hearty obedience,
the Apostle will not have only fear of God, but love of the master; their
obedience must begin at heart, not at hand or foot, if the heart be not with
their obedience, the master may have their labor (and that he has of the Ox)
but such servants lose their labor.

Quest: What is it to obey Ex animo?

Answ: It is to obey voluntarily, and out of a heart and affection rightly
ordered, but especially it is to obey out of a judgment well informed.

8 Objections of servants answered.
The use is therefore to urge them to do it; and here I would consider of the
objections of Servants, why they cannot obey Ex animo.

Object: 1 Bondage is against nature.

Solut. It is against nature as it was before the fall, but not as it is now
since the fall.

Object: 2 But Christ has made us free.

Sol: Free in soul in this life, not in body till your bodies be dissolved,
or till death.

Object: 3 But my Master is froward.

Sol: Yet thou must be subject: 1 Pet. 2.18.

Object: 4 But he does not only give ill words, but blows.

Solu: Perhaps it is needful, for a servant will not be corrected by words,
Proverb: 29.19.

Object: 5. But he corrects me unjustly.

Solu: First, who shall judge thus, shall servants themselves? Secondly, it is
acceptable if for well doing and for conscience thou endure to be buffeted,
etc. 1 Pet. 2.19.20.

Object: 6. But my master is not only a froward man, but a wicked man, and a
enemy of Christ.

Solu: Yet thou must honor and obey him willingly, 1 Timothy 6.1.2.

Object: 7. But I am an hired servant not a bought servant.

Solu: Indeed Masters have not that power over them, they have over bondslaues;
but yet all servants are here bound to obey heartily.

Object: 8 But unmeet things are required.

Solu: Discern things that differ, but yet obey in all things. All this
reprooues grudging, and slow and stubborn servants.

Whatsoever ye doe] Not only fair, easy, cleanly, and best sort of works
are to be done willingly, but all, or any kind of labor whatsoever, though
never so base or vile.

As to the Lord and not to men] Doctr: Servants in obeying their Masters, serve
the Lord.

The use is, both for instruction of servants, and for comfort: for
instruction, they must serve their masters as they would serve the Lord, with
all faithfulness, diligence, willingness, providence, conscience, etc.

For comfort and encouragement also is this doctrine, and that 3. ways.

First, here is a limitation, they must do no service to men that is against
the Lord.

Secondly, art thou a servant, care not for it, thou art Christ's freeman.

Thirdly, let not the baseness of thy work discourage thee, for in serving
thy master thou seruest God as well as if thou were preaching, or praying, etc.
When the Apostle says not unto men, we must understand, not principally or
only. Thus of the exhortations. The reasons follow.

VERSE. 24. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ.


In this verse Servants are persuaded to obedience, by a reason taken from the
retribution or reward of their service; and the matter of the verse is
comprehended in this Syllogism. What faithful men soever serve Christ, and
do their duty to him faithfully and cheerfully, shall receive of Christ the
reward of inheritance: but you Christian servants, when you perform your
obsequious obedience to your Masters, serve the Lord Christ, ergo, you shall
have the reward of the inheritance.

Knowing] Doctr: Servants may and ought to know, and be assured of their own
salvation.

Use is for confutation of Papists, and unsound men, that deny certainty of
salvation; for if servants that have not the greatest wits or knowledge, that
are employed about small businesses, that have not so much liberty, nor
learning as other men, etc. yet may be assured not by conjecture, or hope, but
by certain knowledge, by most undoubted faith: then what color of reason, can
there be, why other Christians, the Lords people, should be denied this
knowledge? and therefore in the second place it should teach us to make our
calling and election sure.

Reward] Doctr: The works even of servants shall be rewarded.

Use is for the comfort of servants, and for reproof of the unbelief, that is
many times in Gods children, doubting of Gods acceptance of their prayer and
holy endeavors; shall the base and secular works of men's servants be
rewarded, and the great works of Piety in Gods service not be regarded?

Of the Lord] God will be play master unto servants, and in that they are turned
over to God for payment, it implies that the most masters are careless and
unmerciful; and this they are not only in withholding convenient food and
raiment, but in sending their servants after long time of weary labor out of
their Families empty, and without means to live in the world.

Reward of inheritance.]

Two things are here affirmed of heaven: first, it is a reward, and so free.
Secondly, it is an inheritance, and so sure.

There are four uses may be made of this Doctrine. 1. We should much love,
esteem, and desire heaven, it is the reward of God. Princes give great gifts,
but Gods least gift must needs be glorious. 2. We should learn to be liberal
as God is liberal, give freely, give largely. 3. Here is a plain confutation
of the merit of heaven, for heaven is an inheritance; now the Son does not
inherit the Fathers Lands, he has not his Lands in measure according to his
deserts, for most an end, the Land is purchased before the Son be borne; much
less can we merit heaven, and the rather because we cannot allege so much as
this, we came out of the loins of the Father, seeing we are children but by
adoption.

For ye serve the Lord Christ] Doctr: Christ is the chief Lord, and therefore
masters should be well advised how they use their servants, for they are
Christ's servants; and servants should be careful how they obey their masters,
for they must account to this Steward.

Thus of the first maine reason.

VERSE. 25 But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong that he has
done: and there is no respect of persons.


Some take this twenty five verse to be a conclusion of the whole Doctrine
before concerning Familie-duties, as if he would signify, that he would not
have this doctrine of household government more contemned then the doctrine of
piety or righteousness; for whatsoever wife, husband, child, father, or
servant, shall do wrong in the neglect or breach of these commandments, for
the family, shall be sure to receive for the wrong he does, at Gods hand
without respect of persons.

Some understand the verse as a threatening to servants, if they do any way
wrong their masters.

But the commonest interpretation is meetest, viz: to understand it as a reason
taken from the certain vengeance of God against all Masters that wrong their
servants, and so is the second maine reason to urge their obedience.

In the Verse I likewise observe 7. Doctrines.

1 Masters must account to God for all the wrong they do to their servants in
word or deed.

2 All Masters shall be punished of God that do wrong, if they repent not,
though they were otherwise never so great, yea, though they were never so good
or righteous men, for if good men wrong their servants, God will require it,
and chasten them for that as well as for other sins.

3 The soueraignety of disposing an exact full and final vengeance be longs to
God only, men administer only a part or drop of it.

4 God will rise up in the defense of the poorest and meanest Christians to
right their wrongs.

5 Servants may not right their own wrongs and return words for words or
blows for blows, but commit that to God.

6 Servants must be subject not only to the courteous and just, but to the
froward and injurious masters.

Lastly, God is no respecter of persons, or faces, he cares no more for the
master then for the man, all are one in Christ Jesus, there is neither bond nor
free, Jew nor Grecian, rich nor poor, but Christ is all in all things, as is
before declared, Verse 11.

Thus of the duties of Servants.
Thus also of the Doctrine of the third CHAPTER.
THE LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF the fourth CHAPTER.
THE first verse of this Chapter belongs unto the special rules of the former
Chapter, Verse 1.
and contains the duty of masters, and the reason of it. Their duty in these
words, Ye masters do that which is just and equal to your servants. The
reason in these words, knowing that ye also have a master in heaven.

In the second verse, and so to the end of the chapter, is contained the
conclusion of the whole Epistle.

This conclusion contains 1. matter of exhortation to v. 7. 2. matter of
salutation, from v. 7. to the end.

The exhortation may be 3. ways considered. first, as it concerns prayer. v.
2, 3, 4. secondly, As it concerns wise conversation. v. 5. thirdly, As it
concerns godly communication. v. 6.

Concerning prayer, Verse 2.
two things are to be observed. 1. the manner 2. the matter: In the manner 3
things are required. 1. Perseverance. 2. Watchfulnes. 3. Thankfulness. v. 2.

In the matter consider, Verse 3.4.
1. The persons for whom. Praying also for us. 2. The things for which, that
God may open etc. These things are 1. briefly laid down, that God would open
to us a door of utterance. Or 2. more fully explicated, 1. By the subject, to
speak the mystery of Christ. 2. By a reason. For which I am in bands. 3. By
the end, that I may utter it as becomes me to speak, v. 3.4.

Wisdom of conversation is propounded with limitation to the respect of some
person, viz. them that are without, Verse 6.
v. 6.

In that part that concerns gracious communication there are two things. 1.
The precept, Let your speech etc. 2. The end of the precept, that ye may know
how etc. In the precept note first the properties of speech. 1. gracious, 2.
powdered with salt: secondly the continuance, viz. always.

Thus of the exhortation: The salutation follows, from v. 7. to the end, where
observe: 1 a narration as an entrance. 2. The salutations themselves.

Verse 7.8.
The narration is in verse 7.8.9. and it concerns first Tichicus v. 7.8. and
Onesimus v. 9.

Concerning Tichicus there is two things: First his praises, with relation to
all Christians, a beloved brother, or to Christ, a faithful minister, or to
Paul, a fellow-seruant. Secondly, the end of his mission, which is threefold:
First, to declare Paul's estate: Secondly, to know their estate: Thirdly, to
comfort their hearts.

Verse 9.
Concerning Onesimus, there is likewise, first his praises, in relation to all,
so he is a brother, faithful, beloved: relation to them, he is one of them:
Secondly, the end of his mission, is to make known, etc: v: 9.

The salutations follow, and they are first, signified: secondly, required: the
signified salutations are from verse 10: to 15: the other from verse 15: to the
end.

Verse 10.
The salutations signified are from six men, three of them Jews, viz:
Aristarchus, Marcus and Jesus, v: 10: 11: and three Gentiles, Epaphras, Lucas,
Demas v: 12: 13: 14*

Verse 11.
The Jews are described, first by their names: secondly, by their country, they
were of the circumcision: thirdly, by their praises, and so for what they were
to the whole Church, Laborers, fellow-workers to the Kingdom of God, or to
Paul, and so they were to his consolatian, v: 11.

The salutations of the Gentiles follow, Verse 13.
whereof the first is of Epaphras, who is described, first, by his office, a
servant of Christ; secondly, by his relation to them, he is one of you:
Thirdly, by his love to them, showed by his striving in prayer for them:
Fourthly, by his zeal not only for them, but the neighbor Churches, v. 13.

Thus of the salutations signified: Verse 15.16.
the salutations required follow: And those are either particular, verse 15:
16: 17: or general, verse 18.

The particular salutations concern either the Laodiceans verse 15:16: Verse
17.
or the Colossian Preacher: who is not only saluted, but exhorted, verse 17.

The general salutation has in it first a sign: Verse 18.
the salutation by the hand of me PAVL. Secondly, a request, remember my bands.
Thirdly, a love, grace be with you, Amen. verse 18.

THE METAPHRASE upon the fourth CHAPTER.
VERSE 1. YE masters do that which is just and equal unto your servants,
knowing that ye have also a Master in heaven.
MAsters also must do that which is just unto their servants, both for their
souls, and for their bodies also, in diet, wages, or correction. And that
which is equal both while they stay with them, in alowance of recreation, and
respect of their weakness and sickness, and when they go from them, not to
let them go away empty. Knowing that they themselves are Servants unto GOD who
is in heaven, and will call them to accounts.

Verse 2. Continue in pra^er, and watch in the same with thanksgiving.
To conclude I return again to all sorts of Christians and exhort them to
three things principally: the first is about prayer, the second is about their
carriage, the third about their speeches. For their prayers there are three
things exceeding necessary: perseverance, and christian watchfulnes, and
thanksgiving for the graces and blessings they do receive.

Verse 3. Praying also for us, that GOD may open unto us the door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of CHRIST: wherefore I am also in bonds.
Remembering us also in their prayers, that GOD would open unto us a door of
utterance with liberty, courage, power and good success to break open the
mystery of the Gospel of CHRIST, for which I am now in prison.

That I may so speak of those dreadful secrets, that I no way derogate from
the majesty of them, Verse 4. That I may utter it as it becomes me to speak.
or that trust that is committed to me, or expected from me. Thus of what I
would specially commend to you about prayer.

Now for your carriage; Verse 5. Walk wisely toward them that are without and
redeem the time.
I would have you especially look to your selves in respect of your behavior
before or amongst the wicked, who are not of GODS family and Strangers from
the life of GOD: it were an admirable thing, to carry your selves in a wise and
discreet manner toward them. Hence and by all other ways showing your selves
to be skillful Merchants in redeeming the time which has been lost. Verse 6.
Let your speech be gracious always, and poudred with salt, that ye may know
how to answer every man.

Verse 7. All my state shall Tichicus declare unto you, who is a beloved
brother and faithful Minister and fellow servant in the LORD.

Verse 8. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know
your estate, and comfort your hearts.

Verse 9. With On^simus a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you,
they shall make known unto you all things which are done here.

Verse 10. Aristarchus my prison-fellow saluteth you, and Marcus, Barnabas
sisters son, touching whom ye received commandments. If he come unto you,
receive him.

Verse 11. And Jesus which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision.
These only are my worke-fellowes unto the kingdom of GOD, which have been
unto my consolation.

Verse 12. Epaphras the servant of CHRIST which is one of you, saluteth you,
and always strives for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and full in
all the will of GOD.




And for your communication, let it be of good and holy things, not offensive
or slanderous or filthy: and powdered with the salt of discretion and
mortification, and thus let it be always and in all companies, that ye may
speak fitly unto every man and to his place and the occasion.

I have sent over Tychicus to declare unto you my whole estate, who is both a
godly man well respected and a painful Minister, that ioynes with us in GODS
works.

And withal I send him to know how you do, and to comfort you by all means,
with hearty consolations.

And with him I have sent Onesimus, who is now a godly man truly sincere and
well respected, even he that was borne or brought up amongst you. These two
will relate all things to you.

I have also diverse commendations to deliver to you, some from some Jews,
others from Gentiles. Of the first sort are Aristarchus, and Marcus, and Jesus.
Aristarchus is my prison fellow. Marcus is Barnabas sisters son, and it is he
concerning whom heretofore you received some aduertisements not to admit him,
but now if he come unto you, receive him.

Jesus by his good carriage has gotten himself the surname of Just. These
three are Jews. And indeed the only men that constantly hold out to help
forward the kingdom of GOD: they are men in whom I am much comforted.

Those of the Gentiles that desire to be remembered to you, are Epaphras, Luke,
and Demas. Epaphras is a worthy Servant of CHRIST, and the dearer ought he to
be to you, because he is one of you: he strives mightily for you in all sorts
of prayers being importunate with God, that you might hold out without
declining, and be more and more complete and full in the knowledge and practice
of the whole will of GOD.

Verse 13. For I bear him record that he has a great zeal for you and them
that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.

Verse 14. Luke the beloved Phisician and Demas greet you.

Verse 15. Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the
Church which is in his house.

Verse 16. And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause it to be read also
in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that you likewise read the Epistle from
Laodicea.

Verse 17. And I say to Archippus take heed to the ministry which thou have
received in the LORD that thou fulfill it.

Verse 18. The salutation by the hand of me Paul, remember my bonds, grace be
with you, Amen.


For I bear him witness, that he is inflamed with great affection both for you
and them of Laodicea and Hierapolis

Luke also a Physician both godly and greatly respected saluteth you, and Demas.

I pray you also to remember my salutations to the brethren of Laodicea:
especially to Nymphas and that religious family, who for their piety and good
order, are as it were a little Church.

And when this Epistle has been publicly red of you, send it to the Church of
Laodicea to be red there also, together with that letter which was sent to me
from Laodicea.

Commend me also to Archippus your Preacher, and charge him to take heed he do
not his work by halues, but as he has received his commission from the LORD,
so let him fulfill it, both by constancy and painfulnesse, and powerfulness
of preaching. I join also my own salutation, which is written with mine own
hand, and not by my scribe. I pray forget me not in this restraint. The grace
of GOD as the only fair portion, be now and always with you. And my
confident hope is, so it will.

CERTAIN OF THE choicest and chiefest points handled in the fourth CHAPTER.
HOw Masters do that which is just. fol. 157. Masters do unequally five
ways. 158. Of continuance in prayer, and of such as fall away from the
affections and practice of prayer, with the inconveniences of it. 159.
Objections about prayer answered. 160. Of watching in prayer. 160. The door of
utterance has five things in it. 162. Five things stops the mouths of Gods
Ministers. 163. Christ is a mystery to six sorts of men. 163. Christ a
mystery five ways. 164. The Gospel hidden five ways. 164. How Ministers
must preach. 165. How the people must hear. 165. What it is to walk wisely.
166. He walks surely that observes five rules. 166. Who are without. 167. The
rules of answering in respect of wicked men. 167. Six things observed
concerning redeeming the time. 168. Four consideration, of the opportunity of
time. 168. What time is lost: and how time may be bought again: and how time
must be used when it is bought. 169. Motives to redeem time. 170. Observations
concerning gracious speech. 171. The reasons why some men cannot leave their
evil words. 172. What they should do to get victory. 172. Perseverance in
good words as well as good works. 173. Six things concerning answering
unbelievers. 173. Seven things required in answering well. 173. Four things
concerning answering believers. 173. Six rules about receiving one another.
178. Whether the name of Jesus may be given to any man. 179 Eight things to
win the reputation of just men. 179. What hearers are like to fall away. 180.
A threefold kingdom of God. 180. The privileges of the kingdom of grace. 181.
Six signs to know the subjects of Christ's kingdom. 181. How men may get into
the kingdom of God. 182. Why many hearers have no more comfort in hearing.
183. Who are Christ's servants. 184. The force of prayer. 185. Sorts of prayer.
185 What striving in prayer imports. 186. Eight things we must fight against in
prayer. 186. Rules for prayer. 187. The misery of such as fall away. 188. The
causes of falling away. 188. How many ways Christians may be said to be
perfect. 189. What we must do to be perfect. 189. The araignment of the civil
honest man. 190.191.192. Twelve sorts of wrong zeal. 194. Six things in true
zeal. 194. Four sorts of men reproved about Physic. 195. Three rules for
our practice concerning such as we suspect in profession. 196. A religious
family is a little Church. 197. Four orders in the family. 197. Of reading
the Scriptures. 198. The profit of reading Scripture. and the causes why many
profit not. 198. Painful Preachers many times grow idle. 199. How many ways
men remember the bonds of others. 202. Of the authority of the Postscript.
202.
CHAPTER IIII.
VERSE I. Ye masters do that which is just and equal unto your servants,
knowing that ye have also a master in heaven.


THis verse belongs unto the doctrine of household government, and contains, 1.
the duty of masters, 2. the reason, knowing, etc.

In the duty, 1. the parties charged, ( ye masters) 2. the duty required, (
do that which is just and equal) 3. the persons to whom it is to be
performed, ( unto your servants.)

Masters. All masters are charged, without difference, yea the wife as well as
the husband by a Synechdoche, the greatest as well as the meanest, and the
poorest must deal justly as well as they that have more means, etc.

Do that which is just and equal.

Doctrine from the coherence: That God that promises eternal things, will
provide temporal things also. In the former chapter God promised the reward of
inheritance to servants: here he takes order for their well being in the
world, charging masters to see that they be used justly and equally.

Just. How masters do that which is just.
] Masters must do justly, and show it, 1. generally, by not requiring unjust
things of them, and by choosing such servants as are just into the family,
Psalm. 101.6.
lest by bringing in lewd servants the rest be infected. For if it be a great
injustice to bring in an infectious servant, that has the plague upon his
body, and to appoint him to work among the rest of his servants that are free
from the disease, then it is much more unjust to bring in lewd servants, that
have the plague sore of sin running upon them: for the presence, and
counsel, and example of lewd sinners, is of more power to infect a sound
soul, than is a plaguie man to poison the sound body of others. 2. More
particularly, masters must do that which is just, 1. to the souls. 2. to the
bodies of their servants. They must deal justly with their souls, by helping
them to grace if it be possible, but at least by bringing them to the public
means of grace, and by private training of them up in Gods fear, by prayer
and instruction. The justice they owe unto their body may be referred unto
three heads: For either it concerns their maintenance, and so they must give
them their portion of Pro. 31.15.
food convenient for them; or it concerns their wages, and so they must give
the wages proportionable to their work, and that in due time, and without
defrauding them of any part of it; or it concerns their punishment, and so the
justice of the master must be showed, both in this, that he will punish their
open disorders, as also that he will do it with instruction, moderation, and
to profit them and the whole family.

Masters do unequally 7. ways.
Equal.] Masters must not only deal justly, but they must deal equally with
their servants. And masters deal unequally many ways.

1 When they require inconvenient things: for though the servant must obey, yet
the master sins in requiring unequal things. 2 When they impose more work
than they have strength to do. 3 When they turn them away when they are
sick: for it is equal that as thou have had their labor when they were well,
so thou should keep them when they are sick. 4 When they restrain them of
liberty for their souls. If thou have the work of their bodies, it is equal
that thou take care for their souls: and if they serve thee six days, it is
very equal thou should proclaim liberty to them to do Gods work on the
Sabbath day. 5 When they restrain and withold their meat and wages. 6 When
they send them out of their service empty, after many years bondage, and not
provide that they may have some means to live afterward.
To conclude, it is not equal for the master to hear every word that men say
of his servants Eccles. 7.23.
, nor is it meet they should bring up their servants delicately Prou. 27.23.
, nor yet that they should leave their callings and the whole care of their
business to their servants, but they ought diligently to know the state of the
herds themselves Prou. 27.23.
.

Thus of the duty.

The reason follows.

Knowing that ye have also a master in heaven.

Here are four doctrines to be observed.

1 That there is no master, but he is a servant; and therefore as he would
require his work to be done by his servant, so he should be careful himself
to do Gods work, to whom he is a servant. 2 That Gods majesty and man's
authority may well stand together: Christ and Caesar can well agree: Man's
government in a family, and Gods government in the world, are not opposite one
to the other. 3 Ignorance of God, and the accounts must be made to God, is the
cause of that security, insolency, and cruelty that is in men. That it is
ill to use servants ill, it will be required if they be wronged.
Thus of the reason.

Verse 2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving.

In this verse, with those that follow to the end of the chapter, is contained
the conclusion of the whole Epistle.

This conclusion contains matter of exhortation to verse 7. and matter of
salutation verse 7. to the end.

The exhortation may be three ways considered.

1 As it concerns prayer, ver. 2.3.4. 2 As it concerns wise conversation,
ver. 5. 3 And as it concerns godly communication, ver. 6.
Concerning prayer, two things are to be observed.

1 How we must pray, or the manner. 2 For what, or the matter.
In the manner three things are required: 1. perseverance, 2. watchfulness, 3.
thankfulness, ver. 2.

In the matter is further added, 1. the persons for whom, praying also for us:
2. the things for which, that God may open, etc. ver. 3.4.

Continue in prayer. Of continuance in prayer.
The doctrines implied in these words are four.

1 That our mortal condition is a condition of singular vanity, in that the
best of Gods servants are ever wanting something. 2 That long prayer of it
self is not blame-worthie. Christ continued all night in prayer. 3 That prayer
is of perpetual use in the life of a Christian. 4 That to pray by fits is not
Gods ordinance, neither that he requires, nor that he will accept.
The doctrine expressed in these words is threefold.

1 That we must hold out and pray still, (...).
and never give over prayer till we give up our souls into Gods hands. 2 That
we must pray upon all occasions, for health, wealth, success in our calling,
preservation of our estates, the blessing of God upon the word, Sacraments,
reading, etc. for pardon of sin, salvation of our souls, ever stretching out
our desires to all the opportunities and callings to prayer. 3 We must be
instant in prayer, set all aside for prayer, wait upon it, for so the word is
rendered, to wait, Act. 10.7.
Use. Is first for reproof of such wretched men as pray not at all, Job 21.14.
Secondly, Of such as fall away from the affection and practice of prayer.
for reproof of such as make apostacy from the affections and practice of
prayer: and this is a fault in carnal men that fall from temporary faith; or
in Gods children, that by the deceitfulness of sin and Satan, give over
their affections and careful diligence in prayer. For the first sort, we must
know, that when such men lose their joy and delight in the word, they lose also
their care in prayer: but they must know they do it not without singular
danger; for now that hearing and prayer are laid aside, seven devils worse than
that one cast out by acknowledgement, may enter in: yea that they may fall from
these affections into a reprobate sense; yea, which is worst, they are in
danger of the sin against the holy Ghost, and the more if they grow to hate
prayer and despite Gods grace in his children: and therefore they should be
advised with all speed to repent with sound sorrow, and beseech God to forgive
them, if it be possible, the thoughts of their hearts. And as for such of Gods
children as are decayed and fallen away from the power and practice of prayer,
they should be wakened and remember themselves, both by considering the hurt
they bring upon themselves, and the remedies for their recovery The hurts
befallen them by this apostacy are such as these. The hurts that follow the
apostacy from the power and practice of prayer.
1. The loss of the comforts of the sweet presence of God. 2. They put on a
kind of image of the old Adam again, they look as if they were no better
than carnal people, they return in many things to the filthiness they had
forsaken, they form themselves to the courses of carnal wisdom, and too much
like the world and the sinful profits and pleasures of it. 3. Faith and love
are more and more enfeebled, less sense of Gods presence, and less love to
Gods children. 4. They bring upon themselves a tedious dislike of the means of
salvation, besides the danger of many temporal judgments.

For remedy of this great inconvenience, they must do three things.

1 They must purge by godly sorrow and fasting. 2. They must labor to reduce
themselves unto an holy order of living, both by a daily course of examination
by the Law, and also by the consecration of themselves to the constant and
orderly practice of all Christian duties. 3. They must by daily importunity
beseech God to give them again the words and affection of prayer: and all this
they should do the more speedily, because if by long dwelling in apostacy
they provoke God, though by repentance they recover themselves again, yet the
ioies of Gods spirit, or the great measure of them, may be lost, so as they
shall never recover the joy of their salvation all their days.

Objections about prayer answered.
3. This Doctrine may serve for encouragement to many of Gods poor servants,
against all the doubts and fears of their own hearts, these need only better
information, for their discouragements arise from mistakings, as may appear by
their objections.

Object. I have much hardness of heart before I go to prayer.

Sol. 1. So had David in the entrance into many of his Psalms, yet he
recouereth and exulteth exceedingly before the end.

2. Hardness of heart that is felt and mourned for, is no hindrance to the
success of prayer.

3. Therefore thou have more need to pray, for prayer is as a fire that melts
the leaden hearts of men.

Object. I want words when I come to pray.

Sol. 1. Go to Christ, and beseech him to teach thee to pray, and pray God to
give thee words that has commanded thee to take unto thee words Luke 11. Hos.
14.3.
.

2. Be more in the examination of thy heart and life by the law.

3. The Spirit helps our infirmities, when (for words) we know not how to pray
as we ought Romans 8.26.
.

4 The foundation of God remains sure, and is sealed; if thou but name the
name of the Lord 2. Tim. 2.20.
, with uprightness, desiring and resolving to depart from iniquity, he may
have an infallible seal of salvation, that but names the name of God in
prayer as the word is in the original.

(...).
Object. But I doubt of audience.

Sol. 1. Consider Gods nature, commandment, promise; his nature, he is a God
that hears prayers Psalm. 95.2.
, his commandment, for he as peremptorily gives his commandments to pray, as
he does any of the ten Commandments, and therefore will certainly accept of
what he so earnestly commands; his promises also are to be collected and
considered as they lie scattered in several Scriptures: He will be near unto
all that call upon him in truth. And his ears are open to the prayers of the
righteous etc. Only be thou careful that thou lie not in any presumptuous
sin, and that thou turn not away thine ear from hearing the law, and that
thou allow not thine own heart in wrath o^ doubting, for these and such like
are great lets of Audience.

Object. I have prayed long and often, and yet I am not heard.

Sol. 1. God sometimes does of purpose defer to grant, that so he might
compel them to continue to pray.

2. Consider the things thou praiest for, whether they be such things as God
will ever grant; For if we ask amiss, or only for fleshly things, or to
spend upon their lusts God will never hear Iam. 4.1.2.3.
.

3. God hears diverse ways, for sometimes he grants not what is asked, but
gives what is answerable, to it or better, so he heard Christ Heb. 5.7.

Thus of continuance in Prayer.

Watching in the same.

Of watching in prayer.
D. Watching is needful unto prayer Mat. 26. Luke. 21.36. 1. Pet. 4.8.
, for explication whereof we must know that watching is taken 2. ways, either
literally or metaphorically; Literally and so is either a Judgment or a
Duty, watching as a judgment, is when God brings upon wicked men the terrors
of the night, or for chastisement of his servants, holds their eyes waking as a
duty, watching, is a voluntary restraining of our eyes from sleep, and
spending of the whole or part, of the night in holy imploiments. Thus the
Church kept the night of the Passover holy, Exodus 12.42. Thus Christ watched
Math. 14.23.25. Thus Paul 2. Cor. 11.23. Thus David Psalm. 139.18. And this
watching used by Gods Children was either ordinary or extraordinary.
Ordinary watching is nothing but a sober use of sleep, in which we ought to
be moderate as well as in eating and drinking. Extraordinarily Gods Children
have been used to watch either upon occasion of great Judgments Lam. 2.19.
Isay. 26.9. Psalm. 102.7. Mark. 14.38.
, or for preparation to some great business. Thus Christ would spend whole
nights in prayer; thus he watched before his passion. Or when they have lost
the benefit of Christ's presence, Cant. 3.1. and all this they have done with
great success, for their reins have taught them in the night Psalm. 16.7.
and their souls have been full as with marrow Psalm. 63.5.6.
* But we may justly complain and take up the words in Job 35.10. But none
says where is God that made me, even the God that gives songs in the night?

But it is spiritual watchfulness that is here specially required, and it is
nothing else but a Christian heedfulnesse, observation, and consideration, both
for prevention of evil, and embracing of the means, ways and oportunities of
good. And thus we must watch, first our own hearts, to spy out where any
spot of spiritual leprosy in thoughts or affections breaks out, to heal it
in time. Secondly the practices of Satan, that we be not ensnared with his
spiritual baits and methods. Thirdly the ways of God: if any mercy appear,
or fountain of grace open, to snatch up our incense, and run presently to
Gods Altar, and offer with our sacrifice the calves of our lips; or if any
threatening arrest us or judgment befall us, to make our peace speedily and
fly from the anger to come. Fourthly, the coming of Christ either by death or
judgment, specially we should watch upon whom the ends of the world are come
Luke 21.36.
, But that which is here principally meant, is watching unto prayer, and thus
we had need to watch, 1. to the means to get ability to pray. 2. To the
opportunity and occasions of prayer. 3. To the success of it, to take notice
of Gods answer, and our speeding, waiting upon God till he give a blessing, or
if God hide himself to sue out an atonement in Christ.

Thus of Watching.

With thanksgiving.

D. 1. When we have any suites to God for what we want, we must carefully
remember to give thanks, for mercies received: and particularly for all Gods
mercies in prayer Phil. 4.7. 1. These. 5.16.17.
.

2. In that the Apostle so often urges the duty of thanksgiving, it shows
that naturally we are exceeding unthankful for the mercies of God, and that
few of us are careful to yield God constantly this sacrifice.

3. There are diverse kinds of thanksgiving, or diverse ways of thanking God.
For men give thanks,

1. By receiving the Eucharist which is called the cup of blessing (...) 1.
Cor. 10.16. Psalm. 50. vlt.
.

2. By obedience of life, for he that will truly offer praise unto God must
order his ways aright.

3 By opening our lips to sound forth his praise, and thus Gods name is
honored, both by the thanks or praise

1. Of celebration when we tell of Gods mercies to others.

2. Of invocation when we speak of Gods praises to God himself in prayer,
this is here specially meant, and of this I have entreated before at several
times, out of other places of this Epistle.

Thus much of the manner how we must pray, The matter follows, and first of
the persons for whom we must pray.

Praying also for us.

In General I observe three things, 1. That we ought to pray one for an
other. 2. That one great means, to get a large heart in prayer, and the
perseverance in the practice of it, is to endeavor after tender and
affectionate desires to help others by prayer. 3. That Christians should
desire the prayers of others, as carnal men make use of their friends to get
their help for wealth, offices etc. So should Christians improve their
interest in the affections of their friends by seeking prayer of them.

Also] It is (...) together, and so notes that it is not enough to pray for
others but we must pray with others, and mutually help one another by faith,
knowledge and prayer.

For vs] Here I observe 4. things.

1. That the greatest in the Church need the prayers of the meanest. 2 That in
hearing prayer God is no accepter of persons, he is as well willing to hear the
Colossians prayers for Paul, as hear Paul pray for the Collossians. 3. It is
the duty of the people to pray for their ministers. Note
4 It is to be observed, That he wishes them to pray for other Preachers as well
as for himself, there may be a spiritual pride in desiring the prayers of
others, he did not envy that others should have room in the hearts of others
as well as he.
Thus of the persons for whom.

The things for which are two ways to be considered, 1. As it is briefly laid
down. 2. As it is more largely explicated.

It is laid down or propounded in these words that God would open to us a
door of utterance, and is explicated in these words that follow, by the
subject, reason and end.

A door of vtterance] There are diverse doors in the Scripture, in the
metaphorical acceptance of the word. There is the door 1. Of admission, into
the functions of the Church, Ioh. 10 1. 2. Of life, and the door of life is
the womb of the mother, Job. 3.10. 3. Of protection, and so to be without
doors and bars is to be without defense and protection, Ier. 49.31. 4. Of
grace and regeneration, Ioh. 10.7.9. Psalm. 24. vlt. Revel. 3.8. 5. Of death and
judgment, Job. 38.17. Act. 5 9. Iam. 5.9. 6. Of glory, Revel. 21.12.


Lastly there is a door of gifts as of knowledge Revel. 4.1. Prou. 8.33. Of
faith Act. 14.27. Of utterance, 1. Cor. 16.9. So here the door of utterance
comprehends 5. things. 1. Liberty and free passage to preach the G^spell* 2.
Opportunity. 3. Power of preaching. 4. Courage and boldness, with full vent to
rebuke men's sins, and reveal all Gods counsels without fear of any man's
face. 5. Success, even such utterance as will open a door into the hearts of
the hearers, so that to pray for the opening of the door of utterance, is to
pray for liberty, opportunity, power, courage and success.

Use. Is first for ministers and then for the people; Ministers may see here
what it is that specially makes a happy Pastor, not living countenance of great
men etc. but liberty, courage, power etc. And it greatly taxes four sorts of
Ministers. 1. Dumb Ministers, that utter nothing. 2. Fantastical Ministers
that utter the falsehood of their own brains, that speak their own dreams,
and from the vanity of their own hearts, and seek out for the people only
pleasing things, dawbing with untempered mortar. 3. Idle Ministers, that utter
not all Gods counsel, for matter or for time, speak but seldom to the
people, preach not in season and out of season. 4. Cold Ministers that seek
not the power of preaching, strive not to approve themselves in the sight of
God and to the conscience of men.

The people also should make conscience of their duty, they may learn from
hence, what to pray for, and should daily with importunity, beseech God to give
this wide door of utterance to their Teachers.

Before I pass from the matter he prays for, I must note a doctrine lies
secretly lodged within the same, we may find in the end of this verse, that
the Apostle was in prison, and yet he does not desire to have the door of the
prison open, but the door of his heart open to utter the mystery of Christ,
Noting that it is a greater want, to want the liberty of his ministry, in
respect of utterance, then it is to want the liberty of his body in respect of
the prison. We should take notice of this for diverse uses: 1. For
thankfulness, if there be a door of utterance opened in Gods house. 2. For
prevention of all things (as much as lies in us) that might stop the mouths
of Gods faithful ministers. There are five things that stop the mouths of
ministers in general: Five things stop the mouths of Gods ministers.
1 Ignorance and presumptuous sins in the ministers themselves; for polluted
lips are no lips of utterance: the lips of the minister should be touched with
the coals of knowledge, zeal, and mortification. 2. The sins of the people
many times put the Teachers to silence: the rebellion of the house of Israel
made Ezechiel dumb, that he could not preach, Ezech. 3.26.24.27. 3. The
violence of persecutors preuailes often to shut the wide and effectual doors
of powerful preaching, 1. Cor. 16.9. and therefore we should pray that God
would deliver his faithful ministers from unreasonable and absurd men, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. 4. Discouragement and fear silence many a minister in respect of
the life and power of preaching, 1. Cor. 16.9.12. Heb. 13.17. Lastly, humane
wisdom not only lets the people from the profit of hearing, but likewise it
lets the minister from the power of preaching.

God would.]

Doct. 1. The hearts of ministers, yea of the best ministers, are naturally
shut; they have no gift to profit withal, but they have received it: and who
is sufficient of himself for these things?

Doct. 2. It Is God only that opens unto men the door of utterance; it is he that
makes the heart of the Priest fat, and creates the fruit of the lips to be
peace: he opens, and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man opens: and
it should teach them less to fear men and their rebukes, and the less to
care for the rage of the oppressor: for if he will give liberty, who can
restrain it? and if he will silence, who can enlarge?

Even unto us.] This manner of speech notes either his humility, or his
restraint in prison, or the difficulty of utterance. His humility it may note
in this sense, that howsoever he has been a blasphemer, or persecuter, etc.
yet that God would be pleased to honor him and his work so much, as give
utterance even to him and such as he is. His restraint in prison it may import
also, and so his desire is they should not pray only for ministers that were
at large, and enioied peace, but also even for him and such others as were in
prison; for a godly Preacher will not be idle, no not if he come into prison:
and thus also it notes, that the wisest men of themselves are not able to teach
with power and profit the simplest and meanest men; an Apostle cannot teach a
prisoner, without Gods special aid and blessing. These words may note also the
difficulty of utterance, as if he should say, you had need to pray not only
for ordinary, but extraordinary ministers.

Thus of the thing prayed for, as it is briefly propounded. Secondly, it is
enlarged, 1. by the subject, 2. by a reason, 3. by the end.

The subject of the utterance is the mystery of Christ.

To speak the mystery of Christ. How Christ is a mystery to 6. sorts of men.
] Christ is a mystery to the Gentiles, to the Jews, to Heretics, to
Papists, to carnal men, yea to godly men. It is a mystery to the Gentile that
there should be a Savior: To the Jews, that salvation should be in the
Carpenters son: To the Papists, that he should be the Savior alone: To the
Heretics, that he should be a Savior in both natures: To the carnal man,
that he should be a Savior in particular to him: And to the godly man, that he
should be such a Savior. Christ a mystery 5 ways.


But to express this more particularly, Christ is a mystery five ways: for
there are mysteries 1 In the person of Christ: for what tongue can describe the
supercelestiall union of his natures, or the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, or the fullness of the Godhead that dwells in him bodily? 2 In his
life and death. The world could not comprehend the books that might be made of
the wonders of his birth, life, and death. We may see in that that is written
what to adore; for in this world a perfect knowledge we shall never attain. 3
In his body, which is the Church: for who can declare his generation? or
express the secrets of his power and presence, in filling her, who himself is
her fullness, and fills all in all things? or describe the manner of the
union between Christ and his members? Is not this a great mystery? 4 In the
Sacraments of Christ: The holy invisible presence of God is a mystery: the
communion of the body and blood of Christ, not locally or by contact, and yet
truly, is a mystery: the seal of the holy spirit of promise upon the hearts
of believers, in the due use of the Sacraments, is a mystery. The spiritual
nourishment that comes to the soul by such secret and hidden passages
inuisibly, is a great mystery. 5 In the Gospel of Christ. And by the mystery
of Christ in this place I think is meant the Gospel of Christ: and it is
called a mystery because of the hiding of it. If you ask me where the Gospel
has been hidden; I must answer, it has been hidden, The Gospel hidden five
ways.
1. in the breast of God from all eternity: 2. in the shadows and types of
the ceremonial Law, which was the Jews Gospel: 3. in the treasury of holy
Scriptures: 4 in the person, obedience, and passion of Christ, who was the
substance of the Mosaicall Ceremonies, and the quintessence of all Evangelical
doctrine: 5. in the hearts of Christians.


If you ask me from whom it was hidden; I answer, not from the elect, for God
by preaching revealed it unto them in due time; but from wicked men, but with
great difference: The Gospel hidden from the wicked diversely.
for to some there is no Gospel at all given, as to the Gentile; to some not
given plainly, as in those congregations of Israel, to whom this evangelical
loaf is not divided, though in the whole lump it be given: to some not given
in the power of it, for though they hear the preaching, yet by reason of
mixtures, carnal wisdom, or ignorance, and confusednesse in the Teachers,
there is little power in it: to some not given internally, though externally
they have means in the plenty and power of it.

If you yet ask me what causes this hiding of the Gospel from such as live
even in the light of it; I answer, it is either Why wicked men cannot see the
Gospel.
1 The veil of their own ignorance. 2 The powerful working of the God of this
world to blind them, 2. Corinthians. 4.4. 3 The custom in sin, and customarie
abuse of pleasures and profits. 4 The secret judgment of God, either because
he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, or because men have been
touched and reject Gods call in the day of salvation, or because they have
presumptuously abused Gods promises, to make them ba^ds for sin.


The uses follow. Is the Gospel a mystery? it should teach us

1 To esteem Gods ministers, seeing they are dispensers of Gods mysteries, 1.
Cor. 4.2 2 To strive by all means to see into this secret, accounting it our
wisdom and understanding, to gain the open knowledge of this secret doctrine,
Ephesians. 1. 8.9. but because every vessel is not meet to bear this treasure, we
should get a pure conscience to carry this mystery of faith in, 1. Tim. 3.9.
3 To account our ears blessed if they hear, and our eyes blessed if they see:
(...).
it is a great gift of God to know the mystery or secrets of this Kingdom,
Mat. 13.11. etc. 4. In compassion to the souls of many thousands in Israel,
to pray for utterance to publish more powerfully, not the common things but the
secrets of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.19. there is need not of more preaching but of
more powerful preaching.
For which even I am in bondes] either at Ephesus as Dionisius thinks, or at
Rome as Caietan and others think, Here are 5. things to be observed.

1. That the truth of the Gospel ought to be so dear unto us, that we should
be content to suffer for it. 2 We should be willing to suffer, the extremest
and basest things, as here even bond, and therefore much more the speaking
against of sinners. 3. As any Ministers are more faithful, they are in more
danger, to be troubled and molested. 4 Crosses should inflame us so much the
more to sincerity, he is more eager after utterance, now that he is in bonds.
5. The cause not the suffering makes the Martyr, not every one in bonds is a
Martyr, but when it is for the Gospel, men may suffer for their indiscretion
and sin.
Verse. 4. That I may utter it as it becomes me to speak.


That I may utter it] (...) That I may manifest it.

D. Sound preaching is the manifesting of the mystery of Christ, this Doctrine
as it shows the profit we may get by preaching so it maintains plain
teaching, and reproues such as would be Doctors of the law, and yet understand
not of what they speak, they darken the texts they speak of.

It (...)] D. As good not preach as not preach the Gospel of Christ, we do
nothing if our people understand not the mystery of Christ, but remain still
ignorant of the favor of God in Christ.

As it becomes me to speak.]

D. It is not enough to preach, but we must so preach as becomes the mystery
of Christ, How Ministers must preach.
and to preach so is to preach with power 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. with instance and all
watchfulness 2. Tim. 4.2.3.5. with patience and all constancy with fear and
fasting 1. Cor. 4.9.2. Cor. 6.4.2. Cor. 4.8. with assurance of Doctrine 2. Cor.
4.13. with all willingness, 1 Cor. 9.16.17. with all faithfulness, 1. Cor.
42. with all zeal knowing the terror of the Lord, persuading, exhorting,
beseeching, 2. Cor. 5.11. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. aprouing themselves in the sight of
God, to the conscience of the hearers, 2. Cor. 2.17. and 4.1.2. with all holy,
just, and unblameable behavior, 1. These. 2.11.

Thus do not they preach that are Neophites, young Scholars, rash, scandalous,
or dote about questions, and logomachios, or fables and vain disputations
which breed strife, and questions rather then godly edifying, nor they that
come with wisdom of words and the enticing speech of man's eloquence, 1. Cor.
1.11. and 2.1.4.

All this may teach Ministers by reading, prayer, and preparation to be with
their God, before they come to speak to Gods people, it may terrify careless
Ministers, woe unto thee if either thou preach not, or not as becomes the
mystery of Christ, 1. Cor. 9.16. It may comfort good Ministers, for if God
stand upon it to have his work thus done, he will certainly pay them their
wages, yea if Israel should not be gathered yet their wages should be with God,
and their work before him.

Lastly if Ministers must preach as becomes the mystery of Christ, How the
people must hear.
the people must hear as becomes the mystery of Christ, with attention,
constancy, patience, reverence, in much affliction, as the word of God, with
sincerity, hungring appetite, and fruitfulness.

Thus of the first branch of the exhortation.

Verse. 5. Walk wisely toward them that are without and redeem the time.


These words are the second part of the exhortation, and concern wise
conversation.

Walke] This is a metaphor borrowed from travelers, and notes both action and
progress; hearing, and talking, and commending of God; servants will not serve
turn, but we must both practice and proceed.

There is a double race in the life of a man, one natural, the other
voluntary, the one is the race of life, the other is the race of holy life, in
the first men must run whether they will or no, and come to the end of it:
But the other will not be dispatched without great endeavor and constancy. As
the most of us order the matter, the natural race of life is almost run out,
before we once enter the lists of walking in the race of holy life, yea Gods
children are so apt to sleep and sit still and tire, that they need to be
excited and called upon and encouraged in their race.

Walk (...)] A Christian is a peripateticke, so is Christ, so is the Devil,
so are Heretics, so are Apostataes, so are worldly men, Christ walks in the
midst Revel. 2.1. The Devil walks in the circumference round about Job. 1.
his motion is circular, and therefore fraudulent, and dangerous. The Apostata
walke^ backward. The Heretic walks out on the right hand, the worldly man
walks on the left hand, enticed out of the way by worldly profits, pleasures,
and lusts, Only the true Christian walks forward.

Wisely] Wisdom of conversation must be considered two ways, 1. Generally.
2. With limitation to the respect of them that are without.

What it is to walk wisely.
In general to walk wisely has in it 4. things.

1. To walk wisely is to walk orderly, and the order of conversation has in
it 2. things* 1. A due respect of the precedencie of things so as we must
first provide for heaven, and then for the earth, first learn to die and then
to live, first serve God and then our selves, and other men; first care for the
soul and then for the body, first seek the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, and then outward things.

2. It has in it a careful attendance to our calling with diligence, and
constancy, (...)
and patience 1. Cor. 7.17. 1 Thessalonians. 4 11.12. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.11. to walk
inordinately is to walk unwisely.

2. To walk wisely is to walk speedily, walk in the light while you have the
light, loose no opportunity, delay no work in harvest, Job. 12.35.

3. To walk wisely is to walk uprightly and that for matter in the newnes of
life Romans 6.4. And for manner exactly, precisely, circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15.16.

4. To walk wisely is to walk surely, and he walks surely.

He walks surely that observes 5. rules.
1 That will live where he may have means for his soul, as well as his body,
he will not live in darkness, but desires to be where he may have the
greatest light.

2. That makes the word the rule of his actions, and is sure of warrant from
the Scripture for what he does Deuteronomy. 4.5.6. this is to walk in the law, Psalm.
119.1. according to the rule Gal 6.16.

3. That will not live under any known threatening, will not venture to go on
with wrath hanging over his head, he is none of those fools, that will not
understand though the foundations of the earth be moved Psalm. 82.5.

4. That walks by faith and not by sight 2. Cor. 5.7. trusts not in things
that may be seen, which are mutable, but labors to be clothed with the
garments of Christ's righteousness, he walks not wisely that walks nakedly,
Revel. 16 15. And for manner of assurance, he that is a wise man when he sees
how careful the men of the world are to make every thing sure, and what
stirs there are for certainties in the things of the earth, he will not rest
in probabilities for his soul, or in common hopes or presumptions, but will
strive by all means to make his calling and election sure, he will not be led
in a fools paradise, and stand to the venture of his soul upon carnal
conjectures Pro. 24.5.

5 That walks in the way of the lest and not of the most, he will not be led
by the example of the multitude, or frame his life according to the commonest
opinions etc. 2. Cor. 12.15. Phil. 3.16.

Thus of wisdom of conversation in the general, here it is limited to
conuersing with one sort of men viz. Those that are without.

Toward them that are without] Without are first all infidels, Who are without.
that live without the Church of Christ. 2 All Hipocrites that mind nothing
but the gailding of the outside. 3 All wicked men in general, that live
without God, without Christ, without hope in the world, 1. Cor. 5.12.13. Luke
13.25. Revel 22.15.

Here are two things I will but briefly touch, 1 That a Christian should be
more careful, how he behaues himself before wicked men then before godly men.
Note.
2 It is to be noted that he says not with them but toward them, it is one
thing to walk with them and an other thing to walk toward them, the one
notes a voluntary consorting with them, this the Apostle allows not, the other
notes a behavior that is well framed when through necessity, and calling we
must have to do with them.

But the maine thing is what we must do, The rules of conuersing in respect of
wicked men.
that we may carry our selves justly toward wicked men? That this may be
distinctly understood, wicked men may be two ways considered, first as
Spectators of our conversation, Secondly, as parties in conuersing.

As they are Spectators and observe us, there are 4. things which in godly
discretion, we should make to shine before them.

1 All good faithfulness in our calling, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.12. 1. Tim. 6.1. 2 All
humble subjection to those in authority showing all meekness to all men,
Tit. 3.1 2. 3 A mortified course of living, the Gentiles will say of such they
are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, Isay. 61.9. 4 Concord and holy love
amongst our selves, doing all things without reasonings and murmurings, Phil.
2.15.19.
As they are parties in conuersing they are two ways to be considered.

1 As they are evil men, but not injurious and evil to us. 2 As they are both
evil men and injurious to us.
Toward the first sort our wisdom of conversation must be showed,

1 In the due observation of the circumstances, of lawful things, for all
lawful things are not to be done at all times, and in all companies, and in
all manners, indiscretion herein does much harm every where.

2 In the skillful applying of our selves, to win them making use of all
opportunities, and speaking to them with all reverence, deliberation,
compassion instance etc. As may become the majesty of Gods truth and
ordinances.

3 In the shunning of conceitednesse, perverseness, frowardness, and such
like things, as do maruellously provoke a carnal mind, but approve our
selves in all meekness of wisdom, It is a great wisdom in the use of our
knowledge, to express a constant meekness, Iam. 3.13.

4 In avoiding evil, 1. to them, 2. to our selves. To walk wisely in avoiding
evils to them, is to be careful that we put no stumbling block before the
blind, but cut off all occasions of reproching or blaspheming. In avoiding
evil to our selves by them, we must look to three things: 1. That we be not
infected or defiled by their company, either by needless presence, or by any
kind of consent to or approbation of their evils. 2. That we be not beguiled
by committing our selves to them, and trusting fair pretenses, Job. 2.24. 3.
That we yield not to them to satisfy them in the least sin: for it is not
yielding will draw them, but a pure conversation with fear, 1. Pet. 3.12.

Toward the second sort of wicked men, viz: those that are evil, and are or
are like to be injurious to us, our wisdom of conversation lies in two things.

1 In a wise demeaning of our selves when they do wrong or persecute us,
showing all firmness and undaunted constancy, patience, reverence, meekness,
clemency, and good conscience, 1. Pet. 3.13.14.15.16. 2 In a discreet
prevention of our own trouble as near as we can. This wisdom Jacob showed in
his dealing with his brother Esau, when he came out against him with four
hundred men, Genesis 32. And Samuel, when he went to anoint David, 1. Sam. 16.
And Hushai when he saluted Absolon, 2. Sam. 26.15. And our Savior Christ, when
he answered the tempting dilemmaes of the malicious Jews. And Paul in his
answer to the people about the high Priest, Act. 23.4. And when in the mutiny
he cried out he was a Pharisie. Act. 23.6. It is noted as a wisdom in the
prudent, in evil times to be silent, Amos 5.13. It Is not good provoking evil
men, nor safe to pull a Bear or a mad dog by the ears. (...).
It Is the true ambition of a Christian, to meddle with his own businesses, 1 Thessalonians. 4 11.
For conclusion, as we have seen what it is to walk wisely in the
affirmative, so we must be informed what this wisdom has not in it. It has
not in it a relinquishing of piety or holiness in the whole, or any part, to
keep peace with wicked men, Heb. 12.14. It has not in it a forsaking of
fidelity in the discharge of our duties. Amos must not leave the Court, though
Amaziah tell him it is his wisest way. M^chaiah must not flatter Ahab because
the 400. Prophets did. Lastly, to walk wisely is not to walk craftily and
deceitfully; for such wisdom of serpents is required, as may stand with the
innocence of Doves.

Redeem the time.] To redeem signifies either to recover what is lost, or to
buy what is wanting. It is usually a metaphor borrowed from Merchants buying
and selling of commodities. Time signifies either space of time, or the
opportunity of time: both may be here retained.

In general, as time is taken for space of time, there are diverse things may
be observed. Six things observed concerning the redeeming of time.
1. That time is a commodity. 2. That a Christian is a Merchant by calling. 3.
That as any are more wise, the more they know the worth of time, Ephesians. 5.15.16.
4. That a Christian finds the want of time. 5. That if he were provident, time
for holy duties might be bought. 6. Not to trade for time is a great fault, and
yet an usual fault, and comes to pass because men have no stock of grace to
employ, or they have never served a prentiship to learn how to use time, or
else they have had such extraordinary losses, they cannot set up again; they
have so often made shipwreck of time by miss spending it, that they cannot
now well set themselves in a course to use it well.

Again, if time be taken for opportunity, we may observe

Four considerations of the opportunity of time.
1 That there is a season, an opportunity, a due time: God has his harvest for
judgment, Matthew. 13.30. his season for temporal blessings, as for the dew of
heaven, and the fruits of the earth, Act. 14.17. so he has for the
manifesting of his will by preaching, Tit. 1.3. for justification, Romans 3.26
for the testification of our justification, (...).
1. Tim. 2.6. for mercy, and deliverance* and the help of Sion, Psalm. 102.13.
and for salvation spiritual and eternal, 2. Cor. 6.2. Finally, there is a
season both for man to do good, Psalm. 1.3. and to receive good, Isa. 55.8.

2 That this opportunity is not obuious, not ordinary, nor easy, and every
where to be had. Every day in the year is not the Fair day, nor every day in
the week the Market day.

3 When opportunity is offered, we must not neglect it, or lose it. Ministers
must preach while the door is open: the people must walk while they have the
light: (...). Romans 12.11. Serving the opportunity.
so we must all pray in every opportunity, (...), Ephesians. 6.18. Luke 21.36.

4 We must advantage our selves by spiritual opportunities, though it be with
our loss and pains. We should not think much to be at some loss for Gods
wares, as well as men's; and we must be content to travel as well to the
market of our souls, as of our bodies.

In particular, concerning redeeming of time, consider 1. what time is lost, 2.
how time is to be redeemed, 3. how it must be used when it is redeemed, 4. the
uses.

For the first, What time is lost.
all time is lost, that is spent idly, or in the superfluous feeding of nature,
either by food, or sleep, or in ill company, or in the service of sin, and
the lusts of the flesh, or in the service of the world, or superfluous cares
about profits, or icies about pleasures; yea the time is lost that is spent in
Gods worship, where it is done idolatrously, superstitiously, ignorantly,
carelessly, hypocritically, etc.

For the second, we must distinguish of times, and the persons that have time
to sell, and the kinds of redeeming. There is time past: this cannot be
brought back again by any price; but yet we may contract with time present,
for some allowance toward the loss of time past. There is also time to come.
How time may be bought again.
And here is first a time of glory to come, and a great bargain to be made:
and for the buying of this, heaven must suffer violence, and we should throng
and crowde into the market to procure it, by prayer, hearing, faith,
almesdeeds, etc. For though it be only Christ's merits that deserves it, yet
these things we must do for the assurance of it. Besides, there is a time of
sorrows to come: as sure as we have had our days of sin, we shall have
days of sorrow and torment. This time is to be bought out with repentance,
watching, fasting, praying, strong cries, by all means endeavoring to make our
peace, and fly from the anger to come.

But time present is the commodity we are with all carfulness to redeem.
The devil and the world have time, our callings have time, and God is a great
Lord of time. Time out of the devils hands and the worlds must be redeemed, by
violent ablation: time from our callings we must redeem by permutation, only
making an exchange, and allowing time for godliness. In the first and chief
place, time of God we must buy, both the space of time to repent in, and the
opportunity of time, both for the giving, and the efficacy of the means: and
for this we must both offer and tender the sacrifice of Christ, to pacify for
time lost, and procure acceptance; and also we must offer up our selves,
souls and bodies, upon the service of opportunities, humbling our souls to
walk with our God.

3 When we have bought time, How time must be used when it is bought.
we must be careful to use it well: and herein a principal respect is to be
had unto the soul; for all this merchandise is for the use of the soul
especially, and for religious ends. And thus we must spend some time in
mortification, 1. Pet. 4.1.2. and some part in searching the Scriptures, lest
that be said of us which was said of the Jews, that whereas concerning the
time they might have been teachers, they did need again to be taught the very
principles, they were so in expert in the word of righteousness, Heb. 5.12.
Much time should be spent in the works of piety, abounding in the work of
the Lord as we abound in time. Some time should be spent in works of mercy,
both spiritual (instructing, comforting, exhorting, admonishing, etc.) and
corporal, (in feeding, clothing, visiting, etc.) Generally our time should be
spent in well doing, Gal. 6.9. And as for time for worldly businesses, we
should observe the Apostles rule: They that have wives should be as they that
have none, and they that weep as though they wept not, and they that rejoice
as though they reioiced not, and they that buy as though they possessed not,
and they that use the world as though they used it not, for the fashion of the
world goes away, 1. Cor. 7.29.30.

The use of all is for reproof of the most of us: for some of us sin against
the seasons and opportunities of Gods grace, some against the very space of
time. Men transgress against opportunity two ways; first, by ignorance of
the signs of the seasons, Matthew. 16.3. secondly, by a wilful neglect of the
opportunity of grace when we have them. There are many things might move us
to redeem the time in this respect. Motives to redeem time.
1. We have our times appointed, and the bounds of our habitation assigned,
Act. 17.26. 2. The times will not be always fair; there are perilous times,
times of sorrow, anguish, sickness, tentation, want, loss, fear,
perplexity, yea we may purpose, promise, expect time of healing and curing,
when we shall be deceived, and find a time of trouble, Ier. 14.19. Besides,
Christ in the opportunities of grace is but a little while with men. There is a
prime of a man's life, yea a prime of every man's ministry, Ioh. 7.33. Further,
the Kingdom of God in the mercies of it may be wholly taken away, if we bring
not fruit in time of fruit, Matthew. 21.34.41. Lastly, this is a very provoking
sin: for if God give a space to repent, and men will not know the day of
their visitation, most an end God casts such into a bed of affliction, after
they have stretched themselves upon the bed of security, Revel. 2.21.22. Luke
19.43.44. Yea many of Gods children are greatly to blame, in neglecting the
opportunities of assurance of grace: and therefore because they are so
careless in making their calling and election sure, this forsaking of the
promise of God is scourged afterward with comfortless sorrows, arising from
such a sense of their corruptions, as makes them for a long time seem to be
deprived of all grace and mercy, Heb. 4.1.

Again, many men sin egregiously against the very space of time, in that
they have much leisure and time, and fill it up with little or no good
imploiment. Their estate, that have means to live without labor, is usually
accounted an estate of great ease and happiness. But indeed it is an estate of
much danger: for the men that abound in time without imploiment, are liable to
many temptations and lusts; besides, they are subject to almost continual
hardness of heart and deadness of spirit: for it is the laboring servant
that enters into his masters joy. Add, that men that abound with leisure, are
easily drawn by the inticements of ill company, and much entangled with the
sports and pleasures of the world. Sometimes such persons grow into great habit
of suspitiousnesse, waiwardnesse, filled with worldly passions and
discontentments: sometimes they prove great medlers in other folks business.

The remedy for these persons, whether men or women, is to exercise themselves
in some kind of profitable imploiment, and to labor so as some way to see the
fruit of it, to eat their own bread; but especially they should be abundant
in the work of the Lord, they should double their imploiment in reading,
hearing, conference, mortification, mercy, etc.

Thus of wise conversation.

Let your speech be gracious always, and pondred with salt, that ye may etc.

Godly communication is here exhorted unto: and for order, here is a precept,
Let your speech etc. 2. the end of the precept, that ye may know how etc. In
the precept concerning our speech observe, 1. the properties of speech, which
are two; 1. they must be gracious, 2. poudred with salt, and then note the
continuance how long the precept is in force, and that is always.

In general we so hear that we must look to our words as well as our works,
and therefore they are far wide that say their tongues are their own who shall
control them Psalm. 12.4.

From Coherence I observe, that he walks not wisely that talks not wisely,
for evil words corrupt good manners, neither may he be accounted an honest man
of life that is an evil man in tongue.

The use is for trial for if God make us new Creatures, he gives us new
tongues, and if he turn the people to him by true repentance, he does return
unto them a pure language, Note
Zepha. 3.9 and therefore if any man seems to be religious and refraineth not
his tongue this man's religion is in vain.

Let] It is not arbitrarie (we may look to our words if we will) but it is a
^lat precept and so a matter indispensible.

Your] God is no respecter of persons, he forbids ungracious wanton and idle
words, in Gentlemen and Gentlewomen as well as in poor men and Laborers, he
dislikes it in Masters and Parents, as well as in Children and Servants, it is
as ill for the Master to spend his time in idle talk etc. as for the Servant.

Gracious] Our words may be said to be gracious 3. ways. First if we respect
the cause. Observations concerning gracious speech.
2 If we respect the subject. 3 If we respect the effect. In respect of the
cause good words are well said to be gracious, 1 Because they flow from the
free grace of God without our merit: for we do not deserve so much as to be
trusted with one good word. Reason yields us conceits and nature an instrument
to speak by, Note
but it is the God of nature that of his free grace gives us good words. 2 Our
words ought to proceed from some grace of God in the heart, as from knowledge,
faith, joy, sorrow, love, fear, desire etc. and in this sense when they are in
the tongue, carry still the name of the fountain whence they flow. Again,
our words must be gracious in respect of the subject, the matter we must talk
of, must be of good things, or religious matters, words of instruction,
comfort, faith, hope etc. but especially our words should be seasoned with the
daily memory and mention of Gods grace to us in Christ Psalm. 40.11.
. 3. Our words ought to be gracious in respect of the effect such as tend to
build up and minister grace to the hearers Ephesians. 4.29.
, yea gracious words are fair words, and fair words are first graceful
words, words of thankfulness. 2. Inoffensiue words, not railing, bitter,
slandering blasphemous or filthy words, nay not jesting words that are intended
to provoke irritate disgrace and bite. 3. Seasonable words Pro. 15.23.
. 4 Wholesome words, not filthy rotten communication Ephesians. 4.29.
.

Use is for reproof. Use
And men sin against this exhortation. 1 by omission of gracious words. But 2
they do worse that use evil words. And 3 they are worse then the former two
that use their words to speak against grace and gracious courses Ephesians. 5.6.
. But they are worst of all that love evil words, even the words that may
destroy either their own souls, or the souls of others. 2 Here is
instruction, we must labor by all means, to get ability for a gracious
speech, either to God by prayer, or to men in conuersing with them, and to this
end, first we must pray constantly and conscionably to God, to give us gracious
words. Secondly, we must get the law of grace into our hearts Psalm. 37.30.31.
, yea we should strive to be examples one to another, not only in faith, and
conversation, but in words also 1. Tim. 4.12.
, and if all Christians are charged to use gracious speeches much more
ministers, they should speak the words of God, they should keep the pattern
of wholesome words and stay all vain babblings which increase to more
ungodliness, and all words that fret as a canker.

Thus of the first property.

Powdered with salt] These are terms borrowed either from the use of the Temple
or from common and civil use. In the Temple every sacrifice was salted with
salt, Mark. 9. l^st
so must every Christian (who is Gods sacrifice) be seasone^ In the common life
of man, meats that are to be kept long, must be powdered with salt, to drink
up or dry out corruption, and to preserve savor, so must a Christian be
seasoned that will be kept to eternal life.

But first here is implied that the words of men are naturally corrupt, rotten,
unsavory and have great need of seasoning. The carnal man's words, are much
after the humor and infection of his mind. The talk of the Covetous is
usually of his mammon, farm, oxen, bargains, wares etc. The Epicures talk is
usually of his sports, dogs, cocks, horses, games, companions, or of his
lusts. The Superstitious man talks of his Dagon or the sign. of heaven. Note
The Wrathful man of his Adversary and wrong. The Ambitious man of his
livings, honors, offices, offers, hopes, or his own parts and praises, to
conclude the talk of all natural men is but of natural things, and as they
are of the flesh, so their talk sauors nothing but fleshly things.

Salt] There is the salt of doctrine and thus Ministers are the salt of the
earth. 2 There is the salt of mortification and so every Christian must have
salt in himself. Math. 9. last
3 There is the salt of discretion and this is the praise of the wise* none of
these three may be here excluded from our word. For first we must receive
laws for our lip, even from Gods ministers. We must learn of them not only
how to order our affections and life, but also how to speak, especially in
matters of God and godliness. 2 We must mourn for the sins of the tongue
as well as for other sins. We must drive out the corruption that cleaues to
our words with the salt of mortification. 3 We must make conscience of
discretion in our words, he is a perfect man that is discreet in his words Iam.
3.2. Pro. 10.20.
The tongue of the wise is as five silver, and his heart guides his tongue
wisely and adds doctrine to his lips. The Use is both for instruction and
reproof. Pro. 16.23.
For instruction both to all Christians to season not only their words of
prayer to God, but also their speech in conuersing with men: and especially
Ministers must have salt in their tongues with all discretion and heedfulnesse
looking to their words, and with all authority and meet severity of rebukes
drive out corruption out of the hearers, they may, they must cry aloud and
spare not, they must powder them. Here likewise are those men to be reproved
that have been often warned of their evil words and mend not. Quest.
Q. But what should be the cause why some men that have good affections and
desires, Answ.
and yet cannot get the victory over evil words. Ans. It comes to pass 1 By
reason of their ignorance of better words. The reasons why some men cannot
leave their evil words.
2 By custom in evil speech. 3 For want of constant taking of words of prayer
and confession to God. 4 By defect of mortification in the heart, their hearts
are not sufficiently humbled, they are too sleightie in godly sorrow, out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and therefore their words are
drossie and naught, because their hearts are little worth Pro. 10.20.
. That these men may get victory over their evil words (which usually are
against the third or the seventh or the ninth commandment) they must do three
things, first they must go to God constantly by prayer, What they should do to
get victory.
beseeching him to open their lips* and set a watch before the door of their
mouth. 2 They must not fail to mourn over their offenses in speech, in secret
till they have subdued them, afflicting themselves with voluntary sorrows for
them. 3 They must strive by all means to accustom themselves in good speech,
and gracious words, yea many professors are to be reproved for their words,
for many times they are either too many, or too vain and idle, or too false or
too rash etc. Their words want much seasoning, Perseverance a good word* as
well as good works.
and it is a great fault to have a heedlesse tongue.

Thus of the properties of speech.

Alwaies] A Christian is bound to perseverance in good words as well as in good
works, he must talk graciously, not only at some times for a passion as when
he comes newly from the Sermon, or on the Sabbath day, not only in some
companies, or in some arguments, but at all times and in all places watching to
all the oportunities to glorify God or profit others by his words.

Thus of the precept.

The end follows, that ye may know how to answer every one, in general I
observe here woe things, first that by speaking well we learn to speak well.
Secondly, that the soundest knowledge is experimental, he does not indeed know
how to answer, that does not in practice exercise himself in gracious words
though he had all places of answer and arguments in his head.

To answere] To answer does not always import a question or demand going
before, but is sometimes taken for continuing to speak as Mat. 11.25. it is
said our Savior answered and yet no demand went before; Some think it is a
part for the whole, and one use of words put for all uses, but I take it in the
ordinary sense as the word usually imports, and so we answer either
unbelievers or believers; concerning our Christian answer before unbelievers
there are 6 things may be here observed. 6 things concerning answering
unbelievers.


1 That true grace is sure to be opposed and such as truly fear God are sure
of adversaries. 2 That mortified men are the fittest to answer adversaries,
especially in causes of religion, such whose tongues and pens are seasoned with
salt. coher. 3 That every Christian shall find opposition. (ye) 4 That every
Christian ought to answer for the truth, apology is the fruit not of learning
or wit only but of godly sorrow 2. Cor. 7.10. (ye.) 5 That the truth has all
sorts of adversaries, open and secret, at home and abroad, learned and
unlearned, Ministers and Magistrates, rich and poor, every one that is carnal
has a bolt to shoot at sincerity. 6 That it is not an easy or ordinary
skill to know how to answer well, 7 Things required in answering well.
for thereunto is required first deliberation, he that answers a matter before
he hear it, it is folly and shame to him. Secondly, Prayer Prouer. 16.1. Hab.
2 1. 3 Faith in Gods favor and promise Math. 10.19. Psalm. 119.41.42. 4
Discretion considering persons, time, place, occasions, one kind of answer
will not serve every sort of men, we answer in one manner to great men, in an
other manner to learned men, in an other to ordinary men Pro. 25.11. and 26.4.6.
. 5 Patience. 6 Humility. 7 1. Pet. 3.15.16.
A good conscience.
Thus of answering unbelievers, concerning the answering of Believers: here are
these things to be observed.

1 That Christians should propound their doubts one to another. 4 things
concerning answering Believers.
2 That strong Christians should support the weak, and help them, and resolve
them from time to time Romans 2.19. 3 It is not an easy matter to give a
gracious seasonable and profitable answer. 4 That custom in gracious speech,
breeds by Gods blessing, an ability to give wise and sound judgment, advise
and resolution, it is not wit, learning, authority etc. that breeds this
skill.
Thus of the Exhortation.

Verse. 7. All my state shall Tichicus declare unto you, who is a beloved
brother and a faithful Minister and fellow servant in the Lord.

8. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your
estate, and comfort your hearts.

9. With Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you, they
shall make known unto you all things which are done here.


In these words and those that follow is contained the second part of the
conclusion. Before he has handled the common doctrine both of faith and life,
now he lets loose his affection to express in particular his love to special
Christians, in all the words there is to be observed, first a narration as an
entrance. Secondly the salutations themselves.

The narration is in these three verses and the sum of it is that Paul being
Prisoner at Rome to express his care for and love to the Church and in
particular to the Colossians, sends Timothy and Onesimus the one a Minister
the other a private man, both faithful to show them of Paul's affairs, and to
visit the Churches and comfort them.

Before I come to the particulars, from the general consideration of all the
verses to the end of the Chapter, these four things may be observed.

1 That religion extends it self to the behavior of men, even in these more
ordinary matters, of life, so as men may sin or obey even in them.

2 That the love even of the best Christians needs (for the preserving and
continuing of it) even these lighter helps and obseruances.

3 That piety is no enemy to courtesy, it does not remove but rectify it,
piety does prescribe to courtesy four ways, 1 By forbidding and restraining
the art of dissimulation and the politic serving of men's humors, and all the
base courses of flattery. 2 By moderating the excess of complements. 3 By
preserving the purity of them, that they be not made the instruments of
profaneness, and pollution and wantonness. 4 By adding to them the seeds of
grace and religion, Paul will salute as well as the Gentiles but yet his matter
shall tend unto grace and some good of the soul, as Col. 1.2. and in the rest
of the Epistles.

4 Amongst Christians there may be a preheminencie of affection, some may be
loved more then others, the Apostle is desirous his doctrine may be a
testimony of his love, to all, but yet he cannot forbear, the mention of his
special respect of some.

The first thing in this part of the conclusion is the narration, and out of
the whole narration these things may be noted.

1 The general care Ministers should have of the Churches, Paul cares for the
Churches far removed, yea when himself is in great trouble, and so it might
be thought, he had cause enough of care for himself.

2 That the affections between faithful Ministers and the people should not
only be conceived but expressed.

3 That Church Governors should be careful whom they employ in the businesses
of the Church, Paul will not send a letter but makes choice of discreet and
faithful men, much less would he have employed about the worship of God or
the censures of the Church, suspicious persons men of ill fame drunkards or of
scandalous behavior, how can it be otherwise but that the grave censures, of
the Church should be loathed, and scorned when such numbers of disordered and
profane persons are admitted to the denouncing, pleading and executing of them.

4 Men should be careful how and whom they commend by word or writing, to
commend evil men is to bear false witness, many times to the great hurt both
of the Church and common wealth.

The first particular thing in the narration concerning Tichi^us, is his
praises. Here I observe, 1 Who commends him, viz: Paul. And this shows that
ministers should be careful to preserve and enlarge the credits of their
brethren. Especially this is a care should be in such as excel others in place
or gifts. They are far from this, that detract from the just praises of their
brethren, hold them down with all disgrace, labor to destroy what they build
up, and pluck away the affections of the people from them; and when they have
occasion to speak to them, use them contemptibly, and rate them as if they
were rather their scullions then their brethren. And the sin is the worse,
when the same persons can countenance idle, evil, and scandalous persons. 2 To
what end, viz: That his embassage might be so much the more respected: for the
credit of the person winnes much respect to the doctrine it self. 3 In what
manner. And here observe two things: 1. That he gives him his full praise; for
a man may slander by speaking sparingly in the praises of the well-deseruing.
2. That he praises him without any (but) to teach us that we should not be
easy in word or letter in discovering the infirmities of faithful ministers.
4 The particulars of his praises. And they may be divided thus: Either they are
common to all true Christians, (beloved brother) or proper to Church officers,
(...).
and that either in relation to Christ, (a faithful minister) or in relation
to Paul (a fellow servant.)


There are four things ought to be in every good minister.

1 He must be a good man, a brother. 2 He should be beloved of his people,
beloved brother. 3 He must be faithful. And his faithfulness stands in two
things: 1. Diligence in labor: 2. Sincerity in giving every one their portion
of rebukes, comforts, directions, etc. in due season. 4 He must be a
fellow-seruant, one that will draw in the yoke with his brethren.
This may smite the conscience of many sorts of ministers.

Some because they are of wicked and scandalous life.

Some because they have made themselves hateful to their people by their
indiscretion, covetousness, contention, etc.

Some because they are not faithful: Either not true to the bed of the
congregation to which they consecrated themselves: or not sincere in the use of
their gifts, being idle loiterers, indiscreet feeders, men-pleasers, or the
like.

Some because they are proud, humorous, selfe-conceited, singular, and love to
go alone.

Thus of his praises. The ends of his mission follows, and they are three.

1. That he might declare unto them Paul's estate. 2. That he might know their
estate. 3. That he might comfort their hearts.

For the first: If you ask what he should declare, I may answer, such things
as these, the success of the Gospel in Rome, the order of Paul's life, and his
afflictions.

If you ask to what end: I answer, 1. For approbation; the greatest men need
the approbation of other ministers, yea of other Christians. 2. For
thanksgiving, that so many praises might be given to God. 3. For prayer for
what was wanting, or hurtful to him or the Church. 4. For consolation to them,
who questionless would rejoice to hear from Paul.

Again it is to be noted that he says his whole estate: for a godly man
carries himself so as he cares not though all men see into all his courses.

Verse. 8. Whom I have sent for the same purpose that he might know your estate.


Doct. The state of the people ought to be known to the minister: not their
worldly estate, but the estate of their souls and consciences, and the working
of the means upon them, not only for the satisfaction of the ministers
affection, but for the guiding of his private preparations and prayers, and for
his public doctrine. Which reprooues the careless ministers, that heed not
the state of the people. We are watchmen for observation, as well as laborers
in respect of preaching: neither can he be a good Preacher, that is not a
careful Watchman.

Again, it is a great defect in the people, when the minister wants
intelligence. For though it be a base humor of any to bring false reports, and
a weak part in any minister to make the Pulpit a place to vent their private
and personal businesses, yet in the general he cannot be a good Physician to
the state of any congregation, that is not acquainted with their diseases.

Quest. But why does the Apostle send to know their estate?

Answ. Because he would not credit reports concerning them: for he knew that
wicked men out of their malice would raise monstrous slanders many times of the
best deserving people; and besides, the better sort of men are not careful of
their words in reports; matters grow with telling, and every man according to
his several affection sets a several emphasis upon the matter he tells, so
that after a while the tale will not be worth receiving. This carfulness
should teach us how to hear, especially we should be wary, and well advised,
and thoroughly informed, before by prayer and fasting we take up the name of God
concerning the absent.

The third end is, that their hearts might be comforted.

Here in general from the Apostles care to have them comforted observe, 1
That Christians need comfort and encouragement. 2 That comfort is the peculiar
portion of true Christians; and contrariwise, nothing but sorrow and the curse
is the portion of wicked men; and if any dram of comfort be applied to wicked
men, the truth of God is falsified.


Ob. But this is the way to make them despair.

Answ. The blind and dreaming world is mistaken. Give me an instance of one
man in this place, nay in this age, nay in any age, (that I can remember) show
me any example in Scripture, or any instance in experience, of one soul driven
into despair by the sincere preaching of the word. It is no great thing I
desire. Note.
That men have despaired I know and find, as Cain and Judas did; but that it
was severe preaching that wrought it, I no where find: and yet for one bitter
word given by us, the Prophets gave ten, and yet this event never followed. Not
but there is enough said many times to make despair, but that there is this
providence of God, that it comes not upon men by this means; but either of the
melancholy of the body, or the special curse that God privately poured upon
them, or by the special working of Satan by Gods just permission. And yet I
allow not indiscreet rashness, or rude indiscretion in applying threatenings.

Doct. 3. That it is the duty of every minister to labor to build up Gods
children in comfort, as the Apostle does herein express his care. But yet
consider whom the Apostle comforts.

1. Such as had the faith of Jesus, Col. 1.4. 2. Such as loved all the Saints
Col. 4.1. 3. Such as were fruitful hearers of the Gospel, Col. 1.6. 4. Such
as were constant, and labored to be grounded in faith and hope, Col. 1.23. 5.
Such as accounted Christ their greatest riches, and the Gospel a glorious
mystery, Col. 1.27. 6. Such as were circumcised with circumcision made without
hands, and have put away the body of sins, and had with painful sorrows
put away, fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection, wrath, anger,
malice, cursed speaking, filthy speaking and lying out of their mouths, Col.
2.10. and 3.5.8.

4 A question may be here asked whether consolations do bar out rebukes and
directions.

Answ. They do not, for Paul does comfort and yet he rebuked in the second
Chapter, and directed in the third, nay many times rebukes, and directions are
great doors of consolation.

Thus of Paul's care to have them comforted.

Tichicus did comfort their hearts, 1. by his presence, 2. by bringing letters
to the Church from Paul, 3. by his words, not of report only, relating Paul's
estate to them, but of doctrine, persuading them to patience under their
crosses, remembering them of the ioies to come, strengthening them against the
gaine-sayings of adversaries, the temptations of Satan, the rebellion of their
own flesh, and the inconvenience of Paul's imprisonment, and lastly instructing
them how to go on in holy life.

Thus of the first part of the narration.

In the narration concerning Onesimus I observe two things: his praises, and
the end of his mission. His praises are as they stand in relation to all
Christians, or in particular to them; to all, he is a brother, faithful,
beloved to them, and so he is one of them: the end of his mission is in the end
of the verse.

Onesimus.] This Onesimus was the theeuish and fugitive servant of Philemon,
who coming to Rome, was converted by Paul in prison, and is now for honors
sake sent with Tichicus. From hence diverse things may be noted.

1 That hateful and unfaithful persons may be converted, and made worthy,
faithful, and beloved.

2 That religion and the word does not mar, but make good servants. The word
will do that which rating and stripes will not do.

3 That no man's sins, of which they have repented before God and the Church,
ought to be charged upon them as any disparagement in subsequent times. Where
God forgiues, men should not impute.

4 It is a good work, to grace and credit such as by repentance return from
their former evil ways.

5 Repentance and true grace is the surest way to credit: the b^st way to lift
reproach from a man's name, is to get sin off his soul.

Now in the particular praise of Onesimus I observe: First, that Christian love
respects not persons; Paul is not ashamed of a poor servant, and he would
have the Church love whom God loves. Secondly, that there is faithfulness
required of private men as well as ministers, and that faithfulness stands in
three things, soundness in religion without error or hypocrisy, diligence in
the particular calling, and fidelity in promises and covenants. Thirdly, that
natural and civil relations are not broken or disabled by religion; they must
not only love Onesimus as a Christian, but also as one of them, for he was a
Citizen of Colosse: there is love should be in men as they are fellow Citizens,
and of the same trade or profession, or the like.

Thus of the narration.

Verse. 10. Aristarchus my prison-fellow saluteth you, and Marcus, Barnabas
sisters son, touching whom ye received commandments. If he come unto you,
receive him.

11. And Jesus which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision. These
only are my worke-fellowes unto the kingdom of God, which have been unto my
consolation.


The salutations follow, and they are either signified or required: signified
verse 10. to 15. required verse 15. to the end.

The salutations signified are from six men, three of them Jews, Aristarchus,
Marcus, and Jesus, verse 10.11. and three Gentiles, Epaphras, Lucas, Demas,
verse 12.13.14.

Aristarchus is the first, concerning whom here is set down, with his name,
both his estate, a prison-fellow, and his salutation. This Aristarchus was a
Jew of Macedonia, converted by Paul, who out of the deerenesse of his respect,
would never leave him, but accompanied him in his adversities; for he was
taken with him in the tumult at Ephesus Act. 19.29.30.
, and here he is his prison fellow in Rome. Crosses abide all that will live
godly: if he will have grace with Paul, he may perhaps lie in prison with him
too. But here we see that adversity does not less ^n that affection that is
sound, either to God or to Gods people: they that cannot endure the smiting of
the tongue, would little endure the iron fetters.

Marcus is the second. This is he about whom the contention was between Paul
and Barnabas, Act. 13. because he had forsaken them and the labor of
preaching with them. Now he is commended by his alliance to Barnabas.
Certainly the kindred of worthy men are to be regarded even for their sakes,
much more their posterities. It is a great fault, that when men have spent
themselves in the labor and service of the Church, their posterity should be
neglected, and exposed to want and misery. And is it a credit to be Barnabas
^^sters son? What is it then to be the child of God by regeneration?

Concerning whom you have received commandment.] Some think that Marcus
brought to them the decrees of the Counsel at Jerusalem, and these read it (
of whom ye received, etc.) Some say the meaning hereof is not revealed* and
therefore they will not inquire. Some think, that upon his forsaking of the
Apostle, the Churches had notice not to receive him if he came unto them, and
that he had written to them himself. Some think the latter word whom receive)
are an explication, and so they show what was commanded, viz. to receive him.

Now for the observations we may note: First, that scandalous persons are not
to be received. Secondly, that the greatness of the offenses of men are not to
be measured by carnal reason, but by the consideration of the person, manner,
place, time, etc. A lesser offense aggrauated by circumstance^ may give cause
of private separation from voluntary company. Thirdly, that an ingenuous
nature is much affected with the distaste of discreet Christian^. Fourthly,
that repenting sinners are to be received, if unto Gods mercy, then much more
unto our houses and companies. It is an ill quality to be hard to ^e
reconciled. In general it is our duty and Gods commandment, that we should
receive one another Romans 15.7.
. Thus ministers must receive their people, when they are with them, to speak
to them of the Kingdom of God Luke 9.11.
, and the people must receive their ministers also Act. 21.17.
, and the people must receive one another, even the meanest Christians as well
as the greatest, the little ones that believe in Christ Mat. 18.5.
, all the disciples of Christ are to be received Matthew. 10.40.41.
.

Now because this point of receiving one another is exceeding needful, and
there may be much mistaking about it, I think good therefore to give out of
several Scriptures rules how we are to carry our selves in this business of
receiving one another.

6. Rules about receiving one another.
1 That we entertain with all heedfulnesse, so Act. 9. in Paul's case, and Act
18.27. in Apollos case. This condemns the carnal hospitality in the world,
which promiscuously admits any of any profession, where the basest and vilest
sort of people are soonest chosen for the table and company: yea many of the
better sort are to be blamed, such as are over credulous, many times to their
own singular disgrace, and hurt of the Church.

2 That when we are assured of the faithfulness of any, we receive them with
all Christian respect, freely and liberally, Romans 15.17. bearing with their
infirmities, Romans 15.1. yea if need be, pardoning their offenses, Phil. 12.17.

3 That in society with weak Christians, we take heed of intangling them
with questions and controversies, Romans 14.1. as the manner of some i^.

4 That great respect be had of our callings.

5 That the imploiment be chiefly about holy things. Receive them in the
fellowship of the Gospel, not for recreation or idle discourse: either labor
to strengthen them, Act. 18.26. or to be furthered in obedience by them, 2.
Cor. 7.15.

6 That great respect be had of frugalitie, Luke 10.8.

Thus of verse 10.

Verse. 11. And Jesus which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision, etc.


The third person that does salute, is described by his proper name Jesus, and
his surname Iustus.

Quest. May the name of Jesus be given to any man?

Answ. Quest.
Before it was appropriated to the son of God, it was both lawful and usual
to give it to men, Whether the name of Iustus may be given to any man now?
as appears by Iosonas name, which is the same, and the son of Syrake. But
now it is not expedient any way: and therefore the Jesuits may change their
names, like Iebusites as they are.

The name Iustus was not given him by the Jews, but by the Romans, as the
varying of the language shows: Answ.
and in all probability, given in praise of his faithfulness and true dealing
with all men.

Quest. What may we do to win the reputation of just persons? What we must
do to win the reputation of just men?


Answ. 1. Be peaceable and make peace, and do all things without murmuring or
reasonings, Mat. 5.8 Phil. 2.15.

2 Be watchful unto chastity and the honesty of the seventh commandment, 1.
Pet. 2.11.12.

3 Let your conversation be without fear, 1. Pet. 3.2.

4 Be not vain in apparel, 1. Pet. 3.3.

5 Get a meek and quiet spirit, 1. Pet. 4.3.4.

6 In yielding Apology, be constant, and immovable with all cheerfulness
willing to give answer, with all meekness, and reverence, and good conscience
1. Pet. 3.15.16.

7 Show all uprightness in thy calling, and this uprightness has 3. things,
1 Diligence, 2 All true and faithful dealing in words and promises 3 A
conversation without covetousness.

Finally to live inoffensiuely is a strong inducement even to the worst men,
many times to draw from them a good testimony even of Gods children.

Thus of their names.

In the 2 place they are discribed, 1 by their country, they were of the
circumcision that is Jews. 2 By their praises, and thus they are commended,
either for what they were to the Church in general, they were laborers,
fellow workers, or for what they were to Paul, they were to his consolation.

Which are of the circumcision] This is added perhaps to note, that even
those men though they were Jews did subscribe to the Apostles doctrine,
concerning the abolishing of Jewish ceremonies.

But by this periphrasis the Jews were noted, not so much because God did once
hereby distinguish and separate them from the world as by a partition wall, but
because of pertinacie in refusing (though they were Christians) to lay down
circumcision. This obstinacy of the Jews should teach us, resolution for the
truth and be more constant in all good courses then they obstinate in evil.

In the praise of their pains I note 1 Their paucity or fewness, ( these
only) 2 Their labor workefellowes. 3 The subject about which they labor ( the
kingdom of God)

These only] Here observe, 1 That when God has any work to do, there are
found few faithful men to do it. 2 That a people, that has had the means and
been convinced, if they turn not speedily, prove of many others the most
obdurate, and hard hearted, thus, almost the whole nation of the Jews resisted
Christ. 3 Persecution drives many Hearers into Apostacy, this was not the case
of the Jews in Rome only, but would be our case if the times altered.

What hearers amongst us are like to fall away if the times should change.
Quest. What hearers amongst us are like to fall away if the times should
change?

Answ. 1 Such as hear without affection. 2 Such as have only a temporary
faith. 3 Such as now forbear society with Gods servants in the fellowship of
the Gospel. For if now they shame their presence, how far would they stand
off in perilous times? 4 If these three only of all the Jews were faithful
laborers in Rome, where was Peter if he had been at Rome, either Paul much
wrongs him, not to mention him, and his eminent praises, or else the gaineing
of a Bishopric made him give over his work.

Workefellowes] Here consider 1 Their labor work. 2 Their honor fellows. For
the first observe 1 That Gods kingdom on earth is erected by man's hands, as
the outward instruments, an honor done to man which is denied to the Angels. 2
Gods kingdom needs much labor and help, Ministers must work, they may not
be loiterers, yea they must work hard, for cursed is he that does Gods work
negligently, yea they must work in their own persons, not by substitutes;
Magistrates also must help forward this work by protecting the ministry and
good men, by compelling such as are by the high ways to come, into Gods house,
and by reforming abuses which hinder Gods grace and kingdom amongst men,
private persons must help by instruction, admonition, consolation etc.

Fellowes] Here note 1 the honor of the laborers they are all one, fellows
though differing in gifts 1. Cor. 3.8.9. 2 Their unity some are workers but
not Coworkers, for they preach not Christ purely. 3 Humility in the Apostle,
imutable, in all though never so much excelling in place or gifts.

Uses of all First for instruction, 1 Pray to the Lord of the harvest to send
forth more laborers, though clergy men are very corrupt, and few of them
faithful, yet it is better our mouths be filled with prayers then with
reproaches.

2 Ministers must study to approve themselves workmen that need not be
ashamed 2. Tim. 2.15.

3 The people must take heed they hinder not Gods work by disobedience, 1.
Cor. 16.16.

Lastly must Ministers in their callings labor, surely then must every man
work in his calling also; else just with God if poverty attend sloth, yea
women must work and not destroy their houses by pride and idleness, and all
both men and women must not talk of it as many do but set to it Pro. 14.23.
nor begin only but persevere Pro. 18.9. but some are so settled upon their
lees in this point, that they are wiser in their own conceit, then seven men
that can give a reason.

2 For consolation to all Gods workmen especially Ministers, though they have
not so great gifts as others, yet if they show all good faithfulness in
discharge of their places, they are fellows even to Apostles, though all that
wrought at the Tabernacle had not Bezaliels skill yet all were coworkers, yea
Gods workmen differ from all the workmen in the world, For first God himself
will work with them, so will no Prince though the work be never so princely.
2 Though their work be not finished yet they shall receive their wages, A
threefold Kingdom of God.
though Israel be not gathered, yet their judgment is with the Lord and their
work with their God, Isay. 40.4.5.

Unto the kingdom of God] There is a thereefold kingdom of God, First of
nature Psalm. 103.19. Secondly of grace Math. 3.2. Thirdly of glory John. 3.3.

The kingdom of grace is here meant, here I observe first the privileges of
this kingdom. Secondly the properties or signs of the subjects. Thirdly the
uses.

For the first the excellent condition of such as by true conversion are
admitted into the kingdom of grace, The privileges of the Kingdom of grace.
may be three ways considered, for they are happy, first in their king,
secondly in their laws, thirdly in the personal prerogatives of the kingdom.

1 They are happy in their King for he is nobly born the son of the most
high. 2 He comes rightly by the crown Psalm. 2.7. 3 He is of eminent
soueraignety, he has a name written on his garments and thigh, The king of
kings and Lord of Lords, Revel. 19.16. Prince of the kings of the earth Revel.
1.5. 4 He is a Prince of admirable qualities, wonderful, counselor, the
mighty God, an everlasting father, prince of peace, one that keeps the
government upon his own shoulders, Isa. 9.6. 5 Lastly he is immortal 1. Tim.
1.17 in the earth if a prince were never so good yet in this the subjects are
unhappy that they shall loose him, but Sions king will never die.

2 They are happy in their laws, for they are not only clearly digested in
Gods sacred volume, but they are every way most perfect to make men wise to
salvation and absolute to every good work, such as need no repeal nor
addition, a perfect rule to all ages, and so are no laws of man under heaven
2. Tim. 3.3.15.16 17.

3 They are happy in the personal prerogatives of the kingdom, for ^ Here
is certain safti^ and quiet habitation for all the Kings subjects Isa. 33.20
21. Ier. 23.5.6. Secondly to all the subjects it is given to know ^he mysteries
of this kingdom Math. 13.11. Thirdly in this kingdom poor men may get
advancement as easily and as soon as rich, Iam. 2.6. Fourthly, if any of the
subjects fall into desperate crosses that they be without all means, yet they
are prisoners of hope, and shall be saved and delivered by the blood of the
covenant Zach. 9.9.11. Fifthly the King does quiet himself in the love of every
subject and does rejoice over them with joy, it is a great benefit to live
under a good King though the subject be not known unto him: but a great favor
that the King should take notice of the subject by name; but exceeding great
comfort it is if the King love some subject with a special love: thus does
Christ to all his subjects, which no King can do because his heart is finite.
Sixthly, here all subjects are sons Romans 9.25.26. Seventhly, They are all
kings Revel. 1.5.6. and 5.10 Romans 5.17. Eighthly, here if any two of the
subjects do agree on earth upon any thing whatsoever they desire their heavenly
father will grant it Math 18.19.20. Lastly the properties of the kingdom show
the felicity of the subject for this kingdom.

First; Is in power not in word 1. Cor. 4.20. Secondly; Is not of this world
but as far more excellent as it differs in nature from the kingdom of the
world, Ioh. 8.36. Thirdly, It is without end, Luke 1.33. Heb. 12.28.

Thus of the privileges.

The second thing is the properties of the subjects or the signs by which they
may be known, and they are six.

First, 6 Signs to know the subjects of Christ's kingdom.
They are a poor and penitent people Math. 5.3. and 3.2. Secondly They do
gladly and constantly subject themselves to be ruled by the powerful preaching
of the Gospel, and esteem the comforts thereof above all treasures Math.
13.44.45. hence called the Gospel of the kingdom. Thirdly, They are a patient
people, and do willingly forgive each other his brothers trespasses, Math.
18.23. vlt. Revel. 1.9. ordinarily one cannot more darken their evidence then
by their unruly passions unbridled, the king of Sion is meek Math. 21.5. and
so are the subjects. Fourthly; They may be easily known by their easy access
to their King in their daily troubles, you may see them betimes every morning
at the court gates Gal. 4 7. Psalm. 5.2.3. where he gives his son he gives the
spirit of his son into their hearts etc. Fifthly, They fear their king and
his goodness, they are more affected with fear upon the sense of his mercy,
then upon the sight of his judgments Hos. 3.5. Sixthly; They make conscience of
the least commandments, fear as well to swear by lesser oaths in common talk
as perjury in courts of justice; They make conscience of drinkings as well as
drunkenness, of filthy speaking as well as whoredom, Math. 5.19. and 13.33.
they are new creatures, they have not a new leg or an arm only, they labor
to abound in grace and duties, 2. Pet. 1.11.

The uses follow.

First for instruction, if the estate of Christians converted by the powerful
preaching of the Gospel under the regiment of Christ, be so excellent an
estate, and so happy and a king-like condition; it should teach, first all
that are not yet converted to settle their hearts about this point, How men may
get into the Kingdom of God.
and that they may get into the kingdom of God, they must get an holy
estimation of the happiness of that estate, a kingdom should move them much,
Satan knew if any thing would prevail with Christ it must be the glory of
kingdoms; behold here God offers thee a kingdom. Secondly, pray daily and
earnestly that Gods kingdom may come upon thee, Math. 6. Thirdly, practice
what thou praiest, and by practice seek the kingdom of God first Math. 6.33.
and to this end observe 4 rules.

1 Remove what might hinder, that is by repentance cast off thy sins, no
unclean thing must enter here, and it is plain it is required Math. 3.2.
Secondly, wait upon the preaching of the Gospel, for it is the Gospel of the
Kingdom, and the keys of heaven, only take heed thou neither betray it by
security, nor choke it by care Math 13. Thirdly, remember to seek it with all
zeal and earnestness, for the kingdom of heaven suffers violence and the
violent take it by force Math 11.12. Fourthly, take heed thou give not over
when thou come near to the kingdom of God, Mark. 12.34. for the children of
the kingdom may be cast out.

2 Take heed of despising poor Christians, for God has chosen them to make
them heirs of the kingdom, they must not be accounted of according to their
outward estate in the world.

3 Those that have attained this excellent estate must be exhorted to three
things.

1 By godly conversation to walk worthy of the kingdom of God 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
1. Pet. 2.9. Secondly to rejoice in their King, and speak of the praises of
the great renown of the sacred Kingdom that thus comes in the name of the
Lord Psalm. 145.10.11. and 149.2. Math. 11.10. for many Prophets and great Kings
have desired to see such days, and have not seen them, in that cleerenesse we
now see them. Thirdly, willingly to suffer for righteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.

Lastly Ministers should here be informed and provoked by all means possible,
in season and out of season to exhort persuade, beseech men, and turn
themselves into all forms to prevail, for it is about a kingdom they labor.

Thus for instruction.

2 It serves for reproof First of such as can be so easily content either to
want or loose the means, the kingdom of God is taken from them Math. 21.43.
Secondly, of the waiwardnesse of caueling hearers that can never be set down
but are still obiecting, against this word of doctrine or the estate of
Christians, these are condemned Math. 11.16. etc. Thirdly, it is a great error
to rich men in special, who are threatened with impossibility to enter into
this Kingdom, if they do not above all other men look to themselves, Math.
10.23.24. Fourthly, of the discontentments of Gods servants under crosses, is
there no king in Sion? or is it no privilege that the first Dominion is come
unto them, Micah. 4 9. Fifthly, it specially reprooues those wicked persons that
profess by their works they will not have Christ to reign over them by his
word Luke 19.14.27. Zacha. 14.17. woe is unto them, and woe to such as shut up
the kingdom of God before men Math. 23.13.

3 For comfort to all Gods servants. Did so great Kings and Prophets desire to
see these things we see? what is it to enjoy such a Kingdom? was it a great
offer in Herod to offer half his kingdom, what is it in God to give a whole
Kingdom, better then any Kingdom on earth? yea this comfort is the greater,
in that such christians whose grace is but like the grain of mustard seed,
may be possessed of this Kingdom.

Which have been to my consolation.]

Doctr. The labors of Gods servants are a great comfort unto good men, it is a
comfort to see Gods work prosper, and besides joy in the holy Ghost is wrought
in their hearts by the power of the word preached.

Quest. Why many hearers have no more comfort in hearing.
What should be the reason, why many that come constantly to hear Gods
servants* yet get not consolation, or not the comfort they desire.

Answ. The lets of comfort are either 1 in men, or 2 in God.

In men they are either of frailty without any great sin, or such as arise
of sin.

The lets of frailty are specially two. 1 Bodily distemper by sickness or
melancholy, but this may be tried thus if they be dead hearted in all other
things as well as hearing and prayer etc.

2 Waiwardnesse in the distress of conscience when the soul refuses comfort
Psalm. 77.3.

The lets of comfort that arise of sin may be considered two ways, first as
they are in the worser sort of men. Secondly, as they are also in the better
sort. In the worser sort these are the lets; First impenitencie Ier. 8.6.8.
Secondly, Providence Ier. 6.10. Thirdly, vile affections such as are.

1 Worldly grief or fretting. 2 Worldly cares, these are thorns. 3 Rage and
passion Romans 15.4. 4 Lust 2. Tim. 3.6. 5 Envy 1. Pet. 2.12*

4 A spirit of slumber Romans 11.7.8. etc. 5 Contrariety or contradiction in
opinions Phil. 2.1.2.

In the better sort 1 want of preparation, plowing must go before sowing Math.
17. Of attention Isa. 55.3.4. Of estimation of comfort received Job. 15.11. Of
godly sorrow Isa. 61.62.

2 Prevailing of other ioies.

3 An over high expectation.

4 Presumptuous sins.

5 Spiritual satietie and fullness, when they seem to have grace enough, and
want nothing, too like the Laodiceans Revel. 3.

Thus in men.

2 God does restrain consolation, sometimes for reasons secret to himself,
sometimes for reasons revealed, but not to us, as

1 To teach us to know that comfort is his gift, and to draw us to look above
the means. 2 To teach us to live by faith and not by sense. 3 To scourge
unthankfulness, 4 To compel us to the use of other of his ordinances, too
much neglected.

Thus of the lets.

To pass from this point we may here observe, 1 An immutable praise in the
Apostle, he enuies not the labors of his brethren, he is so far from it that
he rejoices in it. 2 we may see that the wisest and greatest men have need to
be comforted of meaner men. 3 Here is a reproof of such workmen as by their
labor grieve Gods people, and are as thorns and goades in their sides but
comfort them they do not.

Thus of the salutations of the Jews.

The salutation of the three Gentiles follow, the first is Epaphras who
(besides the report of his salutation) is described 1 by his office the servant
of Christ. 2 By his relation to them, who is one of you. 3 By his love to them
showed by striving in prayer for them. 4 By his zeal not only for them but
for the two neighbor Churches, verse. 13.

This Epaphras was the Cities preacher among the Collossians he is kept back at
Rome for a time that so Tichicus might confirm the doctrine before taught by
Epaphras.

Quest. But why is the Apostle so long in speaking of him being so short in the
mention of the rest? Answ. It is the Apostles discretion to honor him before
his own people.

A servant of Christ] He was a servant of Christ first as a man and so by the
necessity of creation he must serve Christ whether he would or not. 2 As a
Christian man and so he serves him willingly and in religious works. 3 As a
Preacher of the Gospel, and so he serves Christ in a special function in the
Church.

Doctr. 1 Ministers are Christ's servants, whence follows two things, first
they must do his works. Secondly, they must not be servants of men.

Doctr. 2 The estate of the Ministers of God is an estate of serving not of
reigning, they are not Lords over Gods heritage, nor must they think to be
like the Princes of the Nations.

Doct. 3. It is a great honor to be Christ's servant; for all his servants are
freemen, and their wages is everlasting: and therefore we should love to be
his servants, neither should it ever seem evil unto us to do his work.
Besides, it is a great comfort to poor Christians, though they cannot be Kings
and Apostles, yet they may be Christ's servants, which Kings and Apostles have
accounted their greatest honor. Thirdly, men must take heed of despising or
abusing Ministers, seeing they are Christ's servants, yea it is not safe to
abuse any Christian for that very reason. Lastly, seeing it is so great a
dignity to serve Christ, both Ministers and people must be careful to
perform Christ's service, with observation of what Christ requires, for the
manner or rules of his service.

Ministers must not seek their own things, Phil. 2.21. they must not be given
to wine, not to filthy lucre, not fighters, not covetous, not profane in their
families, not young scholars, not scandalous, 1* Tim. 3.3.4.5.6.7. 2. Tim.
2.24. they must faithfully care for all the matters of the Church, Phil. 2.20.
they must serve with all modesty and tears, Act. 20.19.

Christians in their service of Christ must remember to lay aside all
immoderate cares for the profits and pleasures of this world: ye cannot serve
Christ and mammon. 2. That Christ will not be served but in newness of spirit:
the old heart can do Christ no work Christ will accept, Romans 7.6.

Who are Christ's servants.
Quest. But who are Christ's servants?

Answ. If you speak of ministers, it is answered negatiuely, Gal. 1.10. He
that preaches man's doctrine, or goes about to please men, he is not the
servant of Christ. If you ask of Christians in general, it is answered Romans
6.16 His servants you are to whom ye obey. If ye conscionably endeavor to obey
the word of Christ, you are the servants of Christ; otherwise ye serve sin
unto death.

For conclusion, let us so settle our hearts to serve Christ, that we remember
to do it, 1. constantly at all times, 2. sincerely by doing all his works
both public and private.

Which is one of you.] Doct. There is a special love due to fellow-citizens.
This I have noted before. But I add, that the love of Citizens must shun
five things, as great rocks to make the shipwreck of true affection upon: 1.
Opposition or quarrel and suits in matter of estate. 2. Envy at the
prosperity or trade of others. 3. Faction or banding into sides in matters of
government. 4. Schism in matter of Religion: but it is to be noted, that it is
profane and fleshly men that have not the spirit of God, that cannot abide
others because they run not with them into the same excess of riot, for Gods
servants would feign live at peace, Iud. 18.19. 5. A reioicing together in
evil. The love that leads men from their calling to go from tavern to
tavern, or from sport to sport, is not true Citizen-like love, it is base and
unwarrantable.

The third thing in the description is his love to his people, showed by
praiing for them. In his prayer note

1. The action, that he does pray. 2. The subject persons for whom, for you. 3.
The circumstance, he prays absent. 4. The variety of his prayers, prayers. 5.
The feruencie of his prayers, strives. 6. The constancy of his prayers,
always. 7. The matter he prays for, 1. their perseverance, that ye may
stand, 2. their perfection amplified, by the measure, (full) and by the extent
of the subject, (in all the will of God.)

Prayer. The force of prayer.
] Doct. Prayer is the usual remedy and refuge for Gods children in their
griefs and desires: a remedy I say for all times, persons, and places. As for
griefs and fears, it is of force and available, 1. against the troubles and
cares of the world, Phil. 4.6. 2. against the stings of secret tentations and
prevailing sins, 2. Cor. 12.9. Matthew. 9. 3. against the shame of evil works
past, both the blushing and gnawing of the conscience inwardly, and outwardly
the reproach of name, Zeph. 3.11. 4. against sickness, James 5.15. 5. against
ill tongues, Psalm. 119.4. 6. against the fear of apostacy, 2. Tim. 2.19. And
these are the most usual things that need to trouble any child of God. And as
for desires, it is a plain proposition, that God is rich to all that call upon
him, Romans 10.12. This shows the felicity of every child of God, to whom God
has given the spirit of his son into his heart as a spirit of prayer; for
we see he cannot be miserable that can pray: and it should teach us that if we
would be counted Gods people, to show that we trust God, by pouring out our
hearts before him in all places and at all times, Psalm. 6.2.8. 1. Tim. 2.8.

For you.] Doct. 1. Ministers must pray for their people, as well as preach to
them. And as this may humble ministers under the sense of the neglect hereof,
so it should teach the people to requite their labor in the Lord, by praying
for them again: but especially they should take heed they send not their
teachers with hearts full of grief to complain of them.

Doct. 2. Prayer for others is a principal sign of our love to them. Hereby
ministers may try whether they love their people, and parents whether they
love their children, etc.

Doct. 3. In that Epaphras prays for them absent, he is therein a pattern of
a true pastor; no distance of place can make him forget the love of his people.

Prayers. Sorts of prayers.
] There be diverse kind of prayers: for they are varied first by the place, for
there is public prayer, and there is private prayer, either with our families,
or alone by our selves. Secondly, by the manner, and that either for form, or
affection: for form, there are not only ordinary set prayers, but
eiaculations, short requests or desires, cast out upon sudden opportunities;
these be prayers, and accepted of God, though the words be few or abrupt. For
affection in prayer, there is prayer unto which is required the usual devotion
of the heart, and there is supplication which is with special instance and
importunity, Phil. 4.7. Thirdly, by the instrument, there is the prayer of the
mouth, and the prayer of the heart. Fourthly, by the matter, for there is
deprecations for turning away of judgments, and confessions with
acknowledgement of sin, and petition in matters of request, and thanksgiving
for benefits received.

Strives.] But why must we strive in prayer? Because of the greatness of our
own wants and necessities, and because it is a great loss to lose our prayers.

What striving in prayer imports.
Quest. But what does striving import? It imports earnestness as it is opposed
to coldness, when we draw near to God with our lips, but our hearts are far
from him: or to spiritual fainting in prayer, Luke 18.1. Secondly, tenderness
of affection, both sorrowing and reioicing in prayer, according to our
occasions, and the matter of prayer. Thirdly, a resolution to take no denial.
Fourthly, difficulty, for fighting imports opposition.

Eight things we must fight against in prayer.
Quest. But what must we fight against in prayer? Answ. 1. Carnal counsel. 2.
Distractions by the lusts of the flesh or cares of the world. 3. The objects of
our own flesh. 4. Our own unskillfulness to pray, strive to learn to pray
better. 5. Hardness of heart. 6. Sleepiness o^ our body. 7. The temptations
of Satan. 8 We must strive against God himself, as Jacob did by wrestling to
get the blessing.

Use. For reproof of such as never complain of any impediments in prayer, nor
care how they speed: their condition is as far from happiness, as their
practice is from duty. And they are to be blamed, that complain of their lets
and discomforts in prayer, but yet they strive not. But we should learn to
harness our selves, Note
and conscionably strive against all that might hinder us; and to this end set
our selves in Gods presence, and beseech God to heal our infirmities, and
help us against all the lets of prayer, and stir up in our hearts the
promises made to prayer, observing fit times, and watching to all
opportunities, to be importunate when any door is opened.

Lastly, would one be fervent in spirit? They must then look to 4 things.
First, they must serve the Lord; for a profane person can never be fervent.
Secondly, they must labor to rejoice their souls with the hope of a better
life; for such comfortable meditations inflame the spirit. Thirdly, we must
get patience under worldly crosses and tribulations, else the cares and
vexations of the world will choke all true feruencie. Fourthly, we must
continue in prayer; for use and experience breeds feruencie.

Always.] We must be constant in prayer, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Luke 21.36. To pray
always, is to keep a constant order in the daily performance of this duty,
and besides to pray upon all occasions and opportunities. The profit comes by
this constancy in prayer, appears by the proofs, to be 1. much joy, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. 2. they that pray continually, shall escape the last terrible
things, and be able to stand in the day of Christ, Luke 21.36.

Here we may see the difference between a godly mind and a carnal heart.
The godly mind is always praying, but the carnal heart is seldom without a
sense of tediousness, with a desire to be rid of the burden of it.

The reason why Gods children be so willingly employed in much and often
prayer, is partly because God commands them to pray always, partly because
they find unutterable benefit and refreshing in prayer, and partly they daily
get hereby what they desire, Mark 11.24.

If any take unto them the words of those wretched Jews, Mal. 3.16. and say
what profit is it to keep Gods Commandments, or to walk humbly, and that
they could never find any good by it, I can soon answer that in their
prayers and obedience there was no profit, for indeed they did not walk
humbly, nor in the power of godliness did they keep Gods Commandments.

Ob. But have not the best of them all, their sins, distractions and wants,
as well as others? how then can they be so bold and frequent in prayer?

Sol. The children of God have privileges, others have not; for their wants
are covered by Christ's intercession, and their suits are followed in heaven by
Christ's aduocation, 1. John 2.1. and framed in earth by the spirit, Romans 8.26.

Ob. But how can they find matter for so much prayer?

Sol. If men had by the law gathered the catalogues of their sins, and
learned to see and fear the judgments sin might bring, if they had observed
the daily straits of a mortal condition, if they had considered the almost
infinite occasions of prayer for themselves and others, they would not thus
object.

Ob. But there are some that do pray, and that always too, against their
corruptions, and yet cannot speed, nor get strength against them.

Sol. If they have constantly prayed (which yet I doubt) then the reason is
either they watch not in practice to cut off the occasions of evil, Luke
11.36. or they strive not with importunity to prevail with God, Luke 18. or
else they cannot be truly affected toward Gods grace in others: for if envy
at the graces and estimation of others reign in thee, it is just with God to
deny to give thee that grace thou enuiest in others.

To conclude, if any man hitherto careless of this duty, be now desirous to
be instructed how to pray as he ought, with words, affection, and success, let
such a man put on a mind to observe the rules following.

1 Thou must forgive all thine enemies, Rules for prayer.
and resolve to live without malice, Matthew. 6. 2 Thou must constantly hear
Gods word, else thou can never pray, but God will abhor thee and thy
prayers, Pro. 28.10. 3 Thou must get and show a merciful heart to man, if thou
would prevail to obtain mercy with God, Pro. 21 13. Matthew. 5.7. 4 Thou
must carry thy self orderly and quietly in the family, 1. Pet. 3.7. 5 Take
heed of hypocrisy in praying to be seen of men, Matthew 6.
Ob. But I want words. Sol. Pray God to give thee words, and mind thine own
way, by considering thy sin and wants, by the law.

Ob. But I want the affections of prayer. Sol. Search whether there be not some
vile affections, lusts and passions unmortified, Psalm. 66.18. 1. Tim. 2.8. and
pray God to give thee the spirit of compassion, Zachar. 11.12. Yet in all this
take heed of security, rest not in beginnings: God will take that at the
first, which he will not still be content with. Learn to pray better.

Thus of the sixth thing.

The last is the matter he prays for.

That ye may stand.] Concerning perseverance here are four things to be
observed.

Doct. 1. That in the visible Church there may be such as will not stand: and
this is true both in true members, and in seeming members. The true members may
fall either by infirmity, and so the righteous falls seven times, and rises
again, or by presumption, falling to the practice of gross evils, out of
which they cannot recover, but with extreme sorrows. The only seeming
members, not only may, but certainly will fall, and that most an end finally,
without recovery. So Demas, Judas, Ioash, and many more. This should teach us,
not to think it strange if we see apostacy in men that have rooms in the
Church, and have acknowledged the truth according to godliness.

The misery of such as fall away.
Doct. 2. That it is a fearful thing to fall away, a worse condition likely a
man cannot choose for himself, 2. Pet. 2.20.21. For Satan will re-enter, and
gain a stronger possession then ever he had, yea their dispositions unto evil
may seven times more be enflamed then ever before; seven devils worse then the
former may enter. It were better to be ground under a millstone, then thus to
live in apostacy, Matthew. 21.44. Such persons are abolished from Christ, Gal.
5.4. They are in the power of Satan, 2. Tim. 1. last. Their latter end is worse
then their beginning. It had been better for them never to have known the way
of righteousness, then having known it to depart from the holy commandment
given unto them. They are as hateful to God as dogs and swine, 2. Pet.
2.20.21.22. yea they may so order the matter* that they may fall into such a
condition as there will remain no more sacrifice for sin.

Quest. But what should be the causes of their apostacy?

The causes of falling away.
Answ. The causes are either without them, or in themselves. Without them, are
ill counsel, as in the case of Ioash, and the effectual working of Satan, not
only to glut himself in the blood of their souls, but thereby to work
scandal in the weak, and scorn in the wicked.

Within themselves, the causes are in some unbelief Romans 11.20.
, in some pride and the vanity of our own conceits 1. Tim. 6. vlt.
, in some covetousness and ambition, so in Judas and Demas, in some the very
leuitie and inconstancy of their nature, in some the concupiscences of the
lusts of the flesh 2. Tim. 3.
, in some certain opinions wilfully received, as justification by the law Gal.
5.4.
, or that the resurrection is past 2. Tim. 2.16 17.18.
, or the like: but the general cause is the want of practice of that we hear
Matthew. 7.
. And therefore let him that stands take heed lest he fall, or by any means
be turned away from the love of the truth 2. Pet. 3. vlt. 2 Cor 10.11.
, and the rather, considering that many that are fallen, had great knowledge
Heb. 6.4.
, and great joy in hearing the word Matthew. 13.
, and great affections to the ministry, (for so had the Galathians to Paul
Gal. 4.
.) and besides they were such as in reformation did forsake the filthiness^ of
the profaneness of the world 2. Pet. 1.20
, and had a taste of the heavenly gift, and were partakers of the holy Ghost,
and tasted of the powers of the life to come Heb. 6.4.5.
.

Ob. But some one may say, they that are fallen find no such misery in their
estate.

Answ. Thou know not what they find: 2. They are for the most part cast
into a spirit of slumber.

Ob. But they fall not from religion: for they are Protestants still, and not
Papists.

Answ. There is a total apostasy, and an apostasy in part: they fall from
the sincerity of religion. Demas did not turn Gentile, or the Galathians, nay
the Pharisees that committed the sin against the holy Ghost, did not openly
renounce religion. And therefore let men take heed of falling from the
simplicity that is in Christ Jesus 2. Cor. 11.3.
. And thus of the second doctrine.

Doct. 3. Perseverance may be obtained: a man may stand and hold out to the end
To. 5.1.2.3.
. God is able to stablish us 1. Cor. 15.1.
. And the word of God is Gods power, not only to regeneration, but to salvation
Romans 14.4.
. The weapons of our warfare are mighty 2. Cor. 10.4.
, and great power is made known in weakness 2. Cor. 12.10.
: only believe, and use the means.

Doct. 4. Much prayer is a great means to obtain perseverance, and will
prevail: though this be not the only means, yet it is an effectual means.

How many ways Christians may be said to be perfect.
Perfect.] A Christian man may be said to be perfect diverse ways.

1 In the cause or fountain of holiness: so good gifts are said to be
perfect, Iam. 1.17. viz. as they are from God.

2 In respect of consecration or calling, so the word that some translate to
make perfect, is translated by others to consecrate, Heb. 1.10. and 5.9. which
imports that Christ may be said to be perfect, because he was separated or
dedicated, or called to perfection, or has a perfect calling.

3 In respect of acceptance, not in respect of operation, the Lord accounting
our confession of imperfection for perfection.

4 In respect of parts, though not in respect of degrees: he is perfect in
that he has holiness in every part, though not in such measure. Thus to be
perfect is to be sanctified thorowout.

5 Comparatively, not positiuely, comparatively I say either with carnal men,
or ordinary hearers, or infants in grace. A Christian that makes conscience of
all his ways, and can love his enemies, is perfect Math. 5.48.
in comparison of carnal men, that follow the swinge of their own corruptions
and affections, and so he is too in respect of ordinary hearers, that seek
not the power of godliness: and as for infants in grace, it is perfection to be
of ripe age, or strong in the grace or knowledge of Jesus Christ 1. Cor. 14.20.
Ephesians. 4.12. Hos. 5.14.
. And so the doctrine that is to be propounded is called the doctrine of
perfection Heb. 6.1.
.

6 In respect of truth, though not in respect of absoluteness: thus he is
perfect, because he desires and endeavors after perfection, though in act he
attain it not. Thus uprightness is the perfection of a Christian after
calling.

7 In respect of men or common estimation, and so he is perfect that is
unrebukable.

8 In respect of the end, and so he may be said to be perfect three ways.

1 In intention, because he sets perfection as a mark to shoot at Phil. 3.
. 2 In respect of duration, because he holds out to the end. 3 In respect of
accomplishment, because he finisheth what he undertakes in godliness or
mortification, he does it not by halfes, or in some parts of it, for so to
perfect is translated to finish Act. 20.24. Ioh. 4.34. and 17.4.
.
Here then we see what we must do to be perfect men: we must confess
conscionably our imperfection, we must live in uprightness, and not in any
gross or presumptuous sin; What we must do to be perfect.
we must finish what we undertake in godliness, and we must strive after
perfection; we must love our enemies, and rule our tongues Iam. 3.1. and 1.5.
, and let patience have her perfect work: he that does this is a perfect man.

But a man shall never attain unto this unless he labor for much knowledge
1* Cor. 14.20.
* and to that end exercise himself in the word of righteousness Heb. 5.14.
, and besides a man must withdraw himself from the world, and deuote himself
to sincerity, and especially a man must get a great deal of love, for that is
the bond of all perfectness Col. 3.14.
.

Full] The faithful are said to be full both in respect of the number of
faithful persons added to the Church, Acts.
and in respect of the plentiful performance of the rich promises of God 2 Thessalonians. 1.11
and in respect of holding out till their course be fulfilled Romans 11.25.
, but I take it to be meant of fullness in graces, and duties, in both,
fullness is required, in duties fullness is taken for abundance, and sometimes
for the fulfilling of some particular, office or charge, both are required Act.
9.36. Phil. 1.11. Act. 12.14.26.
, in graces there is a fullness of faith and knowledge, and of zeal, Act.
6.3.5.8.
and of joy Ioh. 3.29. and 15.11.
. The fullness of faith is the confidence, and undaunted assurance of it, the
fullness of knowledge is the largeness of understanding and discretion, the
fullness of zeal is the power of words and affections, the fullness of joy is
the truth and contentment of it.

Hence we may discern the state of the soul of a Christian, it is like a
vessel under the conduit pipe of Gods ordinances filling more and more, by the
influence of Christ till it come to be brim-full.

Hence we may see cause to be greatly humbled, because our works are not full
before God.

Now if any shall think this doctrine of fullness to be a doctrine of
discouragement, he may note these things for remoouall of that objection.

1 That it is a kingdom men labor about, and therefore should not think much
if much be required of them. 2 We may fill spiritually, though we do not
discern it. 3 God requires not fulness at first, but by degrees. 4 That the
Lord has in many Scriptures, promised to help us, against all tentations and
impediments, whether arising from our own weakness, or from without us.

In all the will of God.] Caietan a Papist makes a stop at, all, and reads it,
in every thing, by the will of God, and delivers the sense thus: That ye may
be consummate, in respect of your selves, and full in respect of others in
every spiritual thing, by the will of God, that is, not by your own merits
(note that) but by the grace of Gods will.

But I think it should be read, as ordinarily it is read, and so I observe
that we should take counsel for the informing of our faith and reforming and
perfecting of our lives, at the will of God.

Which serves for great reproof, of the course of the most men, who are
advised and guided, either by carnal reason, or by the lusts and wills of
their carnal friends* or the lusts and tentations of Satan, himself 1* P^t.
4.2. Ioh: 8.44.
, or the inclination of their own flesh, how are worlds of men swayed by these
or some of these, almost in all matters of religion: if reformation and the
practice of the sincerity of the Gospel, may not get the consent of their
own carnal reason, or of such and such friends, etc. then it must never be
gone about. But contrariwise, we should learn to stick to Gods will in all
things, yea we should pray earnestly, that we might never be beaten from this
Anchor-hold, but that in all estates, in prosperity and adversity, in life
and death, we might constantly exalt the glory of Gods will, to yield it for
ever our acknowledgment of sovereignty over us Psalm* 40.8.10.
.

Secondly, note here that we must respect all Gods will* and thus we are
tied to respect all the will of God, both in respect of knowledge, and in
respect of practice, for we should labor to be made rich in all things, in
all kind of utterance and in all knowledge 1 Cor: 1.5.
, we should be expert in the word of righteousness, accustoming our selves
continually, to exercise our wits about discerning of good or evil out of the
word Heb: 5. vlt.
: in practice we must have respect to every commandment of God, and as David
did, we must labor to do all Gods will, and not be like Saul or Herod.

This may serve first for confutation of the Papists, that will not allow the
will of God to be the only rule, though they grant it to be a perfect rule.
But let us detest their subtle distinction, and in the simplicity that is in
Christ Jesus, acknowledge that there is a will of God, for every opinion and
work of every man of God, sufficient to make him perfect in all knowledge, and
every good work 2 Timothy 3.16.
.

Again, if this doctrine were soundly urged thorough every commandment, it
would ransacke the hearts of carnal men, and then manifestly let them see, The
arraignment of the civil honest man.
the vanity of their false and wild presumption of civility and Gods liking
of them and their honest meanings; It is true, they dare not say with their
tongues, there is no God, but is there not such talk in their hearts? or could
they not wish there were no God Psalm: 14.1.
. They worship not Sun, Moon, nor Stars, but is there in them that warmth
of love to the true God, that they can love him with all their hearts and all
their souls Deuteronomy: 6.5.
? where is that lively knowledge of God Io: 17.3.
? where is that trembling fear of God Hab: 3.16.
? where is that glorying in God Ier: 9.24.
? where is that cleaving unto God Acts 11.23.
? do these men every day commit their ways and their works unto God Psalm:
37.5. Prou: 16.3.
? These men use to wonder at Heretics, but what forms of God do they conceive
in their heads every day? They will not blaspheme God to his face: it is true;
but will they not murmr from day to day at the work of his hands 1 Cor.
10.10.
? They place no divinity in the signs of heaven, but will they not fear them
neither? yet this is condemned as well as the other Ier. 10.2.
. It is true, popish Images are gone out of their sight in the Churches, but
are the pictures of the Trinity gone out of their houses? They think indeed
it is too bad never to come to Church, or to give God no worship, but do they
make conscience of cold service of God, or luke-warmnes Revel. 3.15.
, and continued hypocrisy? For may it not be truly said of them* their hearts
almost never come to Church Isa. 29.13.
, sure their souls will be indicted in the day of Christ, and convicted too for
obstinate Recusants; witchcraft, coniuring and charming is naught, they say,
but is going to witches and coniurers and charmers naught too in their opinion
Levit. 20.6. Esaias 8.19.20.
? To forswear a man's self they hold it somewhat vile, if it may be discerned,
but what conscience make they of swearing in their common talk, especially by
petty oaths, and that which is not good Math. 5.34.37.
? They dare not curse God, but they dare curse the creatures of God by the name
or justice of God: they dare not talk directly against God, but they dare use
Gods titles without reverence Deuteronomy. 28.58.
. They say they know all comes from Gods blessing, but do they daily seek the
sanctification of their callings and the creatures by the word and prayer 1 Timothy 4.4.
? We all say the Sabbath must be sanctified, but who makes it his delight? we
condemn labor on the Sabbath, but where are those Nehemiahs, that will
restrain this monstrous abuse in the City, of hyring laborers on the Sabbath.
Though for many Sabbaths one after an other, they travel hither many hundreds
of all sorts from all parts round about, and fill the streets almost with
tumults on the Lords day, from the morning till near the evening, yet none
seeks the reformation of this matchless abuse? or if any would restrain it,
how are they opposed? The Lord give repentance to those that have sinned this
way, and lay not the toleration of this damned abuse to their charge. Men say
at length, it is naught to keep open shops, or ride to Faires on the Sabbath
day, but who repents of the idle and fruitless spending of the Sabbath? we
do somewhat in public duties, but who cares for the private duties in the
family on the Sabbath? Men will not openly rail on Magistrates, but how
licentious are men's tongues in private? or when do men affectionately pray for
their superiors? where is a well ordered Family to be found? Say that men
forbear blood, fighting, do they forbear anger, envy, frowardness, bitter
words? They avoid whoredom, but do they shun filthy speaking and lust? Some
men shun drunkenness, but do they shun drinkings 1 Pet. 4.3.
? Open stealth is abhord, but secret fraud and deceit is common 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Deuteronomy. 25.13.
. Covetousness is condemned, but in worldliness men are drowned, and see it
not. Gaming for pounds and hundreds is easily censured, but for crowns and
shillings, it is no offense. Men make some conscience of false witness in
Courts, but at home they make no conscience, of evil speaking, or suspicions,
or censures. It may be men would be loath to be found guilty, of raising
slanders, but yet men love lies Revel. 22.
, if any body else will invent them: and they will go about with tales and
spread them Leuit. 19.16.
, they will discover secrets Pro. 11.13.
, they will slander by scoffing or jesting Ephesians. 5.4.
, they will report part of men's words, but not all, or not in their sense Math.
16.61. Ioh. 2.19.
, and for evil thoughts and worlds of contemplative wickedness, these men
never care for.

Object. But some may say, 11 Objections answered.
what need all this ado, it is preciseness to be so curious. Answ. It is
true it is preciseness, and we are commanded to walk precisely for so the
word is Ephesians. 5.15. And besides there is that necessity of it, that unless our
righteousness, exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (who yet
lead a civil life) we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven Math. 5.20.
.

Object. But we see the most men and those too, men of great place and
learning, do not favor such stricktnesse.

Answ. What then; such is the calling of a Christian that not many mighty, not
many wise, not many noble etc. will be drawn to deny themselves that they may be
saved: But yet we must enter into, at that streite gate that few find 1. Cor.
1.27. Math. 7.
.

Object. But there is none can do as you require.

Answ. In many things we sin all, but yet Gods children do endeavor after
the holiness required confessing their faileings, and no sin has dominion
over them, but now other men allow themselves in these evils, and think all is
well, and have no desire or indeauor to show their respect to all Gods
commandments, but venture all to Gods mercy, yea they will not forgo such
sins, as they can leave if they list, they will continue in sin that
neither bring them pleasure nor profit.

Object. But might some one of the better sort say, what are we bound to
respect all Gods wills, and to be perfect and full, and to stand so too? who is
able to bear it? is it not a heavy yoke?

Answ. It is true that all this is required, and hereby we may see whether
sin has bought us, and what impotencie is now in us: It is true also that a
mortal condition is a hard condition. Our Savior meant some thing when he
said strive to enter into the strait gate. Yet a Christian needs not faint,
for it is all good work, and he is to obey no worse a will, then Gods will,
and for no worse an end then his own good, and with no worse company then all
the Saints.

Object. But the multitude of my former sins troubles me, that I cannot with
that comfort address my self to undertake this strickt course.

Answ. This is thy comfort that in Christ there is a propitiation for all thy
sins past: and now that God calls for this obedience he will accept thee as
righteous by forgiving thee all former accounts Romans 3.25.
.

Object. But if all were forgiven me yet I cannot do all that God requires of
me in his law.

Answ. Thou art not under the law but under grace, Romans 6.14.
thou art freed from the rigor of the law, so that thou extend thy desire and
indeauor to all the will of God, thy perfection is but vprightnes.

Object. But in my best services there is much evil.

Answ. Christ makes request for thee, and by the virtue of his intercession,
the evil of thy good works is hid and covered.

Object. But I am so weak I cannot find strength almost to do any work of
God, much less all and to hold out too.

Answ. As weak as thou have subjected themselves to all Gods wills, of which
some now sleep in the Lord, who from small beginnings grew to great ability
in Gods service: what may not grace like a grain of mustard seed Math. 13.
grow, too in short time, besides Gods ordinances are mighty through God, to
fulfill our obedience 2* Cor. 10 4.6.
, and God will show his power in thy weakness 2. Cor. 12.9.
, yea it is his covenant not only to require all his will, but to give us his
spirit to cause us to do them Ezech. 36.27.
.

Object. But if I were set in never so good a case, and had for the present
never so good success, yet I fear falling away.

Answ. God will keep the feet of his Saints ^. Sam. 2.9.
.

Object. But I have tried a great while, and I have great helps, and yet I
find not any such graces or fullness, or any such likelihood to stand.

Answ. It is one thing what is and an other thing what thou feel. 2 Consider
whether thou have not desired to do all Gods will, and endeavored it as thou
knew it, and that with desire to do all perfectly, certainly the will,
study, care, desire is accepted with God. 3 Consider whether God has no^ let
thee see all this while that thou art accepted as full and perfect, what sin
have thou begged pardon for and not obtained it? what duty or grace is it that
thou have prayed for constantly, and God has utterly denied to answer thee?
if God have accepted thee why do thou charge thy self falsely?

Object. But I know not all Gods wills, much less can I do them.

Answ. It shall be to thee according to what thou have, and not according to
what thou have not; increase in knowledge that thou may increase in grace,
what shall I say? Consider but the recompense of reward, God will reward every
work, and should we not then do all his wills? though the task be hard and
labor great, yet the pay and gain is exceeding great, if we had so many ways
to thrive in our estates, we would refuse no labor, Oh why should we not seek
the gain of doing every will of God?

Thus of the twelfth Verse.

Verse. 13 14 For I bear him record that he has a great zeal for you and them
that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.

14 Luke the beloved Physician and Demas greet you.


In the 13 Verse the zeal of Epaphras (which is the fourth thing) is
described; First by the testimony of Paul, I bear him record. Secondly by the
quantity of it a great zeal. Thirdly by the persons for whom for you etc.

The Apostle uses all these words to set out his zeal, because he was
desirous to have him in great respect, with his hearers, for he knew if he
were once contemned or suspected, his doctrine would be unfruitful, and his
hearers made a prey to false Teachers. Besides perhaps he found the people
inclyning to grow to have enough of him, or to suspect him, or to lessen their
regard of him.

I bear him Record] Note.

1 That the witness of one Apostle is a sufficient testimony and infallible
which should encourage us to study their writings, seeing we are sure to find
nothing but truth there.

2 That the best testimony is not our own record of our selves, let thy
neighbor not thine own mouth praise thee Pro. 29.
.

3 Godly ministers should be ready and forward to preserve the same of their
brethren, and in particular willing to give record for them, but if we would
have record from others, we must not beidle, or ignorant, or corrupt, or
scandalous, Oh the misery of these times, how are insufficient or wicked
Ministers, written for to the Patron, to the Bishop, to the congregation,
concerning whom there can be no sufficient testimony in the day of Christ, and
happy were it if no Church men had their hands in such records, the Lord
pardon and purge the sins of the sons of Levy.

Zeale] D. Zeal is needful in a Minister, now his zeal is two fold, either
for God, or for Gods people, a Minister should show his zeal, for his people,
by praying for them. 2 Painful preaching to them, in season and out of season.
3 By protecting them against the reproaches and scorns of the world, striving
by doctrine not only to comfort them, but to wipe away the aspersions cast upon
them. 4 By earnest rebukes and admonitions: he must cry aloude, and not spare,
not suffering them to sin. 5 By suffering either with them, or for them.

The Use is to excite zeal in Ministers, and to awake them out of that
coldness or deadness, especially in teaching, it is a wonderful scourge to
the people, and a dishonor to the glorious doctrine of God, where the teacher
is without life or spirit, in the enforcing of his doctrine.

And is zeal good for a Minister, then sure it is good for the people too:
indeed it is of exceeding praise in all sorts of men of what degree soever,
neither will it be a miss here a little to consider more seriously of zeal,
seeing there is much need of it, in the world, and there is much mistaking
about it.

Now if men will be rightly ordered in their zeal let them look to these
things. 12 Sorts of wrong zeal.


1 Let it not be a pretended zeal as in Ioash. 2 Nor a superstitious zeal as
in Paul Gal. 1.14.
. 3 Nor a passionate zeal, only for a fit, as in John at his first entrance. 4
Nor a malicious zeal as in persecutors, that think they do God good service
in vexing men wrongfully Act. 7.9. Gal. 4.17.
. 5 Nor a wrong intended zeal, such as is the zeal of merit-mongers. Romans
10.2.
6 Nor a contentious zeal, such as theirs that make needless rents in the
Church Romans 13.13. 1. Cor. 3.3.
. 7 Nor a secure zeal that is a zeal not raised by godly sorrow 1. Cor. 7.10.
, or that is carried without care or fear of falling away. 8 Nor an idle zeal
that is all words without works: the word is rendered labor sometimes, and it
is certain true zeal is spent about good works Tit. 2.14.
. 9 Nor an ouercurious zeal, showed either by sticking too much to the letter
of scripture Act. 21.20 21.
, or by prying into or harsh censureing of the lesser faults of others Math. 7.
, 10 Or a bitter zeal Iam. 3.13.14.
, that spends it self in railing and fiery reproaches, railers seldom stand
long. 11 Or an ignorant bold zeal such as was in the Jews Romans 10.2.
. Or lastly a self conceited zeal, when men trust too much to themselves, and
their own judgments.

True zeal has in it 6 things.

True zeal has in it six things.
1 The affections of worship and spiritual compassion, it will not rest in the
bare work done, either of piety to God, or spiritual mercy to men, it cannot
be cold or lukewarm, in praying, hearing, preaching, admonishing, etc. 2 An
ardent love to such as fear God showed by desire, mourning and seruencie of
mind, toward them 2. Cor. 7.7.
. 3 An utter hatred of the wickedness and profaneness, of the world, with a
willingness to show and maintain, according to a man's calling a spiritual
oposition against it. 4 An affectionate desire after Gods house, and the
purity of it, thus the zeal of Gods house should eat us up. 5 A great
wrestling within a man, against the corruptions of his own nature, expressed
by indignation, sorrow, confession, strong cries to God, and revenge upon the
flesh. 6 The couetting of all spiritual things as the best things in the
world.
Lastly observe that he says much zeal or great zeal, which shows that men
ought to thrive in zeal, as well as in other graces, howsoever the world judge
of it, only let men look to themselves according to the former rules, that
they deceive not themselves nor the world.

For you and for them of Laodicea and Hierapolis] I will not trouble the Reader
with the topographie of these towns, it is out of question they were near
bordering cities. Only observe here 3 things.

1 That the care of faithful teachers, and their desire to do good extends to
other Churches, also hence they are compared fitly to stars that give light
not only to the orb in which they are, but to places further of, and this good
Ministers may do by prayer, example of faithfulness and diligence, or by
counsel or writing, or confirmation of doctrine, by preaching as there is
occasion. And this shows the worth of painful and sincere Teachers: they are
a great benefit, to the whole country, where they live, and therefore they
should be protected, and encouraged, by all them that would be accounted lovers
of their country. 2 That Ministers owe a special love and care to the
neighbor Churches, for as neerenesse of habitation, increases the strength of
civil bonds, so should it much more in spiritual. 3 That the care of other
Churches should not cause men to neglect the stock that depends upon them, it
is not sufficient that men preach somewhere God calls for an account of their
stewardship in their own charge, they must tend their own herds, he were a
strange Husbandman that would plow his neighbors field, and let his own lie
untilled, it is vile corruption, to be intent when we labor for others, and
remiss when we labor for our own people.
Luke the beloved Phisition] There is some ado amongst Interpreters who this
Luke should be, but I incline to them that think it was Luke the Evangelist,
but whosoever it was three things may be here observed.

1 That the Church of God has always consisted of men of diverse callings: so
as no lawful calling is excluded, nor yet any only taken.

2 That Physic has been of ancient honor and use in the Church, we see it
here in the Apostles time, and it was long before also for there were
Physicians in Joseph's time Genesis 50.2.
.

4 Sorts of men may be reproved concerning Physic, or Physicians.

1 Such as totallie neglect them, though they have need to use them, 4 Sorts
of men reproved about Physic.
yet our Savior Christ says the sick need a Physician o. 2 Such as are
wayward and will not be cured, that is such as through impatiencie will not be
ordered by this means, in the manner they should be. 3 Such as put their whole
trust in Physic, as Asa did, neglecting to seek unto God for help: yea it
is to be noted in Asa, that his disease being but ordinary yet to neglect the
Lord in it was a great sin, for though God has allowed Physic as an help,
yet it was never his meaning to rob himself of his own glory. 4 Such as
will out of pride and niceness, be tampering with their bodies in physic,
when there is no need, contrary to that of our Savior Christ, the whole need
not the Physician.

Now in as much as many times it is manifest, physic does no good to the
diseased we are to understand three things, first that this may be the fault of
careless and ignorant Physicians. 2 That as we grow monsters in the world by
sinning, ouerpassing the deeds of the wicked so the Lord sometimes by bringing
in strong and new diseases does ouerpasse the skill of the Physicians.

3 God for sins or trial may restrain the blessing upon the means, which
else would be available.

The third thing I note, is that the holy Ghost gives this praise to a godly
Physician, importing that a Physician should be a man sound in religion, and
zealous for the truth, and known and beloved in the Church, for as it is
certain, godly and religious Physicians may do much good, in the dangers of
their patients, so miserable experience shows that popish and superstitious
Physicians, do exceeding much hurt, by working upon those opportunities to
seduce and pervert men.

And Demas] This is that Demas that afterward forsook Paul, and embraced this
present world, from the consideration of whose estate we may observe three
things.

1 That the vices of men by the profession of the truth may be restrained when
they are not cured. This man's love of the world was in him, when he was at the
best, but it was curbed and held down, and so it is with many hypocrites, and
therefore men should be warned and look to themselves, that they be not
deceived, by taking the restraint of the outward practice of some evil, for
the true mortification of them.

It is many times a great hand of God upon unsound hearted men, that at their
best they are seen into, and not greatly esteemed, it seems it was so with
this man, for if we mark it the Apostle not only reckons him in the last
place, but he names him also without any manner of praise, as if he would
import that he durst not commend him to the Churches. We should here learn
what to do toward such from the example of the Apostle.

Now if any would know more fully what is to be done, and how they should
carry themselves toward such as they justly doubt and fear not to be right,
though they make profession: there are three rules to be observed.

1 Pity them, pray for them, and admonish them. 2 Commit not thy self unto
them, 3 Rules for our practice concerning such as we suspect in their
profession.
but be well advised before thou converse inwardly with them. It is true that
the practice of this rule is strangely censured, when those kind of people,
perceive themselves, not to be regarded so much as they would be, for usually
if in discretion, men prove before they trust, they are taxed of pride and
haughtiness: yet considering the vile hypocrisy that is in many, it is better
to be so censured without cause, then to be beguiled by men that make their
religion but a cloak to their own ends.

The third rule is that while they stand and fall not into open sin, thou
may not traduce them, but conceal thy dislikes, till God lay them open,
unless greater danger might ensue by the concealment, for the Lord may make
him sound, and give him repentance, Paul does not dispraise Demas here, as he
does not commend him.

Thirdly, we may in this man note the property of many hypocrites, they will
not be discountenanced, they are usually impudent, this man thrusts himself
into the Apostles company, and will be commended to the Churches: he will have
a place though it be the last place.

Verse 15. Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the
Church which is in his house.


Hitherto of Salutations signified, now the Salutations required follow, and
these are particular, verse 15.16.17. general, v. 18.

The particulars concern either Laodiceans, v. 15.16. or the Colossean
preacher verse 17. who is not only saluted, but exhorted, or rebuked by
intimation.

In the salutation of the Laodiceans observe two things: first, the persons who
are to be saluted v. 15. 2ly a special direction for the open reading of two
epistles, v. 16.

The persons are the brethren in general, and Nymphas in special, and the
household of Nymphas.

Salute the brethren which are at Laodicea]

1 Christian courtesy ought to have in it a holy remembrance of absent friends.

2 It is not vanity or weakness, but may stand with singular gifts and graces
of mind to be industrious and large hearted in the many remembrances of all
sorts of Christians.

3 It is profitable that men of great gifts and place should preserve their
memory with others, though it be but in these lighter complements of
salutation, for many times it may inflame much affection to godliness, in such
to whom they send their salutations.

4 God has his choice amongst men, for here he takes notice of the brethren
in Laodicea only. God does not drive in whole towns of men into the field of
his grace at once, for as it was then in turning men from gentilisme, so it is
now in turning men from profaneness, the Gospel does not work upon all
promiscuously.

And Nymphas] This Nymphas was not a woman, as Ambrose and Dionisius, and
Catharinus, and the gloss would have it: for it is (...) in the end of the
verse, his house, not her house.

This Nymphas it seems was some eminent Christian, whom Paul would specially
honor before the congregation, and so it shows that a special respect should
be had of such as did excel in gifts amongst such as profess the sincerity
of the gospel.

And the Church that is in his ^oms^.]

By the Church he means those in the household that fear God, whether they
were women or children, or servants.

Now here first I consider of these persons, and then of the title the Apostle
gives them in calling them a Church.

In that the Apostle thus with honor remembers the household of Nymphas, it
shows his singular uprightness, in that he can respect grace in whomsoever
he find it, he loves a good servant as well as a good Master, and can
commend good order in an household as well as in a congregation. This should
teach us not to have the grace of Christ in respect of persons, and hereby also
we may try our love to Gods children, by examining our selves, whether we can
love such as can neither profit or pleasure us, nor grace us in the world. And
this may be a great encouragement to the young and meaner sort, in that they
may perceive from hence, that if they get true grace, they shall be respected
both of God and good men.

Now in that the Apostle calls this household a Church, A religious Family, is
a little Church. The uses of it.
we may note, that a religious and well ordered family is as it were a little
Church. Here, in one family is prescribed what all families should be, this
family is called a church, because his people were godly, and the word of God
was read there, and prayers made to God, and Psalms sung, and the younger sort
were catechized and instructed.

Now do we learn from hence, that our houses are Churches? then these things
will follow.

1 That Gods worship and piety must be set up in them, 4 Orders in the Family.
how can they be churches of God, if God be not served in them? 2 All must be
done there in order, and quietness, and silence, for so it is or should be in
the Church. 3 Evil persons that are incorrigible must not dwell there, but
must be cast out, Psalm. 101. 4 The Husband or Master of the family must dwell
there as a man of knowledge, and wives, children and servants must obey as the
Church does Christ.
Again, are our families Churches? why then religious families are in a happy
case, for then God himself will dwell there. So as a stranger coming to such
places, may say as Jacob did of Bethel, surely God is in this place.

Lastly, should our families be Churches? Oh then woe unto the world of profane
households, should a Church be without sacrifice? and can their families escape
Gods wrath, seeing there is neither prayer nor piety in them, but in stead of
Gods service, there is cursing, and swearing, and lying, and chiding, and
filching, and whoring, and railing, and fighting, and what not? The most
families are very cages of unclean spirits: where not God or good men, but
very devils dwell, they are very styes of uncleanness and unholiness.

Thus of the 15 verse.

Verse 16. And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause it to be read also
in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that you likewise read the Epistle from
Laodicea.


These words contain a direction for reading 1 of this epistle, and that both
privately and publicly. 2 of an epistle from Laodicea.

Of reading the Scriptures.
In the general we may observe, that the Scripture may be read, it is men's
duty to do it, it is a flat precept, search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. and this
may evidently reprove the profane neglect of the most herein, in this great
light, many are so drowned in carelessness, that they have not yet, so much as
a Bible in their houses, and others thought for their credit sake, they have
gotten them Bibles, yet they read them not.

This Epistle.] In that this Epistle may not be neglected, but must be read, it
shows that whatsoever is revealed to the Church, to be a part of the word of
God, it must be read: so soon as this Epistle is written, it must be read of
all Christians, which shows that every part of Gods word is to be read.

Now for the persons that must read the Scriptures, it is here set down
indefinitely ( of you) meaning of all sorts of people, which is in other parts
of the word of God, distinctly expressed. For 1 Timothy 4.13.15. Ministers must
read the Scriptures; and Deuteronomy. 17.19. it is required also of Kings, and
Magistrates also, none are too good or too great to be employed herein: young
men must study in the word, Psalm. 119 10. so must women also, Act. 17.12.
Priscilla was ripe in the knowledge of the Scriptures, able to instruct others,
Act. 18.27. what should I say, every good man must read the scriptures, Psalm.
1.2.

The use may be to stir us up to do it, and to do it constantly, for the
same word of God that requires it to be done, shows it should be done
frequently: we must read all the days of our life, Deuteronomy. 17.19. and that
daily, Act. 17.11. day and night, Psalm. 1.2. they read 4 times a day, Nehem.
9.4.

The profit of reading the Scriptures.
And the rather should we be excited to this daily reading of the word,
considering the profit comes thereby, it would exceedingly comfort us, Romans
15.4. It would be a lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths, Psalm.
119. The word is the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6. and how can we resist
tentations with It is written, if we read not what is written, and without
reading we can never be expert in the word of righteousness, thereby we are
made acquainted with the mysteries of the kingdom, and come to understand all
the counsel of God, it will teach us the fear of the Lord, and keep that our
hearts be not lifted up, Deuteronomy. 17.19.20.

Q. But what should be the reason that many get no more good by reading the
word, and cannot find any great profit in their reading?

The causes why so many profit not by reading the word.
I answer diversely; 1 Some men are poisoned with the inclinations of Atheism
and security, they come to the word to observe it, not to let the word observe
them.

2 Many seek not a blessing by prayer: whereas it is certain the flesh will
not of it self savor the things of the spirit.

3 Men bring not an humble and meek spirit, whereas unto the fruitful
meditation of the word, a heart quiet and patient, and a mind free from pride
and passion is requisite, Psalm. 25.9.

4 Men lay not down their cares and lusts, they have marred their taste before
they come, they do not empty their heads and separate themselves to seek the
wisdom of the word, care or lust will choke the word.

5 Men read not all Gods word, nor do they read constantly, they will not
wait daily at the gates of wisdom: to read seldom, or by starts and here and
there, will do little good.

6 One great cause of not profiting, is the not seeking of the law at the
Priests mouth, that is, want of conference and propounding of doubts.

7 In many, unprofitableness, is the scourge of unthankfulness for the good
they have found in reading.

8 In reading men do not mind their own way, for if men did propose unto
themselves, what sin of their own they might find rebuked, and what
directions might be collected out of that they read for their lives, or did
note how the word did offer comfort when they need it, they could not but find
many excellent experiences of Gods providence and power in the word, they could
not live in any sin, but either reading or hearing would discover it, nor
could they go long without some word of comfort, when they needed it, yea they
might observe, how God in the word they read did counsel them too, when they
were in distress, therefore let him that reads mark, and read for himself.

Lastly, the cause is in the most, that their hearts are not turned to God, and
so the veil is not taken away, 2 Cor. 3.16.

Cause to be read.] Observe here.

1 That it is not enough to read our selves, but we must cause others to read,
by exhorting, encouraging, commanding, etc. especially Parents and Ministers,
should see to it, so should Magistrates also.

2 From the coherence note, that we must cause others to read, when we have
read our selves; It is vile hypocrisy, for a Minister or Parent to urge their
children or servants to read the Scriptures, when they neglect reading
themselves.

In the Church.]

Here we have a plain proof for reading of the Scriptures publicly in the
Church, we see it was anciently both required and practiced. add for the
further confirmation hereof these places, Deuteronomy. 31.11.12. Neb. 8. Luk 4. Act.
13. And this may assure us, 1 That public reading is no invention or ordinance
of man. 2 That the people of God have found in all ages great need of this
help: and therefore they are miserably transported with humor, that so vilify
or neglect this ordinance of God, and it may be just with God, that thou
should not profit by reading at home, when thou carest not for reading in the
Church. Thus of the reading of the Epistle to the Colossians.

Epistle from Laodicea*] Here is a great ado among Interpreters to find out
what Epistle this was.

1 Theophylact thinks it was the first epistle to Timothy, which was written
from Laodicea, an other town of that name, not this Laodicea before mentioned.

2 Some think Paul did write an Epistle to the Laodiceans, which was
Apocrypha: and so Dionisius tells of a third epistle to the Corinthians,
Iacobus Stapulensis caused such an epistle to be printed, but Catharinus could
easily a^ouch that it was a bastard and counterfeit.

3 Some think the Laodiceans wrote to the Apostle, and propounded their
doubts, unto which the Apostle has answered in this epistle: and therefore
required that his answer might be compared with their doubts, this is the most
public opinion.

But in the general it shows us thus much, that we must read other good
books as well as Scriptures.

Thus of the 16 verse.

Verse 17 And I say to Archippus take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received in the Lord that thou fulfill it.


These words concern the Colossean preacher, who is not only saluted but
exhorted.

This Archippus as it seems was their Pastor, joined with Epaphras, who was
now at Rome with Paul, Painful Preachers, many times, grow idle.
it is likely he was grown negligent in teaching, and careless and idle.

Many times it comes to pass that men that sometimes were painful in their
Ministry, do afterward grow slack and negligent.

1 Sometimes from very discouragements from their people, either because they
profit not, or because they weary their teachers, with indignities and wrongs;
thus the very Prophets have been sometimes so tired, that they could have been
almost willing never to speak more in the name of the Lord.

2 Sometimes this comes from the corruption of their own natures, they grow
soon weary of Gods work, or else having taken more work to do then they are
sufficient for, they grow to neglect all, or else they are drawn away with the
love of the world, or else forbear of purpose to preach often, lest they
should be thought to be too precise, or else to win applause, they set out at
first with such a strife to seem eloquent, and learned, that they quickly
spend their store, and then rather then they will be observed to want, they
will give over preaching.

3 Sometimes God himself for the wickedness of their lives casts a
barrenness upon their hearts, and blasteth their gifts.

In this exhortation four things may be noted.

1 Who he is that is exhorted, say to Archippus. 2 The matter charged upon him,
see to thy Ministry. 3 The reason by which it is urged, thou have received it
of the Lord. 4 An explication of the matter charged by the extent of it, to
fulfill.
Say to Archippus.] Here I observe 7 things.

1 The Sinner must be told of his sin, Leuit. 19.17. 2 Such as offend
publicly must be told of it publicly. 3 Ministers as well as others may be
rebuked, though some Clergy men are so sore and so proud, that they may not be
touched: and many times it is a just judgment of God, that no man should rebuke
them, that their sores might not be medicined, but like unsavory s^lt, they
should be cast out of God. No man's learning or greatness of place can so
protect them, but that they may be told of their faults: it is too commonly
known they can sin as well as others, why then should they not be rebuked as
well as others.

Does Archippus need to be told? the Lord be merciful to the land and Church;
There be many Archippasses in the Church of England, had need to be wakened
with a loud trumpet of rebuke, and to be told of their faults, even of their
ignorance, silence, sloth, pride, covetousness, simonie, dissoluteness,
ambition, contempt of their brethren, and soul murder of many kinds.

4 The people may put their teachers in mind of their faults: as they ought to
encourage them in well doing, so may they admonish them for what is evil,
Therefore Ministers should strive so to live, and so to teach, as their people
should not have cause to find fault. 5 Ministers must be told of their faults
by their people, with great reverence and heedfulnesse, and wisdom, according
to that direction, Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father; here they
must say to Archippus not directly reprove him. 6 They must say it to him, not
say it of him, Ministers ought not to be traduced behind their backs. 7 He does
not threaten him if he do not, which implies, he hoped their exhortation
would speed: certainly it is a great praise to profit by admonition.
Take heed to thy Ministry] This take heed has in it three things.

1 Consideration, a weying and meditation of the greatness of the function, of
the dignity of it, and the duty also, with the accounts he must make to God
and his high calling and the great price of souls, etc. 2 It notes diverse of
the worthy qualities of a Minister, as care, attendance, watchfulness,
aptness to teach, and divide the word aright, discretion, to give every one
his portion, diligence, gentleness, in not marring the doctrine with passion,
patience to endure the work and labor of his ministry, etc. 3 It notes
caution, and so Ministers must take heed both of what is within them, and what
is without them, they must take heed of their own diuinations, they must take
heed of sloth and idleness, they must take heed of the objections of their
own flesh, and the tentations of the Devil, without them they must take heed
of the new errors, that will daily rise, they must take heed of the sins of
the people, with all the methods of Satan in devising, committing, or
defending of sin, they must take heed of men's fancies: and for persons they
must take heed of hypocrites, and open adversaries, domestical vipers, and
foreign foes, false brethren and professed Idolaters.
The Use may be for great reproof of our sleeping watchmen, and blind guides,
that take no heed to their ministeries; Oh the woes that will fall upon them,
who can recount the miseries that the blood of souls, will bring upon them.

Which thou have received in the Lord] A Minister is said to receive his
ministry in the Lord in diverse respects. First Because it is Gods free grace,
that he is chosen to be a Minister Romans 5.1. Secondly because, he is inwardly
called and qualified by God. Thirdly because, he received his outward
authority, though from men, yet by the direction and warrant of Gods word.
Fourthly because, he receives it for the Lord, that is to Gods glory, and the
furtherance of his kingdom, over the mystical body of Christ.

The Use is threefold, First the people should therefore learn to seek their
ministers, of God. Secondly Ministers should hence learn, neither to be proud
nor idle, not proud for they received their ministry of God, it was his gift
not their deserts, not idle for they are to do Gods work. Thirdly Ministers
may hence gather, their own safety notwithstanding the oppositions of the
world, that God that called them will perfect them.

To fulfill it] Ministers are said to fulfill their ministeries two ways. 1 By
constancy, holding out in it to the end, to fulfill it is to go on, and not
look back, when they are at plow. 2 By faithful performance of it with a due
respect of all the charge they have received of God, thus to fulfill it is to
show the people all the counsel of God, it is to rebuke all sorts of sins
and sinners, it is faithfully to do every kind of work, that belongs to their
ministry whether public or private.

Verse. 18 The salutation by the hand of me Paul, remember my bonds, grace be
with you Amen.


There are 3 things in this Verse, a sign, a request, a vow or wish.

The salutation by the hand of me Paul] To write with his own hand he calls
the token in every Epistle 2 Thessalonians. 3.17. Here two things may be noted.

1 The great care that anciently has been to provide that none but the true
writings of the Apostles should be received of the Church, it should cause us,
so much the more gladly to receive and read these Apostolical writings. 2 It
implies that even in the times of the Apostles, Satan raised up wicked men who
endeavored to counterfeit books and writings, and to father them upon the
Apostles themselves, or other eminent and worthy men, this continued
successively as a most devilish practice in diverse ages after.
Remember my bondes] The observations are. 1 Gods children have been in bonds.

2 It is profitable to remember the troubles and afflictions of Gods children,
and to meditate of them, for 1 it may serve to confirm us when we find like
hatred from the world. 2 It is an alarm to preparation and the harnessing of
our selves against the fight of affliction when one part of the host of God is
smitten, should not the rest prepare for the fight. 3 It will soften our hearts
to mercy both spiritual and corporal. And 4 It may learn us wisdom and
circumspection.

How many ways men remember the bonds of others.
Quest. How should they show it that they did remember his bonds?

Answ. 1 By praying for him to God. 2 By showing like patience under their
Crosses. 3 By constant profession of the doctrine he suffered for. 4 By a care
of holy life, that they might strive to be such, as he need not be ashamed to
suffer for them. 5 By supplying their wants.

3 As any have been more gracious, so they have been more streitened, and
oppressed by the wicked.

4 The actions of great men are not always just, a worthy Apostle may be
unworthily imprisoned.

5 The people should be much affected with the troubles of their teachers, and
therefore they are far wide, that instead thereof trouble their teachers.

Grace be with you] By grace he means, both the love of God and the gifts of
Christ, as he began so he ends with vows and wishes of grace, which shows. 1
That in God we have wonderful reason continually to exalt the praise of his
free grace and love.

2 That in man there is no greater happiness then to be possessed of the love of
God, and true grace, it is the richest portion, and fairest inheritance on
earth.

When he says ( be with you) It is as if he said three things. 1 Be sure you
have it, be not deceived, nor satisfied till ye be infallibly certain ye have
attained true grace, and Gods love. 2 Be sure you loose it not, never be
without, it matters not though ye loose some credit or wealth or friends etc.
so you keep grace still with you. 3 Be sure you use it and increase it, employ
it upon all occasions, be continually in the exercise of it.

Thus of the whole Epistle.
There follows a postscript or vnderwriting in these words. Written from Rome
and sent by Tichicus and Onesimus.
There is difference about the reading, some coppies have not Tichicus and
Onesimus in some Lattin coppies read, Missa ab Epheso. But the greek coppies
generally agree that it was from Rome.

But it is no great matter for the certainty of the reading, for the Reader
must be admonished, that the postscripts are not part of the Canonical
Scripture: But were added by the Scribes that wrote out the Epistles. If any
desire to be more particularly informed herein, he may peruse a learned
Tractate of this argument published by Mr Rodulph Cudworth, upon the
subscription of the Epistle to the GALATHIANS.

(...)
FINIS.

