THE ROWSING OF THE SLVGGARD, IN 7. SERMONS.

Published at the request of diverse godly and well affected.

By W. B. Minister of the word of God at Reading in Barkeshire.

PROVER. 24. 30. I passed by the field of the slothful, etc. to the end of
the 32. verse. AT LONDON, Printed by the Widow Orwin for Thomas Man. 1595.

THE ROWSING of the Sluggard.
The first Sermon.
PROVER. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 6 Go to the Pismire or Emot, O sluggard, behold
her ways, and be wise: 7 For she having no guide, governor, nor ruler, 8
Prepares her meat in the Summer, and gathers her food in harvest. 9 How
long will thou sleep O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep? 10
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep.
11 Therefore thy poverty comes as one that trauaileth by the way, and thy
necessity like an armed man.
IN the five former verses, the holy Ghost has condemned hastines, and
unadvised rashness, as the very bane of sur^^iship, and the undoing of many men.
In these verses he proceeds against idleness, and negligent slouthfulnes, or
slothful negligence, another extreme, contrary to the former, and no whit
inferior in danger unto the former. And between both he requires in all the
children of God, an advised diligence in all the ways of their calling, to
show that the way of a Christian is to make an even course between so many
rocks and dangers, as he is on both sides beset withal, and always to sail
by the card and compass of Gods word, the spirit of God sitting as Pilote at
the helm to direct the course by the same; lest otherwise, either upon the
rocks of rashness and vain glory, or upon the sands of slouthfulnes and
negligence, he suffer shipwreck of body and soul before he need, or before
he would.

The matter of these verses is in general a disswasion from idleness and
negligence: Idleness for want of a calling, and negligence in a man's calling are
the principal things which the spirit of God here deals against, persuading
also to faithful diligence, by the example of a silly creature the Pismire.
But more particularly these points are in these verses to be considered of:
first, the Sluggards Schoolmaster, and his lesson that he must learn, in the
6. 7. 8 verses: the^ the Sluggards examination in the 9. verse: then his
answer in the 10. verse: and lastly his judgment in the 11. verse.

And this text may be called the rowsing of the Sluggard, because it has to
deal with one that is fast asleep, and therefore comes to awaken him by all
the means he can devise, as it were by calling, pulling, and hallowing, and
pinching, and terrifying, as if he would not leave him till he had awakened
him, if he will be awakened: for first, he persuades him by the example of a
Pismire, to shame him withal: then he debateth the matter with him to know how
long he will sleep, to see if that will awake him: and then he shows him his
nature and property, to see if that will awaken him: and then seeing he will
not awake, he shows him the danger of it, and so he leaves him: And the
same course will I take.

But for as much as every man consists of two parts, viz. body and soul,
both which are in time to be provided for, and Salomons care was as well for the
one, as for the other: therefore we will set down two sorts of Sluggards to
deal withal. The Sluggard temporal, and the Sluggard spiritual: for some are
Sluggards for the body, and some are Sluggards for the soul. Of Sluggards
temporal which neglect the things of this life, we may also set down two
sorts, either such as live without any calling, or such as live neglige^tly in
their calling. Of Sluggards spiritual likewise, I summon two sorts to appear
before the Pismire: first, those that have no care at al to use the means of
their souls health, but live as though they had no souls to save: then those
that use the means of their salvation but coldly, and negligently, driving off
all to the last cast, think that it is not yet time to make their provision.
And first of the Sluggard temporal.

Go to the Pismire, etc. The Sluggard is here set to school with a very
simple schoolmaster, and yet able to teach the Sluggard wisdom, if he will
take the pains to behold her ways, that is, to consider well of the order and
manner of her living, and to apply the same unto himself. Whereby we may
learn first that idle bodies and slow bellies which live without a calling, or
negligently in their calling, are not so wise, and therefore neither so
profitable, as the silly Pismire is. For she is wise to help her self, by
making ready her provision in time: the Sluggard has no wisdom, nor care to
help himself, nor to save any thing that he has. Now he that has no care to
help himself, for whom will he care? He that is unprofitable to himself, to
whom will he be profitable? He that will not till his own ground, whose ground
will he till? He that will not labor for himself, for whom will he labor? for
every man naturally is given to help himself, and to provide for himself:
therefore it seems that Sluggards and idle packes are unnatural, and
monsters in nature. And therefore ought to have no place in nature, that is
amongst men or beasts, because they are not so profitable as either man, or
beast, be the one never so simple, and the other never so filthy. For the
beast is still in his kind even to the very Pismire or Emmot, but the Sluggard
is out of kind. And therefore the Apostle warns the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians.
3. 10.
that if any amongst them were able to work and would not work, they should
not eat; to show that idle persons are not worthy to live: his reason is,
because they be inordinate livers, and work not at all, but are busy bodies,
that is, they live out of all order, intermedling with other men's business, but
altogether neglecting their own duties. Such are those wanton widows and
prattling gossips, of when the Apostle speaks in another place, which live in
pleasure, that is, they love not to take any pain for their living, now hear
the Apostles judgment of them, They that live in pleasure (says he) are dead,
1. Tim. 5. 6.
while they live: that is, they are unprofitable to men, and as good dead as
alive, and better too: for while they lived many were the worse, no man the
better for them: but when they be dead, they hurt no body: besides that, the
worms, or something else, do then feed their fill upon their carcass, which
in their life time fed upon all other, but fed none themselves.

The natural man has abho^ed idleness for want of a calling, although he had
no light but the light of nature: therefore when Joseph's brethren came before
Pharao, he asked them of what trade they were: Genesis 47. 3.
for it was a very unnatural thing to be without a trade, that is, without
some ordinary and lawful kind of calling, either in the Church, or
Commonwealth, whereby a man may be both profitable to others, and helpful to
himself.

As the natural man condemned it, so does the Pismire here in our text rise up
in judgment against the Sluggard whatsoever he be, but especially against him
that for want of a trade, or some calling, is become a sluggard, and leads an
idle life: For she having no guide, governor, nor ruler, does gather her meat
in summer, etc. What would she do if she had a guide and governor? etc. And
what a shame is this to the slouthful person (if he be not past shame) that
has both guides, and governors, and rulers, both to teach him, and keep him
in order, besides the benefit of reason and understanding: and yet for all
these means and helps, which the Pismire wants, is careless of his own
good? But has the Pismire or Ant no guide, nor governor, will some say? how
is it then that she does always keep that wonderful order, and take that
marvelous travail for her living, without breaking or altering thereof? To
this we may answer, that her order is the order of nature given and imprinted
in nature by God at the beginning, her guide is God himself, and her governor
is the euerwatching, and everlasting providence of the Almighty, which
extends it self to man and beast, to all things in heaven, in earth, in the
sea, in hell, and in all places, and at all times, yea to the Pismire, the
fly, the hairs of a man's head, the hairs of every man's head in the world,
and finally takes account of every hair upon every man's head. Mat. 10. 30.
But as for other helps, and other guides, and other governors, the Pismire
has none: man has so much as she has, and more too by many degrees: therefore
if man shall be found more careless; nay, if not ten thousand times more
careful and painful then the unreasonable creatures, he must justly be
condemned: for God does condemn him, the natural man does condemn him, the
brute beast does condemn him, the poor Pismire does condemn him, and the
whole course of nature does condemn him. Then grievous, and just must that
man's condemnation be, that is denounced and ratified by all. Therefore in time
go to the Pismire, O sluggard, behold her ways, and be wise: for she having
no guide, etc.

There be some, companio^s to Atheists, which partly through ignorance, and
partly through pride of heart, (for commonly they go together) that have not
stuck to find fault with the creating of the Pismire, the fly, the worm, and
an infinite number of creatures more, and as it were to quarrel with God for
making of the^, because (as they say) they cannot see to what purpose they
serve, or what good they do in the world. Now for an answer to these witty
fellows that will set God to school, we may tell them, that if these silly
creatures (whereat they are so offended) did no more good, nor were no more
profitable in their kind, then idle brains and the sluggish persons be, and
such as themselves be, which do nothing but find fault with God, and his
works in nature, like dogs which bark at the Moon; it were no great matter if
the world were rid of them, saving that God must be glorified in his judgments
upon them, if they repent not, or in his mercy, if it please him to work
their conversion.

But in the mean time, I demand of these cauillers, and quarrellers with God,
what hurt does the fly, etc? It is said of Apelles the cunning painter, that
he did by art make the picture of a fly, sitting upon a man's face, in such
artificial and lively manner, that diverse coming to look upon the picture of
the man, took the said painted fly for a living fly indeed, in so much that
one with his handkerchefe stroke at it, and thought to have driven it away but
could not, which being perceived, they did greatly wonder at the excellent
cunning of the painter. But what is Appelles to the Almighty? or who gave him
that cunning which he had? did not God? Now, shall a pain^ed fly, which is no
fly, serve to set forth the cunning and skill of a man, and shall not men much
more take occasion by seeing a living fly, to praise the Lord, and to wonder
at his most excellent and unspeakable wisdom, and skill, and power, and
glory, which into a thing of so small compass, and quantity, has put such
variety of joints and members in such order, and comelines, with such ^ute of
diverse colors, such liuelines, nimblenes, and swiftnes, as a thousand worlds
are not able to match or make the like unto any part thereof?

If any man would know to what use frogs, grasshoppers, caterpillars, and lice,
etc. serve, let him ask Pharao, and his subjects of Egypt, and they will tell
him, that as there be many uses of them, so one especial use is to punish
wicked men by them, and when the Lord will, they shall be his host to subdue
even the pride of the proudest, and to make the stoutest to stoop.

But the Pismire, the Pismire, wherefore is she good, or what profit comes by
her, will the sluggish Atheist say, that had never any leisure yet to peruse the
Proverbs of Solomon? Oh says the sluggard, we read that she gathers her
meat in summer and harvest, etc. But what good does she else? does she nothing
but gather meat and devour it? Verily no. That's enough for thee O sluggard,
to devour, and help none: for so thou do indeed. Or else there is no
creature but is profitable in some measure: The sea swalloweth up whatsoe^^^ is
cast into it, but yet it is profitable both in nourishing of fishes, and
carrying the ships for the good of man. The fire consumes all that is cast into
it, but yet it makes a recompense with his heat, which is so necessary that
no man can be without it. Prou. 30. 16
The grave never says hoe, (says Solomon) but yet it is profitable in
smothering evil smells and savors, which else would annoy the living. Yea they
do receive the dead to their lodging, when no body durst abide the^ within
their doors, nor within their streets, nor within their walks, nor within
their fields, nor within their sight, nor within their smelling: Like the
earth which received Abels blood, Genesis 4. 11.
when it might not be suffered to have a resting place in Abels body.

Now, if idleness and slouthfulnes were but half so profitable as the sea,
which yet drowneth infinite numbers: or as the fire, which spares neither
house nor city: or as the grave, wherein is nothing but stink and rottennes:
yea if they were not 1000. times more hurtful, then any of these, they might
be more borne withal, then now they can be, or ought to be.

But yet the Sluggard is not answered, he must needs know wherefore the
Pismire serves, and what she should do in the world: And the Pismire on the
other side meruaileth what the idle Sluggard does in the world. It is no
marvel though the Sluggard cannot away with the Pismire of all other things:
for many idle scholars cannot away with the school, nor their schoolmaster;
no more can the Sluggard well digest the sight of the Pismire, because he is
put to school with her to learn wisdom. For he counts it as a kind of
disgrace to his person, to be set to school at an Ant-heape, or at any body
else: but so it pleases the Lord we see to pull down the pride of men, and by
the vile and base things of this world (as S. Paul says) to confound the
mighty. 1. Cor. 1. 27
What say many now adays? They skorne to learn their duty at the preachers
hand, or to be catechized, they will not so much be abased and disgraced,
when the Lord knows they be as blind as beetles in their duty both to God
and man. But if men be so proud, that they will not be taught by the preacher
of the word, nor be subject to the ministry of their pastors, the Lord
knows a way to humble them well enough: He can turn them out into the field
amongst the Ants, and flies, and grasshoppers, that they may see what manner of
scholars they are, when such tutors are set to teach them their lesson: Dan.
4. 30.
As he turned Nabuchadnezzar out of his palace into the wilderness, from men to
beasts, until amongst the beasts he had learned to know himself. And thus we
may see that the poor Pismire can in no wise be wanting, if it be for nothing
else, but to teach the Sluggard wisdom.

Behold her ways, and be wise. Here we are further taught, that we ought to
behold the creatures, with due consideration of their natures, and the
wonderful works of God in them, and that we ought so to behold them, as to
be the better for beholding them, and not to be (as most are) idle gazers
upon them, or vain and curious disputers of them to no purpose, but for
ostentatio^ of learning or wit, etc. It is good to be a natural Philosopher,
but it is better to be a christian Philosopher withal: that is, when by
beholding and learning the natures of the creatures, we are drawn nearer to
the Creator, and taught to know our selves, and our duty to God better then
we did. For this is true wisdom, and true wisdom is true Philosophy.
Therefore the Sluggard being sent to the Pismire to behold her ways, and so to
get wisdom, what else is he taught, but to become a right Philosopher? So that
a man may learn Philosophy in the fields, by an Ant-heape, if he has the
spirit of God; yea as good as any Aristotle can teach him in the schools, and
better too: for he goes no further then the causes of things, and teaches me^
to rest there, saying: Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas: that is,
Happiness stands in the knowledge of natural things, and the natural causes
of natural things. But Christians have learned out of the book of God, to go
one step beyond Aristotle, and all that are but mere naturals, and that is not
only to search out the causes and qualities of the creatures, (wherein indeed
Solomon did excel, for he disputed of all things from the Hyssoppe that
springs out of the wall to the Cedar in Lebanus) but then further to make use
of the same, 1. King. 4. 33
and out of every thing to learn something, whereby they may either correct
their manners, or be more confirmed in the providence of God, or be stirred
up to the doing of their duty to God and man, or to be more humbled in
themselves, or to magnify the name of God for his wisdom, for his power, and
for his goodness, etc. Such a Philosopher was David: When I behold thy heavens
(says he) even the works of thy fingers, Psalm. 8. 3. 4.
the Moon, and the Stars which thou have ordained, what is man, say I, that
thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou visitest him?

There is no creature of God in the world, but that man may learn somewhat out
of the same, and profit by it, to the amendment of his life. The reason is,
because all the creatures of God do serve their Creator in that course and
kind wherein they were first created, only men are the sinners in this world,
and have forsaken their first estate, and are become unkind against their
Creator. If we speak of dutifulnes to our superiors, we may learn it of the
ox, and the ass: for, Esaias. 1. 3.
The ox knows his owner, (says Esaias) and the ass his masters cribbe, but
Israel has not known, my people has not understand. If we speak of
louingnes and kindness between man and wife, every man may learn it of the
Hind and the Roe: for Solomon wills the husband and the wife, to love
together as the loving hind and pleasant roe: Prou. 5. 19.
to show that there is not amongst all so much love and kindness as they may
learn of the beast. If any man will brag of his diligence and paine^ taking,
Prou. 6. 6.
the Pismire is more painful then he. Again, Pro. 30* 26. 27. 28.
The conies are not mighty, yet they build in rocks. The grasshoppers have no
King, yet g^e forth all by bands: The spider takes hold with her hands, and is
in Kings palaces. Again, the Prophet Jeremy says, Ierem. 8. 7.
that the storke, the turtle, the crane, and the swallowe are skillful in the^
appointed times: but man knows not the indgements of the Lord. The dog is
in his kind more thankful then man is. The sea keeps his tides of ebbing
and flowing, just at the day and hour appointed, that a man may be bold to
build upon his coming: to shame those that promise much, but perform nothing,
and to show that unconstant men of their word may be taught by the sea. As
they go beyond us in glorifying their Creator, so do they also far excel
us in many natural gifts, or qualities of the body, which make me^ forget
themselves: The Horse in strength: The Roe in swiftnes: The Lion in courage:
The Eagle in sight: The Dog in winding. These and ^^ny more besides these, do
excel man in the natural faculties and qualities of the body. And therefore
to conclude this point, what cause is there that we should be so proud of our
selves, or any thing that we have, or can do, seeing as all the creatures in
their kind do excel us? glorifying their Creator better then we do, yea
and are appointed as tutors and schoolemasters to teach us our duties?

Lastly, we may learn from hence, not to contemn, and disdain, but with
great reverence, and in the fear of God to use all the creatures of God: both
for that they serve so notably to set forth the glory of the Creator, and also
for that they are appointed to teach men their duties. Of Lecturers, some read
of one thing, and some of another, and are reverenced for their labor (...)
are maintained in Cities, and V^iuersities: some by the City, some by the
University, some by Noblemen, and some by the Prince, and therefore are called
their Lecturers, and are greatly reverenced and regarded. The Pismire here is
the Sluggards reader, but maintained at the Lords cost and charges: therefore
(...) may not be despised, but the work of the Lord in her is to be had in
great reverence. For the works of the Lord are great, Psalm. 111. 2. 3.
(says the Psalmist) and ought to be sought out of all them that love them.
Yea, His work is beautiful and glorious, and therefore greatly to be regarded.
It is counted no small matter to be the Philosphie Lecturer, or the Greek
Lecturer, or the Physic Lecturer, or a Reader in the Law: but to read a
Lecture of wisdom, as the Ant does, is more* because wisdom is above them
all. That was the cause why the Queen of the South counted the servants of
Solomon blessed, 1. King. 10. 8.
because they were in place continually to h^are the wisdom of Solomon. Now,
when the preaching of the word cannot be heard, which is the Lecture of all
Lectures, and teaches only (...) wisdom, then the creatures are brought forth
both to humble men and to condemn^ them. And surely these are better Lay men's
booke^* then the Popish Images, which Papists caused to be set up in Churches:
for they were layin^ vanities, and taught nothing but ^ollie and v^nitie: but
the creatures of God are not so, and they teach men the truth indeed, and out
of every creature the spiritual man may learn^ some heavenly lesson: therefore
wher^soe^e^ he becomes, he is at school, both at home and abroad, at the
Temple he learneth wis^dome, and in the field, and every where he (...)
learning of something. Now therefore to the Sluggard again. Thou see thy
tutor, it is the Pismire, her school thou know is in the fields, and woods,
all that go to school with her must sit upon the low four^e, even the very
ground, and lower they cannot (...), and (...) low must every one sit that will
go to the Pismires Lecture, for she reads the right P^il^sophie (...) (...)
life. And some would feign be in h^aue^, because they are loath to endure any
pain, or trouble, or labor, especially for the trut^ upon earth, and this is
but the sluggards wish.

We do r^^tly reprehend the Papi^ts for that Monkish life that is amongst
them, to live like Eremites, Eremites. etc.
Monks, Friars, Nuns, Chaunt (...) Priests, Mass Priests, and Soul
priests, and hedge priests, and a company of Cloister ^reepers besides, which
was most abominable before God and man. For first, they cast off all cal^ing,
and were no way profitable, eith^r in the Church or Commonwealth: then
^ec^ndly all helped them, but they helped none. God shall not need an army of
Doctors (...) Councels to confute them, this poor (...) creature the Pismire
does shamefully (...) them, and most strongly confute them. Now, as this is
common amongst those Ca^erp^llers, so we must take heed that this be not in
all of us, for we are al too monkishly addicted. How do men of trades de^^ise
with themselves how to leave their pains and to sit down, Men of trade.
or go up and down, being so rooted in idleness (...) sloth, that they know
not which way to (...) their hands to any honest labor? these are also sent to
the Pismire to learn wisdom.

Next unto them must Churchmen have a place on the low form, which fish till
they have caught that fish that they looked for, (...) then hang up the net.
And no merua^^^, (...) their net they say hit upon a company of od^e steeples
which lay in the bottom of the ri^er, Nonre^^dents*
which they never looked for, nor thought of, and with haling of them up, their
^ettes were so piteously rent and torn and spoiled, that they could ^euer fish
with them since to any purpose. These also are here sent to the Pismire amongst
the idle sluggards, to behold her ways, and to learn to be wise.

The unlearned Minister likewise which has made the Ministry his last
refuge, Ignorant Ministers.
because he would live at ease, he must go to the Pismire too: for if it
should be demanded of him, as Pharao demanded of Joseph's brethren, What
trade, or calling have they? What ^ust their answer be? Forsooth, I was
sometime a Tailor, or a Cobbler, or a Weauer, or a Glouer, or an Ostler, or a
Huntsman, or a Seruingman, or a Player, but now I am a Minister, or a Curat, or
for fault of a better, the booke-reader of our parish, for preacher he is none,
that is too painful: Therefore go to the Pismire O sluggard, behold her
ways, and be wise. That is, give over the Ministry for which thou art so
v^fit, and betake thee to thy old occupation again, and learn of thy tutor
the ^ismire, to take more pains therein.

Next, the negligent Minister must go along to the Pismires Lecture. Negligent
Ministers.
Such as at their first entering into the ministry had good gifts, but
afterward live like idle be^^ies, and betray (...) ^oules of Gods people into
the hands of the diue^. Against such the Prophet Esaias spe^keth, Esaias. 56.
(...). 11.
when he says, Their watchmen are all blind: they have no knowledge: they are
aldu^^^ dogs: they cannot bark: they lie and sleep* and delight in
sleeping. And the Prophet (...) says, Iere. 48. 10.
Cursed is be that does the work of the Lord negligently. Therefore if these
sluggards will avoid the curse of God, they must of necessity go to the
Pismire, and learn of her to be more painful and diligent in the work of the
Lord, there is no remedy.

The Magistrate also as well as the Minister must go to the Pismire, if he be
slothful and negligent in his office. Magistrates
For they are called pastors, and shepherds in the scripture. And therefore it
is said of D^uid, That ^e fed the people of the Lord according to the
simpliciti^ of his heart, Psa. 78. 70. 71. 72.
And guided them by the discretion of his hands. The reason was, because the
Lord did choose him, and take him from the sheepfolds, for to feed his people
in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel: By which Magistrates may see what they
should do. But if they be hot in their own matters, 2. Kin. 5. 11.
like Naaman, who cha^ed because the Prophet would not come to him, when he
sent for him; and cold in Gods matters, like Ely, who let his children do what
they list: then are they guilty of no small negligence, 1. Sam. 2. 23 24
and he is here reproved by this silly, yet diligent creature. Therefore O
sluggish Magistrate wheresoever or whosoever, go to the Pismire.

There be many Gentlemen also that must be scholars to this schoolmaster:
Gentlemen
for it is a common thing amongst the^ to say, I can live of my lands, as
though his lands were only to help him to live, n^^king no matter how he
live: or as though any man were borne to himself, and not to the soc^eie and
comfort of others. And what though they be able to live of their lands? yet God
abhors this idleness, and spending that they have gotten, idly, at play, and
pastime: For when it shall be said unto them, Luke 16. ^.
Give account of thy stewardship* how have thou spent that which I lent thee?
What will they answer? I have spent it in play, shall they say* And will this
go for pa^ment? God placed Adam in the garden of Eden, not to live idly, but to
dress it, and till it, etc. Adam was as well to live as any gentleman (for the
al was his) and yet he was not permitted to live idly. Let no gentleman say,
he has no calling: for all have a calling. If he has no calling, he may busy
himself in teaching his servants and children to know God, as Joshua did: or
in visiting and relieuing the poor, Josh. 24. 15.
and distressed, Job. 31. 8.
in being an eye to the blind, a father to the fatherles, etc. as Job was.

And this is also for the^ that spend their days and revenues in
voluptuousnes and carnal delights, as at cards and dice, hunting and hawking,
and bowling, and dancing, and chambering, and wantonness, etc. smoking it out
in the excessive pride of apparel, and spending of other men's labors: Surely
they must needs to school. Therefore go thou noble sluggard, or thou gentle
sluggard, Go to the Pismire, behold her ways, and be wise.

A number of Citizens likewise must be sent after the rest of their fellows,
for that they have taken pains heretofore, but now sit down, and study how to
live idly with their families: some by usury, and some by brokerage, the one
is the devil himself, the other the devils huntsman: some by promoting, and
some by extortion, and all because of a more easy life, that it may be said
of them as it is said of Issachar, who seeing that ease was good, and the land
pleasant, Genesis 49. 14.
he became as a strong ^sse couching down between diverse burdens: that is, he
gave himself to ease, and let all alone. So these men perceiving that ease is
good, and the gain of usury, and iniquity to be pleasant, they are become
very beasts, and are content to lie down under diverse burdens: that is, to let
all their duties be unperformed, which they owe to God and the Commonwealth.
Now, for that idleness and lazines has drawn them to live a monkish life, this
Pismire shall stand up to give judgment against them, if they do not the
sooner go to her Lecture, and learn to be wiser.

Besides all these, the Pismire has a great number of scholars more, which if
they should come altogether the school would not h^ld the^, and they are
scattered abroad in every country, some in every shire, some in every town,
and in every village, in every fair and market some, and in every alehouse
some, and upon every hie way some: and therefore the Pismire has set up her
school in every field, and in every wood, in every pasture, in every lane, and
in every hie way almost through the world, that they might not miscarrie for
want of teaching. And these be idle Players, and Fiddlers, and Rimers, and
Iesters, and Couseners, and Alehouse-hunters, and whorehunters, and tiplers,
and tospots, and Bearewards, and walking mates, with a number of counterfeit
Soldiers, and Pedlers, and talebearers, with a company of prattling gossips,
and a crew of good fellows, besides legions of idle Seruingmen, and retainers,
that be crept into Bishops houses, Noblemens houses, Knights houses, and
Gentlemen^ houses, which for any great business that many of them have to do,
might very well intend it to go to the Sluggards school. Now to every one of
these is this spoken: Go to the Pismire O sluggard, etc. that is, up, and away
to school. Me thinks* I hear them all called at school by their names, and
some body answering for them to excuse their absence: Some (says he) I saw on
the stage at midnight, teaching youth and servants, and all that came how to
play the Cousener, the Lecherer, the Bawd, the Th^e^e, the Traitor, and how to
scorn and deride the preacher, and religion, and how to practice all kind of
impiety and wickedne^^e, and all to maintain a poor living. Some are at the
Alehouses set at tables, that they cannot come yet: and besides that, they are
so filled with drink, and so emptied of wit and reason, that if they should be
brought to school, (for come alone they cannot) yet they should not be able to
learn any thing, for they would fall fast asleep at the Antheape before the
Pismire, as they do at Church before the preacher. Then others were called:
but answer was made again, that some are gone to the fair, and some to market
to cut purses, and some are keeping the hie way to take men's purses from them,
that they might not be robbed before they come home: Some are at the Tavern
drinking with their friends: some are stepped aside to divide the spoil, and
therefore they cannot come. Then another was called, and one answered for him
and said, agr^tat, he is sick of the dropsy, or laid of the new disease,
called the French disease, and so is she too, his beloved companion. Then
others were called, and answer was made, that they would come, but they cannot:
for some of them be in prison, and some be at the Bar to answer for
themselves, and some be fast in the stocks, some be upon the pillorie, some
be dancing about the market before the whip; and therefore cannot come yet:
and some are executed at the gallows, and therefore never look* for their
coming. So they were discharged* and others came in their stead.

Now these we see have their excuses when they are sent to school: like the
worldling^ in the Gospel, who (being called to the feast of the Gospel) could
not come, because of their farms, or their oxen, or their plough, or their
wives, or some what else, and therefore were shut out when they would have come.
And yet though they could not, that is, would not come to the feast, the feast
was furnished with other guests: so though this crew of good fellows cannot,
that is, will not go to the Pismire, yet her school is furnished with other
scholars. And the sum of all her reading is this, All that thy band shall
find to do, Eccle. 9. 10.
do it with al^ thy power: for there is neither works, nor invention, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go.

The Second Sermon.
AS this diligence and painfulnes in the Pismire does reprove those that live
idly, for want of a calling, and negligently in their calling: so does it
also specially and generally condemn all of us for the contempt of the
Word, Contempt of the word reproved by the Pismire.
and the neglect of the glorious means of our salvation, which the Lord
offers most kindly, and graciously unto us. Now is the market of our
spiritual food, and the harvest of our souls, wherein every one may and
ought to provide against the time of penury. And that we should not think it
a matter of liberty, God has commanded us to redeem the time, that is,
Ephesians. 5. 16
to ransom the time that we have lost, with some loss of pleasure, and
profit, and ease, that we might not always be behind hand like bankeroupts
in religion.

But we sell away the time, and truth and al, in stead of redeeming it. And is
not this worse prophanenes then that of Esaw? for he sold his birthright for
hunger: we sell away ours for a wink of sleep, or a game at bowls, or
cards, or tables, or any thing else. Nay, we are more* base-minded then Judas:
for he would not sell Christ under 30. pence* we are content to let him go for
30. halfepence, or three halfepence, or a peniworth of pleasure, or profit.

We are commanded to preach in season, and out of season, and yet some think
they are not bound to hear so often, but think that we ought to wait and
attend their leisure: whereas indeed if we come at any time, they should leave
all, and come and hear in season, and out of season, as they account it. Exodus
16. 2^. 22.
The Israelites were commended for gathering Manna in the morning, because if
they tarried till the sun was up it did melt. If the sun be up once, I
mean if hot persecution come, that we can not, nor dare not go to hear the
Word, and will not hear it now while we may in the cool of the day: shall
not the Pismire stand up in judgment against us, and condemn us? Our Savior
Christ said, I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: Ioh.
9. 4.
the night comes when no man can work. Then it were best for us to hear the
word of God while it is day: for we have more need then he had, that is, while
we have peace, for the night comes, it is to be feared, when no mq^ can
hear: and as the night succeed^th the day, so persecution commonly succeeds
peace, to sco^re off the ruft that men gather in time of peace.

Some use this as a reason to hinder reformation, and going forward in
religion: for say they, the time may come when we shall be called to account
for putting down Images, for desacing idolatry and superstition, and for
going to sermons, etc. The fear of these men that do thus reason, is like the
hope of Esaw, if it be not the very same: for Esaw said, The days of mourning
for my father Isaac will co^^ shortly, Genesis 27. 41.
and then I will kill my brother Jacob. So say they, the days of mourning for
Queen Elizabeth will come one day, and then we may be called to an account for all the idolatry that we have defaced, and for all the profession that we have
made of the Gospel. But as Jacob needed not fear Esaw, so long as his father
Isaac lived: so (thanks be to God) we need not fear the threatenings of such
ill affected men, so long as our mother Elizabeth reigns. The Lord prolong
her days as the days of heaven, (if it be his blessed will) to the utter
rooting out of all idolatri^, and impiety, and to the further advancement of
his Gospel. And happy are we, that have such golden opportunity. As Solomon
therefore builded the Temple in his rest, so God give us grace to build his
Church in our peace.

Our Savior, the Lord Jesus, did not teach us to reason so. Yet if he had been
of worldlings minds, he would have said, The night co^^^th when no man can
work^: yea the night comes when I shall answer that which I have done,
therefore it is best to let all a^^ne and save one. But he frames his argument
clean contrary: I must do the works of him that s^^t me, while it is day:
for the night comes when no man can works. And if these days should alter,
what then? Yet then shall we hau^ comfort in the obedience of our faith. Pro.
15. 15.
And a good conscience (says Solomon) in the days of affliction is a
continual feast. Therefore in these matters, let us be resolute with H^ster,
who knowing the goodness of her cause, Hester. 4. 16.
said If I p^rish* I perish: so say we, If I lose, I lose* if I answer, I
answer, I must look to lose more then this, and to answer for more then
this, but I shall lose nothing by it in the end Therefore now while we may,
let us be gathering store of knowledge, and comfort, or else the Pismire shall
condemn us: For she (...) go^ernor, nor ruler, gathers her (...), etc. We
have both guides, etc. God make us wise to take the benefit of them while we
have them.

Ios^ph being warned before hand of a dearth that should come upon the land of
Egypt, Genesis 41. 47. 48. 54.
made provision before the dearth came: Psalm. 105. 16. 17.
so would we do also to save our bodies: but the soul which is the most
precious thing* yea the Lady and mistress of the body, as though she were
dead, and lived not in us, is not regarded, no m^n makes any provision for her:
although the Prophet Amos has told us that we must look ^or a famme, Amos. 8.
11
and that of the word of the Lord, in so much as men shall go from sea to sea,
that is, from one part of the world to another, and shall not find it. Joseph
proui^^^g in time of plenty had to serve his turn, and to comfort many more
withal in time of scarcity, and what did Joseph lose by that? So if we provide
food for our souls now in time of plenty, we shall have comfort in store
both for our selves and many others when scarcity come, or when persecution
come, or when temptations come, or when old age come, or when sickness come, or
when death come, or when al come* and what shall we lose by that? (...) said,
Psam. 119. 50. 92.
The word of God was his comfort in his affl^ction, or else he had perished: So
let us say, (for we may be sure of it) if the word of God be not our comfort,
when affliction come, or when sickness, or death, or persecution come, we ^hal
perish, we shall despair, and go to hell. And how shall it be our comfort
then, if we provide not store of it now while we may? Therefore let us provide,
and gather, and lay up now as much as we can, and all will be little enough, if
not too little: for as there is a time of (...), so there will be a time of
spending, and we cannot gather so much do what we ca^, as we shall spend.

But seeing as we are now come to (...) with the spiritual Sluggard, who has
as much need to be to wsed as any other, that he may be awakened indeed, we
will take this cours^: first, I will show what must be gathered for the soul:
secondly, when it is to be gathered.

But what is it that we must gather in summer, What is to be gathered.
which cannot be had in winter? The Pismire tells us, it is meat, or food,
that is, matter of nourishment for the (...) to feed upon, and to prese^ue the
life of God in the soul, and that is another point to be observed in (...)
Emmots Lecture to the Sluggard. Many gather, but it is not meat (...), but not
of food for the soul: which (...) the Prophet Esaias found out and condemned in
his time: Esaias. 55. 2. 3
Wherefore do y^ lay out (...) and not for bread? and your labor without
be^^g satisfied? he arken diligently unto me, and (...) which is good, and let
your soul^ delight (...). Incline your ^ares, and come unto me: (...) your
souls shall line. To show that a man may labor and be never the more
satisfied, he may eat and his soul be never the fatter, but lie pining and
languishing for all that in the shadow of death. S. Paul shows Titus in what
things the Minister must chiefly labor, Titus 3. 8. 9.
and the people must be most careful to follow^, and that is faith in God,
and good works amongst men. His reason is, because these things are
profitable. But foolish questions, (...) (...) (...) want her meat and food.
There be many that be masters in Israel, and will take upon them to know much,
as the Laodicians took themselves to be rich, and to have need of nothing,
when in truth they were poor, and blind, and naked: and in many grounds of
Christian religion, are as gross as Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. 4.
who thought that a man could not be borne again; except he went into his
mothers womb again. And deal with them in any of the Principles, as of
regeneration, or mortification, or sanctification, or justification, or faith
and repentance, or about the use of the law, or the meaning of any
Commandment, or Article of faith, and many things more most necessary to be
known and practiced; and they are to seek, yea so strange they are unto them;
that sometime they are driven to answer, as the Disciples at Ephesus answered
Paul, Act. 19. 2.
when he asked the^ if they had received the holy Ghost: they said, We have
not so much as heard whether there be an holy Ghost.

But some have heard something, and do know more then others, and be as it
were awakened, and a little enlightened: Like Agrippa that was almost a
Christian: and now they think themselves safe enough, like Micah, Judge. 17. 13
who thought that he could not do amiss when he had a Leuite in his house. And
then they cast off all care of using holy means for the increasing of their
faith, or knowledge, or zeal, or rep^ntance: but give their minds to toys
and ^anities, and to idleness, and pleasures. But these men do fearfully
deceiu^ themselves: for the house well built, will fa^l to the ground, except
it be continually repaired: and the field well tilled and sown, (if it be not
still weeded, and manured) will prove barren: so will the soul prove ruinous
and barren in the graces of Gods spirit, if it be not continually sed, with the
solide^ and wholesome meat of Christian doctrine: and the talent not used to
increase, Mat. 25. 28.
shall be taken quite away* Therefore as Christ said, Math. 9. 23. 24.
when he had revived Iairus his daughter which was dead, give her meat: Luke
8. 55.
he said not* give her music but (...) her meat, least she dye again. So,
when the Lord has put his life into thy soul, which wa^ dead before, and has
in some measure quickened thee in faith, in repentance, in love* in zeal, in
patience, etc. give thy soul meat ^^musicke; sound food, not fond fancies.
And as Paul said to Timothy, 2. Tim. 1. 6.
Stir up the gifts of the holy Ghost in thee, least in the end tho^ leese
thy store, with stock and all, till thy sou^ prove bankeroupt in all the graces
of the hol^ Ghost. And withal let us know that there (...) in every one of us
a maine stream of natu^^^ corruption: against which if we do not (...)
continually, but stand at a stay, it will carri^ (...) away, and all our
merchandise: as a (...) standing loose upon the river is carried bac^ward, if
it be not rowed forward.

Some are of mind, Servants.
that if they gather to increase their own store, they have done well: but for
their families they take no care, whether they sink or swim, whether they
know God or be ignorant of his ways, pray or pray not, or whether their
souls be clothed or go naked, go to hell or to heaven, it is no matter, they
never remember their wants: Like Pharaohs Butler, who thought himself safe
when he was out of prison, but never regarded the affliction of Joseph his
fellow prisoner. If a man should demand the food of knowledge and
understanding at their hands for their servants and children, or other their
friends: they will answer as Nabal did, when David's servants requested
somethin^ of him for David and his company when they were wearied with
travailing, 1. Sam. 25. 10. 11.
Who is David? and who is the s^^ne of Is^ai? there be many servants now a
days that break away from their masters. Shall I then take my bread, and my
water, and my flesh that I have killed for my sheerers, and give it unto men,
whom I know not whence they be? So say many masters, and householders, who is
my servant, and what is my family? there are many now a days leave their
work, and fall too much to the scriptures. Shall I then take my ^nowledge, and
my learning, and my notes, and give to them? Shall I hinder my work to feed
their humor, who^ I know not whence they are? or what reason there is for it?
It should seem that if Nabal had known David, he would have given him some
part with him. S^ if thou knew who are thy servants, and children, or thy
neighbor, or friend; or Christian acquaintance, it may be thou would give
them part with thee of thy gifts, and suffer the^ to work by thy pattterne,
and to light their candles at thine. But do thou not know, who they be? Are
they not thy brethren as well as thy servants? Are they not fellow members of
Christ his body with thee, as well as they are thy servants? Have not they and
thou all one father, all one master, and all one Savior in heaven? Has not
the Lord Jesus shed as many drops of his precious heart blood for them as for
thee? and d^est thou not know what they are, that thou should have a care
to provide meat for their souls? If thou keep a beast, thou will give him
that which is necessary for this life: and are those of thy family no better
then beasts, that thou should provide no more for them then thou do for
thy beast? When the Disciples wished (without all mercy) to have fire come
from heaven upon the Samaritanes; Luke 9. 54.
the Lord Jesus told the^ that they knew not of what spirit they were* So when
men (without all mercy and compassion) suffer their families to run into the
fire of hell: saying, if they perish* they perish what is that to me, so I have
my work done* We may say they know not of what spirit they are. If the
Disciples were (...) reproved, the^ these are most justly condemned: for they
had yet some ^loake for their desire of so severe a revenge, because the
Samaritanes refused ^ost v^kindly and co^temptuously to let their Lord and
master, the Lord Jesus our Savior* into their city; But for the careless
cruelty, and cruel carelessness of these men, there is no pretense: for their
servants do not shut them out of their doors, as the Samaritanes shut Christ
out of the city: but they receive them, and labor for them. And if they did
offer thee such unkindness (which God forbid) yet is it not lawful for thee so
to be revenged, by suffering them to perish in their sins, but to pray for
them rather. The spirit of God does not use to speak on that manner: for that
is a spirit of love, 1. Cor. 13. 5
and l^ue (says the Apostle) seeks not her own things: that is, it is not
all for it self: but as it is careful to edify it self in the most holy
faith, by using such means as are appointed by God to that purpose: so has it
also compassion of others, Jude. 22. 23
as S. Jude says, laboring in all holy wisdom to pull others out of the
fire. But these are all for themselves, therefore they have not true love: they
have not true love, therefore not true faith: for faith works by love, as
Saint Paul teaches the Galathians. If they have neither faith not love, the^
have they not the spirit of God in them* if they have not the spirit of (...)
them, th^^ are they (...) children of GOD, but hypocrites, (...) themselves,
and so consequently they neither provide for their own souls, (...) of other:
but as they suffer their (...) souls to perish for want of the meat and (...)
which they should have; so do they suffer their own souls likewise to
perish, for want of that which they suppose they have, but have it not indeed.

That we may be thoroughly moved with that which has been said, and touched
with compassion toward our own souls, and the ^oules of others that depend
upon us: it shall not be amiss to hearken a little unto the piteous moan and
cry of the godly, in behalf of their souls. Psalm. 42. 1.
David ^ayth, his soul (...) after God, as the Heart braieth for the rivers o^
water: to show that our souls are as it were i^ a continual chase, and
therefore must have provided for them the living waters of Gods word, or else
they will perish. In another place he says, that his soul thirsted after God
in ^ dry and barren land where no water was. This moan did David make to God
for his soul, and yet he had more abundance of Gods g^^ces then ot hers have:
to show, that if we had a^ good provision for the keeping, and strengthening,
and defending, and co^forting of our poor souls, as David had, yet all is too
little: for still they lie thirsting and panting for more grace, for more
^aith, for more zeal, for more repentance for more love, for more knowledge,
and for more understanding, etc. for the temptations and assaults of the soul
are so many, so continual, so strong, so mighty, and so hot, that it is not a
little provision of knowledge, or understanding, or ^aith, or patience, that
will serve the turn to make resistance: for the ^^^ell shoots his darts
thick, and burning for they befierie darts. But as soldiers in a ca^tle
besieged, must have day ^e a new supply of powder and sho^, of men, and
munition, of money and victual, or else they will yield up the castle: so must
our souls have a daily supply of the graces of Gods spirit from the word of
God, or else they will faint, and yield up their h^ld: For the soul fights
as well as the body. And therefore Deborah said, Judge. 5. 21.
her soul had marched valiantly: to show that there is a marching, and a
fighting of the soul as well as of the body: and therefore there must be good
provision made for that as well as for the body, or else it will not march
valiantly, but fight faintly, and yield most cowardly, and perish most
miserably. Which daily and woefully appears by that fearful staggering and
yielding of so many, when any scoffing Papist does but as it were breathe upon
them. And what else does this show but a great emptines in the knowledge? there
is no preservative of the word against the infection.

Besides that, in regard of thy brethren thou should labor to store thy
self with the co forts and counsels of Gods word, and to be strong in the
heavenly graces of Gods spirit* for such a famine of the food of souls may
come, that one man may be glad to seeks to another for counsel and comfort.
And if thy house be empty, or have but a little, thou will be ready to say
to thy neighbor, as the widow of Sarepta said to Eliyah, when he asked, a
morsel of bread of her in the great famine that was in Israel, 1. King. 17. 12.
I have not a cake but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little ^yle in a
cruse, and behold I am gathering of stickes^to dress it, for me and my son,
that we may eat^ thereof, and die. So if any man troubled in conscience, come
to thee for comfort and resolution of his doubts, thou will say, Alas, I have
not for you, I am no Divine, I am troubled as well as you, I have nothing but
the Lords prayer, and the Belief, and the Commandments by heart, but I
understand none of the^, and some good prayers and lessons I have in a book
beside: And if those will not serve my turn when the tempte^ comes, I may
go hang my self, or despair, I must die, or do^ as it please God.

Now what cruelty is this so carelessly to neglect the means of thy souls
health, who was bred and brought up with thee from thy conception, and has in
thy service spent her self, ministering strength and relief to thy body, to
every part of thy body, yea to every member, to every joint, to every vain
and sinew in thy body. And more service then that too: for it has made thee
to differ from the beast, in that it has ministered to thee* both reason, and
understanding, and judgment, and memory, and affections, (for it is a
reasonable soul) which the beasts want: it has taught thee to speak, and to
speak sensible, and wisely, and to conceive things quickly, and to use all
other of Gods creatures comfortablie, and to rule over them all, which the
beasts cannot do: And wilt not thou oh sluggard find so much leisure as to
gather heavenly meat and food for thy soul, that in the day of affliction
and judgment, it may save both it self, and thy body too? Nay further
consider, how the Lord has shut it up in thy breast, that it might be always
in a readiness to supply thy wants, and wilt not thou be ready again to
supply her wants? If it should depart from thee but a foot, for a minute of
an hour, it were present death unto thee, how can thou then miss her? nay,
how can thou not in pi^ie and compassion provide for her safety? Nay
further, that it might be always ready to minister unto thee, the Lord has
made her which is immortal, and divine, and spiritual, and heavenly, and the
most principal commander of all, nay all in all, and all in every part of
thee, to be enclosed within thee, as thy close prisoner, and art not thou then
bound to look unto her as her keeper? Say not as Cain said, Am I my brothers
keeper? So, am I my souls keeper? for thy soul is thy prisoner, therefore
thou art her keeper: and if thou either drive her out of thee* or suffer her to
perish within thee, for want of good keeping, her blood shall be required at
thy hands. Take pity then, O sluggard, upon thy poor prisoner: which makes
as pitiful a cry for her provision, if it be wanting, as any prisoners in
the world. In London, and other such places, it would move a stony heart to
hear one crying up and down the streets. Bread and meat, Bread and meat
for the poor prisoners of Newgate, for Christ Jesus sake, and the prisoners
crying out of their grates and holes, one penie or halfepenie, for Christ his
sake, to buy some bread, to buy some bread* But thy poor soul lies in a
worse prison the^ Newgate, there is no Gatehouse, nor Colehouse, no Bocardo, no
Little ease, no Dungeo^, no channel, nor Duckpit is so vile a prison for thy
body, as thy body is for thy soul: for it is neither lightsome nor
beautiful, but dark, and most dirtie, disquiet and ^ustie, frail, and filled
up with much venom, and venomous vipers, I mean it concerning our affections.
By reason whereof the souls of Gods children have been constrained to cry,
lament, and bewail their long being in it. Oh (says David) ha^ long shall I
lie in this prison? Romans 7. 24.
Oh wretch that I am (says Paul) who shall deliver me out of this body of
sin? Oh that I were dissolved, Philip 1. 23
and had out of this earthly and frail tabernacle. Luke 2. 29.
Now let thy servant depart in peace, says Simeon. Take me unto thee, (says
David again) and bring my soul out of this prison, that it may give thanks
unto thee O Lord. For so long as it is in this body it cannot see the Lord,
yea it is an heavy habitation, and presses down s^re the spirit from that
familiarity, which else it should (...) with God.

Now all this while there are none that go about to gather for these poor
prisoners, but as the preachers cry out to men to remember their souls: but
oftentimes they speak but to the belly which has no ears. Oh that thy poor
soul had but a grate to look out at* and leave to speak for her self to
those that pass by thee, then would it appear how thou have kept her, nay how
thou have starued her, oppressed her, and robbed her of her spiritual
exercises, her heavenly comforts, and christian conference with her godly
friends and acquaintance: nay, that she has not been allowed a good meal in a
year, but now and then a few cold, idle, sluggish prayers, or a little blown
milk from the breasts of an old Homely: and when any good matter was in hand
indeed, thy poor soul was so oppressed with surfeting and riot, that it was
not able to receive any comfort: And yet thou will say, thou have as good a
soul to Godward as any body. But thy soul may say to thee, as Queen
Elizabeth said to Sir Henry Bennifield her layler (as she called him) from such
a keeper good Lord delitier me.

The third Sermon.
But yet some will say (for all that has been said) if there be no remedy
but the soul must have provision made for her, they will look out for it: but
it shall be hereafter when they are old, Of the time to gather.
or sick, or troubled, or imprisoned, or persecuted, it is time enough then:
and it is not good to be too holy, or too religious betimes, for fear of
young saints we prove old devils? Now all this is the devils counsel, and who
would think it that he should be so careful of men that they prove not
devils Now the effect of his counsel is but thus much: Be not too hasty in
these matters, it is enough if thou be a Protesta^e at large, and play the
good fellow, and make provision for thy soul when thou art full of pain, when
thy senses be gone, when thy body is dead, and thy soul be in hell: and then
thou may cry for water to cool thy heat, then father Abraham, father
Abraham, as the rich glutton in hell cried: and then thy friends shall sing a
Mass of Requ^em for thy soul, say the Papists, and then by thy good works,
and prayers of holy Church (if thou pay well for them) thou shall be redeemed
out of hell well enough. But (to let this popish trash go) what is this but to
shut the door when the horse is stolen? or to fetch the Physician when the
party is dead? or to seek for oil to thy lamps when the Bridegroom is past,
as the foolish Virgins did? and to seek for the blessing with tears, when
there is no place to repent, Hebr. 12.
as profane Esaw did? and to cry for thy goods when they be lost, at fools
do? Is this the wisdom of a Christian? Then what is that wisdom that
says, Remember thy maker in the days of thy youth? Eccl. 12. 1. 2
If he were a wiseman that said so, then are they but fools that ^ay* In youth
it is too soon. If thou be no wiser then so, go thou sluggard to the Pismire,
behold her ways and be wise* (...) she in summer, and harvest, gathers her
food against winter time: to reach thee what a fool thou art if thou let pass
the gold opportunity, and do not provide for thy soul in time.

(...) want nothing: as husbandmen in the field to till it, and weed it: as
planters and waterers to set it, and dress it: as pillars of brass in
Salomons temple, that are mighty to uphold thee: as Elisha with his staff
ready to revive thee: as guides with their lights ready to conduct thee: and
for thy safety, and all their safety, behold the Lord and his Angels
attending upon thee, and them too, serving them which serve thee, and defending
them which defend thee, and guiding them which guide thee: and therefore does
he serve, and defend, and guide the^, that they in him, and by him, may serve
thee, and defend thee, and guide thee. And as the Lord from heaven provided for
Joseph, that Joseph from Egypt might provide for his father and his brethren in
Chanaan: So does the Lord still from heaven minister to our Princes, and to our
Magistrates, and to our Preachers, and to our Captains, and to all the friends
and maintainers of his Gospel, that they in their places may provide both for
their own souls, and thine too. So that now thou need not go in fear,
nor hear in fear, nor read in fear, nor pray in fear, as they did in
Queen Mary's days, when they could not read a good book, but still they must
be looking who came to see them: like the silly Hare and Conie, that at every
bit she takes is still pricking up her ears to hear if the dogs come: or
rather like the Jews which were feign to build the wall of Jerusalem with
their trowelles in one hand, and their swords in the other hand, for fear of
their enemies. But now, if thou be not too sluggish, and fearful of thy own
shadow, thou may gather the food of thy soul in peace and security, and
work with both hands, because the Lord himself fights for thee, and
watches for thee, and keeps thee while thou do work, and that thou
may gather: As Solomon says, He preserves the state of the righteous:
Prou. 2. 7. 8
he is a shield to them that walk uprightly, that they may keeps etc. Thou
see what blessed means and helps thou have now for thy souls health. Now
consider with thy self (O sluggard) what monsterous and intolerable
ingratitude thou committest, if thou give the Lord leave thus to wait and
attend upon thee, with all his servants, in heaven and earth, and with all his
blessings ready for thee, and thou in the mean time lie down and sleep, and
say with thy self, It is not yet time to go, and gather. Besides that,
consider further how hard a thing it will be for thee (if not impossible) to
make provision for thy soul, when all these means are gone, and this summer
turned into winter. If thou will not plie it for thy soul in time of health
and peace, what can thou do when thou are beset with troubles, and sickness,
and pain? when al thy mind shall be of thy pain, and all thy wits and senses
shall be taken up, and gathered together to devise some remedy against thy
disease, and to prevent, or to sustain the pangs of death: yea nothing will be
so fearful unto thee then (thou sluggard) as the remembrance of death, and all
thy study will be how to live still, for fear of going to hell, if thou dye.

Remember again the proverb, When the belly is full the ^ones would be at
rest, not at work. Now if the mind has no list to work when thy belly is
full of meat and drink, and ease, I pray thee consider what mind thy soul
shall have of heauenely things, when thy body is full of pain, and grief,
and torment, if thou do not provide before hand spiritual and heavenly
comfort? Therefore, Go to the Pismire, O sluggard, behold her ways, and be
wise: for she gathers her meat in summer, and provides her food^ in harvest.

But some will for all this still put off the evil day, and say as the evil
servant said in the Gospel, Tush, Luke. 12. 45.
my master will not come yet: so the sluggard says, Tush, winter will not come
yet, we are yet but young, says the young sluggard. And the old sluggard
says, What need we care for persecution, or fear our enemies, so long as
Queen Elizabeth lives. And both of these, if they were sure that the winter
time of persecution, and trouble: or that the storms and tempests of
sicknesses and common calamities were at hand, they would perhaps awake and get
them to work, that they might not be without provision at th^^ time. But alas
poor souls, what charter has the former of his life: or the latter of his
peace? do we not see young dye as well as old? and many both young and old die
suddenly, when they thought to have lived long? Some dropping down in the
streets: some at boarde: some in bed: some at sea: some at work: some at
play: and some cut off by murder in frayes: some by thieves murdered in
travailing by the way: and some sitting at table, are murdered with the meat
in their mouths. Woe worth the time, and the trees that ever brought forth
such fruits of savage cruelty, and brutish barbarism in the peaceable
government of England, under the Gospel of Christ. And yet for all this, and
many more such like, thou are not warned, but think thou shall live still: as
though thou heldest thy life by Letters Patents from the Lord: and still thou
forgettest: [Thou fool this night shall thy soul be fetched away from thee:]
And wherefore has the Lord left us certain of our death, and uncertain of the
time of our death, but that we should be always ready for the coming of
death?

And as for this summer time of peace and plenty, which under the government
of our sovereign Queen, the Lords handmaide, we enjoy now, it cannot be
denied but it has been, and is great, and wonderful. And therefore great and
fearful will be the Sluggards judgment, when the winter of trouble and
penury shall come, with the famine of the Word into the land, because he has
not gathered any riches for his soul, but is bare, and barren in all the
heavenly graces of Gods spirit, yea in all this time, wherein any man might
have stored himself for many winters, and all weathers. And when that time
comes, thou shall lie and think upon the time past, yea and burst thy heart
with grief, when thou shall think how many golden occasions thou have
omitted: how many sweet sermons thou have lost for a little sleep, or one
vanity or another. And the burden of thy doleful and woeful song will be then,
the fools Had I wist.

But if we speak of Popery and persecution, or alteration of religion, or
coming of enemies, etc. some make a jest of that, as they do of all the
judgments of God: No, no, say the secure sluggards, we shall never see those
days: and if they should come, thousands and thousans would dye before they
would turn: and as for the Spanyard, let him come when he will, or when he
durst, he shall be met withal I warrant him: oh one Englishman will be too
hard for ten Spaniards: and if we all be ture amognst our selves and hold
together, we need not care how many, or how mighty they be. Thus we see how
foolishly foolish men talk, and how vain their confidence and hope is, which
is builded only upon ifs, and ands. As if one should say, If it does not
rain, it will hold up: But is he sure it shall not rain? so, are they sure
the enemies shall not come? or if they come, are they sure that al will be true
amongst our selves? or is it likely? And what reason have any man to stand so
much upon the strength and valor of an Englishman, as that one should be too
hard for ten outlandish me^? seeing God gives strength, and victory where it
pleases him, and sometime armeth his enemies against his church, yea and the
very flies, and lice, and frogs, and caterpillars, and grasshoppers, and all
his creatures he can arm when he pleases, to humble proud flesh, and to
subdue the pride and power of Kings and kingdoms.

Oh but God will never suffer them to prevail so far against us (say some)
they are most wicked Idolaters, and we profess his Gospel, etc. As if the
Lord were more bound to us, then to them: or as though it were for our goodness
sake that the Lord had preserved us hitherto, and not for his own name sake,
because it was his pleasure to make us his (...). David was once of that mind,
^. Sam. 12. 22.
that the Lord had made his hill so strong, that it should never be moved: but
that was David's error. So we think that the Lord has made our hill so strong,
that it shall never be moved: but that is our error. And pride was the mother
of it both in David, and in us. But David was moved, and his kingdom sorely
shaken as strong as he was: so we may be moved, and shaken too, as strong as
we are. But seeing as the sluggard has sealed himself a quittance, and
thereupon has promised unto himself a continual peace: we will consider a
little of these two points. Two points very necessary.
First, whether it be a thing likely or no, that after this long and blessed
possession of the glorious Gospel of Christ, a winter time of trouble may
come, or not come. Secondly, if it prove a thing likely, how we may know
whether it be far off, or nigh at hand. And by that time, it may be the
sluggard will awake. I dispute not of Gods power, and what he is able to do,
for he is almighty: nor of his mercy, and how he may renew it with us still:
for he is infinite in mercy, and his mercy is over all his works: but what
his justice requires to be done, which is no way disanulled by his mercy.
And now the question is, what is likely to ensue, by all circumstances, and
probable conjectures, in respect of the manifold and wonderful blessings
which the Lord has so long heaped upon our nation with his Gospel; and the
manifold unkindness, and daily rebellions which his majesty has received
continually at our hands for the same: And if his spirit should still strive
with man, to put our sins out of his remembrance: or for Noah's sake a while
longer to spare the world: or for some Lots sake to save the city from
burning* and to draw out the thread of our peace and happiness yet longer: it is
no more then his majesty may do, and can do if it please him, and (that it
may so please him) we do all most instantly beseech his divine majesty, for
his mercies sake: which if he grant, shall be no less wonder, then to
command the Sun to stand still, and the Moon to go back again, as in the
days of Amaleke: or to divide the sea again, as in the days of Pharaoh: or
to forbid the fire to burn again, as in the days of Nabuchadnezzar. But this
is not likely, and therefore it shall be no part of wisdom for us to presume
upon it.

Now then let us come to the point, and see why it is not likely. We use to
say, that after a great time of heat, there will come a cooler, and it is so
for the most part. And as it is in the state of times and seasons, so is it
also in the state of the Church: and therefore it is not unlikely, that after
this long time of peace and ease, there may come a cooler: for so it has been
commonly seen from the beginning, and not without cause: for if nature should
not sometimes be corrected, it would in time be wholly corrupted: the standing
water that is never troubled, we know by experience does breed the most
filth. And if the air should still be calm, and never be cleansed by the
winds, by thunder, and lightning, it would prove infectious: the body that is
not exercised, abounds most in ill humors, and the iron that is not scoured
still gathers rust, and the child that is continually fed, and has
whatsoever he craves, and cries for, at last plays with his meat, and
casts it to the dogs: and therefore it is necessary that sometime he
should be abridged and pinched. And so does the Lord also (by interrupting the
peace and ease of his Church) purge the ill humors of pride and contempt
growing in the body of his Church: so does he use to scour off the rust of
impatience, and distrustfulnes which grow upon our iron hearts with the graces
of Gods spirit. So does he by storms and tempests, by thunderings, and
lightnings of troubles and persecutions, cleanse the corrupt air of his Church,
least the good graces of faith and of repentance, and of love, and of zeal,
and of patience, and of charity, should through continual calmenes be
infected with infidelity, or impenitenc^e, or hardness of heart, or profanenes,
or pride, or vaineglorie, or self-love, or coldenes, or Apostasy, or with one
spiritual disease or another: and so does the Lord use to pinch, and abridge
his Church of the food of his heavenly word, now and then, and sometime for a
long time, when it is loathed, and played withal, and trod under foot, and
all this the Lord does in singular wisdom, because the worth of benefits is
not so well known, as by the want of them. That our hearts and souls are
cankred and rustie it is most evident, and therefore a scouring is to be
thought upon at the least: that there are many ill humors of unthankfulness, of
pride, of contempt, of cruelty, and oppression, of swearing and forswearing,
of whordomes, and drunkenness, of al kind of profanenes and abominations
abounding in the body of the Church, it is not to be denied. And therefore a
time of purging and exercise is to be thought upon. That Manna is loathed, and
the pure preaching of Gods most holy word despised, and the faithful Prophets
of the Lord hated, and molested, for doing the Lords message, and the feet of
the^ which bring glad tidings counted most soul, which should be esteemed as
most beautiful, all this is too visible, and palpable, and therefore Amos his
famine is to be thought upon, Amos 8. 11.
, if not to be looked for. When the Lord had planted a vine in Israel, Esaias. 5.
1. 2. etc.
and watered it, and hedged it, and dressed it, he looked for grapes b^^ found
none, but the wild grapes of oppression and iniquity. But what then? Then he
purposed to take away the hedge thereof, to break down the wall thereof, and
to lay it waste* that it might be devoured of wild beasts: verse. 3. 4. 5. 6
but first he told them that he would deal th^^ with them, and themselves
should be iudg^^ whether he did them any wrong or no. Th^^ the Lord has done
as much for his vineyard in England, as ever he did for his vineyard in Israel,
(if not a great deal more) no indifferent body will deny: that the grapes of
Englands vine be as wild, and as sower, as ever were the grapes of Isreal's
vine (if not much worse) the branches themselves can testify. But what then?
And is not now a breaking down of the wall, a plucking up of the hedge, and a
laying waste of the vine in England to be thought upon (O sluggard) if not to
be looked for? Has not the Lord told us of his purpose and determination
herein, again, and again? And are we not rather worse then better for all
that? Now if these things come to pass, we our selves shall be judges
whether the Lord has done us any wrong or no. Now consider further with thy
self (O sluggard) what privilege has England more then Israel had? How much
is the Lord beholding to us, more then to them? surely neither to them nor to
us, nor to any was ever the Lord beholding, for if a man be righteous, he is
righteous for himself, says Job. But what promise or warrant have we more
then they had, Job. 35. 7.
or any Church from the beginning of the world? Has there not been in nature a
continual intercourse and change of winter and summer, of night and of day,
of fair weather, and of ^owle wether, of cold and of heat, of the spring and
the fall? And have thou not observed the like in the state of grace? Surely if
thou had not closed up thy eyes of purpose (O thou sluggard) thou could
not ch^se but see the Lords work therein. Well, yet thou can not deny, but
that there have been many alterations, and sundry changes in the world, and
thy self sometime (between waking and sleeping, but without any feeling) wilt
sit and tell of them, and what thou have seen in thy time, which shall be
sufficient to condemn thee: for it is more then a dream that thou speak
of. But if thou will now (besides thy own drousie experience) a little listen
unto the word of God, and pray unto God that he may open thy eyes, thou shall
see that which yet thou did never so much as dream of* like the servant of
Elisha, which saw (...) mountains covered with heavenly soldiers, when the
Lord opened his eyes, which before he saw not. Mark it well I say, and thou
shall see, both how often the Lord has turned, and as it were wheeled about
his Church, and the cause thereof to be still the Churches iniquity. Note that
well.
And thou shall see, if not confess, that the continual starting of men from
GOD, has broken the course of his grace, which otherwise had been continual^^
The truth whereof may appear almost from the beginning of the world. For
first, when the true worship of God was in the cursed of spring of Caine almost
utterly decayed, Genesis 4. 26.
(...) Lord restored it again in the days of Seth, and his son Enos, that
it might thrive and flourish in the world. Now it was summer time with them: but
how long did it last? Surely not long, for scarce eight generations were
passed, when all the posterity of them whom God had separated for his own
children, Genesis 5. 2.
did mingle themselves with the sons and daughters of men at their pleasure
without the fear of GOD, throwing themselves in such wise into all manner of
wickedness, that (having defiled themselves, and the whole world with their
abominations) the Lord brought a flood upon them, Noah.
to destroy them all, that they which had drowned themselves in sin, might
be also drowned in water: and so they were twice drowned; and now was winter
come. When the Church was brought to eight persons, it seemed then so purged,
that the little seed which remained, should of it self bring forth nothing
but pure holiness: and yet anon after it diminished almost by the fourth part.
Afterward the Lord renewed his covenant with Abraham Abraham.
and his seed, for whom he wrought many wonderful things: for first, with
a mighty hand and stretched out arm, he brought them out of Egypt: then he
led them through the red sea: then he fed them with bread from heaven: then
he destroyed many Kings for their sakes, and made their very name famous and
fear^full full whatsoever it came, and thus they we^^ going toward the land of
promise: now, (...) would not of such happy beginnings (...) judged that there
should have ensued a co^^^ nuance of a happy state? Notwithstanding the very
same people, (in whose deliueranc^ the Lord had showed so manifest a proof
(...) his power and mercy) did not cease contin^ally to provoke the Lord with
their impati^^^ murmurings, and unkind rebellions, until by fearful, and
horrible judgments they were all destroyed in the wilderness. 1. Cor. 10. 5.
At length the children of them took possession of the said^ land, but yet
such a possession as well near in 600. years after, had no stabilitie,
because they themselves through their own falsenes, and inconstancy did
continually trouble it: and still (by shaking off the yoke of God) they
procured new mischiefs to themselves. Moses had told them before, how it
would come to pass, Deuteronomy. 8. 10. 11.
that when they were fat and full, they would lift up the heel, and forget
the Lord* And what does the story of the Judges rehearse, but continual
backslidings? When (...) kingdom of David was erected, there seemed a more
certain and grounded state of a church to have bin established, for a long
continuance. But that lamentable slaughter of the pestilence, 2. Sam. 24. 15.
which for three days space raged most mo^sterously in the world, did greatly
abate (...) felicity. When Solomon came to the Crown, summer came again to
the Church: for God gave him great peace on every side, and in his rest he
builded the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem. 1. King. 4. 24.
But by and by, after the death of Solomon, the body of the realm was
divided, and the torn members ceased not afterward to bite one another. And
both the kingdoms, I mean of Israel, and Judah, Esaias. 9. 20. 21.
were miserably turmoyled by foreign wars. Shall we say that this came unto
them by fortune and chance? Nay rather they themselves, through their sins
enforced, and hastened the vengeance of God: for even when they seemed most
innocent, namely, while David goes through with nu^bring of them, because it
was the peculiar fault of one man: yet the holy story says plainly, that
God was wroth with them all. 2. Sam. 24. 1.
At length followed that great euersion, little differing from utter
destruction, when all the whole nation was led captive to Babylon: but after 70.
years they were restored home again: which joyful return was unto them
another birth. Notwithstanding, so soon as they were returned home, straight
ways forgetting so great a benefit, they degenerated again into sundry
kinds of naughtines: Some defiled themselves with heathen marriages: some
defrauded the Lord of his tenths, and first fruits: othersome neglecting the
building of the Temple, Mal. 3. 8.
were wholly occupied in making of brave houses, Hag. 1. 2. 4.
and bestowed excessive cost thereon: whi^^ ^oule unthankfulness of theirs was
such, as every man must confess (the Sluggard and all) that it ought not to
escape unpunished. Neither did it escape: for after that, the Lord brought
them in subjection to the Romans, who burned their Temple, and made hauock^ of
all.

When Christ, Christ.
the Prince of peace, and author of all good things, showed himself to the
world, men might sensibly have felt how certain and well grounded the
felicity of his eternal kingdom is, if they would have suffered him to rest
among them: but the world was never shaken with more cruel tempe^^ of war,
nor never drowned in so deep a sink of manifold evils. But what was the
cause? Surely when Christ was borne, there was singular peace and quietness
every where. Abo^^ 40. years after his Gospel was spread through diverse costs
of the world: After it was published far and near, suddenly things began to
be on a turmoyle every where. And whereof came so sudden alteration, but that
God (...) the contempt and refusal of his Gospel, wa^ now bent to be revenged
of so great unthankfulness? and that most justly. For when Kings and their
people had despised the peace which God offered them, Note that.
was it not right and reason that they should be set together by the ears,
that one of them might wound another to the death? And what can continue in
order amongst them, who refuse to submit themselves to God? I speak not only
of the open enemies, which have wilfully striuen against the wholesome doctrine
of godliness, but also of them that have professed themselves Christians. For
how coldly, and disdainfully have many of them, how falsely, and dissemblingly
(like Judas) have othersome kissed Christ? It is not unknown that Jerusalem
Jerusalem.
was once the fountain from whence salvation flowed into the uttermost bounds
of the earth: but at the coming of Christ, it retained scarce a thin shadow
of the ancient worthiness: and within a while after, it not only lost that that
remained, but was utterly cast down also, and made a waste wilderness: which
made the Lord Jesus shed tears when he looked upon the city. What is the
reason that no man trauaileth in seeking out the cause of so monsterous a
ruin: but that the desperate wickedness of that nation does openly cry out
that the same was the cause thereof?

Rome Rome.
was never plagued with so many cruel slaughters in so short a time, as it
has been since the Gospel came thither. But what was the cause thereof? Open
thy eyes (sluggard) and thou shall see the cause plain enough, that when God
brought the medicine of his Gospel thither, as the uttermost remedy against so
many deadly diseases of lawles lust, wicked partakings, and intolerable
tyranny which reigned in that city, they (like persons that had sworn their
own destruction) proudly rejected it, and ceased not to fall from worse to
worse.

The very self same thing we may observe in this our age, both in the kingdom
of France, and elsewhere: For when the Church was as it were new borne again,
and had a glorious beginning, like the rising of the Sun, it has been seen
soon after to slide down and carried back again. And yet before the Lord
laid those fearful punishments upon them, of civil dissentions, and of
bloody massacres, accompanied with many horrible mischiefs more, the Gospel
was seen diverse and sundry ways every where filthilie abused: in so much that
the sudden turning up of things that happened, is not so greatly to be
wondered at, as Gods long sufferance, in bearing with the prodigious wickedness
of our time.

And in England, amongst so many thousands as to outward appeara^ce had very
gladly denied the Pope, and professed themselves Gospellers: how few (I pray
you) do fall to amendment of their vices? Nay rather, what do the greater part
pretend, but that when the yoke of superstition was shaken off, they might more
licentiously give themselves to all carnal liberty? And albeit they confess
the doctrine of the Gospel to be true, yet where is there one among many that
submits his neck unto the yoke and discipline thereof? That Christ shall be
abased for their advancement, they are content: That he shall be pinched with
poverty and penury to make them rich, they are content: That Christ shall be
betrayed for them, if not by them too, they are also content: That Christ shall
be whipped for them, and imprisoned for them, and buffered for them, and mocked
at for them, and crucified for them, they are very well content, and like it
well: but that Christ shall be the King of their souls, and rule them, and
ce^sure them, and order them, by his own laws and ordinances, they will none
of that; because that is against our pleasure* and against our profit, and
against our honors, and dignities: Like the young man in the Gospel, that
would do any thing that Christ bad him, Mat. 19. 22.
saving selling away his goods for the use of the poor: but that he could not
abide, because he was rich; and it was not for his profit.

Now then what is to be looked for, or likely to ensue, but a most sharp
punishment answerable to such wicked, and wilful contempts? And if any thing
be to be wondered at, here is the wonder, that (considering our great
unthankfulness) any part of the work remains which God has begun. And (to
conclude this point) we see how the Lord has tossed and turned his Church
from time to time: how he has from the beginning of the world both summered
it, and wintered it, eased it, and pinched it, pardoned^ it, and plagued it,
for the abuse of his grace, and contempt of his worde^ we see the print of his
steps in all pla^^^^ before the flood, and since the flood: in Israel, and in
Judah, and in Jerusalem, and in Rome, and in Chanaan, which is now Turkey, and
in France, and in Scotland, and in Germany, and in England too, which has
been ouerrunne sometime by the Danes, and sometime by the Normanes, and sometime
by the Britains, and now inhabited with Englishmen, that can scarce tell of
whom, or whence they came. And in England we know what changes and alterations
have happened: one while Popery, another while the Gospel: now peace, and
ano^ persecution: and like the sea, our peace still ebbing and flowing, but
never certain, and now more envied, and threatened, then ^uer it was. This we
see, I say, and this may the sluggard see if he will awake. And seeing ^his
course which God has continually thus taken, what reason has the sluggard to
lie still snorting and sleeping in his sins, as he does, both in the Court
and country, in the cities and villages, and in every place else, as he does?
And what reason have thou (oh sluggard) to dream still of a dry summer, as it
is in the Proverb, and not to think of a winter as well as of a summer? What
charter have thou (...) then thy fellows that are gone before thee? (...) thou
better then they? I tell thee, nay the Lord Jesus tells thee, thou art not
better whatsoever thou art, but worse: Except thou repent (...) shall likewise
perish. Think no longer therefore with thy self, that thou shall never be
awakened: for by all likelihoods and probable conjectures, a winter will come,
with such storms and tempests, that shall awake thee, and pinch thee, and
starve thee too, if thou provide not in time for thy safety. And take this
withal, that the longer it be in coming, she sharper will it be when it
comes: because, to whom much is given, of him much shall be required.
Therefore, Go to the Pismire, O sluggard, b^hold her waits and be wise: for
she etc.

Whether this winter be near, hand, or far off and how we may know it.

The fourth Sermon.
But all this will no awake the Sluggard. (...) with himself, (...) for though
it (...) winter may come, yet now it is summer, and winter will not come yet:
Like the evil servant in the Gospel that said, My master will not come yet and
so fell to beating of his fellows still, as the sluggard falls to sleep
still, and still puts off the day of his turning to God. And it seems that
this is no news devise of the sluggard: for he has learned it of the
scornful men of Jerusalem, and it is a common answer of all sluggards that
mean to dwell still in their sins: It will not come yet* Esa. 28. 15.
When the Lord by his Prophet sent word to Jerusalem that a scourge was
coming upon them for their sins, they cared not for it: for they had made a
covenant with death, and were at agreement with hell, that is, they had a shift
for every thing. And admit, say they, that a scourge do come, and run over
us, and pass through us, yet it shall not come at us: for We have made
falsehood our refuge, and under vanity are we hid. A goodly refuge, and a
covering suitable, and best beseeming the scornful sluggard. And what other
refuge, or covering have all the sluggards of our time, but a refuge of
falsehood, and a covering of vanity? that is a falfe refuge, and a vain
covering, which is as good as none at all. But because the sluggard is at that
point, to think that it is yet a great way off: like the fool in the Gospel,
who told his soul of pulling down his old barnes, Luke 12. 20.
and building bigger, and of living many years, even that night when his soul
was to be fetched away from him: we will now go a little further, and as we
have proved it a thing very likely to (...) a winter come after this fune-shine
summer of the Gospel: so we will also prove, by the grace of God, that it is
not far off, but very likely to come shortly upon us. I set neither hour,
nor day, nor month, nor year: but would have the sluggard to know that it is
at hand, and nor so far off as he does imagine. And let not this caveat be to
dismay, or terrify any man, except it be the drowsy sluggard, whom nothing
will awake: but as a voice going before the Bridegromes shoute, Matthew. 25. 6
that they which now want oil for their lamps, may in time provide against his
coming. But how shall we know that the winter storms of trouble and
persecution are approaching, that we may make our provision? Surely, as Christ
taught his Disciples to know when summer is at hand: so by the same rule we
may learn to know when winter is at hand And by the fig tree both may be
learned: Mat. 24. 32.
Learn the parable of the fig tree (says Christ) when her bough is yet
tender, and it brings forth leaves, ye know that summer is near: Therefore
by the rule of contraries, when the fig trees bough has lost her tenderness,
and cast her leaves, we may know that winter is near. The fig tree shall be
the Church of England, the boughs the members of the Church, or professors of
the Gospel; the tenderness of the boughs, the love of the Gosped; the leaves,
the profession of the Gospel; the fruits of the tree, the fruits of the
Gospel; as love, joy, peace, long suffering, ge^tlenes, goodness, meeknes,
temperance, godliness, patience, charity, sobriety, faith, repentance,
mortification of fleshly lusts, Gal. 5. 22.
and such like, which are called in Scripture the fruits of the spirit: which
should be in all the true professors of the Gospel, because they are led by
that spirit which is a spirit of love, and of joy, and of understanding, Esaias.
1. 12.
and of counsel, and of courage* and of the fear of the Lord, as Esaias
shows: The hardness of the boughs may show the contempt of the Gospel,
which argues (where it is) a departing of the grace of God: the fall of the
leaf may resemble the falling away from the sincericie of the Gospel: which
Saint Paul calls a departing from the faith: which he prophesied of to come
in the latter end of the world: which also argues, that the end of the world
is at hand. Now, to know whether the fig tree has any fruit, or be casting
off of her fruit, leaves and all, great search need not to be made with a
candle, as if it were a thing hidden in darkness: for it is so evident that a
man may see it a far off. When Jeremy was set to make search in Jerusalem
for one righteous man, that it might be spared: he was not willed to stand still
in every place that he came at, and narrowly to look into every corner, as
though he should else have wanted matter: but to run to and fro in the
streets, Iere. 5. 1.
and it was enough: for their wickedness was so openly professed, that a man
might see it as he ran. So a man need not stand prying into every corner of
England, and leisurely to take a narrow view of every man's life, that were too
much: but let him run to and fro in the streets, and open places of the
land, and it is enough: so openly is wickedness professed, and so manifestly
is our filthy nakedness laid open. Ieremi^ ran through the streets of
Jerusalem, but he could not find one that executed judgment, and that sought
the truth: So they that execute judgment justly, and seek the truth
vnsainedly in the Church of England, are least in sight, and must not do it
openly, least they be noted for Puritanes. Many say, the Lord lives, yet
swear falsely: there was swearing, and false swearing, and common swearing in
the streets, and in the houses, and in the shops, and in the markets, and in
the courts of Jerusalem: and the same is to be ^eene in England, and all under
the cloak of religion too. And for these things the Lord has stricken us, but
we have not sorrowed: and some has he even consumed to the terror of others:
but neither they, nor others have returned to the Lord. If we go along with
Jeremy from the common people to the great men, what shall we find? Surely
they should know the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God should not
be hidden from them. But alas, none more ignorant then many of them, they have
altogether broken the yoke of discipline, and burst the bands of godliness. If
a man look into the Court, is not there also the fall of the leaf? for how
else is the time spent? but (as the Apostle said of our forefathers) in sitting
down to eat, and drink, and rising again to play, studying who shall exceed
and excel others in vanicie; pride, and bravery, in flattering, and
dissembling, in ^^^hing, and scoffing, in chambering, and wantonness: but alas,
there is no leisure to look upon the book of God. If Amos the rough h^wen
heardman come thither to preach, there is no place for him, he must go again
to Bethel, what should such a fellow do there to awake the sluggard, and
trouble the devil in his sleep? As for the often preaching of the Word, which
was wont to be there, how is it eclipsed, and abridged? and that which
remains, alas what is it for the most part, but a swee^e pleasing song, to
rock them fast asleep in their ^innes, which were asleep before? and happy
were it for England if that kind of preaching were not made a pattern for the
most preachers in the land to follow. But how else should the people (when
winter comes) be found frozen up in their dr^gs (as the Prophet speaks?)
how else should ^hey be ^ardenedhin their sins, and have their condemnation
sealed up unto them? As for the Prelate, and great men of the Church, have not
their fig tree also lost her tender^es, and cast her leaves as well as others?
Verily it is to manifest, that it cannot be denied: or (...) what is become of
that ancient diligence and painfulnes in preaching, of that zeal and
faithfulness in professing, of that courage and boldness in reproving, and of
that louingnes (...) lowlines in entertaining that was in many of them before
they were exalted?

Before (...) was King of Aram, the Prophet Elisha looked earnestly upon him,
an^ wept: and being asked of Hazael why he wept, he told him the cause, 2.
King. 8. 12
and that was because Hazael coming once to the kingdom, should do much
evil to Israel, and told him that he should burn their cities with fire,
that he should slaye their young men with the sword, that he should dashe
their infants against (...) stones, and rent in pieces their women with child:
which Hazael then took in such ill part, that he asked the Prophet if he
thought him to be a dog, that he should do such vile things. But yet when he
was promoted to the kingdom he did it. So if Elisha had come to some when they
were students in the universities, and afterward zealous preache^ else where
in King Edwards day^s, and perhaps in our time too, and told them that they
being then (...) should lose their fatnes, that they should prove cold and
negligent in preaching the word, that they should deny that which they then
maintained, that they should silence, and trouble their brethren, and
strengthen the hands of the wicked, would they not have been offended as Hazael
was? but have not promotion and preferment made i^ prou^ too true? Look into
the state of the Church, and behold her ministers and watchmen, ar^ they not
for a great part of them, either blind and ignorant, of negligent, or
unfaithful, (...) fearful or rash and h^ady and (...), or ungodly, and
profane? And if any be otherwise, and approved for their learning, and
painefulnes, and wisdom, and courage, and godliness: is there be some such, and
(thanks be to God many such) yet how are they hated, and molested and made
wonderments to those that are round about them? If we come to the ancient
prosessors of the Gospel, such as in Queen Mary's days were zealous, and in
the beginning of our Queens reign were forward to set up the Gospel of
Christ, what shall we find but in the most of them through the land, a
general numbnes, and Apostasy, having put off the shoes of preparation for
the Gospel, and put on the shoes of preparation for all kind of vanity,
preferring plays before preachings, tables and cards before the old and new
Testament, resolving to be just of the Kings religion, and to stand to nothing
for fear of alteration. These men have been made so drunken with prosperity
and ease, that they are fallen fast a sleep, not caring who stands and
laugheth at their nakedness, having nothing left but their beardes, and their
budges, signs of gra^itie, like an Iuie bush at a Tavern door, where there is
no wine: but as for their love, and zeal, and charity, and piety, and
religiousnes, etc. the date of them is out long ago, and their coppies
altered. And if these things be any where, are they not generally resting in
the younger sort? Others there be which of late years have al^o made a
glo^^ous show of zeal to the word, and o^ lo^^ to the ministers there of,
which are also (...) aside like a broken bow: for as untimely fruit they were
^oone ripe, and soon rotten. At the first so far in love with the preachers,
that they would build their salvation upon them. But by degrees (God cursing
their pride, and preposterous zeal) they fell quite away, insolently
condemning the church, for no church the min^stery for no ministry, the
Sacraments for no Sacraments, but all to be worse then naught, like the
Barbarians, who one while took Paul for a murderer, Act. 28. 4. 6.
and another while esteemed him as a God. And with their preposterous
proceedings, have both hurt themselves, and hindered the whole Church of many
good things, which otherwise might have been obtained, the Lord lay it not to
their charge. Other some at the first coming of their pastors amongst them,
have (in show) given forth good, testimonies of love to the truth who afterward
have also lost their tenderness, and cast their leaves, (but fruit they never
bare) To these men the preaching of the word has been acceptable at the
first: and as a flashe of lightning did a little dazzle their eyes for the
present time, but after a while, when it began to rub upon their beloved
sins, and the mockes of the wicked began to encounter them, they gave over:
and with Demas betook the^se^ues to the world again, like men that repented
the^ of their bargains. And not staying there, have proved the ^orest and
sharpest enemies to their power that might be against their ministers, and the
wholesome doctrine of the Gospel, in who^ is fulfilled that fearful saying in
the Gospel: Luke 8. 18.
From him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which he seems to
have. I say nothing all this while of the infinite swarms of Papists, and of
Atheists, and of Neuters, and of Libertines, and of Epicures, and of Machiuels,
and of Hypocrites, and timeseruers, and false brethren, and scoffers at
Religion, and Protestants at large, and Schismatikes, and worldlings, and
priury whisperers, and backbiters, and ruffians, and couseners, and cutters,
and many more of that crew, besides whoremo^gers and baudes, and thieves, and
rogues, and a company of rakehels which cannot be numbered, all which are
permitted and suffered for money, and briberie, by baseminded under officers to
iet it, and brave it up and down in the land, yea, with countenance and credit
too, perhaps more then shall be aforded to better men. And where is he that
dare speak almost against the^, much less bridle them: for fear of many
displeasures, and dangers? And is it not come to pass, that a man may with
more saftie and credit commit sin then control sin, which is most
lamentable? It was once said of Rome, (so far was it degenerate from all grace
and goodness) that Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bon^^. (...) was lawful to
be any body, and to do any thing in Rome, but not to be a good man. And is
it not almost come to that pass in some places of England, that it is more
tolerable for a man to be what he will, saving a good man indeed? For that
can hardly be without some trouble. Do thou see now how the poor Church of
GOD is pestered, and ou^^runne with weeds and wilderness? And (...) thou not
marvel that the Lord has let it ^lone so long? When thou see the Church
of God thus pained, (though in respect of others of her sisters very blessed)
imagine thou see Job alive again, sitting down upon his ash heap and
breaking out with botches and sores, from the top to the toe, Job. 2. 7. 8. 13.
and his grief increasing so, that his friends begin to sit aloof from him,
being so grieved with the sight, that they know no^ well what to say to his
comfort. And what does all this foreshew, but that the Lord is hard at hand to
visit the land with scourges, and to feed his people with the bread of
affliction?

And further, it is to be observed, how the enemies of the Gospel, and the
Church of Christ do increase, how bold they grow, how disguisedly they go,
and how they can fit themselves to the present time, and frame themselves to
every company, having change of suits, and visards wherein they mask it at
the^^ pleasure, that the Church of Christ has (...) a do to (...) her friends
and foes as^^der: neither does she know with whom to (...) for piety, or whom
to tr^st for safety. All our comfort (under God, whose (...) still watches
over the righteous) ^s, that our Mother is yet living, I mean her (...), on
whose lap the poor Church of the Lord Jesus may lay her head, whose tender
love and care does still ^euiue the fainting spirits of Christ's little ^^ocke,
which otherwise were even readi^ (...) yield up the ghost: but that their trust
is in their great shepherd* who will both keep and defend them that they
miscarrie not: No not o^e of his will (...) lose. This is some comfort yet,
(God make us truly thankful for it to his divine Maiestis) This is some
comfort yet, I say, that our tender Mother is yet living amongst us, and Lord,
for thy mercies sake* long prolong her days ^o the comfort of (...) Church.
But yet in this blessed comfort there appears s^fficient matter to humble us,
and to make the sluggard look about him: For is not the Church now very sick,
and weak? Is not her Mother, our gracious Sovereign, in continual danger of
(...) hangbies; and bloody traitors? Are not hollow hearted, and false hearted
subjects a^mitted to her gracious ^^^sence many times* more then she or her
friends know of? But that the Lord has still (...) them, as cunni^gly as they
masked it, (blessed be his name.) And do not the bloody Papists (for that is
their brand) stand be (...) the cloth as it were, with their swords draw^^,
ready every hour to step upon the stage and to play their parts? do they
not only wait for a day, like Esaw who purposed to kill his brother when his
father was gone? Well, (...) Lord is in heaven and laugheth them to scorn, and
knows how to dispose of their purposes and intents well enough, and can
prevent them if it please his Majesty (as he has done): but this may greatly
humble us, and awake us. Again, as we have observed in the preaching of the
Word where it is, a great defect in respect of the manner which is too
pleasing: so also may we observe (if our eyes be in our head^) some corruption
in respect of the matter in many places, though not so general as the former.
And that is not lightly to be passed over, but we should learn in the fear
of God to make some use thereof. And let the sluggard consider well of it, that
when any shall now in so great and clear a light of the Gospel, popishly
maintain the 7. deadly sins: or call in question our justification by faith in
Christ alone: or deny to the Church the assura^c^ of her salvation by Christ:
or discourage men (...) the reading of the scriptures: we are to (...) of these
things. Last of all (to conclude (...) point) when any shall teach that we must
believe as the Church believes, without examining the doctrine by the word:
and if any man be deceived, that it is sufficient for him to say before the
Lord, that the Church deceived him: as if it had been sufficient for, Adam to
say, his wife deceived him, and the serpent deceived her. When thou Hear (I
say) of these things day them to heart, and take them as prognostications of
further matters, and forerunners of greater evils to ensue: especially seeing
the people are as greedy to drink, as othe^^ (...) broach whatsoever it be.
Therefore the (...) his rich mercy open our sluggish ey^^ (...) of our (...)
curitie. And as Christ said, Mat. 24. 1^.
When you see the abomination of desolation stand in the holy place, let him
that reads consider: So I say, when you see the corruption of sound doctrine,
and the abomination of popish filth stand in the holy place, let him that
hears consider: for it is Gods doing, though it be the devils suggestion,
and that justly* for our sins.

Thus have we run about the streets, (...) Jeremy did, and in casting our
eyes here and there, we have found that which you see: much more is behind
that we see not. But this is suffici^n^ to prove unto the sluggards face, that
as a winter is likely (...) come: so (if God be not exceeding merciful) by
all signs and ^okens it is hard at hand: for the fig tree has lost her
tenderness, and there is generally a fall of the leaf in all places: and when
we see that, we may know for a certain that winter is near. Therefore (O
Sluggard) put off the time no longer: but while it is yet summer provide
against winter, least thou repent it too la^e. By this time the Sluggard might
have been awakened, but he sleeps still* and therefore now let us hear the.
Lord calling (...) him, and what answer he will make when he is called.

The fifth Sermon.
9 How long will thou sleep, O sluggard wh^^ (...) thou arise out of thy
sleep 10 Yet a little sleep, etc.
THis question demanded of the Sluggard, does most (...) set forth his
nature, which ^^lighteth in sleeping long, which loves ease and idleness, which
hat^th labor and diligence, and yet (...) al (...) little though he has been
long idle^ and finally* is so far stom amendme^^, being admonished, that he
resolves still to (...) he began, excusing it by a little, and (...). Whereby
we may see, that whatsoever (...) said to the Sluggard, that wants the spirit
of God to quicken him, is but as so much water powered on a Blackamoore, the
water is spilt, and the Blackamoore is never the whiter.

In this demand to the Sluggard, the Lord expostulateth the matter with all of
us for our duties, and rowseth us up out of our dead sleep, to show that we
are all too careless in our duties commanded of God: So loath is the Lord to
leave us unto our selves, that when he has called once, he calls again, and
debateth with us for our carelesnes, as he did with Israel his own people for
their unkindness and wilfulnes, in refusing the means of their salvation:
saying, Why will you die O house of Jacob, Ezec. 18^1
why will you die? That both they and we might see the great goodness of the
Lord toward us, and that the Lord might be justified when we are judged,
Psalm. 51. 4.
and cleared when we are condemned: because our destruction is of our selves,
which sleep on still when we are called, and yet count all but a little. And
this may serve as a notable pattern of love for Christians to follow, in
reclaiming their brethren that go astray: whereby we are taught not to give
them over at the first: but when we have taught, to teach again, and though
we have called once and often, yet to call again, and not to leave teaching,
and instructing, and calling, and expostulating with them till they hear, and
return, if there be any spark of hope left unto us: like those that blow at
a coal till it has set all the wood a burning. And in dealing thus with our
brethren, let us but imagine that we are laboring to fetch one again that is
fall^^ into a swoune, who with often rubbing and chafing, with much pinching,
boxing; and wringing, may be recovered again, or else not.

The former pattern of diligence in the Pismire was sufficient to co^troll us
all, and to humble us, for our slouthfulnes in our calling, (if we were wise
indeed, for a word to a wise man is sufficient) and very effectual is that
doctrine which the Lord has taught us by it: yet it pleases God to go on
still in expostulating and debating the matter with us (as we see) whereby we
may learn, what a hard matter it is to awaken our sluggish nature, and when we
are awake, as hard it is to keep us awake: for our eyes are no sooner open,
but we fall to nodding again: Like the Disciples of Christ, who slept on
still, though their master called them, though he called them loud, and often,
though the tempter were near, and they in danger of falling into the pit of
temptations; yet could they not watch so much as one hour, so heavy were
they: And so is it with us, if we be as good as Christ's disciples. Now if the
best be so heavy and sleepie, what are the worst? The experience hereof we
have daily: Let us go but to the Temple where the word is preached, and there
we shall see men no sooner set down, but fast asleep. And the like we find
at home in perfourming our spiritual exercises, whether it be of prayer, or
reading, or singing Psalms, or instructing our families, though Gods spirit
does sometime touch us, and awake us, yet are we soon forgetful, and sleep
creeps on again. Therefore the Lord gives us to understand, that we have
need of many words to rowse us, and all little enough. For sin is stubborn,
like a monster whose face is of brass, whose neck is of iron, and his heart
as hard as an Adamant. And therefore when the Prophets had to deal with the
stubborn Jews, the Lord told them they should deal with a stiffenecked
people, whose necks had finewes of iron, Eze. 3. 7. 8. 9
and therefore would not easily bow to the yoke, and their faces were of
brass, and therefore would not blush at any thing, and their hearts were
harder then the flint stone, and therefore would not easily relent. They were
even such as the preachers now adays speak unto. Philip. 3. 18.
Paul says he spoke often against belligods, which are enemies to the cross
of Christ, telling them that their glory would be their shame, and their end
damnation, if they repented not: and yet they continued still in their sin, as
if it had never been touched, and Paul continued still in beating upon them for
it, as if he had never touched them: to teach us, that it is not enough to
glaunce at sin a far off, (as the manner of many is) and to touch it
lightly and away, a^ some would have it: but to hammer him, and never to leave
beating and calling upon him, til he made either to yield, or to flee: which
cannot be done with glancing, and touching: for he has a thick skin, and
hard scales, under which he lies fast asleep. And this the servants of God
have well understood: therefore David (being guilty of his own slouthfulnes
in the service of God) made vows, and bound himself by band as it were, to a
more constant course in the service of God: Psalm. 119. 106.
I ha^^ swor^e (says he in one place) and will perfor^^ it, that I will keep
thy righteous judgments. I^ another place, the Church prays God to ^^member
David: that is, his covenant made with David, Psalm. 132. 1. 2. 3.
and al his troubles: And amongst other special virtues that he is described
by* this is one, that he swore unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God
of Jacob, saying, and vowing, that he would not enter into the tabernacle of
his house, nor come upon his p^lace, or bed, nor suffer his eyes to sleep, not
his eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of hi^ head to take any rest until he
found out a place for the Lord, and an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.
Thus that holy man (perceiving his zeal to faint) would bind himself in
many obligations. And thus also in the exercise of prayer, the feruants of God
do use many words, not because they delight in many words, and vain babbling,
(as Pharisles and Papists, which labor it with their lips, thinking to be
heard the sooner for their lip-labor) but thereby laboring to amplify their
grief: and because they do not yet sufficiently see the wants that be in
themselves, therefore they use many words, as bellows to blow up their minds,
and to kindle their fainting spirits in zeal, and feruencie. And for this
cause likewise the servants of God have set themselves to their task of
reading, and praying, and studying, that so much they will read (if God will)
every day, and so often they will pray every day, Dan. 6. 10.
as David and Daniel set themselves to pray three times a day at the least. And
thus Isay in these and all other things belonging both to their calling, and to
their profession, they have still tasked themselves, and applied their task
through the grace of God, which (as S. Paul says) works and labors in
them, fearing least otherwise they should do but little or nothing. And in the
doing of their taskes, it is a wonder to see how sluggish they are, and what a
number of lets, and lions lie in their way (as the Proverb says) that they
be constrained to prick themselves forward, and then they dragge their legs
after them too.

In this demand we are (as we see) accused, and indicted of making great delays
of those duties which we owe to God. A matter surely very worthy to be
expostulated: Note that.
for it is a true token of a soul that fears not God, to drive off so long
the doing of that which the Lord by his word requires to be done: for if they
feared God, they would be more dilligent, knowing that God is able every minute
to cast them down to hell, and to press them with his judgments. Some go on
(for all this) and say, the time of their calling is not yet, they are not
called yet: although they hear the word, and know in their own conscience
that they do evil, yet they go on like desperate wretches, making a mock at
the judgments of the Lord, and say they are not called yet, when they are most
evidently convicted in themselves, and by themselves. And being told of it,
they tell us, that they must pray to God to be merciful to them in that, and
so they continue still in their rebellion, bathing and rotting in their sins,
like Naaman the Assyrian, who said, God be merciful to me in this: for though
he knew it to be a sin to go into his Rimmon, yet he must go in and do as
his master did, and God must dispense with him in that. Many such Naamans there
are still, which have one Rimmon or other that they know of, and yet they
sleep on still in their beloved sins: some in usury, some in whoring, some
in stealing, some in swearing, some in oppressing the poor, some in deceiving
both poor and rich, some in scoffing at Religion, some in profaning the
Lords sabbath, some in persecuting their brethen, some in their ambitious and
vaineglorious attempts, and some in one sin, and some in another, every one
has his Rimmon. And thinks in his base conceit, that the Lord is as
negligent in punishing of their presumptuous rebellions, as they are in obeying
his holy commandments: but let them take heed of dallying too long with his
Majesty, for he will not be mocked, though they be deceived.

The Children of God are commended (in the word) for their diligence in obeying
the will of God, when once they know what was his pleasure: Genesis 17. 23.
When Abraham was commanded to circumcise himself, and all the male that were
in his family, he might have sought many toys to drive off the time, as that
he had many souls in his house, himself was 99. years old, but he
circumcised them al presently that self same day. Genesis 21. 12. 13. 14.
So when he was commanded to cast out his son Ismael over night, he gate up
early in the morning, and did it, as he was commanded, which might be a
hook to pull out his very bowels: to cast out his son was grievous unto him
(as the story shows) yet he did neither deny, nor delay the doing of it.
So in the 22. of Genesis we read, that when he was commanded to offer up in
sacrifice his only son Isack, (which might have cut his heart strings in
pieces) yet he delayed not the time, but rose up early in the morning, and
went speedily about it: I am persuaded that Abraham loved his sons, (and he
had cause so to do) as dearly as we love our sins, and yet when God
commanded him to cast out one, and to kill the other, he was ready to do
both: how ready then should we be to obeie the Lord when he commands us to
cast out, not our children, but our iniquities, and to sacrifice not ou^
sons, but our sins, which else will cast us out of Gods favor, and
sacrifice us in the valley of Gehinnom, that is, in the pit of hell fire?
Surely, if we believed the promises of God, and feared the judgments of God
as Abraham did, we would no more stick at the matter then he did. Many have
received as good a warrant from God and her Majesty, both of Magistrates, and
Prelates, and Pastors, and people, for the casting out of many abuses and
corruptions, both in the Church and commonwealth, and in their private
families, as Abraham had for that which he did, but they are not yet half so
forward as Abraham was, nay would to GOD they were not backward: which
shows, that though Abraham were the father of the faithful, yet he is not
their father, because they are unfaithful.

If men cannot like that duty which comes slowly from us, much less is it
acceptable to God. We must first serve our selves, and then obey GOD, as he
that would first go home and bury his father, Matt. 8. 21.
and then come and follow Christ. But this obedience loses the favor of GOD,
therefore what reward can ^hey look for, which have a purpose indeed to
leave their sin, but not till their sin leave them? That will serve, God,
but that is when for want of ability, or occasion they can serve the di^ell no
longer? That will measure out the Lord a part, but yet with a false balance?
That will give the Lord the cup, but it shall be when the devil has drunk
the best of it, and nothing is left but the dregs of old age in the bottom?
Oh let us consider what (...) pray when we say: Thy will be done in earth by
us, (...) A^gles do it in heaven. The Angels never (...) their business, but
do it (...), and therefore the scripture does gi^^ (...) note their swiftnes:
now if we say^ his: (...) and do not (...) God (...), that do we else (...)
with his (...)*

How long will thou sleep O Sluggard? How long shall God dance attendance
upon thee? As the Lord in this demand does charge us with delays in his
service, so in the same words he does likew^^e teach a way to redress the
same* And that is to consider how long we have slept, or ^ow long we have
made the Lord to wait our leisure in every thing. And in the Scripture we
shall find that by this means the children of God have been much stirred
(...) to do their duty. In the 119. Psalm (...) 60. David says, He
considered his wai^^, (...) then made haste to keep the Comma^^^^ments of GOD,
which he did not before he considered his ways, that is before he considered
how long he had gone out of the rig^^ way, and wandered in his own crooked
(...) to show that the cause why we put off the k^^ping of Gods commandments
is, because we consider not how long we have dwelt in (...) sins. But if we
do consider how long God has forborne us, and swallowed up our si^nes in his
mercies, this would make our (...) hearts to relent, except we were past all
goodness. To consider (I say) how long the Lor^^ has spared us when he might
often most (...) have punished us: how he has every ^o^ning renewed his
mercies with us, when (...) might have consumed us in our sins: and how long
we have disobeyed him, and pro^oked his majesty to wrath, except we were
desp^rate, and given up to a reprobate mind, these things would wring bitter
tears from (...) eyes. He has wooed us, and besought us this 36. years, by
his word, to be ^^conciled ^^to him, and still we provoke him. Then let the
sluggish Magistrates consider of this: How long will they neglect the glory of
God to set up their own? How long by their evil examples shall the people
stumble and fall into (...) How long shall the poor cry out for justice? How
long will they continue in discountenauncing of good men and good causes, and
many foul faults more would be considered of them, how long they have
continued? This is also for the slothful minister to think upon: How long
will they keep the door of Heaven shut? For if they had preached diligently
and faithfully, it had been impossible for popery to have crept into so many
minds as it has done. How long will they betraye Gods cause, and let the
people perish for want of instruction? So to the Adulterer also, how long shall
the Lord bear thy filthiness, and how long will thou abuse thy body and thy
^oule in his sight as thou do? And how long will the Usurer eat up the
Lords people, as o^e eats bread, and grind the faces of the poor like a
millstone? This must also come to the quarreller, and malicious person to be
considered of: how long will they (...) in their hatred, biting one of another?
is there no end of their malice? will their rash judging, and condemning one of
another never come to an end? This is also spoken to Parents: how long shall
the Lord call upon you to bring up your children in the fear of his name? How
long will you suffer them to live so wantonly, and so loosely as ye do? How
long shall they go up and down the streets with such filthy songs, oaths
and ribaldies in their mouths to bewraie their filthy educatio^ withal?
Consider of this question also, yo^ that be servants, How long shall the
world complain of your idle and unfaithful service? When will you begin to
adorn the doct^in^ of the Gospel, with your good conversation? This is also
for unthrifty gentlemen, that spe^^ their da^es in play, and ^iotting: How
long will you be unfaithful (...)? how long shall the Lord wait for your
conversion? Thi^ is also to occupiers, which live by false oaths, by false
waights, and false lights, and false (...) how long shall the Lord dance your
at^^ndance for the reformation of these abomin^tions? There be many mo^ that
are also to consider of this point: but that which the Lord speaks to one, he
speaks to every one, (...) long will thou sleep O sluggard? Though (...)
woman of Samaria dallied and iested long (...) the words of the Lord Jesus* yet
at the last, Ioh. 4. 29.
(...) Christ told her what she did, and she per^^iued him to be the Messiah
indeed, she believed, and ran into the city, and called her neighbors to
come and see. Christ has told us all that we have done, and all that we ought
to do, and yet we believe not his words: but put them off with scoffs and
iest^: and those that would go to Christ we do not further them, but hinder
them. Now, if we continue at this stay, shall not the woman of Samari^
condemn us? In the 18. of Luke the 4. and 5. verses, we read of a wicked
Judge, which feared neither God nor man: yet when a poor woman was importunate
with him, at the last he heard her. The Lord by his ministers (poor men I
confess) has been importunate with us to hear his suite, and to reform our
selves by his word, which is not for his good, but for our own, as he says in
Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
Oh that there were such a heart in my people to hear me, and obey me, that it
might go well with them, and their children. But yet we hear him not. Now, if
we still shall give him the deaf ear, hardening our hearts when we should
hear his voice, shall we not show our selves worse then he that feared
neither God, nor man? When Christ forbad the devil to torment and vex a man,
he trembled at his word, and obeyed his commandment. There be many that devise
with themselves how to molest and vex the children and servants of God, for
professing the truth, and discharging a good conscience: The Lord Jesus has
often forbidden them, crying to them as he did to Saul: Act. 9.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? thou do but kick against the prick:
and yet they still persist in their purpose. By which it should seem that they
have less ^eare of God in them then the devil himself: and if they still
continue so, shall not the veri^ devils of hell condenme them?

When the Lord spoke the word, the flies, Psalm. 105. 31
and the lice came, and were obedient to his commandment. GOD has spoken
many words to us, and yet we obey not: therefore they also shall condemn us.
When God spoke, the grasshoppers came, and caterpillars innumerable upon the
land of Egypt, and when he spoke the word, they went away too. There be many
caterpillars come amongst us, before they were called, and all the words in
the world will not drive them away again: therefore the caterpillars of Egypt
shall condemn the caterpillars of England, in the day of judgment. Though
Peter did three times deny his master: Luke 22. 61
yet at the last, when Christ looked upon him he remembered himself, and went
out and wept bitterly. We have oftener then three times denied our master,
Christ has both looked upon us, and spoken unto us, but yet we remember not
our selves: nay, we are so far from weeping and grieuing at the matter, that
we rather rejoice and laugh it out. Therefore if we still so continue, what
weeping and wailing will there be at the last? For it is said in the Gospel,
Luke 6. 25.
Woe be to them that laugh and rejoice now: for they shall weep and lament.
When God had both warned Pharaoh to let Israel go, and plagued him for
detayning of them still: at length he asked him this question, Exodus 10. 3.
How long will thou refuse to humble thy self before me? So the Lord has
warned us often to let our sins go, and has also in some measure plagued us
for keeping them still. Now he asks us also the same question, How long will
you refuse to humble your selves before the Lord? which argues that we are
grown as hard and as desperate as Pharaoh was, which is also a sign of
greater plagues yet to ensue. Now this is fearful and grievous, when the Lord
comes upon us with such questions: for that shows that he does not onel^
note our sins, but the long time that we have provoked him by them, and that
he is even weary in bearing them any longer, and minds to unburden himself
of them, and to bear no longer. And commonly we may observe in the scriptures,
that when the Lord comes with ( How long? and how often?) there is some great
judgment following: as in the 14. of Numbers the 11. verse, The Lord said t^
Moses, How long will this people provoke me, and how long will it be, ye^ they
believe me, for all the signs which I have showed amongst them? Then mark
what follows in the next verse, I will smite them with the pestilence, and
destroy them, etc. to show, that though the Lord bears long, yet he will
not bear always. When Christ said, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
have gathered thee, as a hen g^thereth her young ones, and thou would not?
So great was his grief conceived with the remembrance of those mischiefs that
were to come upon Jerusalem, that he could not utter his speech without
shedding of tears. Therefore when the Lord comes, expostulating the matter
with us in this sort, with How long, and how often, etc. then let us beware, if
ever we beware, whether it be spoken in general to al, or in particular to
any one man, that has been often warned by the hand of God upon him.

Had not Moses prayed for the Israelites, Exodus 32. 10 11.
they had perished oftentimes in their sins: so if some did not pray for us,
(whom yet we can as hardly abide, as they could abide Moses when they would
have stoned him) surely we had perished yet this time. When the Lord swear in
his wrath that the Jews should not enter into his rest, he set them down the
causes which moved him thereunto, and those were in number five: They tempted
him, to try what he could do: then they provoked him by their often
murmurings, etc. then they grieved him with their continual unkindness and
rebellions: then their hearts were filled with error. And how could it be
otherwise? for they cared not for the knowledge of his ways. And to aggrauate
the matter, and make their sin appear in his full ripenes, he sets down the
time how long they had continued at that stay, saying, Forty years long have
I been grieved with this generation, etc. Forty hours had been much to grieve
the Lord, but forty years was intolerable. Now the same sins are we also to
be endited for: and if no Jury will find the indictment, our own consciences
will cry guilty. And how long have we grieved, and tempted, and provoked the
Lord? Has it not been ever since the Gospel came among us? waxing every day
worse and worse? And what does that now lack of forty years long, have I
been grieved with this generation? surely but a little. Thus the Lord we see
marketh well enough every thing, not only what we do, and how we live, and how
we sin: but how long we have sinned, and how often we have been warned, and
how long we have refused to return, and to humble our selves: yea the Lord
marketh how many years, how many months, how many weeks, how many hours, how
many sermons, and how many sentences in every sermon we have passed over in
careless contempt, without trembling at the word of the Lord, or profiting by
his corrections. And according to the time of his long suffering and patience,
and of our stubbornnes and disobedience, shall his judgments be powered upon
us, if we do not prevent them by true and speedy repentance. Long did the
old world sleep in their sins: long did Noah preach against their sins,
and at last the flood came and awakened them to their cost. Long did Sodom and
Gomorrha sleep, and long did they vex the soul of righteous Lot amongst
them, and at last the fire of Gods wrath awakened them. Long slept Jerusalem in
security, but at the last their enemies awaked them. So Nabuchadnezzar heard
his dream as a dream, and Daniel told him what would come of it long before
it came, but he fell a sleep again: and at last the Lord turned him out
amongst the beast, and then he remembered himself: but he was seven years
first in learning his lesson.

And this is most certain, The longer the blow be in fetching, the heavier
will the wou^d be when it comes: And the deeper the arrowe be drawn in the
bow, the deeper it pearceth when it is let fly. Now in truth, all this time
the Lord has forborne us, he is but bending of his bow, and whetting of his
sword, and aiming at the mark: and because he does not yet let go at us, we
think there is no such matter. But we deal with the Lord (oh miserable
wretches that we are) as birds play with a skare-crowe standing in a corn
field with a bow and arrowe in his hands, as though he would shoot, but does
not: and therefore they even wax bold by little and little, and at last even
fly to him, and sit down upon him, and pick upon him. In all holy reverence
of Gods unspeakable majesty be this comparison made, which serves only to
declare the base, and brutish conceit that the wicked have of God, and his
long suffering of them. But who knows the force of the Lords wrath? Psalm. 90.
11.
(says the Psalmist) for after as a man fears, so shall his wrath be: and
when it comes, it shall burn like mountains of fire, which no sea of water
shall be able to quench, if once his wrath be kindled, yea but a little.

And on the other side, (for the comfort of the godly and faithful, which have
a sanctified desire to awake out of their sleep, and to serve the Lord at the
last in all holy obedience, and careful diligence) though we have long tempted
the Lord, and tried him: yet if now at the last we awake in truth, we shall
find, that as he has been long in suffering, so he will be as rich in
mercy. The prodigal child was long absent, and at last (returning truly
humbled) was welcome to his father, and joyfully received: and so shall we be
to our heavenly father, if we make such a return, and that betimes. Therefore
let none be so desperately minded as to continue still his old course, as though
there were no hope of grace at his return. And let none be so discouraged with
the remembrance of his long sleep, as to run quite away from the Lord: for
God will find us out wheresoever we become, as he did Adam when he had hidden
himself (as he thought) among the trees of the garden. The devil indeed will
be ready to show thee what a great way thou have to go back again, what a
number of duties neglected thou have to repent of while thou did lie
asleep, and how hard a thing, and impossible it is for thee to perform all
this; and all to discourage thee, and to keep thee still fast asleep, but
believe him not: for wherefore does the Lord else put thee in mind of the same
things, but to have thee awake and be diligent in doing thy duty hereafter?
And wherefore else does he thus reach forth the hand of his grace unto thee, but
to help thee up, which can not help up thy self? Therefore give over now at
the last, and be resolute in the work of the Lord, and the Lord has promised,
that all that is past shall be forgotten. Let us therefore in the fear of God,
leave our delaying, and descanting, and lay this doctrine to our hearts, that
it may appear in our lives, that we be truly awakened, and all will be
well: if not, but our purpose be to sleep still, then the Lord by his Apostle
does give us to understand, that custom of sin will bree^e hardness of heart,
and hardness of heart will bring forth impenitencie in the end, that thou shall
not be able to repent if thou would. And thus have we heard the Lord
calling to the Sluggard, and expostulating with him for his long sleeping. Now
we will hear what answer the Sluggard makes unto the Lord.

The Sluggards answer.

The sixth Sermon.
10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep.
IN this answer the spirit of God does so lively describe the condition of
the Sluggard, that he may know he is in his bosom, to show us that he can
painte out our sins as plainly as we do commit them: for he is in our
hearts, and waits upon us, and can tell what we do, and though the wicked
cannot see them, because the devil has blinded their eyes, yet Gods spirit
does search them out, because all things are open in his sight, be they in
respect of men never so secret.

Now the Lord in causing the Sluggard to speak for himself, does make it
known to all the world, that he has no wrong offered him, because his own
mouth has testified against himself, and openly shamed himself, and
therefore his condemnation must needs be when it comes both great, and
just. For whereas other sinners being called to their answers, were both afraid
of God and ash^med of themselves, the Sluggard clean contrary as a beast that
is past all fear of God, and shame of the world, resolves still to continue
in his old course, counting all but a little. When Adam and Eve saw their
nakedness they blushed, and feared, and ran away for fear, thus wrought their
pride and disobedience: when Caine saw his wickedness, he knew not what to
do, except despair, but wished it undone again, and thus did murder
bestirre himself, when he was awakened: when David was roused for his
adultery and murder, he said that he had offended: when Paul was called to
his answer for persecuting Christ, he fell to the ground astonished, and took
a new course: when Peter was awakened for denying his Master, he went out and
wept. And thus we see that when pride and disobedience have been called, they
have feared the judge, and when murder and adultery were called, they feared
the judge, when persecution and treason were called, they feared the judge: And
all other sins being roused out of their holes, have startled at the call,
seeking either how to yield, or how to fly. And being convicted, have all
cried like the prisoner at the bar, O my Lord be good unto me now, and I will
never do the like again. But when sloth and negligence were called, and
endited by the name of careless his children, they (in stead of submitting
themselves to the mercy of the judge,) stand to the defense of their fault,
and like beasts both careless, shameless, and graceles, in stead of saying,
pardon O Lord that which is past, and we will take a new course, they cry
out to the wonder of all the world, and the utter shame of themselves, Yet a
little more sleep, and a little slumber, etc. We have not enough yet, and all
is but a little, so that shameful was pride, and rebellion, and murder, and
whoredom, and persecution, and treason, and all other sins, but shameless is
the Sluggard, and passes them all in wickedness.

Here then we are taught to make a reckoning of our sluggishnes: and it
argues that we count all too little, to give unto sin and Satan: as though
they were two such dear friends of ours, that we could not do too much for
them. And the devil on the other side who has taken up his lodging in the
wicked, and gotten like a fawn ghest into the minds of the godly, he cries
still, a little more, a little longer, and though we have suffered him with his
impes to lie sleeping in our Churches, in our common wealths, and in our
shoppes, and markets, in our houses, and families, and in our souls almost
forty years, and in some twice forty years: yet he has taught us to say,
yet a little, and a little, and still he must have a little more, like Achsah
in 15. of Joshua: Josh. 15.
who when she had begged of her Father an inheritance of the South countries,
then she must have certain grounds with wels and springs. Such a shameless
beggar is sin, and Satan, that they never leave begging, like hungry
courtiers, and covetous worldlings, which will not stick to beg their own
brethren for fools, to have their lands: and not rest there neither, but would
beg the garment from the Kings back, and the King himself too, with a good
will, if they thought they might have them for the begging; and yet count all
but a little. So plaieth the devil too, he will still have a little, and a
little, and never leave till by little and a little he gets both body and
soul into hell. And so sweet has he made s^n to the taste of the wicked, that
they cry still a little more of it, and find no fault with it: but that there
is too little, and they cannot have enough of it; like little children which
know not what is good for them: if they begin to taste honey once, they will
not leave eating by their good wills, till they be sick with eating. And so
greedy of sleep is the Sluggard, that as Esau would sell his birthright for a
mess of pottage; so he will sell his souls right for a mess of sleep, and
a little more of sin.

But as for religion, and things pertaining to the worship and service of God:
as the knowledge of the ways of God, and the graces of the spirit of God:
they think that of such things they have enough, when they have nothing, like
the lukewarm Laodiceans, Apoc. 3. 17.
who thought they were rich, and increased with goods, and had need of
nothing: when they were wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. And here now appears the difference between the wicked and the godly:
for the servants of God having a little mortified themselves through the grace
of God, they are come to this point: that all they can do is too little for
the service of God, but are desirous still to serve him more, and better, and
still to bring more and more knowledge, more faith, and more repentance, and
more love, and more zeal, and more holiness, and more courage, and more good
works, to the glorifying of their heavenly father, So free hearted are the
true children of God, Ioh. 8. 36.
whom the son of God has made free indeed, that they think they can never
do enough, like the free hearted Jews, which still brought either gold or
silver, or silk, or hair, or one thing or another to the building of the
tabernacle, and as they left not bringing till they were stayed by
proclamation: So in building the spiritual tabernacle of the Lord the
children of God leave not coming, and going, to the ^^ercises of religion,
preaching and reading, and hearing, and meditating, and practicing till they
be stayed by death: for proclamations, and laws, and statutes, have been
made; but all that could not stay them: nay it has made them more diligent,
and painful like the Pismire, because they perceived winter to approach: yea
they do also encourage their own souls, and their brethren with them, saying
as Elia^ said to 1. King. 18. 41.
Achab, Get thee up, eat and drink, for there is a sound of much rain: so
say they one to another, get thee up, read and study, preach and pray, and
lose no time, for there is a sound of much trouble: and all their fear is
that they shall be stopped and stayed by the way, when troubles arise, as
Eliah feared least he and Achab should be stayed by the rain. They can
scarcely have any rest in their hearts, but are still panting with David for
breath, Psalm. 42. 1.
like the Heart in continual chase. They think they have done nothing, they
can see nothing but their sins and wickedness, their rebellious motions, and
corrupt cogitations of their own false hearts, do still appear unto them, and
afright them: they suspect all their doings like Job that holy man, who feared
all his ways. And when they have done the best they can, they still condemn
themselves for unprofitable servants, still crying out to their souls, as
Christ said to the young man that was so forward in the Gospel* yet one thing
is wanting: so they say, yet my soul, either for the matter, or for the manner
something is wanting. It is not then with the godly christian, as it is with
the superstitious Papists, which think they may serve God enough, by their
own devises, and stintes of mattens and their even songs, and their Orisons,
and their Kyrileysons, and their Masses, and their Ladies psalters, and their
Jesus psalters, and their often belabouring the name of Jesus, and their
pattering of beads, besides their pipings, and singing, and perfuming, and
abundance of draffe more to fill up the tubbe withal, that let the hogs come
home never so hungry, yet there is meat enough for them, and some to spare for
their friends that will give any thing for it, which they call works of
supererogation. Now when their t^skes are done, all must be set upon the sco^^,
and the Lord must be beholding to them for their devotions, and Heaven they
must have of duty not of favor: like the meritmongers of Jerusalem, who going
to Christ in the behalf of the Centurions servant that lay sick, Luke 7. 4.
5.
told him that he had deserved to be healed at his hands, because the
Centurion had b^ilded them a sinagogue. And not much unlike is the service of
Atheists and Protestants at large, living under the Gospel, though they defy
popery with open mouth, and wide throats, yet they are too popish in this
point: for do they not think that God is well served of them, if they go to
Church when (...) comes, and hear a few cold prayers read, and after dinner
spend the time at Cards, or Tables, or Bowls, or Church alings, or in one
^^nitie or other: but if they have been at Church in the forenoone, though it
were but to sleep at the sermon, the Lord is much beholding to them. But to
come at the beginning, and continue waking, and attentive to the ending, both
forenoone and afternoon, that they think may serve for a great while: but to
have preaching every Sabbath day, and in the week too, that is counted an
unreasonable serving of God. But the godly think they have never enough of the
service of God, and his worship: and for this cause have they desired to liu^
still, Esa. 38. 18. 19.
not for fear of death, which indeed is a vantage unto them: but for that
they have not s^^ued God enough, and in the grave they cannot praise his name.
Psalm. 118. 17
So David desired to live still, that he might declare the works of the Lord.
And in the 119. Psalm. he says, Psalm. 119. 175.
Let my soul li^^ and it shall praise thee. This he craved, because he had not
praised God enough. And upon this Paul discussed this question in his heart,
For my self (says he) it is better to dye: Philip. 1. 22. 23.
but for (...) (meaning the Church) it is better that I live still: to show,
that if we have any desire to live longer, it must be that the Church of God
may be the better for us: for the godly are of that mind that they cannot do
enough for the good of the Church of God* They are like Abraham, who when (...)
began to speak with God, would have still one question more: And like the
Disciples, who when they heard Christ commend the bread of life, I^ h. 6. 34.
said Lord evermore give ^s of this bread. Now if this be the affection of the
godly, all too little: then what shall we say to the wicked, which count all
too much that is given to God? like I^das that grudged at the cost that was
bestowed upon Christ, cou^ting is more then needed. But this was because I^das
had the bag and was a thief to Christ: and so the wicked have the bags, and
would fill their bags with the spoils of Christ and his Church. They say, they
have heard a sermon once in a year: what so many say they? hear one and follow
that well, etc. This is the voice of a wicked heart, that knows not what he
owes to God: If he knew that he owes him all his life, he would not speak
in that sort. Concerning the things of the world, they play the Horseleach that
lie sucking still, and never cries ho. And they are of Achabs humor, when he
had a kingdom, yet he wanted a vineyard, and a little was still wanting. So
wordling professors of the Gospel, when they have much, and that which they
desired, yet they must have a little more, another house, or another lease, or
another Benefice: but as for the Lords part he shall have the offall, or refuse
of their crooked old age, when they can serve the devil no longer: but then
the Lord will none, except he give them great repentance. Therefore, seeing as
the Lord is the beginner, and continuer, and ender of our life: let us offer
him al for a sacrifice, and yet say, we are ^nprofitable servants, and have
done but (...) duty.

Again, here we are to note further the cunning of the devil: for he brings
men by degrees to the top of sin: yet a little, and a little, says he, and
al is but a little: yet al these littles being laid together make a great
deal. And as a covetous man gathers his fart^ings and his halfepenies
together, till they come to a pound, and so becomes rich in the world: so the
devil teaches the wicked, to gathe^ now a little and then a little, till at
last they become rich in sin, but bankerout in the grace of God: for there is
never a sin that is let in to the soul, but it lette^n out many graces of
Gods spirit. It is no dallying with the Lord: for in Romans 2. 5. the Apostle
says, They that abuse the long suffering of God, do in the hardness of their
heart heap up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath. Therefore let us
take heed of this little: for by little and little the devil creeps upon
us. The wicked go scoffing at the children of God: oh there go Puritanes, and
Precisians, etc. And, what? are you so precise? Why? this is but a little oath,
a little meriment, a little of the fashion, and a little must be borne
withal, and still they go on pouring out themselves to all kind of
wickedness, till they be so drunken with sin, that they know not what they
do, nor where they be.

The devil plays the labourer that riueth wood, who having a great piece to
cleave, has also diverse wedges for the purpose, and every one bigger the^
another, and enters with the least first, and that makes way for a bigger,
and that again for the biggest of all, and so by little and little the great
tree is split in many small pieces, and made fit for the fire. So (...) Satan
purposes to make a spoil of the graces of God in the soul, he has diverse
devises for the purpose, and every one of them differing from another: for the
lier he has a pack ^^ll of lies: for the swearer he has a pack full of
others: and for the scoffer he has a pack full of frumpes and floutes: and so
for others: but he will enter with a little one in show, as first to teach men
to swear by their faith and troth, or by cock and pie, or by some other
counterfeit o^^e, and tells them that it is nothing: and after, by little and
little, when it is grown into a custom with the^, they come even to blaspheme
the most holy name of God, like devils incarnate, not being able to leave it
though they would. So does (...) draw (...) to adultery, and so to m^^ther,
and to ^o drunkenness, by (...) and a little: first, by circumstances a far
off, as of dalliance, and ^^sting, and quarrelling, and carowsing, and at last
they grow to the very substance of the matt^^. And so by little and little does
he draw (...) quite from hearing of the word, to schism, and Apostasy:
first, he breeds in them a misliking of the preacher, for his plainnes, (...)
roughnes, or his tediousnes, or his li^^, or one thing or other, and then there
is way made (...) a loathing of the doctrine, and at last they fall quite away
from that sincerity which they professed at the first, especially by means of
such company as the devil can fit them withal for the purpose. And if one
sin creep^^^ into our conscience, it will not leave till it has made a hole
for the entering, and a place for the lodging of horrible and outrageous sins.

Then let us say, that is great, which ^hey call little, and aggrauate our
^innes now, and condemn the^ now, that they be not made great, and condemned
of the Lord at the last day. The devil is contented with a little, and a
little will please him: he will (if he can) bring thee to all sin: but when
he cannot do so, he (...) play at small game rather then sit our* As if thou
be a Protestant, and traua^^est beyond the seas amongst Idolators and
Massemongers, i^ is sufficient for him if thou do but salute the cross as it
is carried through the streets, or bow the knee to Baal, though thou do
(...) them in thy heart. So, if thou be a Papist in England, and go to Church
according to law, it is no matter, so thy heart be at Rome, and thou keep thy
conscience to thy self, that's enough for the devil, and pleases him very
well: for by the outward gesture of the one, and by the inward affection of
the other, he does (as it were by the ring of the door) take possession of the
whole house, knowing that if he has the body, the soul will come too: for
God will have all or else none. Worldly men will say now adays, If they be not
notorious offenders, they are not Satan's prisoners: which is all one, as if a
malefactor, being fastened with a chain but by the foot to a post in the
street, should brag that he is not the Iaylors priso^er, because all his
body is at liberty saving his foot. Alas poor souls, how wise we are to
deceive our own souls. Though we can see nothing but great beams, yet that
is not the way to be discharged. The Papists can see none but 7. deadly sins
that will hurt them: but David prays both against presumptuous sins, Psalm.
19. 13.
and secret sins, which would prove presumptuous in time.

The Papists have a question which cannot be answered, as they think: Show us
the time (say they) when Popery came in, and when we sell away, if we be
fallen from the truth. Alas poor souls, they are not acquainted with the
custom of Satan: for he comes in by little and little. If then a Papist
would know how Papistrie came in, I will say by (...) custom of the devil* by
little and little: for the devil will not get all at once. The Apost^^ Paul
says, 2. These. 2. 7
The mystery of iniquity began (...) work in his days, and to creep into
the Church by little and little: So for worshipping of Angels, Colos. 2 18.
the Apostle says, they worshipped Angels then, and thought it to be a part of
insti^^cation* Also for will worship, and humane traditions, as taste not,
touch not, eat not, and beating of the flesh, Paul spoke of it in his time,
and called it voluntary religion, verse. 20, 21, 22, 23.
which had a show of wisdom and humblenes of mind^, but indeed were to no
purpose. And the (...) part of Popery, namely, merits, and satisfaction by our
own works, began when Antichrist was borne: for Paul spoke of it, and against
it in his Epistles to the Romans, and the Galathians, and almost in all his
Epistles. So for fasting on their Saints ^^ues, as they call them, their Ember
days, and their popish Lent^^ fast, they have made it a painted garment, and
very ^^^^itorious, and so by little and little they have made up this monster
of many coto^^. So came in Idolatry at the first into the Church: first, the
images of the godly were o^ a good intent brought into the Temples, and
afterward superstition crept in like a Ringworms, and men fell to worship
them, as in time the Israelites worshipped the brazen S^rpent in the wilderness.
Then the supposed pictures of Christ were worshipped, where of there grew to be
very many, and never any one like another, but even as it pleased master
Painter: And then the Cross by the hie ways side, and then the very letters
of the name of Jesus: and when the painter had made a picture like some foul
Mawkine, or some foolish gameplayer in disguised colors, and set it up in a
glass window, or some stone wall, and a toy took ignorant men in the head
(for strong is imagination) that must be our Lady forsooth, and so to be
worshipped. Then further, when men began to neglect the most sacred scriptures
of God, which are the only pillar and ground of all truth, they began to
build upon Councels, and Fathers, and Doctors, and the interpretation of the
Church, without any tri^ll of the same to be made by the scriptures: and at
last the word of God (which should have sit as Judge) was brought down, and
set at the bar to be judged by men, yea by his enemies too. And by little and
little it came to this paste, that the Church could not err in any thing: and
that the Church of Rome must be that only privileged Church which could not
err. And then they thrust upon us what they listed, as the Philistims made
Sampson do what they would, when they had put out his eyes. But this was done
by degrees: for first, the Bishops and teachers waxed rich and wealthy: then
they grew to be proud and lordly: then covetous and greedy* then idle and
lazy: and then cruel and bloody, as also subtle and crafty, to cover all
withal. And when the stars thus began to fall from heaven,(that is, from the
heavenly doctrine, and from heavenly conversation, to become so carnal and
earthly minded) the sun of righteousness also the Lord Jesus Christ himself,
that true light began to be darkened, and his Gospel to be depraved, and then
the Moon (that is) his Church must needs lose her light: for she has no
light but from the sun: and then (as the Prophet Joel speaks) Joel. 2. 31.
was the Church also turned into blood: for upon these things grew most
horrible persecutions in the Church, through the malice and cruelty of the
Prelates, so that she failed both in light and life together. And so it is to
be feared, that (for our sins) it may fall out again: for as by little and
little the candle goes out: so by little and little darkness comes in. And
after the same manner came in such monsterous abuses in apparel, both in men
and women, such excess and riot in eating and drinking, such idleness and
prophanenes, as is every where to be seen: and so grew tumults and rebellions
in the common people: so grows stubbornnes in servants, and disobedience in
children, through sufferance and too much foolish cock^ring, till by little and
little many of them come to shame and confusion. And thus have all ill customs
grown up from time to time, both in the Church, and in the Commonwealth, and
all by the custom of the devil, that is, by little and by little: yea, and
that so softly and slilie he creepethinto men, that they can hardly either see
him, or feel him when he comes: As we see the weeds grow up amongst the
corn while men sleep, but so softly that no man can perceive how they grow,
or how much they grow at once: but that they do grow, and in time (if they
be not plucked up) ouergrow the corn, every man may see that: Or as the Iuie
by little and little creeps upon the oak, till at last he does ouergrowe and
destroy the oak: So does sin by little and little get up, and get the
strongest and the mightiest men sometimes under him: as it did Solomon, and
David, and Peter, and diverse others, for all their wisdom, and learning, and
judgment, and experience, which they had both of themselves, and of the world.
Now, to save our selves from this usurping and encroching enemy, it shall be
our best course still to pray unto our God, for the help of his grace, and
holy spirit, and still to persuade our souls and our friends by the word of
God, to make resistance at the very first entry, and continually to withstand
the beginnings and first motions of Satan unto any sin, lest by little and
little now a stone and then a stone, now a basket full, and then a basketfull,
he cast up his mount, and fortify himself against us, until he has battered
and spoiled all the good things that were in our souls. And that the danger
of these same littles may the better appear unto us, let us remember that
sin is like leaven, a little whereof will sower the whole lump of dowe: It is
like fire, whereof but one spark is sufficient to kindle a great fire, and to
burn down a whole city: It is like a tree, whose stubbes remaining in the
ground are enough to give one a fall: It is like Iezabel that painted harlot,
whose very remnants, as the skul of her head, and the palms of her hands,
must be buried, least they infect the air. A mote in the Sun is but a little
thing, and yet enough to hinder the sight, to pain the eye, and to trouble the
whole body. A hair is but a little thing, yet enough to stiffle a man. The
^lies of Egypt were but little things, yet none of the least plagues. The lice
were less then the flies, yet one of the greatest plagues that came unto
Egypt. And such be our sins, which we call little sins, and the Papists
call them venial sins, that may be washed away with a little holy water,
etc. we count them little and nothing, and not to be stood upon, nor once to
be touched: but in time we may prove them to be the greatest plagues that
will trouble us, if securely and rashly we venture upon them. For though the
occasions and motions perhaps be but small in respect of gross sins, and
heinous crimes, yet there is a hidden corruption in our nature, (whose very
froth does continually annoy the children of God) and that may threaten some
heinous downfall in time to come: which has made even men of very good report
and conversation to hang down their heads, still fearing their secret
hypocrisy, as that which may break forth to the shame of all the former in
time to come. In regard whereof, Gods children have such a jealousy, that they
tremble at the very first motions, and the least occasion to sin that can be.
And the rather too, because they see many excellent men in gifts, and constant
in profession, for a long time, whose end has not answered their beginnings.
And this is very true, whether we look into the word, (...)o the world, and
is a thing that may much humble us. For though we may remember what we have
been, and what we are, yet who can tell what may come to him hereafter,
especially if they yield to a little and a little.

But alas there be some too venturous, which think it no masterie to offer
themselves to ma^king, and minstrelsie, and dancing, and wanton company, nor
to run into quarrels, and brawles, and contentions, as though they had their
ear^s, and their eyes, and their hands at command^ment: But Gods children are
afraid of these occasions, as knowing that their eyes may be p^ouoked to lust,
their ears may quickly listen^ to unchaste delights, and their hands may
suddenly strike a deadly blo^^^ etc. Therefore both men and women are (...)
beware how they venture upon such small occasions, for though thou meanest no
su^^ matter, yet for thy venturing without warr^^^ thou may be over thy
shoes before thou b^ aware.

And yet because vice is so near unto virtue, we must also beware of
superstition, for the enemy still labors either to make (...) too hardy
and venturous, or else to fear it to^ superstitiously. And to these
temptations our nature is very pliable. First to presumption, and over much
hardines, as may appear^hy our common speech. Tush the preacher i^ but a man as
I am, he has his infirmities as well as others: we are no Angels, our nature
is corrupt, we are but men, and I am sure you will not make us Gods, a little
is not so much, and if God were so hard as you would make him, that were hard
indeed, etc. Thus Satan comes to tempt men unto presumption: but when he
would drive men to despair* then he apparelleth himself in another suit, and
then of a fly he makes an Elephant, and of a moate a mountain. If he cannot
bring men to make conscience where they should* he will labor to bring them to
make conscience where they should not. As we see the^ manner of many is either
to be profane in their mirth, or to allow no mirth at all, either too gawish
and new^angled in their attire, or to allow no ornament at all, and so in many
things ^ce: he cares not, whether thou be remiss, or superstitious, so thou
be one. Gods children therefore must labor for a measure, and that must be
sought for in the word, which will guide them in the narrow way: showing
^^eu^ry thing what is the virtue, and what is the vice; what is the mean, and
what is the extreme on either hand. In these extremi^ies, if any man has
been overtaken by little, and a little, (as who has not) let him imagine
himself to be sick, either of a spiritual consumption, or a spiritual
burning fe^er: and let him from henceforth keep that diet which is prescribed
unto him in the word, and carefully abstain from such occasions hereafter: and
by the grace of God he shall redouer himself again, though not by and by, but
by little and little, like the man that has been very sick, who first feels
a stomach to meat, and then has some taste of his meat^ which before was
unsavory unto him: and then he begins to sit up in his bed, then to rise
out of his bed, and then to walk in his chamber: and after that abroad by a
staff, and by little and little, (through the blessing of God) comes to his
full strength again. Neither let any willing mind be discouraged, by the
hardness of his heart, which he now feel^th wrought by the custom of Satan: but
let him plie the means appointed by God and he shall see, that as the water
droppeth (...) the flint until it be worn hollow, so the w^^ter of Gods
grace shall be still dropping upon thy hard heart, until thou be recovered. And
thus we have seen the custom of Satan, and how it may be broken.

Another note is this: That the wicked do still extenuate, and lessen their
sins, crying: Yet a little, and it is but a little: but the children of God
do say their sins are great, and cannot aggrauate them enough. And this is
their grief, that they cannot lay out their sins enough: lob. 1. 5.
lob sets blasphemy upon the sins of his children, when they were
banqueting together: and it might be some idle word^ or unsavory jesting
might pass their lipp^^ when they were set to be merry: but lob g^^ueth it
no less name the^ blaspheming of God. Christians in their feastinges and
meeting^^* power out rivers of idle words: and if a man call them rebellion or
blasphemy: what? th^^ is too full mouth, we must seek some (...) words to
color them withal: like the (...) which will not say they stole it, but they
took it. If the Preacher shall labor to lay out the ouglesomenes of sin,
he is called a rayl^^ for his labor. Paul called himself a blasphemer, a
persecuter, and the chief of sinner^; though he were not so indeed, yet thus
(...) labors to beat down himself, and to (...) humbled with true
repentance, and he had the spirit of God. Therefore they that will not be
launced, and have sin touched, it is a sign that they have not the spirit
of GOD. The world calls covetousness good husbandry: but the word calls it
idolatry, Col. 3. 5.
and the ^ote of all evil. 1. Pet. 5. 5.
The world calls pride clenlines and handsomnes, but the word calls it
fighting against God: the world calls their painting of faces, the frisling
of hair, the wearing of false hair, and other such disguisinged deformities,
and ougly inventions, both seemly and comely ornaments: the word calls them
whotish attire. 2. Kin. 9. 30.
The world calls malice and hatred, 1. loh. 3. 15.
manhood: the word calls it manslaughter. The world calls excessive eating
and drinking, and ryoting and idleness, and chambring, good fellowship: the
word calls them the sins of Sodom, Ezc. 16. 49.
and Gomorrha: the world says that fornication is but a trick of youth, and
a common infirmity: the word says it is to make the members of Christ, the
members of a harlot: the world calls that honest recreation, which the word
says, Ephef. 5. 6.
brings the wrath of GOD upon the children of disobedience. The world
says they take but their fees, when the word says they play the thieves:
the world calls that duty, which the word calls robbery. And so it is in
many things more. But as the word speaks of sin, so does the godly speak
of sin; for they speak (...) the spirit of God, which is not contrary
(...) the word of God, And thus we so how very foul sins having gotten a
liuerie of the^^ Master the devil, and stolen the cloak of virtue, do i^tte
it, and brave i^ up (...) down, like fiddlers, and players, vndernoble men's
coats: which (when their coats are taken away) are butrogues by statute: and
the other when their colored cloaks are taken (...) way, are most foul, and
ougly devils by the word of God: yet no man must say so, but at his peril.
For the devil when he has brought up a fashion, will follow the fashion
himself: and the fashion is amongst hunters, that if any body do call a hound
or a spaniell by the name of a dog, he must be punished, because the hawk
has no tail, but a train, as if she were some state: and two be not a
couple, but a cast, and a brase, and I know not what: So, if a man come when
the devil is at hunting, and call the wicked his dogs, by the name of hell
hounds; as they are indeed, he must be punished: for they are neither dogs nor
hell hounds, but good fellows: and their hunting of virtue and godliness, is
good fellowship: And hereupon a common harlot is commonly called a good
fellow. And still the devil follows the fashion: for amongst men of trade,
and manuel occupations, they have words of art belonging to every tool and
instrument in their shops: and if a man come into their shoppes, and do but
touch any of them, or call them by other names then the occupation does call
them by, (as to call a spade a spade a spade) is a forfeit called for by and by.
So if a man come into the devils warehouse, and do but touch a piece, except
it be to buy it; and do but call his tools and implements by other names then
he and the occupation does call them: as to call a knave a knave, you shall
straightway have one or other at you for a forfet, which do serve for nothing
else, but to watch for such booties: and are as glad of them too as sumners are
of citations: or as quiristers in Cathedral Churches, when they see a man come
into the quire with his spurs on his heels: because then they hope to get
something to increase their commons, by a law of their own, such as Christ was
put to death by, But that ^oule that lies so wide open that he cannot see his
sins, but makes great sins small, and calls sower sweet, and darkness
light, as Esaias speaks, Woe be unto them says the same Prophet: They shall
one day feel the greatness of their sins to their cost and pain: for it is a
true ^aying of Christ in the 5. of Matthew, He that breaks the least of Gods
Commandments, and teaches men so to do; shall be the least in the kingdom
of heaven: that is, he shall have no place at all there: for Christ speaks of
it, but according to that opinion* which men had of it. Thus have we spied the
devils craft in minsing of sin, now let us learn to make some use of it. The
Magistrate may learn hereby to take heed, that he yield not so much as a
little to the wicked, because they watch at an inch for the least advantage
that can be: like the servants of Benhadad King of Aram, when they were
parling with Achab the King of Isra^ll about their master: of whom it is said
in the holy history, that they took diligent heed, if they could catch any
thing of him: and when they heard Achab but call their master his brother, they
made have, and said thy brother Benhadad: to show how the Magistrate is
watched: and if the wicked perceive any coldness, or fearefulnes, or negligence
in him, or hear but a word of comfort from his mouth that makes for them, they
work upon that, like the stream against a ba^cke, if there be but a little
hole made through it. Hereby the Minister also is taught to take heed how he
straineth his conscience against the truth in any thing, though never so
small, lest in time he swallow down camels, as some do steeples, and make
shipwreck of all: like Demas, and Hermogenes, with their fellow Phygellus, of
whom Paul speaks: and like Diotrephes, against whom Saint John giu^th
evidence. It is the policy of the world to lay baits and snares for the
Ministers of Christ: it must be therefore their wisdom to hold out the
world at the swords point. For covetousness is like aquaf^rtis upon steel, and
if it take the heart once, it will not leave till it has eaten out the spirit
of GOD there, and all goodness there. And therefore the Apostle doothe well call
it the root of all evil: for so it is, for wheresoever it takes root, it
rooteth out all goodness, causing to err from the faith and pearceth the ^oule
through with many sorrows: so does she reward her master for giving her
lodging, like the viper that eats out her mothers belly, and so gets his
own being with the destruction of another.

Here also may parents learn not to feed their childrens humors too much,
nor to suffer them over long, as the manner of many is to do, nor to inure
them to such wantonness, nicenes, and pride, as we see in many: for they will
grow to such things fast enough without teaching: and by little and little it
may turn them to shame, and their parents to smart and grief, as too woeful
experience does daily teach. As Absalom being suffered a little, first killed
his brother Amnon: then abused his fathers concubines: then stole a way the
hearts of his fathers subjects, and at last rose up in arms, and drove his
father out of his own kingdom: and this came by little and little. And if the
twigge be suffered to grow crooked, it will be crooked when it is come to bea
^^ee, and then it will sooner be broken then ^owed. To some parents and
masters it is a pastime to see their children and servants run colting about
the streets with open mouth, like a kennell of hounds: but to the godly and
wise it is both a grief, and a shame, because they know that by little and a
little, they may prove impudent, and shameless, and thieves, and harlots: for
then do such seed take deepest rooting. Hence may wo^ldlings also take
warning, and learn to come to the word preached when they are called, least if
they listen but a little unto the enchantments of worldly commodity, they fall
quite away: like the unworthy guests in the Gospel, who trifled away the time
so long with excuses, that at length they were quite excluded. And in the
hearing of the word, take we heed how we hear: for then by little and by
little the devil will rob us of al, or fill our heads with so many toys and
by-matters, that we shall be never the better, but the worse. And lastly, he^
let all Christians learn not to feed upon v^ kindnesses, least by little and
little it grow to ^ mortal hatred, and an utter mislike one of (...) other,
without any likelihood of sound reconciliation for ever. And this that teaches
some, may teach all to beware of the devils dangerous custom. But whosoever
takes warning the Sluggard will take none: for he cries still, Yet a little
sleep, a little slumber, and a little folding of the hands to sleep:
therefore now let him hearken unto his judgment.

The Sluggards judgment.

The seventh Sermon.
11 Therefore thy poverty comes as one that tra^^^leth by the way* and thy
necessity like an armed man.
HEre is now the Sluggards judgment, and the fruit of idleness, and
negligence. The wicked man (says David) trauelleth of mischief, and brings
forth a lie. And the Sluggard (says Solomon) trauelleth of idleness, and
brings forth poverty, and necessity: two twins borne both at a burden,
but such ill favored ones, that every one is out of love with them so soon as
they are borne. A poor, and a ne^die birth, without beauty, or comelines, o^
shape, or strength, or any thing to live upon o^ his own. And surely a fit
birth for the Sluggard to beg withal. The sluggard and the sluggards birth,
are feign to live upon other men's labors, and yet are still poor, and necdie:
like Pharaohs seven lean kine which ^^uoured seven fat kine, and yet were
lean: now that was but a dream, but this is a truth. And n^ ^^^uaile: for it
is just and (...) which will not sow in summer, for fear of a shower, should
beg in winter when showers do fall. And he that will not work when he may,
and is able, must be put from his meat when he would eat.

Therefore thy poverty comes, etc. As if he should say, thou art the cause
of thy own poverty thy self, which is more then the sluggard would willingly
confess. For by nature we would be rich, and idle too: and when (...) are most
dissolute and careless, yet then (...) look to be relieved as well as if they
had ^^uer been the cause of their own poverty: (...) profane reprobates,
which look to cometo heaven as well as any body, and yet care not for the
ordinary means which God has appointed to bring men thither by.

By this then we may see what a hard matter it is for flesh and blood to see
what is the crew cause of Gods hand upon men, especia^^^ when the fault is in
our selves: for self-love is blind. And though we bee-plagued through our
own default, yet commonly we think not so: but we make that the cause which
is not the cause: sometime most wickedly accusing the Lord of hard dealing
against us, who is most just in all his ways, and holy in all his works:
sometime crying out upon the hardness of the weather, and vnseasonablenes of the
year: sometimes condemming others for wa^^ of charity, and compassion, as is
to be seen when any dearth, or scarcitio comes upon us: sometime with one
thing, and sometime with another: but as for our selves we can never intend
it, to search out the cause there: but still put it off from our selves, though
indeed our own sins have moved the Lord to deal in this and that sort
against us. Wherein we show our selves to be the right children of Adam (...):
for so played they when the Lord came to examine them about the eating of the
fo^bidden fruit: Adam lays his fault upon his wife, Genesis 3.
and his wife puts it off to the ^erpent: but neither of (...) would be known
(...)int in fa(...). So when any plague or calamity came upon the heathen,
they cried out against the Christians, and ^ayd, that they were the cause of
(...), which indeed was (...): for ^od plagued the heathen, because they (...)
the Christians. By which we may see (...) heathenish trick this is among
(...), to blame, oth^r^ f^^ that which themselves are the causers of: I. King.
18. 17. 18.
like Achab, who said that Eliah troubled Israel, when it was himself that
troubled Israel, as Eli^^ truly told him. Though Achab be dead, y^^ his
peevish and perverse opinion still lives amongst us, and the wicked keep it
fast, and plead hard for it, as though it were Achabs legacy beq^eathed unto
them, which no man may take from them. For when any be fallen into decay, and
proved bankeroupts, as many are through their own folly: as some by vn^
advised suretiship: some by play and gaming: some by feasting: some by
negligence: some by cousening, and other vngo^ly practices: Then they cry out
upon the preachers, or against the preaching of the word, or against the
professors of the Gospel, or against their creditors: like d^gges which bark
at the Moon, when it gives (...), and n^ue^ did hurt them, more then Eliah
did hurt Achab, when perhaps he told him of his fa^^^, and bad him look to
his soul. And being thus bewitched and besott^d, they sleep (...) out in all
security, and bravery, ^hrowding themselves under false pretenses, and vain
^llegations: as l^nas did under the hatch^^, when both himself and the
wholeship were ready to petish with him. And so do wi^^ ked men lie still in
their unthriftiness, and idleness, and vain life, when they be readi^ (...)
^ink themselves, and many others with (...) Therefore the Lord does here pull
out the sluggard, and set both his sin and the fruit thereof before his face,
and tells him plainly that himself is the cause of his own poverty, and
misery, and none but himself.

Again, we are to note that God does not say ^^^plie [ poverty shall come
upon thee] but he says, [ Thy pouertie] teaching us thereby to distinguish of
poverty, and the causes thereof: for sometimes good men are in poverty,
as well as bad: Christ was poor in the world, bu^ his poverty was to make us
rich: Job was stricken with poverty, and yet a good man, fearing God, and
painful to do any good that he could to all men: but his poverty was sent
him to make tri^ll of his patience, and to set forth the riches of Gods spirit
in him, which else could not have so well appeared. Lazarus was poor, but his
poverty was to try the rich man's charity withal, and to make the hard
hear^^dnes of rich gluttons to appear. And as the blind^ m^n in the Gospel,
was made blind, John 9. 3.
neither for his own sin, nor his parents sin, but that the work of God
might be made manifest in him: so some are made poor, neither through their
own fault, nor through their pa^ents fault, but that the work of God might
appear in them, as it did in Job: and that in other^ either the work of God,
or else the work of the devil may be made manifest, while some show compassion
in relieuing the poor, and others shut up all compassion from the poor. All
men shall dye, but not all of one disease. Many have suffered, but not al for
one cause: some have suffered as cuill doers, and some for well doing: and true
it is, that not the death, but the cause makes a martyr. Therefore to make this
point more plain, we will consider of two things.

First, how many kinds of poverty there be. Secondly, what be the true causes
of the sa^^.

Of poverty then we will make two (...), according to the parts of man
consisting of body and soul, as by the same rule we (...) both the Sluggard
temporal, and the Sluggard spiritual: So that there is the (...) of the
body, and the poverty of the soul^: ^^dily poverty is bodily want, and that
is when a man wants such necessaries as belong to this life, as health, and
food, and apparel^, and money, and lodging, and household (...), and sufficient
to pay every man his (...). And of this bodily poverty there be also two
kinds: some belonging to the godly; and some to the wicked, for both good and
bad have oftentimes their part in these wantes. So that good men, and honest
men may (...) poor, and yet good and honest still: for goodness and hone^tie
goes not by riches, for oftentimes worldly riches are means to the wicked to
make them worse and (...), having wealth to corrupt themselves and others,
authority to do violence, and health makes them lusty to do mischief.
Neither do dishonestie and wickedness always go^ by poverty and want, though
these things be counted the only evils of this life: yet we see sometime they
are means to good men to make them better, as poverty to bridle lust, baseness
to humble them, and encumbrances to drive them to God, and to teach them to
succor others: by which we may see that the poverty of La^arus is better then
the riches of Dives: The sickness of a wise man, with his wisdom, is better
then the health of a fool with his folly. And what goods soever a man has,
he cannot be a good man so long as he himself is evil: and if a man may be
termed a good man for having riches, then a fool may be termed a wise man
when he has on a wise man's gown. The Scriptures speak much in the
commendation of godly poor men, and prefers them before ungodly rich men,
as there is cause: ye see your calling 1. Cor. 1. 26. 27.
(says the Apostle to the Corinthians) How that not many wisemen after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called: but God has chosen the
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise: and God has chosen the
weak things of the world to confound the mighty things: and vile things of
the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen, etc. To show of
what person^ for the most part Gods Church does consist: now what greater
preferment then to be chosen of God, and who are counted more foolish, and more
weak, and more vile, and more despised in the world then the poor, especially
whom God has chosen, and set his mark upon? Among other great matters which
Christ sent to John to show the power of Christ; Mat. 11. 5.
this was one thing of special note, that the poor received the Gospel,
which was as great a work, and as much to be rejoiced at as that the halt did
walk, or that the leapers were cle^sed, or that the deaf did h^are. The rich
were most bound to receive the Gospel, but the poor received it, and it was as
much as if he had said, the poor are become rich, and the rich are poor, for
the gospel is true riches.

Solomon says, Better is the poor man that walks in his vprightnes, Prou.
28. 6.
then a rich man that peruerteth his w^^es: to show that a poor man may be
an upright man, and an upright man may be a poor man, and yet is to be
preferred before the wicked rich man. And in an other place he says, Eccle.
4. 13.
Better is a poor and a wise child, then an old and a foolish King which
wil^^^ more be admonished: to show that wisdom and lowlines do not always
go by years and riches, though the riches of a king, and that some men's
poverty is more blessed, then some men's riches: and as the poor which are
godly, are more blessed then the ungodly rich: so are they in more account with
the Lord, and always more dear unto him. And therefore has the Lord laid
down so many charges in his word concerning the poor, which are as so many
letters sent unto the rich in their behalf. Remove not the bounds of the
fatherles, Pro. 23. 10.
(says the Lord) for he that is more mighty will surely defend them. And
again, ^ob not the poor, Pro. 22. 22.
because they are poor, neither oppress the afficted in i^dgement, for the
Lord will, etc. To show that the poor have as good friends to stand by the^,
as the rich: for the Lord himself does promise to take their part, especially
(as S. Paul says) If they fear God, and be of the household of faith. And not
without special cause in his singular wisdom has his majesty so ordained,
that there shall always be some poor mingled among the rich in this life, and
one reason is: thereby to try the rich men's charity, as appears by the
Lords own testimony, because there shall be ever some poor in the land,
therefore I command thee, saying: Thou shall open thy hand unto thy brother,
Deuteronomy. 15. 11
(that is, thou shall be liberal, and not close-fisted unto thy brother) to
thy needy, and to thy poor in thy laud: calling them our poor, and our
needy, etc. As if they were of our family and charge, to be provided for by
us. And to this does the Son of God, the Lord Jesus also give witness: Mat. 26.
11.
The poor (says he) you shall always have with you, but me you shall not
have, (meaning in bodily presence) and look what (...) would do for me, do
it for them: to show that if the poor were wanting, the rich should not have
whereupon to exercise the works of liberality, and christian compassion.

Another reason why there are poor in the world as well as rich, is, that by
such a difference Gods bountiful liberality might appear to the rich, as he
would have the liberality of the rich appear to the poor. God could have
made all alike, and enriched all alike, if it pleased him: but he saw this
inequality to be more for his glory; wherein appears so many singular
arguments of his unspeakable wisdom, and power, and mercy, and goodness
toward all men, and all his creatures. For if al were head, where were the
comelines of the body? And what does show the height of the mountain but the
valley that lies under it? And if the rich consider well of the work of God
in this point, they shall find great cause to love the poor, and not to
disdain them. We see how proud and insolent many are if they get up a
gorgious house over their heads, or a velvet coat upon their backs, or a
gold chain about their necks: and as for their poor neighbors, they count
them but as peasants and slaves in respect of themselves. But alas poor
souls, what is it that sets out the bravery of their building, but the
poor cottage that stands by it? And in what estimation would their veluets
and silks be had, if some did not wear frize, and go plainly apparelled?
And again, if none were unlearned, then who would reverence the learned? or
what account would there be of Arts and Scicoces, if the knowledge of them
were equally given to every one? And where does wisdom shine most in her
glorious beauty, but in the midst of fools? Therefore men should leave
admiring of themselves, and despising of others which come short of them,
whether it be in the riches of the body, or in the riches of the mind, and
learn to praise the wisdom and goodness of the giver and disposer of them,
and in all humblenes of mind use them to the glory of the giver, and the
benefit of their brethren. And further, how could the rich live without the
poor and baser sort of people, whom God has made their servants to supply
their wants? For as it is not meet the ploughman should wear the Crown: so
is it as unfit for the King to hold the plough. And therefore as in the body
natural God placed diverse members, and all differing one from an other, that
one might be serviceable to an other: so in the body political he has in no
less wisdom made diverse degrees and estates of men, that one might be
serviceable and helpful unto another. And thus we see that for diverse causes
the Lord will have the poor still amongst the rich, and that good men have bin
in poverty as well as bad: and yet the Lo^^^ has still supplied their wants,
and not (...) them to lack what he saw good for (...) neither will he, but will
either give them bread, or abate their hunger, or give such a blesing with
their little portion, that it shall go as fa^^e, and content them as well as if
it were gre^^^, and withal makes them rich in the heavenly graces of his
spirit, wherein many very (...) rich men of the world are both bare and barren.

As there be good poor men, so be there also wicked poor men, which are
become poor and miserable through their own negligence, and slothfulnes: such
are they (...) Solomon speaks unto in my text. And to such persons, poverty
is both a reproach of men, and a judgment of God: for as it is no shame to
suffer, but to suffer for evil doing: so it is no shame to be poor, but to
become poor through our own negligence and wilfulnes. Of those that bear the
burden of poverty in that sort there be some in the Church, and some in the
common wealth: of Church men that be in poverty, some are of the popish and
antichristian Church, and some of the christian Churches. In the popish church
there are a company of idle Monks and (...) ers, and hedge priests, and
cloisterers, which profess wilful poverty, making the worlds believe that it
is a step to happiness, and a degree of christian perfection, and if that be
^^ue, what need the Sluggard care for such a judgment? Nay then it is no
judgment at all, but a blessing and a happiness: and so by that reckoning the
Sluggard were a blessed and a happy man, and the Sluggards life were the only
happy life that could be devised in this world, but that cannot be; for here
we see poverty and necessity set upon the Sluggard to punish him for his
slothfulnes. In our christian Church also we have seen some both in the
ministry and otherwise, who lived in good estate: and yet afterward through
their covetousness and ambition have fallen into great decay: for when they were
not content with that which was convenient for them, but still would have more:
it has happened oftentimes to them as it did to the dog, that having a piece
of meat in his mouth, would snatch at the shadow of the meat in the water,
and so when he thought to have both, he lost both.

In the scriptures there are diverse causes of poverty set down, and poverty
is made a punishment for diverse kinds of offenders, and is a whip for the
back of many fools: it is a whippe for the Sluggards back, that in time will
whip him to death if he repent not, for Solomon says, The disire of the
Sluggard ^layeth him* for his hands refus^ to wor^e. Pro. 21. 25.
It is also a scourge for the wasting vnthri^t, and prodigal spender, Luke 15.
as may appear in the example of the prodigal son, who having spent all,
was driven to feed among the swine. When it has scourged the unthrift, it will
also serve to scourge the niggard, that knows not how to use his goods, as
appears by the parable of him that hid his talent, Luke 19. 20. 26.
and therefore had all taken from him in the end, to show that it is not the
best way to thrive, for a man to live to himself. Pro. 11. 24. 25.
And Solomon says, There is that scatters and is more increased, but he
that speaks more then is right, shall surely come to poverty. The liberal
person (sa^^h he) shall have plenty, and he that waters shall have rain.
When it has punished the niggard, and the myser, it shall also punish the
^^uell man, and the oppressor: for it is set down by Solomon Pro. 22. 16.
as a definitive sentence against him in this manner: He that oppresses the
poor to enritch himself, and to give to the rich, shall surely come to
poverty. And the Prophet Esaias as one in the same commission confirms the
sentence, and goes a little further and faith, Esa. 33. 1. 2.
W^e he to thee that spoylest and wast not spoi^^, for when thou shall cease
spoiling of others, th^^ shall he spoiled by others, and when thou have deals
wickedly against others, then others shall deal^ wickedly against thee. The
truth whereof i^ not hard to be seen in some that have gotten up by prises,
and many that have lived by usury, brokerage, promooting, bribing, extorting,
cousoning, and such like means. As it punishes the cruel oppressor, so will
it also punish those which are rash and profane in their affairs: as Esau,
Heb. 12. 17.
who (without any more ado) when he was hungry, sold away his birthright
for a mess of pottage, and when it was gone, cried to have it again, but
could not get it. The sentence is recorded by solomon thus: Prou. 21. ^.
The thoughts of the diligent dee surely bring abundance, but who soever is
hasty, comes surely to poverty. Which is also verified in many sureties
which have in a vaineglorious heat, passed their words, neither regarding for
whom, nor for what, and after ward have repented them too late: and surely
this is a point not unfit for noble men, and great gentlemen to consider of,
whom God has blessed both with great livings, and also beautified with a
liberal and free heart, lest being (as many are) attended upon and haunted by
hungry horse leaches, and fawning parasites, they impeach their estate and
honor before they be aware. As it punishes the rash and headie fool, so
does it also help to plague fornicatours and adulterous fools: as may appear
by that woeful complaint of such as have been brought into the fools paradise
by the alluring ba^tes of harlots. And therefore Solomon, Prou. 5. 8. 9. 10.
that great man of experience, advises all that fear God, to keep their way
far from the harlot, and not to come near the doors of her house, and
gives this as a reason: lest (says he) thou give thy honor unto others, and
thy years vnot the cruel: and le^t the strangers be filled with thy
strength, and thy labors be found in the houses of strangers. And last of all
it is a piece of a punishment for the contemners of the word, and those that
obstinately disobey the laws of the almighty. Deuter. 28. 15. 23. 24.
For (says Moses) If thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, to
keep and to do all his commandments, and his or (...), which I command thee
this day, The hea^^^ shallbe brass, and the earth iron: The Lord shall give
thee for the rain of thy land, dust and ashes, until thou be destroyed. So
that poverty and necessity, be like a common gallows at the towns end,
which hang up both thieves, and murderers, and traitors, and witches, and all
that are brought to be executed. Then it is not a part of happiness, nor a
degree of perfection as papists hold, but a very sore judgment of God.

Here is now the Sluggards poverty, and the niggards poverty, and the
unthrifts poverty, and the hasty man's poverty, and the whoremongers poverty,
and the cruel man's poverty, and the ungodly man's poverty, and poverty is a
whippe for them all. By which we are taught not to blame others (as many do)
if they be fallen behind hand, but let every man examine himself in these
points: and if thou can clear thy self of one, suspect thy self in
another, and try thy heart in all, till thou have found out the cause, as
thou will try every keye of the bunch until the lock be opened. And say to
thy soul as David said to the woman of Tekoah, who came to the King about
Absalom, 2. Sam. 14. 19.
Is not the hand of loab in all this? So is not the hand of flouth, or
negligence, or the hand of cruelty, or the hand of incontinencie, or of
niggardlines, or of rashness, or of ungodliness in this my poverty? And this may
suffice for the poverty of the body.

And now a little of spiritual poverty. Where of the Scriptures speak
sometime in the better part, and sometime in the evil part: in the better part
it is attributed to the children of God to their great commendation, and as a
special ve^tue, and grace of God, and that is when they be humble and lowly
in their own eyes, and think poorly and basely of them themselves in respect
of others. And this is that ^pirituall po^ertie which our Savior (...)
speaks of, and calls it blessed po^^itie, in Ma^th. 5. ^. ^hen he says:
Blessed (...) ^oore in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of (...): To show
that it is not only a blessed, but a rich poverty, because the kingdom of
H^auen does follow it. And this is a grace found ^swell in Kings and great
rich men of this world sometimes, as in the pooret (...) when God does
sanctify their hearts, and teach them to know themselves: such a one was
Abraham a rich (...), and Job a rich man and David a King: yet were they poor
in (...) rite, and therefore blessed: the contrar^e whe^of is found in those
that are wise in their own conceit, and wedded to their own wai^r, whatsoever
can be said to the contrary, Pro. 26. 10.
whether they be rich or poor, of such Sal(...) says, There is more hope of
a fool then of (...)

Again to be poor in spirit is sometime taken in the evil part, not as a
virtue, but (...) foul vice: not as a grace but as a disgrace^ and that is
when men a bound in their own spirits, and in their own judgments, and
^^ing altogether carnal, and (...), are (...) of the spirit of God, and
barren in the gr^t^^ of the same spirit, abounding in pride, and ba^re^ in
humility, abounding in ma^^ce, and barren in love, abounding in ignorance, and
barren in knowledge, abounding in (...) ^ie, but barren in (...), and so i^ the
rest and yet think not so, ^ president of which pouerti^ we have in
theminister and (...) of Laodicea, to whom Christ speaks in (...) sort:
Reave. 13. 17.
Thou say thou are rich and (...) with goods, and bast needs of not ^ing,
and (...) est not that thou art wr^^^^ed, and (...) and poor, and blind, and
naked. And in (...) do the soul that is destitute of the heavenly (...) c^s of
the holy ghost, is a poor soul, although he iette it up and down in his
silks and veluets: yea and in cloth of gold too. But the soul that has them
is rich indeed, though otherwise for want of worldly necessaries they be
constrained to lie begging in the streets. Therefore the holy ghost doubts
not to call them riches, Ephe. 2. 7.
saying that God sent the Gospel of his son amongst the gentiles that he
might show thereby to the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his grace,
through his kindenes toward us in Christ lesus. To show that the gifts of the
holy ghost sanctified to the children of God, are riches, and more then riches,
for they are exceeding riches. And in the same Epistle, the Apostle says, that
he preached unto the gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephe. 3. 8.
to show that whosoever has Christ, is rich enough. Therefore is the Gospel
of Christ compared to a pearl of inesti^nable value, which could not be
bought, except a rich man sold all his substance to buie it, to show how rich
they are that have that pearl. Many rich men want these riches: Therefore let
no man say, oh I am rich and well increased in worldly goods, therefore I am
not guilty of the sluggards sin, for through thy slouthfulnes thy soul may
be poor enough in the riches of Gods spirit, how rich soever thou be in the
things of this world. And if any man would have these riches, he must
earnestly desire, and long after them: Luke 1. 53.
for the Lord fills the (...) grie with good things, but the rich, that is
the full stomach, he sends empty away. In the 2. of Prou. Solomon
propounds two things and shows what course must be taken of those that
will obtain them. The (...) the understanding of the fear of God, and the
knowledge of God: the way to get them is to receive the word, and to hide it:
then he must hearken with his ears, and incline his heart, then to calland
cry after them, as if they were going away, for fear they should not beint^^
rained as they are worthy: and if they cannot be had with calling and crying,
then he must fall to seeking, and searching, as if they sought for filuer, and
searched for treasure. This being done, then shall thou understand, and fi^^^
etc. to show that these things sent from God, must be earnestly sued unto, and
will not ma^rie, but with such as will use them well, and (...) count of them
as special guests. Unto whi^^ hunger and longing, must also be joined (...)
gence, and painefulnes: for A slotfull (...) (says the holy Ghost) makes
poor, Pro. 10. 4.
but (...) hand of the diligent makes rich: So a slot(...) ear to hear, and
a slothful heart to bele^^^ makes poor in heavenly things: but the ear and
the heart of the diligent makes rich. Some say they have been diligent in
hearing, etc. and yet are poor, and that may well (...) for it is not our
diligence, but the blessing of God that makes rich, which blessing is not
given always at the first, but is promised to those, that in faith and
patience, and by earnest prayer are continual su(...) and seekers for the
same, Genesis 32. 26.
like lacob, who could not obtain a blessing of the Angel, without great
stri^^ng and wrestling. And sometime it is v^terly denied, and not given at all
to some, because the Lord sees in them a false heart, and a wicked affection
that set them a work, and knows that if the wicked should have those
excellent graces and ie^^els, they would abuse them filthilie and proudely, to
the dishonor of the giver, like swine which trample pearls under their feet,
and dig up filth out of the dunghilk and to speak indifferently, what should
the Lord do reucaling his secrets, and his counsels to them that mean not to
follow them? Of such kind of seekers, and gatherers of spiritual riches, is
that speech of Saint James verified, Iam. 4. 2.
which he uses against some, that seek for temporal riches: Ye lust and have
not, ye (...) others, yede fire (...) derately, (...) cannot obtai^e, ye ^ight
and ^arr^, and get ^^^hing, because ye ask not. verse 3.
Then to those that ask he says: Ye ask and receive not, because ye asks
amiss, that you might lay the same out upon your pleasures. So in seeking for
heavenly riches, many (...), and have not, and no body does pity their
longing, because they are not with child traueling, Apoc. 12. 1. 2.
nor traueling in paine^^ be delivered as the true church does. Against they
envy the gifts of other men, they des^^ immoderately, they would attain to
gre^ matters, but they cannot obtain, they stri^ and keep a stir and get
nothing, because they ask not. And when they ask, they (...) ceiue not,
because they ask amiss, to spend their knowledge and their learning, and
the^^ utterance in maintaining of contentions, and quarrels, and in defending
of superstitions, and sin, and in perverting the straight wai^ of the Lord,
and all at their own pleasure, but nothing to the glory of GOD, or to the
good of Gods Church. Now it is well, if (...) poverty comes not for want of
diligence and painefulnes but then God may curse (...) unsanctified affections,
and his gifts that h^^ gauevs may be given in his wrath, as Saul was to the
Israelites, and the wicked may peri^^ with all their knowledge and excellent
graces, for want of Gods grace, as the Iewes^^ ed with the meat in their
mouths, for want of Gods blessing: and this may likewise (...) fice for the
matter of spiritual poverty. Now further (to increase the pain) besides
poue^tie there comes necessity, to show that the time willcome, when the
sluggard shall be^ glad of that which before he despised and ca^^ away, and
shall not get it, like the rich glutto^ who while h^^ lived amongst his
delicates scorned to drink water, yea perhaps wind exceptit were the best,
but being in hell, he called for water: yea but for a drop of water* and
could not get it. Or as the prodigal child, who was at last glad of pease
hulles amongst the swine, when in his fulness he scorned bread And so is it in
spiritual necessity, the time will come when many will be glad to hear the
meanest of those Sermons, and instructions, and books, which now they neglect,
and loathe, and consure at their pleasure, and will think themselves happy
too, if they may ^^^ue but a drop of that water to drink, which now they
power down the streets and channels, for God must needs be reuen^^d of such
horrible contempts.

Now for the manner of this judgment, it ^^^ery fearful, for it is said in
my text, first, that it shall come upon him as one that trauai^^h by the way,
which ^eeteth with a thee^e on a sudden, before he looked for his coming.
(...) has (...) out with ^any dealers and ^^^upiers in the world, who for want
of diligence, and careful circumspection, have gone (...) still, as if they
were on a journey, and so^^inely have been overtaken with poverty, and set
upon by necessity before they have (...) aware, and where as they were taken
before, to be in very good case, it has been ^ounde, that when every man has
taken his share, they have been left very poor and naked. And so shall Gods
graces waste in v(...) one after another, if we suffer them to di(...) us for
want of renewing, and continual(...) payring: And at the last when we think^^
have the most use of them, our faith will (...) gone, and turned into
infidelity; our rep^^^ tance shall be turned into impenitencie (...) hardness
of heart, our zeal will be blasted, (...) our love we shall find abated, and
also (...) ted up, as if all the hogs in the tow^e (...) been in our garden.
And then we shall (...) and do nothing but weep for them, as (...) chel wept
for her children, and shall not (...) comforted because they are not, nor
can^^^ be had or else we shall hardly kno^ them, ^ take them again, nay they
will hardly know^ us, or take us again, we shall be so altered, (...) if we
had r^^ne away from out masters, (...) lien long abroad in ditches, or as
though w^^ had been newly taken out of our sti^ck^^ graves.

And lastly, as this execution shall be so^^^^ ly served upon the Sluggard, so
shall it (...) mightily assisted with necessity, which shall come against him
as an armed man: so(...) no rescue or resistance can be made. And (...) the
Sluggard then make any, it will not se^^^ his turn, for he shall be so over
matched, that he shall not be able to recover himself, (...) new supply of
strenght and grace come from God. And this point may serve notably t^^ uerthrow
the folly of Papists, and secure gospe^^ers, which think to command God, and
to repent when they list, or believe, or hear, or work when they list. No,
no, well may thou strive, but it shall be against an armed man, and thy
self naked: yea thou must then yield and confesle thy folly in spite of thy
teeth. Genesis 49. 14.
The Sluggards are of kindred to Isbachar, who seeing ease to be good, and the
land pleasant, became secure, and careless, and like a strong ass cou^hing
down between diverse ^^^hens: to show that the Sluggards are like asses, which
have some strength indeed, but al their strength is in couching down, but not
in rising up: when he goes to sleep, and betakes himself to idleness, and
slothfulnes, he shall find himself strong enough: but when he thinks to
rise up to work, and to make resistance against pouerrie and necessity, the
Lords sergeants sent to arrest him; he shall then find himself weak enough,
and too weak. For as the drun ^ ard drinks till he has drunk all the
money out of his purse, and all the wit out of his head, and all goodness out of
his heart, that there is no difference between him and the beast, except it
be in this: that the beast can go and keep his way which the drunkard cannot
do: so the Sluggard sleeps in all security, and neglects al his business,
and puts off all care, for doing of all his duties, until he has slept all
thri^t out of his shop, and all his friends out of his (...) panie, and all
Gods gra^^^ out of his (...) and all comfo^t out of his ^oule* and all (...)
out of his body, and all conscience out of (...) dealing, till his stock be
spent, and his (...) pying decayed, and his customers gone, (...) Gods spirit
gone, and all be gone: and (...) nothing be left but fear, and shame, with
(...) uertic, and penury, and a bare head and (...) ble shoulders to bear off
the blows. And in^ word, til there be no difference between hi^ and the ass,
except it be in this: that the (...) can rise again when he is down, which
the Sluggard cannot do: For his poverty is (...) like one that trauaileth by
the way, and his (...) cessitie is set upon him like an armed man. And thus
have you heard the Sluggardrowsed. If ^ has roused any of us, let us thank
God for it if it has not, let us pray that it may, and when we are gone, let
us take heed we fall not asleep again, lest a worse thing happen unto us.

FINIS.
Soli Deo gloria.
A Table whrein are set forth the principal points that are handled in the
Treatise following.



