TEN SERMONS UPON THE FIRST, SECOND, THIRD and fourth verses of the sixth of
Matthew. Containing diverse necessary and profitable Treatises, viz. A
Preservative against the poison of vainglory, in the 1. and 2. The reward of
sincerity, in the 3. The uncasing of the hypocrite, in the 4.5. and 6. The
reward of hypocrisy, in the 7. and 8. An admonition to left handed Christians,
in the 9. and 10.
Whereunto is annexed another Treatise called the ANATOMY OF BELIAL: Set
forth in ten Sermons upon the 12.13.14. and 15. verses of the 6. Chapter of
the Proverbs of Solomon.

Imprinted at London by Richard Field for Thomas Man. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, RODVLPH WARCVP ESQVIRE, AND ONE OF THE IVSTICES FOR
THE PEACE IN OXfordshire, W. B. wishes all prosperity in this life, and true
felicity in the life to come.
RIGHT worshipful, musing with my self, where to find a fit patron for these
poor Sermons, you coming to my mind, I resolved to go no further for that
matter, as not knowing indeed where to better my self. For things spiritual I
know you to be of holy Isaaks diet, who longed not so much for curious and
dainty meat, as for sauory meat. In regard of humane variety, and carnal
curiosity, you shall not find them very dainty or rare: yet in regard of the
spiritual simplicity, and plainness which I have endeavored to show therein,
I hope they will not be altogether unsavory and distasteful. The doctrines
therein handled I presume you will grant to be most necessary for these times.
For first, though through the abundant light of the Gospel, many are both
allured and enforced to speak and do more good things, then they could do in
the times of darkness and ignorance: yet considering the subtilty of Satan,
and the corruption of our nature, we have need to stand upon our guard: for when
he cannot make us desist from holy actions, yet he will then use all his art
and skill to poison our affections with the stain of vaineglory. And such is
the pronenesse of our corrupt nature to be tainted therewith, that neither
touch-wood, or gunpowder are more capable of fire, then our nature is of that
poison of vaineglory and hypocrisy. Again, sincerity and plain dealing be
had in so little regard, that of most they be despised, no less then the high
way to beggary and misery: and on the otherside, that Machiuilean principle we
know is too well maintained, Qui nescit dissiumulare nescit viuere, no
dissembling no trading. And further, most men, yea even the better sort, are as
untoward to good works, as they that do all with the left hand, consulting
still with flesh and blood, and calling their worst affections to counsel. Now
seeing these things are so, what could I propound more necessary, then this
preservative against the foresaid poison? and what more needful to be set
forth, then the commendations of sincerity, taken from her beauty, from her
riches, and inestimable reward? And knowing you to be so sincere a friend to
sincerity it self, and so unfeigned an enemy to fained hypocrisy, and glosing
vaineglory, as you are, what could I present unto your Worship, more suting
with your so Christian and sanctified affections, then these poor Treatises of
sincerity and hypocrisy?

As for the second part of this book, it contains (as the title shows) An
anatomy of the man of Belial, and vain man, who living only (as the saying
goes) by the finenesse of their wits) are more unprofitable then the smoke,
and (for any religion or goodness to Godward) scarce worth the ground they
tread upon. Yet the only men with most men now adays, who being very witty
and expert to exalt vanity, are very highly exalted themselves: but it is only
of such as are as vain as themselves. Here you shall see Belial set forth by
his names, by his gestures, by his speeches, by his imaginations and by his
contentions. By his names you shall at first see his nature: By his gestures
you shall perceive his dexterity in teaching, and his facility in learning of
evil: By his evil imaginations, and lewd affections, you shall see that his
heart is not so secret but it may be and will be discovered well enough. But by
his delight in contentions, and his manner of contending, you shall easily
discern his turbulent spirit, and soon judge of what house he comes: And
by his fearful doom that is awarded him, it will be no hard matter to
perceive how well he may be spared, and how ill the Church of Christ will
thrive where the lawless libertine is suffered to harbor. But by all
together, who (but the wilful blind) will not see and confess, what a
monstrous monster the carnal gospeller, or libertine Protestant is? and what
days we are now fallen into, wherein so much liberty to evil is so freely on
all sides both given and taken, to the great endangering of the whole body both
of Church and commonwealth? To you these Treatises I do offer in a double
respect. First, to testify my thankful mind for so many Christian kindnesses,
and religious favors, which to my great comfort, and encouragement in my poor
Ministry I have received from your hands. And next, for that by reason of that
place which in your country you hold, you have right good experience of these
things. For you that are to judge (as long you have, and daily you do) between
party and party, between plea and plea, cannot choose but be acquainted with
all sorts of men: who in their turns have all of them played and do daily play
their parts before you: yet as Salamon (by the wisdom of God which was with
him that he might govern well) could discern the true mother from the false:
so can you by the same wisdom easily discern a counterfeit from one of a
sincere and simple heart, though with Ieroboams wife he disguise himself never
so much. And as all men did then fear and r^uerence that renowned king,
because they saw the Lord with him to do justice and judgment: so I know
nothing that has so much advanced, your name and credit in your country, and
caused the sweet savor thereof to spread it self like a precious ointment,
both far and near, and round about you, but that all men do evidently see
(besides your love of learning, and travel for the same) that God is with you
to do justice and judgment, to relieve the poor and distressed, to encourage
the virtuous and well disposed: but especially to heal the breaches of the
commonwealth, and to bind those fast together with the bond of godly unity,
which by unkind iarres and contentions have been likely for ever to have been
disioyned, distracted and dismembered in mind and affection the one from the
other. Blessed are the peace makers, says our blessed Savior and Prince of
peace. And who does not see how abundantly God has blessed you? whose heart he
has inclined, and whose travels he has employed, and still does employ (for
the greatest part of your time) in so blessed a work? Without all suspicion of
flattery be it spoken, unto the praise of God, and the comfort of your soul in
the day of the Lord: your readiness to do good unto all, your Zeal in
religion, your felicity in composing of controversies, in planting of peace,
and in quenching of strifes, and that to the contentment of all parties, does
not a little rejoice the hearts of all that are round about you, and shall
minister no small occasion to their posterity that is to come, to commend the
same to the everlasting praise of God, and your never dying fame. It was Paul's
rejoicing, that the care of all the Churches being laid upon him, yet he
through Gods power fainted not under his burden. And surely you may well say,
the care both of Church and commonwealth about you lies upon you: but yet God
does enable you to undergo that care. Yea, from what parts almost do they not
repair unto you (as unto the common Physician of the commonwealths diseases,
and the stay of the country, and most blessed instrument of every man's peace
and welfare, when any of their matters are otherwise like to languish and fall
to the ground? When it was first reported that you should be employed in
Embassage for her Majesty into France, although it could not be denied but that
your employment that way might, yea and in all likelihoods would (through the
blessing of God) have proved very beneficial to the Church of God in both
nations, yet it grew very disputable among some, whether your presence there or
at home in your own country, had been the more necessary. And so fast has
God united unto you the hearts and affections of the poor commons about you:
yea and of all sorts, that as unwillingly they would have parted with you, if
the choice had been in them, as the young infant forbeareth the presence of the
kind and tender mother. I speak not this to the prejudice of any: neither is
there any such cause, for thanks be to God you cannot in this respect say (as
sometime Eliah said of himself) that the Lord has left you alone: but I
speak it to your comfort and encouragement, wheresoever you shall be employed,
whether in foreign business or domestical affairs. For though you cannot want
your crosses more then other of Gods dear children, who both abroad and at
home, do by daily experience find that virtutis est inuidia comes, and that
they are envied of the malignant no less for their virtues, then Jacob was
hated of Esaw because of the blessing, yet cannot that gracious aspect of Gods
loving countenance, and favorable blessing, which have hitherto continually
seconded al your godly endeavors, but be tanqua^ arrha, as an undoubted pledge
and testimony unto you, that whither soever you shall be lawfully called
forth, to do him service in serving your Prince and country, he will not
leave you to your self, nor to the malice of the envious: but will on the
contrary stand by you and hedge you in with grace and mercy, wherewith you
shall be defended as with a shield. And as he has promised to honor those
that honor him, so shall you assuredly find for ever, as you have hitherto
done, the truth of that promise in due time performed unto you. Therefore go on
still like your self, as a faithful friend to truth and sincerity, and an
unfeigned enemy to the man of Belial, and vain man, whose counterfeit dealings
shall vanish as the smoke against the wind: and the God of heaven prosper you
in your goings. And now, no whit doubting of your willingness to peruse these
Treatises, nor of your readiness to construe all things in the best part, and
to make your best use of them, to the glory of God, the good of his Church, the
comfort of your soul, and benefit of your country: I humbly commend both your
self, and them to the blessing of God. From my study this 8. of February.

Your worships in all good affection, W. BVRTON.

THE I. SERMON.
MATH. 6.1.2.3.4. Take heed that ye give not your alms before men to be seen
of them, or else you shall have no reward of your father which is in heaven.
Therefore when thou give thine alms thou shall not make a trumpet to be
blown before thee, as the hypocrites do in the Sinagogues, and in the streets
to be praised of men: verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But when
thou do thine alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does.
That thine alms may be in secret, and thy father that sees in secret will
reward thee openly.


THE drift of our Savior Christ both in this Chapter, and in the Chapter
following, is all one with that which he had in the former. Namely, to teach
his followers, that if they would enter into the kingdom of heaven, it is
necessary that their righteousness do exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees: only with this difference. In the former he confuteth
the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, and in these two he notes and
condemns their life and hypocrisy. From which observation two things are to
be noted. First, that above all things the his back, and works altogether at
adventure, to the spoiling of the whole building, and undoing of himself, with
shame enough of all that behold him?

Take heed, etc. The parts of this admonition are two, negative, and
affirmative. In the first part we are admonished what to avoid in giving of
our alms* In the second part we are showed what to do. Concerning the thing
that is to be avoided note we three things. First what it is. Secondly, how to
avoid it. Thirdly, the reason why it must be avoided. For the first, the thing
that is to be shunned in giving of alms is vaineglory, and that has two
parts. First, inward desire of the same. Next an outward show of it. The first
is the root, the second is the leaves and the branches. The first is the
mother, the second is the daughter. The first is the poison, the other is the
sign thereof, or the breaking out: The first is the fountain, the second is
the stream. The first is the coal, the second is the flame. The first is the
cause, the second is the effect of the same. The first is the thief, the
second is his accessory. The first robs God of his honor, the second does
publish it. Therefore both the first and the second be damnable: neither the
first nor the second are sins venial, as the Papists say, but both the first
and the second, the mother and the daughter, without faith and repentance are
sins eternally mortal. And therefore our Savior Christ says here. Take
heed of them: as if they were some dangerous enemies to the soul.

The first thing therefore to be taken heed of, is all inward desire of
vaineglory, or worldly praise, and that is forbidden in the first verse, where
our Savior says, Give not to be seen of men, that is: with an intent,
purpose, or desire that men should see thee and commend thee for it. Mat. 5.16.
Public giving is not forbidden, for Christ says, Let your lights shine
before men, that they may see, etc. But vaineglorious giving in public is
forbidden, and therefore he does not simply say, Do not your alms before men,
but adds, to be seen of them, condemning that end, which is first in heart
though last in act. So in Math. 5.16. he says not, Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify you, but that they
seeing your good works may glorify God, your heavenly father, who works
both the will and the deed. So then we see that it is not simply evil to do
good works in the view of men, nay rather it is good so to do, to glorify
God, and encourage others. God is much glorified, when his children walk like
their father, being merciful as their heavenly father is merciful, though not
in that degree of mercy, yet in mercy of the like nature, heavenly,
bountiful, free, and harmless. By the death of Christ he was known to be
the natural son of God, and by the good life of Christians as well as by
their death, it may be known that they are the adopted sons of God. For when
Christ died there was a strange alteration of nature, the earth did shake, the
powers of heaven lost their power, the graves opened, the dead arose; there was
darkness upon the face of the earth, as if day had been turn into night,
which when men saw they confessed: yea the very enemies of Christ himself
confessed to the glory of the divine power, saying, doubtless this was the
son of God. So when Christians dye to the world and live unto God, when they
by the power of Gods spirit, do crucify sin and quicken righteousness,
there is also a great alteration in nature, their nature is refined by grace,
their night is turned into day, and their day into night, their present shame
is their glory, and their former glory is their shame, their dead affections
are raised up, the deuowring graves of their hard hearts being opened, and now
they speak, and do, and study otherwise then they did, and not like other
men. In a word as Christ's death was not like other men's death, so Christians
lives are not like other men's lives. Christ's funerals were solemnized by the
Sun and the Moon, by the powers of heaven, by the graves and the dead, by
the earth and the stones, and all the insensible creatures, whereof in their
kind some blushed, some trembled, some fainted, and all mourned for the death
of their Lord, and feared (seeing such things happen to their Sovereign) an
utter dissolution of themselves and all nature. These things were not looked
for in the world, nor regarded at worldly men's funerals, yea such as beseem
not the Princes of the nations: so Christians lives and deaths too are
solemnized and graced with the ornaments of the spirit, and the joy of heavenly
Angels, with the fruits of righteousness, and the applause of the godly,
things not regarded of the wicked, nor beseeming the helhounds of this world:
But doubtless when men see these lights, they must needs glorify God, and
say God has done great things for them, and when the wicked themselves see
such an alteration in them as they may stand a far off, and wonder at, but
never attain unto, they must be enforced spite of their hearts to give God the
glory, as Achan did, saying, this is the truth, and so it was, and as the
Jews did, doubtless these were good men, the sons and daughters of God. A
man may by their behavior know of whose bringing up they were, by their habit
and spiritual attire, a man may discern them to be the Citizens of the
heavenly Jerusalem. Blessed be God, in so much as they must go a little farther
with the wicked in the book of Wisdom: and say, we are fools and they are
wise, howsoever we counted their life madness before: we are they that played
the madmen, and have wearied our selves in the ways of unrighteousness. And
with Balam: Oh that we might dye the death of the righteous, and that our last
end might be like unto theirs. And thus we see how for the glorifying of God in
this life, it is necessary for Christians to exercise works of mercy, as
giving of alms, and other good works appointed of God in his word, even
before men.

As it is necessary for the glory of God, so also is it as necessary for the
encouragement of the godly. And first of the painful Pastor, and Minister of
the word, and then of other Christians. To the godly Minister it is no small
comfort, and encouragement, when he shall see the Lords people under his
charge, fruitful in good works as well as in good words. For then shall he see
the fruit of his labors, when after his labor he sees them fruitful in all
manner of good works: and on the other side, when they receive the word in
vain, he may fear that he has labored in vain, in vain I say as touching
their conversion, though not simply in vain otherwise, for the word of God is
never preached in vain, whether men believe it or no, hear it or no, being
ever either a savor of life to life, or of death unto death: and coming as
the rain which never returns in vain, but either waters the earth, or
drowneth it: and makes the ground to bring forth either corn or cockle, sweet
flowers or stinking weeds, whereof the one shall be preserved, and the other
rooted up, and cast out upon the dunghill. The husbandman is encouraged to
follow his husbandry when his vines are fruitful, and his haruests plentiful,
growing timely, ripening kindly, and yielding abundantly: and no less is Gods
husbandman the minister of the word encouraged by the timely growing, kindly
ripening, and plentiful yielding of his charge the Lords husbandry, after he
has taken pains amongst them. The shepherd loves not only to hear his
flock bleate like sheep, and go to the green pastures, but also when time
comes he expects their fleece for his gain, and their young for the
increase of his flock. So the shepherds of our souls love more to see the
flock of Christ yield their love, to the encouragement of their shepherds,
and the increase of good works, for the enlarging of the flock of Christ,
then only to hear them speak and ^alke like Christians. It was an
encouragement to Paul to travel in birth among the Galathians, when he was in
hope to bring them forth unto Christ, or to beger Christ in their hearts. What
had that blessed Apostle to boast of when he came at Macedonia, but of the
zeal of the Corinthians? and when he came at Achaia, what joy was it unto him
to report of the forwardness and liberality of the Macedonian Christians? 2.
Cor. 8.
Even so, no less comfort is it to godly Ministers still in places abroad to
commend the zeal, and love, and knowledge, and patience, and godliness, and
charity of their people at home: and the contrary to all these is as great a
cross and discouragement, as the former is joyful, comfortable and
encouraging.

As the minister of Christ is encouraged by the lights, that is, the good
works of Christians shining before men, so are other Christians also no less
confirmed, and drawn forward to do the like. So the readiness of the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 8.1, 2.
was a spur to the Macedonians, and Achaians, yea their zeal (says the
Apostle) provoked many to be zealous. Iron sharpneth iron (says Solomon) so
the face of a friend sharpneth a friend, Pro. 27.17*
that is, one man quickneth another. One piece of wood being set on fire, and
laid to another, does also kindle the other: so one zealous Christian makes
other zealous, which were cold before. Examples are very forcible either to
good or evil, for in the affections of men there is a certain unity and
united league, so that when one is moved, another by the same is moved: like a
chain of many linkes one within another, draw one and draw all: or like a
clock which has many wheels, which all stand still, until one be set a
work; but if one be set a going, that will move his fellow, and his fellow
will move his next fellow, and so one will move another, the greater the
lesser, and the lesser in some place the greater, the lower the higher, until
at the last the clock sound, and tell all the world thereof. And this
spiritual moving of affection by the like affection, and drawing on of one
action by another like, which the same affection embraces, is effected by
virtue of the communion of Saints, which we rather believe then express. Thus
Nathaniel is drawn by Philip to see Christ, and Philip is drawn by Simon
Peter, Ioh. 1.43.
and Simon by his brother Andrew. Thus the woman of Samaria being moved by
Christ, moves the best of her neighbors to come out and see Christ. And
herein appears the unity of the Spirit, which the Apostle speaks of Ephesians.
4.3. and wills Christians to hold and maintain with the bond of peace: for
the Spirit of God is always one and the same, in all men, in all ages, and at
all times; and look what it commends to one, it comes to another, and what
it persuades one unto, unto the same it persuades another. So that one man
being moved by Gods Spirit to show works of mercy, he does it, his affection
liking the same, commends them unto another, that man's affections also being
ruled by the same Spirit, cannot choose but affect and entertain the same
things, and so they go from one to another, and all being moved by one and the
same spirit. And yet every one is moved by means, and in his several degree
and measure, whether it be of faith, or charity, or patience, etc. David was a
mean to make many zealous with him, in fetching home the Arc, and in other
religious actions no doubt, Psalm. 116 10.
but how? he first hears the word, then he believes, then he speaks, then
others hear him speaking, then they believe that which they hear from him,
and then they affect that which they believe, and then they practice that which
they affect, as all men do, whose hearts are where their treasure is, and their
tongues are occupied about that which their hearts are set upon. To conclude
therefore this point, seeing as the doing of good works before men, makes
much for the glorifying of God, and the encouraging and drawing on of others,
both the godly Minister in his place, seeing some fruit of his labors, and
also of other Christians, by the example of their brethren, and by virtue of
the spirit, which unites their affections, let no man condemn the giving of
alms, or exercise of other works of charity before men, but do them rather,
but always, take heed (as our Savior wills) that ye give not your alms
before men to be seen of men, that is, with a desire of praise, and
vaineglorie.

It is the affection that makes or marreth all our actions, and is the thing
that is more respected with the Lord, then the outward action it self be it
never so good: Pro. 16.2.
Solomon is witness, for he says: The Lord pondereth the spirits, that is: he
considers with what affections things be done. 2. Cor 9.7.
And the Lord loves not a giver but a cheerful giver. Now the gift is in the
hand, but cheerfulness lodges in the heart, and appears in the
countenance, which the Lord does more respect then the gift. No one thing does
so soon, and so much poison all our actions as vaineglory does, a sin indeed
that waits on the best, as it did upon S. Paul, who therefore had a
messenger of Satan sent to buffet him, that is: he had a part unregenerate to
humble him, lest he should be exalted above measure, by reason of those
revelations which he had given him, 2. Cor. 12.7.
to show that the best men are given to think well of themselves.

How many do give and forgive to be seen of men? How many have Sermons and
Dole at their burials only to be praised of men? How many hear the word, and
daily frequent the exercises of religion, only to be seen of men? How many do
lend and give their word vainegloriously, to be praised of men? How many do
build aloft like Nimrods, even till Babel (that is to say, confusion) fall upon
their heads, and only to get a name amongst men? How many have even confessed
their faults and wept for their sins too, even to be seen of men? How many
coming through Cathedral churches, kneel down by a pillar as though they
prayed, only to be seen of men? And might not Osorius the Papist himself be
as vaineglorious as another, when he wrote a book, de contemnenda gloria, in
contempt of vaineglorie? As many rufflers in the Church make most glorious
Sermons in praise of mortification, and sanctification, when themselves are
most vain. This humor waits upon us all, and makes all that we do
fruitless before God: and therefore in all our actions ought carefully to be
prayed against, as we are taught by our Savior himself, Psalm. 115.
saying: hallowed be thy name Lord: and with David: Not unto us o Lord, not
unto us, but to thy name let the praise be given: for to us belongs nothing
but shame of faces.

This humor of vaineglorie does steal craftily upon us, and does subtly
beguile us: therefore take heed of it says Christ. It lurketh in the heart,
as dregs in their vessel; if great heed be not taken it will rise up and
mar the wine. It is like a fair spoken thief at the door, who if thou take
not heed of him, will get in and spoil thee before thou be aware. It is like a
heard of Players, who with their variety of bewitching vanities, do cause men
willingly to be robbed of them. It is like a moth, that if thou take not heed
of it, will breed in thy souls garment and spoil it. It is like leaven, a
little whereof will sower the whole lump of dough. It is like Ioab and Judas,
who kill when they kiss, and stab when they embrace. In a word, it is a
disease that makes many to die even laughing, and sometime depriueth them of
their wits. Therefore take heed of it, says Christ, it is a very dangerous
evil: take heed you give not before men to be seen of men.

Therefore when thou give thine alms, thou shall not make a trumpet to be
blown before thee, etc. As before our Savior Christ forbids all inward
affectation of worldly praise, so here he condemns all outward show of
vaineglorie, and all ostentation of a vaineglorious mind in giving of alms.
According to which rule the Apostle says: 1. These. 5.22.
Abstain from all appearance of evil. Now this was in the Scribes and
Pharisees very gross hypocrisy and palpable. For first, they must have their
alms giving proclaimed by sound of trumpet. Secondly, not in any private
place, but in the sinagogues, the most public and notorious places that were.

For their proclamation of the matter by sound of trumpet, they might pretend
some excuse, and that reasonable in show too, as thereby to call the poor
together: for hypocrites are never without their pretenses and excuses. 1. Sa.
15.21.
Saul he reserueth of the Amalekites beasts contrary to Gods commandment,
Genesis 3.10.
to offer sacrifice forsooth. Adam hides himself, and pretends the cause to
be his nakedness. Ioh. 12.5.6
Judas grudgeth at the cost that was bestowed upon his Lord and master Christ:
and to save his credit, pretends care for the poor. 2. Sam. 15.7
Absalon intends treason, but pretends a vow made at Hebron. But pretenses
are no better then couers made of fig-leaues, which the Sun will soon dry,
and the wind will quickly blow away.

Whatsoever those hypocrite^ might seem to pretend for their trumpet, it would
not serve their turn, neither before God, who knows the thoughts and intents
of the heart long before they be conceived, nor yet before men, who by the
light of common reason are able in some measure to descrie hypocrisy, in that
and the like action. And doubtless it could not be otherwise then an evident
note of vaineglorie in them: for what needed they make any proclamation for the
matter? had they not their Elders? had they not also their Deacons and
overseers for the poor, that knew well who had need of alms? might they not
enquire of them? or could they not trust them with their contribution? or if
they must needs make it known to all the world, when they would deal their
dole, had they no other way to publish it by, but by sound of trumpet? A bell
might have been tolled, if they had any, or if they had none, a bill might have
been set up, or a messenger might have been sent to the houses of the poor:
yet none of these ways would serve the turn but a trumpet must be blown
before them, whereby they might be honored, and admired after a mere stately
and princely manner. Whereby likewise they did sufficiently bewray their
ambitious humor: and therein did they not a little forget themselves: for they
knew by the law of Moses (which they had amongst them, and was read daily in
their sinagogues) that trumpets were not appointed to any such end or use, as
they put them unto. For in the tenth of Numbers, from the second verse to the
ninth, it is evident that trumpets were appointed only for the assembling of
the congregation, and for the removing of the camp: the manner of using them
is more at large there set forth, to which place I refer them that are
desirous to know the same more fully. Again in other places of the Scripture,
we shall see that they were used at the coronation of Princes, in managing of
war, and solemnizing of Princely affairs, or business of State, and not
otherwise: as when Solomon was proclaimed King at Gihon, 1. Kin. 1.39.
they blew the trumpet, and cried, God save King Solomon. So likewise when
Athaliah was deposed, and Ioash made King in her stead: 2. Ki. 11.14.
it is said, that the King stood by a pillar in the house of God, as the
manner was, and all the Princes and trumpetters by the King. And the Apostle
commending the use of known tongues in the congregation, and condemning the
contrary, uses a similitude of the trumpet in war, 1. Cor. 14.8.
saying: that if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare
himself to battle? By which both they might know, and we also may understand,
that the trumpet is an instrument of state, and therefore not to be made common
to every one, nor for every thing. There be certain ornaments and dignities,
peculiarly belonging to certain persons, and in no wise to be made common unto
all: as Coronets, chaires of State, cloth of State, garters of Honor,
Trumpetters, Pages, Chariots, etc. Neither is it fit for every obscure
Gentleman, neither is it seemly for every, or any base artificer, or man of
trade and occupation, to ride in Coches, to have Pages run by their horse
side, nor to solemnize the marriages of themselves, or their sons and daughters
with sound of trumpet, as if they were some Princes, or persons of State and
high calling. It is too intolerable pride, and too manifest a note of
Pharisaicall ambition: whereby they (which do so) make themselves odious and
ridiculous before God and all wise men. When the malicious Jews saw Christ, in
life and doctrine to excel other men, they blasphemously said in derogation of
both: Mar. 6.3.
Is not this the carpenters son? But we (when we see such princely ornaments,
and solemnities taken up amongst country clownes, or other inferior persons
of base estate and mean calling) may well say in defacing of such insolent
fools: Iud. 9.15.
Is not this the Carpenter? and is not that the bramble, that has so exalted
himself above the trees of the forest? What would these persons do, and how
would they be honored, if their place, and authority, and birth, and wealth,
did answer their humor? Nimrod never builded so high as they would build:
Absalon had never so many men running before him as they would have:
Nebuchadnezzar the King of pride, never strouted it so in his palace, as they
would strout it. Dives was never so dainty in his diet, not so costly in his
habit, nor so hard-harted to Lazarus, as they would be: Iezabel was never such
a painted harlot, as some of them would be: Michol was never such a scoffer at
the zeal of David her Lord and husband, as they would be: Herod's mincing
minion, and dancing damsel, did never so trip it as they would trippe it. If
those days should come, as they are not far off, then it were good for John
Baptist to look to his head, and for Naboth to his vineyard, and David to his
kingdom and life too. For who so cruel as the harlot, that is made a mother
before her time? and who so lofty and lusty as the bramble, that is exalted
beyond his desert? Woe to the children that have such to their parents, and woe
to the tenants that should hold of such Landlords, and woe to the subjects where
such should dominere, and woe to the sick where such are Physicians, whose
teeth would tear as fast as their tongue would lick: whose Physic must be
recompensed with the skin of their patients. Woe to those soldiers that have
such to their captains, and to those horses that have such for their riders.
And doubtless, great is the abuse on both sides in these degenerate days,
wherein all things are so grown out of order and kind. For as the ploughman in
some places, can scarce be known from a Gentleman, nor a carter from a
Courtier, nor a Gentleman from a Nobleman, nor a Milk-maid from a Lady: so on
the other side is it observed as a fault in persons of state and high degree,
that they do so much abase themselves (what the cause is God knows) and
obscure the light and glory that God has given them, that a man can hardly
know them as they go or ride, from persons of far meaner estate then they be
of: vertitur hoc vitio, etc. this is a vice which many take to be a virtue.
They that wear silk, and costly apparel are in Kings Courts, says Christ,
to show that Princes, and those which attend upon Princes, should go otherwise
then other men: that is, it is a lawful for them to take and use for
difference sake, those ornaments and dignities, which God has annexed unto
their places and degrees: always provided, that no man goes beyond his
calling and ability, but a degree under, rather then beyond: and that they
take not that honor to themselves, as Herod did, which should be given to God.
Some are so high minded and fantastical withal, that to be of every fashion
they will borrow of every man: and then they may go one degree further, then
that Philosopher took, who said: Omnia mea mecum porto: I carry all my goods
with me: for these may say so: Omnia mea: I carry all my goods about me: which
they may easily do, when they have metamorphosed or turned their great Oaks
into gay coats, and their farms into farthings, and their fee simples into
simple fees, and their rents into ruffes, and their lands into laces: for that
indeed is the way to bring a castle into a capcase: and then they may well
play the king and the beggar too; the king abroad, and the beggar at home: and
always cry: Omnia nostra nobiscum portamus: and more too, may another answer.
for Non solum vestra sed aliena, non tua sed mea portas: not only their own but
other men's goods too they wear. But when every bird has her own feather
again: monet cornicula risum: the naked though becomes most ridiculous, being
stripped of her borrowed colors. It was well with old Father Latimer that
reverend Father and religious Bishop, and constant Martyr of Christ, when he
could answer the Courtiers in King Edwards days, that made themselves merry
with his lether coat, and tell them to their faces, that his lether coat had
one property, which many of their velvet coats had not: and what was that?
forsooth it is paid for quoth he, and so are not many of yours, so that I may
say I wear none but my own, so cannot many of you do. Never a merchant, nor
mercer in London will pull me by the sleeue, and say: Sir, pay for your coat.
And truly me think such an answer should both comfort those that live within
compass, and shame many a lusty gallant, and wanton brave Dame in these
days, who when they are gotten into a shop book, are as safe as if they
were in a castle: for they will never come out until they be rent out. Other
some through envy at other men's estate, cannot be content with their own, and
therefore play the toade, who thought by swelling to be as big as the ox,
but he burst himself with his swelling before he could be a quarter so big,
and so does the envious man too.

Others are called to high place, and to bear rule with majesty and
authority, and of these two, many are content to forget all that, and to
become hail fellow with every base companion at cards, at tables, at dice, and
quaffing, and so live amongst men not like rulers, but like Aesops block,
drowned in the bottom of carnal and base delights, for every frogge to leap
upon, and abuse at his pleasure. These men while they neglect and abuse those
good means which God has lent them, to grace and countenance them withal, do
live both in contempt, and in some danger. For too much fond familiarity
breeds contempt, as too much stateliness and severity breeds hatred and
disdain, because there is fear without love. So an unarmed man many times
emboldneth a thief, and even a valiant Gentleman being alone, does not a little
encourage his enemy to set upon him, or to lie in wait for him, because he
knows, that although when he has his men with him, he is like a threefold
cable which cannot easily be broken, yet being alone, he is but as a single
cable, or rather as one untwisted that can easily be twitched in pieces.
Therefore to conclude this point: let the abuse on both sides be taken away,
and let persons of state use their stately ornaments, and instruments to the
glory of God, and good of their country, and themselves. And seeing as such
things are appointed to put a difference between the superior and the
inferior, let not any presume to use any noble or princely ceremony, for the
solemnizing of his mean and base affairs: but remember what our Savior says
here in my text: When thou give thine alms, cause not a trumpet to be blown
before thee. And so much for the first point, namely, the thing that is to be
avoided.

THE II. SERMON.
2. Point.
NOW we are to see which way, or by what means it may be avoided, and the way
to avoid vaineglorie, in giving of alms, or in any other action is to take
heed of it. So says the text. Take heed that you give not to be seen of men,
that is, watch over your affections narrowly, and examine every affection and
every cogitation: every affection what it chiefly desires, and every
cogitation what it museth upon, and deuiseth to effect.

Mar. 13. Mat. 26.
Take heed (says our Savior Christ in another place) watch and pray, lest ye
fall into tentation: to show that there is no true heedfulnesse without
watching and prayer; and without such kind of heed taking, we soon fall into
tentation.

This watchful heedinesse, and heedie watchfulness, is that which S. Paul
calls circumspect walking: Ephe. 5. and the profane persons of the world by
a nickename call preciseness and Puritanisme. Well whatsoever the world does
call it or account of it, it suffices the godly wise, that wisdom it self
has both commended and commanded it. It is the thing that in every place of
the Scripture is urged unto us for our good* One Scripture calls to those
that go to the holy assemblies, and says, Look to thy feet when thou entrest
into the house of God. Eccles. 9. Luke 8.
Another Scripture cries to men, when they are set at a sermon: Take heed how
ye hear. Another Scripture calls to those that go to the Communion, 1. Cor.
11.
Let every man examine himself before he eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup. Another Scripture cries out to the whole camp of Israel saying:
Heb. 2.12.
Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart to depart away from the
living God: that is, from your sovereign Lord and Captain, to a Forraigner,
to a Rebel, to the Devil. Another Scripture cries out to those that are
planting, and setting, and weeding in the Lords garden, Take heed and beware
of covetousness, for that is the root of all evil, Another gives warning to
those that are at their devotions, Luke 12.1.
and serving God, Take heed of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, which
is hypocrisy. And every Sripture almost comes to us with a friendly
watchword, whatsoever we are about, and bids us take heed* and they stand
like Sea marks whereby Mariners are both warned of rocks and sands, and
directed rightly and safely into their desired haven. And surely if we would
well consider that we are always in danger of enemies both visible and
invisible, and those not a few but many, not weak but mighty, not simple but
subtle, and that our own false hearts within us are the readiest to betray
us, we we would easily confess, that this is a friendly watchword, and no more
then is needful: Take heed unto your affections, watch over your cogitations,
and pray against tentations. The ground that we go upon is slipperie as ye,
our knees are weak, we are soon down, and being down do hardly recover our
selves, and therefore we had need take heed. Sin is subtle and impudent,
it will easily deceive us with false colors, as Drapers do with false lights,
and it will not be said nay; but with often and resolute resisting the Devil
is driven away. I am manhood says malice, and for thy credit: thou need not
fear me. I am good husbandry says Covetousness, and for thy profit, thou
need not fear me; I am good fellowship says Profaneness and Filthiness,
and for thy pleasure: thou need not fear me. I am handsome cleanelinesse
says Pride, and will make thee to be admired: thou need not fear me,
Gloria calcar habet says Vaineglorie, glory and praise is a spur to
encourage men in well doing: true says another of the same humor, Virtus
laudata crescit, and the masters euge is the servants auge in virtue and good
service, the praise of virtue is the increase of virtue. And this is true, but
now a friend with a friendly caveat were very necessary, and Take heed will
serve for all if they be wise. Take heed, o man, that thy manhood be not
malice, that thy good husbandry be not greedy covetousness, that thy
goodfellowship be not beastliness, that thy unity be not conspiracy, that
thy love be not wanton lust, that thy cleanelinesse be not Sodomiticall
excess, that thy glorious spurs of vaineglorie and praise, be not poisoned
by thy desiring of them. Oh master how shall we know these things, will thou
say? I can give thee no better counsel then God has given thee, and that is
Take heed. But how shall I take heed? Surely by watching and praying. Alas
sir, three things hinder my watching, and that is drowsines, and darkness, and
fearfulness: I would watch says one, but sleep oppresses me: and I would
watch says another, but darkness troubles me, that is, I am an ignorant
simple man, not knowing the right way from the wrong, nor vice from virtue, nor
a subject from a rebel, nor truth from error. And I would watch says
another, but I see the enemies so many and so terrible, that I dare not set my
self against them, I will put out my light, that I may see no more such
fearful sights, and lay down my weapon, and let them do as they will, and
fall asleep in my sin, as men do in their beds when it thundreth: but to be
safe against all dangers, they will first bless themselves, and say their
Auie Marie, and so commit themselves to the weather. This is good plausible
counsel to flesh and blood, that sauoureth any thing, saving the things of
Gods spirit: but how loathsome soever you take it to be, for certain it is not
very wholesome: therefore my brethren let it alone, and take better advice: and
that is this. If you be in darkness and ignorance, get you lights both within
you and without you, and that good store too. For the enemy cannot abide the
light, but will put out as many as he can come handsomely by: these lights that
thou must set up without thee, must be first the holy word of God diligently
read, orderly preached, and duly frequented: that shall be a lantern unto thy
feet, and a light unto thy paths: that shall descrie unto thee the right way
that thou must walk in: by that thou shall discover all false and counterfeit
colors: and by that touchstone, thou shall try all dross from gold. Having
that as the great Sunne-light of the Church, neglect not to read if thou
can, or at least to hear the good works and writings of godly and learned
men: especially have conference with them, both soberly, and with a holy
purpose to be reformed by them: for they are lights too, not to be neglected
nor despised, no more then the Moon is, whose light is nothing in comparison
of the Sun light, and is altogether borrowed too of the Sun: but it is
borrowed for thy good. With these lights set up also before thy eyes, the good
works and godly examples of humility, and of patience, and of lowliness, and
of zealousnesse, and of constancy, and of sincerity, and of love, and of
charity, and of true devotion, which thou have seen or heard of in the Saints
and holy men, and women of God: for even they are lights, and comfortable
lights too* when Christians mean to keep Christ's watch over their hearts and
affections. But all these are to no purpose to thee, except thou have one light
within thee, as well as without thee. When God has bestowed these outward
lights upon thee, then pray thou for the gift of the holy Ghost, that he being
in thy heart, may open thy eyes of understanding and judgment, to see the
wonderful things of Gods law: as he opened the heart of Lydia when Paul
preached: and also to frame thy will and affections to take pleasure and
delight in the Saints and their examples, who excelled in virtue upon earth:
and so much for thee that sit in darkness. Now to those that have lights,
that is, preaching enough, and good books enough, and good knowledge enough,
and can discourse of good examples enough, but are oppressed with sleep, and a
spirit of deadness and drowsinesse: that is, are careless of that they hear,
and forgetful of that they both hear and read, and make no conscience of any
thing longer then it is rung into their ears. I cannot tell well what to say
unto them: to discourage them I am loath, and to encourage them, as they are I
am afraid, but let us see: is there no way to make them vigilant? that they may
take heed of the enemy when he comes? verily yes. First, they must desire
their fellows and neighbors to call upon them by exhortation, and awaken
them: as men do that mean to ride a journey together: then if they fall
asleep again, they must cause the watchmen of the streets, that is their
public teachers and pastors to smite them and pinch them, even with special
application of the doctrine unto their own hearts and consciences: then they
must resolve to be patient and contented that they be often and loud so called
upon, as Christ did often call upon his Disciples when they were heavy: and
therefore often and loud, because they were heavy. To which end the
congregation should not be pestred with an ignorant nor a cold teacher, nor a
strawbury Sermon man, that either cannot or will not, or will but coldly, and
seldomly rouse up men's drowsy consciences, but such as shall be instant in
season and out of season, that is: upon all occasions, to lift up their voices
like trumpets, and to tell the Lords people of their sins, both in general,
and also in particular. And lastly, they must take heed of eating and drinking
such things as are like sleepy and drowsy meats: that is, that they delight
not in such carnal company, and fleshly pleasures, as will in time both breed
a consumption of Gods graces in them, and also harden, and besot them so in
their sins, that in time they may grow past all feeling, for consuetudo
peccandi (says Augustine) tollit sensum peccati: the custom of sin takes
away the feeling of sin.

Now for those that are discouraged through fearfulness of their own
ability, and affrighted with the fearful sights of their enemies, like Elisha
his servant at the sight of the Aramites: there be of two sorts, which have
need of good instruction, and great encouragement. The first sort are dismayed
at that which is past; the second is afraid of things to come. The first are
such as have been in the battle, and have been foiled, and ouermatched with
rebellious thoughts, and unsanctified affections: and these like a weak porter
at a gate, having opened the door to some one whom he had a mind unto, were
not only so troubled by that one sin of theirs, whom they meant not to keep
always, that they could not tell how to be rid of him any more; but also by
that same one false and fained friend have been betrayed, in letting in a
press of many other sins, which they never thought of, to the spoiling of
all that was within: which they thought to keep out, but finding themselves
ouermatched with the preasse without, and wanting strength within, have even in
a kind of desperate manner sit down, and let all alone, to come in and do what
they will: wishing when it is too late as they imagine, that in time they had
taken heed of that one false and deceitful affection which they entertained.
To these men a man cannot say, obstate principijs, withstand the beginnings:
for that the fray is already begun, and they almost, nay altogether put to
the worse. But the best counsel for such a one is, redime te captum quam queas
minimo, get out of their hands so soon as thou can: and as Christ said to
the woman taken in adultery, go and sin no more, least a worse thing happen
unto thee: that is, take better heed another time. But how shall I get out of
their hands? will thou say: verily of thy self a thing impossible: thou must
crave help of a stronger then thy self, or then the enemy that has thee in
possession, and that is Jesus Christ, the victorious Lion of the tribe of Judah,
who has already dispossessed the strong man of his hold, and purchased the
possession to thy use: if thou sue to him by earnest prayer, and embrace him by
a holy faith, thou shall recover thy hold again. And without these two
weapons, it is not possible for thee, by all thy heed taking to avoid the
sleights of Satan. And what though thou carry a scarre, and wear some
shakles of the unregenerate part: yet be content, and thank God for thy
victory by Christ. Jacob could not get the blessing without wrestling, and in
wrestling he was smitten, and being smitten, he halted, and continued lame ever
after: and thus was it with Israel, that is he that prevailed with God. And so
shall it be with every true Israelite and member of Christ, while the world
stands. But what of all that? Gods power is made manifest in the weakness
of his children: and so thou may in the end prevail with God for his blessing,
be content to receive with the blessing of God many a blow, knowing that it is
better to go lame and blind into heaven, then otherwise after all ease and
carnal pleasure to go into hell.

Now for those that are afraid to stand upon their spiritual watch, for fear
that they should be foiled and spoiled, they are to be encouraged and
admonished. Great cause of encouragement they have, for that if God once open
their eyes they shall see more with them, then be against them, as the servant
of Elisha did. God himself has an eye over the righteous, and an ear always
open to their prayer. Therefore let them watch and fear not, Gods Angels are
charged to pitch their tents about them, therefore let them watch and fear
not. With their hands they shall hold thee, that thou dash not thy foot
against a stone: therefore watch and fear not. Christ himself both God and
man, thy Mediator does plead for thee, does pray for thee, does pay for thee,
therefore watch and fear not. Christ's Ministers without are ready to awaken
thee with their silver trumpets of knowledge and wholesome doctrine, if thou
chance to fall asleep, therefore watch and fear not. Gods spirit within thee
as Lord deputy for Christ Jesus, is ready to do all his offices for thy
sanctification and consolation here, and for thy salvation and glorification
hereafter, therefore watch and fear not. As Lord privy seal he is ready to
set upon thee the stampes of regeneration, and marks of mortification, as dying
to sin, living to virtue, with increase of faith, and charity, and patience,
and temperance, etc. These are his marks, by which thou shall know that thou
art sealed up to the day of redemption. As Lord comforter of Gods elect, he
shall speak peace unto thy soul, when thou art cast down under thy sins:
and say, Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. If thou
receive any wounds in thy inward man, whereby thy zeal, and faith, and
repentance, etc. may grow into a consumption, yet watch still and fear not: for
he with his quickening virtue, and sovereign oil of heavenly assurance shall
restore unto thee again the joy of thy salvation, creating in thee still a
clean heart, and renewing a right spirit within thee: and therefore keep thy
watch and fear not. And if thou dye, he shall change thy death into life, and
thy mortality into immortality: yea if the boisterous winds of persecution
and trouble chance to arise, and drive thee either into prison, or to the
stake, or to the gallows, or to banishment, or to the uncomfortable coasts of
contempt, reproach, or any other cross whatsoever, he can quench the fire, or
stop the lions mouths, or open the prison doors, or raise thee up new
friends, or take away thy hunger, or give thee strength to bear all if he
will, or else make all these as means to drive thee sooner into heaven then
thou would be: and therefore take heed, watch and fear not.

But now thou must take heed, that those things which are spoken for thy
consolation and encouragement, do not make thee careless and remiss: but be
admonished in standing upon thy watch to take heed of two things. First, that
thou post not off thy watching unto other men. Secondly, that thou drive it not
off unto another time. If thou post off this duty to other men, thou deceiuest
thy self: for thou have no more privilege then other men have, thou art in no
less danger then other men are, thou art subject to the same passions, the
same corruptions, the same laws, the same judgments, that other men are
subject unto: and therefore if other men must take heed and watch over their
affections, thou must: if some must, all must: and therefore, lest any man
should think he were more privileged then all men, Christ says, Mar. 13.
Mat. 24.
That which I say unto one, I say unto all watch. It is a subtlety of Satan
to make men believe that they are exempted, but others are not: that ministers
had need watch over their affections, and look to their ways, but not other
men; as in Popery they say, that Friars, and Monks, and Nuns must be more
holy, and more devout then other men. And therefore we say as the disciples
said, when they heard Christ say, one should betray him: Is it I? Is this to
me? Does this doctrine concern me? Whom does he mean? As though Christ had
said here; but one of you must take heed and watch. And when we see, or hear
of any other man that is come to reap the shame of his vaineglorious and
ambitious attempts, or of others their lascivious or covetous attempts, what is
our saying? Alas it is pity, this was for want of heed taking: but yet we
take no more heed then they, for we think it concerns us not. But this is our
great folly. Other men that have fallen before us, are like ships that are
sunk before our eyes, and cry out unto us; look you to your selves, and come
not after us, for if you do, you shall all likewise perish. Let other men be
our warnings, and not our deputies in these cases. For do man shall go to hell
by his deputy, but every man that has been careless in his watch, without
repentance shall in his own person die the death.

Secondly, thou that art to begin, if thou will keep thy watch well, post it
not off until another time, for that is another of the devils sleights: but
remember what Christ says in the Text: When thou do thine alms, take heed.
He does not say, when thou have done it: for then it comes too late, because
that action is past with a theeuish affection already. Take heed after the
evil is committed, is like, shut the door when the horse is stolen If thou will take the thief with the manner, thou must watch him even at the very same
instant, when thou art doing of thy good deeds; for then he comes and does
his feate, and afterward he lurketh in a corner of thy heart, where thou can
not so well find him: and there he both watches his time for the like booty
another time, and in the mean time he does as it were laugh thee to scorn,
for that thou were so foolish, as to let him rob both God of his honor, and
thee of his favor, while he tickled thee, and flattered thee with fair words.
As Nehemiah that courageous magistrate dealt with the Sabbath Breakers, so must
we deal with our vaineglorius thoughts. He watched them when the Sabbath day
came, and then he found them, having found them, he showed them the law: when
that whould not serve, he threatened them: when threatening would not serve, he
apprehended them and punished them, and then they came no more upon the Sabbath
day. So let us watch our thoughts and affections, when we are about to do, or
are in the doing of our good works, and then we shall find those theeuish and
peevish thoughts, that go about to rob God of his honor: having found them,
lay the law of God before them: if that will not serve, threaten them with the
judgments of God: if that will not serve, then lay hands (not upon thy self)
but upon them, and take a more straight examination of thy heart where they
are, even before the Lord chief Justice of heaven and earth: then imprison
them by restraining them of their liberty, and refraining of thy self from
such objects, and sights, and places, and company, as would animate them
against thee. Having thus restrained them, feed them with fasting, as it were
with the bread of affliction, and with weeping mingled among, as it were the
water of affliction: and then with the spirit of fervent prayer, correct them
zealously and continually, and spare them not: accuse them, arraigne them,
endite them, and condemn them, and fear them not, but still pray: for prayer
is flagellum diaboli, as Augustine calls it, the whippe of the Devil, which
he more fears, then all the coniurations of Popery, then all holy water, and
crossings: yea more then the dog does the whip: and as when the dog hears
the bell at the whips end, he runs out of the house: so when Satan
perceives a Christian address himself to prayer, though it be never so
weakly and with great striving: yet he then fears the rebuke of God, and
gives place. Oh then let us pray good brethren, even then, then when we are
about to give alms, or to hear a Sermon, or to preach the word, or to reprove
sin boldly, or to handle doctrine soundly, or to deal roundly with the
consciences of men, and in all other spiritual exercises: and not only in
them, but also in our civil affairs, in buying and selling, if thou meanest
to deal truly, and use plain and simple dealing, and to be at a word. Oh then
pray also in inuiting thy friends and neighbors to thy house, when thou
entertainest the preachers of Gods word at thy table, when thou art troubled in
making provision, and to have all things clean and handsome: oh then pray,
when thou call forth thy children to show their wit, their aptness and
towardnes to learn, their profiting in learning, and such like: oh then pray
too, when thou cariest thy friend to show him thy house, and thy rooms, and
thy riches, and the works of thine own hands, and thy fine gardens and
walks, and thy fruitful Orchards, and thy fat cattle, and thy great
dealings, and thy daily expenses, etc. Oh in all these go not without thy
whippe of prayer to drive away Satan, and all his theeuish suggestions, and
vaineglorious cogitations: for even then when thou think to do all for the
best thou shall be circumuented and deceived of thy reward before thou be
aware, if thou then (even then I say) do not take heed.

Then shall thou hear the whispering, and feel the tickling of a number of
spiritual and invisible thieves in thy heart. Oh says one to him that studeith
for a Sermon, when he reads a trim discourse, or fine simile, that pleases
himself, Oh this will do well to grace thy Sermon withal, oh men will commend
thy wit, and thy invention for this, and thy boldness for that, and thy
judgment in that, etc. Oh here is a tickling thief in the heart: drive him
out by prayer: take heed of him: yield not unto him: but pray then and say:
Lord none of all these come of my self, thou art the giver of them, they are
thy mercies to me o Lord, I am not able nor worthy my self, to carry such
treasures of thy Spirit to thy people: Lord be merciful unto me, and
sanctify my heart, that I may seek thy glory, and not my own. Oh hallowed
be thy name Lord, hallowed be thy name: not unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but
to thy name let the praise be given. Lord humble my swelling heart with the
feeling of my sin, and my special corruptions. Oh Lord drive out these proud
though^s, these vain imaginations, these wicked and sacrilegious affections,
which go about thus to rob thee of thy honor, both in me the speaker, and in
others the hearers: let them not commend thy gifts in me, or in any man, but
always to thy praise and glory. And thus must we be exercised continually,
while we live. In like sort when thou art about to show thy reading, and
discoursing vein, at the table: pray, for then a thief within thee will be
ready to tell thee that all the company will, and do admire thee for thy gift
that way. Yea, or if thou sit still and be silent, and never speak but when
thou art required, and then very modestly too, yet then watch and take heed,
for even then comes a spiritual thief, and persuades thee to think with
thy self, surely men will commend me as well for my silence and modesty, as
such a one for his learning and wit: but where is the Kings Attorney all this
while to plead for Gods right* I mean the spirit of sanctification, to
persuade thy soul to give the glory to God, who gave thee those gifts, and
that grace with God and man: where is he? Oh therefore then when thou do
these things, even then I say take heed: watch and pray, Hallowed be thy name:
Lord rebuke Satan, quench these his fiery darts: humble my proud heart: make
it to affect thee and thy glory, above all things, and in all things. In like
sort in doing the parts of a civil man, entertaining of preachers, or thy
honest friends and neighbors, in showing them thy fair houses, thy well
contrived rooms, thy wealth, thy gains, thy great expenses, thy great
revenues, thy toward children, etc. do thou not feel a thief within thee,
tickling and dallying with thy false heart, and telling thee, that thou shall
be highly commended for these things, and thy fame shall be spread far and
near, and thou shall be spoken of for it, and reverenced, and admired? etc.
do thou not feel such a thief within thee speaking such things? And what
is all in effect, but to persuade thee to rob him who has enriched thee, to
disgrace him who has graced thee: and to wound him who has healed thee?
whereas thou ought then to say, I will show these things, and tell what
goodness I have received of my merciful God and heavenly father, that men may
commend his goodness therein, and spread the fame of his name far and near,
and may reverence, and admire his wisdom and power, and merciful works
toward mortal man, and may both fear and love his Majesty for the same. And
to this end, let us watch and pray, that God in all things, and for all things,
may have his due praise and glory. In like manner, when thou give thine
alms, or buildest any hospital, or give any thing to the poor of such and
such a parish, etc. if thou do not take great heed, and examine thy heart,
and stand with prayer at the door, then will Satan be busy, and a spiritual
thief will stand up in thy heart and say, Oh now this being known, how will
the poor commend me? how will the world commend me? I shall now get a name
that I am a good man to the poor, I hope to come into the Chronicles for my
good deeds one day, etc. Oh then scourge these corrupt and devilish affections,
and chase them away by prayer, let them not dwell in thy heart, give the^ no
entertainment, desire to give all the glory to God, and desire others to do
the same for thee: for that he has made thee both able, and willing to give,
and has made thee his steward, and deputy to give every one his portion, that
his fatherly goodness has appointed them. The like is to be done of every one
that prays in public assemblies, and hears the word diligently, and turn
over their Bibles, and sing reverently the holy Psalms and praises of God, and
confer of that which they heard, and call their families to account for that
which they have heard at the Sermon, etc. all most holy actions: but take heed
now, when thou do all these, or any of these, that the messenger of Satan
come not like a cunning companion and poison all these. Take heed I say even
then, when thou art about these services, for even as cut-purses, and pilfering
rogues watch their times till they see men busy in buying and selling, or come
in a preasse: so do these vagrant affections watch our hearts when we are about
holy business, and in devout conference with our God, to rob God of his
honor, and to poison that which we offer him; and if it be poisoned he will
none of it. A strange thing, and a hidden mystery this is, that a man should
then rob the Lord of his honor, when he is honoring and serving him: that we
should take from him that which we give unto him. Verily so we do, if we take
not heed, and nothing is more common then that evil. Thou art devout in thy
prayer, in hearing, in sighing, in singing, in eleuating eyes and hands to
heaven: it is well done: but then take heed of the thief with the poison that
thou see not: and that is, that affection that makes thee to cast thy eye
aside, perhaps to look whether such a man sees thee, or no: and that
affection that tickleth thy heart, and says, now I am a good man, I shall be
counted a zealous professor for this, I shall be well esteemed for this, I
shall by this means get familiarity, and so commodity with him and her, and
a thousand such odd conceits that come wharting and crossing of thy heart in
the best things that thou can do. All which if thou take not heed of them,
even then at that instant, and pray against them, they will get within thee,
and pluck off the garment of purity, and holiness, which in Christ Jesus
should commend thy action unto God. And thus thou see how God is robbed when
he is served: and therefore even then without any further delay, or dallying
take heed, and watch over thy heart: and pray against these vile and vain
affections, desiring God to reform and correct them, that so thou may give
him his due, clad in such holy and pure affections as are desirous that all the
glory should be given unto him, from whom, and for whom all things are, and
shall be. And in so doing thou may safely show, what God has done for thee.
Take for example in the old Testament Jacob, and in the new Testament the
Virgin Mary, and Zachary the father of John Baptist. Genesis 32.10.
Jacob he shows his brother how God had blessed him since his coming over
Jordan, with only a poor staff in his hand: and now had given him troops or
bands of children and servants: and blessed him with flocks of sheep, beeues
and camels: but in all these things his desire was that God might he glorified,
and therefore he said, I am not worthy of the least of these mercies: that is,
all that I have set forth the great and undeserved favor of God unto me. So
far was he from seeking thereby to be counted a great man, as the manner of
the world is. So when Elizabeth rejoiced with her cousin, for the great favor
and goodness of the most high, in choosing her to be the mother of the Lord
Jesus: and said, Blessed art thou amongst women, she was not proud thereof,
Luke. 1.46.
but presently gave the glory unto God, and said, My soul does magnify the
Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. I shall be magnified indeed,
but he that is mighty has magnified me, and holy is his name: and so made
that whole song to set forth the glorious praises of God, in that singular
work which he had done to her. In like sort when Zachary knew that John was
borne, to be the forerunner of Christ, he presently gave the glory to God,
saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people, etc. And thou o child shall be called the Prophet of the most high, for
thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare the way before him, to
give knowledge of salvation unto his people for the forgiveness of their
sins. But then comes forth the holy affection, wherein God is delighted and
says, Through the tender mercy of our God, etc.

And this shall we do if we take heed, and still watch over our hearts in
every action, by secret prayer unto God, that his name may be hallowed.

This wise course being taken, we shall be able by the grace of God, in a short
time to discern a false hearted affection, from a true and a holy affection: a
double heart from a single and sincere heart: for in every man that is
regenerate, there is a double motion, the one of the flesh, the other of the
Spirit, the one of God, the other of Satan, and in every action if he watch
narrowly, he shall find and feel a striving between them. Now here is
wisdom, to discern how much is of God, and how much of Satan; that we may
cherish the one: and crush the other in the head, before he grow to any
strength. There will be two fires kindled, and both burning together in one
heart, the one must be quenched, and not maintained: the other must not be
quenched, but be maintained: for so says the Scripture, quench and quench not,
quench the fiery darts of the devil, but quench not the Spirit of God, whereby
ye are sealed up to the day of redemption. Now then seeing the glory of God is
set up for one mark to aim at, and the good of the Church of God for another:
let us learn by our leuelling and aiming at them, or besides them, to judge of
our affections and cogitations. If thy cogitations be studying and devising how
to avoid vaineglorie, and how to get glory to God, by casting about to make
others to praise God in thy graces, and to love and fear him for the same:
then is that cogitation kindled by Gods Spirit, quench it not but cherish it.
If thy affections be longing and desiring to bring the same to pass, which thy
mind by Gods Spirit has devised, then is that a holy affection, and of God:
quench it not, but maintain it, and rejoice in God for it. But if one the
contrary, thy mind be devising what to do, and what to say, and how to bring
things to pass to please men, and not God, and to win credit and estimation
amongst men, Gods glory being cast behind thy back: know that those thoughts
and affections are fiery darts of Satan's kindling, quench them, and cherish
them not, take heed of them in time. In taking this timely heed, thou shall by
the grace of God be able easily to epsy the beginnings of thy special
sins, and all the degrees of them, and the growth of them, and all the shifts
and sleights of Satan, and shall ever get the victory over them in Christ
Jesus. And albeit thou be haunted, and molested, and buffeted with such
messengers of Satan, and pained, and humbled by such pricks and goades in thy
flesh while thou live, yet here remains thy comfort, when death comes,
thou shall be able to say with the Psalmist, By this I know o Lord that thou
love me, Psalm. 41.
because these my spiritual enemies have not triumphed over me: blessed be the
name of the Lord God for evermore.

But one other side, if thou be careless, and put off the matter still from
time to time, thinking to repent, and leave thy sin when thou art old, or a
dying, as many do, thou do miserably deceive thy self: for doubtless any
one sin that is grown into a custom, will be too hard for thee, before age
come, or sickness come. And for proof of that I say, do but try thy strength
with one of thy sins, which thou have accustomed thy self unto, and when
thou would leave it, see how many shifts and delays, and devises, and
excuses it has, still pulling thee back again, when thy foot is in the
stirrup, and thou ready as thou think to ride away from it. Now if it be so
with one sin that thou have been familiar withal, what will thou do, when
all thy sins are proved customs? Is it not an usual answer of most men,
that have used swearing, or lying, or profane mirth, or sluggish serving of
God, etc. It is my custom, I cannot leave it. Those young men which were
Ieroboams companions before his reign, would be his Counselors when he did
reign: so those sins which are thy companions now, will be thy Counselors
and masters too hereafter. Therefore say not, thou will take heed of them
hereafter: for hereafter thou art likely in all common sense and reason, to be
every way more unfit, and untoward then thou art now; but when time and
occasion serve, watch sin, and thou take him, and destroy him, which else in
time will overthrow thee.

THE III. SERMON.
WE have heard what it is that Christians must take heed of in doing of good
deeds, and the manner how to take heed thereof. Now we are further to consider
of the reasons which our Savior gives, hereby to make men the more fearful
of that which he warns them of, and more careful to follow his counsel. And
his reasons contain two propositions, the one is negative, the other is
affirmative. The first is these words: For else you shall have no reward of
your heavenly father. The other is in these words, Verily I say unto you, they
(that is hypocrites) have their reward. The first reason is very sovereign and
available against the inward evil, namely all inward desire and affection of
popular praise, and vaineglorie: and the other is as forcible to dissuade from
the outward evil, that is, ostentation and show of vaineglorie. The former
tells us what we loose if we take not heed, and keep not good watch over our
hearts, against vaineglorious affections, and that is Gods reward: Our fathers
blessing a heavenly reward, and in the second reason we are told what we shall
get in stead thereof, namely the reward of hypocrites, and no more: and that is
the praise of men, the wind of men's mouths, the good opinion of mutable minds,
then the which there is nothing more vain, nor transitory, nor frivolous, nor
ridiculous: a miserable reward, indeed a punishment, and a torment to a godly
mind.

Now we see, that by this bargain, a man if he take not heed, may be a great
looser, and by taking heed he may be a great gainer. Again, we see that the
vaineglorious Christian, that is to say: a plain hypocrite, is a gainer by his
hypocrisy; but his gain is nothing to that which he expects, and nothing
comparable to his loss. These reasons are used by our Savior Christ in most
high wisdom, as proceeding from one that best knows every man's disease, and
every ones humor, and every ones delight, and accordingly he fitteth both his
medicines, and his motives. Now seeing as all men are much moved with hope of
rewards, especially when for a small matter they are in hope to obtain a great
and a good reward, what could our Savior Christ propound of greater force to
move men to embrace sincerity in all their actions, then Gods reward, which is
the greatest and the best? And because hypocrisy is of that bewitching nature,
and besotting humor, that it makes her suitors and attendants believe, that
they shall be both honored here amongst men, and glorified hereafter amongst
Angels in heaven: and so by feeding them with a vain hope of a double reward
for their double dealing, our Savior Christ here does notably cool their
courage, by abating no less of their wages, then heaven comes to: assuring
them, that whatsoever they dream of, it will prove but a dream. And least any
man should think that it is otherwise, and God will be better to them then so,
(as all hypocrites do) our Savior Christ binds up the matter with an earnest
asseueration, or constant affirming the matter, and says not, I fear me they
have their reward: I doubt they will loose their reward in heaven: I cannot
tell, but I stand in great doubt of the matter: for then yet there were some
little hope left, like a bone for the hypocritie to pick upon: but the goes
more directly to the point then so: saying, verily, and out of all question,
build upon it, know for a certain what to trust unto, if you take not heed of
hypocrisy, you have your reward here, there is nothing to be looked for
hereafter at Gods hand, but the hypocrites portion, and that is hell fire with
the devil and his Angels for ever: for when men have rewarded them, God will
punish them. And thus you see the force of Christ's reasons, and the drift of
his words, wherein we have two excellent points offered us to consider of.
First, the reward of sincerity: secondly, the reward of hypocrisy.

The reward of sincerity and uprightness of heart verily is great: for the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 19.11
that in keeping of the commandments of God there is great reward. Sincerity
is commanded in the first commandment of the first Table: and more largely
in other places of Scripture, which bid us to serve God with all our hearts,
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Psalm. 103.
and with all our souls, and to praise him with all that is within us. And
therefore out of all doubt there is a great reward laid up for those that are
sincere hearted Christians, and upright professors of the Gospel of Christ. 1.
King. 3.6.
Thou have showed great mercy to David, says King Solomon, when he walked
before thee in truth and uprightness of heart: to show, that great mercies
belong to upright hearted men. But what it is, or how great it is, or how good
it is, few yet do know, fewer believe it, and fewest of all do so feel it, as
to be moved therewith.

We know what we have here, say some, we know not what we shall have hereafter.
Now, ignoti nulla cupido, of a thing unknown there is no desire: Therefore
that men may desire it, it is fit they should know it. Others there be that
(having heard of it) are desirous to see it, as Philip said to Christ, Job. 14.
Show us thy father, and it suffiseth: so say they, Show us the reward of
sincerity, and it suffiseth. Dreaming as the Disciples of Christ did awhile,
of some earthly and temporal preferment. But as Christ said to Philip, He that
has seen me, has seen my father: because the Son was in the Father, and
the Father in the Son: so we say to them, he that has seen sincerity, has
seen the reward of sincerity, because sincerity of it self is the gift of
God, and Gods reward goes with his own gift, according to the saying of a
learned father: Sua munera coronat Deus in nobis: God does crown his own
gifts in us. Other some there be which have seen the reward of sincerity a
good part of it, that is, have known it, and believed such a thing, but have
bin no more moved therewith, to preserve themselves against the poison of
vaineglorie, then they of the old world were moved with the report and sight of
Noah's Arc, to prepare for them selves against the flood. Others there be that
have both seen it by faith, and tasted of it too, but afterward have lothed
the same, and lusted after vaineglorie: as the unthankful Israelites lothed
Manna, which did nourish them when all other food failed: and sell to lusting
for the flesh pots of Egypt. It fares with those that have left their
sincerity, as it did with those that left Christ after they had heard him
awhile. When they heard Christ speak of eating his flesh: Ioh. 6.60.
they said, this is a hard saying, who can bear it? and so came no more. So
the other hearing that sincerities men shall have Gods reward, they like that
well enough: but when we tell them, nay when Gods word tells them, that they
shall loose the worlds reward, and in stead of commendations, shall be
condemned, and hated, and scorned: they say, this is a hard saying, and so give
over their sincere courses. But what says our Savior Christ to the woman of
Samaria? Job. 4.10.
If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, give me
drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee water, yea
water of life. So it may be said to those that make a jest of sincerity, or
prefer the glory of the world before the reward of sincerity: If they knew
the gift of God, the excellent reward of sincerity, and who it is that says,
Take heed of vaineglorie: and who it is that will reward the embracers of
sincerity, they would seek to him for credit, and ask glory of him, and he
would give them an everlasting reward, even a crown of glory which never
should end. As when David asked life, Psalm. 21.4. 1. Kin. 3.13.
the Lord gave him a long life: and as when Solomon asked wisdom before
riches, the Lord gave him both wisdom and riches too.

But now all the enquiring will be, what this same gift of God should be, and
what reward they shall have that give entertainment to sincerity. Verily, as
the Church says of Christ her beloved: My beloved is white and ruddie, Cant.
5.10.
the chiefest of ten thousands: so may the lovers of sincerity say, our
beloved is white and ruddie: that is, she is like the kings daughter, all
glorious within, she is the chiefest often thousand, she has many fair
sisters, but she passes them all: her sisters be patience, and humility, and
meekness, and zeal, and courage, and long suffering, and contempt of the
world, and love of God, with faith, hope and charity: and all these are
glorious and beautiful virtues, yea sweet children of the holy Ghost, when
they come from God: but sincerity and singleness of heart does excel them
all. The Sun does give light to all the stars, and the Queen does grace
her Ladies of Honor with her presence: So sincerity or truth of heart does
beautify and grace all other virtues: for without that they are but naked and
counterfeit. She goes before them, and speaks for them all, like a foreman
of a Jury, when all the rest (though they be her fair sisters) must hold
their peace. Faith is seeble and weak, and love her handmaid is lazy, and
cares for none but her self: patience has a scarre on her face given her by
intemperancie: devotions is so frozen with cold, that she can scarce go:
humility is so tired with wrestling against pride, that she looks very lean
and bare: and as for repentance that is so trampled upon with custom of sin,
that it is scarce to be discerned from hardness of heart. Now all these go
from us that have abused them, into the Lords presence, as Thamar did from her
brother Amnon, 2. Sa. 13.18, 19.
when he had enforced her: with their garments of diverse colors rent and
torn: with ashes upon her head in token of sorrow: and with great weeping,
grief and shame. For that they must come before their Lord and King their
father so defaced, so ragged, so basely and so beastly as they are, as if they
had lien all their life time, since they went from heaven, in some stinking
ditches with vermin, or in vile stables amongst beasts, or in the woods and
fields of wandering cogitations, amongst the euish conceits of vaineglorie,
and unwholesome affections of anger, and wrath, and couetuousnesse, and
uncleanness: for so they have indeed. But when they meet with there sister
sincerity, and uprightness of heart, oh how glad and joyful are they: for
her sake they know they shall all fare the better. Oh sincerity, sincerity,
where have thou been all this while, say they? until thou came, we could
have no grace, nor favor, no entrance into the Court gate of our heavenly
Jerusalem, no our own father would not know us, but took us for counterfeits,
until we fetched thee: as Joseph took his brethren for spies, until they
fetched Benjamin whom he loved better then they. And now that we have met with
thee we are glad, our hearts are comforted: thou shall be heard for us all,
being altogether in Christ Jesus our Mediator. But otherwise, though we said we
are Christians, and have professed Christianity, and offered to put in for our
surety no worse bail then the Kings own natural son Jesus Christ, all
would not serve, we could not be heard, until we brought sincerity with us.
For she, as respects God more then all the world, and sets more by his
love and anger, then by the love and anger of all the world: so in Christ Jesus
she is more respected, and honored, and rewarded of God then all the world
beside. Oh happy man and woman, that professing Christianity or faith in
Christ, or repentance for sin, or patience in affliction, or contempt of the
world, or zeal to Gods glory, or devotion in Gods worship, or liberality to
the Saints, or mercy to the miserable, can in all these have the company of
sincerity, and uprightness of heart: then may they say thus: nay our surety
the Lord Jesus will plead for us in this manner: Father, despise not these
little ones; they are my friends: and though their faith and repentance be
weak and imperfect, and other graces of thy Spirit be but small and feeble:
and for want of nourshing and good looking unto, be not so well grown, nor so
well ordered as they should have been: yet forasmuch, as they come before thee,
and have called upon my name in sincerity and truth, which thou love,
without counterfeiting, dissembling, and hypocrisy, which thou abhorrest, thou will not despise them. Their fruit though they be but little in quantity, like
a grain of musterd seed, yet it is right fruit of the Spirit, true faith,
though little faith, true love though little and small love: not like the
fruits of hypocrites, which are like the apples of Sodom, fair in show, and
ashes in substance.

What has soundly comforted all the Saines of God here on earth, but the
testimony of an upright heart? And is not sound comfort a good reward? What
has encouraged and emboldned them to come before God in prayer, but the
testimonial of a sincere heart, and holy affection? And is not boldness in
Gods presence a good reward? What has made the prayers of the faithful
available with God for other, but the sincerity and upright affection of them
that have craved their prayers? and are not these sweet odours, that is, the
prayers of the Saints a good reward? What made Jacob to be honored with the
new name of Israel, that is, prevailing with God for a blessing: but that his
wrestling was not in show, but in good earnest, in sincerity and truth of
heart, with a constant purpose of perseuering, till he had gotten that which he
strove for? And is not prevailing with God a good reward? All the days of the
afflicted are evil (says Solomon) that is, troublesome, grievous, and bitter
to flesh and blood, Pro. 15.15.
but a good conscience is a continual feast: that is, he that has an upright
heart, and sincere affection before God, feels no want. Now such a feast, as
it is continual, so is it provided by God himself, served in with the Spirit
of God, where the Angels do wait, and rejoice: and the worst dishes are the
assurance of Gods love, forgiveness of sins, peace of conscience, and joy of
the holy Ghost. There all the communication is secret and heavenly between
Christ and the soul: the Musicians are the faithful, and their music is
praising of God, and their harmony is the communion of Saints, and all are of
one heart and mind: and is not such a feast a good reward? Nay more then this,
if this be not enough, whosoever will earnestly hegge this gift of God by
prayer, and lovingly embrace and keep her as his dear spouse, shall have with
her a large dowry, a great reward in heaven, in heaven says Christ. For such
gifts come not without craving, and of our selves we cannot have it: for if a
good wife be the gift of God; much more is a good heart, which God in creating
does give, and in giving does create: Psalm. 51.
therefore David says: Create in me o Lord a clean heart: to show that we can
no more make the heart sincere, then we can create a heart. But when such a heart
is created by God, he gives thee a singular gift: and a great portion
belongs unto it. Part of it shall be paid thee in this life, but the greatest
part in the life to come. In this life thou shall be loved of Christ's friends,
and moned of good men when thou art wronged: and the more thou do seek to
honor God, the more he will honor thee, as he told Samuel. The more thou fliest
the vainglorie of the world for sincerity sake, the more will true glory
follow thee, according to the Proverb: Honos fugientem sequitur, sequentem
fugit: It follows those that fly from her, like friends which enforce gifts
and other courtesies upon modest persons which refuse them, but flies them that
follow her, as men do impudent beggars. But besides all this, when death comes,
thy dear friend sincerity shall more comfort thee then all the Physicians in
the world. And after death thy name shall live, and walk up and down in the
world, to warn some, to comfort some, to admonish some, and to shame some, and
to condemn many. But yet here is not all, for then shall thou first receive
commendation of God, whom thou have served, and secondly enter into full and
everlasting possession of thy masters joy, which is no less then a weighty
crown of glory immortal, then a kingdom, and inheritance of eternal
blessedness with the Saints and Angels, and God himself: where all tears
shall be wiped from thy eyes, and thou shall rejoice for evermore. Where thou
shall enjoy for ever and ever, such things as no eye has seen, no ear has
heard, nor heart to man can conceive: and nothing shall ever obscure or eclipse
the same, nor cross, nor diminish the same.

And what is all this, or whatsoever else can be said of it, but scarce a
shadow of sincerities reward? Alas, a drop taken out of the sea, and a moate
out of the mountains: like the hem of Christ's garment, which did comfort the
woman that touched it: but she found more comfort in him, then in the hem. So
the description of sincerity is delightsome, and the picture is pleasing: but
whosoever has sincerity it self, shall find at his left hand the fullness of
joy, and at his right hand pleasure for evermore.

Whosoever after this Sermon, shall find so much favor with God, as to meet
with sincerity and uprightness of heart in all his actions, and such an
affection that prefers Gods glory before his own, and seeks praise of
God and not of man: shall say as the Queen of the South said when she came to
King Solomon: 1. King. 10.
That which I heard of thee I did hardly believe it, but now I perceive that
the report which went of thee, is nothing answerable to that which thou art
indeed. And though no man deserves such a reward at Gods hand, no nor any
reward at all, but shame and confusion, which is our due desert; yet both for
his promise sake, as also for his honor sake he will so reward his children.
If mortal men will keep their promise one toward another, as all that have
but common ciuility and honesty will, them much more will Almighty God, who
is all truth and righteousness it self, and can no more break his promise,
then he can deny himself, or cease to be God. The Prince promises to pardon
a traitor, and he keeps promise with him: this is of the Princes goodness,
and not of the traitors desert. We are all traitors to God: he has promised
upon our true repentance to pardon us: it is of his goodness to make us such
a promise, and not of our desert: childish therefore are the Papists, who
whenever they read of a reward coming from God, do strait way dream of
some desert or merit to proceed from man and fetch the same.

Again, in that it pleases God so liberally and abundantly to reward the
poor travels, and endeavors of his children, and so gloriously to crown his
own gifts in them, when notwithstanding they are so stained and abused as they
are, let no man marvel thercat: for that is done according to the worthiness
of his Majesty, and the greatness of his own honor, and not according to the
baseness of our persons. This did Alexander the great consider, when a poor
soldier came unto him to beg a reward for his service that he had done: What
would thou have quoth he? A hundredth crowns quoth the soldier. Well quoth
the King, though that be too much for thee to ask, and more then thou
deseruest, yet is too little for me to give that am thy Emperor: so we
according to the baseness of our minds and cogitations would beg of God,
worldly preferment and credit in the world, gold and silver, house and land,
honor and worship. Well, content thy self says our Sovereign, and heavenly
father, that is too much for thee to ask, and too little for me to give, being
Lord of heaven and earth, I will give thee that that is fit for thee here: and
a kingdom hereafter if thou serve me in sincerity and truth of heart,
respecting more my glory then thy own glory, or thy life either. For it
stands not with the honor of Gods Majesty to recompense travels of his
servants with trifles. God deals with his children that are most sincere
hearted in this world, as great men deal with their children in their
minority, whom they intend to make their heirs: they put them to school, and
give them correction, and allow them from hand to mouth, and abridge them of
their liberty, and keep them in awe: but when their fathers are dead, and
they come to men's estate, they are then rewarded with no less then all their
fathers lands; which if they should have had before, they would have spent
riotously, and wantonly: so God keeps his children here in this world under
schooling, and nurturing them, correcting and crossing them: and gives them
their stint, and allowance of wealth, of health, of credit, of friends, etc.
But when they come to a perfectage, and are perfect men grown in Christ (which
will not be until after term of this life) then lo they are made fellow
heirs of the kingdom of heaven, with the Lord Jesus himself, blessed be his
name for ever.

Now by this time my good brethren, you have (I hope) well considered of the
matter, and will not deny but that the reward of sincerity is a great reward,
like unto him that gives it: a fathers reward, yea a heavenly fathers reward,
and a heavenly reward.

Consider well, you whose hearts yet long for the vain praise and estimation
of men, like sucking weanlings, that cry still after the breast: can the world
afford you any such reward? Can your father and mother? can your friends an
kindred? can Kings and Princes? can all the world? Let us see, sincerity is
rewarded with sound comfort, as Christ said to the sick man, Son be of good
comfort. You that desire to be seen of men, you desire sound comfort, can the
world give it you when God denies it you? Or can the world take it from you,
if God does give it you? Sincerity is rewarded with courage in prayer, and
boldness before Gods throne of grace. You that desire to be seen of men,
desire also to stand boldly before the face of God, but consider: can all the
commendations of the world give you that boldness and courage when God does
deny it you? or can all the condemnations and evil speeches of the world take
it from you, if God does give it you? Sincerity prevails with God. You that
desire to be seen of men, you desire also to prevail with God: but consider
well, can all the praises of men make you prevail with God, if God himself
does not like you? or can all the world by disgracing of sincere hearted
Christians, hinder their suite in the Lords Court, if God does like of them?
Sincerity is rewarded with a continual feast, of the love of God, of joy in the
holy Ghost, of peace of conscience^, of the merits of Christ. About whose
dwelling places God has charged his own guard of Angels, to pitch their tents,
that the man of earth may not make them afraid, nor the son of violence do
them any harm. You that desire to be seen of men, you commend this feast, you
also desire to be at such a feast: but consider well, can all the men, and
Princes in the world make you such a feast, when God will make you fast? or can
all the world cause you to fast, or to want when the Lord has provided you
such a feast? Sincerity shall be rewarded with a crown of glory, and
inheritance immortal, the kingdom of heaven: for our heavenly father gives
heavenly rewards, and infinite like himself. Now you that desire to be seen
of men, desire also such a reward, as the sons of Zebedeus did desire each of
them a place in the kingdom of heaven: but consider well, when you have won
the commendations of all men, yet cannot all the men in the world give you that
reward: for Christ said it was not his to give: if not his to give as he was
man, then much less is it the worlds to give unto men: neither can all the
world, with the help of all the devils in hell take it from you, nor molest
you in it, when God has given it unto you.

But least any man should yet stand in doubt of that I say, let witnesses be
examined: let their records be searched: ask Enoch, he walked with God, that
is, he had his conversation as in the sight of God, his care and study was to
please God, Genesis 5.24.
and not men: and he was translated from men unto God. Ask Joseph, thy heart
was upright toward thy master, as in the sight of God, insomuch that thy
master took no account of thee for anything: neither did thou care for the
love of thy light mistress, but in the fear of God did choose rather to
please him then her. It is true says Joseph, neither did I loose any thing by
my uprightness, and sincerity: for though I was a while in trouble and
disgrace for it, yet the Lord that gave me the gift of sincerity, he took my
part, and caused me to be set at liberty, and brought me with my great credit,
and her great shame to high preferment, and now am I free from all troubles,
and live like a king in heaven, as sometime I was a ruler in Egypt. Ask
David, and he will tell thee, Psalm. 119.10.
that when he could say unto God, With my whole heart I have sought thee, then
could he most boldly call upon God, and say: Let me not wander from thy
commandments. Ask Saint Paul, and he will tell thee, that he would not
presume to crave for the prayers of the Church, Heb. 13.18.
but when he could also certify them that he had a good conscience in all
things, and desired to live honestly. Again, Paul speaking of himself and
his fellow laborers, says thus: We are not as many, which make merchandise of
the word of God: 2. Cor. 2.17.
but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God we speak in Christ.
Chap. 4.2.
We walk not in craftiness, neither handle we the word of God deceitfully,
but in declaration of the truth we approve our selves to every man's
conscience in the sight of God. And what have thou gotten Paul for thy labor?
In how many dangers have thou been both by sea and by land? By thy own
confession thou have been whipped, and beaten with rods, cast into prison,
stoned and laid for dead, hunted from one place to another, and at the last
lost thy head: had not thou been better to have pleased thy honest
neighbors by preaching Christ after their fashion? No no, says Paul, never
tell me of these matters, I was crucified to the world, and the world to me:
that is, I cared no more for the world, then the world did for me: the power of
God did appear in my weaknesses: when I was in prison I was at liberty: when I
went from the whip to the dungeon, I sung Psalms: yea, all this was an honor
unto me that I was not worthy of. From all my dangers the Lord delivered me.
And where I lost my life, there I found it again: even everlasting life. In a
word, I have fought a good fight, 2. Tim. 4.7.8
and have finished my course, I have kept the faith: For henceforth is laid up
for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall
give me at that day, and not to me only, but to all them that love his
appearing. Ask King Hezechiah, what was most comfortable to him in his
sickness, when he looked for nothing but death. Esa. 38.3.
Oh, says he, I paid, and said, I beseech thee o Lord, remember how that I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, that is, a sound
and upright heart without dissembling, and have done that which is good in thy
sight, to show that when all fail, yet sincerity, and truth of heart shall
comfort us, like a good keeper and kind nurse at the hour of death.

Now then, what remains for this point? but that we gather up the sum of
all that has been said of it, and make the conclusion: and that is this:
Seeing that sincerity shall be rewarded by our heavenly father, both in this
life with sound comfort in time of trouble: with courage and boldness in time
of prayer: with the prayers of the Saints in time of need: with a continual
feast in the time of affliction: with heavenly consolation in the time of
death: and in the world to come, with the kingdom of heaven; let every man
confess that the reward of sincerity is a great reward. And seeing as it is so
great for quantity, and so good for quality, that all the world cannot
afford so much as a shadow thereof, nor tell how to commend it, let every one
of us be more moved therey to embrace sincerity, and to seek praise at Gods
hand, rather then all the vain praises of the world. And seeing as sincerity
is of all virtues the chiefest, and that which graceth all our virtues before
God and man, let us above all look in all our affairs that nothing be done
without it.

Lastly, seeing as both Enoch, and Joseph, and David, and Hezechiah, and Paul,
besides many else have given such testimony thereof: let no man doubt to
believe, nor fear to follow it, for out of all doubt those that are approved
in Gods sight, shall be well rewarded of their heavenly father. And so much for
the reward of sincerity.

THE IIII. SERMON.
MATH. 6.2. As hypocrites do in the Synagogues and streets, to be seen of men:


WE have heard heretofore the excellent nature, and heavenly reward of
sincerity; now brethren, that we may be as much out of love with hypocrisy,
as we are in love (I hope) with sincerity: let us see the nature and reward of
hypocrisy: because contraries being laid together, do the better appear. And
first, of the nature of of hypocrisy, upon these words: as the hypocrites do,
etc. Of the second branch when we come to the next words, Verily I say unto you
they have their reward. At this time only of these words: as hypocrites do:
wherein our Savior Christ does give us to understand two things First, that
whosoever professes a show of that which he is not, is an hypocrite: secondly,
that the doings of hypocrites are to be made known, that every one seeing the
hypocrite laid out in his colors, with his reward that belongs to him, may
take heed, that he play not the hypocrite, or if he has played that part, to
be ashamed thereof and repent, and follow the Lord ever after in sincerity and
truth of heart.

Now seeing as our Savior Christ would have hypocrites known by their doings:
I will endeavor my self at this time by Gods help, to uncase the hypocrite,
who has played his part so long, so impudently, and so vncontrolledly, carrying
away all the credit of the world, even to the undermining of the house of God,
and endangering the whole estate of Christian Religion. And call this Sermon
(if you list) the uncasing of the hypocrite: for I will (if God will) do my
best endeavor to uncase him. Wherein perhaps I shall not behave my self so
handsomely and finely to please all parties, as some could do: but yet I hope
both soundly and plainly I shall go to work. You know brethren, that plain
dealing is my profession, though it be counted a jewel for beggars: flattery,
and curiosity, and hypocrisy I leave to them that will dye rich men, and
therefore I speed accordingly: and I must needs confess, that I am wellinough
served, to be so well belabored as I am with the strife of tongues. Well, if I
could handle this matter more learnedly then I can; yet I would of purpose
deceive all such itching ears, as come rather to have their humors fed, then
their lives reformed. A piece of work both thanklesse and dangerous, yea a
most unpleasant argument have I taken in hand, especially as the case stands
now, when most men come to catch and to cavil, and quot homines tot
sententiae, every man's head swarming with as many odd conceits and
uncharitable surmises, as there be heads to hear. But it is no matter my
brethren, think and speak of me at your pleasure, so long as I have the truth
on my side, I care the less, words are but wind, and truth will prevail in
the end, and judge them that now condemn it. Saint Paul tells me, that I
must pass through good report and bad report (and I thank God so I have dove
meetly well:) and to the Galathians he says thus, 2. Cor. 6.8. Gal. 4.6.
Am I Paul become your enemy because I tell you the truth? to show, that
whosoever will speak the truth shall be counted an enemy. But what says the
same Apostle? If I seek to please men, I cannot please God, and therefore I am
at a point. God gave me an upright heart in his sight, and then, as for the
favor and disfavor of the world his will be done. But now to the matter in
hand: Do not your alms, that is, your good deeds to be seen of men, as
hypocrites do. Our Saviors purpose is to illustrate his precept by an example
of counterfeits and players, who do all their feats of purpose to be seen of
men: to which end, they have a stage erected, that me^ may see them, making
proclamation, that whosoever come to such a place, at such an hour, shall see
such a man's players, that is, such a man's hypocrites make a play, that is, play
the hypocrites by counterfeiting and showing diverse men's actions and diverse
men's persons, which they are not, neither act they indeed. Therefore seeing
that the nature and practice of players does most fitly serve to set forth the
nature and practice of such as do but counterfeit and dissemble in the
profession and practice of religion, when they would be thought to be in good
earnest: and seeing that (for their counterfeiting) plaiers were the first,
that were termed amongst profane writers hypocrites: therefore I say the
Scripture has borrowed that name of them, and translated it to all that play
the dissemblers and counterfeits in Gods business or otherwise. Of this
judgment is master Calvin, whose words are these, Call. Har.
in his Evangelical Harmony, upon this place: Nam quum hypocritae profanis
scriptoribus dictifuerint histriones qui in scena and ludis fictas personas
agebant, Scriptura hoc nomen ad homines duplices cord, and simulatos
transtulit: that is, seeing as players which in Enterludes and on stages did
feign and counterfeit the persons of other men, were termed hypocrites by
profane writers, the Scripture has translated that name unto dissemblers and
men of a double heart. And most fitly are they both called hypocrites, because
they both counterfeit alike, and make a show before men of that which they are
not before God: yea so like are they one to another, as things cast both in a
mould, or as those men are that for their likeness in favor and condition, or
for their neerenesse in affinity or office, do call one another brothers.

Amongst Players, one counterfeiteth the King, and yet is no King, but a base
fellow in comparison: another counterfeiteth a merchant, and yet is no
merchant, but a beggarly companion: others come to fight, and yet do not fight,
but dally one with another: others scold and brawle, and seem to be at mortal
enmity one against another, like some kind of Lawyers at the bar for their
Clients: but when they are gone, they are as good friends as ever they were,
and laugh at them whom they have made fools. But indeed certain persons
amongst Players are to be excepted, which are not counterfeited: for some play
the fools part, and are fools indeed: some play the varlets part, and are
varlets indeed: some play the rogues part, and are rogues indeed: some play
the cousiners part, and are cousiners indeed: some play the parts of lewd men,
and lewd women, and are lewd indeed: so that these (I think) have wrong
done them to be termed hypocrites, because they do not counterfeit the parts
they play, but are the same indeed that they make show of, except it be in
regard of the persons which they represent, that they be called hypocrites: for
those persons they are not indeed, though the quality of those persons they
have indeed. In like manner is it with men of a double heart in religion or
otherwise. Some seem to pray, when they do not pray, but babble with their
lips, words which their minds think not of, and their hearts consent not
unto: and keep a stir for thrice a week service, not caring for the Sabbath
day; and come perhaps of contention too, rather then of any devotion. These are
in show devout, but in truth devout hypocrites. Some pretend friendship, while
with the lion they offer to lick poor men whole with a dinner at Christmas, or
the loan of a little money, or the sale of some rotten commodity, while with
their teeth, that is, by cruel practices (ill neighbors to a smooth tongue)
they mean to pray upon them: these are in show friends, but in truth friendly
hypocrites. Some make a show of zeal to the glory of God, when their zeal is
nothing but bitter malice, and malicious bitterness: a thing that too many in
the ministry are guilty of: and wherewith many zealous and faithful
Preachers are unjustly charged by hypocrites. But our comfort is, that God does
acquit us, when the wicked do condemn us; but they that are maliciously
zealous, are zealous hypocrites. Some in their humble and courteous behavior
seem altogether to be compounded of humility, with kind speeches and friendly
offers, as, yours to command: I owe you any service that* I can, (meaning
indeed ever to owe it, and never to pay any) I have the courtesy of the town
for you, and I marvel when you will come to our house, and I wot not what,
when indeed they mean no such matter: these are humble and kind hypocrites.
Some seem very careful for the poor, like Judas, when they would oppress
the Church, and either disburden themselves, or else enrich themselves with the
spoils of the Church: these are charitable and benefacting hypocrites. Some
make a show of a troubled conscience, and seem desirous of resolution in their
pretended doubts, when they purpose only to entrappe the Preacher: these are
afflicted hypocrites. Some seem to harken to the Preacher very attentively and
devoutly, when in their hearts they turn most of that they hear into a jest,
because they like it not: these are attentive hypocrites. Some make as though
they desired nothing more, then the observation of the Princes laws, when in
the mean time they freely violate all laws themselves: these are lawless
hypocrites. Some cry God forbid, but that every man should have his due, and
in the mean time practice all the devises that may be to defeat every man:
these are conscionable, or rather unconscionable hypocrites. Some pretend the
discharge of their office, when they mean thereby to play their parts against
some whom they owe a grudge unto: now these you may call officious hypocrites.
Some seem more forward then others in the outward profession of the Gospel,
that under the color thereof, they may the more freely give them selves to
their pleasures, and every newfangled fashion that is daily invented: these
you may call (if you will) hypocrites of the fashion. Some are as the company
they come unto; and as Pedlers with their packes have access to men's gates to
get money: so these with their tales of every man get access to most men's
tables, where they buy and sell at their pleasures, they care not whom, and
all for a meals meat: these you may call (if you will) pedling hypocrites, or
Protestents for the pot and the spit. There be diverse others, which (if time
would tarry) I would decipher unto you: as the dainty eared hypocrite, called
Noli me tangere, who will profess Christ crucified, but cannot abide to have
Christ crucify his sins; and the brazen-faced hypocrite, who in secret will
say any thing, and in public will deny the same again. But here are enough
and too many, to act a play that shall please the world, the flesh and the
Devil. Now what is the religion of all these I pray you? or (to speak the
truth) of most men now adays, but hypocrisy? that is to say, a very play,
which every one studieth to act as artificially as he can, upon the tickle
Stage of this vain world, to win thereby credit and commodity amongst men,
being before God nothing less, then that which they seem to be unto men. Now
all these hypocrites or players may be divided into two sorts or companies.
First, such as make a counterfeit profession of religion. Secondly, such as
make a counterfeit practice of that which they profess. And both these
companies of hypocrites, are either public or private. Public are those which
play their parts in the Church, or in the Commonwealth, and they are also of
two sorts: such as abuse their office and authority which are public, or such
as abuse the public assemblies and exercises of religion, seeming there to be
that which they are not. Private hypocrites are such as play the counterfets in
households, or otherwise. In households and families there is much hypocrisy,
that is: many a play played by diverse actors, both comically nnd tragically,
that is, in sport and in earnest. The actors in these plays be sometime the
husband, sometime the wife: sometime the master, sometime the servants:
sometime the parents, sometime the children, and sometime all together, as
hereafter more at large we shall see. As in households, so elsewhere is much
private hypocrisy reigning, as in shoppes amongst buyers and sellers, and
elsewhere between party and party: making contracts and bargains with great
protestations of love and kindness: and all to deceive.

Some think none may be termed hypocrites, but such as have been forward and
zealous professors of the Gospel in show: but they are deceived. Indeed
whosoever is a professor of Christianity, and denies the power thereof, is an
hypocrite. But of professors there are two sorts: some are very forward, and
some are not so forward: some are zealous and make a great show, and some are
not so zealous, nor so much in show, yet all professors of Christ's Gospel.
Whosoever has given his name to Christ in baptism, and is a partaker of the
Lords table, is a professor of the name of Christ: but if in their lives they
serve Satan, they are but hypocrites. But it will be replied, that such as
never made any show of religion cannot be counted hypocrites, because hypocrisy
is a counterfetting or dissembling in religion. It is true indeed: but what
count you religion? or what is it to make a show of religion? Is it only to be
a diligent hearer of Sermons? or a daily frequenter of the temple? or to talk
much of the Scripture? or to reason well in matters of Divinity? or to use
prayer and singing of Psalms, and catechizing in the family? or to keep
company with godly persons? or to speak against unlawful swearing and
profaning the Sabbath? or to defy idolatry and superstition, etc. Surely he
that does all these, makes a good show of religion, and if he does them not to
God as well as to men, he is a gross hypocrite. But what then? Is this all
religion? Indeed many think so, and deceive themselves. But whosoever makes a
show of any religious duties, makes a show of religion. And we know that all
the duties required in both the tables of the Commandments, are religious
duties being performed by way of obedience to God, as they ought to be. And if
they be not so performed, they are then done but to the halfes, that is, to men
but not to God. Now that religion consists as well in the duties of the second
table which concern our neighbor, as in the duties of the first, which
concern Gods worship: it is evident by the testimony of S. James. Iam. 1.27.
Pure religion and undefiled before God: even the father is to visit the
fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world, that is, to help those that have no means to help themselves. He
does not exclude the duties of the first table, which concern the immediate
worship of God, but shows that all that without the other is vain, as he
says plainly in the verse before: If any man among you seems religious, and
refraineth not his tongue, (meaning from backbiting, lying, slaundering, and
maliciousness, and filthy talking, against which he inueigheth in the 21.
verse) this man's religion is vain. Now many civil honest men being baptized
and admitted to the Lords table, and coming at times appointed to the holy
exercises of Gods worship, may in some good measure keep the duties of the
second table, and yet not be very forward obseruers of the first table, paying
man his due, and being slack inongh to give God his due. Now these I say if
they keep the second table, that is, pay every man his own, honor their
superiors, and live chastely and orderly, and seek to preserve life, and keep
hospitality for the poor, and help their neighbor to his right, and bear
true witness, they do also make a good show of religion: but if they do these
things but to be seen and commended of men, they are but hypocrites: that is,
counterfeits before God. Again, if they stand more precisely upon one thing,
that God has commanded, then upon another: it is a sign that their hearts
are not upright with God: for if they were upright, they would as well regard
his commandment for one thing as for another, or else they are hypocrites and
dissemblers, to pretend obedience to Gods commandments when they mean
nothing less.

But it will be objected again, that the duties of the second table may be
performed in some sort, even by a mere civil or natural man, that knows
not God (as amongst the heathen be many such) nor make any show of religion at
all: or else where is the common distinction of ciuility and religion? Of
civil actions and religious actions? The answer is easy, and to stand long
upon such a point, were but to trifle away the time. We speak now of
Christians in name and profession at the least, and not of the heathen: and
every one that professes himself a Christian, professes also the works of
Christianity in show at the least, which are (as has been showed) the works
of the second table as well as of the first: which self same works may be done
both ciuilly and religiously too: and so one and the same man in one and the
same action: may show himself both a civil honest man, and a religious honest
man. As for example: the law of the Prince commands me to pay my debts, to
help my neighbor, to relieve the poor, etc. As a subject owing obedience to
my prince I do these things, and therein I do the part of a civil man, because
I obey unto civil authority. But if in doing of the same things, I have an
eye unto God who commands the same things, and do them in his fear, and of
love unto his Majesty: then do I the same things both religiously and ciuilly
too. As for the heathen or heathenish professors of the Gospel, if they do
obey civil authority for fear or for vaineglorie, or for any other end then
the love of their neighbor, which also must flow out of the love of God, as
being the end of the law: they also play the hypocrites because they seem to
love their neighbor, when they only love themselves.

And to make all this more full and plain which has been said let us hear
what our Savior Christ says to the matter, who is the best expositor of his
own mind. In the 23. of Matthew, he pronounces woe eight or nine times against
the Scribes and Pharisees for diverse kinds of hypocrisy, or diverse several
counterfeit parts which they played, all which were not in matters of religion,
most were but not all. First, in the thirteenth verse he says: Mat. 23.13.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, because ye shut up the kingdom
of heaven before men: for ye your selves go not in, neither suffer ye them
that would enter to come in. There is one kind of hypocrisy: his meaning is,
that they had one device or other still to keep men from the hearing of
Christ's preaching, which was the very kingdom of Gods grace, and the mean to
bring them to the kingdom of glory: and for that matter they had diverse
pretenses: but because the thing they aimed at, was to keep men from hearing
of the Gospel preached: therefore Christ calls them hypocrites. When I
consider well of that place of Scripture, it makes me remember such Church
officers, as never go forth to cause men to come to Church, but when the
Sermon is ready to begin, which they neither care perhaps to hear
themselves, nor would by their goodwils that others should hear. Now because
the preaching of the word, is the kingdom of Gods grace, and the means to
bring men to the kingdom of glory, let them take heed of Christ's woe, because
they shut up the kingdom of heaven before men: for they themselves go not in,
neither suffer they them to enter that would come in, and all under pretense of
executing their office in causing men to come to Church. Oh cunning devil,
that under pretense of bringing men to church, can keep men from that, which
should let them into the kingdom of heaven, that is, from hearing the word
preached.

Verse 14.
In the 14. verse our Savior Christ pronounces woe unto the same persons for
another kind of hypocrisy, and that is this: Under color of long prayer, they
devoured widows houses, for which they were to receive the greater damnation.
Here is religious hypocrisy condemned, that is, under show of any religious
duty to practice mischief. Some abuse long prayer, some short prayer, some
read prayer, some weekly prayer, to cover their malice, and to make the world
believe they are devout persons. Let such as do so take heed: for Christ's
sentence is already gone forth against such: they shall receive the greater
damnation.

Verse 15.
In the 15. verse he says they played the hypocrites another way, and that was
in taking great pains to make men of their painted profession, and then to
nusle them up in all kind of gross hypocrisy and wickedness, to which end
they would compass sea and land, and use all kinds of forcible persuasions,
pretending their souls health, etc. Of this sort are all Jesuits and Seminary
Priests, which in like manner go from place to place, to withdraw men from
their right faith to God, and true allegiance to their Prince, and to reconcile
them unto the Church of Rome.

In the 16. Verse 16.
verse he notes another gross hypocrisy: and that is, to make a conscience
of swearing by one thing, and no conscience of swearing by another, as to
swear by the Temple was with them no sin, but to swear by the gold of the
Temple, that was a great sin. And to swear by the Altar was nothing, but to
swear by the offering upon the Altar, that was a great sin: Such hypocrites
are they that make it no matter of offense to swear at every word, by the
holy and dreadful name of God, so they swear not by that precious blood which
he shed, or the wounds which he received, or some part of his most sacred
person. And to swear by the creatures of God, as by the light, by the fire, by
their silver, by the bread or other things which God made, as also by their
faith and troth: is no sin, so long as they swear not by God himself. But
mark what our Savior Christ says unto all such. In the 17. Verse 17.
verse he says thus: Ye foolish and blind, to show that there are foolish and
blind hypocrites, which ever through ignorance and folly commit hypocrisy.
Whether is greater (says he) the gold or the temple that sanctifies the gold?
the offering or the Altar, that sanctifies the offering? whosoever therefore
swears by the Altar, swears by it and by all things thereon. And whosoever
swears by the temple, swears by it, and by him that dwells therein. And
he that swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him that
sits thereon. And even so by Christ's reason, he that swears by the light
or any other creature, swears by it and by him that made the same and rules
the same: and he that swears by his faith or troth, swears by it and by
God, from whom is faith and troth be derived, and on whom they be grounded. But
to proceed: In the 23. Verse 23.
verse the Lords Jesus taxes the^ for another kind of hypocrisy, and that is
this: They tithe mint and annise and cummin, and leave the weighty matters of
the law, as judgment, mercy and fidelity. This he calls straining of a gnat,
and swallowing of a cammell. A disease that al hypocrites do labor of, to be
very busy and doubtful in small and trifling matters, and to neglect
altogether the weighty and principal duties of the law. Hic morbus omnibus
fere saeculis and apud omnes gentes regnauit (says Master Calvin) vt mayor
pars hominum leuiculis obseruationibus Deum placare studuerit. This is a
disease (says he) that has reigned in all ages, amongst all men, that the
greater part of men have studied to please God with the lightest and
triflingest observations that could be, and his reason is this, because (says
he) they cannot exempt themselves from all kind of duty and service to God,
therefore they fly unto this as a second remedy, to redeem most grievous
offenses with satisfactions that are nothing worth. And for an instance, he
brings in the Papists: who passing over the great and most substantial
commandments of God, do think to make him amends by sweating about cold and
naked ceremonies. And such a thing is it that Christ reproues in the Scribes
and Pharisees, who cast by the principal points of the law of God, and thought
yet both to satisfy him, and to retain also a name of righteous men, by
paying of their tithes, and not of all things neither: but of mint and annife
and cummin, and such toys, when notwithstanding in greater matters they used
all the fraud and deceit that could be, and left no cunning means
unpracticed, to defeat the Church of her right in the chiefest things. After
the manner of many now a days, who (most hypocritically) will come to the
Minister, and say, you shall have all your due, God forbid that we should
keep a farthing from the Church that is due. No Sir, you shall have rather
more then less of your due. Now these be good Pharisaicall speeches. But when
it comes to trial indeed, it shall be the tithe only of mint and cummin,
etc. that is, of toys and trifles to speak of, as it might be of the remnant
of an apple tree, or if you will the tenth part of an apple. And because you
shall not say, but that they deal well with you and with a good conscience,
you shall have the paring and all, whereas when we come to the uncasing of the
hypocrite, we shall find him just of Ananias his religion, Act. 5. Ier. 43.
who told the Apostles that there was all, when there was but half, or of the
Jews religion, in Jeremy 43. who said that they would hear the word of God
from Jeremy: but when Jeremy spoke, they said plainly, this is not the word of
God, we know the word of God. So say minting hypocrites, we will pay our dues:
yea, to the uttermost, but we will set down ourselves what is due, and more
then that you get not: like a good fellow on the way, that bad a man deliver
his purse, and when it was told him that it was against the kings laws to rob
and steal: his answer was; It is true indeed, the kings laws must be obeyed,
but you must know that for this time I am king, and my commandment is that you
deliver your purse: behold my Septer (quoth he) and showed him his sword, even
so is it with those which say, all dues must be paid, but they will set down
what shall be due, and their will shall go for a law: I speak not now of
things in controversy, but of things that be out of controversy. What
devises? what shifts? what art and cunning? what craft and subtily, even among
the meanest as well as the greatest (except here one and there one, a few
amongst many that deal truly*) and all to defeat and defraud the Church of
her right: and yet forsooth when they come to pay the tith of their mint and
their annise, and cummin, and stubble, and a half penny for a shilling: and a
shilling for a pound, and a pound for ten, devouring both fields and flocks,
that is, the greatest matters of all, they will say, God forbid, but you should
have your due. And let a Christian Minister demand, but what the Christian
Magistrate has allowed him: what exclamations shall you hear? what grievous
accusations of hard dealing? of cruel dealing? a covetous man, never content,
and I know not wat will ensue? I speak it to warn you my brethren to take
heed in time, of such gross hypocrisy: and to repent of that which is past,
and deal uprightly as in the sight of God, who will brook no such dealing at
your hands. It is a point that touches the state of our souls, and the hazard
of our salvation very nearely: and therefore look unto it, as you will answer
it unto God. I doubt not but God will still provide for his servants, what his
gracious will and pleasure is, as he did for his servants the Apostles, in the
Primitive Church, Act. 5.
when Ananias and his wife played their parts with them, lying unto the holy
Ghost, to save part of their goods, and to keep a good opinion amongst men:
but God took them with the manner, and smote them down with present death, to
show how he can do with all such as play the like parts. And though he does not
strike all such presently as he did them: yet many of them may sensibly feel
Gods hand upon them, in their goods, or in their bodies, or in their cattle,
or one way or other, or hardening their heats, or blinding their eyes, that
they cannot repent of their wickedness, because he reserueth for them (I
fear) a more fearful judgment.

And what else (I pray you) do they but tithe mint, and annise, and cummin, and
neglect the greater matters of the law, which in the Church or commonwealth do
so vehemently urge matters of ceremony and circumstance, and in the mean time
leave the principal and most substantial points of Gods worship unlooked
unto? What a stir do some keep to have every thing in order about the
Church, to please the eye and the time withal, but have no care to have a
learned preacher to instruct their souls in the ways of life and salvation?
What a coile do others keep about sitting and kneeling at the Communion? and
never regard the due examination of themselves aforehand, that they may come
worthily unto the same?

These and such like matters ought to be done, but the greater matters ought
not to be left undone. Or else (says Christ) men are like those that strain a
gnat and swallow a cammell. Now what a ridiculous jest is it, to see one mince
and chew a small crum of bread for fear of choking, and yet swallow down a
whole loaf? or to strain the liquour that has a gnat in it, for fear of
hurting their jaws, and make no bones of a cammell, which is a huge beast,
that is, of a thing that is more then they are able to compass, without
manifest peril and destruction? Such ridiculous hypocrites are they that keep
a great stir about trisles, and let foul abuses pass by, yea swallow them
down whole.

And because we are now entered into the bowels of hypocrisy: give me leave a
little to clear my self of one thing more, wherein (as in diverse others) I
have been not a little mistaken, and that is this. It is rumoured abroad, that
I would have persuaded the Church Officers of this place to dispense with their
oath, in not presenting those things which concern my self in my ministry:
which is all one, as if I should persuade them to be perjured, by a witting and
willing abusing of the most sacred name of God, whom they have called to
witness against their own souls, if they do not present all things that they
are sworn unto. It is untrue, and a wickedness, that I trust God in his mercy
will preserve me from while I live; but this indeed I said, that in their oath;
as in all other oaths that are ministered iudicially, two things are chiefly
respected, if they be not expressed: the one is the glory of God, the other is
the good of the Church; which I told them they were in the execution of their
office, and in all other presentiments to have a special regard of: aduising them
to look most to those things, that do make most for the advancing of the
glory of God, and the reformation of the Church of God: as namely, the
profaning of the Lords day, by unnecessary working thereupon: by carrying of
wares up and down, and open gaming upon the Lords day, together with
blasphemers, drunkards and usurers, and negligent comers to the church; al
which be foul blots and spots in a Christian congregation: and therein should
God be greatly glorified: and not to let these alone, and stand altogether
prying into the Minister, for matters of ceremony and circumstance: as if they
were in office for no other end, but to trouble Gods Minister, and to
strengthen the hands of the wicked. But forasmuch as God is glorified also in
presenting of every thing that comes within compass of their oath, I would
have them answer truly unto every article. And so I say still unto you that be
in office: deal so as God may be glorified, and Gods church may be edified.
Leave this partiality in doing your office: have the fear of God before your
eyes: and fear more to offend his Majesty by abusing his holy name, then to
offend your honest neighbors by winking at their sins. I tell you these
things plainly, and in love to your souls (whatsoever men judge of me) I
protest before God (if protestations will serve) your courses that you take be
not good. God is dishonored by you, and the Church of God unreformed. It is
seldom that you go abroad to visit men's houses: I mean those that are frozen
in their dregs: and when you do go, it is so unseasonably, that it were
better that you went not at all. You should go at the beginning of common
Prayer, and compel men as much as in you lies, to come to the general
confession and prayers of the Church, and reading of the Scripture, as well as
to the Sermon but you tarry till the Sermon begins, and then draw out many
with you, that would be gladder to hear the Sermon, perhaps then your selves
are, and so you hinder both your selves and them too. And by this means you
offend double, by bringing in an open contempt both of the Sermon and the
common prayers of the Church. For what say many? we are a coming: all in good
time: the Sermon is not begun yet: and so you let them alone: as who say, if
they come to the Sermon then all is well. Again by this means, behold another
inconvenience while men are left to themselves, to go and come at their own
pleasure, the poor are for the most part defrauded of their allowance, because
(men coming not in due time) the collectors cannot have it of them, unless they
would go as vnseasonablie about in the Sermon time, as you do.

Again, when you do go, to whom do you go? or whose houses do you visit?
Alas, none but a few poor base Alehouses, and the meaner sort: you dare not go
to the richer sort, to the better sort: no, you are afraid to displease them:
you say it is not the custom: but they may, and their wives may, and their
servants may come at their pleasure, and do what they list: and that see the
poorer sort, and they think they should be suffered as well as the rich.
Again, when you have visited some few places or persons; what do you? Do you
present any of them? Never. Do you take twelve pence apeece of them according
to the Statute? Seldom. And there again the poor are defrauded by your
partiality. And to say the truth, I do not see with what faces you can
present the poor and meaner sort, except you also present the rich, for fear
least either perjury or partiality should fly in your faces. And what are
your pretenses? Forsooth for the poorer sort: alas they are poor, we have
given them warning, etc. as though they have not had warning enough, or should
from year to year still be warned, and never be spurred forward by the
discipline of the Church. And for the richer sort, why sir, we see them not, we
know them not that do offend: do you know any? Can you tell us of any? And what
a stir would here be, if we should be so forward? What, would you have us
noted above all men in the town? and I know not what. A way with these fig
leaves for shame, and look to your oath sincerely. My brethren leave this
halting, and dissembling, and malicious dealing, and partial dealing in Gods
business. For all that deal so, do as hypocrites do: and you know that
hypocrisy is detestable in the sight of God. It is no marvel (good brethren)
that there be so many Schismatics, Schismatiks.
that have divided them selves from our congregations, crying out against us,
that we have no Church amongst us for want of discipline and government,
although therein they be foully deceived. For they think, that because in many
places of the land, discipline is either not used at all; as where every man
is let to do what he list: or else abused, as where only good men are troubled
for trifles, or some few of the most inferior sort, which have no money to
pay, are called in question: that therefore we have no discipline at all: but
they are deceived greatly. For even as a rich man has gold and silver in his
house, though he let it lie and rust, or else mispend it: and as there is a
sword in the sheath, though it be not drawn forth; and power also in the
owner thereof to draw it forth, though he exercise not that power at all, or
not aright: even so in this Church of England is a sword of discipline: that
is, Church government, and power in the Ministers and officers of the Church
to exercise the same, although in some places it is let rust in the sheath, and
in other places perhaps drawn forth and used unseasonably. But alas many that
be ignorant and weak, and yet tender of conscience (howsoever most of that
sort be carried with a spirit of fury and insolency) do stumble exceedingly at
these things: and surely no great marvel, when those that be sworn to present
so many things, let all alone, or else turn the edge of the sword against the
Ministers of the word, taking, as it were, a pride and felicity in disgracing
and discrediting of them. For (to let pass the corruptions of many which are
in place and authority to punish faults) surely this is a thing intolerable,
for any that are sworn to bring disorders to light, to make no more conscience
of their oath, then if the fearful name of God were a matter of no regard,
but to be played and dallied withal, or made a cloak for mischief and
malice, as if God himself did either know nothing of your dealings, or had no
will or ability to punish the same. Neither is it any marvel though the
Minister of Christ be had in contempt, and be counted a contentious and a
troublesome fellow, when those which should second him with the censurers of
the Church are content to let the wicked do what they list, without
controulment: nay are as ready to violate Gods orders as others, and as soon
as any to misuse Gods Minister for doing of his duty faithfully. And what will
be the end of all this, but a fearful judgment of God upon the land, to end
the matter withal? As it fell out in the days of Zedechiah king of Judah, in
whose days both he and the Priests, and the people trespassed wonderfully, and
heathenishly, and polluted the house of the Lord, even as in our days the
house of God is polluted and contemned. To redress this gear, the Lord sent
unto them his messengers, rising early and sending: for he had compassion on
his people, 2. Chron. 36.15.16.17.
and on his habitation; but they did as we do: They mocked the messengers of
God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the
Lord arose against his people, and till there was no remedy. For he brought
upon them the King of the Chaldeans, who slew their young men with the sword in
the house of their sanctuary, and spared neither young man nor virgin,
ancient nor aged: God gave all into his hands. See the 2. of Chron. the 36.
Chapter, and the 16. and 17. verses: to show us that though God can bear with
many sins, yet he cannot bear with the contempt of his word and Ministers.
And thus you see brethren, three foul and fearful monsters brought forth by
the malice, and nursed by the negligence, and covered by the hypocrisy of
Church officers: and that is, contempt of discipline and government, Schism
and division in the Church, contempt of Gods message and messengers, and all
attended upon with the consuming wrath and vengeance of God. If any man shall
think that I have urged these things too near, and too particularly applied
this doctrine: let them but seriously consider as before God, what damage the
Church sustaineth by the corrupt and partial dealing of Church officers, and I
hope they will easily confess, that a Pastor (whom God has made a watchman
to see that none of Christ's sheep be lost or devoured) by his pastoral
authority in his own place, may and ought to say as much as I have done, yea
even to the Church officers of this place, without offense to any. And I marvel
(considering the great mischief that ensues the negligence and counterfeit
dealing of Ecclesiastical officers, and how the fault (when Schismatikes are
bred) is returned upon the Ministers and faithful teachers) that others are so
sparing, or no more earnest against them then they are. For if men be ielous
over their children, and do with great indignation set themselves against those
that are means whereby they are bereaved of the^, yea of their cattle, which
is less. And if the Church ought also to be as jealous over her children,
(which through the painful travels of her Ministers have been begotten unto
Christ) as men are of theirs: then why should not the Fathers, and nurses, I
mean the Ministers of the Churches children, for the Lord Jesus open their
mouths* yea with great zeal and indignation against those, by whose means the
members of the Church may and do miscarrie? For why should the Church of Christ
be robbed of her children: as this very congregation or flock has been of
some since my coming hither, through your negligence that be in office, and
sworn to bring gross and noisome abuses to light (the stink whereof makes
many weak ones to loath their mothers house) and we sit still and hold our
peace? But alas sir (will hypocrisy say) what would you have us to do? when we
present faults, nothing is reformed: as good let all alone, as get the ill
will of our honest neighbors and do no good: money will buy of all, etc. But
this is too open a net to dance in, when all the world shall see, that the
least part of the hypocrites care, is to reform gross abuses, to do good
indeed, and with a religious heart zealously to maintain the glory of God:
but rather bend all their study to serve the time, to please men, and to
cross the truth. Nay rather if men's hearts be upright with God, Josh. 14.
they are of Iosuahs mind, who said, Though all Israel will not, yet I and my
house shall serve the Lord: so, though no man else will make a conscience of
their oath or office, yet we will: and so do I pray you. For if others will be
remiss, and partial, and corrupted when you have presented faults, and will
swallow those Cammels, that you bring out of their stables: that is their
sin, and they shall answer for it. But if you fail in your duty, seeing
and not seeing, straining gnats and swallowing of camels: that is your sin,
and you shall answer it also; for every one shall bear his own burden. And
therefore in the fear of God, let us look every one of us better unto in then
we have done: and repent of that which is past, that God in Christ Jesus may be
merciful unto us.

THE V. SERMON.
MATH. 6.2. As the hypocrites do.


WE have hitherto heard, how vaineglorie, and hypocrisy do defile all our good
actions before God: and how by taking heed, vaineglorie is to be avoided. The
reward likewise of sincerity we have seen, and in part the mature of
hypocrisy; according to the intent and purpose of our Savior Christ, who both
describes hypocrites unto us in their colors, and in so doing does plainly
tell us, that he would have the doings and qualities of hypocrites to be made
known unto the world. To which end it is necessary, that the hypocrite be
uncased and viewed well in the light, that every one espying his ugly visage,
and taking good marks of him, may beware of him, avoid his conditions, and
escape his punishment. And this work (as you know good brethren) I called the
uncasing of the hypocrite, wherein I showed you first what is hypocrisy:
namely, a counterfeiting of religion, or any religious duty, or a doing of
that which we do only to be seen of men, and yet seem to be such as would
approve our ways in the sight of God, professing the love and fear of God,
when there is no such matter in us. For which cause they are most fitly
compared to players, who make a show of doing that which they do not indeed,
and represent those persons which they are not. Next, how many kinds of
hypocrites there be, some being public, some private, some religious, some
civil. Lastly, we took a particular view of some special hypocrisies,
described by our Savior Christ in the 23. of Matthew, from the 14. verse to the
23. whereof the last was of them, that seem to make a conscience of trifles,
and none of weighty matters, which Christ calls straining of gnats, and
swallowing of camels: all which for breuities sake I do omit, because there are
many mo yet behind to be uncased: whose acts and monuments are truly recorded:
whose visages and pictures are plainly deciphered, and whose bowels and inward
parts are deeply searched, and whose iuglings and dissemblings are all fully
discovered by Christ the searcher of hearts, in the forenamed 23. chapter of
Matthew, and diverse other places beside. Wherein our Savior Christ we see is
not sparing but plentiful, not mild but severe, not short but long, not
negligent but painful, and never has done with them, but ever anon meets
with them, remembers them, and never lets them pass until he has marked
them with his black cole of deep dislike and deadly detestation, and still
warning his disciples to beware of hypocrites, and their leuin of hypocrisy,
whereof but a little sowreth and spoileth the whole lump. Now seeing our
Savior Christ bends all his force as it were against hypocrisy, and the
doings of hypocrites: I see no reason that any should be offended that I do so
too. For hypocrisy in religion is like Judas amongst the disciples, a fair
spoken thief, but a cunning and dangerous traitor, ready still to betray
both Christ and all Christianity into the hands of their enemies: only she
says, as Esau said: The days of mourning for my father will come shortly, and
then I will kill my brother Jacob: that is, I only want and wait a time to do
my feats in.

Besides those acts which our Savior Christ has already noted in the
Scribes and Pharisees to the 25. verse of the 23. of Matthew, we find in the
verses following diverse other parts of their hypocrisy, severely taxed, and
lively described by him, whereof some be in actu, some in potentia: that is,
some be present, and some are to come. By the former he shows what is always
the present behavior of hypocrites, even when they are at the best: by the
latter he prophecieth what they will be when time shall serve, and that he
shows in the 34. verse: where he says: that they (which now for the present
do garnish the sepulchers of the righteous) shall one day both kill and
crucify, scourge and persecute both Prophets and wise men, in their
sinagogues, and from city to city.

But for the present thus it is with them. First, they make clean the outside
of the cup and platter: Verse 25.
but within they are full of briberie and excess: and these he further
likeneth to whited tombs, which appear beautiful outward, 27.
but are within full of dead men's bones and of all filthiness: applying his
similie unto hypocrites thus: So are ye also, for outwardly ye appear
righteous unto men, 28.
but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Christ's meaning is, that
all hypocrites care is to approve themselves in the sight of men, by setting
fair shows upon every thing, but before God they are most wicked and
abominable: like the harlot, who to please strangers is very diligent and
careful, and toward others is very courteous, and sober, and kind, but
toward her own husband is most savage, impudent and shameless.

In the next place Christ shows, what friends and welwillers hypocrites are
unto the Prophets, that is, to the Preachers of Gods word: but you must note,
that is to them that were dead: and that they are great friends to them,
appears two ways. First, by the cost that they are at in decking their
Tombs. Secondly, by blaming of their forefathers, by whom the Prophets were
persecuted and iniuried while they were alive. And thus would they get a good
opinion amongst men, by reuerencing the memory of the Prophets and holy men of
God. For while they did thus counterfeit a love unto their persons, they seemed
to yield to their doctrine: and who would not take them now for most faithful
followers of their doctrine, and most zealous servants and worshippers of God?
It was a thing very plausible to deck the Tombs of the Prophets, and to erect
monuments for them. For by this means, says Calvin: Call H^^. Euang. Mat. 23.
quasi ex tenebris eruebatur religio vt in suo honor staret: religion was as
it were plucked out of darkness and set up in her due honor. But indeed
they meant nothing less then to restore the doctrine of the Prophets, which by
their death might seem to be put out. And yet being both strangers unto the
prophetical doctrine, and also most deadly enemies unto the same, they would
bestow goodly Tombs upon the^ being dead, as though that they and the Prophets
had stood both for one and the same cause.

And this says Calvin, is usual with hypocrites, to honor the holy servants
of God, and pure teachers of the word after their death, whom they could not
endure being alive. And for this M. Calvin does yield a very singular good
reason. This comes not only from the corrupt custom of the vulgar people,
says he: sed quia duris and seueris correptionibus molesti, amplius non sunt
mortui cineres, non agree in illis colendis euanida^ religionis vmbram ostentant
qui loquentiu^ vocibus ad insaniam aguntur. But because their dead dust and
ashes are no longer troublesome unto the^ with hard and sharp reproves:
therefore it does not grieve them to make show of a vanishing shadow of
religion, in reuerencing the^ being dead, who were driven to madness and rage
with their lively voices. The world (because it durst not wholly despise God,
or at least rise up openly against him, as it were in arms) has invented this
device to worship the shadow of God for God himself: and in like manner does
reverence the shadow of the preachers and Prophets for the doctrine it self.
What need we go any further for an example of this play, then to the Popish
church? who are not content with that lawful and due reverence that is given
to the Apostles and blessed Martyrs of Christ: but will bestow most impiously
upon them that worship that is due to God: and profess that they cannot honor
them enough: when in the mean time by their raging against the faithful,
(which follow their steps and doctrine) they do plainly show how they would
use the Apostles and Martyrs, if they were now alive again, and did perform
that duty which they did when they were on earth. For why else do they with
such rage burn and flame out against us, but because we desire to have that
doctrine to be received, and to flourish, which the Apostles and Martyrs have
sealed with their blood? Let them then a dorne the images of the Saints, with
their frankensence, candels, flowers, and all kind of pomp as long as they
list, says Calvin: if Peter were now alive they would surely pull him in
pieces: if Paul were amongst them, they would certainly stone him: if Christ
himself were alive and amongst the^, they would roast him to death with a
softfire.

And do not diverse Protestants play the same part? who will seem to make much
of some Preachers: and give them good entertainment, as Herod did John Baptist,
and yet persecute with might and maine their own Pastors for teaching the same
doctrine which they do? Or for the covering and cloking of their special and
beloved sins, will seem to the world to be religious, by hearing the
preaching, and entertaining of the persons of Preachers at their houses,
thinking themselves then safe, Judge. 18.
as Micah did when he had a Leuite in his house, when in their hearts they do
utterly loath and detest the sincerity of that truth, and the strictness of
those courses, as puritanisme, and too much preciseness which they urge? And
what is the religion of all such, but a play to be seen of men?

Verse 33.
In the 33. verse of the former 23. Chapter, Christ (being about to conclude his
Sermon) does more plainly uncase these hypocrites, and lays them wide open to
all the world, telling what they are, what they must look for, and what his
servants must look for at their hands. What they are he shows, when he says:
O Serpents and generation of vipers! to show, that they were not only enemies
to the doctrine of the Prophets, but most pestilent enemies to the whole church
of God, and like vipers will not stick to eat out the very bowels of the
Church their mother, to maintain their own state and pride. What they must
trust unto if they truly repent not, he shows, when he says: how should ye
escape the damnation of hell? As if it were a thing almost impossible for
professed hypocrites to repent and be saved. So hypocrites we see by Christ's
example are to be handled, though they be the great masters of Israel: their
vizards are to be plucked off, and they are to be laid open to the view of the
world, and to be haled by force as it were before the tribunal seat of Gods
judgment. What Gods servants must look for at hypocrites hands when time
shall serve (howsoever they seem now to hear them, and to entertain them)
our Savior Christ shows, when he says, he will send Prophets and wise men,
and Scribes among them, that is, men endued with all manner of learning, and
qualified with abundance of Gods graces: but they shall scourge them and
persecute them from city to city: Verse. 34.37.
yea even in Jerusalem, the Lords Prophets shall be killed, and the messengers
of the most high shall be stoned to death. In times past their rage was such
against the holy Prophets, that neither the holiness of the Temple, nor
reverence of the Altar, whereupon the sacrifices were offered, could stay them
from shedding of innocent blood. As for example: the blood of Zacharias the
son of Barachias, meaning indeed him, that was the son of Iehoiada the
priest, whom Christ calls Barachias, that is, the blessed of the Lord: of
Barach and ias, which is, the blessed of the Lord, as M. Calvin notes; because
he had spent his whole life in the worship and service of God. And this is
usual in Scripture, to give unto men besides their proper names, other names
of special signification, either for their consolation, or for their
humiliation. So Jacob was called Israel, that is, prevailing with God: 2 Chronicles.
24.22.
and Solomon, Iedidah, that is beloved of the Lord: and James and John,
Boanerges, that is, sons of thunder: and Iehoiada, Barachias, that is, the
blessed of the Lord. So terroris gratia, to terrify him, Bashur that misused
Jeremy, was called Magor Misabib, that is, fear on every side. And Naoim in
the bitterness of her soul, would be called Marah, that is, bitterness. But
now to the matter of Zacharias, the son of Iehoiada Barachias, the blessed of
the Lord. Of whose martyrdom and the cause thereof, we may read sufficiently
in the second of Chronicles, the 24. chapter, from the 17. verse unto the 23.
So likewise in time to come they which now boasted of the Prophets Tombs
amongst them: and of learned Preachers in their sinagogues, should through the
just vengeance of God, be given up to such a reprobate mind, that they should
show all kind of raging cruelty against the same Prophets, whom they so much
seemed to reverence. God grant this prophecy may never take place amongst us,
if it be his will: but surely it is much to be feared, that if time should
turn, and religion alter (which our sins have justly deserved) it will prove
too true. For hypocrites will play the hypocrites, and show them selves in
their colors when all is done: even as the Blackmoore will be black, if all
the water in the sea were spent in washing him. For they that are so forward
now in color of their office and pretense of law, to abuse Gods Ministers, as
many be: what would they do, if they had Prince and Prelates, and law, and all
to back them? They that now in the public and authorized profession of the
Gospel, (and under the government of so gracious and Christian a Prince as we
have, who esteems of the true Ministers of Christ in the Church, as of the
soul in the body, the Lord long preserve her amongst us) are not ashamed to
contriue wicked plots, and devilish devises, to call their Ministers names
into question, by suggesting unto great persons, most impudent lies and
shameful slanders, and that under pretense of their office, and upon the
credit of their oath. They that now so abound in malice against their
Minister, for speaking but the truth, that when they can find no matter against
him at home, can send an hundred miles for matters objected and answered, ended
and finished ten years ago, and to revive matters whith have been dead and
buried so long time, like those that in Queen Mary's time, dug up Bucers
bones out of the grave, to endite them and burn them: what cruel persecutors
would these become if time did serve? What would not these men do against the
poor servants of Christ if Queen Mary's time should come again? except God
did give them repentance, and work a strange alteration. God deliver me out of
their hands, and give them better minds if it be his will. It were a strange
alteration to see some that now bring Bibles to the Church, and turn to places
after the Preacher, one day to be instruments to burn so many Bibles as they
can come by. It were strange to see such as are now most attentive in hearing
the preacher, and most kind in giving him entertainment, one day to throw a
faggot at his head, or to be a witness against his doctrine, or to help to
burn him? Well, such times have been, and such times may come again for our
sins: and then shall the approved be known, as the Apostle speaks, and
hypocrites with their light and chaffie profession shall then be discovered,
and blown away with the wind. Many now would answer as Hazael did to the
Prophet, 2. King. 8.12.13.
if any should say to them as the Prophet said to him. I weep, says the
Prophet, to remember what thou shall do to the children of Israel when thou art
king of Aram, how thou shall burn their cities. and put their young men to the
sword, and dash their infants in pieces, and rent their women with child. What?
said Hazael, is thy servant a dog, that I should do this great thing? So
would many answer now (no doubt:) Are we dogs, that we should so use God
servants, etc? No doubt of it, in King Edwards days, he that should have
warned some persons of such things, that were hearers of those reverend Martyrs
and Bishops, Hooper, Latimer, Ridley, Cranmer, and other faithful Ministers.
D. Tailor, Bradford, and others, they would have been at defiance with the^:
yet for all that, they (when time served) stood forth to accuse these godly
Fathers, and to persecute them to death, that a man would little have thought of
be actors in such ttagedies. Well, God bless us all my brethren, and keep us in
his holy fear, and make us upright hearted, and constant in the profession of
religion: for I do fear greatly else, that if ever time should serve (which
God for his mercies sake forbid, if it be his will) too too many would play
Hazaels part, though they make a fair show now, and stand at open defiance for
such matters. Well, let no man brag of his own strength, that he will do
this, and he will not do that: for many good men, even sincere Christians, may
promise and vow a standing for the truth with Peter, and because they rely
upon their own strength, may fall with Peter: but I trust God will give them
mercy and repentance to rise again with Peter: but as for hypocrites and
time-seruers, whose hearts are best known unto God, out of question, they will
then show themselves in their colors. Let them now pretend with Judas never so
much care for the poor, or love to Christ, they will one day prove thieves to
the poor, and traitors to Christ, as Judas did: and if they once fall with
Judas, let them take heed that they hang not themselves with Judas, for
betraying and persecuting innocent blood. For it is not the approbation of the
Elders that will justify Judas, nor his officious kiss that will cover him,
nor the law of the land that will warrant him, nor the silver bribe that will
enrich him, nor the praise of men that will comfort him, nor his forced
restitution that will restore him, nor his constrained confession that will
convert him, nor his faithless repentance that will save him; when his money,
and his friends, and his own tongue, and heart, and hand, and conscience, as a
thousand witnesses, and God himself shall be against him, God grant that all
counterfeits and hypocrites, and dissemblers in religion, may in time take
heed by his example. There be many both honest and godly religious Christans,
whose desire is, with all their hearts to please God, by doing those things
which his word requires of them. And these for the love that they bear unto
the truth, and their hatred that they carry against wickedness, are by an
odious name called Puritanes: and if they fall at any time through occasion, as
oftentimes they do through some infirmity against their wills, then are they
condemned as hypocrites, but most unjustly. For though all our actions smell of
hypocrisy, as master Bradford well perceived, when he desired the Lord to
forgive him all his hypocrisies, and confessed a little before his death, that
all his prayers, and all his best serving of God were but hypocrisy, meaning
in comparison of that sincerity that is required of every Christian: yet
notwithstanding are none to be termed hypocrites, which fall by occasion
through infirmity, and are only stained with the dust of it, and infected
with the contagion thereof, as men that draw in one and the same air with
hypocrites: but only such are to be counted for hypocrites, which make a show
of that which they are not, nor mean to be, but with their tongues can hold
men cunningly with a fair tale of religion and godliness, while their hearts
are resolved to practice all kind of mischief and iniquity: of such I speak,
and not of simple hearted and well meaning Christians, who have (no doubt) their
faults as well as other men, though they make not an art of sinning as
hypocrites do.

This secret hypocrisy of Gods children does not a little trouble many of them,
neither can many be persuaded but that all that they do is done in hypocrisy,
as master Bradford writing to one of his friends, in most of his letters
condemns himself for a painted hypocrite, and being thus troubled in their
tender consciences, they are still afraid of that woe, that our Savior Christ
pronounces against hypocrites. But for the comforting of such tender
consciences (whose fear is ever that they shall not deal uprightly and
sincerely enough in Gods sight) we are to distinguish of hypocrisy: for some
hypocrisy respects men only, seeking only praise of men and not of God: and
some hypocrie there is that respects God also, yea most of all, and that
steals in this fort upon us. A Christian that fears God goes in private by
himself to call upon God, by prayer. Now in his private prayer, sometime his
mind is drawn away into a number of by-thoughts and wandering imaginations,
insomuch as he oftentimes thinks least of God, when he calls upon him,
neither is thoroughly moved with an inward desire of obtaining those things that
he prays for, nor with a hearty loathing of those sins that he prays
against: then comes Satan and suggesteth thus: Surely thou art an hypocrite,
for thou have not prayed with all thy heart, nor with all thy soul, nor with
all thy might. Again, sometime the Christian soul prays earnestly, with
great feeling and groaning of spirit, and has his mind wholly intent and bent
upon God, that he is even ravished, as it were in prayer, thinking of nothing
but heavenly things, and when he has done goes his way, thinking with
himself that he has done very well, and no doubt but God does highly commend
him for it: and flattereth and commends his own heart for so doing. The like
corrupt thoughts and motions, shall we feel in performing other holy duties of
reading our task in the Bible, or meditating or giving secret alms, etc. And
when we bewail these corruptions, yet still we shall be ready to think well of
our selves for it: as one that wept bitterly for his secret hypocrisy, and
the^ was troubled because he thought he should be co^me^ded for that. In a word,
whatsoever the Lord works in us, or by us, we are ready straightway to
think well of our selves for it: even this secret hypocrisy is a sin and a
great stain, and is the last sin that shall be subdued in the godly, and
needs also great repentance, and must be washed away by faith in the merits
of Christ's blood. I deny not, but that a Christian soul may rejoice and take
comfort unto himself in the performance of such holy duties in private, for
that it is a lively sign of the sanctifying grace of Gods spirit with him: but
yet there is matter sufficient to humble him remaining, if he does not still
continually return all the glory unto God, and not think the better of
himself in so doing neither. But this is not that gross hypocrisy against
which I deal all this while upon this next, nor against which Christ cries
woe so often, for that is a domineering sin in the wicked, who study to do all that they do to be seen of men: and thereunto (to blind the eyes of the world)
bend all their wits: and yet for the most part do not so much as once think,
neither will they be known to play the hypocrites: these make an art of sin,
and think they do well to live thereby.

Now those that make an art of sin, and put on profession of religion for
their cloak, deal artificially indeed, for being given to lying and
dissembling, they will inuey egerly against lying and dissembling, like the
thief who having found more money about the true man then he would be acknowne
of, cried out, Good Lord what a world is this, whom can a man believe now a
days? Art thou not ashamed to lie? did not thou tell me thou had no
more? etc. when notwithstanding he was busy in committing of his robbery.
Again, they will extol and commend humility, and condemn the proud to the
pit of hell, that a man would think they were the meekest men in the world, when
all the matter is to have all submission and reverence showed to themselves, as
an usurer of London, who willed the preacher to cry out against usury, that all
might come to him for money. Again, they will not stick to frequent Sermons,
to commend honest men, to intrude themselves into good company, and all to make
the world believe that they are such themselves, as they are whom they do
commend, and converse withal. If you bewail the corruptions of the time, they
can bewail them as much as you. If you condemn hypocrisy and dissimulation,
they can do it as iudicially as you. If you speak of the Ministers duty, they
can tell it as well as you. If you allege Scripture for proof of any matter,
they can be as deep in Scripture as you. If you will be an Apostle or amongst
the Apostles, they are for you: nay they will go a little beyond you and them
too, they will ease you al of your burden, and care: for none shall carry the
bag nor make the provision but they, because they mean with their brother
Judas to play two parts in one, that is: the tray-God, and the thief too.

Is this true will you say? how shall we then know hypocrites from honest
Christians? if we cannot know them, how then shall we avoid them? Math. 7.
Well enough: by their fuites you shall know them, says Christ, speaking of
those that are sheep without and wolves within, as all hypocrites be, by their
fruits you shall know them. To show that we must wait a time for the matter, for
fruit is not presently ripe so soon as it sown, but it must have a time to
bud, and to blossom, and to harden, and to ripen: and then taste it, when it
is ripe, and you shall then by it know what name to call the tree by. One of
you is a devil says Christ, meaning Judas, and one of you shall betray me.
Now when Christ said that Judas was a devil, the same Judas was a gross
hypocrite, but it was not known unto men until he had betrayed his master,
and hanged himself. There was a time for Judas to conceive devilish purposes,
and there was a time to bring forth the same. So hypocrites have a time to
conceive mischief, which lies hidden in the heart, like the infant in the
mothers belly, but when the fullness of time comes, forth it must come, and
cannot be dissembled any longer, no more then it is possible for a woman to
keep her infant within her, beyond the appointed time of nature. God knows
them now, and men shall know them hereafter. God sees when the seed is sown,
how it grows, and how it ripeneth: yea he knows the thoughts of men's hearts
long before they are.

Math. 22.
The Pharisees come to Christ: Good master thou art a good man, and teach
the way of God truly, and carest for no man. Tell us, or resolve us of our
doubt: Is it lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or no? In show these are good
trees. Christ sees the root, and the sap, and the bud, and presently
determines what they are. Why tempt ye me ye hypocrites? and afterward when
they accused him to be an enemy to Caesar, then the fruit ripened, and all men
knew them to be hypocrites. Herod was a crafty fox, and Christ knew him to be
one, long before the world espied him. Herod had one sin that he loved well,
and lodged it in his heart. But as Rahell covered her fathers idols with the
asses litter, so he had a fair covering for his sin, he would hear John
preach, he would reverence the man, and seem to be glad of him, and what was
all this? but so much litter to cover a beast withal: a fair covering to cast
over a foul sin. For who would have thought now that such an auditour of
such a Preacher had loved his brothers wife, and kept her as his wife? He
seemed to like well of John Baptist, but the dancing damsel pleased him
better, and his brothers wife best of all: and when for the saving of his
credit before men, in performing of a wicked promise, rashly made to a lewd
wanton, he cares not to shed the innocent blood of the man of God, whom before
he seemed to reverence: then is Herod's fruit ripe, taste it now, and tell me
if he was not an hypocrite: and are not all they such hypocrites, as do to
their power as he did, though not in that degree and measure of iniquity? We
are professors of the Gospel say some, and we like our Preachers doctrine
well, but our honest neighbors please us better, and our beloved vanities best
of all. We live by them, and we are sorry that we cannot do for him as we would,
for we have passed our word against him: so was Herod sorry too, for that he had
passed his promise. And to keep credit with those that have pleased, and
pleasured us, we must not call back our words: so said Herod too, but uncase
the hypocrite a little, and view him well. First, if thou will be counted a
true Christian, and a sincere professor of the truth, why do thou lodge any
one sin with delight in thy heart? tell me that: If thou say there is no
such matter, then tell me why do thou frequent the company, and take such
excessive pleasure in the bewitching vanities of such persons, as will snare
thee, and deceive thee? Then: why art thou so rash as to promise thou know
not what? Then: when thou see that thou art in danger of committing
wickedness, who can compel thee to keep such a wicked promise? Oh I must
keep my credit with men. Oh but hypocrite, first keep credit with God, and
remember thy former promise that thou made and vowedst to him in thy
Baptism: if all this will not serve, then rush on like an hypocrite, uncased
to thy own destruction.

Many in the world are content they say, to hear the Preacher, so long as he
preaches Christ crucified, or else not: and surely no reason. But open this
case, and see if a counterfeit may not be under it. For, many are content to
sin freely, and set all upon Christ's score: saying, he shall pay for all. If
any man means so when he bids the preacher preach Christ crucified, then
there is an hypocrite uncased. Many are content to hear that Christ lived in
poverty to enrich them, that he was abased to advance them, that he was
punished to acquit them, that he was mocked to grace them, that he was naked
to clothe them, that he was hungry to fill them, that he was cursed to bless
them, and that he died to save them: but to hear that they must be poor for
his sake, and be abased for his sake, and to be mocked for his sake, and to be
crucified for his sake, and crucify their sins which crucified him, they
cannot abide; this is not to preach Christ crucified. Christ crucified must
dispense with some sins of theirs, or else they have done with him: nay if
Christ come now to crucify their beloved sin, and their sweet sin, and
their profitable sin, let Christ take heed that he be not crucified again by
them. What? is Christ crucified for us? and must we have our sins crucified
too? nay we will none of that: we are content to take a place in his kingdom at
his right hand and his left hand, but to baptized with his baptism, and to
drink of his cup, we will not endure. We will do any thing he will have us to
do, saving that which goes about to restrain us of our liberty: we will
follow him, hear him, eat and drink with him, give him leave to pay all, and
to dye for us, and commend him for his kindness, but to be so kind to him, as
for his love to part with one sin, that we are in love withal, to leave
following the fashions of the world, or to part with a lock of hair, is a
hard saying: who can abide it? To forgive our enemies, to lend freely, to
relieve the poor cheerfully, to keep the Sabbath wholly and entirely, to leave
our pleasures at his call, to hear his doctrine more then ordinary, is a hard
saying, who can abide it? To leave our false weights, and false lights, and
false oaths, and false friendship, and to deal simply, and plainly, without
fraud and deceit, is a hard saying: who can abide it? To leave our engrossing,
our forestalling, our cogging and dissembling, our backbiting and slandering,
our rash judging, and condemning of our brethren, is a hard saying, who can
abide it? To forsake the filthy fellowship of profane persons, to cast off the
company of scoffers, and deriders of religion, to embrace the truth sincerely,
and to make much of those that fear God, be they never so poor or simple, is
a hard saying, who can abide it? To be checked for our swearing and blaspheming
of Gods name, to be called upon for Catechizing our household, and to use
thanksgiving at the table, and singing of Psalms for our spiritual
recreation, and to confer soberly and friendly of the Sermon, is plain
Puritanisme (as they call it) who can abide it? No, no, Sir, we can no skill of
this gear: preach Christ crucified, and we will hear you, otherwise not: we
cannot away with this doctrine.

Well, but let the hypocrites know, that if Christ crucified be preached
rightly, and applied truly to the conscience, he will make all the veins in
the hypocrites heart to ache, he will suffer him to have but small rest in his
bed, and little list to his meat, and less pleasure in the world, and least
of all in the word of God: for that in the end is the judgment of God upon
hypocrites, to loath the word because it goes about to make sin loathsome
unto them. Christ crucified has wrought a double work, he has both destroyed
the Devil, and also the work of the Devil. And so is Christ to be preached,
both crucified and crucifying, crucified for our sins, and also by his virtue
and Spirit crucifying sin in us, or else we cannot be saved.

Now let us pray.
THE VI. SERMON.
MATH. 6.2. As the hypocrites do.


THE next sort of hypocrites to be uncased are, secret underminers of the
truth, in show defenders, but in deed destroyers of the Church: such are called
in Cant. 2.15. foxes which destroy the Vine, that is the Church, who by their
grating at the root of the Vine, do cause the same to bring forth but small
grapes, that is, the Church cannot thrive in religion, and good works because
of them: these are called foxes for their craftiness, and their cruelty. Such
a one was Herod, who craftily sent for the wise men to enquire where Christ was
borne, pretending a mind to worship him, when his purpose was to kill him. Such
are all close Church-papists, and time-seruers, who to please men do as the
most do: but in the mean time by all crafty devises do undermine the Church,
the Preachers, and cause them to be troubled for toys and trifles in
comparison, to stop the course of the Gospel and in the mean time pretend a
care of the observation of laws, which themselves break as freely as any
other, and regard as much as the horse or mule, whose mouths must be holden in
with bit and bridle. Such also are those that come to the Sermon, in show very
devoutly, and to be edified; but in deed only to watch and catch, at a word
and a half, taking only what will serve their turn (like the devil himself)
to entangle thereby the preacher, if they like him not. You shall have many of
these come orderly, and mark attentively, as if they would latch every word
with their mouths, but as it was with the Prophet Ezechiels auditors, so is it
with them, their hearts run another way, and they mean not to follow any
thing that is given in charge: and therefore when they are gone, with their
mouths they make iestes of the Sermon. And to the Minister of Christ commonly
their answer is: you do well sir, to tell us our duty, and to tell every man
his own: well fare your heart, you do well sir, you do well to discharge your
conscience: and if we do not as you bid us, that is our fault, we must answer
for it: and though we do as our honest neighbourt do, yet we hope God is a good
God, and will hold us excused, he is not so hard as many would make men
believe. The last sort of open hypocrites that are not yet uncased, are common
cauillers, and deprauers of the truth, and of those that teach the same. Some
carpe and cauil at that which they understand but like not, as the Lawyer in
Luke 14. Master in so saying thou put us to rebuke also, when Christ
touched Lawyers: and as the covetous Jews, which mocked Christ when he
preached against covetousness. Luke 17. Some cauil at that which they
understand not, as the Jews which called Paul's preaching babbling and new
doctrine, when he preached the resurrection.

Object.
Oh but (will some say) he reuengeth his own private quarrels and grudges in
the pulpit: yea he speaks of malice: and therefore we cannot regard that
which he preaches. Answer.
Does he so? verily the greater is his sin, if he does so. But if those be
Gods quarrels which thou call his quarrels, and if that be spoken in the
evidence of the Spirit, and with plain demonstration of the truth, which thou
say is in malice against thee, then is it evident that thou have played the
gross hypocrite, so uncharitably to accuse, so rashly to judge, and so
wrongfully to condemn the Minister of the truth: and pretendest thou carest
not what: and all to put by the blow of Gods sword, that so thy sin might not
be launced, and yet in the mean time be a professor of religion. And what art
thou oh man (says the Scripture) that thou iudgest another man's servant, whose
heart is known to his God, and not to thee, and to God he either stands or
falls, and not to thee? Alas this is an old objection and slander of great
antiquity, common to all the true Preachers of the word: and it has ever been
the common practice of all hypocrites, which meant to live and dye in their
sins, when they knew not what to say for themselves, and fearing that the
truth would choke them if they should swallow it, to cast it up again: saying,
that it was spoken of malice and revenge. So played king Achab, who had sold
himself to work wickedness: he could not deny but that Micaiah was a true
Prophet, a plain dealing man, but yet he could not away with him: and why so?
forsooth because he does not prophecy good but evil unto me: that is, he
speaks that that likes me not: so many cry now adays, he has not the
good-wil of his hearers: and why? because he does not seek to please them, he
is too tart, he has a bitter spirit, he does not heal but wound: they do not
complain that he has a flattering spirit, or a lying spirit, or a soothing
spirit, or a fearful spirit, or a pleasing spirit: for all this hypocrites
can away withal well enough, because such a spirit is toothsome: but that he
has a quick and sharp spirit, and his reproves are sensible and bitter,
this is wholesome, but not toothsome, and therefore not to be brooked of
hypocrites. But now let us consider my brethren whether this will go for
current payment in the day of the Lord or no: Why have thou cast my word behind
thy back, will the Lord say? Our answer will be, because we did not love him
that delivered it. But why did you hate him? Because he did not please us. Not
please you, why? did he preach errors and lies? No, we could not find any
fault with his doctrine, that is sound: but yet we cannot away with him, he was
too plain and round with us. Too plain? why that was for your good, if plane
and sane, if both plain and sound. Oh but Lord we like not his life, he was
covetous, and hard, and proud, and had no love in him, he was not sociable, no
good companion, not one of his neighbors do love him. Well shall the Lord say,
thine own conscience thou hypocrite, shall give evidence against thee, and
convict thee of false witness bearing against many of my servants in these
respects, and if I now do acquit them, what are they the worse for thy bad
constructions and hard words? And if thy conscience do now prove to thy face
that all these allegations were but counterfeit devises to cover thy sin
withal, what art thou the better though all thy neighbors take thy part, for
thou know: and I know it much more, that many of my servants have sought
peace at thy hands, and then have thou prepared thy self to war: they have
used all good means to procure thy love and good liking in the truth, and thou
have then construed every thing in the worst part against them that thou
could imagine: to their faces thou have spoken fair words, and behind their
backs thou have used all lying and slanderous speeches, whereby thou have made
them odious in the world: and when they would have taken al pains to do thy
soul good, thou have complotted by all ways and means to discourage them, and
to grieve and quench my spirit in them. So do hypocrites which love not the
pure light of truth, and so have thou done. And admit that all this were true
which thou pretendest, yet so long as they came in my name unto thee, and with
my message, revealed in my word, which thou could not disprove, but carpe
at, yet ought thou to have heard them, and to believe them, and to fear at
my word coming out of their mouths, and in charity to have judged the best of
their affections, or prayed for the^: knowing that I which am the searcher of
the heart, would surely call them to reckning for their affections, if they were
not upright in my sight: but now in that thou have devised mischief of thine
own head, and put it before thee as a stumbling block of purpose to fall
upon, and to cause others to fall with thee: and seeing as thou have through my
servants sides, even pierced my name, and my glory, and not stayed there, but
pearked up Lucifer-like into my seat, to sit as a peremptory Judge over the
hearts and affections of my servants, when thou had no list to yield to the
truth, to confess thy faults, and amend thy life, how can thou deny but that
thou art guilty of most saucy and insolent hypocrisy? Moreover, when thou
likedst not the plain and simple utterance of my truth, and the confirmation
thereof by the sacred testimony of my servants the Prophets and Apostles, it
has pleased thee o hipocrite to count my servants no scholars, but unlearned
and ignorant fools, as though my book contained nothing in it but ridiculous
matter for thee to make thy self merry withal. So has it always bin with
all hypocrites since the world stood: my wisdom has bin counted foolishness,
and man's folly high wisdom, but thou shall know, that they were truly learned
which had learned Christ aright, and they were fools who in the swelling words
of man's wisdom have sought only to feed thy ears and not thy conscience.
Furthermore, I forget not thy hypocritical show of maintaining false love, and
unity, and peace with the wicked, under pretense that the Preachers whom I
have sent unto thee, have bin condemned by thee and thy consort, for troublesome
and contentious persons, when they have disquieted thy sin. But let not my
servants be discouraged in my business for all this, says the Lord, For so
did they use my Prophets before them. Jeremy was counted but a babbler, Mat. 5.
Ier. 20. Eze. 33. Act. 16. Mat. 22.
and a contentious person. Ezechiels Sermons were but as the songs of a
minstrell, and matter to jest at. Paul was accused of sedition by Dianaes
siluer-smithes. My own son who was wisdom it self from everlasting with me, he
was counted an enemy to Caesar: and the wicked hypocrites turned away
whatsoever he spoke with a jest. And let no man think himself better then
these, or too good to pledge the^ in that cup of contempt and bitter reproach
that they have begun to them in.

Oh but me thinks now the hypocrite being thus uncased, begins to plead
hard for himself, saying, that though he come not at those troublesome
fellows, and unlearned, yet he hears others and makes much of the^ too, so
that he is wrongfully charged, if men say that he cares not for the word of
God, that he is not religious, that he cannot abide to have his sins reproved,
etc. Surely this at a blush is good fruit, but in truth no better the^ an apple
of Sodom, fair in show, but being touched, it turns into ashes. For nothing
is either more easy or usual amongst hypocrites the^ to do so: that is to
say: First, in way of revenge, to disgrace one who^ they like not, by gracing
another, and to discountena^ce one by countena^cing some other. And yet in the
mean time pretend another matter, and that is to be better edified, and I wot
not what: and that they may seem notwithstanding both religious and judicial,
they will highly commend the one, and deeply cast down the other; but why, or
upon what good grounds they cannot well tell. There be in diverse places of the
world, especially in great cities and other popular places, running auditories,
or as one calls the^ Circumcellions, wheelers about hither and thither,
hearing now one the^ another, and then a third, and every one, and indeed never
a one long, like one that has a giddy brain, who being whirled into every
place, is truly said to be of no place. These humorous hearers of al me^
commonly cannot away long with their own Pastors teaching, though he teach the
truth never so soundly, nor so profitably. Except it be between man and wife, I
do not know so near a conjunction of any thing, as is by the ordinance of God,
between the Pastor and the flock. Now as nothing ought to separate man and
wife, but fornication or adultery: so nothing ought to make the flock leave
their Pastor, but false doctrine and heresy, if he be a teacher. And surely
there is no sincere hearted Christian but makes a conscience of this duty: that
is, they dare not leave the Ministry of their own ordinary Pastors, by whom
they have sound any profit or spiritual comfort: they dare not so much as
yield to any such changes, for fear they should not only be troubled with the
spiritual itch of the ear, a disease (where it once rooteth) altogether
incureable, but also discourage and make sad the Spirit of God in their
faithful teachers, whereby they may in time be given up of God to flatterers
and seducing teachers, fit for their humorous vein and vain humor. And surely
whosoever does duly consider the offense that grows thereby, and the hurt that
follows also thereupon, both to the whole body of the Church in general, and to
their own souls in special, they dare not (but in the fear of God) make great
conscience of it. Mat. 18.6.
Christ pointing to children said, That whosoever should offend one of these
little ones, it were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
cast into the bottom of the sea. How much more may that be spoken to those
that take a felicity in scandaling and offending, in disgracing and
discouraging, by their fantastical rouing abroad the greater ones, that is, the
Pastors and builders of the Church?

I speak not this, as though we were the worse for your giddie gadding and
straggling, but to let you understand, that you are the worse that give such bad
examples, and that you must answer your contempts unto our Lord and Master
Christ Jesus. This humorous course of giddy brains and itching ears is both
schismatic, childish, and unprofitable. Schismatic, because they go about
to make a rent in the Church of God, 1. Cor. 3.
and to divide Christ among them. This disease reigned in Paul's time, and it
reigns in our time. I hold of Paul, says one: I am of Apollos, says
another: and Cephas shall go for my money, says a third. But never a one of
those hold of Christ soundly and substantially. But what is this but to divide
Christ? as the Apostle says, is Christ divided? as if he should say, you all
would be counted Christ's, and to hold of Christ: if you do so, why then do you
not regard all his Ministers alike, and hear all alike? Paul as well as
Apollos, and Apollos as well as Cephas, and Cephas as well as either of the
other: for every one of them preaches Christ, though every one after his
several gift and measure of knowledge, and utterance, and eloquence. etc.
Though one be milder then another, and one sharper then another; yea though one
man's gift please your humor better then another, yet every one has Christ
for you. But now as if one had Christ and another not, ye will hear one and
not another, and so you divide Christ which is but one: this is not: well are
you not carnal? nay are you not Schismatikes?

As it is a carnal and schismatic practice, so is it also childish: for so
do children that go to school, being once held in to their books, and
restrained of their liberty, they are weary of that Master, and desire to go
to another, or else no more to school: so hypocrites when they are required to
take a settled course for their profiting in religion, and are restrained of
their liberty, in sin, in vanity, in riot, in pride; and are pressed with the
doctrine of mortification and truth of heart, they are weary of such a teacher,
and must go to another, or else come no more at school: so that it appears
that they have no more government of themselves, nor strength of the Spirit,
nor stayednesse of affections then little children have. As it is both
schismatic and so danderous, and childish and so ridiculous: so it is also
unprofitable. For they that leave the ordinary and standing Ministry of their
own Pastor (and none (certain) gather here a piece and there a piece, but
never lay any sound foundation, nor make any orderly building, as they do that
tie themselves to one man, who keeps an orderly proceeding, laying all the
principles of religion one after another, and one by another, and every one in
order till all be finished.

I deny not, but that upon some special occasions a man may be sometime drawn
away from his ordinary teacher, as traveling from home, or being requested by
our faithful friends of another congregation, to answer for their children (as
they call it) at their Baptizing, or to accompany some of our friends or our
Magistrates departed out of this world, unto their grave, and such like: if
Christ be preached there, that we may follow him: otherwise I see no great
necessity to enforce a man to leave his ordinary teacher, to go to a bare
reader for a civil duty performing: but rather to remember what our Savior
Christ answered to one that said he would follow Christ, but first he would go
and bury his father: Mat. 8.22.
Let the dead bury the dead (says he) follow thou me. To show that those that
have no list to follow Christ's doctrine, are no better then dead men, as
touching the life of the spirit in the soul, and they may serve for such a
purpose well enough, it is pity to interrupt those that are better disposed,
and devoutly addicted to the heavenly doctrine of the Gospel. And further I
hold it a thing very expedient and fit, that there be sometimes also an
intercourse of Ministers labors: that is, that other Ministers be sometimes
admitted, yea procured also to exercise their gifts in their brothers charges;
both for the confirmation of doctrine, as also for the quickening of the
auditorie: for consent of teachers, is a great confirmation of the truth, in
regard of our weakness and unbelief, otherwise the truth is strong enough of
it self, and will prevail against all the world. And as variety of meats
sometime does make a man have a better appetite to his ordinary diet, even so
is it not amiss that sometime our ordinary auditors should have change of
teachers, that so they tasting that variety of Gods gifts and graces which is
in diverse men, they may have a better spiritual appetite unto the ministry
and doctrine of their ordinary pastors and teachers. But to run hither and
thither, and commonly to leave our ordinary teachers, only either of a
fanstasticall desire to hear new things, or of a loathing the plain and
simple manner of delivery of the truth, or of stomach, in contempt and way of
disgracing, and discouraging those that God has set over us, because they have
more sharply reproved their sins, or more nearly applied the doctrine to
their consciences then others do: (a blessed favor of God indeed, if men had
grace so to take it) this is it that I say is both carnal, schismatical,
childish, and altogether unfruitful: and further it is flatly repugnant to the
commandment of Christ delivered by his Apostle, in the 1. to the Thessalonians
the 5. Chapter, 1. The. 5.12.13.
and 12. verse, where he beseeches the Thessalonians to know them that labor
among them, and are over them in the Lord, and admonish them; and that they
have them in singular love for their works sake. And lastly is the practice of
such as never professed the Gospel of Christ in sincerity and uprightness of
heart, with an humble spirit, and a holy desire to have both their judgment
informed, and their lives reformed by the word of truth. But on the contrary,
in palpable and damnable hypocrisy, with shows, shadows, and flourishes, to
be seen and well esteemed of men, as hypocrites do.

Private hypocrites.
Besides these public and open hypocrisies, there be also many other lurking in
private corners, which deserve to be uncased, as in households, where between
man and wife many times much love is counterfeited, only before men, and in
heart much bitter malice and hatred maintained against each other, which
between themselves break out in open and bitter extremities, and behind each
others back into foul adulteries, and cursed undoing of the whole family: such
an hypocrite is the harlot that Solomon vncaseth in the 7. of the Proverbs.
Pro. 7.
Who when her husband is from home, calls in her lovers and companions to
lewdness, and colors her villainy by prating and telling him of her peace
offerings, and vows that she has performed that day, that is, by talking of
religion. I say nothing of those that in shops and markets selling wares, will
pretend great love, saying; If it were not to you I would not sell it so:
another should not have it so, etc. when for the most part all this is but
mere cunning, and counterfeiting. I also let pass those that spying a
bargain that they hope to reap a great benefit by, will earnestly protest and
pretend unto the party with whom they mean to deal, great care that they
have of his good and his ease, rather then of their own benefit: too many such
there be in the world. Well, God will pull off their visour one day, and lay
them open to the world. What should I say of those, that being to follow and
further men's suites with great persons, or otherwise at law, have still one
trick or other to delay the time withal? pretending great care to do their
friends business, and to follow their clients causes in the best manner that
may be, and for their best advantage, when all their doing is but a cunning
kind of fishing for more money, like Felix who often sent for Paul before him,
hoping that some bribe would have been given him to have enlarged Paul. And a
thousand more such parts are played in the world, which men in continual
practice, and conuersing one with another in Church and commonwealth, abroad
and at home, shall have occasion to meet withal.

But for the uncasing of the hypocrite at this time, this shall suffice. Those
that fear God unfeignedly, and detest this ugly beast the hypocrite, will make
of that which has been said: as for those that say, they could make good use
of it if it had come out of another man's mouth, having laid of purppse a heap
of preiudicate conceits and unchristian surmises before them, as so many
stumbling blocks, and erected a number of proud and disdainful opinions, and
evil constructions of every thing, as rampires or bulwarks against the truth,
because they mean not yet to forgo their sins, nor to part with their painted
visor, I cannot tell what to say unto them, but even leave them to the Lord,
their hypocrisy I will not censure: it is like the darkness of Egypt that
might be felt: I am sorry to hear that any should have the word of God in
respect of persons, contrary to the rule of Saint James, pretending to regard
it, if one man speak, and professing a contempt of the same, because another
man has spoken it whom they hate: as Achab did hate Micaiah for no other
cause, but because he prophesied not good but evil unto him, that is, he did
not flatter him in his sin, as others did, and therefore he hated him: these
men show with what good devotion they come to the preaching of the word of God.
If they might change their Minister, they think that they should change
affections, but they are deceived: for as the Poet could say, and that truly,
so say I, Coelum non animum mutant qui transmare currunt, they change the air
and not their nature, which go beyond the sea: as appears by those that have
separated themselves from our Church assemblies in England: Schismatikes they
were here, and so they are there. In like manner hypocrites which have the word
in respect of persons, Non mentem sed ministrum mutant, they may well change
their Minister, but their mind they change not: their sins they leave not: it
is no part of their meaning, what shows soever they make, except God of his
great mercy work a wonderful alteration.

It seems that such persons are of that opinion that Dives was of in hell,
who thought that his brethren which were alive would repent, if Lazarus might
have been sent unto them from heaven, he was well acquainted with their humor,
for belike when they were all living together on earth, never a one of them
cared for their ordinary teachers, but (says the holy Ghost) they have Moses
and the Prophets amongst them, if they will not hear them, let them pretend
what they list, neither would they repent though one should come from the dead
unto them.

Many will tell us, that another man has said as much, and more then such and
such, whom the people mislike, and it is well taken* Such a one may say any
thing (say they) and no offense will be taken against him: we marvel that they
should take it so ill from one more then another: to these we answer.

1 How well soever they take it, from one or from another, nothing is reformed,
they will give all the hearing: but see if any reformation follow from one more
then another.

2 The cause why they do not so break out against one man for the same
doctrine, as well as against another, is because his time is not yet come, as
Christ said in Luke 22.53. When I was daily in the Temple with you, you laid
no hands on me, but this is your hour, and the very power of darkness. Every
man has a time appointed him of God, a time to be promoted, and a time to be
persecuted: a time to be regarded, and a time to be rejected: a time to be made
much of, and a time to be set at naught: and when the date of the one is
expired, then the other takes place.

Now to conclude: if any man think that I have dealt too severely against
hypocrites, or that I might have carried a lighter hand toward them then I have
done: seeing as there is no man but is stained with some hypocrisy, much or
little, in the sight of God at the least, or that in the application of any
point of doctrine in the uncasing of the hypocrite I have too particularly, and
directly aimed at some, and namely at the partialities, and wilful winking at
gross abuses, by Churchwardens, and other Ecclesiastical officers with them,
contrary to their oath and a good conscience, whereby God is dishonored, and
his worship is contemned, his Sabbaths are polluted, his Church unreformed: and
whereby the wicked are strengthened, and the godly despised: whereby his
blessings are restrained, and his judgments hastened upon us: then this is my
answer. That in both (as I take it) I have had my warrant from the word of God,
which is a sufficient stay unto my conscience, howsoever amongst the
unregenerate and wicked hypocrites, it is a matter of least weight, and
therefore with them of all authorities least regarded. And for the first, have
I dealt more severely against hypocrites then the Scripture, and namely our
Savior Christ? or have I handled it worse then it deserves? Has the
hypocrite any wrong, to have no more but the truth said and proved against him?
Or what? is his service so well pleasing to God, or the Church of God so much
beholding unto him for his shows and shadows, or rather his trecheries and
cousinages, that he of all other may not be uncased? I speak not now of secret
hypocrisy, whereof even the regenerate and faithful are guilty in their best
actions before God, and for which all of us must desire mercy at Gods hand in
the blood of Christ: but of that hypocrisy which reigns in the wicked, and
of such hypocrites as are professed hypocrites, professed I mean in their own
hearts, whose desire is nothing else but to be seen of men, and nothing less
then to approve themselves and their doings in the sight of God.

Every one is stained with some lust: which is adultery before God, and with
some malice, which is murder before God: and with some envy, which is theft
before God: and with some covetousness, which is idolatry before God: and yet
every one is not to be called an adulterer, nor a murderer, nor a thief, nor
an idolater: because those gross sins are not the study, nor the profession
of the regenerate; but they studying and professing, and indeuouring to serve
the Lord in sincerity, truth and uprightness of heart, and to deal with men
in all good conscience, are called sincere, and just men, as Job was: Job. 1.1.
and being in Christ Jesus, through his righteousness imputed unto them, they
are just before God. Hypocrisy properly is a sin against the third
Commandment: for none more then the hypocrite does take the name of God in
vain, who still for the most part, makes religion a cloak for all manner of
iniquity: which cloak of theirs, when it is once espied or taken from them,
they cry out, and rage as men utterly forlorn and undone. For take away their
clokes, their signs, and their shows, and then are they naked, and ashamed
both before God and man: and as sincerity graceth the godly before God: so
hypocrisy graceth the wicked before men: which is all that they desire or
delight in. Give me the substance of religion, says sincerity, and me the
ceremony, says hypocrisy: give me the body of Christianity, says
sincerity, and me the shadow, says hypocrisy: let me have praise of God,
says sincerity, and me the praise of men, says hypocrisy: let not me lack
the thing without which I cannot serve the Lord, says sincerity, and me to
serve the time, and my own turn, says hypocrisy: give me a good conscience
before God says sincerity: tush, conscience was hanged long ago, give me
goods and worldly riches says hypocrisy: give me virtue and honesty says
sincerity: and let me borrow their clokes to play my part in, and that shall
serve my turn says hypocrisy: give me peace with God, says sincerity: and
me with my honest neighbors, says hypocrisy, as for God I shall do well
enough with him. Handle the matter cast, that is purely, says sincerity:
caute, that is, warily, says hypocrisy. Take heed, for God sees thee, says
sincerity: nay take heed that the world see thee not, and then good enough,
says hypocrisy. It is against the word of God says sincerity, therefore
leave it: tush so long as he can have no vantage against me by law, I care not,
says hypocrisy. Qui vadit plane vadit sane: that is, he that goes plainly
to work, goes safely to work, says sincerity: Qui nescit dissimulare,
nescit viuere: that is, he that cannot tell how to dissemble, cannot tell how
to live, says hypocrisy. You see then the difference between the nature of
sincerity, and the nature of hypocrisy. The one you see is like a rich King
in a beggars cote amongst men. Because as Christ our head said of himself,
when he lived poorly and contemptibly upon earth: My kingdom is not of this
world, and I have meat to eat that you know not of: so must Christ's members
say: we are poor and despised in this life, because our riches are not of this
world, and we have friends that the world know not of. The other is like a King
in a play, who for the time makes a brave show, domineering over such
counterfeits as himself is, having upon him cloth of gold, and with the same
perhaps are covered a number of scurfe and scabbes, lice, and vermin: and when
the Play is done, the poor beggarly fellow must be feign to return home his
borrowed coat again to the right owner, and pay well for the hire thereof. Now
you have heard the difference, consider the matter, consult, and give sentence,
whether this honest man the hypocrite has so played his part before God or
man, that he deserves still to go on without noting, and never to be uncased or
no. And so much shall suffice for the uncasing of the hypocrite, and descrying
of his nature. Now it remains that you see his reward: and by that time I
hope you will not greatly desire to be an actor in his Play: but of that in the
next Sermon. Now as for those that think I have too particularly applied this
doctrine: let them know that if Eliah did well in telling of Achab, that it was
he that troubled Israel: and if John Baptist did well in telling King Herod
that he might not have his brothers wife: and the Ministers of the Gospel have
the same authority that they had: then do we not amiss to make special
application of our doctrine as they did. Again, if the Apostle said well, when
he said, Those that sin openly, rebuke openly, that others may fear, 1. Tim.
2. then do not they well which find fault with us, for following the Apostles
rule. For whom have I admonished or reproved, but public persons by office,
and public abuses and scandals by them committed and given, to the great
dishonor of God, and hurt of this Church? Lastly, if a Preacher may speak to
the Prince when he preaches before the Prince, and to the Judges of Assizes,
and to the Jurors, and to the Lawyers particularly, and to the Bishops, and to
Justices, all being public persons, and charge them in Gods name to look to
their office, and amend that which is amiss, and that safely without danger,
yea boldly with good warrant: then do not I see but that any Pastor by his
pastoral authority may in his own congregation speak particularly to a
Churchwarden, or a Sideman, and tell them what they ought to do: yea more, and
charge them to do their office faithfully too: yea and more then that, if they
have been admonished privately and friendly, and yet will not be admonished,
but take upon them still to dispense with their oath, and suffer Gods Church
(as much as lies in them to go to wrack) then to reprove them both openly and
roundly, that themselves may repent, if they belong to God, or others may fear
as the Apostle says. And until the Mayor of a town, and the Churchwardens
and other officers of a parish, can show me by Scripture or common reason, that
they be of greater state then Kings, Queens and Princes be of, or then
Noblemen, Judges, and Bishops be of, or that they be more privileged and
exempted from the reproof and censure of the word, especially when their
offenses are public and desperate, then others be whom I have named before,
and take to be far above them: surely I must, and shall by Gods grace, both
hold my former opinion, and as occasion shall serve, declare the same by
practice: that is, by making of special application of the doctrine to the
general and public offenders and offenses of this congregation. Let him that
has an ear to hear, hear what I say: and let him that has an heart
sanctified consider well of it: and let him that has grace from God, make a
good use of that that has been said. As for the rest, I say as Joshua said:
let them choose what they will do, whether they will make a conscience of their
duty, or dispense with their oath as they have done: I for my part will surely
by Gods grace do that which belongs to a true Pastor of Jesus Christ. And as
Saint John said: he that is filthy let him be more filthy, and he that is
froward let him be more froward, and he that will be obstinate let him be more
obstinate, and he that will be an hypocrite let him be more hypocritical, that
their sins may be full ripe against the day of Gods vengeance. But so many as
fear the Lord in truth of heart, and are truly humbled to endure the sifting
and trial of the word of God, and are desirous unfeignedly to yield obedience
to the holy will of God: let us go on forward in our good courses without fear
or fainting, and God our heavenly Father, in whom is our trust, will surely
keep us from final falling away, and in his rich mercy will pardon all our
sins in the merit of Christ his bloody passion: blessed be his name for
ever. Amen.

Now let us praise God.
THE VII. SERMON. Of the reward of Hypocrisy.
MAT. 6.2. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.


OF the nature of hypocrisy, we have heard sufficiently in the three former
Sermons, and as sincerity graceth all our good actions before God: so on the
contrary side, we have seen that hypocrisy disgraceth and shameth us, yea
makes even our best deeds to stink, as most loathsome filth before his
heavenly Majesty: yea and before men too, when once it breaks out. And this
might serve sufficiently to persuade us to take heed of hypocrisy, and
counterfeiting in Gods religion, or any religious duties commanded by God: but
because the hypocrite dreameth of some great reward, whereby he shall become
some great man, both in this world, and in the world to come, imagining that as
he is liked of men, so he cannot choose but be loved of God: therefore our
Savior Christ affirms most constantly and in earnest manner, that hypocrites
have all the reward that they shall have. For the praise of men have they
hunted for, and that they have, and more then that they shall not have to
reward them: but to punish them, a portion they shall have with the Devil and
his Angels in hell. The praise of men what is it? surely even as men are
themselves: and as they are affected; men are but men when they are at the
best, and at the highest. Whether it be in wisdom, or in authority, or in
goodwill, or in ability, or whatsoever else: that is vain, and vanishing,
mutable and inconstant, blind and partial. A simple reward then is the praise
of men, even fit for such vain fools as seek for nothing else. The hypocrite
takes great pains for the obtaining (notwithstanding) of this vain reward,
as fools which hunt after a fether blown up and down in the wind: they cannot
get it unless they will sweat, and almost run themselves out of breath, and
when they have gotten it, it is but a fether, and nothing lighter. The praise
of men what is it? surely but words proceeding from inconstant minds, false
hearts, and from those whose hands cannot accomplish the devises of their
hearts. And what are such words but wind? and what is more inconstant then the
wind? He that observes the praises of men, is like him that observes the
wind: and is fitly resembled to a Windmill, that whirleth about apace so long
as the wind blows a main: but when the wind slacketh his gale, then he
slacketh his pace: and as the Windmill is turned with the wind, so the
hypocrite also turns with the time. If he may be praised for well doing, then
he will do well still: but if he be reproched, or threatened, or not highly
esteemed; then he alters his course, and is gone.

But here perhaps it will be objected by some, Objection.
that the Scripture commends a good name in many places, and thereby
admonishes men to get a good name, and to keep it being gotten. And what is
that but to be praised of men? and to get the good opinion and estimation of
men? Answer.
Indeed this is true: a good report is to be sought for amongst men, and
carefully to be kept too, when it is obtained. But this must be propter aliud
non propter se: for some other end then simply for it self. But the meaning
and drift of our Savior Christ here, is that we should not make that the end
and scope of our well doing, as if that were our summum bonum, that is, our
felicity and happiness, as hypocrites do, that look no further, and desire
no better thing then the praise of men.

To get and keep a good name, there be many reasons to persuade us: but to
make the praise of men the end of our well doing; we have no one reason to
persuade us, but diverse to dissuade us: as we shall see anon. For the getting
of a good report amongst men, we have reason: for Solomon prefers it before
riches, Pro. 22.1.
and before precious ointment: that is, before all pleasures and profits
whatsoever. Before riches he prefers a good name, and says, that it is
better then riches: and that for three causes. For first, few riches are hardly
obtained without much They that will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.9.
fall into temptations, and snares, and many foolish and noisome lusts, which
drown men in perdition and destruction, says Saint Paul. 2. Cor. 9.2.
A good name provoke unto golinesse. Your zeal (says Paul to the
Corinthians) has provoked many. Meaning: that the good report which he made of
them to others where he came, did through the blessing of God provoke many to
the like zeal. Thirdly, riches are uncertain, Pro. 23.5.
and gone to morrow. Travel not too much to be rich, (says Solomon) for
riches take them to their wings like an Eagle: but a good name is more
permanent then life, for it lives after death. As a good name is better then
riches, so is it also better then a precious ointment. For first, the best
ointment that is, may be purchased for money: as appears by that which Mary,
Job. 12.3. Mar. 143.
a mean woman bought for our Savior Christ: but a good name cannot be bought
for thousands. Secondly precious ointment only suppleth the outward parts,
Luke 10.34.
and is sovereign for outward wounds, but a good name does comfort the heart:
The light of the eye rejoices the heart, Pro. 15.30.
and a good name makes the bones fat, says Solomon. Thirdly, a good ointment
only profits the anointed, but a good name is profitable to others. Aug. de
bono viduita.
Nobis necessaria vita nostra, alijs fama nostra, says S. Augustine: our life
is necessary for our selves, and our good report for others, to encourage them
to godliness as we have heard. Lastly, ointment is pleasant in smell only to
those that are nigh: Job. 12.3.
The house was filled (says the Evangelist) with the smell of that ointment
which Mary bestowed upon Christ, but a good name flies far and near. Mat.
9.26.
And this brute went of Christ (says the Evangelist Matthew) through the land.
Again, a good name is in part a reward of righteousness: Heb. 11.39.
All these (says the Apostle to the Hebrews, speaking of the faithful, whom
he names and commends in that place) through faith have obtained a good
report. All which commendations of a good name, do serve not only to persuade
us to get it, and keep it, for the glorifying of Gods name, and encouraging of
our brethren: but also they do greatly condemn two sorts of men in the world.
First, those that so they do well, care not what men say of them; but so far
as we can, we must with doing well keep a good name, for the causes before
alleged. Secondly, those that make no conscience of detracting a man's good
name, being so excellent, but make a continual practice of slaundering, and
backbiting their brethren. And these are worse then thieves: for a thief may
make restitution of goods ill gotten, but he that has robbed a man of his good
name cannot make restitution of it again. But what is it to have a good name,
or how may it be gotten? Is it so to live as all men may speak well of us? No,
Woe be unto you (says our Savior Christ) when all men speak well of you: Luk
6.
for he that handles matters in such sort as shall please all men, must needs
be a notorious wicked man, and a cunning deep hypocrite. What then? that the
wicked may commend us? verily if it be possible, we must so live as that those
which are without (says the Apostle) may afford us a good report: that is,
those that are not yet of the Church, or not called. But surely it is a hard
matter for the wicked to commend the godly: and if they should commend thee
being a good man, it will make good men to think that thou art leaving thy
goodness, and enclining to them, whose humors thou now feedest. No: never
look for a good name but amongst good men: for the wicked, says Christ, Mat.
5.
shall speak al manner of evil saying against you falsely for my name sake: that
is: if you love me and my truth, and because you will not run with them unto
the same excess of riot that they use: 1 Pet. 4.4. Pro. 28.3.
therefore they speak evil of you, says Saint Peter. They that forsake the
law (says Solomon) praise the wicked: and that is because they are like
themselves. And if at any time they condemn the evil or imperfections, which
through occasion Gods children sometimes fall into, (as commonly the wicked do,
which make themselves merry with the slippes of good men) it is not for any
hatred that they bear against sin, but either to justify themselves in
their riotous courses and outrageous wickedness: or else to disgrace and
deface the beauty of that holy religion which we profess, or both. In a word
then it must follow, that a good name is that commendation, which good men
through the blessing and motion of the good spirit of God, do bestow upon good
men, for doing of good things, to good ends, and all to comfort and encourage
them in their well doing, and that God the giver and worker of all goodness
may therein be praised and glorified.

And thus we have heard both what a good name is, and for what causes it is to
be procured and retained. But that we may not (for all that) make the praise of
men, whether they be good or bad, the end of virtue and well doing, setting up
our rest when once we come to that; there be many reasons to persuade us so to
believe, and to dissuade us from so doing: and all may be drawn from the words
of this Text: Verily I say unto you they have their reward: the sum whereof,
for the matter is, that hypocrites have all that they shall have, as touching
any matter of reward, for the pains that they take. And for the manner of the
speech: that it is most certain true, and not to be doubted of, but that they
have here in this world all the reward that they shall have: and that is the
praise of men if they have that. Which words do show most plainly, that
hypocrites who serve for the vain praise of the world, are of all men the most
vain and the most miserable: and their reward (of all rewards) is the most
vain, and miserable reward that is.

The vanity or mad folly rather, of those that make the praise and
estimation of men, (yea, say they be their honest neighbors, or great states)
the end of their good deeds, shall appear, if we consider their reward.
First, by the uncertainty of it. Secondly, by the deceitfulness of it.
Thirdly, by the brevity of it. Fourthly, by the unprofitableness of it.
Lastly, by the danger of it. The praise and hearty liking of men is an
uncertain reward, and so uncertain, that nothing is more uncertain then it,
both in the winning, as also in the wearing. Such is the frowardnes, and unto
wardnesse of man's nature for the most part unto goodness, and his weakness
and weariness in the love and liking of virtue, that it is no small matter to
make him taste of virtues fruit, much more hard is it to keep him in a
continual liking of it. One thing the hypocrite is sure of, that he takes
great pains, and is at great cost, and uses all his art to please this man,
or that man, or all men: but whether he shall please them all, or any of them
or no, that he is not sure of. It fares with them as it did with Hester in
some sort, though they want Hesters resolution: she was sure that she had a
good deed in hand, when she should go into the Kings presence, to speak a
good word for the lives of her people: but whether the King would like of her
sure, or reach forth his golden scepter unto her in token of favor or no, she
was not certain: and therefore she willed them to pray for her. But because it
was not so much the liking of the King, Hest. 4 16.
as the good of Gods people, and the glory of God that she sought: yea to no
other end did she desire the Kings favor, but for the good of her people, and
the discharge of a good conscience before God: therefore she put her life in a
venture: saying, if I perish, I perish: which hypocrites will not do, because
they have not that hope of a better life, which Hester had.

When a man has won the commendation and liking of men whom they go about to
please: are they sure it shall continue? Surely no: men's minds are mutable.
Oftentimes of a sudden they will commend a man for that, which upon better
consideration they will mislike: or for novelties sake they will praise a thing
at the first, which within a while will grow stale, and out of request. Or some
talebearer comes in the hypocrites way, and crosses him with some false
information, and so breeds some sinister or wrong construction of a man's
labor: and another extenuateth the gift, or good will, the work or the
pains: and when we think to find a friend as in times past, behold we meet
with a hotefoe, or a cold friend. As David who found a great friend of Saul one
day, and the next day for no cause his mortal enemy. Tell me now, is there
any thing more uncertain then the good opinion of men?

The deceiptfulnes of worldly praise.
As it is uncertain, so is it also deceitful, and many times false, making men
believe that they are that which they are not: praising sower for sweet, etc.
The hypocrite in seeking to please men only, meets many times with as much
an hypocrite as himself. One offers much service, and duty, presents him
many and rare devises, dedicateth new and learned Treatises unto him, talks
very godly and religiously, and saluteth most humbly, and persuades most
pithily, etc. The other requiteth him with the like, highly commending him for
his pains, for his zeal, for his skill, for his cost, etc. and behind his
back derideth all: he protests that he shall always have a friend of him,
and he shall always be welcome unto him, and he will help him to preferment,
and I know not what: when in his heart he means no such matter: and thus
hypocrisy is rewarded with hypocrisy, one shadow with another.

As the praise of men is uncertain and deceitful: Of the breuity of praise.
so also is it for the brevity of it, a vain thing: for as a flash of
lightning for the time dazeleth the eye, and suddenly vanishes away: so do the
praises of vain men for a time tickle the ears, and delight the senses of
vain hypocrites, and straight way they come to an end. And if liking last, and
all the effects thereof, that is kindness, friendship, hearty welcome, hope
of preferment, or preferment it self; what is all this but a thing of no
continuance? neither can a man leave it to his heirs after him.

As it is of no continuance, The unprofitableness of worldly praise*
so is there no profit in it, I mean: for the most part, men are rather
loosers then gainers that serve only for the praise of men, especially when
their humor is once espeid. The hypocrite that never aymeth at the glory of
God, or the good of others, but only his own vain credit and estimation,
shall have fair words enough, but little else, except it be sorrow of heart,
and vexation of spirit, for the loss of his time, and labor, and study, and
goods, and all for the wind of men's mouths. Nay, if he do win perhaps (as
many flatterers and Parasites do sometime, which observe great persons humors)
for some small counterfeit service, or odd trifle, or pleasant jest, or
witty conceit, some great benefit, some gainefull office, or great
preferment, or high reverence in the world; yet has he made but a bad bargain
of it, if he has no further purpose in all this but to magnify himself;
giving no honor to God, but all to himself: he has his reward says Christ:
Mat. 16.26.
and what profit is in this, to win the whole world, and to loose his own
soul?

As the praise of men is unprofitable, and a thing which who so labors to
get, The danger or it.
shall get nothing by it: so is it also for the danger thereof a vain reward
of virtue. For many times a vain glorious man being praised to his face, or
hearing that his courses are well liked and commended of men, is thereby
emboldened to go so far, without all modesty or discretion, that he shameth
himself: yea many times fondly presuming upon them that have soothed them up,
and made much of them, venture most foolishly and desperately, in pursuing of
lewd attempts to their own undoing. Pro. 17.4.
The wicked gives heed to false lips, (says Solomon) and a lier hearkeneth to
a naughty tongue, that is, to be ruled by them: and is not that dangerous?
Now whose lips are more full of falsehood, then the lips of the flatterer;
who still persuades fools that their copper is good gold, and their black is
pure white, and that their foolishness is high wisdom, and that their
crooked ways are the straightest ways? etc. And who does hearken more to such
lips, then the vaineglorious hypocrite, who does all to be praised of men,
and cannot endure by any means to hear any fault found with anything that he
does?: Again, if he be a fool that praises the hypocrite, or a foolish man
that has no judgment or understanding, nor ability to discern of colors,
then has he gotten a blind man to lead him into the ditch. If many wise men,
and of great place do praise the hypocrite: then is the fool lifted up aloft,
but to show his nakedness, that others may envy him for his advancement, and
despise him for his folly, and contemn him for his unworthiness.

1. King, 22.
King Achab was glad when his going to war against Ramoth Gilead was liked of,
and confirmed by the approbation of four hundred Prophets: the wind of their
mouth was pleasant, but most dangerous: for it blew him with a maine gale like
a ship without a Pilote upon the rocks of his own destruction. When Herod
for his vain Oration received the commendation of his flattering Courtiers and
servant, who cried, the voice of God and not of a man; he felt a sweet and a
pleasing wind that blew him up beyond himself, that like one in a trance (or
dream rather) forgot himself to be a mortal man, Act. 12.
and so quietly took to himself that honor that was due unto God. But it was
the most dangerous wind that ever blew upon him: for it both ripened his
sin, and hastened the vengeance of God immediately upon him. Many such
dangerous winds and blastes, are Princes and Noblemen, and other persons of
great calling subject unto: the more need have they to look unto themselves,
and we to pray unto God most earnestly for their standing. Seeing therefore
that the praise of men is so uncertain, so deceiptfull, of so short a
continuance, so unprofitable, and so dangerous, we may safely conclude, that
of all rewards it is most vain, and that hypocrites in making of that the end
of their actions, are most vain men, or mad fools: for, they have their
reward.

As it is a vain thing to serve for the praise of men, that is to say, for
vanity it self, The misery of the hypocrite.
so is it a thing most miserable, and slavish. For first, though it be a most
vain shadow and fruitless vanity of all vanities that man hunteth after, yet
cannot he have it without great pains taking. Secondly, before he can wear
it, and enjoy it freely, he must be censured of all. Thirdly, how often and
commonly is he after all his pains and cost that he has been at, deceived of
his expectation. For the pains that the hypocrite takes to please men, he may
truly say as Jacob said (though not with so good a conscience) I was in the
day consumed with heat, Genesis 31.40
and with frost in the night, and my sleep departed from my eyes. Yea the
fears, cares, and doubts that he is turmoiled and tossed in, are
unspeakable: one while he is vexed to know certainly the humor and
disposition of him whose praise he seeks: then he cares how to fit his
humor, with what words, with what gestures, with what by-matters, what tales
and discourses, with what presents: then what company to have, and how to
consort himself with them. And then what is the fittest time to find him both
at leisure, and in a good mood. Then it is a world to see how the hypocrite
acts his part, and what pains he takes: first, in marking the countenances,
and gestures, and speeches, and commendations, and welcomes, and fair promises
that are showed him. Then in recounting of them, and descanting upon them:
first, to himself, and then to others, thinking and bragging how he was
reputed and taken with such and such, and that he was so bold and so bold with
him, and better entertained then his betters, and how glad such and such were
of their company, and I know not what: Did you note how attentive he was
(says he) when I spoke such a thing? Did you not mark how he smiled ar such a
word? Did you see I pray you, how he took me by the hand, how courteously he
entertained me, how he bad me sit down: what commendations he gave me: he said
he never saw a thing better done, nor heard a speech that better pleased him
in all his life. All this while the fool is counting his chickens, as they
say, before they be hatched. But if one come in his way, and seem to take any
manner of exception to anything, or to advise him in such a point, or such a
point, or that he be not so highly applauded, and regarded for this and that
action, or for this and that speech, or for this and that circumstance wherein
he pleased himself: then his comb is cut, and a cloud is ouercast, his glory
is eclipsed, his market is marred, and he must cast about again how to have
his cake better baked another time: for that time he cries as Caesar's Parrot
did: Operam and oleum perdidi: I have lost both labor and cost. Then he vexes
himself again, in musing and studying what should be the cause of so hard
success. I believe says he, that some body has angered him, he was so
melancholic: or I may thank such and such that had told some tales against
me. And then is the poor fool beset and hemmed in with a number of odd
surmises, and conceits, and imaginations, whereof every one does haunt him,
and pull him, like the furious spirit that haunted Saul.

If all for the present runnne current, and answer his desire, then he thinks
himself a jolly fellow: and who but he, with such and such that have taken
good liking of him; and there (as one come to his fools paradise) he sets
down his rest.

But now begins a new piece of work, and that is, how to keep this credit
and commendation wholly to himself: and not be dispossessed. For what if the
wind turn, and afterward by some mishappe or other those parties that so
magnified him before, will not vouchsafe so much perhaps as to salute him, or
speak kindly unto him, or to converse with him as in times past? or send for
him as they were wont to do? or give him so much as a good countenance? as
nothing is more usual in the world then such alterations in the minds of men.
So was it with Jacob and Laban. When Jacob had taken exceeding great pains in
his Uncle Labans service, and was still the same man that he was wont to be,
careful of his Uncles good, yet when Laban saw him to prosper and thrive well,
he envied him: and Jacob perceived it well enough by his countenance: Genesis 31.5.
for says he to Rahel and Leah, I see your fathers countenance, that it is not
toward me as it was wont. Now the godly can make use of such things, as not to
trust in men, nor to set their hearts on the world, but to walk wisely, etc.
But they are no whit dismayed at such alterations and chaunges: but knowing
that the world is ever like it self, and is no chaungeling, except it be from
evil to worse, they go on still in doing their duty, making themselves merry
at the feast of a good conscience before God, whose glory and favor are the
marks that they aim at, and in him only they trust. But the hypocrite is
then much vexed and troubled, and new fears and thoughts arise in his heart,
casting about how to recover that countenance, and commendations which he has
lost, that is: how to get the shadow that goes from him.

To this end he resolves with himself to make friends, to frame new devices,
to use all the art and skill that his brain can afford, practicing,
promising, and bestowing much against his nature: flattering here, and lying
and dissembling there, much against his conscience: he must creep to one, and
crouch to another, and sooth up all beyond all modesty and reason: backebiting
this body, and accusing another body, and censuring of every one to feed
men's humors, against all honesty and equity: for by honest and simple dealing
it cannot be obtained.

And thus by this little you may see what pains, what charges, what cares,
what fears, and doubts, and inconveniences a man must undergo that will hunt
for the praise of men: is not then the reward of hypocrisy a miserable reward,
and they miserable fools, that take such pains and vex themselves so, for
the getting of that which is vainer then their own shadow?

The hypocrite before he has his reward, must not only take great pains, be
at much cost, and vex himself with many cares, fears, and foolish conceits,
which is a marvelous misery: but also be subject to the censures and
judgments of every one: his name must be called in question upon every
occasion that is offered to speak of him, his whole life ripped up, and all
his actions sifted and scanned at every man's pleasure: some will commend him,
some will condemn him, some will admire him, some will deride him, some will
say he is a good man, some will say he is a bad man, and a deceiuer. And what a
miserable thing is this, for a man to have his name thus haled and pulled, like
a bone among dogs, and to be like a tennise ball tossed up and down, and
canuassed at every man's pleasure: and all for a vain shadow, which the more he
follows, the more it flies from him? The Apostle therefore in Gal. 5.26.
disswadeth us from vaineglory in this manner: Let us not be desirous of vain
glory, (says he) provoking one another, envying one another. To show that the
fruits of a vaineglorious mind are but prouocations to evil, and the reaping
of envy: which like a monstrous monster will spoil her self to hurt another.
A miserable reward then is that, which sets the envious man a work, and
provoke others also to sift us, and to practice against us.

And this is not all, but when the hypocrite has taken all this pains, and
endured all this sifting, he oftentimes comes short of his expected hope, and
therein they are most miserable: like the builders of Babel Tower: they looked
for a great name, and lo they reaped a great shame. Genesis 11.
For Babel, that is, confusion, fell upon them. They serve long for Rahel, and
the world sends Leah in her stead, which they like not so well. 2. Sam. 1.15
They run many times with news, when they have no thanks for their labor:
like the man that ran to tell David of Saul's death, who looking for some
reward, (or thanks at the least) at David's hand, lost his life for his labor.
What pains did Ioab take with the host of Israel, 2. Sam. 10.
to quench the rebellion of Absalom? and to kill Absalom that monster in
nature, who first kindled the fire? What thanks did the messenger look for at
king David's hand, when he told him of Absaloms death: and behold the King fell
to weeping and crying out for the death of the traitor. What praise and
encouragement did Ioab the Kings General, with all the Captains of the army,
look for at the Kings hand? and lo, they were deceived of their expectation,
for the King would not so much as once show himself unto them, till he could
not choose. 2. Sam. 10.
David deserved both love and commendations at Hanuns hands, when so kindly he
sent Ambassadors to see how he did* but instead thereof that wicked Ammonite
construed every thing to the worst, suspecting them to come as spies into his
land, and so used them accordingly with all spite and shame, shauing their
beards off by the halfes, and curtalling their garments by their buttockes. And
even so many times it falls out in the world, when a man thinks to do for
the best, it falls out for the worst. Is there any thing then more miserable
then to hunt for the praise of men? Achitophels counsels were for a while
esteemed of as the Oracles of God, but at the last his wisdom was turned into
folly by Hushai David's friend: whereupon the foolish hypocrite, 2. Sa. 17.^3.
and hypocritical traitor went home, and for sorrow hanged himself. And so is
it usually in the world: many carry all the credit for a time, and afterward
when others come in place that shall excel them in one thing or other, then
they are no body. What is then more miserable then to make the praise of men
the end of our labor? The children of God see this and believe it, and have
good experience of it, and therefore they make no reckening of it, but resolve
with themselves as the Apostle has taught them: We must pass through honor
and dishonor, 2. Cor. 6.
through good report and badde report, through praise and dispraise. The
counterfeit secketh only for honor, and there he rests* the hypocrite
hunteth after praise and commendation, and there he rests: but through
dishonor and bad report he would pass, and not stay there: but, as if one
were no more to be regarded then the other, but both to be despised alike. The
Apostle tells us that we must pass through both, and go on in our holy
courses: like ways that bring us to our iourneis end, whereof some be fair,
and some be soul: so must we account of the praise and dispraise of men. For
we have a journey to make unto the kingdom of heaven, wherein we must imitate
wise travelers, Simile.
who when they come to a foul way, they are not much troubled though it does
moile them, and somewhat hinder their pace, but they go on the more warily. And
when they come to fair ways, and pleasant fields, and well furnished Innes,
they do not there set down their rest, but go on their journey with more
boldness and comfort. The chiefest thing that they respect, is not so much the
foulness or fairness of ways or weather, as that they be not out of their
right way. Even so in our spiritual journey, while we walk the paths of God,
we shall pass through the blind lanes, and deep sloughes of reproaches, and
privy slander, and through many a storm of tempestuous spirits. What then?
We must go on for all that, but so much the more circumspectly and warily.
After that we shall meet with friends, and come to fair ways of peace and
tranquillity, and the pleasing winds of good report and commendation will blow
upon us: what then? shall we there rest? as though the end of our journey were
for to come to a green way, or to a pleasant wind? no: but we must go on
still, keeping a good conscience, to cheer us up withal, and the better our
way be, and the more temperate the air be, the more chearefully and
comfortably should we persist in our heavenly journey: not so much standing
upon these accidents of praise and dispraise, of liking and disliking, of
storms and calmes, as whether we be in the right way or no, taking heed that
we go not too fast for fear of tyring, nor too slow for fear of casting
behind, and coming too late.

But vain hypocrites only talk of going this journey, they do not mean to
travel it indeed, but make a show of such a thing, traveling and professing
religion, and civility, so long as they may be assured of easy iourneis, good
provision, fair weather, and pleasant ways, or else they are undone. If they
know that dishonor and bad report lie in their way, they will not set out. And
if they see that they shall be praised and well esteemed for their labor, they
will then go, and run themselves out of breath too, for all that they do, is to
be praised of men: but of all men they are most vain and miserable; for they
have their reward: and what is that else, for the uncertainty thereof, for the
deceitfulness thereof, for the brevity thereof, for the unprofitableness
thereof, for the danger thereof: considering also the pains they take for it,
and the fears and cares that they are vexed withal for it, and the manifold
siftings, and censurings they endure for it, and how often they loose their
expectation, reaping the clean contrary to that which they look for? These
things being well considered, (I say) what else is the reward of hypocrisy
compounded of, but of vanity and misery it self?

THE VIII. SERMON.
MAT. 6.2. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.


IF godliness should be no better rewarded then with the praise of men, then
were true Christians of all men the most miserable, and Christianity it self
were a miserable profession. For in this life their lot is to be hated and
scorned, molested and persecuted for their virtues sake. The world loves his
own, says Christ, but me it hates: and you it shall persecute for my names
sake: yea for my names sake they shall speak all manner of evil saying
against you falsely. If the world will not love us, then it cannot like of us,
if it does not like of us, then it cannot commend us, if it cannot commend us,
then it must condemn us, if it cannot love us, then it must hate us, and if it
can neither like nor love us, what reward then must we look for in the world?
not promotion, but persecution: not life but death. Sometimes the wicked will
seem to commend and love those that fear God and hate wickedness: but then I
would wish the godly to beware most of all, and to cast a double fear. A
double fear, when the wicked commend the godly.
First, least they have put forth their hands unto some wickedness: that is,
done something that likes the wicked, and offends God. Secondly, if they be
free that way, then let them fear, lest some snares and baits be laid to
entrap them in their goings. The Scribes and Pharisees, and Jewish Elders did
often commend Christ, but never for his good: Good Master (say they) we know
that thou carest for no man, and teach the way of God truly: there is the
bait; then comes the hook: Is it lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or no? Now
Christ knowing their subtlety, gave them no thanks for their commendation,
but called them tempting hypocrites, Mat. 22.18.
saying: Why tempt ye me ye hypocrites? And will the wicked deal better with
the members then they did with the head? These men are the servants of the
living God (says the cunning maid to Paul and Silas, or rather the devil by
whom she wrought) and they bring unto us the way of salvation. This was not for
the good of Paul and Silas: but to have them apprehended the more speedily, and
handled the more severely. It was a cunning sleight of Satan; and therefore
Paul and Silas rebuked her for her labor, Act. 16.18.
being grieved to be commended by such a one, and commanded the spirit in the
name of Christ to come out of her. In a word, the co^mendatio^s of the wicked,
are but traps, Psalm. 69.22.
and their tables but snares, as the prophet David calls the^.

And for all this, seeing that it cannot be denied, but that love and
commendation amongst men is a good blessing: in which sense it is said that
both Christ and John Baptist, and others were in favor both with God and man:
1. Tim. 4.8.
and godliness has the promises both of this life and of the life to come,
that is, the blessings of God, both temporal and eternal belong unto
godliness: The godly shall have praise and renown in this life.
it must also be granted, that even the godly themselves (which are so much
hated and scorned in the world by the wicked of the world) have had, have, and
shall have their part in that blessing of renown, fame, and commendation: yea
a good name shall follow them to their grave, and live after them too in the
world, to the high glory and praise of God, who does so honor his servants
which have honored him, 1. Sam. 2.30
and to the comfort of their friends, the encouragement of the weak, and to
the shame of the wicked. They shall have praise indeed, but as the brother
whom Paul commended to the Corinthians had, 2. Cor. 8.18.
whose praise (says he) is in the Gospel, that is: in embracing the Gospel,
or else in setting forth of the Gospel, as Luke did, whereby his love, and
zeal, and godliness toward Christ, were manifested to his great praise and
commendation: for virtue and piety is worthy of praise, as vice deserves the
contrary: therefore Peter says to servants: This is praise worthy, 1. Pet.
2.19.
if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully: And the
Apostle Paul says: Whatsoever things are of good report, Phil. 4.8.
if there be any virtue, or any praise, that is, if there be any thing indeed
praise worthy, think on these things. And God forbid (seeing as God has given
such a blessing to his servants, and their virtues amongst the godly) but that
we should give unto virtuous men, and fearing God their due praise and
commendation.

When poor Mary showed her love to the person of Christ, in anointing his
body with sweet and precious ointment, and her humility in wiping his feet
with the hair of her head, Christ told her that wheresoever his Gospel should
be preached, Mat. 26.13*
that deed of hers also should be published for a memorial of her: to show
that the virtuous acts of the Saints are not to be curied in oblivion, but to
be had in a thankful remembrance unto God. The Lord in his word has crowned
his servants with fame and renown, which never sought it but fled from it:
both according to his promise, and also his gracious and wonted manner of
dealing, 1. Sam. 2.30.
Those that honor me shall be honored of me, says the Lord. 1. Sam 2. there
is his promise, his manner is to give his servants more then they seek for or
desire: 1. Kin. 3.12.13.
as when Solomon desired not riches but wisdom to govern Gods people well,
God gave him both riches and wisdom too: so when the godly desire that only
Gods name may be hallowed, and cry with David, Not unto us, not unto us o Lord,
Psalm. 115.1.
but to thy name give the praise, then does the Lord give them that thing which
they desire, and that also which they craved not, and that is, commendation
from his own mouth, and a part in his own joy. Well done good and faithful
servant: there is their commendation: Math. 25.
Enter into thy masters joy: there is their full reward. And thus is Moses
become famous for being Gods Ambassador to King Pharao, and his Captain
general over the Lords army from Egypt to the land of promise. Thus Joseph is
famous for his chastity, and faithful service: and the midwiues of Egypt are
renowned for saving the childrens lives, against the Kings commandment. How
famous is Deborah for judging of Israel, and Iael for nailing of Sisera
(Captain of King Iabins host) unto the ground? How famous is David for
conquering of Goliath, and for his zealous courage in fetching home of the Arc?
Now is Eliah famous for reproving King Achab, and the widow of Sarepta for
nourishing the Prophet: Solomon is famous for building of the Temple: the three
children for contemning the Kings displeasure: and Daniel is famous for his
being cast into the Lions den. Now John Baptist is renowned for telling the
King of his fault, and loosing of his head for the same: Peter for his sound
confession, and Paul for his heavenly conversion be both famous, and renowned
by the holy Ghost, whose praises are in the word, spread throughout the whole
world. So are all the holy Martyrs which suffered for the testimony of the
truth, and all Christian benefactours (with the streams of whose love and
liberality many Churches, Christians, Universities, and schools of good
learning, and nurseries of good arts and sciences, (have been watered and
refreshed) most famous and renowned in the Church of God. And all these having
shunned (as much as they might) all worldly praise and glory in the world,
have found most high praise and renown with God, and all the godly in the word
of God: and their praise is not of men, but of God. As for wicked hypocrites it
is not so with them, but as the godly are crowned with perpetual fame and
renown, so the wicked are and shall be crowned with everlasting shame and
reproach. Cain is infamous, and his name does stink, for murdering his brother
Abel. Putiphars wife is infamous, and her name does stink for her lewd
tempting and false accusing of Joseph. Pharaoh is infamous, and his name does
stink for his cruel handling of the Israelites. Doeg the Edomite is infamous,
and his name does stink for accusing and killing the Lords holy Priests. Micol
is infamous, and her name does stink for scoffing at the zeal of David her
Lord and husband. Iezabel for her whoredoms, and murdering of Naboth for his
vineyard is infamous, and her name does stink. Hanun is infamous for misusing
of David's messengers, and Ammon does stink before all the Israel of God unto
this day. Sanballat and Tobiah, for hindering the building of the Lords Temple
and holy City: Haman for seeking the death of the Lords people: Herod for
murdering the young children: Ananiah and Saphira for dissembling with Peter,
and lying to the holy Ghost: Simon Magus for his offer of money for the gifts of
the holy Ghost: Elimas for withstanding of Paul: Tertullus for his accusing of
Paul: Judas for betraying of his Lord and master. The Gadarens for preferring
their swine before Christ's doctrine. All these, and every one of them are
become infamous, and do stink before God and man: and their reproach and shame
shall never be blotted out: For the word says: Pro. 10.7. Pro. 13.9.
The memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall
rot. And in the 13. of the Proverbs, 9, verse. The light of the righteous
rejoices: but the candle of the wicked shall be put out: To show that the name
of the wicked is no better then rotten carrion, at the stink whereof every one
that passes by shall stop his nose, and the discoursing of their lives shall be
as noisome in hearing as the stinking snuff of a candle burning low in the
socket, that every man shall say, put it out: fie upon it, away withal. And
this is the righteous judgment of God upon the wicked, which regarded not to
glorify God, but themselves, therefore to give them up to such vile
affections, and lewd actions as can breed nothing in the end but a rotten and
stinking name.

But wicked hypocrites will take a good order for that, they can have such as
themselves, to perfume their doings (while they live) with brave commendations,
to whom they say as Saul said to Samuel: Honor me before this people. And when
they dye, there are enough that will for a small reward be hired to commend
them in a Sermon to the skies, and then we can have Pamphlets printed, and
Epitaphes engraven upon our tombs, which will keep our names from rotting.
Besides all this, we will give some gowns, and money to the poor, which we
can no longer keep, and may well spare: and all this put together, will cast a
most sweet smell. Surely for the godly that lived well, and died in the Lord,
it will: for their life is like a wax candle, made and compounded of sweet
matter, which men are content it should burn out, because when it is our it
will cast a most fragrant and sweet smell: but the life of the wicked is like
a candle made of filthy stuff, which men will not suffer to burn out, because
it is no sooner out, but it stinketh all the house over. Although you commend
it never so much, yet men will not believe you that it was like that of wax:
Simile.
nay if you praise it, will they not laugh you to scorn, and think you mad, or
drunken, or senseless? Even so is it with him that praises a wicked man either
living or dead: what does such a preacher but play the foolish Herald, and go
about to persuade men that a stinking snuff is as good as a sweet wax
candle, or that filthy puddle water is as wholesome and as sweet as rose
water? Many such there are in the world, who while they so preach, the auditors
that have indgement and knew the life of such a man as well as he (if not
better) sit and smile to themselves, and wonder that any man either for money
or monies-worth should be hired to become so void of sense And whereunto shall
we compare such Sermons and Epitaphs better, then unto flowers and herbs that
are strawed and pricked upon dead corpses, buried only in a winding sheet?
Those flowers may well be laid upon the dead corpse for a show, Simile.
or to keep men from smelling ill aires, and may go with him to the grave, but
to keep it from rotting, and putrefying, from corruption, worms and stink,
they cannot. So such high commendations bestowed upon unworthy persons, as
Papists, Atheists, drunkards, whoremongers, and such as lived most profanely
and irreligiously (and so died for ought that any man can tell* without
repentance, or any life of Gods Spirit in them) are sweet herbs and fair
flowers bestowed upon them for ornament sake, to please their friends, but to
preserve their name from rotting and stinking they cannot by any means: for
God is just, who has said, Those that dishonor me, I will dishonor: and as
for that stinking and rotten co^mendations that they have bestowed upon the^,
by such as thee^selues (who also hunt after the like things) it is all: For
they have their reward: and are they not then in a miserable case?

But yet this is not all, for when the hypocrites reward is come to an end
(which soon it does, like a thing of naught, that is soon ripe, and soon
rotten) and when the date of his good deeds, or rather glorious sins is
expired, then must he come to a new reckning for all his hypocrisies, and
treacherous robberies committed against the glory of God: while he has abused
the name of God, and taken unto himself all that praise which was due unto God
only, like those kind of fellows, which come to men in the Princes name, to
take up their goods as it were to the Princes use, and then appropriate them
wholly to themselves. And for that they have both robbed God of his glory, and
made his most glorious name and sacred religion their cloak and covering,
while they have most profanely played their parts therewith, to the great
dishonor of his Majesty, and the spoil of the Church, and oppression of their
brethren. And seeing as in their best deeds they have made more account of
men's praise, then of commendation at Gods hand, Their judgment.
their judgment is from everlasting decreed, and already is sentence gone
forth against them, which can never be revoked, and that is to have their part
and portion with the devil and his Angels in hell torments for ever, where
they shall not only be deprived of Gods gracious presence, which is true
felicity, and fullness of joy for ever, but also ly languishing not for a year
or two, nor yet for a 100. nor a 1000. nor 10000. nor a 100000. nor a millio^
of thousands of years, for the^ there were some hope that their pain would
one day end (though it were long before, and intolerable in the mean time,)
but for ever and ever, perhaps with many of those also whose vain praises they
have in their life time so much hunted after: where the one shall curse each
other; and their rewards, yea the persence of each other, and remembrance of
their mutual folly and vanity; of the one in giving, of the other in seeking
and taking the glory from God: even the remembrance I say of this their former
vanity, folly, misery, madness, and impiety, shall like an ever gnawing and
tormenting Serpent, sting, wound, and torment their consciences for evermore.
Yea if there be any pains or torments in hell greater then other, they shall
surely fall to the hypocrites lot: yea, the hypocrites portion is so fearful,
that the wicked servant that lives most carelessly, not regarding his masters
displeasure, nor once thinks of his coming, but is found misusing of his
fellows at his masters coming, Mat. 24.51.
is threatened in the Gospel to be cut off, and to have his portion with
hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: to show, that of all
sins there is none more odious in Gods sight then the hypocrite is, neither
shall any be more severely punished then he shall be. And thus good brethren
you see the reward of hypocrisy in this life, The use of the former doctrine.
1. It shows the sottish vanity of men, that seek after praise of the world.
and in the life to come: a miserable and a woeful reward, miserable here when
it is at the best, but most woeful hereafter when it is at the worst.

Now let us see what good use we may make of all that has been said. And
first, seeing the great vanity and misery of the hypocrites reward in this
life, and his woeful portion in the life to come, who can wonder sufficiently
at the world, yea at himself, that is so bewitched and besotted with the love
of worldly praise (as a fool enamored of a cruel harlot) that notwithstanding
all this, yet every man almost makes it his summum bonum, and chief study how
to obtain unto it? Surely most men do know this to be true, even by experience
(the schoolemaister of fools) but how few do rightly consider of it? It may
be, that now and then, some being wearied with their hunting after it, and
troubled with vexation of spirit, may fetch a sigh at the matter, and cry (as
many do) fie upon the world, and who would trust the world? and fair words
make fools feign: and I will not trust men's fair speeches again in have, etc.
But yet for all that, as soon as the pang is a little past, all is forgotten,
and a woing of this common painted harlot they go again. How many in the world
(especially followers of Princes Courts, and attendants upon great persons) do
go beyond themselves, some in gorgeous building, Building. Apparel. Dainty
fare Great gifts. Play.
some in sumptuous apparel, some in delicate fare, some in great gifts, some
in holding company at play: all which they would not have done but to be praised
of men? If I should not do as others do, I should be counted a coward, says
one. If I should not keep a feast as others have done before me (says another)
I should be counted a miser, or a beggar, though they beggar themselves for it
indeed. If I should not have it something like on my table, and wear somewhat,
and give somewhat more then ordinary, how should I be accounted of? If I should
not flatter a little, and please a little (says another) I should not be
liked. If I should not be very eloquent, and garnish my Sermon with Doctors,
Fathers, Poets, Philosophers, as well as with the Scriptures, though there be no
need of them; and speak all languages, as well unknown as known, I should be
counted no scholar, nor to have any learning. But if I do excel others in my
building, in my feasting, in my apparel, in my alms giving, in my preaching,
and show of learning, in my courting, my aduenturing: (yea in swearing, and
whoring, and drunkenness, and riot, and reuelling, say some shameless and
graceless persons) why then I shall be had in admiration, and every body will
commend me: I shall leave a name behind me, etc. These things being thus
resolved upon, then comes forth the men of the world, their fellows in
folly, and deal their reward. Whose house is that (says one?) as if he had
something to give toward the building or repairing of it. Such a man built it
says another: now the reward. I assure you says the inquisitor, it is a very
fair house, and well contrived. Yea says the third, all the smoke comes out
at one chimney, or else is conveyed under the ground, etc. and there is his
reward: besides occasion ministered of an hours or two discoursing and
descanting upon his whole life. In like manner are those rewarded, that iet in
all kind of bravery, with pedlers shops about them: as many women do? Who is
that, says one? Such a one says another. I promise you says the third, and
that is the reward: he is very brave: she is very fine says another: Is it a
man or a woman says another? I cannot tell says one, by his long hair he
should be a woman: by her bare head it should be a man says another: Yea,
says another, but God knows who pays for all this. In like sort come from
a feast, and see the reward of the world: We had great cheer says one: Yea,
he may well enough says another, for he comes easily enough by it. And then
comes a third: But I doubt me he must pinch a good while for this gear. And
thus you see the worlds reward: are not men well rewarded now, that look for
no more then the praise of men?

Let those Ministers also consider well of this point, that even against their
own consciences (as they are driven sometime openly to confess do bumbast
their Sermons with all kind of humanity, besides the word of God, not because
they think it then necessary, but as some have freely confessed, in the most
famous and public places of the land, because the ears of the people are
troubled with such a kind of itch, that they must needs do it, or else their
doctrine would be loathed for the plainness and simplicity thereof. I speak
not against the use of humane authorities when case shall require, even in the
Pulpit: for I know there is a very good use of them many ways: both for
confutation of error, and also for confirmation of doctrine by way of consent,
but against the vanity and weakness of those that would not use it but only
to please men: their vanity and weakness I say is to be pitied, and so is
also theirs too, that study hard, and preach often, and deliver sound doctrine,
and abound with nothing but the Scriptures, if therein they respect nothing but
the praise of men: For mark I pray you; a Minister studieth hard, takes great
pains, he watches when others sleep, etc. and at length comes like a woman
to travel, and bring forth the birth of his mind, which by meditation, and
study, and other good means he has conceived, etc. when he is delivered of
his burden, the world vieweth it, and rewards him for the same: but how?
first perhaps they are away whom he did especially look for, and desire to
please, there is one grief: then others perhaps fall asleep, or tarry not to
the end: then there is another cross: but for those that are most attentive,
perhaps some will inuit him to dinner of conscience or of custom: well, that
he could have had at home: then there is inquiry, what was he that preached to
day? do you know him? No says one: I know him says another. How like you the
Sermon? He made a good Sermon, says one: a proper man says another: he
touched all degrees, and spared none says another: he had but a soft voice,
says another, no utterance, it is pity, with a little practice he would do
well: he was too long says another: he has no learning says another? What
University was he of? where dwells his friends? what living has he? has he no
more benefices then one? He said well says another, if he can follow it
himself when he has done, etc. And afterward perhaps if he stay long amongst
them, or chance to have charge over them, they that before praised him to the
skies, will be the first that shall pick quarrels against him for one thing or
another, and all to remove him. Is it not then a labor well bestowed, to set
our selves only to get praise of men? can there be a greater misery? were we
not in a good case think you, if we had hope of no better reward then this? no
marvel though. But blessed be God, our hope is, and our comfort is, that we
(dealing faithfully and uprightly in Gods business) shall be rewarded of God
himself in Christ his son, with another manner of reward then all the world
can give us, or take from us either. In a far more miserable case me think
is the hypocrite, then many a man's horse or beast is. The horse is rid hard,
The hypocrite is more to be pitied for his misery, then the beast.
and traveled sore all day, and at night is turned into a sorry stable, with a
galled back and spurred sides: but yet with his masters reward, and that is a
good bait, and a good word: Let him be well dressed, and well meated says the
owner: he has gone well to day: it is as good a horse as ever man put leg
over. And if he chance to be stolen, or lost, or to dye, his master makes
great inquiry, and searches for to find him again, or great moan (besides
high commendations of his beast) because he cannot be had again. In like manner
fares it with the hypocrite in part, whom every man rides, and derideth at
his pleasure: as the spur makes the horse to go, so vain glory and praise
makes the hypocrite to go: and therefore it was well said in the Proverb:
Gloria calcar habet: praise is a spur, as if the vaineglorious fool were a
jade that would not go without spurring. When the hypocrite has ended his
journey, he is turned home again with a gald conscience: well may he have a
good word: as, It was well done, etc. but scarce many times the worth of an
asses bait. And if he be missing, perhaps there is not so much enquiring after
him, as after the strayed horse, except peradventure as Laban sought after
Jacob, to call him to account for the manner of his departure. And if he dye,
some moan may perhaps be made for him, and a good word from a false heart may
chance be cast after him: but it may be more moan will be made for a good
serviceable beast, and the one shall be as soon forgotten as the other. But
when death comes, it were happy for hypocrites if then they were horses, or
asses, or vile toades: for then should their misery end with their lives: but
they cannot have that privilege, and therefore they are far more miserable
then the brute beast which perishes. Consider well of it my good brethren,
and let us not be any longer bewitch^d with this tickling humor, and most
vain vain as I may call it, of carping and caring, and studying and seeking
how to please men against God, or to please men and not God: but let us labor
by all good means, and call instantly upon God by humble prayer, that we may
be so governed by his holy Spirit and grace, that all our desire and study may
be to do chose things, and that in such manner, as may get praise and
commendation at his hand, and we may be approved in his sight.

Lastly, let his doctrine serve to work patience in all those that having
deserved commendation, and love, and good liking of those amongst whom they
have labored, cannot get the fame, or having once gotten it, through their
faithful and plain dealing, or the inconstancy and frowardness of men lost
the same. Every man has his time; as Solomon says, there is a time to
rejoice, and a time to be sorry, so there is a time to be praised, and a time
to be dispraised, a time to be lifted up, and a time to be cast down again,
least we should look for our heaven upon earth. And let it not grieve any man
to be dispraised: nor greatly puff up any to be commended, but rather be we
grieved that we cannot study to please God better then we do: and be we glad,
that we have the testimony of a good conscience before God, that we have
deserved better of men, then we find at their hands: and shall find far
better of Gods hands then ever we desired, or deserved. And seeing as the
praise and commendation of men is so vain and miserable a reward, both for the
uncertainty of it, for the deceitfulness of it, for the brevity of it, for
the unprofitableness of it, and for the danger of it: let us neither strain
with a good conscience: nor (keeping a good conscience according to Gods word)
greatly regard it, when we have lost it. For so do miserable hypocrites, who as
Christ says here in our text, have their reward. If any body has now put
upon him the Devils armor of proof, I mean unbelief (as commonly all
hypocrites do) that this doctrine may not enter into his heart, let them but
consider and weigh well, who has said it, and how he affirms it, that
hypocrites have their reward. He that has said it, is the Lord Jesus himself,
who being the wisdom of the father, knows what he says: and being truth it
self cannot err: let no man now suspend his judgment for the matter, or stay
his repentance, until he hear it confirmed by some Doctors, or Fathers, or
Councels: for he has spoken it, that cannot deceive any, nor be deceived by
any: yea, upon whose word and authority, all the Doctors and Councels in the
world have builded and must build whatsoever they teach, or else they build
beside the foundation.

As Christ has said it (against whom I say, there is no gainesaying) so has
he affirmed it in most earnest and confident manner: Verily I say unto you, they
have their reward: that is, in good earnest I speak it, and for a most
undoubted truth I affirm it. And all little enough: for such is the cunning of
Satan to beguile men's souls, that he will still feed them with some hope,
that it is not so hard as the Preacher says it is. Thou shall dye the death
says God to Ad^m, if thou eatest of that tree: No says Satan, ye shall not
dye, that is, God does not mean to deal so hardly with you as he says: he is
merciful, and that was but to make you afraid. So plays the hypocrite still,
Tush, tush, says he there is no such matter, they have not their reward, we
hope to go to heaven as well as the best, and that we have as good a faith to
God as any body. What sir: we have souls to save as well as you, we would you
should know it: Verily says Christ, they have their reward: Verily no, says
the hypocrite: now who shall be believed? Christ or Belial? God or the Devil?
Well, but we trust God be more merciful unto us then so: Verily no, says
Christ (meaning except they repent.) Yea, the hypocrite has so good an opinion
of himself, that he thinks the Lord is as it were beholding unto him for his
play, or counterfeit service, and should do him great wrong if he should not
receive him into favor as well as others: For (says Christ) when it shall be
said unto them definitiuely: God ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels: for when I was naked ye clad me not etc. they will
not take this for an absolute and just decree of the Judge; but as though they
had wrong offered them, they reply again: Why Lord when did we see thee naked,
Mat. 25.
and did not clothe thee? etc. If that will not serve, then they will put him
in mind what they have done for him: we have cast out Devils in thy name, and
heard thee preach in our streets: so will others plead for themselves: why
Lord we have sharply rebuked Satan, and reproved sin by thy word: we have
kept out Church orderly, and duly: we never missed a Sermon, nor Service on
weeke-dayes: we gave as liberally to the poor as any man of our ability in
the country. I have paid my tithe mint and cummin, says another, and I hope
no body can charge me to have been a thief, or a murderer, or common
whoremonger, etc. and therefore I trust to be saved as well as another. And
thus do many deceive themselves, by imagining (as the Psalmist says) that the
Lord is like themselves:: Psalm. 56.
that is, not so good as his word: But my brethren be not deceived, Christ has
said it, that is enough: If that be not enough, he has confirmed it with an
earnest asseueration most confidently, to put men out of doubt, and to assure
men what to trust unto, if they live and dye in pypocrisie: If all that be not
enough, then the Lord has sworn in his wrath, Psalm. 95.
that they shall not enter into his rest.

Therefore cast away these vain persuasions, and this false hope, take heed of
that Devil, and vile motion that goes about to weaken the credit of Gods word
with you. And from henceforth let us so endeavor to please the Lord, that at
his coming he may commend us, and say, Well done, good and faithful servant,
enter into thy masters joy: which shall never be said to hypocrites: For verily
(says Christ) they have their reward.

Now let us pray.
THE IX. SERMON.
MATH. 6.3.4. 3. But when thou do thine alms, let not thy left hand know
what thy right hand does. 4. That thine alms may be in secret, and thy father
that sees in secret, he will reward thee openly.


IN these words we are taught in doing the works of charity, to be contrary
minded to hypocrites, who hunting after nothing but vaineglorie, or filthy
lucre, do always give their alms to be seen of men. But true Christians must
not only shun popularity, and avoid worldly praise, but also they must
beware of their own private praise, and selfe-liking, and (not arrogating or
conceiting to themselves any commendations, nor consulting with themselves how
to be recompensed for the same) content themselves only with the approbation
and allowance of their heavenly father, and comforting themselves in the holy
obedience of his most glorious will, as a singular fruit of his Spirit, and of
their faith, which is wrought in them by that Spirit, no whit doubting, but
most steadfastly assuring themselves, that he to whom only, and for whole love
only, and at whose bidding only, they have done these things, though never so
secretly (in respect of men) will one day reward them openly. Our Savior
Christ in saying, Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does: uses an
hyperbolicall, or excessive kind of speech (as Rhetoricians call it) to show
thereby, that with all possible care and diligence, the study of getting
vaineglory must be avoided, and that we must never desire in doing good deeds
to please the ears and eyes of men: except (as has been showed before) to
make them in love with our good manners, and good fashions, and so to have them
glorify God with us: but otherwise in doing of our good deeds to be as secret
as may be: as if he should say; be so far from seeking the applause of the
common sort, when thou do thy good deeds (as the Pharisees did, and all
other hypocrites do, who give not but sell their alms for the praise of men)
that thy left hand though it be most near conjoined unto thy body, and a
fellow worker of the deed with thy right hand: if it had any understanding, may
not know, what, or to whom, or how much, or when, or how often thou give, or
do good. His meaning is (to speak as plainly as I can) that thou which art
a Christian, in doing the works and duties of christianity, must be so far
from desiring to be looked upon of man, that if it were possible thou thy self
should not know that which thou do aright, but should forget thy own
deed: and neither impute it to thy self that thou have done well: nor stand in
thy own conceit, thinking the better of thy self for it, but only rejoice
inwardly that the poor and needy is refreshed, and that thy faith has
brought forth such fruit to the glory of God, and sealing up of thy election
in thee.

What if men know not, yea what if he that is relieved, do not know him that
has relieved him? (says Erasmus.) It is enough for thee to have a witness of
the father, from whose eyes nothing can be hid. He will reward thee, although
thou have no thank at all of man: yea though thou do take no pleasure in it
thy self, yea though thou do utterly condemn and mislike thy self, and
iudgest thy self (as many do) altogether unworthy of any favor, yet thou
shall be rewarded at thy fathers hand. And this I take to be the simple and
plain meaning of these words.

Now let us come to the doctrine that arises from the same. And first, from
hence we have to observe, that in doing of our good works, all selfe-liking, or
conceit of our selves, must be avoided: that we must neither attribute any part
of the work unto our selves, as a thing done by us, as of our selves: nor yet
think that we are ever the better for the same: but to be still as humble, and
to carry as low a sail, and as unworthy an opinion of our selves for all that
good we have done, as if we had done nothing but evil: or else in doing of
good we offend God, and hazard his heavenly reward, which in Christ is laid up
for us.

The contrary to this, Hab. 1.16.
is it as I take it, which the Prophet Habakuk condemns in the wicked, when
he says: They sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their yarne,
because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous: Meaning that
they imputed all their wealth unto their own industry only, and to the means
whereby they compassed the same. And surely it is neither good, nor safe, but
very ungodly and dangerous in doing of good works, to make our selves privy
thereunto (if we could choose) or once to keep account with our selves of the
good that we do. I deny not but that a Christian soul truly humbled in the
feeling of his own unworthiness and inability, may with some comfort call to
remembrance, what duties he has performed the day or week that is past,
through the grace and favor of God, who has wrought both in him, and by him:
so that withal he be (as I say) truly humbled, and prepared thereunto, calling
to mind withal, to that end, what graces he wants, what sins he has
committed, what dangers he has incurred, and with what weakness and
imperfection the good has been performed, which is a rare thing. But surely
otherwise it is very dangerous to keep account unto our selves, of any good
deed that we do: For, by reason of our natural corruption, which cleaves too
fast to every one, and hangs on (if not presses down) the very regenerate
themselves, we are so prone and apt to the study and affectation of vainglory
(which is indeed plain robbing God of his glory) that it is a very hard matter
to do good, and not to be proud of it.

It fares with us, as it does with wanton women, who when they understand how
fair they are, casting away all modesty, wax proud, like the Peacocke that
always strouteth it, when his tail is spread. Take for example the Pharisee
spoken of in the 18. of Luke, Luke. 18.11.12.
whose prayer was proud, boasting of his own righteousness. First, he keeps
a note to himself of what gross sins he was free, that other men were
overtaken withal: then he scoreth up his good deeds, and namely his integrity
and uprightness in tithing, and then his due and constant course of weekly
fasting. And having thus made his left hand privy to that which his right hand
did, that is, recounting with a wrong affection to himself, what he had well
done, he spreads his tail, and falls to crowing over his poor brother in
this sort: I thank God I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or as this Publican: I fast twice in the week, I give tithe of all
that I possess: as if the proud Peacocke should have said: behold my feathers
are not of that color that other birds are of, but his feet were: which he
then remembered not.

In like manner do many keep a score of their good deeds, and register in
their note-bookes what they bestow weekly, or monthly, or yearly upon the
poor, etc. I warrant you say some, it costs me every week so much, and so
much ordinarily, besides that I spend extraordinarily. It were good for them,
and others the like, to regard the admonition of Christ here: Let not thy left
hand know what thy right hand does. Do good, and make no body privy unto it,
if thou can: no, not thy own soul: take no notice of any good thou do
thy self, least thou be proud of it.

It was the wisdom of God in creating of the woman, not to create her until
he had first cast Adam into a sleep, and while Adam slept, he took a rib out
of his side, whereof he made woman, least if he had been awake when this was
done, he might have thought that he had had a stroke in it, if it had been no
more but suffering, or consenting to have one of his ribs taken from him; which
yet had been great folly in him so to have done. So should it be the wisdom
of Christians in doing of good deeds, to cast their carnal affections in a
sleep: least they (seeing and knowing what is done) should imagine that they
had a stroke therein, and so should begin to filch and steal some glory to
themselves which belonged not unto them.

The horse does employ his strength to carry and draw, but yet he knows not
so much: if he did, peradventure he would not be so subject unto man as he is.
The sheep does yield us her fleece to cloth us, and her flesh to feed us, and
her lamb for increase, but yet she knows not so much: if she did, perhaps
she would if she could vpbraid us by her benefits, and not be so beneficial
unto us as she is. The birds with their variety of notes do delight our ear,
but God saw it not good that they should know so much, for if they should
perhaps they would be as mute as nonresidents, scorning to afford their
music unto such fantastical and vain masters as they now do serve. The
flowers with their variety of orient and beautiful colors, and fragant, and
pleasant smells, do delight our eyes, and refresh our spirits: but God saw it
not good that they should know so much, for if they did, perhaps they would
disdain to be abused so much, and so little regarded to the praise of their
maker as they are.

In like manner, if we could do good works to the glory of our God. and profit
of our brethren, and not let our left hand know thereof, that is, not consult
with our carnal and crooked affections about them, we should not be so loath to
go about them, nor so lazy in doing them, not so lusty when we have done
them, as we are. If the Peacocke were hatched blind: or could shut his eyes
when he spreads his tail, surely his pride would abate, for it is not the
having of such colors, but the knowing them, and viewing of them, that
breeds conceitednes, and causes his nature to swell. So, if Christians, when
they take any blessing from Gods hand, or enjoy the graces of Gods Spirit, or
bring forth the fruits of the same Spirit, had not their minds and
affections so much bent upon them, and set to view the beauty of them: but could
set them to look narrowly downward upon their black feet, that is, upon
their sin, and sinful affections, it would be a means greatly to humble
them. Therefore the Apostle says: 1. Cor. 7.30.31.
Let them that weep, be as though they wept not, and them that marry, be as
though they married not. So says the Scripture too: Let him that gives alms,
be as though he gave not. And in another place he says of himself and his
brethren thus: 2. Cor. 6.9.10.
We are as men sorrowing, but yet rejoicing, and as men rejoicing, and yet
sorrowing, as poor and yet making many rich, as dying, and yet living, etc. So
on the other side, as making many rich, and yet as it were poor, and giving
nothing. To show what manner of men Christians must be.

But how can that be (will some say) that a man should give alms, or do any
other good deed, and not make himself privy to the matter? and count it
nothing which he does? Surely very well, or else truly do many dissemble, and
speak against their own consciences: for come unto them, and thank them for
such and such kindness bestowed, etc. they will say: Alas sir, for nothing, I
know no such matter: it is not so much worth, etc. as if he should say, If I
did any such thing, it is with me as if I did it not at al: I am to begin it
again: I keep no reckning of it: my heart was not set upon it when it went
from me: I weigh it not, etc. Again, every true Christian is in part
regenerate, and in part unregenerate: the one part is called in Scripture by
the name of flesh, and the other by the name of spirit; Gal. 5.17.
the flesh rebelleth against the spirit, that is, the part regenerate against
the part unregenerate: Now this part that is regenerate by the spirit of
sanctification and grace, may well be called also the right hand of the soul,
and the other part which is still fleshly, carnal, and sensual, and not
sauouring the things of God, may well be called the souls left hand, for the
untowardness thereof to any goodness: in which sense it may truly be said,
when thou do any good deed, let the spirit, that is, the part regenerate as
the right hand of thy soul do it, but let not the other part (which is so
untoward and not regenerate, and fitted for it) have any thing to do in the
matter, more then if it knew nothing at all of it. We must do as men that
travel in company together, and are so earnest in talk that they forget the
length of their journey: and to such ten miles seem but as one mile: but if a
man go alone, and thinks of nothing but his journey, then his left foot
shall know what pains his right foot takes, and will keep account of all
his sleps as it were, and think his journey long, and his pains exceeding
great. So we in traveling toward heaven (which we must do so long as we live,
by walking in such good works as God has appointed for us Ephesians. 2.10.) must
count all things but loss and dung, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ
Jesus our Lord, to win him, and to be found in him, not having our own
righteousness, but the righteousness which is of God by faith in Christ,
forgetting that which is past, and endeavoring our selves unto that which is
before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. And no marvel though the Apostle made so light account of
his own works, or righteousness: for, he knew they were too light to endure
the trial of Gods justice, and too unclean to appear in his most pure
presence. Our good deeds are like a fair garment with a filthy lining: or (as
the Prophet Esaias speaks) like a menstruous cloth, Esa. 64.6.
The beauty and goodness of them is from God: the deformity and uncleanness
is of our selves. Shall the one part lift us up to any proud conceit of our
selves? No: it is of God, give him all the glory: and let the other humble us.

All the gifts and graces of God do bear some part of his image, and stamp,
though given to diverse persons, and in diverse measure and manner: like the
Princes coin, which has the Princes image and stamp upon it, to put the
subjects in mind of their loyalty and duty which they owe to their Prince:
that (as Christ said) when we see Caesar's image and superscription we should
remember to give unto Caesar that that is Caesar's: so when we see any thing
with Gods image upon it, we may also give to God that that is Gods. The Princes
coin comes out of the Mint fair and bright, but when it comes into our
hands it takes soil, and loses beauty. So the good graces of God come to
us with a most heavenly beauty, but we cannot return them so again: for with
us they take soil and loose their beauty. As every piece of coin has on the
one side the Princes image, and title certain: so have all the graces of God,
Gods image, and Christ's title, to admonish us of that holy duty, and absolute
praise which we must return unto him for the same. Look upon thy faith, and
thou shall see this superscription upon it: (...) (...): This is the work of
God, Ioh. ^6.29.
to believe in him whom he has sent. Look upon thy patience, and thou shall
find this graven upon it: (...): Philip. 1.29.
to you it is given for Christ's sake, not only to believe in him, but also to
suffer for his sake. Look upon thy love, thy knowledge and judgment, and
every one bears the same stamp that thy faith does (...): the work of God:
and therefore says Saint Paul, this I pray that your love may abound yet more
and more in all knowledge and judgment, Philip. 1.9.
to show that they come from God and not from our selves. Art thou filled with
the fruits of righteousness? thou shall find this Poesy sent with them:
Philip. 1.11.
They are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. Art thou
converted unto God? look upon the work of thy conversion, and thou shall find
this withal: The work of God: and therefore says Joel: Joel. 2.
Turn us o Lord, and we shall be turned. Have thou a new heart? look upon it,
and thou shall find Gods stamp upon it, and that is this: Created of God.
Psalm. 51. 1. Cor. 4.7.
And over all one general Poesy for all: and that is this: What have thou,
that thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.7.

If there be any thing besides this that comes from God, that is of Satan,
or else of our selves. We commonly look on the one side of the garment, but
not on the other. Now, if we think upon our defectes and stains, nay filthy
and rebellious pollutions, we would never take notice to ourselves of any good
we do: but say when we have done never so well, as Nehemiah did, when he had
most zealously reformed the Lords sabbath, and set every thing in very good
order: N^h. 13.22.
Remember me o God in this, and pardon me in thy great mercy: and as Christ
commands us: Luke 17.10.
When ye have done all that ye can do (says he) say that you are unprofitable
servants, and have done but that which was commanded you.

Further it is to be observed, that Christ says, the right hand must do the
work, and the left hand must not know of it. He appoints the right hand to
the work, because that is readiest, and quickest, and handsomest in working.
The left hand is not so fit, nor ready, but is rather a hinderance of the work
then a furtherance of the same. Christ's meaning is, that we must not only not
arrogate any glory to our selves, or liking of our selves: but when we do any
good, we must do it with our best affections, and not once to consult with our
carnal, proud, and untoward affections: for they are like the left hand, and
have many froward cauillations, and odd reasons, and false persuasions to
hinder the work, like so many crooked fingers, which are good for nothing but
to pull back, and hinder, and are altogether untoward to every good work.

Our affections are compared in Exodus 3.5. to feet: Exodus 3.5.
Put off thy shoes from off thy feet (says the Lord to Moses:) that is, put
away all carnal and fleshly cogitations, and earthly reasons from thy
affections when thou come before me, and come with holy affections. And in
Eccles. 4.17 Look unto thy feet before thou go into the house of God: Eccl.
4.17.
that is, examine with what affections thou go. For, as the feet do carry
the body up and down in the world: so do our affections carry our minds and
studies and hale us both in soul and body to such things as they like.

Here they are compared (as I think) unto hands, because they are necessary
(when they are sanctified) to work the will of God, as hands to do external
duties, and as forcibly they effect things, or thrust men forward, or pull me^
backward as the hands do, unto good or evil. Look what the body has after a
visible manner, the same has the soul after an invisible and spiritual
manner. An eye of knowledge to see good from evil, and the right way from the
wrong: a taster of judgment to discern things that differ: as what is good,
and what is better, etc. legs of faith, whereby we stand without sinking
under our burden, and go therewith to God. Shoulders of patience and long
suffering, to bear injuries and crosses manfully: hands and feet of
affections and desires. Of all which there be two sorts: as there be belonging
to the body, a right eye and a left eye, a right hand and a left hand, a right
ear and a left ear, etc. Now, some be in the service of God, and in all other
good works as it were left handed: hearing with their left ear, that is, with
a lazy desire to learn: understanding with a gross understanding, as
Nicodemus did understand Christ, when he spoke of being borne again: and
marking with a drowsy attention, and taking all things with the left hand,
that is, very frowardly, and untowardly. But in worldly matters and vanities,
which they love and like well of, they are right handed, and right eyed, and
right footed, and right eared: that is, they can work apace, and see quickly,
and go swiftly, and hear readily, etc. Therefore let not thy left hand, that
is, thy untoward affections and senses have ought to do when thou do any
good work: as we use to say; tell not such a man of it, for he will hinder it
as much as he can possibly. These lefthanded Christians will soon murmr and
grudge at a little cost that is bestowed upon Christ in his poor Church or
members, like Judas who was offended at the box of ointment that Mary bestowed
upon Christ: and cavil at every thing that is spoken, like the cauilling
Jews, which set themselves to carp at every thing that Christ spoke, or his
servants the Prophets and Apostles. And if they once conceive an hard opinion
of the doctrine, or doctor, they will forsake that man, and in time give over
hearing the word, as the Capernaits did, and most untowardly, and unseemly
will they perform whatsoever else they go about in Church or commonwealth, if
they have no mind unto it: and will soon be weary of well doing, their
shoulders of patience and courage being out of joint: and in learning and doing
of the best things, are as men that altogether work with their left hand,
having no list to work.

A man may easily perceive a difference between those that do good deeds with
good affections, and those that consult with flesh and blood about the matter.
Those that do work with their right hand will show it by their willingness,
by their forwardness, by their zealousnesse, by their venturousnesse, by their
bountifulness, by their cheerfulness, and by their perseverance. If they
bestow any thing toward the building up of Gods Church, by maintaining of
religious exercises, they will give as the Israelites did to the building of
the tabernacle: Exodus 35.
they brought till they were stayed by proclamation. If they bestow any thing
on the poor members of Christ, they say not as worldlings do: any thing is
good enough for them: but they bestow the best they have, like Mary who would
not bestow any ointment upon Christ except it were costly and precious. Ioh.
12.3.
If they contribute to any necessary uses, they do as the poor widow did, who
cast in all the substance that she had, Mar. 12.42.
not doubting but God will provide more. If they go about to reform things in
Church or commonwealth, being in authority, they do it zealously and
thoroughly, with great courage, and constancy, and resolution: Neh. 13.
like Nehemiah when he reformed the sabbath. If they venture for love of their
Prince, they will break through an host of men, 2. Sa. 23.16.
as David's worthies did, when David longed for the water of Bethlehem: nothing
will be too hard for them.

And on the other side, those that make their left hand privy to that which
their right hand does, do consult with flesh and blood about the matter, and
being ruled, and persuaded altogether by carnal reasons, and vaineglorious or
gainefull inducements, do that good which they do unwillingly, and niggardly,
and cowardly, and sluggishly, and frowardly, and negligently, and are soon
weary of well doing: all which may well be called lefthanded Christians for
their backewardnesse, and untowardness to any good thing. If you ask their
relief for poor distressed Christians: before you get a penny of them, they
will reason as churlishly against you and them too, as Nabal did agaisnst David:
Who is David? 1. Sam. 25.
and what is the son of Ishai, etc? If they give one groate, Act. 5.
they will boast of two, as Ananias did. If any thing be given to Christ's poor
Church, that comes not to their share, they repine at it, as Judas did. Ioh.
12.4.
If you require them to do any matter but of small difficulty, they will answer
with the sluggard, Pro. 26.13.
There is a lion in the way, that is, it is as much as a man's life is worth.
And even the best of us all are many times too much left handed, that is,
untoward to the best things: if Christ calls us to hear what he has to say
unto us, and to communicate with him at his table, we answer, as the slothful
Church does in Cant. 5. Cant. 5.
I am in bed, how can I rise? I have put off my clothes, how shall I put them on
again? I have washed my feet, how can I defile them? That is, when we have no
list to hear the Sermon, or to call upon God, or to receive the holy
Sacrament, a small excuse will hold us back, a shadow is even as good as a
wall to stop us. And otherwise it will not be, so long as we consult with flesh
and blood about Gods matters: therefore says Christ; Let not thy left hand know
what thy right hand does. And that we may do al indeed with our right hand,
that is, with our best affections cheerfully, and comfortably, and
prosperously: let us still consult with the word of God, that we there may
learn what is to be done: for our good works if they be not warranted by the
word, are abominable unto God, as glorious sins. And next, let us confer
with him by prayer, that we may be enabled to do that good we know must be
done: and as for carnal reason, and worldly persuasions shut them out, and do
not once call them to counsel about the matter, for they will both hinder thee,
and spill thy good deed.

THE X. SERMON.
MATH. 6.4. That thine alms may be in secret, and thy father that sees in
secret, he will reward thee openly.


THat thine alme:] that is, between God and thy own conscience let it be
done, that thy conscience may witness for thee unto God, that thou have sought
nothing less then the vain applause of men, and God (that sees thy secret
thought and intent of heart) may approve of the same, and witness for thee
against Satan and all the world, that thou have uprightly in thy secret
thoughts and affections served him, and sought nothing more then his glory. In
this case we may learn of Joseph, who caused every man's money (of his
brethren) to be secretly conveyed into his sackes mouth with their provision:
which when they saw by the way at their Innes, they marvelled, giving God the
glory, who (as they confessed) had sent it unto the^, but by whose means they
knew not. Some are secret enough, and too secret in giving to the poor, for
that which they give is only in conceit, that it may be in secret, and known
to no man: and most profanely and scoffingly abusing this place, (as they do
all other holy things and the whole body of religion) they will give nothing at
all, lest (as they like themselves most wretchedly pretend) that their left
hand should know what their right hand does: Abusers of these words
as though the purpose of our Savior Christ had been to dissuade men from
giving any alms at all. These men are like the Friar, that would provide well
over night against the next day, by carrying with him the remainder of his
supper, scoffingly alleging, or rather blasphemously abusing the words of
Christ in this chapter: Be not careful for to morrow: and therefore I do it
says he, because I would have no care for to morrow. These persons have
learned this lesson of Christ to the halfes: they have learned to be secret,
but not to give alms in secret: as the Papists have learned another lesson of
Christ, so have these men learned this: Christ says: Pray for your enemies,
bless them that curse you: and if thy enemy hunger, give him meat: if he be
thirsty, give him drink, etc. In so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon
his head. This latter part they have learned well, namely to heap coals of
fire upon the heads of their enemies: yea of Gods dear Saints, and faggots
too, and to burn them to ashes too: but the former part which contains
works of love and charity, is yet to learn, they can no skill of that. And
if some of them be told of their hard dealing, they will not stick to allege
this Text, and say: why, does not Christ say, we must heap coals of fire upon
our enemies heads? Such gibers, and scoffers at the word of God, I couple with
Julian and Lucian their predecessors, wishing them in time to take heed, and
pray unto God (if it be possible) that they may truly repent them of their
blasphemous courses: their state is fearful and dangerous: for that they go
on plodding and scoffing at religion. Blessed is the man that comes not into
their way: for it leads as directly as can be, and in time will bring men
unto the sin against the holy Ghost, which is unpardonable.

Now for the consolation of those that do all their good works as in the sight
of God, debarring themselves from all vaineglorious applauses, and
commendations in the world, and in themselves too, it is said further, that thy
father which sees thee in secret, will reward thee openly to show, first, that
we must endeavor to approve our selves unto God, and not unto the world: like
an honest wife, that will so attire her self, and so behave her self in all
things, as she may please her own husband, and not other men. And next, that
the best way to weane our selves from these vain desires of worldly praise is,
to consider effectually, and to remember continually, that we are still, at all
times, and in all places in the sight of our heavenly father, to whom we either
stand or fall, and of whom we shall be abundantly rewarded openly (according
to his gracious premise) for that which faithfully we have done in secret. And
lastly, to show that those which seek for open praise of men, or give unto
themselves any secret praise, to the impeachment of Gods glory, cannot look
for any open reward at Gods hand in the day of judgment: but those that are
persuaded of that, and moved effectually with that, do not care which way it
goes with them in the world, so that they may be approved of God their
heavenly Father, and carry a good conscience unto their graves. Here be three
things attributed unto God our heavenly Father: First, that he sees those
things that are done in secret. Secondly, that he will reward the good that we
do in secret. Thirdly, that he will reward it openly. Fitly are these things
propounded to the children of God, that they may accustom themselves to do
whatsoever they do, as in the sight of God: and to approve themselves unto
their heavenly Father. And as fitly are these three opposed to the vanity of
the flesh, all which men do so hunt after.

For the first: that God seerh and knows all things that are done in secret,
the Scriptures in many places do witness: Whither shall I go from thy
presence? (says the Psalmist) If I go up to heaven, thou art there, if I go
down to hell, Psalm. 139.
thou art there: If I go beyond the sea, thy right hand will there find me out:
if I say that darkness shall cover me, behold darkness and light to thee
are both alike, thou art about my bed, and spyest out all my ways, and thou
know all my thoughts long before: meaning before they are conceived. Again:
Psalm. 94.
He that made the eye, shall he not see? and he that made the ear, shall he
not hear? And again, by Jeremy the Lord says: I the Lord search the hearts,
Ier. 17.10.
and try the reins. A point this is very necessary to be urged. For first,
the wicked either believe it not, or they regard it not. Many will confess
that there is a God, which yet are not ashamed to say with the wicked in the
10. Psalm: Tush the Lord sees us not; or if he sees what we do, he does not
regard: and thereupon they make themselves bold to commit all wickedness with
greediness: for would so many so desperately else give over themselves, some
to theft, some to whoredom, some to drunkenness, some to practicing of
murder, and some to the contriuing of treason: if they were persuaded that the
Lord of heaven and earth did look upon them in secret: and take a note of that
which they do in secret? and heap up vengeance as they heap up sin? Would
the foul mouthed blasphemer swear again, when he is reproved for his
swearing, in despite of God (whose most holy and fearful name he does abuse)
and of him that in the name of God does reprove him: if he were persuaded that
the Lord did hear him, and mark how he does abuse his name? would so many
beat their brains, and study so hard as they do in secret, to practice all
kind of wrong and oppression, and how to cover it with flattery and deceit,
if they believed that God did see them or regard? In a word, would so many come
to the Church, and make a show of great devotion, and play the hypocrites,
hardening their hearts against the word of God, and imagining evil, and
descanting upon every word at their pleasure, if they did believe that God did
see them in secret? And what is this but plain Atheism? to say there is a
God, and not to believe that this God sees in secret? What is this but to make
an idol of the true God? If this be Atheism (as doubtless it is, though not
in the highest degree) then how many Atheists are there which live so, as if
God did not see them in secret? for in secret they conceive their wickedness,
and in public they bring forth ungodliness: for why, they think themselves
cock sure, so long as God (as they imagine) does not see their secret devises,
or not regard them. They think that because they see not the Lord, therefore
the Lord sees not them: Number. 23.
like Balaam who feared not the Angel because he saw not the Angel: but it is
said, that his beast feared him, and stayed so soon as he saw him: to show,
that those which know that God does see them, and yet go on still in their
wickedness, are worse then the beast: and that ass shall condemn them. This
doctrine is also to be urged in regard of the godly themselves, who though they
know and confess it to be most true, and can allege many Texts of the
Scripture, to prove that God has all knowledge, and sees all things that are
done in secret: yet they have not so powerful use of this doctrine as they
should. Then is it powerful unto us, when (by the Spirit of God) our hearts
are kept in awe, and made afraid to do those things that will offend his
Majesty, as Joseph who (knowing this point well) feared therefore to yield to
the lewd motion of his light mistress.

How many sins do of a sudden steal upon us, and slip from us, when we
think not of this, that God sees in secret? How many again are arrested (as
it were) and taken in the manner, yea and staid from going forward, when once
this meditation comes to mind: God sees in secret? We are always conversant
in his eyesight, neither can we possibly do or conceive any thing, be it never
so secret, but that he sees it.

It is a sign of great rashness and impudent audacitie, if a son without
fear of his fathers displeasure dares do a fault in the sight and presence of
his father. Nay what strumpet so impudent that in her husbands sight dares
prostitute herself before another? yea would she not be ashamed and afraid
too, if but a little child were in presence? What then shall we think of our
selves, that dare boldly without fear, confidently without doubting,
impudently without blush ing, and continually without ceassing, do those things
in the sight of Almighty God our heavenly Father, which we fear and shame to
do in the presence of a mortal man, or a little child? The breath of man is
in his nosthrils, but the least glimpse of Gods divine, imperial, and
immortal Majesty, is able to confound and crush in pieces ten thousand
worlds at once. As God does see his children in secret, so he does look upon
them as a heavenly Father, and not as a cruel enemy, or rigorous Judge, when
they do well: and being well pleased with Christ Jesus his natural son, does
also take great delights in the endeavors of his adopted children which are in
Christ Jesus: and therefore does he delight in them, because they are in Christ
Jesus, and else not. Therefore whatsoever devotion or service we offer unto God
in secret or otherwise, it must be offered in and through Christ, for whose
sake alone it is acceptable, or else it (being without Christ) is unto God most
abominable.

Secondly, it is said that our heavenly Father will reward his children for
that they give in secret. And this is a good encouragement to the godly. For
flesh and blood (unless it has some hope of reward) thinks it altogether lost
which is given to the poor. It is not lost says Christ, it shall be rewarded
of your heavenly Father. Therefore well says a learned man: Eleemosina non est
dispendium, sed negotiatio: Alms giving is no loss or damage, but a kind of
traffic or merchandise from heaven. For whatsoever we lay out here upon
Christ's poor needy members, it shall be paid again with advantage. Eccles.
11.1.
Cast thy bread upon the waters (says Solomon) for after many days thou shall
find it: that is, fear not to bestow thy liberality upon the poor, which can
give thee nothing again, and though it seem to be lost as that which is cast
into the sea, yet after many days, that is, when thou do least look for
it, and think that it is forgotten, and worn out with time, thou shall find
it again, thy heavenly Father with whom a thousand years are but as one day
will reward thee for it, if thou give of faith in his son Christ.

Lastly: because we naturally affect popular praise, and desire to be famous,
Christ says, that our heavenly Father will not only reward us, but it shall
also be openly. This our Savior Christ plainly shows in Luke 14.13.14, Luke
14.13.14.
When thou make a feast call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy
acquaintance, nor thy rich neighbors, least they also bid thee again, and a
recompense be made thee: but call the poor, the lame, the maimed, and the
blind, and thou shall be blessed, because they cannot recompense thee, for thou
shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just: that is, if thou
regardest a good reward indeed, then rather call the poor then the rich. What
recompense this is that shall be given in behalf of the poor Christ also
shows in Mat. 25.34. Mat. 25.24.
where he shows that it shall be said to them on the right hand, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the world: for I was a hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. for in as much as
ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto
me: that is, I take it as done unto my self, which you have done unto these
poor ones that believe in me, and for whom I have died. What manner of reward
is this? Luke 1.29.
We may well wonder at this reward: as Mary did at the Angels salutation: for
the Angel did not salute her as her neighbors used to salute her: and God
does not reward his children in whom (for his beloved Sons sake) he takes
delight, as men reward their friends. Amongst men ye shall have a dinner for a
dinner, and one good turn for another: but here is a kingdom given for giving
a piece of bread, or cloth, or drink, or comfortable speeches, which they have
not given neither as owners thereof, but as stewards put in trust from God. And
what kingdom? No less then the kingdom of heaven. And how? not as a lease,
or a farm, or a coppie hold for years: but as an inheritance of their Father
for ever. And this shall be given them in possession with all the grace and
glory that can be, not in the presence of some few persons, of this place, or
that country, but before all the inhabitants of the whole world, at the sight
and hearing whereof, the wicked and ungodly hypocrites, who sold their good
deeds for worldly praise and filthy lucre, Genesis 25.33. Heb. 12.16.
as profane Esau did his birthright for a mess of pottage, shall even gnash
with their teeth for grief, and consume away like the smoke against the wind,
through extremity of fear, grief, and shame: being withal at the same
instant overwhelmed with the most dreadful and intolerable sentence of Gods
everlasting curse, which in like manner is set down already: Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
Angels: from which the Lord for his rich mercies sake in Christ Jesus deliver
us all. Now my brethren by this time I hope you be persuaded, that there is
nothing lost by that which a man does unto God in secret, or unto any of Gods
Church for the love of God. For God that is love it self, and infinite in
love, cannot but infinitely reward the love of his children, which any way they
have showed unto his Majesty, especially seeing as he crowns not our gifts
to him, but his own gifts in us, which we received first of him. And what can
we desire more? Would we be seen when we do well? behold who sees us, even
God our heavenly Father, who is all in all, who cannot deceive any, nor be
deceived by any. Would thou be rewarded for that thou do? and would we
not loose our labor for a toy or a trifle, as many do? then behold our
heavenly Father is ready, able and willing to reward us with a kingdom of
eternal happiness: only let us be content with his reward, and tarry his
gracious leisure. Would we be openly rewarded and graced by some great person,
before many, and before our enemies, that they might be ashamed, and before our
friends, that they might with us rejoice and triumph over them: then behold, we
have our hearts desire: our heavenly Father will not only most bountifully
reward us, but also in the open presence, view, and hearing of all the whole
world will bless us: where all Kings, and Emperors, and Tyrants shall appear
and stand naked: and many of them shall shake and tremble for extreme fear
and horror of their own conscience, and Gods vengeance. Blessed be the most
glorious name of our heavenly Father for ever. Amen.

As we have heard what is to be shunned, and what is chiefly to be respected in
giving of alms: so now it will not be amiss to speak something (though but
briefly) of alms it self: Of alms.
and therein to see, first, what this word alms does signify. Secondly, to
what end, or for what cause God did ordain that alms should be given and
taken: or why he would have any occasion thereof in the world. Thirdly, how men
may be moved or induced to give alms. And lastly, to whom alms must be given.
For the first: the word alms is derived of the Greek word (...), which
signifies mercy. Therefore as that is called grace which is given of grace,
so that is called mercy which is given of mercy. Alms then is some benefit
that is bestowed freely upon the poor and needy, only of a merciful and
pitiful affection, and fellow feeling of his grief and want. So the
Samaritane is said to have showed compassion and mercy upon the wounded man,
when he powered oil into his wounds, and help him up to his beast, and laid
out money for him at the Inn, and gave his word for him: this was a right
alms giver, which gave of pity, and was moved by mercy: which is nothing
else but a grief and sickness of the mind for another misery, and makes a man
ready to relieve the same. And of alms some is true, and some is false; that
is true alms which comes from them that give of mercy, and compassion, or
feeling of another misery, who is sick and troubled in his mind until his
brothers misery be relieved. That is a false alms which comes from
hypocrites, who give not of any mercy, or compassion, but of some other
strange affections, seeking either to win fame, or to avoid shame, or
because they are compelled by law to give something. For otherwise, if they
should see their poor brother in never so great need alone, and no body by
them to see them when they give, or if there were not others to give before
them, and to wonder at them for their hardness of heart, or some law to
compel them, they would go by him, and come by him too often enough, and let
him die too for want, before they would part with any thing to save him. That
our alms may be true alms, or mercies gift indeed, it is not so material how
honest, or dishonest, how good or how bad he be to who^ we give, nor whether it
be much or little that we give, but with what mind we give. Musc.
Discriminat in hac causa non dati sed dantium diuersitas, says a learned
Writer: It is not the diversity of gifts, but the diversity of giuers that
make the difference in this cause: Mar. 12.42.
The rich men of their abundance cast much into the treasury, and the poor
widow cast in two mites which makes a farthing. Now (by the judgment of
Christ) she cast in more then the rich men did, because they of their
superfluity gave some, but she gave all that she had. And so it is we see by
daily experience, that many a mean man considering his ability, or rather his
inabilitie, does give more when he gives a penny, then some rich man does when
he gives a pound. And perhaps as he gives all that he has in comparison of
some other, so he parts from it with a better mind then some that give more,
and can better spare it then he. Diverse do examine (in giving of alms)
whether he be a good man or no to whom they give, as though it were of
necessity required to the truth of alms, that he must be a good man to whom
alms is given, and not rather a good man that gives it: Facile dignus est
pauper, hoc ipso quod miser est and egenus, vt eleemosynam accipiat (says
Musculus:) A poor man is capable enough of an alms, in that he is in misery
and want.

Some say, they would give alms if they were able; but let them give of that
small ability that they have, a little, and it shall be acceptable before God,
being given of a pitiful mind. There is the alms of the hand, and the alms of
the tongue, and the alms of the eyes, and the alms of the heart. The alms of
the hand is some visible thing given, as gold, silver, bread, cloth, etc. The
tongues alms is two fold: first, good counsel, and comfortable speeches,
which oftentimes do more good then gold and silver: such an alms did Peter
bestow upon the creeple, when he said: Silver and gold I have none, but such as
I have I give thee: in the name of Jesus arise and walk, Act. 2. Secondly,
earnest prayer unto God: such an alms did the Church bestow upon Peter when he
was in prison: and it relieved him more then money: for it caused the prison
doors to open alone, and Peter escaped. Act. 12. The eyes alms, are tears
for the calamities of other, proceeding from a sorrowful heart: such an alms
did the women of Jerusalem bestow upon our Savior Christ when he went to
suffer death. And Christ noted the^ in gracious terms for it, saying: Weep
not for me daughters of Jerusalem: but weep for your selves, etc. The alms of
the heart is a certain grief and sorrow arising from the feeling of another
misery, and is the mother of all the rest, if ability serve: and of all
th^se, he that cannot give one may afford another. Some give, but it is
grudgingly, and angerly, and some in policy only, to please unruly persons,
and stay a further mischief, for fear that else they should lose all: like
those that cast bread to a dog for fear of biting: these give no good alms.
No more do those that give somewhat of that which they have ill gotten, to the
end they might keep the rest in the better

Now we are to see why the Lord will have alms to be given, that is: why it is
his pleasure to have poor men in the world, that shall stand in need of the
rich man's alms; for, it cannot be denied but that this is the Lords doing:
Pro. 22.2.
as Solomon says: The rich and the poor meet together, but the Lord is the
maker of all: He could have made many women for one man (says the prophet) for
he had abundance of spirit, meaning he had power enough to give many wives to
one husband; but he made but one wife for one husband: Mal. 2.15.
and why but one? because he sought a godly seed. So he could have made all
rich, or those rich which he made poor, and those poor which he made rich:
for he had abundance and enough for every one, if every one had been a world:
and yet he would not do so: but would have some to be rich and some to be
poor. And why so? Surely to give thereby occasions of patience (as he does
unto the poor by their poverty) and of liberality, and doing of good, as he
does unto the rich by placing of poor and needy amongst them. God could have
brought to pass, that sin should never have been in the world, if it had so
pleased him, but then how should his justice have appeared in punishing the
vessels of his wrath: and the riches of his mercy been manifested in pardoning
his elect? Even so, if he had made all rich and none poor, what should then
the rich have had to exercise their liberality upon? and wherwithall should
the patience of the needy have been tried? Both rich and poor therefore has he
made for the manifesting of the singular work of his Spirit to his own praise
and glory in both. Let not therefore the rich contemn the poor: because they
have not their abundance for themselves, but as stewards appointed of God to
relieve therewith those which want. Neither let the poor envy the rich, or
impatiently bear their burden: because God has provided that their want
should be supplied by the rich: but let both poor and rich glorify God in
their estate and calling, and know, that if they use the same to that end that
God has ordained them for, they shall reap unto themselves the most sweet
fruits of the sanctifying spirit, unto the sealing up of their everlasting
election and adoption in Christ.

In the next place we are to consider, how men may be moved or induced to give
alms willingly and chearefully. First, because alms giving Mat. 25. verse 24.
and so forward. Now if it be so that Christ is relieved when his poor members
are relieved, what reason has any hard hearted Nabal to be so close fisted as
many are against poor Christians? considering what Christ has done for them,
for whose sake they ought to open their hand, yea and even to power out their
very hearts, with all the bowels of mercy and compassion that can be? Christ
does feed us with heavenly bread, namely, with his own flesh and blood to
eternal life, and shall not we again feed him (when he is hungry) with
earthly bread? Christ does cloth us with garments of immortality, and shall not
we cloth him when he is naked, with garments which soon wear out and come to
naught? Christ will receive us into his everlasting and heavenly habitations,
and shall not we receive him (coming as a poor pilgrim amongst us) into our
earthly mansions? Christ came down from heaven to us, not only to visit us,
but also to cure us; and shall not we visit him when he is sick in his
members? Christ was imprisoned to set us at liberty, he was wrongfully
condemned, to acquit us, and miserably accursed to bless us, and deeply
impouerished to enrich us, and shamefully crucified to redeem us, and cruelly
tormented to ease us: and shall not we vouchsafe to visit him in prison, and
endure some pain for the ease of his poor members? Yes verily, and woe, yea
ten thousand woes be to them that are ashamed of his bands? All this does every
one profess that says, I believe the communion of Saints. Many do speak
those words, but few show the power thereof: most profess, but fewest practice
the Communion of Saints: which shows plainly, that many more profess the
name of Christ, then do indeed belong unto him. For none of his members be
dead and senseless, but are all of them fellow and feeling members, suffering
one with another, like the members of a man's body, and helping one another as
they would be helped themselves. To conclude this point, let us imagine there
is some rich man of whom we have received more benefits then ever we are able
to recompense. He has no need of our reward, but only commends unto us some
poor friend of his, whom he specially loves, and would require at our hands
in token of our thankful mind, to bestow somewhat upon that his poor frind:
would not all the world cry shame of us if we should refuse it? Christ himself
is that rich man, unto whom for infinite benefits we ow not only great
thankfulness, but even our selves. And this one thing especially he requires at
our hands, that what we could find in our hearts to do unto him, we would for
his sake do it unto the poor: who^ by special charge he has committed to our
care: for which cause he said (when Judas grudged at the ointment which Mary
bestowed on him:) Mar. 14.6.7
) Let her alone, why trouble ye her? she has wrought a good work on me: to
show that those should not be hindered which are about to show the fruits of
love to Christ; and adds withal (as a reason why she should not be
hindered:) For ye have the poor with you always, and when you will ye may do
them good: to show, that as he was once anointed and honored in his own
person, so he looks still to be anointed and honored in his members, which
who soever refuses, what love can he imagine that he bears unto Christ? For
if the love of Christ were in him, he would count nothing too dear to bestow
upon Christ: nor yet too hard to suffer for Christ. Genesis 29.20.
As it is said of Jacob, that he suffered twice seven years for Rahel, and
they seemed unto him but a few days, because he loved her: to show, that such
is the nature of love, that it will make the most hard things become easy, and
the most heavy things light for their sakes whom we love. Lastly, it is
requisite that the poor move the rich unto the works of mercy by their good
behavior, showing themselves thankful and contented, for whatsoever is given
them, and not to harden the hearts of men against them, by shifting for
themselves, or by pilfering and filching, nor by idle loytering, nor by
impudent outfacing, nor by slanderous backbiting, nor by busy tale-carying:
nor by taking in ill part that which is given them, as too too many do. For, as
many husbands which obey not the word, are won to love their wives without
the word, while they behold the pure conversation of their wives, coupled with
fear. 1. Pet. 3.1.2. even so many rich men which are not yet moved by the word
to love the poor, may in time be won without the word, while they behold the
honest conversation of the poor, coupled with thankful reverence and
faithful diligence. Now in the last place it remains, only that in a word
we To whom we must give.
and that is generally to every one that craves the same, having need thereof,
according to Christ's commandment: give to every one that asks of thee. Luke
6.30.
Meaning if he has need, and thou be able to supply his want: but more
especially to those that are godly, and well disposed, according to the
restraint that the Apostle has made in Gal. 6.10. Gal. 6.10.
Let us do good unto al me^, but especially to those that are of the household
of faith: but most especially unto those faithful ones that are of our own
household, stock or kindred. As Joseph gave messes of meat unto all his
brethren, Genesis 45.22, 23.
and change of raiment: but unto Benjamin whom he loved better then the rest,
he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five suits of raiment, and unto his
father (who was dearer unto him then his brother Benjamin) he sent ten he
Asses laden with the best things of Egypt, and ten she Asses laden with
wheat, and bread, and meat, for his father by the way. And they are no men
but monsters, that being able, suffer their parents and kindred to perish for
want of relief. And yet it is not meant that we must give to every one that
shall ask of us without exception, for then we shall in short space go a
begging our selves; yea if we had the treasures of a King. This did a certain
Emperor well consider, to whom on a time (as they say) a certain bold faced
companion came, and desired his Majesty to bestow some reward upon a poor
kinseman of his: I am your kinseman, quoth he, both by father and mother: for
we come all of Adam and Eve. Indeed thou say true, quoth the Emperor: and
with that drew forth his purse and gave him a penny. A penie (quoth the other)
shall I have no more but a penie? a simple reward from an Emperor. Hold thy
self content, quoth the Emperor, if I should give to every one of my kinsemen
a penny, I should soon become a poor Emperor. Even so, if we should give to
every one that would ask of us, we should soon empty our selves, and beg
too. But it is meant that we must give as we are able, having respect to time,
and place, and occasion, and as we are appointed by order of law, and civil
policy, and yet still in compassion. As for counterfeits and idlepacks, they
must be wisely looked unto, and severely punished when they are found out: Ios.
9.
as Joshua did, who punished the Gibeonites when they counterfeited themselves
to be far travelers, when they were his next neighbors. Some become
miserable through gaming, tippling, and carrowsing, through idleness and bad
company keeping: to these belong a threefold alms: instruction, correction,
and yet some contribution too, as is allowed unto malefactors in prison,
until by order of law, and sword of justice, a riddance may be made of them*
if otherwise they will not be reformed: for by the rule of the word, he that
will not labor, must not eat.

Now let us praise God.
THE ANATOMY OF BELIAL.

SET FORTH IN TEN SERMONS upon the 12.13.14. and 15. verses of the 6. Chapter
of the Proverbs of Solomon.

The sum whereof is set forth in the next Page.

Imprinted at London by Richard Field for Thomas Man. 1602.

A Table showing the general contents of the Sermons following.
The Anatomy of Belial has two parts.

1. The description of a wicked man, and he is described here, two ways. 1. By
his names that are here given him, viz. 1. A man of Belial, that is, a lawless
man. 2. A man of vanity, that is, unprofitable.
2. By his actions: and they be two fold. 1. Outward and they be two fold. 1.
His speeches, and they be described by two adjuncts. 1. Of their quality, which
is evil, for they be froward. 2. Of quantity, which is great, for they are
continually froward
2. His gestures, al which be significa^t, and tending to mischief, and they
be of his Eyes. Fingers. Feet.

2. Inward, of the heart, and they are set forth, 1. Generally. Lewd things are
in his heart. 2. Particularly, by noting two vile and odious properties
springing from a lewd heart. 1. That he is given to imagine and surmise, whose
imaginations are 1. Evil. 2. Continually evil.
2. That he raises up contentions.



2. His destruction, and that is amplified by noting, 1. The manner of the
coming which is fearful, in regard of 1. The speediness. 2. The suddenness.
2. The continuance of it, which is long, yea everlasting without end, for he
shall never recover.

THE I. SERMON.
PRO. 6.12.13.14.15. The unthrifty man [or the man of Belijal] and the wicked
man, or [the man of vanity], walks with a froward mouth. 13. He makes a
sign with his eyes, he signifies with his feet, he instructs with his
fingers. 14. Lewd things are in his heart, he imagines evil continually, and
raises up contentions. 15. Therefore his destruction shall come speedily, he
shall be destroyed suddenly without recovery.


THis text may well be called the Anatomy of Belial, because it searches and
opens every vein of him, and every sinew of him, Why this text is called the
Anatomy of Belial.
to the very heart, and to that which is in the heart, as Anatomies do: and
shows the causes of every spiritual disease, and the effects of every cause,
and what it is that brings the wicked man to his woeful end, as Anatomies
do. And that so lively, that if any man desire to see a lively picture, and a
true Anatomy of Belial indeed, let him with patience mark, and behold the
hand of Gods Spirit, while Belial is a ripping up: and he will say as the
people said of another action of our Savior Christ, we never saw such a thing.
Mark. 2.12. But all is done, and must be done to this end, that we may know our
selves. And this indeed is therefore made the Anatomies speech or poesy: Nosce
teipsum, know thy self: as if he should say, why do thou stand still gaping
and gazing upon my naked bones? or prying into my bowels and entrails? or
judging of my heart? etc. good leave have thou so to do, but learn by me then
what thou art, and what thou shall be thy self.

This Anatomy is altogether spiritual, The parts of this Anatmomy.
and has in it two parts. First, the description of a wiked man: secondly, his
judgment. He is described two ways: first, by his name: secondly, by his
actions. His name sets out his nature, and it is double: first, he is called
in the Ebrew tongue, A man of Beliall: that is, a lawless person. Secondly, he
is called in the same tongue, A man of vanity: that is, a man altogether
unprofitable. As he is described by his names, so also is he known by his
actions, and they be of two sorts, outward and inward: his outward actions are
also two fold, his speeches, and his gestures. His speeches are set forth by
two adjuncts, or circumstances: first, of their quality, then of their
quantity: for their quality, they be very evil, for they be altogether
froward: for their quantity, they exceed, for he walks with a froward
mouth, that is, he is continually froward. His gestures are also observed, the
gestures of his eyes, of his fingers, and of his feet, and all of them are
very significant, and tending to set forward sin. The inward actions of his
heart, are laid forth two ways. First, (...), or in general terms, saying:
Lewd things are in his heart. Secondly, (...), or in particular observations,
by noting two vile properties arising from a lewd heart. First, that he
imagines evil continually. Secondly, he raises up contentions. After his
description comes his judgment, and that is, to be destroyed: and this
destruction is amplified further, by showing the fearful manner of the coming
thereof: for it shall come speedily without delay, and suddenly without any
warning, before he looks for it. Secondly, the everlasting continuance of it:
for it shall be without recovery.

Judge. 19. v^lt.
In the Scripture we read of a Leuite that cut his wife in pieces, when others
has wickedly abused her to the death, and sent her quarters unto the twelve
tribes of Israel, with this motion and message: Consider the matter, consult,
and give sentence. But here the Lord has cut Belial in pieces, who was the
cause of his own death, and has hanged up his quarters (as it were) in his
word, which he has sent into all parts of the world, that his people might
consider the matter, consult, and confirm the sentence of the Lord: and also
take example by him, least we come into the same case.

But before we come to the particular examination of Belials marks, it shall
not be amiss to enquire of three very necessary points. 3. Points.
The first is, to what end this description is made. Secondly, whether we may
by the same description take upon us to judge who is a man of Belial. And
thirdly, what may be learned from the coherence of this text, with the rest of
the Chapter.

For the first point: Machiuels and Atheistes think that all the Bible, and
all preaching, To what end this Anatomy tends. Not for policy.
and all religion, is but matter of policy, to keep men in awe: and so
consequently that this that is said of Belial is so too. For that devil that
told Adam that he should not dye, though he did transgress the commandment
of God: does also tell these fellows, that whatsoever the Scriptures say, or
Preachers babble (as they say) yet they shall not dye the death. But what could
Eve say at the last? The Serpent deceived me. So will these cry one day: Satan
has deceived us. Well, leave them to the Lord, and let us know for certain
truth, that whatsoever is written before hand in the Scripture is written for
our learning, as the Apostle says; Romans 15.4.
and therefore this Scripture also is written for our learning as well as any
other.

God has not taken such pains (as I may say) in making and setting forth
Belials picture, Nor to gaze at,
in this lively sort as you see, to that end that we should do nothing but
stand and gaze at his picture, but that we should note him well, But to know
him and avoid him.

Belial in like a runagate.


and learn to know him when we see him, and to avoid him when we know him.
For, Belial is like a runagate, who has done that which he is ashamed of, and
having stolen the cloak of virtue, and honesty, is run away with the same
upon his back, seeking how to hide himself in the world. And for fear of
being taken, he has gotten himself into service with great me^ of the world,
like Elimas with the Deputy. And has so won their favors, Act. 13.
that he walks with them in the fields, and strowteth it with them in the
streets: he feasteth with them at their tables: he buyeth and sells for them
in their shops: he tradeth for them beyond the seas: he courteth with the most
gallant in the court: He has found a place in the Universities amongst
scholars: in Cities amongst merchants: What entertainme^t and friendship Belial
has in all places.
in Churches amongst Preachers: in judgment hals amongst Lawyers: in
Consistories amongst Doctors, and proctors: at Theaters amongst players: in
households amongst servants and children: in Gentlemen's houses amongst
seruingmen and their masters. He has learned to insinuate himself into the
company of all states and degrees: and has found the favor to be shrouded
amongst Captains and soldiers, amongst Lords and Ladies, amongst Knights and
Esquires, amongst yeomen and artificers, amongst prentises and iourny-men, and
where not? And if need be, he can have a license to go beyond the seas amongst
Italians and Barbarians, and to come from all places of the world, Virtue and
godliness can never get good service nor good marriage.
and be welcome at his good leisure and pleasure: and all this can Belial do,
and more then this too: for, he has a great number of foul deformed vices,
and monstrous ugly abuses, which are all begotten of his own body, both male
and female, which he can easily prefer into service. And so well are they
brought up by the double diligence of his brother Machiauell, that many become
suitors unto them, and glad is he that can match his son, or his daughter with
one of them, when virtue and godliness may go through the world, and can
harldy get a service, except in the iayle, or in some beggars cottage: much
less can they get a good marriage: and if they do hit upon a good marriage, it
will not be long before they shall be divorced again.

But Belial with his cubs, because they are every where, are thought to be no
where: but the Lord from whom they are run away, he knows them well enough.
And here he has made out a warrant, Gods warrant for the attaching of Belial.
you see, to attach them wheresoever they can be found, and to summon them to
answer for themselves before Gods judgment seat: which warrant is committed
to all Magistrates, Ministers and other of his faithful people and subjects.
And because many say they cannot know Belial, and they must take heed how they
detect any by that name: therefore the Lord has well provided here for his
people, and in this his attachment has put down such marks and notes, of his
talk, of his name, of his gestures, etc. that unless men will be wilfully
blind, they cannot choose but know him, although he goes never so disguisedly,
and denies his name never so stoutly.

And indeed let Belial be arrested at Gods suit for dishonouring him, or at
Christ's suit for crucifying him, or at the Churches suit for persecuting her,
or at the Gospels suit, for slandering of it, or at Religions suit for
contemning of it (as all these actions and many more will come against him one
day) he will straight way deny his name, What actions come against Belial, and
at whose suit.
and say, You mistake me sir, I am not the man that you look for, etc. Then
those men which want either will, or skill, or courage, or all (nor greatly
regarding the words of their warrant) take his word for the matter, and so let
him go for an honest man: but those that are wise in God, can easily discern
Belial from an honest man, as King Solomon could well descry the harlot from
the true mother of the child, because the wisdom of God was with him. 1 King.
3. vlt.
And the godly wise have learned to say to Belial as the damsel said once unto
Peter: Surely thou art one of them, for thy voice bewraieth thee: So, thou art
one of the men of Belial: How Belial is descried by the godly wise.
for thy filthy speeches bewray thee, thy outrageous oaths bewray thee, thy
proud and profane gestures bewray thee, thy lewd and contentious behavior
bewray thee, therefore it is but a folly to deny thy name: for as the Ass is
known by his braying, and the length of his ears, to be an Ass, though he
iet it in a Lions skin: so, thou art known by thy conditions to be a man of
Belial, although thou go in the habit of an honest religious, or religious
honest man.

When our Savior Christ said that one should betray him who was then in
presence with him, there was looking one upon another, and every man was
jealous over himself, saying: Is it I? Is it I? But what says our Savior
Christ? He that dippeth his finger with me in the dish, that is the man that
shall betray me. He named no body: but that was enough, for thus might any one
conclude upon Christ's words, A strong argument.
He that dippeth his hand now with Christ in the dish, is the traitor: but
Judas dippeth his hand now with Christ in the dish, therefore Judas is the
traitor. In like manner, when God says, there be wicked men of Belial, and
vain men, lawless persons, and unprofitable, that must be destroyed speedily,
suddenly, and without recovery: now every man will put it off from him self,
and say, that he is not that man of Belial, etc. But what says the Lord? he
names none, but notes them thus: The man of Belial and the vain man, walks
with a froward mouth: he makes a sign with his eyes, etc. that is, he that
walks with a froward mouth, he that is lawless in his affections, he that is
unprofitable in his conversation, he that imagines evil at all times, and
raises up contentions, he is that man of Belial, that must be destroyed if he
repent not: then may we conclude thus: But such a one walks with a froward
mouth, etc. and has all the marks of Belial, and therefore he is a man of
Belial. And thus we se to what end this description of Belial is set forth,
namely to that end that we might know him, when we meet him, and avoid him
when we know him. And now let us go to another point, and see whether it be
lawful for Christians to judge of another, 2 Point. A point of ingratitude and
an abuse of Gods mercy to outface the truth. To take the notes that God has
given is not to judge, but to pronounce the judgment of God. Christ's words
Judge not, how they are abused by the wicked. The impudency of the covetous man.
by this description or no.

It is no small mercy of God so exactly to anatomize, or describe the wicked
man: for by this means, one shall not be taken for another: and Christians
knowing for certain a wicked man by his picture, may more easily avoid him,
more safely reprove him, and more freely give Virtue her robes and her
ornaments again, when Belial that runagate is stripped out of all, and turned
out naked as he deserves. But intolerable is the unthankfulness of many, and
by this doctrine to be reproved, that so abuse the mercy of God, as to outface
the truth even now in the day light of the Gospel, and glorious truth of the
Lord. So shameless and impudent are the favorites of Belial, that they will
not stick to say: How know you that he is a wicked man, or a wicked woman? Oh
you may not judge, you may not judge, when we do but judge the tree by the
fruits, and pronounce that which God has set down. Now he that takes the
notes which God has given him, does not judge, but only pronounces the
judgment of God.

Whatsoever the wicked do, yet when they dance in this net, You must not
judge, etc. they think themselves safe, like the foolish bird called the
Ostrich, which puts her head into a bush, and then thinks that no body
sees her, though all her body be out of the bush. If a wicked man be reproved
for covetousness, what is his defense but this: How know you that I am
covetous? you may not judge, when all his life favors of nothing else but
greedy covetousness, all his talk is of worldly matters, for heavenly things
he can find no leisure, no time to hear the word, and yet how know you that he
is covetous? He gets al men's trades into his hands, to the spoil and decay
of many that would live by him: he will be a mercer, a grocer, a draper, a
cutler, an armourer, a girdler, a malster, a brewer, a corne-bodger, a
gamester, and what not? and so ouerdroopeth all occupations about him, and
under him, that none can thrive but he: and yet how know you that he is a
worldling? Of the proud man.
In the like sort if the wicked Belial be reproved for pride, he will straight
be at defiance with you, and for his defense, this shall be his plea: How know
you that he is proud? you may not judge, etc. when all their whole life
bewrays nothing else: every day a new fashion: all the day little enough for
their curling, and crisping, and frisling, and pluming, and setting etc. Their
gate must be counterfeit, their speech is counterfeit, their beauty is
counterfeit, their hair is counterfeit, and yet how know you that teyh be
proud? Of the incontinent person.
In like manner will the lascivious and incontinent person plead for himself:
you may not judge, when all his life does stink of his filthiness, when he
hunteth harlots houses: yea though the streets swarm with his bastards,
though he does daily vomit out filthy, shameless, and ribaldry speeches: yet
he may be an honest man, The wicked are patrons one to another.
will some say: Oh it is hard to judge. These are such as claim patronage one
of another, claw me, and I will claw thee. They will stand out with it at the
bar with God himself, as in Math. 3.8. Your words have been stout against me
(says the Lord:) But they answer: What have we said? But they that make no
conscience of justifying wicked men, will make no conscience to justify
wickedness it self in time: as Solomon made no bones of idolatry, when once
he liked idolatrous women.

How Christ's words in Mat. 7.1. are to be understood. 1. Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 11.
Phil. 1.9.
It is said indeed, Judge not that ye be not judged, Math. 7.1. But that place
is to be understood against rash judgment, not judgment simply, for other
places do allow of judging, but no place allows rash, hasty, and peremptory
judging. The Apostle Saint Paul handling the doctrine of the Lords supper,
says unto his auditors the Corinths, Judge ye what I say: to show that
Christians must be able to judge of doctrine. And speaking of the preparation
of Christians before they come to the Lords table, he says: Judge your selves:
to show that Christians must be able to judge of their own estate. In another
place he prays that the Church of Christ may abound in all knowledge and
judgment, and gives a reason, that they may be able to discern things that
differ. Deuteronomy.
In another place the Lord himself says: Judge righteous judgment. All which
places (besides infinite more to the like effect) do show that our Savior
Christ for bad not all kind of judgment: they may as well conclude that there
must be no Judges, nor judgment seats: no courts, nor verdicts, no Assizes,
nor sessions, because Christ has said: Judge not: and so we should make a good
piece of work quickly. But harken now what common reason says to the matter.
Shall not the Goldsmith judge of metals, because Christ has said, Judge not?
Shall not the Physician judge of a sick body, because Christ has said, Judge
not? Shall not a jury of twelve men judge of a fellon, because Christ has said
judge not? Shall not the Judge give judgment upon a malefactor, because
Christ has said, Judge not? Shall not the ear judge of sounds, and the eye of
colors, and the nose of smells, and the palate of meats, because Christ has
said Judge not? Yes: you will say all. Very well: And shall not a Christian
also by the powers of his inward man discern between a good man and a wicked
man, because Christ has said, Judge not? Or does all power of judging, and
ability of discerning belong only to the outward man, and none to the inward
man? or shall the inward man be able to judge of every thing, saving of men's
actions and behavior? 1. Cor. 2.14.
That is very absurd. The natural man perceives not the things of God, says
the Apostle, because they are spiritual, and must be spiritually discerned:
but the spiritual man judges all things, and is judged of none: that is, of
no carnal man is he rightly judged, for the carnal man can no more judge of
the spiritual man and his actions, then a blind man can judge of colors.
Therefore, though Christ has said, Judge not, yet will no man loose his
authority in place of judgment, They that cry out, you must not judge, are
most rash themselves in judging of others. The judgment which wicked me^ give
of the godly and of others is perverse, and peposterous.
nor the privilege of his sight, nor of his hearing, nor of his tasting, nor
the use of natural reason. Nay more, though Christ has said, Judge not, yet
these fellows will not stick to be most swift judges of others themselves:
for do they see another man zealous in religion, devout in prayer, a diligent
hearer of the word of God, a painful searcher of the Scripture? a severe
reprouer of sin, and a strict man in his life and conversation? what is their
verdict of such a one? Forsooth, such a one is an hypocrite, a Puritan, a
Precisian; oh fie upon him, none are worse then these professors, a busy
fellow I warrant you, a dangerous man, an enemy to the state, etc. But if a man
will serve the time, and play the pot companion, and become an unthrift, a
gamster, a tavern hunter, or a whore hunter, and blaspheme the sacred name of
God at every word, and scoff handsomely at religion: then their verdict is
this, and their bolt is leuelled in this manner: Such a man is even the
honestest man that lives, a notable good fellow, and no man's foe but his own.
A preposterous judgment they give on both sides, like the Barbarians, with
whom Paul was either a murderer, or a God. But now hear the judgment of the
word concerning these swift judges, Esa. 5.20.
and their crooked measures: Woe be unto them (says the Prophet Esai) that
speak good of evil, and evil of good: which call light darkness, and
darkness light, sower sweet, and sweet sower. He that justifies the
wicked, Pro. 17.15.
and condemns the innocent, even both these are abomination unto the Lord,
says Solomon. And in another place: He that says to the wicked thou art
righteous, Pro. 24.24.
him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him. All which
places do teach us two things. First, that it is lawful for a man to judge
between a godly man and a wicked: but then we must beware how we judge: that
we condemn not, or commend not one for another. Secondly, that those which
rashly and unadvisedly judge of men at their own pleasure, are the worst men
that live. Let us learn then to judge the Lords judgments. Mat. 7.
It is an easy way that Christ has taught: The tree is known by his fruits.
He that cannot judge of meat by his taste is sick: So, they that cannot judge
of sin for want of spiritual taste, are very dangerously sick. When God
has set up a torch, and lighted it at noone day, and yet we blindfold our
selves and will not see, it is unthankfulness most peevish and intolerable,
which calls for a most severe judgment, even deprivation ipso facto, of all
spiritual understanding, Romans 1.
and to be given up of God unto a reprobate sense.

But here now grows a question: whether may we judge of reprobates unrevealed
or no? We may judge who is (for the present) a wicked man, but not who is a
reprobate. A similitude of a Jury.
Verily that is a matter that belongs not to us, but to the high Judge of
heaven and earth: Neither does it follow, that because I see such a one is a
wicked man, therefore such a one is a reprobate, and a damned wretch: God
forbid we should reason so: for though I see now what he is, yet what he shall
be hereafter I know not, neither do I know what God has decreed of him from
everlasting. A Jury of twelve sworn men do find (being led thereunto by their
evidence, that such a one is a thief, and guilty of felony, but further they
cannot go; to say for certain that such a one shall dye for it they cannot:
for the book may save him, or the Judge may repriue him, or the Prince may
pardon him, for any thing that they know: So a Christian by the evidence that
Gods word gives, may find such and such to be guilty of wickedness: and for
the time may by his fruits pronounce, that he stands in the state of
reprobation, so long as he so continues: but that he shall dye in that case,
is more then he knows: for the book of God may be a mean of his conversion:
and God the judge of quick and dead may repriue him to a further time of
repentance: and in the end God for his mercies sake in Jesus Christ may pardon
him all his sins, and so receive him to mercy: but this is more then any man
can assure himself of, if he continues in his wickedness: therefore let no
man presume to be a wicked man still in hope of mercy, for he may so deceive
himself. Cases rare and extraordinary.
The Church perceived that Iulianus the Apostata, or backesliding Emperor had
sinned against the holy Ghost, and therefore was a reprobate that way:
whereupon they made a decree, that all the Church should pray against him.
Paul by a special spirit of discerning, discerned of Alexander the
Copper-smith to be a reprobate: and so did our Savior Christ discern of Judas
to be a devil incarnate, John 6.
and so a reprobate: but these are no presidents nor warrants for private
persons to hold by, while they give final sentence upon any. And so much shall
suffice for the second point, where we see how far we may safely go in the
judging of other men by the description of Belial, and how far not: and now
let us come to the third circumstance, and see what we may learn from the
coherence or joining of this text with the rest of the Chapter.

In this Chapter, The third point: of the coherence of this text with the rest
of the Chapter.
Solomon makes a division of sins, and deals against diverse kinds of
sin: as namely against rashness and vaineglorie in suretiship, but not
against suretiship it self, as more at large I have showed in my Caveat for
sureties: and then he taxes those that live idly for want of a lawful
calling, and negligently in their calling, and unprofitably both, as before I
have declared (according to my poor measure) in my Rowsing of the sluggard
(the greatest enemy I confess one of them that ever I had to deal withal in
my self.) And these sins he prosecuteth unto the 12. verse. From those he
arises, and encountreth with greater, and grosser sins, both of men and
women unto the end of the Chapter: Doct. Gods fan does find out all.
from whence we may note, that the fan that God sifteth sin withal shall
find out all, and is like the net that brings all to the shore. Some think
to go away with their sins as many thieves do with their pilfers, and not to
be espied: but it cannot be: for if Gods word may have free passage, it will
find them out. How fondly then do they deceive themselves, which will have the
word to be sincerely delivered, and thoroughly applied, and yet think that they
should be exempted from the censure and reproof of the word, Luke 11.45.
and not be touched? Of such we read in the Gospel: Some look to be dispensed
with for their sins.
and namely of a certain Lawyer, who hearing our Savior Christ inueying
against some great fault amongst that profession, steppeth up, and bestirreth
himself as a fish that felt himself masked in the net, and says, Master, in
so saying thou put us to rebuke also. Where we see, that there are some
sins that can be contented to sit still, and see their fellows arrested, but
being attached themselves, they storm, and startle at the very sight of the
officer: yea at the very glimering of the light when it comes to them,
supposing themselves to be privileged, by reason that they belong some to
Princes, some to Noblemen, some to Gentlemen, some to Lawyers, some to Bishops,
and some to their officers, and all retaining to great men in the world, that
they should be spared for their masters sake: Partiality is to be found in the
world, but not in the word. No man can escape the power and censure of the word
Luke 12.3 The use of this point. I. King. 18.
which partial dealing may well befound in the world, but in the word it
cannot be: for the word of God is of that largeness that it compasses all: of
that brightness that it discovers all: of that majesty, that it astonisheth
all: of that power, that it apprehends all: and of that authority that it
commands all. Neither can any sin, or sins, withal the shifts and
devises in the world escape the power and censure of that word, which has once
spoken the word, and proclaimed it to all the world, that whatsoever is done in
secret shall be preached on the house top, that is, shall be made known to all
the world. Therefore, think it not strange good brethren, if you find your
selves touched, and rifled too, when you hear a Sermon, for the word of the
Lord being divided aright, will do both. Say not as Achab said to Eliah: Have
thou found me o my enemy? when your secret and dear sins are by the power of
the word rightly handled, and applied by your Pastor, or whosoever else: for
God has found you out, as he did find out Adam hidden amongst the trees of the
garden, or else we should have lost our selves for ever: and therefore let us
be thankful to his Majesty for so great a mercy, The minister does but hold
forth the glass that shows us our spots, Ier. 43.3. Ioh. 4. Great sins and
small sins are knit together.
for it is great indeed: and not be angry with his ministers, who do but hold
us the glass while we see therein our spots. Neither say you as the proud
Jews did to Jeremy: This is not the word of the Lord which Jeremy speaks,
but he speaks as Baruch the son of Neriah provoke him. For it is the
nature of the word to tell you all that you have done, as Christ told the woman
of Samaria.

Again, here we may further observe, how great sins and small sins are knit
together, as great thieves and little thieves lie all in one prison, go all in
one line, stand all at one bar, and have all one manner of trial: where we
are to note, that Gods Spirit is not so careful to sift out the lesser
offenses of men: but the greater also. For, as he is the Judge of all men, so
he deals uprightly in equity with all men: and not as the Scribes and
Pharisees, nor as their Apes the Papists, who strain gnattes and swallow
camels, while they urge the tithing of mint, and cummin, and rue, and let the
weightier matters of the law go by: who make the breaking of a Popish ceremony,
or dirty traditions of men a mortal sin, but never urge matters of
substance, either in matters of faith, The laws of the Popish church are like
the Spiders web.
or manners. Neither are Gods laws like the Spiders web, that catches only
little flies, but like the net that takes the Lion as well as the Hare, which
straightness and uprightness bewraieth the crookednes of men. For first, how
contrary to Gods course is the practice of Antichrist, and Papists? For how
precise are they in the searching out of toys and trifles, ceremonial and
circumstantiall things, and punishing men for the omission of them? But for the
profaning of the Sabbath, for the insufficiency of unpreaching Ministers, for
the contempt of Gods word, and such like things, they are not so precise; nay
scarce do they account of them as of sins. Many professors are zealous
against smaller offenses in others, and dispe^ce with foul abuses in
themselves! Our force is to be bent against the least sins as well as the
greatest.
This also reproves many professors of the Gospel, which will seem to make
a conscience of many matters of less moment in others, and dispense with very
foul abuses, as of swearing, gaming, etc. both in themselves, and in their
families. Whereby all of us are to be admonished to take that course that Gods
Spirit takes here, and that is, to be as zealous against one sin as against
another, and to bend our force against the greatest as well as against the
least: and to pull out as well the beams as the motes, out of our own eyes,
as well, as out of other men's. And so much for the doctrine that arises of the
coherence, or joining of this text with the rest of the Chapter.

Now let us pray.
THE II. SERMON.
PROVE. 6.12. The unthrifty man [or the man of Belijal] and the wicked man, or
[the man of vanity.]


IN the former Sermon we have heard to what end this description of a wicked
man is made, and how far we may go in judging him. Of the names of Belial.
Now let us consider of his marks (by which he is known, as the Leopard by his
spots, and the black Moore by his skin.) And first of his names, and they be
two. The meaning of this phrase, the man of Belial among the Hebrews. A
dissolute and loose man.
The first is Adam Belijahall, the second is Ish-auen, which in our English
Bibles are translated, the unthrifty man, and the wicked man: the words in the
original text are more significant. Adam Belijahall is a phrase whereby the
Hebrews do use to note out a dissolute and loose man, a lawless person
without a yoke, that gives himself to do what he list, and is not unfitly
translated, an unthrifty man, ab effectis, from the effects of lawlesnesse,
because such commonly never thrive, nor come to any good end. So is this word
Belial taken in diverse other places of the Scripture, as in Deuteronomy. 13.13. Deuteronomy.
13.13.
Wicked men are gone out from among you, meaning children of Belial, as they
are called in the original. These like lawless persons have drawn away
(says the text) the inhabitants of their city unto other Gods. So likewise is
it taken in the 19. of Judges verse 22. where it is said, Judge. 19.22.
That as the Leuite and his wife were making merry, at an old man's house, who
gave them entertainment in their journey, the men of the city, even men of
Belial (says the text) meaning dissolute and lewd persons given to all
wickedness, beset the house round about, and smote at the door, and enforced
the old man, the master of the house, to bring forth his guest unto them,
where most villanously they abused the Levites concubine all night unto death.
In like sort it is taken in the first of Samuel 2. Chapter 12. verse. 1. Sam
2.12.
where it is said that the sons of Ely were men of Belial: that is, given to
all wickedness. In this sense it is used also or abused rather, 2. Sa. 16.7.
in the 2. of Samuel chap. 16. ver. 7. where that cursed Shimei being a man of
Belial himself, does most undutifully rail upon King David his Lord and
Sovereign, saying: Come forth thou man of blood, and man of Belial. And in
the new Testament it is also so taken in the 2. to the Corin. the 6. Chap. and
15. verse. where the Apostle says: What fellowship is there betwixt Christ and
Belial? 2. Cor. 6.15.
That is, there is no fellowship betwixt Christ and lawless persons, that are
given to wickedness. And thus were dissolute persons called among the Jews.
The Lord calls such a kind of persons, Exo. 32.9.
A stiff necked people in Exodus 32.9. Alluding to untamed oxen, which will not
(unless they be enforced) bow down their necks unto the yoke. Such are
those that say in the 2. Psalm. 2.3. ver. Let us break their bands asunder,
and cast away their cords from us. Psalm. 2.2.3.
Such are those also that say (in the 19. of Luke ver. 37.) We will not have
this man to reign over us. Luke. 19.27.
Such are all those who allow Christ to be their Priest, to die for them, but
not their Prince to bear rule over them. Such also are all those that say (as
in Psalm 12. ver. 4.) With our tongue we will prevail, Psalm. 12.4
our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? And all such are called here in my
text, men of Belial, and men of vanity and wickedness: as if obstinate
stubburnnesse were their father, His names set forth his nature. 1. Sam. 25.
and vain wickedness, or wicked vanity their mother, deriuing their
reproachful names from their perverse nature, and crooked conditions: that as
Abigaile said, Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: so a man may say,
Belial is his name, and stubburnenesse is with him: yea Auen is he called, for
both vanity and iniquity are with him: that is, he has not his name for
naught.

He has beside these, Belial has as many names as the devil.
as many names as his grandfather the Devil has: he is called a devil, that
is, an accuser: so is Belial also an accuser, especially of the brethren, as
the devil is. Apoc. 12.10. He is called Satan, which signifies an enemy,
Accusers. Apoc. 12.10.
for he does envy the glory of God, and the peace of Gods people: and such an
enemy is Belial. He is called a compasser of the earth, Job. 1.7. So do the
wicked also, which have shaken off the yoke of Christ, Enemies. Job. 1.7.
compass sea and land to make one Proselite, as our Savior Christ speaks in
Math. 23.15. that is: They take great pains like the devil, Co^passers. Mat.
23.15. Luke. 22.31.
to frame others unto their conditions. He is called a sifter of men. Luke
22.31. Simon, Simon (says the Lord) behold Satan has desired to sift you as
wheat is sifted: and who has a greater felicity in sifting of men, and
proving by all means to make them fall, then Belial has? He is called a
deceiuer Genesis 3.13. Sifters. Genesis 3.13.
And the woman said, the Serpent deceued me: but that was the Devil. So is
Belial a deceiuer too: But evil men and deceivers (says the Apostle) shall
wax worse and worse; Deceivers. 2. Tim. 3.13.
deceiving and being deceived, 2. Tim. 3.13. He is called a Serpent for his
subtilty. So likewise are lawless Belials for their noisome nature, and
dangerous conuersing among men, Serpents. Psalm. 58 4.
compared to serpents: Their poison (says the Psalmist) is even like the
poison of a Serpent. Psalm. 58.4. He is called the wily fox: so are the wicked
and lawless Belials, both for their cruelty, and for their subtilty called
foxes: Foxes. Cant. 2.15.
Go tell that fox (says Christ of Herod) what ye see. And in the 2. of
Canticles the 15. verse, the Church says, Take us these foxes, the little
foxes which destroy the Vine, for our Vine has but small grapes. Psalm. 91.3.
He is called a hunter, Psalm. 91.3. and so is Belial too a hunter, for they
hunt men as Saul did David, from one place to another, Hunters. 1. Sa. 24.12.
I have not sinned against thee (says David to Saul) yet thou huntest after
my soul to take it. 1. Sam. 24.12. And at another time David said unto him,
The King of Israel is come out to seek a flea, as one would hunt a Partridge
in the mountains. 1. Sam. 26.20. He is called a red dragon for his cruelty
Revel. 12.3. Dragons. Psalm. 44.19. 1. Pet. 5.8.
So are the wicked called dragons; Thou have smitten us down in the place of
dragons (says the Church of God in Psalm 44.19. He is called a roaring Lion:
Your adversary the devil walks about like a roaring Lion, Lions. Psalm. 54.4.
therefore be sober and watch (says Peter in his first Epistle, the 5. Chapter
and 8. verse. So the wicked are called Lions too, for David says, That his
soul was among Lions, Psalm. 54.4. He is called a Prince of darkness, Lovers
of darkness.
Ephesians. 6.12. And the wicked also are called lovers of darkness: Light is come
into the world (says Christ) and men loved darkness rather then light, John.
3.19. Ephesians. 4.18. Ioh. 8.44.
Ioh. 3.19. And of the Heathen the Apostle says, They have their cogitations
darkened, Ephesians. 4.18. He is called a father of lies, Ioh. 8.44. When he
speaks a ly, he speaks of his own (says Christ) for he is a liar, Liars.
Psalm. 52.3.
and the father thereof. So the wicked are also called liars: Thou do love
evil more then good (says David to Doeg) and lies more then truth, Psalm.
52.3. And one name more we find that the devil gave himself, a quantitate,
from the great multitude of them: My name is Legion (says the unclean spirit
to Christ) for we are many, Mar. 5.9.
Mark 5.9. Legion. A mark of the Popes Church. Phil. 3.19.
So the man of Belial may say, his name is Legion, for there be many of them,
and that likes them well, for they have nothing else to glory in, but their
great number, or universality (one glorious mark of the Popes Church) which is
the glory of them, whose glory is their shame, as the Apostle speaks;
Philip. 3.19. And thus much for the meaning of the first word Adam Belijagnall,
the man of Belial, Now let us see what we may profitably learn from the same.
There is no concord between Christ and Belial.
This name notes out such as are enemies to Christ, and have Christ an enemy
to them: they cannot agree with him, nor he with them: For (says the Apostle)
What concord has Christ with Belial? 2. Cor. 6.15. As Dagon fell down when
the Arc came in place: so Belial falls down when Christ comes in place. The
contrariety between Belial and Christ.
Christ has a burden to bear, but Belial will bear none of his burdens.
Christ has a yoke to put on his servants, but Belial will put on none. Christ
has a cross to be taken up, but Belial will take up none. Christ has freed
us from the curse of the law, but not from the keeping of the law: Belial
will be free from both. Christ will have his sheep to hear his voice: Belial
will come at none of his Sermons. Christ will have his people often to visit
his table in remembrance of him: Belial says once a year is enough: and
otherwise, he will come when he lift* Christ says, if ye love me keep my
commandments: Belial says he will keep none of his commandments, and yet
love him well enough. Christ says, by this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another, as I have loved you: Belial by the contrary
is known to be none of Christ's disciples, because he hates the brethren, Genesis
27.
as Esau hated Jacob because of his blessing. Christians love is Christ's love,
that is, hearty and unfeigned, heavenly and vehement, A description of Belials
love.
found and permanent: Belials love is only tongue love, lip love, false love,
dissembling love, no true love at all, but like the love of the harlot whose
mouth is sweet as honey, but her end is bitter as wormwood: Pro. 5.
whose lips drop as the honey comb, but her feet go down to death, and her
steps take hold of hell: such a lover is Belial, and such is his love. In a
word, true Christians are under Christ's law, they draw his yoke, they mortify
the lusts of their flesh, they travel in pain to bring forth the fruits of
Gods spirit: but Belial is lawless, dissolute, and careless, and shameless,
therefore there can be no concord betwixt Christ and Belial.

The use of this doctrine is twofold: A double use of the former doctrine. 1.
It bewraieth a Popish slander.
first, it bewrays the blasphemous slander of Popery, that charge us with
preaching liberty to sin, because we preach justification by faith in Christ
only. Whereas we are so far from that slander, that we affirm clean
contrary, that no Libertine Protestant, or dissolute professor of the Gospel
has fellowship with Christ more then the Devil has. But indeed they know
not what faith is, except the devils faith: for the devils do know and believe
that Christ dyed for sinners: and they believe all the articles of the Creed,
Papists are men of Belial.
and tremble thereat, but yet are they Devils still. Look to their lives which
live under the Popes yoke, and we shall see that they are the children of
Belial: for what sin is there that they are not sold unto, like Achab? And
what sin can be named almost, that is not bought and sold in the market of
the Romish church? And the Pope may pardon all as they say, for a thousand
years, yea (if they will pay well for his pardon) for ever. And what are their
Popes themselves, who bear the glorious title of holy Fathers? Of the wicked
lives of their Popes.
Have not some of them been Necromancers, sorcerers, and coniurers? and some of
them Sodomits, and buggerers: and most of them common whoremongerers? Was not
one of the^ a harlot? did she not travel of a child in going their Procession?
And is it not recorded by Platina and other Writers of their own, to their
everlasting shame? What should be thought of those six thousand skulles of
children, which were found in another Popes Mote? What need they care what they
do, Popish doctrine fit to make men of Belial.
so they may be forgiven for giving of a little Apostolical gold? They are not
ashamed nor afraid when they take a solemn oath to murder Princes, yea
Christian Princes, yea their own most Christian Sovereigns: for they are
pardoned aforehand, as he was that poisoned King John, and the Prince of
Orange: and that cursed Friar that trecherously stabbed the late French King:
and therefore they are Belials and not we: their religion gives liberty to
sin, and not ours: they may do what they list, and not they which are
justified by faith in Christ only.

The second use of this doctrine, is to teach those that are entered into the
body of Christ's Church, The 2. use, to teach Christians mortification and
obedience. Mat. 11.29.
and are called by that excellent glorious name of Christians, to put on the
yoke of Christ, and never while they live to put it off again: for though
Christ says, Come unto me and ye shall have ease; yet it is upon this
condition, that we labor and feel our selves heavy laden: yea though he
promises to refresh us, yet it is upon condition that we put his yoke upon us
and bear his burden. Whosoever then will have ease by Christ, must not be
(like the man of Belial) without the yoke of Christ, but must put on his yoke
and carry his burden, that is to say, he must submit himself to the censures
of Christ his Church, and to the doctrine of the Gospel, and to the reproof
of the word: and in all things yield obedience unto the truth: yea he must
labor by all good means to mortify all carnal lusts, and to ouerrule all
his unruly affections. But this is as hard a saying to flesh and blood as can
be; yea who can endure it? The mother of Zebedeus children thought for the
asking she might have a place in Christ's kingdom for her children: Mat. 20.20.
but Christ told her of two hard things which she dreamed not of, and that was
drinking of his cup, and to be baptized with his baptism, before they could
come into heaven: so we think (many of us) to have heaven for the asking: Many
think to have heaven for the asking: without any more ado.
but there belongs more to the matter then so. And as the Papists think to
earne heaven with a Kerelyson, a Pater noster, and a Creed: so many
Protestants think that a sigh, and a little lip-labor and eare-seruice will
bring them to heaven. But when they hear of mortifying their beloved sins,
which bring them in pleasure, and profit; and of yielding obedience unto the
Gospel, Mat. 19.22.
it fares with them as it did with that young man, who went away from Christ
with a heavy heart and a sorrowful countenance. He would follow Christ, but
he would not part from his goods: so many will hear Christ preached, and look
to be saved by him too, but they will not leave their sins. If they may be
Gospellers and usurers too, and gamesters too, and adulterers too, and swearers
too, then so it is: otherwise Christ shall go alone for all them. These are yet
but men of Belial, and without the yoke: content they are to travel toward
Canaan, so they may meet with the commodities of Egypt by the way. Manna
without the fleshpots of Egypt was loathsome to the Israelites: so the Gospel
without goodfellowship and carnal delights is irksome to the man of Belial.
Lots wife was content to leave Sodom and go to Zoar as she was bidden, but yet
she must look back, though she were forbidden: so many are content to leave
Popery and embrace the Gospel, yet not without some looking back, like those
which once openly gave account of their profiting in religion with comfort and
commendation, but now because their backsliding friends like it not, and
profane persons scorn them for it, they will show their faces no more in that
conflict. The carnal Capernaits would hear Christ, till he spoke of eating
his flesh, and drinking his blood, and then because they understood it not,
they said, that saying was a hard saying, and taking offense thereat came no
more. So many now a days as carnally minded as they, will hear the Preacher,
till they hear something that does offend them, either for want of good
understanding or good affection: and then they say, that either the preacher
found not that in his text, or it might have been spared: or in such a thing he
went too far: all which in effect is no less then (as the Capernaits said)
this is a hard saying, 1. King. 3. Of such as keep the sabbath to the halfes.
They are like, 1. The harlot that would have the child divided. 1. King. 18. 2.
The idol Baal, that could not hear.
who can abide it? And so like bleare-eyed men which are offended at the
brightness of the Sun, will walk no more by the light thereof, except it be
once a month, or upon a sabbath day, for fear of law, or for shame of the
world. And many that do keep the sabbath day, do use it as the unnatural
harlot would have used the child for which there was such pleading before
Solomon: Let it be neither hers nor mine, but let it be divided. So they divide
the Sabbath: in the forenoone they are at the Temple, in the afternoon at
home. The one half shall be given to God and after the homeliest fashion too:
without any holy reverence or due preparation: the other half to the world, or
the flesh, or the devil, or al, and that with all devotion and earnestness of
affection. These may well be likened to the idol of Achab, to whom Baals
Priests cried, O Baal hear us. But what said Elias: Cry louder, for it may be
that your God sleeps, or pursues his enemies, or else he talks with some
body, or is in his journey. So if the Minister of Christ would have Belial to
hear him, he must cry louder: O Belial hear us, for it may be that the men
of Belial are a sleep, and must be awaked, or pursuing their enemies, or
setting their rackes, or casting over their usury books, or selling their
wares, or viewing their grounds, as Nebuchadnezzar did his palace, or running
after their bowls, or playing at cards, or pursuing of their vanities. And
that see others of the inferior sort, and they become as deaf too as their
betters. If a man cry never so loud to these Belials, it will not boot: for
they are as deaf as Baal: and if there be no law to compel them to sanctify
the sabbath in better sort, we do but loose our labor. Herod would hear John
Baptist, so John would let him alone with his brothers wife: so would many also
now be hearers of the word, and reverence as much the Preacher as ever Herod
did John, so they may have a dispensation for some special sin of theirs,
which does yield them some filthy gain or beastly pleasure. But Herod was a
man of Belial for all his devout hearing of John: and so are these kind of
hearers too: for he cast off the yoke of mortification, and so do they.

What it is to put on the yoke of Christ.
Well, if we will be Christians indeed as well as in name, we must put on the
yoke of obedience to Christ's laws. What he says we must believe: what he
commands we must obey: what he promises we must desire: what he threatens
we must fear: what he suffers we must partake: what we understand not we
must reverence: what we like not we must (at the least) affect it: what we
brook not we must yet hunger after: It is a great honor to pledge Christ in
his sufferings. Christ's laws.
and what cup he has drunk to us in, we must desire to pledge him in the same
with all our heart, and count ourselves not worthy of such an honor, when we
have obtained of God so great a favor. We must then deny our selves willingly,
and for his sake take up the cross chearefully, for this is Christ's law, we
must hear his voice and follow him: for this is Christ's law: we must often
remember him by worthy receiving his holy supper, for this is Christ's law: we
must do to the poor what we would do to him, for this is Christ's law: we must
love one another as he has loved us, for this is Christ's law: we must suffer
reproaches and rebukes for his sake, for this is Christ's law: we must learn to
forgive our enemies as he has forgiven us, for this is Christ's law. In a word,
we must mortify all our evil lusts and affections, and make our members
weapons of righteousness, for this also is the law of Christ. For this cause
the word is called a candle to light us in darkness, a sharp sword to cut
and divide us, a hard hammer to drive and break us, and a burning fire to
purge and consume us: by ruling our lives whereby, both young in years and young
in knowledge are to redress their ways. Psalm. 119.9. Psalm. 119.9.
And the obedience of a Christian is nothing else, but a following of that
light: a suffering of that sword to hew and cut him: of that hammer to break
and batter him: of that fire to purge and consume him: of that fan to winnow
and cleanse him: and of that plough to break and till him: and all this with
patience, gladness and thankfulness. A duty this is very painful for flesh
and blood to perform: and therefore is called in the scriptures, a cutting off
the hand, and a pulling out of the eye. Mat. 5.29.30. Mat. 5.29.
A cutting of the throat. Pro. 23.2. a weaning of the soul. Pro. 23.2.
Psalm. 131.2. and a crucifying of the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof. Gal. 5.24. To show, As hard to forgo our sins as our lives.
that is is as hard a matter by nature to forgo our sins, as our eyes, or our
hands, or our lives. Yet because grace does go beyond nature, and goodness is
stronger then evil, and the spirit does overcome the flesh, and faith
begins where reason ends: therefore Christ's yoke is called easy, and his
burden light: Mat. 11.26. Mat. 11.26. How Christ's yoke is made easy
For he has borne it for us, and does bear it in us, and bears us too, and
therefore it is light to him that would bear it: as Solomon says, All the
words of God are plain to him that will understand, and straight to them that
would find knowledge. Prou. 8.9. Pro. 8.9.
Nay more, as the birds feathers are a benefit unto her and not a burden,
because they carry her up from the snare of the fowler: so the service of
Christ it no burden unto us but a benefit, Christ's burden is a benefit and
no burden.
because it freeth us from the bondage of the Devil. Therefore let us go on my
good brethren without fainting. Let xs resolve to put on the yoke of Christ, to
be obedient unto the Gospel, to cast off our laziness in the service of God,
and to cast away our sins of profit and pleasure, though we go through honor
and dishonor as we must, like the yoked ox, that haleth his burden after him
through thick and thin. It is not enough to defy Popery. Mat. 5.
Many defy the Pope, and think then that they are good Christians, and yet
are lawless in their affections. The Turk, the Jew, the Saracene, and the
infidel can say so much: but except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven, says Christ: so, except our righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Turks and Saracens we cannot be saved. Therefore as we
defy Popery, so we must be careful to imitate Christ, and to glorify him by
the subduing of our carnal lusts and desires. The commendation that Saint
Paul gave unto the Thessalonians was, 1. These. 1.9. Many forsake Papists, and
join with Atheists.
for that they turned from their idols unto the living God. 1. These. 1.9. But
what commendation shall we deserve if we forsake Popery and serve other
sins? if we leave the Papists and join with Atheists, Machiauels, and
Libertines? The yoking of a Christian, David calls a waining of the soul: to
show, that we long after liberty, Why mortification is called a waining of the
soul.
as the child does after the breast: that is, to cry for it, when we cannot get
it. Now in waining of the soul, we must do as nurses do in waining of
children: they first anoint their breasts with some sower things to bring the
child out of love withal: then they provide some other wholesome food for the
child: so we must have before our eyes the discommodities of the world, How to
waine the soul.
and the miseries of vanity, and the pains that follow sinful pleasures: and
then let our souls be fed and nourished with the sweet food of the heavenly
word of God. And then fear not: for as Abraham found a sacrifice where he
looked for none: even so, if we be as ready to sacrifice our sins, as he was
to sacrifice his son at Gods bidding, we shall find new comforts, and
pleasures where we looked for none. And as Sampson first slew the lion, and
afterward found a sweet honey comb in the dead lions belly, so if we will arm
our selves to slay our sins which like ramping lions do meet us in the way,
we shall by the power of Gods spirit overcome them, and after that find a most
sweet honey comb of Gods mercy in Christ Jesus, by whom we have overcome sin
and Satan, to our everlasting peace and consolation. Psalm. 73.24.
He that can truly say with David unto God: Thou shall guide me by thy
counsel, shall follow with David, and say assuredly, Afterward thou will
receive me to glory. And he that is not come to that point, Pro. 1.27.28
29.30. The fearful estate of Libertines.
is as yet at a miserable pass: for the Lord in the first of Prouer. shows,
that because he has called to the foolish, to make them understand his words,
and they have refused to be instructed, or to be guided by his counsel: he
will laugh at their destruction, and mock when their fear comes upon them:
yea, when their fear shall come upon them like desolation, and their
destruction like a whirle wind. When affliction and anguish shall come upon
them, then shall they call upon the Lord and he will not hear them, they shall
seek him early, Verse 31.
but they shall not find him. Thus says the holy Ghost: they shall eat of the
fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devises. To which the
Apostle agrees, and tells the men of Belial: that as they regard not to know
God, To. 1.28.
even so God will deliver the^ up to a reprobate mind, to do things that are not
convenient. And moreover says Christ: Luke 19.27.
Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them bring
hither, and slay them before me. A fearful thing: therefore the children of
God pray heartily: Thy will be done in earth o heavenly Father, as it is in
heaven: Psalm. 115. The practice of Gods children.
and with the Church in the Psalm: Not unto us (o Lord) not unto us, but to
thy name give the praise: fighting continually against their affections,
because they fight against their souls. And as the ox is not ready to work,
until he be under the yoke, so Gods children think not themselves ready to
serve God, until they have put on the yoke of Christ: Psalm. 40. The comfort of
Gods children at the hour of death.
and then they say as David said, I am ready o Lord to do thy will. And this
shall be a singular comfort unto us at the hour of death, to remember that we
have striuen against our affections, and earnestly labored, and prayed to obey
God, which the man of Belial, or lawless dissolute person never did. And so
much of the wicked man's first name.

The second term or name that is here given to the wicked man, Of the 2. name
of the man of Belial.
is (...) Ish auen, vir nihili, says Tremelius: that is, a man of no worth:
Auen signifies both iniquity and vanity: therefore the house of idols is
called Beth-auen, because idols are vain things, and idolaters are vain and
wicked persons: therefore lawless loose men are called Ishim auen: because
such are both vain and wicked, yea more, full of vanity and iniquity. First,
they are unprofitable, pursuing (as it were) the wind and the smoke: secondly,
they are practisers of mischief and wrong. What is profaneness.
This is profaneness, from which the Apostle dehorteth us, in the twelfth to
the Hebrews and 16. verse: where Esau is propounded as a most lively image of
such profane persons as prefer earth before heaven, the world before the
word, gold before godliness, the body before the soul, and the shadow before
the body: as Esau did a mess of pottage before his birthright; and as the
Israelites preferred onions before Manna: and as the Jews did Barrabas before
Christ. Such were they that said in Ier. 43. It was well with us when we made
cakes for the Queen of heaven: as many say now adays: It was never merry
world since we had so much preaching: it was a good world when we could go to
the Abbeys and other religious houses, and have our bellies full of good cheer
for nothing. Jeremy is a babbler (said they) and preaching is babbling, say
these. But what were they and these too? Surely but Ishimauen, profane
persons. Profane vanity and wickedness is called now adays finenesse of wit.
This vain profaneness and profane vanity, is called finenesse of wit now
adays, whereby many profane and vain persons get their living, which is
nothing else but plain and lewd shifting. This is a matter that men make no
reckening of: but such a one is viler then the earth. Yet the custom of the
wicked is to commend such, saying: such a one is a good honest man, and does no
body any harm, which is untrue. For Ish-auen, the vain man is also a wicked
man, that is hurtful unto others. One may be a bad man that does hurt no body.
And if it were granted that he did no man harm, yet is he no good man, but a
profane beast and most wicked to Godward. An honest man they say he is, but of
what religion is he? what religious exercise does he frequent? How does he
serve God with his family? what striving has he against his imperfections?
When does he enter into private prayer for strength against his special sins
and temptations? What care has he to bring up his children in the fear of
God? He may be an honest man and yet a profane man: Honesty is double: civil
and religious.
for honesty is two fold, civil and religious. Some are civil honest men and
not religious: some are religious honest men, and scarce civil: some are
neither civil nor religious: and some are both civil and religious. Examples
we have in the Scriptures of all these. The Barbarians in Miletum were civil
honest men, whose civil courtesy and courteous ciuility appeared in that kind
entertainment which they gave, and that abundance of necessaries which they
ministered unto Paul and his weather beaten company. Religious honest me^ give
God his due.
But religious honest men they were not: that is to say, such as give God his
due: for they had not so much as the knowledge of the true God amongst them, as
does appear by those extremities that they ran into at the sight of Paul. For
one while they rashly judged him to be a murderer, Act. 28.
and that was when the Viper leaped upon his hand: another while they did
superstitiously suppose him to be a God: and that was, when he shook off the
Viper and had no harm. In the first of Kings, the 14. chapter, and thirteenth
verse, it is said of Abijah the son of Jeroboam, that when he dyed all Israel
mourned for him, because there was found in him some goodness toward the Lord
God of Israel: that is, he was a man careful to give unto God his right, as
well as unto men: and therefore he was a religious civil honest man. Some
seem to be religious without civility: as the harlot whom Solomon describes
in the 7. of the Prou. who prateth of her peace offerings, and paying her
vows, while notwithstanding in her hushands absence, like a dishonest filth
freely violateth her marriage vow (made unto him) by prostituting her body
unto others: and as Iezabel religiously proclaims a fast, while most
uncivilly, and with barbarous cruelty she depriueth innocent Naboth both of
his life and living: and as those do that divide the spoils of the Church
among them, devouring (as Solomon says) the sanctified things, and then
enquire after the vows: Prou. 23.
that is, make show of religion. But they that have neither civility nor
religion in them, are like Esau, who hated his brother Jacob, because God
blessed him: and like Hanun the Ammonite, who misused David's messengers which
were sent of good will to see him: and like Doeg the Edomite, who laid hands
upon the Priests of the Lord and slew them, when every body else refused to
touch them. And such commonly are the men of Belial and the men of vanity.
Good honest men they are counted among such as themselves are; Who is a good.
man indeed.
but he is a good man indeed, and greatly to be lamented when he is gone, that
vpholdeth Gods true religion, and with Cornelius fears God with all his
household, and gives much alms to the poor: and with Job shows himself a
just man, and one that worshippeth God aright: becoming also as Job did, an
eye to the blind, What manner of persons we must choose to co^uerse withal.
a foot to the lame, and a father to the fatherless. Such does God choose for
good men, and such must we choose to converse withal, and not such as spend
their time in ridiculous sports and vain pastimes, which vanish away like the
wind and smoke, without any profit to those that have delighted in them. For
David says in the 26. Psalm: I have walked o Lord in thy truth: and presently
adds: I have not haunted with vain persons, Vain company will draw men from
God.
neither keep I company with the dissemblers: I have hated the assembly of
the evil, and not companied with the wicked: to show, that whosoever
consorteth himself with vain and evil company, cannot walk in the ways of
the Lord: and therefore let them that desire to walk in the ways of Gods
truth, take heed that they haunt not with vain persons, but hate the
assemblies of the wicked, as David did.

And further here is to be observed a difference between Adam and Ish: The
difference between Adam and Ish.
both do signify man: but the first notes the matter of which man was made,
that is, red earth: or as Tremelius has translated it, the dust of the earth,
which is the worst of all the earth, and good for nothing. Earth is good for
something, and clay is good for something, and sand is good for something, and
marle is good for something, and dung is good for something: but dust is good
for nothing, except it be to put out ones eyes, and of that was man made which
is good for nothing. The confideration whereof may greatly humble us, when we
begin to think well of our selves, to wax proud of Gods gifts, and to
despise our brethren. But the man of Belial is so called, Vain Belial is viler
then the^ earth.
to show, that such a one is the vilest man that lives, yea viler then the
earth: and according to his name, so is his nature: for of a word that
signifies the vilest earth is his name derived: and accordingly, all his
studies, cares, and communications are earthly and profane. All which the
Apostle notes in one word, when he says: they mind earthly things: Phil.
3.19. A God they have, but it is their belly: a glory they have, but it is
their shame: enemies they are, but it is to the cross of Christ: and an end
they have, but it is damnation, says the Apostle.

Ish also is a man, but it notes a man of strength, and signifies strength:
of the Latins it is translated vir, a virtute: that is, a man of manhood, or
strong of strength, or virtuous of virtue: because if manhood, strength and
virtue be not found in man, where should they be looked for? And Adam is
translated homo de humo: that is, taken out of the ground, because of all that
God made nothing was made of the earth but man. And in our English tongue we say
of one that is valiant, virtuous and active, that is a man indeed. And the
Philosopher could say by the light of nature: non vestis sed virtus facit
hominem: Not vestures, but virtues make a man: which is quite mistaken in these
days, and that saying wholly inuerted: for most men hold, and by their
practice do uphold, that non virtus sed vestis, not virtue but bravery makes a
man. But why is Belial called Ish, which is a word of strength, virtue and
perfection? What virtue, excellency, or perfection is in earthly vain Belial?
Surely no goodness is in him, and yet is he Ish, he is vir, a man indeed; but
a man whose strength is wholly applied to vanity. The strength of the wicked
is wholly employed in evil.
He does excel, but it is in contriuing of mischief: he is quick witted, but
it is in disgracing of truth and her friends: They are wise (says Jeremy) but
it is to do evil: They are expert (says Esaias) but it is to drink wine and
strong drink: They can take no rest (says Solomon) but it is only till they
have made some to fall. Such were they that watched all night to take Christ:
they were Ishim, men indeed. They ran to fetch him vinegar with gall to
drink, which would not go nor creep for a drop of cold water to have done him
good. Such are all those lawless and dissolute persons, that can beat their
brains, and break their sleep, and go late to bed, and rise early in the
morning, and travel hard all day, yea day and night, by sea and by land, far
and near, refusing no pains, neither sparing for any cost, nor fearing any
colors, but most audaciously put forth themselves to speak, and to practice
what mischief they can against godliness and virtue, against honest men and
good causes, and standing as stoutly in defense of vanity and wickedness.
These have a kind of felicity and dexterity in gracing of the bad, and in
disgracing of the good, and do very often strongly prevail in wicked
enterprises. And this must teach us, first, not to be dismayed when iniquity
does prevail: for the very names that are given to wicked men do show no
less, but they shall prevail for a time, which is to verify the Prophecy of
our Savior Christ, who foretold that before the end of the world, wickedness
should prevail, and iniquity get the upper hand. Secondly, it does admonish
the children of God, who are haters of wickedness, to be Ishim, that is,
strong, and wise, and valiant, for God and good causes: as Ish-auen, the vain
man is for the Devil and wicked enterprises. 1. Cor. 16.13
And this is not mine but Gods counsel by the Apostle, with whose words for
this time I will end: My brethren watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you
like men, and be strong.

THE III. SERMON.
PRO. 6.12. Walks with a froward mouth, etc.


WE have heard of the names of Belial: Of Belials actions.
and how they do set forth his nature. Now it remains that we consider of
his actions: whereby he is also described as well as by his names. And first of
those which set forth his outward behavior; where, the first member to be
ripped up, is his mouth: which for the quality is very evil: for it is
froward: and for the quantity is exceeding great: for it is full of
frowardnes, as that which is accustomed to speak froward things. He walks
with a froward mouth: or as Tremelius translateth it, ore peruerso, with a wry
mouth, or a mouth drawn out of fashion.

The mouth is put here Metonymice, for that which proceeds out of the mouth:
Of his speeches.
and that is, froward speeches, and crooked constructions, etc. Walking is put
Metaphorically, for a custom and continuance in the said frowardness. And
albeit I deny not, but that sometime the man of Belial may stumble upon a good
word, or yield a good reason, or utter a wise sentence, or speak to one
friendly, or salute courteously, or discourse learnedly, or determine
iudicially, etc. all which Belial can do, when he is not provoked to anger, or
when he is soothed, or is in his good mood (as they say:) yet for all this, he
is noted for one that walks with a froward mouth, because commonly, and for
the most part, his words are peevish and perverse: and ordinarily like Nabal he
is, who was so wicked, 1. Sam. 25.
that a man could not tell how to speak unto him. And therefore, A man is that
which he is for the most part.
because of his usual manner of frowardnes, he is said to walk, not with a wise
mouth, nor with a courteous mouth, etc. but with a froward mouth: for
denominatio fit a maiori part, the denomination of any thing (say Logitians)
is taken from the greatest part: as the Blackmore is called black, though his
teeth be white, because all his body is black.

That a froward mouth is a note of a wicked man, shall easily appear, if we
consider two things.

First, the right use of his tongue, or the end for which it was given.
Secondly, the true difference between the wicked and the godly in the use and
abuse of the tongue. Of the first he may be instructed in diverse places of the
Scripture: but especially three. One is in the old Testament, the other two are
in the new: that in the old Testament is the 45. Psalm, where in the beginning
of the Psalm, the Psalmist calls his tongue, the pen of a ready writer.
Psalm. 45.1.
But what is it that he will write? that is, what will he declare or set
forth? He shows in the first verse in general terms: first, that it shall
be of a good matter: to show, that the tongue was made to set forth none but
good matters: The tongue was given to set forth none but good matters.
but what matters does he mean? He says, that he will entreat or discourse of
the King, meaning Solomon: his Majesty, his beauty, his riches, his power,
his wisdom, his virtues, his ornaments, his honorable marriage with the Queen
of Egypt: and under all these he means to shadow out the unspeakable
Majesty of Christ, and the excellent dignities and prerogatives of Christ his
church. For otherwise he might seem only to set his mind to commend men, and
to flatter Princes, Job.
which is a thing condemned by Job, when he says: Shall not my maker confound
me, if I give titles unto men? But from this place of the Psalm we may learn,
that our toungs are given us, chiefly to set forth the glory of God, And
chiefly the glory of God. The tongue compared to a pen for three causes.
and those things that may tend to the extolling of Christ and his kingdom,
and to the alluring of others unto the love of Christ. But why does he compare
the tongue unto a pen? Surely, for three causes. First, because as the pen
shows what the mind thought, so the tongue should express the zeal of the
heart. Secondly, as the pen does his message without blushing, so the tongue
must speak nothing that a man may be ashamed of, but should boldly justify
the same. And thirdly, to show that there must be that consent between the
tongue and the heart, And to the pen of a swift writer for three causes.
that is between the pen and the mind of the writer. As the tongue is compared
to a pen; so also, to the pen of a swift writer: and that for three causes.
First, to show, that as swift writing is a sign of one that is well practiced
in writing: so the tongue should not be slow, but swift, and well practiced in
the praises of God. Secondly, to show, that it must dispatch much in a short
time, and not a little in a long time, as the hand of a swift writer does. 1.
Thirdly to show, that the tongue must ever be renewed and corrected as the pen
of a swift writer that writes much, 2.
must be still renewed and corrected. 3.
And so much for this place of the Psalm. The use of the tongue may further be
learned out of two other places in the new Testament: whereof the first is of
S. Paul, and the other is of S. James: Ephesians. 4.29. etc.
that of Paul is in the 4. of his Epistle to the Ephesians. 29.30.31. verses:
Let no corrupt communication (says he) proceed out of your mouths, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers: and grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by which ye are sealed unto the
day of redemption. Let all bitterness and anger, and wrath, crying, and evil
speaking be put away from you, with all maliciousness: be ye courteous one to
another. To show, The tongue is given to build up others in goodness.
that our toungs are given us as well for the building up of others in
goodness, as the helping of our selves: and therefore must be accustomed to
words of grace, and not unto corrupt speeches. For as the benefit of the one
is great both to our selves and to others, so is the hurt also as great of the
other, both to others, and also to our selves. To others corrupt speeches are
very hurtful: for if only good speeches, The hurt that comes by corrupt
speeches.
and words of grace serve for the use of edifying others in grace and
goodness, as they do (witness the Apostle in the forenamed place:) then
corrupt speeches can serve to no other use but to destroy and pull down men
from goodness, and to infect them with evil: 1. Cor. 15
Be not deceived (says the Apostle in another place: 1. Cor. 15.) evil words
corrupt good manners: to show, that some think otherwise, but they are
deceived. There be two sorts of people that are deceived with a wrong opinion
as touching evil words. First, he that speaks them: next, they that hear
them: and neither of both suspecting any hurt to grow thereby: The vain
persuasion of profane persons.
but unto both the Apostle says, be not deceived. The wicked and profane
person will not stick to say, that though he does accustom his mouth to
swearing, and filthy talking, and all manner of vile ribaldrie, yet he has as
honest a heart as the best of them all, and means no hurt. Of the same mind
also are they that find ears to hear, and memory to bear away all such
filthy communications, (yea they can remember such things better then words of
grace) but they are deceived (says the Apostle) for evil words do corrupt
good manners. And as they do corrupt good manners, The corruption of good
manners is the generation of evil ma^ners in others.
so do they engender evil and wicked manners: for corruption vnius est
generatio alterius: the corruption of one thing is the generation of another:
as in nature we see the corruption of the egg, is the breeding either of a
bird, or else of rottenness and stink: and the turning of the wine is the
making of that which was sweet wine, to become sharp vinegar: and the
corrpuption of the grain in the earth, is the generation either of a new blade
of corn, or else of a weed: even so the corruption of good manners is the
generation of evil conditions: the corruption of chastity is the begetting of
incontinencie: the death of humility is the life of pride: the corruption of
faith is the generation of infidelity: the corruption of sobriety is the
procreation of drunkenness: and the decay of piety is the setting up of
profaneness. And is all this no hurt? Is there no hurt in evil words, which
be as infectious and dangerous to good manners, as any plague, sore is to the
body? Evil words are hurtful al^o to our selves, and signs of much evil in
the heart.
As they be hurtful to others, so are they no less evil to ourselves, and
signs also of much evil in our hearts. For as a rotten sore argues a rotten
disease, and an unsound body: so a corrupt and froward mouth, argues a
corrupt and froward heart: and as a stinking breath does bewray an unsound
stomach, so a filthy mouth does argue a filthy mind, which is within like a
swines stie, or rather a devils stie: and therefore in verse 27. of the 4. to
the Ephesians, when the holy Apostle does dissuade Christians from sinful
anger, and from dwelling in wrath, A wrathful heart is the devils lodge
he says: give not place to the devil, as if the devil did lodge in a
wrathful heart. Which cannot be but to the grieuing of the spirit of God, who
is thereby (as much as lies in us) dispossessed of his hold and inheritance.
For would it not grieve any man to be either annoyed in his own house, or put
out of his inheritance which he has dearly purchased and paid for? And will
it not much more grieve and offend Gods spirit to be dispossessed of his own
inheritance, which God has purchased with his own blood: Act. 20.28. and to
have the devil set up in his place like an usurper? Act. 20.28.
And therefore in the 30. verse of the former fourth to the Ephesians, he
adds: And grieve not the holy spirit of God: using that as a reason why we
should not suffer corrupt communications to proceed out of our mouths. For,
though there be in all men natural corruption and infirmity, which is bred
and borne with them, yet by the grace of God, it is so suppressed and corrected
in the regenerate, Natural corruption does not domineere in the regenerate.
What it is for corrupt communication to proceed out of the mouth.
that it has no full sway, nor domineering power in them. And therefore he
says not, let no corruption be at all in your minds: but he says, Let no
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths. For it is said in Genesis 6.5.
that the imaginations of man's heart are evil continually. But if lewd speeches
have liberty to proceed out of our mouths: that is, at pleasure to go and
come, like a master of a family, that is a sign that Satan has won the
hold, and keeps possession of the heart. And on the contrary, when good
words are frequent and usual in the mouth, it is a sign that Gods spirit does
bear rule: though now and then by reason of our natural corruption that still
remains in us, some crooked thoughts will break in to our minds, and some
froward speeches will break forth at our mouths by force, or by stealth,
while we be not so watchful as we should be. Iam. 3.3.4.
The Apostle S. James also agrees with the former as touching the use of the
tongue, in his third chapter, verses 3. and 4. where by two similitudes, he
shows that the tongue has a double use, both in regard of our selves, as
also in regard of others. And namely, first our maker, and then our neighbor.
For with our tongues we must bless God: that is, praise God, and with our
tongues we must also bless our neighbor: that is, pray for him, wish him
well, and speak well of him, etc. How this little member must be governed, he
shows by two similitudes. Two similitudes.
First, of a bit in a horse mouth, which the rider uses for his own safety:
which also must be moderated: for if it be let loose too much, Of a bit in a
horse mouth.
the horse will stumble, or go which way he lift, or cast his rider: if it be
pulled in too much, the horse will either stand still or else go back, or rise
up to the danger of the rider. So the tongue if it be too silent, too
fearful, and too much restrained, the owner shall make no way in his heavenly
journey, he shall not be able to keep company with others: it will make his
affections rise up with desperate cogitations to his own hurt: neither shall
God have his due praise of that member which he ought to have: neither shall
man reap that benefit thereof, which we owe unto him: as it falls out when
men are so tongtyed, that they will not preach nor reprove sin, when they are
called thereunto, and when others will not afford their neighbor their
testimony or witness in time of need to do him good. And again, if it be
let go too loose, and suffered to be too bold, then it will fling out, and
run riot (as the saying is) to the shame of the speaker and grief of the
hearers. Secondly, he likeneth it to the rudder of a ship, Of a rudder in a
ship.
which is to rule the ship, and to direct her course: whose benefit (if it be
well stirred) redoundeth to many, to the Pilote himself who does guide it, to
the owners, to the mariners, and to the whole ship, with all that is in it: and
so on the other side is the danger as great and manifold, if it be not well
ordered and stirred. So the tongue is so to be used, as that thereby the body
may be well ordered, the affections may be bridled, others may be preserved,
and all may be edified, by counselling some, by instructing some, by
admonishing others, by comforting others, and by praying for all, and
interpreting all things in the best part. Which graces whosoever has attained
unto, has attained to an excellent thing: Iam. 3.2. Yea, a man of wisdom
(says Solomon) spares his speech, Pro. 17.27.
and he that understands is of an excellent spirit: Prou. 17.27.

So that by the testimony of David, Paul, and James, it appears, that the
end why the tongue was given unto man, was to praise God who gave it, The
application of the former doctrine.
and to edify others, to direct the course of our lives to our own safety,
and the peace of others. But far from this use of the tongue, is Belial, and
Ish-auen, the man of vanity: for he walks with a froward mouth, a mouth out
of fashion and order, not contrary to nature, but contrary to grace. A
description of Belials tongue.
All his words be from the matter, all his understandings be commonly wilful
mistakings: all his conceits be malicious constructions: all his reproves be
quarrellings: all his allegations be cauils: and all his reasons be
unreasonable. I will because I will, (says he:) all his censures be bitter
condemnations: all his admonitions be false accusations: all his communications
be mingled with oaths, scoffs, and taunts, all his discoursings are bitter
deprauings, or vain ianglings: all his mirth is foolish and ridiculous, and
nothing to the praise of God. The most wholesome doctrine he turns into a
jest, taking all with the left hand, and hearing all with the left ear: that
is, with the worst affections that he has: Psalm. 73.8.
This is a froward mouth: They are licentious (says the Psalmist) and speak
wickedly, they talk presumptuously. And of such was the Prophet Ezechiel
warned. Eze. 33.31.
They shall sit and hear thee as my people use to do, but with their mouths
they will make jests of thee. These are they that S. Paul says are delivered
up of God in his judgment unto a reprobate mind, Romans 1.29.
being full of all unrighteousness: and that appears in no one thing more,
then in taking all things in evil part.

A perverse mouth, a note of one that fears not God.
This perverseness of the mouth is a true note of a wicked man, and one that
fears not God. The heart is secret, and therefore it is the impudency of
many to outface the matter, although he walk never so openly with a froward
mouth, when God has given such evident notes of his profane heart, that a man
cannot choose (except he will be wilfully blind) but know him. Out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks (says our Savior Christ: Mat. 12.
) to show, that by that which comes forth of the mouth the heart may be
discerned. The righteous will speak of wisdom (says the Psalmist) and his
tongue will talk of judgment, Psalm. 37.30.
for the law of God is in his heart: to show that if wisdom be in the heart
it will appear in the tongue, and so will folly too. To conclude this point:
If any seem to be religious, (says James) and refraineth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this m^ns religion in vain. He that cannot speak
well cannot do well.
And no marvel: for he that cannot speak well, can hardly do well: and he is
far stepped into wickedness, that can neither speak well nor do well.

This doctrine reproves two sorts of persons. First, such as think they need
not care what they say, so that they speak the truth, and speak neither
felony nor treason. Two sorts reproved by the former doctrine.
In which number may be ranged all froward and perverse hearers of the word,
who use to pick quarrels against the Preacher, for teaching things that they
like not, or that they understand not. Also all husbands and wives which live
in continual frowardness and bitterness one with another. As also all idle
gossips and Ale knights, who do nothing but wet their lips with drink, and dry
them again with carrying of news, lies and tales, and discoursing of every
bodies matters which belong not unto them. These are such as David prays
against in the 12. Psalm. the 4. verse, Psalm. 12.3.4.
where he says, The Lord cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that
speaks proud things: which have said; with our tongue we will prevail, our
lips are our own, who is Lord over us?

Now, these are such as will be careful enough for speaking of treason, or
felony, or any thing that may bear any action at law (although sometime
through the judgment of God they are ouerreached and taken in their own
craftiness before they were aware.) But with their flattering and deceitful
lips they do much mischief: and howsoever they may shift in the world, yet for
so much as they walk with a froward mouth, the Lord has branded them in his
word for wicked men of Belial.

Secondly, 2. Sort.
this doctrine reproves such as will peruersly discourse of men's matters, and
dispute contentiously of Gods matters, pro and contra: and when they have
defended their popery, Perverse disputers.
their usury, and their vanity as much as they can, then forsooth it was but
for disputation sake. These are counterfeit mad-braines, such as Solomon notes
in the Proverbs: Pro. 26.18.19.
As he that faineth himself mad, casts firebrands, arrows, and mortal
things: so deals the deceitful man with his friend, and says, am I not in
sport? Sober disputations tending to edification, are commendable.
I condemn not sober set disputations, which are for edification, but
contentious frowardness of lawless libertines, for the maintaining of their
malice, and defacing of the truth, which is the practice of a man of Belial,
and a wickd vain man who walks with a froward mouth: And so much for the
quality of Belials speeches: now for the quantity of his frowardness: it is
to be noted where he says, he [ walks.]

This word (walks) is a Metaphor, Walks.
or borrowed speech, taken from those that go in a way, doubling their steps,
until they come at their iourneys end: it notes a continuance of going in
them that do go: and being translated unto other actions, it notes a
continuance of that thing unto which it is applied, Co^tinua^ce in frowardnes
is a difference between the godly and-the wicked.
as here it notes unto us the continuance of Belials frowardnes, and that the
vain lawless person, does not now and then stumble upon a froward word, but
makes frowardnes his continual practice. And this is the difference between
the wicked and the godly, for even a good and a godly man may sometime speak
frowardly, hastily and unadvisedly, as Moses did once, Psalm 106.33. So did Job,
and Jeremy too, when both of them cursed the day of their birth. And Saint
James says, Ia. 3.2.
He that sins not with his tongue is a perfect man. But as David, and Moses,
and Job, and Jeremy did all strive against such imperfections, and unruly
affections, so do the godly: and having once overcome the^ by the renewing grace
of Gods holy Spirit, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 39.
they bridle the^ up more straightly the^ before. I thought (says David) I will
take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my tongue, I will keep my mouth
bridled while the wicked are in my sight. Gods children are far from the nature
of wicked Belial, which use to say: What? which of you swear not sometime?
which of you be not froward sometime? be not moved sometime? be not impatient
sometime? Yea, indeed it is true, but yet the godly may answer them again, We
walk not with a froward mouth as Belial does: The wicked delight in speaking of
the frailties of the godly, to justify themselves. The comfort of the godly
after their falls.
who uses to allege and reckon up the faults and frailties of the godly only
to justify themselves in their libertine courses, and lawless behavior. This
shall be a great comfort to the godly, to remember how they have striuen
against their headstrong affections: and being foiled, and cast down sometime,
have risen again by Gods renewing grace, and walked afterward more
circumspectly: when the wicked shall find nothing but horror and horrible
desperation, because they have made a continual practice, and art (as it were)
of swimming, giving themselves over wholly like slaves unto sin, as unto a
cruel tyrant, whose cruelty never appears until the day of reckning
comes, to pay men their wages. The fruit of this tree is fair in show, but in
taste most bitter, Romans 6.
for what else is it, but fear and shame, and death eternal? Romans 6.

And indeed the custom of any sin is very dangerous: the continual driving
at the wedges, The custom of sin is dangerous. Similitudes
at length drive them home to the head, and so the great oak is spoiled and
broken in pieces: by continual dropping of rain the hard flint is worn
hollow: by continual blowing, the fire is made to flame out: by continual
going, great iournies are gone, and a great way is to be gone back again: by
continual leaking, the ship is sunk at the length: by continual wooing,
the suter speedeth at length: by continual walking in the Sun, the face is
Sunburned at the length: by continual digging, Castles are undermined, great
pits are made, and high mountains are cast up. Yea, what should I say more?
nothing, but use and custom does make men perfect and expert in any thing they
go about. Custom and use makes uncomely fashions seem comely.
Custom and use has made even those fashions (which at the first seemed very
ugly and abominable) to become in account very good and commendable. And if a
man does accustom himself to any thing which is hard, and against the mind at
the first, at last (by long use and custom) he shall find a certain
easiness, yea a felicity, and dexterity in it, how much more shall we find the
like in any sin which we do accustom our selves unto, the pleasures and
allurements whereof be so fitting unto our natures and dispositions? yea
doubtless, he that has accustomed himself unto any sin, whether it be of
swearing, or whoredom, or drunkenness, or hastiness: How hard a thing it is
to leave that which one has been accustomed unto.
or whatsoever else, he shall in time find it as easy a matter to be persuaded
to cut his throat, or to cut off his right hand, or to pull out his eyes, or
to be nailed unto a post, or to have his bowels pulled out of his belly, as to
be persuaded to leave that sin, whereunto he has accustomed himself: as
soon shall he cease to desire drink when he is in extremity of thirst, as to
cease from that sin, and sinful path wherein he has used to walk: Can a
black Moore change his skin, Ier. 13.
or a Leapord his spots (says Jeremy?) No more can this people do well, which
have accustomed themselves all days of their life to do evil. The former is a
thing impossible in nature, In nature impossible.
and so is the latter too, and therefore let no man accustom himself to do
evil, nor to walk in any lewd path, but return betimes, or else at last the
way will seem so long, and the journey so tedious that must be gone back
again, that he will rather sit down, Custom takes away the feeling of sin.

How an evil custom may be broken off. The folly of those that think custom
will excuse them and grace the^. Another difference between the wicked and the
godly.

Zeal in the godly seems to be frowardness.

The smoth words of the wicked are dangerous.


or go on still desperately, then go back again: yea custom is another
nature, and takes away the very sense and feeling of sin. But if any man
has walked in any dangerous custom, and would be rid of such a haunting
spirit and dangerous customer, let him resolve with himself to endure much
striving, and fighting, and much pain, and many blows and buffetings of
Satan, and therefore must be very earnest with God by continual prayer, for
the creating of a new heart, and renewing of a right spirit within him.

But most wretched are those fools, and monstrous is the folly of them, who
instead of fearing the custom of sin, and praying unto God for grace against
it, do take it as a sufficient plea, and defense for themselves (being
admonished to leave their sin) to say, Sir it is my custom, you must bear
with me: yea account it a grace unto them to do as the custom has been of
their forefathers, though it be never so wicked.

Again, further we are to note, that even in outward show, there is great
difference between the wicked and the godly, least we condemn the just and the
innocent causeless. The godly seem sometime to speak frowardly, when it is
indeed earnestly, and zealously for Gods glory. The wicked for the most part
are cross, and when they speak most fair, and utter words most smooth (which
formally they can do at their pleasure, per artem adulandi, by the art of
flattering) then are they most dangerous, like Ioab who in saluting and
embracing slew his brother Abner, and like Judas the traitor, who with a kind
kiss (in show) betrayed his Master Christ. The godly are most moved for the
glory of God: the wicked are most moved for their own glory: The minister of
Christ shall be counted froward and malicious, if he reprove sin.
like Naman who was in a chafe, because the Prophet came not out unto him. And
as touching the Minister of the word, who many times has just occasion to
thunder out the judgments of God against obstinate sinners: he seems unto
men of perverse and froward conditions (who list not to see others otherwise
then they are themselves, nor to muse but as they use:) to such I say the
Minister of Gods word, seems to speak of malice, and bitterness, and by way
of revenge for some old grudge (as they say) and to deal frowardly with his
people, when in zeal and earnestness he cries aloud to awake men out of
their dead sleep, and cutteth and launceth them, to cut out their festered
corruption: but surely they are deceived. Reprehension wholesome, though not
toothsome.

2. Tim. 4.3 True love appears in plain dealing.


Reprehension indeed has a sting (as the saying is) which is not very
toothsome, but it is very wholesome, and it is not doctrine, but wholesome
doctrine (says Paul to Timothy) which men cannot endure. The father seems
to be out of patience with his child when he severely rebukes and corrects
him, but then is he most tender over him, and careful for his good. So the
fathers of our souls seem to be our enemies when they sharply rebuke us for
our sins, but then they love us most, and are most desirous (or at least
should be) that we might be saved: Am I Paul become your enemy, because I
tell you the truth? (says the Apostle to the Galathians:) to show, that if we
tell men the truth without flattery, we shall be counted their enemies. The
more I love (says the same Apostle to the same people) the less am I loved:
The more the minister loves truly, the less he shall be loved.
to show that true spiritual love will procure us hatred. And what other
account will the world make of us if we deal plainly with them for their
souls health, but as of babbling fools and mad men? Jeremy was counted a
contentious person, Ezechi^ls Sermons we reckned of but as of a fiddlers song?
Ier. 20. Eze. 33. Act. 17.18. Act. 26.25.
What will this babbler say? said some of Paul, when he came to preach the
resurrection of Christ: And too much learning makes thee mad (says Festus.)
And were not the Apostles words esteemed as words of drunken men, when they
were filled with the holy Ghost? Act. 2.13.
And Christ has told us that men shall speak all manner of evil saying falsely
against us for his names sake: even as they did of the Prophets before. So that
in outward show, all zealous Christians in general, and every true and
faithful Minister of Christ in particular, whose mouths are still open to
find fault, and reprove sin, shall seem to the blind world, of all men most
froward, but we know, and so many as are taught of God do know, that none but
the man of Belial, and Ish-auen (that is lawless, and vain persons) are those
which walk with a froward mouth. As for the regenerate, though they be (as
has been said) through weakness sometime overtaken with a froward speech,
Psalm. 1.1.
yet blessed are they (says David) because they walk not in the counsel of
the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners. The grace of God is abounding
(says Paul) through our sin, To. 6.1. Act. 9.
but not if we continue still in our sin: and therefore (to conclude) as
Paul (going to persecute the Church) was obedient to the heavenly vision, and
returned a true convert: so let so many as have walked in froward ways, now
take warning by this heavenly vision, and so shall he return home truly
converted.

Now let us praise God.
THE IIII. SERMON.
PROVE. 6.13.14. He makes a sign with his eyes, he signifies with his feet,
he instructs with his fingers. Lewd things are in his heart.


WE have heard before of Belials froward mouth, Of blind gestures.
and how he is to be discerned thereby, for a lawless, and a vain man. Now it
remains that we consider of his outward gestures, and then of the internal
shop of his heart, and the stuff that he keeps there, together with the
matter that he frames of the same. And first for his outward gestures, they
are such as (if we mark them well) do show that all his behavior is
counterfeit. The meaning is, that the man of Belial, and the vain man, is very
cunning, and skillful both in playing the hypocrite before God, and also in
practicing of other lewdness before the world. In actions religious (wherein
consists the outward service of God) he counterfeiteth very cunningly, He
co^uterfeiteth in religion.
making great signs and shows of devotion and piety, by eleuating, or lifting
up his eyes unto heaven, as the Pharisee did, and by running a pace, or making
great expedition to the Temple, as Ezechiels auditors did, and by turning over
with his fingers the Bible to places alleged by the Preacher, etc. All which
be signs, and instructions unto the world, that he or she that does so, is
very devout, and godly, and have their hearts wholly possessed with the love
and fear of God, and their minds employed about the study and practice of
righteousness, sincerity, and honesty. All which gestures may well beseem the
godly, whose hearts indeed are upright with the Lord: but as for Belial, and
Ish-auen, they are odious in them, because when they make such signs, and give
soorth such shows and instructions, the Lord sees, and tells us here in our
text, that lewd things are in their hearts. They are only signs without the
things signified, like an Iuy-bush over a door, where no wine is in the house.
The wicked that make them, are like the wicked Scribes and Pharisees, who under
color of long prayer, studied how to devour, yea devoured indeed (as Christ
says) widows houses. They are also not unlike to players on a stage, who come
forth with long beards and side gowns, like grave Senators and wise
Counselors, when notwithstanding there is neither gravity nor wisdom in
them. And as Belial plays the counterfeit in religious exercises, to cover
(with signs of holiness) the lewd things of his heart: so also in his civil
conversation and dealing amongst men, He counterfeiteth in civil affairs.
does he (by making shows and signs in his outward gestures, of that which he
has not) cover much lewdness, and practice much mischief. What was the kiss
of Judas but a sign of love? yet treason was in his heart, and covered
therewith. What were Ioabs courteous embracings, and kind salutations: but
signs unto Abner of a kind friend? yet murder was in his heart, and covered
therewith. Pro. 7.14.
What is the harlots talking of paying her vows, and offering her peace
offerings: but a sign of a godly woman? yet even then is lewdness in her
heart, and it is covered therewith. How many in the world do make signs with
their eyes and countenance of great love and kindness, with bending the body
to embrace, and hastening their feet to meet even those whom they hate in
their heart? How many again have put finger to the eye, and seemed to weep,
and taken up great lamentation, with wringing of hands, and refraining their
meat, with other signs of grief and sorrow, for the hurt, and death of some,
whose death perhaps they have procured, and for whose loss they laugh and
rejoice in their hearts? What signs of humility also shall we see, or not see,
even in the proudest persons that are? what signs of gravity, in the lighest
and vainest? what signs of charity in the cruellest? what signs of liberality
from the most niggardly? and what signs of manhood and valor, even in the
most cowardly persons that are? Long locks, stern countenances, big looks,
great bragges, monstrous oaths, cruel threatenings, and like Saul breathing
nothing but slaughter, as if they were more then Lions, and when it comes to
the trial they are less then men: like empty vessels, which make the greatest
sound when they are empty. Of all which, with many more the like, it may be
said, as it is in our text, They make signs with their eyes, they signify
with their feet, and instruct with their fingers, but lewd things are in their
hearts. And again, as the man of Belial and vain man, does oftentimes play the
counterfeit both in religion and ciuility, making signs of that which is not
in him, yea only to cover the lewdness that is in him: so sometimes also does
he both openly declare by signs and gestures, the vanity and lightness of his
heart: and as cunningly likewise by signs and gestures both practice, and also
teach mischief and lewdness, when he is amongst his companions. And
certainly, when the outward gestures of the body, and the parts thereof are not
according to simplicity, it must needs proceed from some evil that is in the
heart.

Now, this noting and marking of a lawless person by his gestures, and
external behavior, does teach us many very profitable lessons worthy our best
consideration.

1 The severe preciseness, and precise severity of the word of God, which
looks into the very gestures of the body: as the motion of the eyes, of the
feet, and the fingers, etc. 2 The tyranny of sin, which exercises all the
parts of the body, domineering over the whole man. 3 The nature of hypocrisy,
and how it is descried in the outward parts, and gestures of the body. 4 The
cunning of the wicked, who can teach sin, and set forward mischief and
lewdness, even by signs and gestures. 5 Lastly, the aptness and pronnesse of
our nature to learn evil, even by signs* gestures, and dumb shows.
Of every one of these a little: and first, of the strictness, and severe
preciseness of the word of God, in marking and noting the very motions of the
body, and every part thereof. The Lord we see plainly notes the very gestures
of the body, Every member of the body is bound to his good behavior.
as well as the words of the mouth, and actions of our life: yea he teaches us
not only how to live, and how to speak, but also how to go, and to move our
bodies: every part and member is set to school, and bound to his good
behavior. Even as in the building of the tabernacle, and material Temple,
there was nothing left to the discretion of them that built it, but a pattern
was given them by God for euerything, even to the very pinnes, and ash-pannes,
and flesh-hookes, etc. So, in the spiritual building of our bodily
tabernacles, and temples of the holy Ghost, nothing is left to our wills and
discretions, but even from the very thoughts of the heart, to the outward
gestures of the body* yea to the very moving of the eyes, the fingers, and the
feet, the Lord has set down an order in his holy word: and whosoever breaks
that order is noted for it by the Lord: but who soever wilfully neglects it,
and sets the same at naught, is also branded for a man of Belial and vain
person, whose heart is full of lewd things* and whofe destruction comes both
speedily and suddenly upon him. Caines countenance cannot be cast down, but
the Lord will note it, Genesis 4.6.
and search out the cause thereof, Genesis 4.6. to be an envious eye, and a bloody
heart against his brother for his goodness: to show, that we must look unto
our very countenance, least wrath and envy be espied therein. Pro. 7.13.
The harlot is noted well enough for her impudent face, and thereby is she also
noted for a harlot: to teach women and maidens to watch over their countenances
and outward behavior, that there appear not too much boldness and lightness
therein, because thereby they are discerned, either what they are, or what they
would be. Esa. 3.16.
The proud women of Israel, could not walk as they did with their necks
stretched out, nor counterfeit a minsing gate, but the Lord does note them for
it: and does he not note the daughters of England for the same things as well as
the daughters of Jerusalem? The Pharisees could not disfigure their faces when
they fasted, but our Savior Christ would surely mark it, Mat. 6.16.
and have it recorded in his word to their shame, and the admonition of all
others. We are become a laughing stock (says the Church of God being in
captivity) and a nodding of the head unto the Heathen: Psalm. 44.13.14.
to show, that the very fleering of the countenance, and the nodding of the
head in contempt and despite of Gods people, must be answered for before the
Lord, as well as reproachful speeches, and bloody actions. And amongst other
signs of contempt and reproach showed by the Jews against our Savior Christ
at his death, Mat 27.39.
this is noted by the Evangelist for one, that they wagged their heads at him.
So, the man of Belial cannot work his feats by signs and gestures, but the
word of God will take notice of it, and tell all the world, that He makes a
sign with his eyes, he signifies with feet, instructs with his fingers.
And according to this rule must we live: by this card must we sail, making (as
the Scripture teaches us) strait steps unto godliness. So far are we
from teaching men liberty to sin (as the wicked Belials of popery
slanderously charge the Preachers of the Gospel) that we allow not men so much
liberty as to make signs to any evil purpose, Against the slander of Papists.
but to carry even the outward parts of the body, and the motions thereof, in
such sort as they be neither offensive, nor infectiue, but according to
sobriety and simplicity. For this is one chief end why the grace of God has
appeared (says the Apostle to Titus) to teach us not only to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11.12*
but also to live soberly, godly and righteously in this present world. Which
sobriety mentioned by the Apostle in that place, is opposite unto all
lightness, and scandalous behavior which appears as well in the gestures of
the body, as in other things.

Some in their wanton and light behavior are both offensive to the godly, Our
behavior must be in Sobriety.
and infectiue to the weaker Christians: these walk not according to sobriety.
Some again are as counterfeit both in matters of religion, and also in common
ciuility, embracing, affable, courting, ducking, promising, and protesting etc.
when there is no good meaning at all in them: Simplicity.
these walk not according to simplicity. All which counterfeit behavior the
Lord notes and condemns, as well as Cain for for the heaviness of his
countenance, when it bewraied the envy and malice of his heart. And no marvel:
for both charity and chastity are the worse for such gestures as are not in
sobriety and simplicity. How charity is broken by signs.
Charity is broken as well by a proud or disdainful look, as by a railing and
slanderous, or reproachful speech. As well by the nodding of the head, and
fleering of the countenance, and winking of the eye, or putting out the tongue
is charity broken, and wrath provoked, as by the violence of the hand. As
charity is broken, Chastity is assaulted by signs.
so also is chastity assaulted that way, even by lewd signs and wanton
gestures of the body, as well as by plain motions, and enticements of speech:
both modesty and impudency, love and lust, will all appear and show themselves
in the gestures and motions of the body, though the tongue sit still in
silence, and say nothing, according to the saying of Salomo^ in another place
of this book: Pro. 17.24.
Wisdom shines in the face of the prudent. Many are ashamed to speak what
they think, but yet by signs and gestures they will show what they desire:
Luke 19.40.
If these should hold their peace (says Christ) pointing to his disciples
which praised him) the very stones would cry. So, if the tongue be silent, the
eyes, the fingers, and the feet will speak. Therefore every member must be
sanctified, and made a weapon of righteousness.

This severity of the word of God is it that troubles all the world: It is
counted too great preciseness to live so strictly: We cannot look awry now
adays (say some) but we shall be told of it in the Pulpit. Ah (says another)
the world is come to a good pass indeed, we must now go to the school of good
manners again; This preciseness does much trouble Libertines.
we must learn of the Preacher how to go, and how to look, and when to laugh,
and when to be merry. These and such like speeches are rife in the world, but
it is only amongst the men of Belial and Ishim auen, lawless and dissolute
persons, vain and foolish people, such as have cast off Gods yoke from them:
and like them that said of Christ. Luke 19.27. Psalm. 2.3. Psalm. 12.4.
We will not have this man to reign over us: come let us break their bands
asunder, and cast their cords from us: our tongues are our own, we may speak
what we list, who shall control us? and so are our eyes too, and our fingers
too, and our feet too, we will look, and go, and gesture it as we list, and
what has any man to do with our gestures? These are right men of Belial
indeed, whom the Lord (that sits in the heavens) does laugh to scorn, and
shall have in great derision when destruction shall come suddenly upon them in
his wrath: yea he shall vex them in his sore displeasure, and break them in
pieces like a potters vessel, if they be not wise unto repentance in time,
even before his wrath be kindled, yea but a little. This preciseness that the
profane Belials of the world have in so much contempt, This preciseness is
called in Scripture circumspect walking.
is nothing else but that circumspect walking which is commended and commanded
unto us by the Apostle from the Lord in Ephs. 6. Walk circumspectly says he,
like wise men: as if our life were a journey to be walked, upon a narrow bridge
over a deep water, over which there is no safe passage if a man go leaping,
and skipping, and gazing about him, as those that wander and roue at scope in
the wide fields: Why we must walk circumspectly.
but we must look to our feet, and to every step that we set, or else we are
quickly gone, and being down very hardly recovered again, without Gods great
mercy and grace.

So much for the first point. Now the second thing that we have to observe, The
second point.
is the tyranny of sin, having once gotten possession in the heart: If lewd
things lodge in the heart, surely they will take up all the outward parts of
the body to serve at their pleasure, and from one member to another will
lewdness fetch his continual walk. Sins walk.
Therefore says the blessed Apostle: Let not sin reign in your mortal
bodies, to obey the lusts thereof, To. 6.12.13.
neither give you your members as weapons of unrighteousness and uncleanness.
To show, what a tyrant sin is, who when he has gotten hold in the heart of a
wicked man, will domineere over his whole body, and every member shall serve
as a weapon to fight withal in the defense of sin, and to the offense of
virtue.

The tyranny of sin described.
When a tyrant reigns, no man that is under him is his own man, no man can
say what is his own: so where sin reigns (the most cruel, subtle and
insatiable tyrant that ever was, is, or can be) every member of the body, and
every cogitation and affection of the soul, is held in most miserable bondage
and slavery nothing is free to serve the Lord, but all are at Satan's beck,
and ready to obey his suggestions. This tyrant will not be closed up in the
heart, but will look out at the eyes as at a window, and will walk abroad:
nay rather be carried abroad like a Pope upon men's shoulders: the hand must
feel, and reach him that which he likes, and give what he will bestow, and
where he will bestow it, and strike whom he likes not: The eye must seek out
such pleasures as he delights in, and the tongue must call for them. Yea, of
such bewitching power is this tyrant sin, that he poysoneth like the
Crocodile with his very sight and countenance: he has greater power over his
servants the members of the body: nay his servants the members, have greater
power over others, then the Centerion in the Gospel had over his soldiers: I
say to one come, Mat. 8.9.
and he comes, to another go and he goes (says the Centurion:) but this
tyrant does but look upon men, and they fear him: he does not fawn upon
men, and they affect him: he does but make a sign with his eyes, and signify
with his going, and instruct by holding up of his finger, and it is enough to
make men go and come at his pleasure. How sin enters.
And all his fawning and flattering, and terrifying of me^, is for nothing else
in the world but to get in to a man, and to reign over a man which he can
easily do. He can by little and little, yea with a little entreating (where
Gods grace is not to make resistance) enter in at the eye, or at the ear, or
by touching the body, and tickling the senses, and so from thence into the
heart, and there he sits like a commander, and a cruel tyrant, even over al
those members and affections, by which he was first let in, and which first
gave him any entertainment. Adonijah begged only Abishag the Shunamite to
wife when David had done with her: a small request in show, but he had a
further reach: his mind was to the kingdom, which wise Solomon perceived well
enough: So Satan will request but a little dalliance with the fingers, and
will but borrow they feet to carry him to such a place, and such a place to
hear, or see a play, or the like vanity, and thy countenance to brave or beard
such and such: or thy eye, to look out at: as thieves that will crave a
standing in a man's shop to see some strange sight, when they mean to rob and
steal: Of the subtilty of sin.
a small request in show. But sin is deceitful, and Satan is an old subtle
serpent, trust him not, he has a mind to a kingdom, and that is, to rule like
a hellish tyrant in thee and to get all the members of thy body, and all the
affections of thy soul from out of Gods service into his slavery and
subjection: and this can none epsy, but those that have heavenly wisdom as
Solomon had. And therefore as Adonijah made his subtle request against his
own life, when wise Solomon had espied his treachery: so let all wise hearted
Christians (who by the light of this doctrine have received any inckling of the
subtle policy of sin and Satan, in entering: and of their tyranny being
entered into the heart) desire of God by continual and earnest prayer, that
through the gracious assistance of his blessed Spirit (his fear keeping the
passage) all these fawning and treacherous motions solicited in the
unsanctified gestures and behavior of the body, We are to pray against the
treacherous motions to sin.
may be made against their own life, that is, that they may be so crushed and
checked at the first, that neither eye, nor ear, nor hand, nor foot, nor
tongue, nor look, may ever have any list, or joy to serve sin, or Satan, or
the man of Belial any more. And so much briefly for the tyranny of sin, which
has all the parts of the body at commandment.

The third point.
Now come we to the third point, and let us see how the sin of hypocrisy in
particular, does break forth and appear in the very external behavior and
gestures of the body at one time or another. How hypocrites are deceived. Sin
is like poison.
Hypocrites are greatly deceived, who think to do well enough, so long as they
can keep their hearts secret (for so they imagine:) but all sin in general,
and hypocrisy in special, is like poison, and leaven. Now if poison be drunk
into the bowels, it cannot be kept there from his working, but it will break
forth and make the whole body to swell, and the very nails of the fingers, and
hair of the head, will tell that poison is within. And like leaven.
And leaven (though it be but a little in quantity) being buried in a great
lump of dough, will have his operation, in such sort that every part and
crumbe of the whole lump shall taste of it, so that by the very taste of it, a
man shall be able (that has a sound taste) to say, surely here was leaven. And
therefore says Christ: Take heed and beware of the leven of the Pharisees,
Luke 12.
which is hypocrisy: as if he should say: take heed of hypocrisy, for it is
like leven, it will not only sower, and make unsavory all your actions before
God, but it will break forth, and by the very taste of your deeds it will be
perceived of men. Yea this poison will appear in your faces and gestures: for
all will be distempered and out of order. It may be that Belial may with his
cunning deceive some: but the servants of God, which have the spirit of
discretion cannot so easily be deceived. 1. Kin. 14.6.
Ahijah knew Ieroboams wife before he saw her, though she came in disguised
apparel: that could he do because he was a Prophet: now though we be not such
Prophets as he was, yet (following the direction of Gods word) we may easily
discern an hypocrite if we co^uerse long with him, and mark him well. By one
letter missed in the pronuntiation of one word, Judge. 12. Slubboleth
the Ephraimites were known from the Gileadites: so many times, by one word in
a sentence, or by one sentence in a sermon, or in a book, or by the very style
and phrase, a man may easily discern the humor and disposition of a man: and
by such a little matter it will be no hard matter to conjecture whether he has
borrowed any popish tools and patterns to forge his work by, and so whether
he be inclined to popery or no. When Peter was familiar both with Jews and
Gentiles, and soothed up both sides in their contrary opinions, Paul thought
him not sound. So likewise, when we see men professing the Gospel, to be alike
familiar both with Papists and Protestants, and give the right hand of
fellowship as soon to the one as to the other, and to commend the Church of
the one to be no less the family of Christ then the Church of the other, we
may justly suspect that they are not so sound as they should be. Halting and
iudgling in Gods matters will easily be espied if me^ be awake. Act. 24.27.
Pro. 7.10. etc. 2. Sam. 16.
Oh their halting and iugling, will easily be espied if men be awake. Let Felix
pretend what he will: yet by his often sending for Paul, and by his often
co^muning with him, with so many sleeuelesse messages sent to him, it will
easily be perceived that he looks for a bribe. Let the close harlot prate
never so much of religion, yet by her impudent behauior it will appear what
she is, and what she desires. Let Absalo^ pretend what he list, vows made at
Hebron, etc. yet by the greatness and gallantnes of his train it will be no hard
matter to guess wherabout he goes, and that his vow was to play the traitor,
ex pede Hercule^, ex vngue leone^: Hercules was known by his footsteps, the
lion is known by his paw, though he show nothing else: the wolse by his
howling, though he be clothed in a sheeps skin: and the ass (howsoever he be
disguised) by his braying, and by the length of his ears will be known to be
but an ass. The hypocrisy of popery how it is discovered.
So in Popery the number of duckings, crossings, eleuatio^s, kneelings,
sta^dings, turnings, and windings, do show, that Balaam and popish Balamites,
are but hipocrites, to build so many altars, and to offer upon the^ as they do,
as though they knew not without al those ceremonies what they should do; and
only to blind the eyes of the foolish king of Moab and his people. Number. 23.
But Balaam has not in all points so much wit as his ass which bears him:
the mouth does not always bewray the heart, yet it is true prouerbially that
Christ says in Mat. 12. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
And there are other signs also to know a man of Belial by (we see) as well as
by his mouth: his hypocrisy will break out into gestures: It is a fault in
Christians not to mark how God does note out the wicked. Pro. 10.10. All these
notes must be taken together.
when he has so many iro^s in the fire he cannot plie them all well. A fault
surely it is in Christians, not to mark those things which God has set down
for marks of a wicked man, and therefore they are deceived. Jacob gathered by
Labans countenance, that his heart was not toward him. Iehoram gathered by
Iehues marching, that he came not peaceably, and Solomon takes the winking
with the eye for a note of a man that works or sows sorrow and trouble. But
as we have al these marks here together, so we shall do well to take them all
together, and not to judge of any man by one of them alone, and then we shall
be sure not to be deceived: for a man may be by nature hasty, and soon
displeased, and yet not a man of Belial: another may be earnest in contending
for some point that he imagines to be truth, and yet no man of Belial: another
may sometime against his will, through humane frailty imagine evil of a thing
that was well intended, and yet not man of Belial: another may be a means
unawares of some strife and contention, when perhaps he intended the contrary,
and yet no man of Belial: and another may have a natural imperfection and
weakness, of winking with the eye, or looking downward or another way in
talk, and yet no man of Belial: another may be merrily and pleasantly
conceited, and yet no Ish-auen, no vain man. And lastly another may be somewhat
stiff in his opinions, and hard to persuade, and yet no man of Belial. But
this is for certain: he that is lawless, and incorrigible, wilful, obstinate,
and inflexible, he whose will must stand for a law, against al reason and force
of argument, he is a man of Belial: he that delights in du^ghil and filthy
vain sports, and spe^ds his time unprofitably, as one that hu^teth after the
wind, and pursues the smoke: he that walks with a froward mouth, and has no
care to use his tongue to the praise of God, and benefit of his neighbor: he
that counterfeith signs of that which is not in him, and which he desires not
to be in him: and he that is cunning to cover a lewd heart with counterfeit
gestures, and in like manner to practice and teach lewd things: and he that
imagines evil continually, and knows not how to give a good interpretation
of any thing, and withal delights in stirring up of strife: he (I say) that
is thus broken out, has assuredly Gods marks upon him, and may be known
thereby, to be a man of a lewd heart, a man of Belial, and Ish-auen, a vain man,
whose destruction approaches with speed, and sudde^ly shall fall upon him
without recovery. And so much for the nature of hypocrisy, and how it may be
discovered in the gestures of the body.

The fourth point.
Now in the fourth place we are to consider a little of the cunning of the man of
Belial, which is so great that he can practice sin, and declare his mind by
signs and gestures: for sometime they are ashamed, or afraid to speak what
they think, or to crave what they desire. But when they make signs with the
eye, they signify with their feet, and instruct with their fingers, that is,
they show their mind by signs, very painful they are, but it is to their own
destruction: and very busy to set forward Satan's business, but to their own
shame and confusion. The wicked are cunning and painful to their own
confusion.
Very wise they are in their generations, subtle as serpents, and crafty as
foxes. This may teach us to be as wise as they, to hinder sin by as many means
as they do further it by. When Rabsakeh came to rail, and did rail upon the
God of Israel, and to blaspheme the name of the Lord the most high, what did
the servants of king Hezekiah? did they reprove him by words? No, least they
should cause him to blaspheme more: and because such a dog (or devil rather)
was not to be spoken unto, by signs and gestures they showed their dislike and
hatred of his blasphemies, Esa. 36.21. and 37.1.
in toke^ of grief they rent their clothes. Esa. 36.21. and 37.1. If men should
now a days use to rent their clothes when they hear Gods truth reviled and
his holy name blasphemed, what ragged congregations should we have in every
place? I suppose that few or none should come to the Temple with a whole garment
upon his back. But if the blasphemers flesh might be (by a law established)
rent and torn as well as men's garments were, I suppose it were a good way to
make their number lesser: and surely I think that by that ceremony of renting
garments, was showed that the blasphemer was worthy to go naked, or to have his
flesh rent and torn in pieces, or both. When Jonathan would instruct David his
friend, of Saul's wrath against him, he did it by signs, given him in the
shooting of certain arrows, and the order of taking them up again. When our
Savior Christ would show how little he regarded the temptations of those which
accused unto him a woman taken in adultery, and how unworthy they were to be
answered, Ioh. 8.6. We may reprove sin by our gestures, How vain^ men show
their dislike of the truth. Especially at Sermons
he turned another way, and wrote or scribled (as we say) on the ground, as one
not minding what they said. So might we also reprove foolish and vain people,
as well by our gestures as by plain speeches, if we were but half so wise for
God as the wicked are for the devil: for they if they like not the truth, or
the man that delivers it, they will show their dislike by whispering, or
fleering, or turning their backs, and giving deaf ear, as we see at Sermons,
where sometime you shall have a Church-papist, or a Libertine Protestant, or one
that has an itch in his ears, and is sometime curious to please, who when they
hear a man, or a matter which they like not, they will not speak, for that
they know is dangerous, but they will either fall to whispering with their next
fellows, or to laughing, or to frowning and outfacing the Preacher, or fall
asleep, or read upon a book, or go out of the Church: but such is our
simplicity, that if one way be taken from us, we have not another. The forcible
working that is in outward signs and gestures of the body, The force of
outward signs and gestures.
with the setting or changing of the countenance, we may somewhat perceive, if
we consider, how the moving of laughter does not a little embolden fools,
iesters, and merry co^ceited companions, still to feed that parties humor with
jests and odd co^ceits whom he has moved there withal: and it is their glory
when they have done, to tell how they made the Queen to laugh, or the Council
to laugh, or the grave Judges, or such a great man, or such a one to laugh, or
any one who^ they would delight: and on the contrary there is no such cut or
disgrace to the forenamed iesters, etc. as when they perceive no change or
alteration of men's countenances at their fooleries: yea then are they quite
done, as if a dampe had put out their light. And so much briefly may suffice
for the cunning and wisdom of the wicked, working their feats by signs, with
the use that we may make thereof.

The fifth point.
Now last of all in a word let us but observe the aptness of our nature to
learn that which is evil. A word to a wise man (they say) is enough, but a
wink (we see here) to a wicked man, is enough: for all our wisdom (naturally)
is in sin. When we are children, we no sooner hear an oath, but we learn to
swear: we no sooner hear a lie, but we believe it: we no sooner hear a
foolish tale, but it is our own. Yea in any evil custom, or practice, a
wink, or a sign with the finger is enough: so well does our nature and such
things agree together. But when the word of God is taught never so plainly, and
the principles of true religion proved never so soundly and strongly, by all
the demonstrations in the world, we cannot learn, not believe, The pronenesse
of men to evil, and untowardness to learn the truth, is a great cause of
Antichrists advancement.
nor bear any thing away in comparison. And this towardnes and pronnesse unto
evil and error, has set up the kingdom of Satan and Antichrist in his
throne: how many would rise at midnight to go hear an idolatrous and
blasphemous Mass, that will not stir out of their doors in the day time to a
fruitful and comfortable Sermon? When Patriarchs and Prophets came, me^ had
no list to hear the^, nor to follow the^, because they brought spiritual
things which are not sauoured of flesh and blood: but when Antichrist came,
with a number of masking and mumming Mass Priests, in all glorious show to the
eye, with piping and singing, with belly cheer, with their Robinhoods, and
morris dances, and all their relegio^ like a stage play, full of carnal
delights, and bewitching vanities, the^ me^ would run, and hear, and follow,
and think nothing too much, or too dear to uphold that filthy Sinagogue (or
sink rather) withal. Those that are apt to learn lies, shall be given over of
God to believe lies.
Therefore when me^ were so apt to learn lies, and so dull and untoward to
learn the truth, God gave the^ over to believe lies. Oh how many could then
learn many lessons and prayers in Latin, when they understood not one word
that they said, but might have called for a curse as well as for a blessing, and
might say Amen to a prayer made to the devil as well as made to God for ought
they knew, which now can learn nothing for their souls health in English?
Well, let us take heed that we continue not still so untoward to serve God, and
to learn his most glorious will, least God give us over again in his just
judgment to walk in ignorance, Men's inclination to popery makes Papists and
popery to grow.
and to believe lies. Popery grows apace in many places, and Papists are very
bold: doubtless they see (it is to be feared) too much inclination, and aptnes
both in some teachers, and much of the people to receive their Popish trash
again, and that is the matter. Popish pictures show themselves in every shop,
and street almost, and many think there is great devotion stirred up by the
sight of the^: yea they hope of a merry world toward. And doubtless the
Papists cannot brew so fast, but (as they hope) others will be as ready to
drink. Well, the Lord in mercy look upon us and our Christian governors, that
we may be more and more forward and apt to the embracing, and setting forth of
his holy truth and Gospel to our lives end.

Amen.
Now let us pray.
THE V. SERMON.
PROVE. 6.14. Lewd things are in his heart.


WE have heard before, how vain and lawless the man of Belial is, The cause
of Belials distemperature.
how froward and peevish, how counterfeit and cunning in his outward behavior:
now we are come to the cause of all, and to the digging up of that which is the
fountain of all his distemperature and disorder, and that does the holy Ghost
here show us, when he says: Lewd things are in his heart: as if he should say,
it is no marvel though his behavior be so bad and barbarous, so vile and full
of lewd actions, when his heart, which is the fountain of all his actions, is
full of leude things. Then first, here let us consider what is meant by the
heart. And next, what profitable doctrines may be gathered from this sentence:
and the coherence thereof with the rest of the wicked man's description. What is
meant in the Scripture by the heart.
By heart in this place he means not the fleshly and material heart, which is
the good creature of God: but the corrupted, and depraved qualities of the
heart. For the heart is put sometime for the whole inward man, as in 1. Pet.
3.4. Let the hid man of the heart be meek and quiet: sometime for the thoughts
and affections, for the will and understanding: as in 1. King. 3.9. Give me an
understanding heart: the prayer of Solomon. That is, give understanding unto my
heart, mind, or soul: for he had a heart before. So that in the heart is
understanding, but in the wicked it is lewd understanding, because he
understands leude and vile things best. And in Genesis 6.5. it is said, The
imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart were evil continually: to show,
that thoughts and imaginations lodge in the heart: but in the man of Belial
they are leude and wicked. In the 23. of the Prou. 26. the Lord says: My
son, give me thy heart: that is, the affections of thy heart: as thy desire,
thy love, thy joy, thy fear, thy trust, thy zeal, thy delight, thy sorrow, as
if he should say, if thou desire any thing desire me: if thou love any thing
love me: if thou ioyest in any thing joy in me: if thou fear any thing fear
me: if thou trustest any trust me: if thou be zealous for any thing be zealous
for me: if thou sorrowest for any thing be sorrowful that thou can not do
thy duty to me as thou ought: and these things I leave not to thy choice,
but see thou do them indeed. Now all these affections are in the wicked man of
Belial, but they are lewd, and not for the Lord. In the fourth of the Hebrews
12. the word of God is called a deuider of the thoughts and intents of the
heart: so that in the heart lie thoughts and intents: that is, purposes,
conclusions, and determinations, but in the wicked they are all lewd and
naught. So that the meaning of these words ( Lewd things are in his heart) is,
that the man of Belial understands lewd things, he thinks and studieth lewd
things, he purposes and intends lewd things, he desires and affects lewd
things: yea he deuiseth and contriueth nothing else but lewd things. This
anatomizing and discovering of Belials heart in this sort, with the rest of his
behavior, in other parts of his body, teaches us many excellent points of
doctrine for our instruction.

1. That the man of Belial is no better within then without. 2. That whatsoever
a man is without, yet God does judge of him by that which is in his heart. 3.
That the cause of all outward disorder is in the heart. 4. That a man cannot be
a good man until the heart be reformed. 5. That the word of God is of that
nature, that it discovers the hidden things in the heart. 6. That the same
word of God which shows us the corruptions of our hearts, does also show us
to reform the heart.
The first point.
Of the first: That a wicked and profane man, such as Solomon here speaks of,
is no better within then he is without, but rather worse: is evident both by
this, and diverse other places of holy Scripture. Here he says, that as he is
froward in his speeches, and dissolute in his outward behavior, so his heart
is lewd and wicked. So that if the heart be naught all is naught: If the heart be
naught al is naught
If there be any goodness in his heart, it must be either in his understanding,
or his will, or his affections: but the subject of all these is leudnes,
therefore within there is no better then without, but rather worse. In the 6. of
Genesis verse 5. it is said: That man's wickedness is great, Psalm. 41.1.
and his heart is also evil continually. The Psalmist says, The fool
(meaning a wicked man) has said in his heart there is no God: his ways are
corrupt and become abominable, there is not one that does good: no, not one.

A description of a natural man.
The Apostle Paul searches every part of the natural man within and without,
and finds all alike: Roman. 3. from verse 11. to 19. Let him be asked the
question, and hear his answer. And first of his understanding: What
understanding has the unregenerate or natural man? None: There is none that
understands (says he) meaning the things of God. How are their affections
bent? What? do they not desire to know God? No: (says the Apostle) There is
none that seeks God. What? is there none better then another? No: (says the
Apostle) They have all gone out of the way: they are made altogether
unprofitable: there is none that does good, no not one. But let us make a
better search: it may be there is some goodness in some secret corner, or in
some of their members. What say you of their throat? Their throat (says the
Apostle) is an open sepulcher: from whence proceeds nothing but stink and
rottenness to infect the air. How are their toungs used? To deceit (says
the Apostle.) What is under their lips: The poison of Aspes. And what in
their mouths? Abundance of cursing and bitterness. They are swift in going,
whereabout is it? It may be they plie it so fast to save some body that is in
danger, or to visit the poor and needy. No, (says the Apostle,) Their
feet are swift to shed blood. But yet it may be their trade and manner of
living is good and profitable to the Commonwealth. No, (says the Apostle)
Destruction and calamity are in their ways. But yet it may be their life is
harmless and peaceable amongst their honest neighbors. No, (says he) the way
of peace they have not known. But yet for all this, they may fear God in
their hearts, may they not? No, (says he) The fear of God is not before their
eyes. Why then we perceive that a mere natural man wholly unregenerate, such
as Solomon calls, The man of Belial, is all one man both within and without:
in his life lawless, and in his heart leude and wicked. The use of this first
point is to be made against those wicked me^ that (being altogether sold unto
sin, and hating reformation) will reason in this sort: Whatsoever my sayings
and my doings be, or howsoever my gestures, and outward behavior be, or
whatsoever my religion be, yea though I come not at Church to hear the
Sermons, nor take any pleasure in the Scriptures, etc. yet I would you should
know it, I love God, and I regard Gods word: yea I have as good a heart to God
as the best of you. But he is deceived: for if a lewd heart be a good heart,
then so it is: but a good heart sends forth good things, (being first
renewed by the spirit and grace of God) but if thou be a wicked lawless
Belial, and a vain man, that walk in froward customs, etc. then know for a
certain that thy heart is full of leude things, from whence proceed all thy
outward disorders. And how can that heart be a good heart to Godward, that is
stored with lewd things? And so much for the first point.

The second conclusion that arises from this place, The second point.
is this: that God judges of a man according to that which is in his heart:
(whatsoever he be in show) yea, though a false heart may be (and is commonly)
shrouded under a civil behavior, yet it is seen of God, and judged by him
too. God sees not as man sees, (says Samuel) man looks on the outward
appearance, 1. Sam. 16.7.
but God looks unto the truth of the heart. The heart of man is deceiptfull
above all things (says Jeremy) yet I the Lord search the heart, Ier. 17.10.
and try the reins, to give to every one according to his ways: to show,
that the ways of man are in his heart, and none can know them thoroughly, but
the Lord, whose proper office is to search the heart: and that he will surely
do.

A needful point this is for two sorts of people (especially) to think well
upon. The first, are Papists of all sorts, Church Papists and all. They are
skillful in their Popish eleuations, The skill of Papists.
idolatrous crossings, down low duckings, demure countenances, holy habites,
and observations of times, but they keep their consciences to themselves, and
the Lord looks upon the leudnes and villainies that are lurking in their
hearts, The villainies of Papists.
till a fit time serve for the bringing of them forth: as murdering of
Princes, undermining of kingdoms and states, subuerting the Gospel, enriching
the kingdom of Antichrist, under color of wilful poverty: besides their
whoredoms and other abominations, which make them now so to storm and rage,
because they are discovered unto the world. But let them look unto it, God
will judge them for the leude things that are in their hearts. Many ceremonies
they make like Balaam with his seven altars, Their ceremonies. Prayers.
etc. but both his and their hearts go one way, and God sees it well enough.
Many prayers and great devotion they pretend, but after the Pharisees fashion,
who when they seemed to pray most devoutly, then they devoured most greedily
and cruelly poor widows houses. Inquisitio^s.
Their Inquisitions are full of such prancks, even amongst their holy fathers:
but I will not now stand raking in those puddles: Leude things are in their
hearts, and God sees them well enough, and will judge them: not so much by
that which sounds in their mouths (although he will also judge them for that)
but especially by that which is in their hearts.

2. Sort. Politic Protestants
This is also to be thought upon of our politic Protestants, who say they
defy Popery: but yet are not (many of them) very sound at the heart. They are
too well read and practiced in Machiauell, to be good Christians: they will not
stick to promise, to protest, to say and unsay, to do any thing for profit
and gain. These civil honest men can outwardly behave themselves in print,
with kind kissings, and courteous embracings, with courting and saluting, but in
their heart God sees much cruelty, and covetousness, deceit, profaneness,
and treachery: like a legion of Devils in a common Inn for all that come from
hell, Psalm. 10.
so they bring no godliness but gold with them. They creep and crouch (says
the Psalmist) to make the poor fall by heaps into their nets: their courtesy
and kindness is framed rather by art then by heart: yet all this artificial
dissembling is seen to God, and in time to the world. Woe be unto them if they
repent not, for, Leude things are in their hearts, as in the heart of Belial.
Many are sick of Amnons disease, Amnons disease.
who seemed to long for cakes of his sister Thamars making: but he could not be
well till he had his pleasure of his sister. Absaloms practice.
And as Absalom invited his brother Amnon to a great feast of purpose to
murder him, which he most leudly effected: so can many as pollitikely inuit
those to their feasts whom they mean to snare and catch at their tables: of al
which it may be said as it is said here of Belial: Whatsoever is in their
lips, yet, Lewd things are in their hearts, and accordingly will God judge of
them, and judge them too for lewd and wicked persons.

Many of our gilded Politicians, and varnished Protestants at large, are no
whit behind their tutour Machiauel, nor his brother the Pope, in shrowding a
lewd heart under civil policy, and politic ciuility, to no small
endamaging of the Church of Christ: but perhaps they think that God does not
note it, and will not judge them for it. A man may descant upon Machiauels
name, as Abigail did upon Nabals: Nabal is his name (says she) and folly is
with him. So Macheuil is his name, Machiauels name opened,
and he matcheth all in evil, and an evil match also has he made, for he has
matched a Princess and a pesant together, Christian religion and carnal
policy together, (or devilish policy rather) who agree like the bondwoman
and the freewoman that were in Abraham's house, the one hating, scoffing and
persecuting the other, so that there could be no peace in the house, until
they were parted asunder: yea until the bondwoman and her son were cast out
of the doors. And this rude companion Carnal policy, (who never had any other
bringing up, or schooling then in the flesh, which is altogether for it self)
is fallen grievously at debate with Piety: and with his cruel long nails
has almost scratched out Religions eyes: and yet says* he loves Religion
well, yea and protests that he makes much of her too, and of all her friends.
And verily I do believe him: How carnal policy does make much of religion.
but I believe withal, that it is as Judas made much of Christ, who (being
pursebeater) stole what he could from his master, and at the last sold him
right out, for what he could get. So this same Heliogabalus, (carnal policy
I mean) by purloyning and stealing from Religion, and her friends the Church,
all that he can get, does make much of Religion, and of the Church. And surely
not without just cause does true religion complain in many places of the land,
that her servants the Ministers are so shaue^ and curtalled in their
maintenance by policy, Religions complaint.
(as David's ambassadors were by Hanun king of Ammon,) that they are almost
ashamed to show their heads: and so weak brought that they cannot follow her,
with that courage and cheerfulness which should be in them. And in most
places generally the course is this: (to let pass those gulfes that swallow up
whole livings of Colleges and Churches, Devouring gulfes.
and allow their shepherd, or some other smokie Sir John like unto him, some
twenty nobles a year, and a cast doubler to serve the Cure:) in most places I
say (where livings are laid to the Church) the course is this. If a preaching
Minister be called to a place, (a pastoral charge I mean) where great ones
dwell, who must pay their tithes as well as other men: and they perceive that
he be but a nouice in the world, then policy is called to counsel, who does
give him entertainment, by art, Politic practices against the Ministers of
Christ.
but not from the heart: for lewd things are in his heart. Now sir, master
Policy will for a time be a diligent hearer of his Sermons, and with his
presence and countenance draw on others to like of him, inuit him to his
table, commend him for his gifts, in courteous and familiar manner to confer
with him: yet with some strange countenances sometime among, lest perhaps he
grow too bold with him in reproving his faults, and demanding of his own due.
Now all this while the world imagines that here is such a friend, that he were
better lose half his living then loose him. And the poor simple man thinks
that he, which pretends such friendship unto him, which so earnestly
entreats him, so highly commends him, so stoutly defends him, so lovingly
embraces him, so zealously follows him, and so diligently hears him, will
not deny him any part of his due, but will let him have all, yea with the more
rather then with the less. But he is deceived: for the miserable worldling is
all this while but practicing by policy to get into his hands the spoils of
the Lords inheritance. And in his heart perhaps he thinks thus with himself:
Surely I shall so fill him with my morsels, and make him so beholding unto me
for one thing or another, that except he will incur the note of an
ungrateful person, he shall not choose but let me have his churchright as good
cheap as Esau sold his birthright, for a mess of pottage, or half for
naught: if not, then actum est de amicitia, farewell friendship* I will meet
with him some other way, and make him weary of his place. Verily whosoever
practice thus, have lewd things in their hearts. But it may be they think that
God does not note them; neither will he judge them for it. But they are
deceived: for surely he that tells us here that leude things are in Belials
heart, does also tell us, that even therefore his destruction shall come
speedily and suddenly upon him without recovery. Politic and cruel
practices against the common wealth.
And let them think well of this point also, who in the commonwealth under
color of dealing well with poor men, carry a leude heart and a cruel hand
against them. As Achab was sick for Naboths vineyard which lay hard by his: so
many rich men are sick for poor men's livings and commodities, because they
lie somewhat commodiously for them: if a fair offer of some base exchange will
serve, so it is: if not, then practice his overthrow: or by ouerburdening him
with taxes, and paiments, or by some other device to weary him, and so to make
him give over: but first speak him fair, and give him a dinner. Herein they
play the Lion that came to the sick fox, Of the fox and the lion.
and offered to lick him whole with his tongue, when in his heart he purposed
to tear him in pieces with his teeth: which the fox perceiving, he made him
answer that his tongue indeed had a sovereign virtue in it, but it had a
company of ill neighbors, meaning his teeth, and until they be removed,
(quoth he) I think your Lordship will have but a few patients. And like to the
Lions Physic is the kindness of usurers in lending their money, Usurers
kindness in lending of money.
but their devises be indeed innumerable, and therefore I will not meddle with
them at this time. In these and such like cases, it were good for poor men to
remember, and to follow the counsel of the holy Ghost, in Prou. 23.6.7. Pro.
23.6.7.
Eat not the bread of him that has an evil eye (says he) neither desire his
dainty morsels. For as though he thought as he says, he will say unto thee:
eat, eat, when his heart is not with thee. Thou shall vomit up all thy
morsels, and shall loose all thy sweet words: that is, thou shall be vpbraided
by them, and thou shall never digest them well: they shall do thee no more good
then meat which thou art enforced to cast up again, which does not nourish but
pine and pain the body. And the like caveat he gives us in Pro. 26.24.25. He
that hates will counterfeit with his lips, Pro. 26.24.25.
but in his heart he lays up deceit, though he speak favorably believe him
not, for there are seven (that is many) abominations in his heart. Others
there be, who (to spy out the liberty of their Christian brethren) come with
Herod (that fox) pretending a desire to worship with them, Mat. 2.
when they mean nothing less: Lewd things are in their heart, and God sees
them. Mat. 22.
Others like the Herodians: Is it lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or no? So,
what say you to bishops, what think you of the book of Co^monprayer? Others
are like Saul, who encouraged David to the wars in hope there to have made him
away. Most men come to hear as Gods people use to do, lending very attentive
ears, and sober countenances to the preaching of the word: but God sees many
lewd things in their heart, and much bad stuff and filthiness which man cannot
perceive of a long time: all which they must give account for. For it is a most
vile thing to dissemble with his Majesty by whom we live, and move, and have
our being: and a marvelous mercy of the most high that we are not consumed in
our sins, A necessary admonition.
And let us take heed, that even now (while this matter does sound in our
ears) we harbor not lewd things in our hearts, but pray God to give
repentance and grace to expulse them, and faith in the blood of Jesus Christ to
cleanse our hearts. O let us take heed I say, for we are in his powerful
hands, who can either smite us as we sit before his holy presence, or else
harden our hearts in his just vengeance unto a greater judgment. As Dagon fell
down at the presence of God's Ark: so God give grace that all lewd thoughts,
and imaginations, al wicked purposes and determinations, all lewd understanding
and misconstruings (if there be any) may fall down out of our hearts at the
presence and hearing of his word. And so much for the second point, which is
this, that howsoever a man may carry himself in outward show, to the great
admiration of the world, yet God does look further, and judge him according to
the lewd things that are in his heart.

The third point.
Now let us come to the third point, and therein consider that the cause of all
that evil and disorder which appears in the outward parts of the body, is
in the heart. For when the Lord has ripped up the outward parts of Belial: as
his mouth, his eyes, his fingers, and his feet: then he says presently, Lewd
things are in his heart, as if he should say: No marvel though his outward man
be so ill occupied: for there is one within that sets him a work, and that
is a leude heart, which is the cause of his froward mouth, etc. A leude heart,
or a heart not regenerated, is like Achan among the tribes of Israel, Josh. 7.
who secretly played the thief, and brought all out of quiet: for whose sake
all were plagued. And as Achans leude act was the cause of Isreal's trouble, so
his own lewd heart was the cause of his lewd act, and of his own trouble.
When Israel was plagued in king Achabs days, Achab blamed Eliah for it, little
dreaming that himself was the cause thereof. Achabs humor lives still in
most men, though Achab be dead: for every one looks one upon another, and
says, that such and such are the causes of the troubles, and stirs that are
amongst them: when it may be, if they searched well, they should find the cause
(most part of it, if not all) to be the lewdness and coruption of their own
hearts. Some set upon the Preachers, as Achab set upon Eliah, and cry out that
they are troublesome, and preaching has marred all: but are they not deceived
as Achab was? For ask them: Is it not the truth that we teach? and that they
are so much disquieted withal? they cannot, they will not deny it. Oh but (say
some) they live not according to their doctrine. Well, admit that to be true,
(as it is in many) which yet is an accusation more general then true, and is
more maliciously, then truly or Christianly objected: yet are not they found
liars, which say, that preaching of the Gospel is the cause of evil? For,
first, they confess that we preach well, and that our doctrine is of God, and
is sound and good. Then of that which is good, properly can come nothing but
good: For qualis causa talis effectus: Of good comes no thing but good.
such as the cause is, such is the effect, says reason. If there follow any
evil effect of a good cause, it is per accidens, through some evil accident
that came between, or upon: as when wheat was sowed, tares came up; the wheat
was not the cause of the tares, but an ill accident happened upon the sowing of
the wheat, and that was this: while the keepers slept the envious man came and
sowed tares. Indeed Christ is called a rock of offense, as though he were the
cause of offenses: which yet is not so, for he is the door of eternal life.
And the doctrine of the Gospel is continually matched with many offenses,
Christ is called a rock of offense, but is no cause of offense.
and yet it is the way to salvation. For where Christ comes and the Gospel
is preached, we meet with many lets, which either lead us awry out of the
right way, or else do stop us, lying in our way, or give occasion of falling:
and yet of all these, nothing can be imputed to Christ or to the Gospel. Not
to Christ: for first, it is his office to lead us by the hand the right way to
heaven. Secondly, he is the light of the world, Ioh. 1.
by which we are guided thither. Thirdly, he is the path by which we come
thither. Fourthly, he is the door by which we enter in thither: and therefore
none of these lets or stumbling blocks can be imputed to Christ, nor to the
Gospel: for it is the nature of the Gospel, by taking away all lets, to set
us open an easy access unto the kingdom of heaven: and therefore it is
called glad tidings. Nothing therefore is more disagreable to the nature of
Christ and his Gospel, then offense and disorder. But this offense happens
through the leudnes of men's hearts: How Christ is an occasion of falling.
for as soon as Christ appears, by and by men are wrapped in with offenses,
or rather of themselves run headlong into them. Thus is he the stone to
stumble at, not because he gives occasion of stumbling, but because occasion
is wilfully taken. And so the Gospel which is the doctrine of unity and
peace, Call. de. scandalis.
(as Master Calvin both learnedly and largely does show in his Treatise of
offenses) is the occasion of great troubles and garboiles in the world: because
the wicked take occasion thereby to set all things in a broile. Therefore if
any evil follow the doctrine of the Gospel, it arises from some other cause,
which is this: Lewd things are in his heart, who receives evil by the truth.
And such men turn even the best things to a bad end, so soon as they touch
his lewd heart: Some are like the Spider.
like the spider, who being full of poison turns every thing into poison that
she sucketh. If therefore men would leave raking abroad in the doctrine of the
Gospel, and the lives of Preachers and other professors, and search at home
in themselves, they shall find the cause of most of that hatred and contention,
and wilful mistaking, and rash judging, and bitter censuring, and wicked
living that is in our Christian Churches, to be in some an ignorant and
profane heart: in some an idolatrous and superstitious heart: in some a proud
and ambitious heart: in some a covetous and worldly heart: in some a drunken
and a voluptuous heart: in some a dissembling and Machiuilean heart: in some a
scoffing and scorning heart: in some a cruel and Herodian heart: in some a
treacherous and Iudas-like heart. Now when all these chance to join together
against the truth, as Herod and Pontius Pilate did against Christ, then know
that the Devil whose name is Legion, is up in arms against God, but to his
own destruction.

Now the^, when we have by the grace of God found out the cause of our evil to
be an evil heart in our selves: we may truly say of our hearts as David did of
Doeg, Psalm. 55.12.
and prophetically of Judas: Psalm. 55.12. Surely mine enemy did not defame me,
but it was thou my familiar friend, which was bred and borne with me, even thou
my heart with whom I have been so familiar, that have wrought me the greatest
part of my woe. Of the same judgment is the Apostle James: Iam. 1.13.14.
Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. 15.
But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence,
and is enticed. Then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and
sin when it is finished, brings forth death. Err not my dear brethren.
Where the Apostle plainly shows us two things: first, that such is our
impudency, shameless ignorance, and presumptuous blind boldness by nature,
that rather then we will acknowledge our selves to be in fault, 2. points to be
obscrued in the words of James.
and to be the cause of our own evil, we will not stick to lay the fault
upon God, and make him the cause of evil. As our first parents did: the woman
blamed the serpent and the man blamed not simply the woman, nor himself at
all: but the woman forsooth which God had given him. Secondly, that whosoever
thinks that God is the cause of his evil, and not that his own corrupt heart
is wholly the cause thereof (the force whereof is so great both to entice, and
draw unto evil, to conceive and to bring forth evil) does err and is
deceived. Into a lewd heart the word cannot enter.
Hereof it comes also that the word of God cannot enter into many: it cannot
fasten upon their hearts, because their hearts are full of lewd things. Like
the Inn where Christ was borne: there was no room for him in the Inn, and
therefore he was feign to lie in the stable. And in many, though it enter, yet
it tarieth not, In an evil heart the word cannot abide.
but departs away presently: saying as Christ said, when the Jews sought
after his life: Arise, let us go hence, as being unwilling to lodge in so
filthy a place, and amongst his enemies. And hence it is likewise, that the
Preachers words come out from many when they repeat a Sermon, as Thamar did
from Amnon when he had defiled her, with her garments all rent and torn.
Simili^.
If pure wine be put into a filthy and unclean vessel, in pouring it forth
again, it will appear what stuff was in the vessel, for they come out
together: so, if wholesome doctrine be delivered to a lewd heart, in the
rehearsing thereof it will appear with what manner of understanding and
affection he heard it. Such caskes do many bring with them to put our Sermons
in, A lewd heart makes a lewd report of a Sermon.
that either run out like Siues, or else are defiled with ignorance, or
malice, or preiudicate conceits, that it would loath a man to hear it come from
them. For though it came to them in a princely robe, yet it comes from them
like a beggars cloak: yea though it came to them with a lovely countenance, yet
it comes from them like a filthy carrion, dragged and haled in the miry
streets amongst dogs: that a man would think the Preacher had been out of
his wits, to deliver such matter, or in such manner as they utter it: or else
(which is the right) that they wanted both wit, and understanding, or grace, or
conscience, or honesty, or all, that heard the Sermon to report it in such a
lewd manner.

But the best is, the shame turns to themselves, and no body is so much
defiled with such hearts as the owners thereof: So says our Savior Christ:
Those things which proceed out of the mouth come from the heart, Mat 15.18.19.
and they defile the man: for out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, false testimonies, slanders: these are the things
which defile the man, meaning him that is troubled with them: as if he did but
vomit upon his own clothes, A man of a lewd heart does most shame and annoy
himself.
that speaks from a filthy heart. And verily they are but fools that do so:
for what wise man will carry one with him still, that shameth him wheresoever
he goes. A lewd and unreformed heart, is such an unmannerly companion, that does
nothing else but discredit our persons, deface our religion, grieve our
friends, harden our foes, advance the Devil, provoke the Lord, mar all the
good things that come near it, and always annoy, shame and vex the owner.
Lot had much ado with the Sodomites, but none did more dishonor him then his
own daughters. Noah was vexed with the old world, but none did him so much
shame as his own son. David had many enemies, but none put him in such fear
and danger, as his own Absalom. Sampson had much ado with the Philistines, but
his own heifter his wife ploughed up his riddle to the advantage of his
enemies. Our Savior Christ had many enemies, yet none like Judas, who was
always in his company. So every man, yea every true Christian shall have many
enemies, crosses, troubles, and dangers, but his own heart is his greatest
enemy, which does flatter him most, and deceive him soonest: which for want of
godliness cannot be content with that it has: which for want of contentation
cannot be in quiet: for want of quietness cannot have any joy of any thing
that it enjoys: which for want of heavenly wisdom cannot divide his times
aright, nor tell how to deal with all sorts of people: which for want of
patience cannot bear an injury, or put up a wrong: for want of merciful
affections cannot tell how to forgive offenses: for want of charity cannot tell
how to construe things well: for want of the fear of God cannot have a good
understanding: for want of a good understanding peruerteth the straight ways
of the Lord: which for want of humility cannot see the meaning of Gods ways:
which for want of a lowly affection cannot tell how to seek peace: for want of
Gods grace cannot acknowledge his fault: and for want of remorse of conscience
cannot repent him of his lewdness. Such a heart is the heart of the wicked
Belial, which being fraught with lewd things, disordereth, distempereth, and
shameth all the life of that man that has it and is ruled by it. And so much
for the third point: in handling whereof, we have seen that all the cause of
outward disorder and trouble is within a man's own heart: of the other three
points in the next Sermon.

Now let us pray.
THE VI. SERMON.
PRO. 6.14. Lewd things are in his heart.


OVt of these words (joined with the rest of Belials description) we have
hitherto learned three excellent and worthy points of doctrine. First, that
Belial is no better within then without. Secondly, that the heart and
whatsoever is in the heart of man, is known to God, who will also judge a man
according to that which is in his heart, whatsoever show he makes outwardly.
Thirdly, that the cause of all outward disorder, and scandalous behavior* is
in the wicked man's own heart. Now, it remains that we consider of the three
other points, which (being propounded in the former Sermon) for want of time I
could not entreat of. The heart must be reformed before one can be a good man.
Whereof the first is this: that so long as the heart is unreformed, and
continues stored with lewd things, it is not possible to be a good man. For
until then (as we may perceive by this anatomy of Belial) the affections will
be rebellious and lawless, the speech will be froward and peevish, our
religion will be hypocritical and counterfeit, our prayers will be
lippe-labour and cold babbling: our zeal will be either none at all, or very
bitter and rash, our faith will be mere historical, our love will prove only
self-loue, our anger, reuengefull and injurious, our life dissolute and
scandalous, our repentance desperate and faithless, and our death dreadful
and comfortless. Therefore if any would reform his life, he must first
reform his heart, from whence as from a spring flows continually a stream
of corruption and unrighteousness; unto death, if it be not reformed and
altered; or of holiness and righteousness unto life, if it be well reformed
and kept. Therefore Solomon pointing to the right way that leads to the
reformation of manners, Pro. 4.23.
says: Keep thy heart with all diligence: and adds this as a reason: for,
thereout comes life, Mat. 15.19.
and thereout comes death. And out of the heart (says our Savior Christ)
proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, murders, fornications, debate, strife,
etc. speaking of an evil and unregenerate heart: to show, that a wicked man's
heart is like a filthy dunghill, which both breeds and harbors all kind
of venomous vermin: and as a snake on a sunnie day comes forth of her hole:
so the wicked, when fit time and occasion serve, do set forth, and show the
ware and stuff which was hidden in their heart, saying in the mean time as
Esau did. When the days of mourning for my father Isaac do come, Genesis 27.
then I will kill my brother Jacob: which agrees with that, that David
speaks of his enemy, in Psalm. 41.6. Psalm 41.6.
His heart heapeth up iniquity within him, and when he comes forth he
utters it. Many counterfeit holiness, devotion, sobriety, love and
kindness: and indeed they do but counterfeit, for holy, and devout, and
sober, and loving, and kind, etc, they cannot be, so long as the heart, or
inward man is unreformed. In vain do we sweep the channels of the street,
Similitude.
except we stop the fountains from whence they flow. In vain do we crop the
weeds, except we dig up their roots from whence they receive their
nourishment. In vain do we plaster the sore, except it be searched and
cleansed to the bottom. So in vain do we labor to bring forth good actions
without, except first we labor to beget good affections within. How can thou
say that thou love me, Judge. 16.15.
when thy heart is not with me? (said Dalilah to Sampson:) which she uttered as
a common known principle in nature, to be denied of none: that all love is but
counterfeit and false, which comes not from the heart. And therefore whosoever
will love indeed, must begin first at his heart, and frame that to love. And
the like is to be said of other affections, and all the actions or effects that
proceed from them. The heart like a great co^mander.
The heart among the members of the body, is like a great commander among his
soldiers: look which way he goes, that way go they. Well may we preach, and
long may we hear of the reforming of our lives, of mortifying our pride, our
strange fashions, our wantonness, our covetousness, our malice, etc. the
tongue will make but a jest at the matter, so long as the heart is unreformed:
as appears by the testimony that the Lord gives against Ezechiels
Auditors: Ezec. 33.31.
They hear thee (says the Lord) as my people use to hear: but with their
mouths they make jests at thee and thy Sermons: their hearts run after their
covetousness: to show, that there is no outward obedience to be looked for,
where the heart yields not to obey: for all actions outward, will follow the
affections of the heart. On the other side, win the heart, and all is won:
without which there is no rowing but against the stream. A ready heart makes
a ready hand to give, a ready tongue to speak, a ready ear to hear, and a
ready foot to go. And a holy religious heart, makes a holy and religious
hearing, speaking and living. Who were they that brought so bountiful gifts to
the building of the Lords holy tabernacle among the Jews? as we read in Exodus
35.21.22. Exodus 35.21 22.29.
verses. It is said in the 29. verse: Every one whose hearts moved them
willingly to bring, brought some gold, some silver, some silk, some badgers
skins, some stones, etc. yea until they were forced to stay by proclamation:
to show, that when the heart is won to be willing, and to like of the work,
the work shall go well forward: and nothing will seem hard to a willing mind.
Psalm. 45.1.
When David's heart was enditing or framing of a good matter, then was his
tongue ready (like the pen of a swift writer) to declare the same. Psalm. 108.2.
And whosoever can say with David, O God my heart is prepared, shall follow
with David and say, so is my tongue also, I will sing and give praise: to show,
that when the heart is not ready to serve God, nothing is ready, for all
tarry for the heart.

Therefore it is that the Scripture does so much call upon us to reform our
hearts. Pro. 23.
In the three and twentieth of the Proverbs, the twelfth verse, Verse. 12.
Solomon says: Apply thy heart to instruction, and thine ears to the words
of knowledge. But first the heart, and then the ears will follow; and in the
seventeenth verse: 17.
Let not thy heart be envious against sinners, 19.
but let it be in the fear of the Lord continually: In the nineteenth verse: O
my son, hear and be wise, and guide thy heart in the way: And in the 26.
verse: 26.
My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes delight in my ways.

And no marvel: for what shall the Mariners do, if the Pilote be false at the
helm of the ship? What shall the soldiers do at the hold, if the captain of
the hold be a traitor? A false heart is like such a Pilote and such a
captain: yea a false heart is like Judas among the disciples, who carried the
purse, and made the provision for all the rest, laying up one groate for his
ma^ster, Too many such now adays.
and ten for himself. A bad Cater, being a cunning thief, and a secret
traitor. So the heart is the storer; if that be secretly false and treacherous,
it will store the body with lewdness: and if it chance to speak one word
for Gods glory, he will address and set forth in most brave sort a thousand
for his own. Here is much ado when the Lords day comes, to reform and deck
the body, The principal care of most me^ when the sabbath day comes.
the apparel must not have a spot or wrinckle, the house fine, and every thing
neat and trim, but no care to reform the heart: and therefore the word of
the Lord is unto us as a tale that is told which we like not, in at one ear,
and out at the other: or as water to the Blackemoore; great washing, but we
never the whiter. When we go to a feast, and when we meet our friends, we have
much care to set our gestures, our words, and our looks after the ciuillest
manner, but the heart is still after the old fashion, badde enough: leude
things are in that: The heart is still of the old fashion
reform that and all the rest will be well. Thou would serve God, but thou
think that thou art not fine enough: nay rather think that thou have a
proud heart, and seek thy own self. Thou would give to the poor, but
for fear of wanting for thy self: nay rather fear that thy heart is not
enlarged with the bowels of mercy and liberality. Thou would go to thy
neighbor that has offended thee, and is offended at thee, but for fear that
he should think thou art glad to seek unto him, and so should be more
contemned of him: but rather think that thy heart is not humble and peaceable.
We blame others, when our selves are in fault.
Thou had not committed such nor such sins, but for such and such persons
(thou say) who enticed thee thereunto. Nay rather say, that thy heart was
not well bounded with the fear and love of God, but lay open like a common
field whose hedge is plucked up to the ground, for all unchaste, vnpure, and
vile thoughts to break in. How a good heart is to be grounded and bounded.

What religion will do if it be lodged in the heart.


Joseph's heart was surely grounded in the knowledge of Gods will, in the
obeying of his word, and strongly bounded with the fear of God: and therefore
do his mistress what she could, she could not by any means break into the
hold of his chastity, though she did strongly assault it. Let religion be in
thy heart, and that will make thee serve God with the congregation of his
people, in such as thou have, yea through heat and cold: no weather will keep
thee from the public service of God. It will make thee with Zacheus to climb
a tree to see Christ, and with the creeple in the fifth of John, Luke 19. Ioh.
5.
desire some body to carry thee into the poole of the heavenly waters, and
lively fountains of Gods word, when the Angel (Gods Minister) does stir
them. So far thou will be from saying, the weather is too cold, or too hot,
I am not well, I am troubled with a murre, Light excuses serve them that have
no list to serve God.
and I know not what; as the manner of many dainty ones is to do, when they
have no love of God, or his truth in their hearts. So also, let love, and
humility, and mercy, and zeal be in thy heart, and they will cause thee to
give and to forgive, and to seek peace, and to speak of the Lords statutes
even before Kings, and wilt not be ashamed, except it be that for want of those
graces thou could not perform those duties any sooner. And so much for that
point, in discoursing whereof we see plainly, that until the heart be
reformed, a man cannot be a good man, nor an honest man: and how they take a
wrong course, that begin to reform their outward parts, and not their
hearts first,

Ithe next place we are to consider, Of the nature and power of the word of God.
of the piercing nature, and searching power, or powerful searching of the
word of God: which deals with the heart, searches the heart, makes laws
for the heart, finds out the lewdness of the heart, and reproves the
thoughts of the heart: searching and discovering even the most secret corners
and closets of the heart, to see how those laws are kept or broken: for as the
Lord does see the heart himself, and cannot otherwise do because he makes it,
and rules it: so by his word he searches and gageth the same. God needs no
informatio^s.
Not to be better informed himself of any thing that is there: for he from
everlasting at one instant, had and for ever has all the thoughts, intents,
imaginations and purposes of all hearts in the world open before him, knowing
them all before they be conceived, with the means and manner of their entrance,
and all the effects of them being conceived: but it is to show us (his poor
creatures) and unworthy children, What manner of God we serve.
that we serve such a God and Father, as does know us truly, even to the very
heart, and the most secret thoughts thereof: and further, that we also might
hereby learn to know our selves, and reform our own hearts, which without
the light of the word we could never do. And therefore David asking the
question how a young man may reform his ways, Psalm. 119.9
meaning, how he shall bridle his affections, and order his words and his
deeds, he makes no other answer but this, Even by taking heed thereunto,
according to thy word. And to this end he has given gifts unto men. Ephesians. 4.
even his spirit of wisdom, and of understanding, and of counsel, and of
courage. Esa. 11.3.

Now therefore whosoever (being endued with that searching and powerful
spirit in any measure) handles and deuideth the word aright, cannot choose
but rifle the very thoughts of the heart. Yea, the faithful Minister of God
shall search the hearts of his hearers whether he will or no: and sometimes
shall be in their bosoms when he has no such purpose. Some say to themselves
as Jeremy did (when he was had in contempt and hatred, for speaking against the
special sins of his time: Ier 20.9.
) They will not make any more mention of God, nor speak any more in his name:
but the word of the Lord is in their heart as a burning fire, shut up in their
bones, and they are weary with forbearing, yea they cannot stay, but must
utter it. And then they speak so to the consciences of men, that if a
stranger, or an unlearned man come in, in the mean time, he feels his heart
discovered, and is rebuked of all men (as he thinks:) for he thinks that
his secret thoughts are then known to all men, and he confesses plainly,
that God is amongst them, as the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 14.24. 1. Cor. 14.
which is a very sure argument, that this word which we preach, is the word of
God: for what laws or writings can deal so with the heart and consciences of
men, but only the laws and Scriptures of the most high, who only searches
the heart?

A double use of the former doctrine.
Of this point we may make a double use, first, it may teach us for a certain
truth, that there is no thought in the heart, but that God is privy to it: for
when he shall give man a spirit to search, and knowledge Jeremy tells us)
meaning that no man by his own skill can thoroughly sound the depth of any man's
heart, nor perfectly know his own) how much more does God himself search and
know them most perfectly and exactly, who is all wisdom it self? Elijah was
a sharp sighted Prophet, as any was in all Israel: yet he could see no more
then himself left, which stood zealously for the glory of God, and hated
Baal: but the Lord saw 7000. in Israel, 1. King. 19.14.18.
which never bowed their knees to Baal, more then Elijah saw. So the Ministers
of the word of God may see, and show us a little corruption: but God will find
7000. times more then they can find. David was privy to his own heart as much
as any man, and yet he could not see all the sins that lurked there, and
therefore he prays against his secret faults. Psalm. 19.12. 1. Ioh. 3.20.
And if our hearts condemn us (says Saint John) God is greater then our
hearts, and knows all things. Therefore, when by the light of the word of God
(shining in our hearts) we see more corruption in our selves then we did
before, let us thank God, and repent of it, for to that end does the Lord hold
forth that candle, to discover unto us our hidden corruption, and to draw us to
repentance, and not to stay there neither, but pray against more, that we know
not of by reason of our ignorance and negligence, and not to think ourselves
well when we have repented that which we know.

How a man may be acquainted with his own heart.
And whosoever would be thoroughly well acquainted with his own heart, let him
be a diligent searcher of it, by the continual reading of the Scriptures,
hearing of Sermons, and daily meditation in that which he reads and hears,
for want whereof the wicked blind Atheists and Epicures, and other profane
persons which care not for the word of God, know no more the deceit of sin,
nor the corruption of their hearts, then the brute beast does, but glory and
rejoice in that which is their utter shame: and how can they repent them of
that which they glory in? and that is, the lewd things of their hearts, which
for want of the heavenly light they cannot discern. And this is that which
Solomon means when he says, Pro. 5.23.
the wicked shall die for want of instruction, and go astray through his great
folly. And as for their own natural light, it is (in comparison) but mere
darkness, and a false light, that (like a Drapers shop light) does deceive men
with false colors. And further, let no man be offended with the minister of
God, who does but hold forth the glass, which does show unto them the spots
and deformities of their souls: Nay rather let us account him the best teacher
that comes nearest our consciences, and that a good Sermon that rippetth and
tumbleth up all our hearts. Note that.
And if we go from a Sermon which does not trouble us, and like a purgation
work strongly in discovering and disturbing our hearts, and the sins that
lurk there: then let us think, that either we have dead and hard hearts, or
else that the speaker wanted either will, skill, or courage, or that his
weapons had no edge, and his physic no strength. But many in steed of making
this use of it, do presently think that some body has told the Preacher some
tales of them: as the proud men of Jerusalem said that Jeremy spoke as Baruch
the son of Neriah had provoked him against them* Ier. 43.3.
and do marvel how he came to the knowledge of their thoughts, and of their
words, which in secret they have uttered, 2. King. 6.8.
as the King of Aram marvelled who disclosed his secrets to the King of Israel.
Now Elisha having the spirit of prophecy, was able to do it, and did it: so
likewise the Ministers of Christ having the light of the word, with the
direction and power of the Spirit of God, can in some measure also disclose
unto us (when we hear them) the secrets of our hearts: and that we should be
out of all doubt for this matter, the Apostle tells us plainly, that this is
the powerful working of the word of God* Heb. 4.12.
Which (says he) is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two
edged sword, and enters through, even to the dividing asunder of the soul and
the spirit, and of the joints, and of the marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. Then as for God himself, in the next verse
he says: That all things are naked and open unto his eyes. And so much for
this first point: namely, the power of the word of GOD, which tells us what
is in Belials heart.

Now it will be time to see what remedy may be had against those The sixth
point.
lewd things that breed in the heart: whereby we may approve our selves in the
sight of God, such as need not fear that sudden and irrecouerable vengeance
which is to fall upon the man of Belial. And surely, whither shall we go for a
remedy, but unto him that has told us the state of our hearts, and that is to
God himself? who does not only by his word tell us what we are, but also what
we ought to be, and by what means we may be as we should be. That which David
appointed to redress the young man's ways, is the only mean both for young
and old to reform themselves by: Psalm. 119.9.
and that is the word of God. That which discerns and shows us the diseases
of our hearts, is that which also prescribes a remedy against the same: but the
word of God has showed us that lewd things are in the heart; therefore the
word of God also will show us how to reform the heart: and is like a skillful
Physician, who both shows the disease, and the remedy.

Now, the means which are prescribed in the word, are of two sorts, either
Restoratiue in regard of the time past, or Preservative in regard of the time
to come, and both of God: which the holy Prophet David acknowledges when he
says: Psalm. 103.3.
My soul praise thou the Lord, which forgiueth thee all thy sins, and heals
all thine infirmities. And the same does Jeremy also confess, Ier. 17.14.
when he says: Heal me o Lord, and I shall be whole, save me* and I shall be
saved: for thou art my praise. For the time past, forgiveness is to be had:
for the time to come deliverance from evil. To obtain forgiveness of our
lewdness and wickedness past two things are requisite: Repentance, and
prayer: So much does the words of Peter to Simon Magus import. Act. 8.22.
Repent thee of this thy wickedness (says he) and pray God that if it be
possible, the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. So our Savior Christ
also taught us in that prayer which we (therefore) call the Lords prayer:
Forgive us our trespasses, and deliver us from evil. That our repentance may
be sovereign, and not deadly, there must be faith joined therewith, whereby we
applying the promises of God to our hearts, may be assured that our sins are
both fully punished, and freely pardoned in Christ Jesus: Act. 15.9. Our
preservative.
For by faith our hearts are purified (says Saint Peter.) For our preservative
against the corruption, and contagion of a lewd heart in time to come, there
are also two things required. The first is, heedfull watchfulness. The second
is continual prayer, and calling upon God. That this is true, it is very
evident by the words of our Savior Christ in the Gospel: Take heed, watch
and pray (says he) least ye fall into temptation. Mar 13.33.
To show, that if we be careless, and negligent in prayer, we shall soon fall
into the hands of the tempter: Luke 22.
And in another place, Take heed least at any time your hearts be surfeted,
and overcome with the cares of this world. To show, that our hearts must be
kept and looked unto, like little children, which else would every hour eat
and drink that which should hurt them, or fall into the fire, or water, or
incur one mischief or another. And this is that which Saint Paul means,
when he requires us to walk circumspectly: and is all one with that of
Solomon in the fourth of the Proverbs. Keep thy heart with all diligence: as
if there were no hold in the world so much assaulted, nor any man's daughter or
goods so much laid for, as the heart of man is: and therefore that must be
kept with all diligence, and watched most narrowly.

This diligent keeping, and heedfull watching of our hearts must be after the
manner of soldiers, The souls armor.
with our armor and weapons about us. And what those are, the Apostle teaches
us in Ephesians. 6.12. etc. Ephesians. 6.12.13. etc.
and he calls it the armor of God, because all the world could not tell how
to make an armor for the soul, but God: who created it, and knows what
enemies and assaults it is subject unto. A helmet she must have, A helmet.
but that must be of hope, which causes her with patience to expect the
performance of Gods promised salvation: and this bears off all the blows of
Satan. Then a breast plate she must have, A breast plate.
but that must be of righteousness: to show, that the lovers of
unrighteousness and wrong, are easily thrust through and spoiled: yea (as
Paul says) they pierce themselves through with many noisome lusts, and
temptations. A girdle.
Then she must have a girdle to keep all her armor close about her, and that
must be of truth and sincerity, or soundness of heart and a good conscience,
which is opposite to hypocrisy. Then a sword she must have in the one hand, A
sword.
and a shield in the other, to defend her self withal, and to offend her
enemies. But this sword must be the word of God, not the Popes Legenda aurea
(which has wel-neare as many lies as lines in it) nor any of his dirtie
Decrees. A shield.
And her shield must be a lively justifying faith, which must still apply
Christ and his merits, and oppose him against all that ever Satan cannot
object against her. Shoes.
Then she must be shod with shoes, but they must be affections prepared, and
always in a readiness to hear and believe the Gospel, whereby she shall
speedily and easily travel and come to all the rest. Prayer continual and
fervent.
And to all these she must join continual, and fervent prayer, both for her
self, that she may betime put on, and skilfully use this armor: as also for
others, and namely first, for her Captains and Leaders the Ministers of the
word, For her self.
and next for all the Saints and members of the Church that be her fellow
soldiers. For others.
And thus we see a Christian man in arms, appointed to keep diligent watch
over his heart, being thus appointed with armor of Gods making, and of the
Spirits putting on, he is diligently to examine every thought before it enter,
and every word and gesture before it pass from him: having the fear of God in
stead of a guard always to keep the door and passage.

Now further, that we may watch and pray to good purpose; we must know and
remember: First, what we are to pray for. Secondly, what we must pray against.
The things that we must pray for, are principally four. 4. things to be prayed
for.
First, that God would create in us a clean heart, and renew a right spirit
within us, Psalm. 51.10. That is, in stead of an ignorant heart, to give us a
heart endued with knowledge: in stead of a dull heart, an understanding heart,
The heart renewed and cleansed.
as Solomon prayed 1. King 3.9. in stead of an adulterous heart, a chaste heart:
in stead of a subtle and crafty heart, a simple and discrete heart: in stead
of a proud and high minded heart, an humble and lowly heart: in stead of a
foolish heart a wise heart: in stead of a malicious heart, a charitable heart: in
stead of a hard heart, a soft and tender heart: in stead of a vain and profane
heart, a holy and religious heart: in stead of a stubburne and rebellious
heart, an obedient and tractable heart, and in stead of a counterfeit and
dissembling heart, an upright and a sound heart. 3. things to be learned by the
words of David in Psalm. 51.10.
And a heart thus altered and renewed by God, David calls a heart new created:
to show first that we can no more of our selves reform our own hearts
(whatsoever Papists prate) then we can create a heart. Secondly, that until
our hearts be renewed by the grace of Gods Spirit, they are as if they were not
at all. And thirdly, that as all the works of creation belong to God only, 1.
so does also the reforming and altering of the inward man, 2.
and every affection and power belonging to the same. 3.


The second thing that we must pray for: is, that it would please his divine
Majesty to join sanctification and illumination together in our minds,
Sanctification.
that is, not only to enlighten our hearts with the understanding of his will,
but also to work in us the love of righteousness, and obedience to his will:
yea, that he would (to that end) give us an understanding heart, or a heart
enlightened, that we may keep his law with our whole hearts. So David prays
in Psalm 119.34. Psalm. 119.34.
Give me understanding, and I will keep thy law: yea I will keep it with my
whole heart. And that is the way indeed to come unto a sound and a saving
knowledge of God, A saving knowledge.
as our Savior Christ shows in the seventh of John, verse. 17. If any man
will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God of no. Not
the idle hearer, or vain disputer, or the carping cauiller, etc, but the doer:
yea, he that is resolved to follow Gods counsels, shall know Gods counsels,
and none else. And until we have an active understanding in the law of God,
not the form of doctrine only, or a formal knowledge of the same, but the
power of it (as the Apostle teaches:) until then (I say) we be like Balaams
Ass, who indeed could do that which other beasts could not do, and that was,
to speak, and reprove his master with a man's voice, and yet was still a
beast: or like Vriah, who carried letters in his own bosom to his own
destruction. 2. Sa. 11.15.
Or like unto the devils, who said in the fourth of Luke, that they knew
Christ, but it was to their torment. Therefore whosoever would keep his heart
well, and have it purged and preserved from the lewd things of Belial, let him
pray that the truth may not swim aloft in his brain (as it does in many
wicked men,) but that it may sink down into his heart, and work
righteousness and true obedience to Gods will.

Thirdly, Perseverance, or constancy. Psa. 86.11.
because our hearts are very false to God, and like run- awayes, new fangled,
mal-contented, and desirous of liberty, therefore in the next place it will not
be amiss to pray with David: O Lord knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear
thy name. And then indeed are we in safety and security: for in his service is
freedom and protection. But if we wander out of his service, and Just after
carnal liberty, then are we in danger, and it will fall out with us as it did
with Dinah the daughter of Jacob, Genesis 34.
who was not ravished until she wandered abroad among the Sichemites from her
fathers house.

Fourthly, A qui^kning spirit, or cheerfulness.
because we are dull, and lazy in the service of God, we must also desire the
Lord to quicken us with his grace, that is, to rouse us up: by calling unto us
by his Ministers, or by pinching us with some fatherly and merciful
corrections when we fall asleep, and are hard to be awaked: and so to make us
lively when we are heavy, and fainting away under our burden: and still to set
an edge upon our zeal. How needful this prayer is, it may sufficiently
appear unto any one that will but consider, that David prays in one Psalm,
the 119. no less then seven or eight times for this grace. And these are the
things which I find at this time most necessary to be prayed for of every one
that would have his heart well purged and reformed: not excluding other things,
which others presently, or hereafter upon further meditation, and experience,
may find requisite to be prayed for.

Now, as we must pray for these graces and favors of God before specified, so
also must we beware of four most dangerous enemies, and pray earnestly
against them, that through Gods gracious help and power we may be delivered
from them.

The first enemy, neglect of the means.
The first is, neglect and abuse of the means whereby the heart is to be
regenerated, sanctified, established, and quickened. These means are of two
sorts, the outward and inward: the outward means are the word and Sacraments:
Outward.
The word of God (says David) will redress the young man's ways, Psalm. 119.9
if he take heed thereunto. And the word of God (says the Apostle) is mighty
and lively in operation (as has been showed before) Heb. 4.12. Heb. 4.12.
the Sacraments are also very effectual signs and seals of Gods favor
toward us in Christ, and be called of Augustine, visible words: because they
do in a manner visibly demonstrate unto our sight, that which we heard with our
ears: and the more we are assured of Gods love, the more are our hearts
inflamed again with the love of his Majesty. The inward means, Inward.
is the Spirit of God working faith, conversion, and obedience in our hearts
by the outward. So was the heart of Lydia opened and converted at the Preaching
of Paul: Act. 16.
not Paul, but the Lord opened her heart, that she believed Paul's preaching.
And as at the first the Lord by his word and Spirit created the world: Genesis
1.2. Ioh. 1.3.
so the Lord by his word and Spirit still creates the hearts of men new
again. Therefore let us frequent the preaching and use reading of the word of
God: let us delight to confer and meditate upon the word in all reverence and
sobriety: use the means, and the use will (in time) beget a blessing. Let us
never (my good brethren) give over hearing of the word) as many have done: How
dangerous a thing it is to give over the hearing of the word.
) for Satan never has men at such advantage to work upon them what he will,
as when men have given over hearing the word preached. And seeing as the
Spirit is the mean whereby our says and conversion are wrought through the
preaching of the word, let us nourish that by all good means, taking great
heed that we neither quench it nor grieve it. 1. These. 5. by taking away the
exercises of hearing, and prayer, and meditation, and conference, whereby it is
nourished: nor by dispensing with any sin in our hearts, where the Spirit must
reign. If we want these means the^ are we to pray for them: Pray to the Lord
of the harvest (says our Savior Christ) that he would send forth laborers
into his harvest. And for the spirit we must pray as David does: O Lord take
not thy holy spirit away from me: and open my eyes that I may see the
wonderful things of thy law. Woe be to them that despise prophesying, A
desperate kind of reasoning. God has fore ordained the means as well as the
end.
and think these means to be more then need, as they that profanely and
desperately reason thus without reason: If I be elected I shall be saved, do
what I list: if not, I shall be damned, do what I can. These be the speeches of
the me^ of Belial, whose hearts are pestered with lewd things, neither can they
wisely consider, that as God has foreordained me^ to a certain end, so also
has he fore ordained the means whereby they shall come to that end. Of such
contemners and beastly hogs and dogs (as Christ calls them) we may read more
in Mal. 3.14. and in Job. 21.15. Mal. 3.14. Job. 21.15.
The effect of both which places is one, that such wicked persons think there
is no profit in serving the Almighty, and therefore they say unto God, Depart
from us: we desire not the knowledge of his ways, and (spending their days in
all iolity and carnal prosperity, like oxen set up a fatting, and never used
to the yoke) at last they go down suddenly to hell. Of recusa^ts that refuse
to hear the word, there be two sorts.

1. Schismatikes. 2. Afflicted consciences.

Let them also beware and look to themselves, who give over hearing of Sermons,
of which there be two sorts, schismatikes and afflicted consciences:
schismatikes are they that cut themselves off from our assemblies, whose
property is to justify themselves, and to condemn others, and therein they
have no small felicity: of these, some be Papists, some Brownists, some
Anabaptists, etc. To the first sort we may say as the Apostle does in Gal.
1.6.7. I marvel that you are so soon turned away unto another Gospel, from
him that has called you, which is not another Gospel. But some among you
intend to trouble the Church of God. And if we be not Apostles, and Ministers
of Christ unto them, yet doubtless we are unto others, who are the seal of
our ministry unto God in Christ. To the second sort we say as the Church
says in Canticles. 3.1.2.3.4. Thou would find Christ, and can not, thou
have sought his love and can not find it, therefore thou will seek no
longer: oh do not so, but hear what the body says to thee a member of the
same: In my bed by night I sought him whom my soul loves, but I found him
not: What then? did she give over seeking? Cant. 3.1.2.3.4.
No verily: I will rise (says the Church) and go about in the City, by the
streets, and by the open places: I will seek him whom my soul loves: I
sought him, but I found him not. The watchmen that went about the City found
me, (meaning that she went to the Ministers of the word for comfort) to whom I
said, have you seen him whom my soul loves? When I had passed a little from
them, I found him whom my soul loves: I took hold on him, and left him not,
etc. Meaning that she (having long used all means both private and public)
then found him when she was out of all hope to find him: and so do thou that
art troubled in thy soul, because thou can not yet find that alteration of
thy heart, and that inward obedience, and that truth of heart, and that comfort
and joy by hearing the word and prayer, etc. which thou desire and lookedst
for: use all means, continue still seeking, asking, and knocking, seek privately
at home in thy bed, by private examination and meditation: then confer with
thy Christian neighbors about the state of thy soul: then go to the Ministers
of the word, and frequent the public holy assemblies, with an earnest desire
of finding: and doubtless at last when thou art out of al hope, thou shall
find comfort. And as in taking of bodily physic, many (through the weakness
of their stomachs) do cast up that which they take, and yet take the same
thing still, though their stomach loath it: so in taking of spiritual physic,
though yet thou do in a manner loath it and distaste it, yet take it still,
and at the length strength and delight will grow.

The second enemy that will hinder the reformation of the heart, if it be not
avoided, 1. Enemy, unbelief.
is unbelief, which (like armor of proof) Satan commonly puts upon the
hearts of the wicked, that no persuasion, counsel, nor threatening, will enter
where the soul is armed with that: therefore it is said in the Gospel, Mat.
13.58.
that Christ could do no great work in his own country, because of their
unbelief: to show that unbelief does (as much as lies in us) bind the hands of
the Lord, and hinder his gracious work upon us. Therefore commonly Christ
asked this question of those which came to be healed of him: Can thou
believe? And to those that did believe, he would say, in commendation of faith,
Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace. O woman says he to one that would have
no nay, great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou beleeuest: and her daughter
was healed the same hour: this was the Cananite, a Gentile. Another suing to
Christ for his son that was possessed with a dumb spirit, and being asked
of Christ if he did believe that Christ was able and willing to dispossess
that spirit, cried out with tears, and said: I believe, Mar. 9.23.
Lord help my unbelief: to show that we are to pray against unbelief of
heart, even with tears. The best Christians are subject unto it, as appears
in that Christ reproved his Disciples for their unbelief, and hardness of
heart, because they would not believe them that had seen him after he was
risen again. Mar. 16.14. Where we are also to note, that unbelief and
hardness of heart do go together. And the Apostle Paul confesses freely
against himself, that he was sometime a blasphemer, 1. Tim. 1.13.
and a persecutor, but he did it ignorantly (he says) through unbelief: to
show that unbelief does not only hold men in ignorance and blindness longer
then otherwise they should be, but also does nourish in them many gross
sins. Therefore whosoever would have a better heart then Belial has, let him
pray against unbelief.

3. Enemy, custom of sin.
The third enemy which hinders our sanctification, is custom of any one sin
whatsoever. S. Augustine says, Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati, the
custom of sin takes away all sense and feeling of sin. Io. 2.4.
It is a despising of the long suffering and patience of God, which should
lead us to repentance: and it breeds two dangerous diseases, hardness of
heart, and impenitencie: for, as that way must needs be hard which is dry, and
much trampled upon: so that heart must needs be hardened in sin, which is void
of the softning grace of Gods Spirit, and is accustomed to sin: therefore
such a hearer is compared to the high way: Luke 8.5. and that in three
respects: first, because it is crooked, and winding this way and that way, like
the high way. Secondly, because it is common for all that come, men and beasts,
God and the devil, for good company and for bad, like the high way. And
thirdly, because it is hardened by often sinning, as the high way is by often
treading: therefore he that goes about to reform his heart, and yet accustometh
to lodge any sin therein with love and delight, does but deceive himself.

Now further to withstand these enemies, and to put them to flight, the
Apostles counsel is to be followed, Heb. 3.12. The Apostles counsel.
in Heb. 3.12. Take heed (says he) lest there be in any of you an evil heart,
and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God: but exhort one another
daily while it is said to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulnes of sin. The sum of his counsel is this. First, that every man by
himself must look unto himself, that he A double reason of the former
counsel.
for which he gives a double reason: the first is from the nature of sin,
which is deceitful, and at a blush like virtue: secondly, from the effects of
sin, which are hardness of heart, and impenitencie. Though the profane
person with Esau seek the blessing with tears, yet shall he find no place for
repentance: so A cursed guest: a wretched host.
who gives him Brotherly love how it works.
to note and to notify unto others, such things as they see amiss in the^.
And this holy course, who soever does wisely, speedily, carefully, and
continually observe, shall do good both to his own heart, and to other men's;
and shall find in the end that the gain will answer the pain, the fruit will
defray the charges: and that will be this, he shall find that his heart is not
like the heart of Belial, who is still fraught with lewd things: and
consequently that he shall not need to stand in fear of that destruction,
which so speedily, so suddenly, and so irrecouerably shall fall upon lawles
Belial, and Ish auen, the man of vanity: and so much for the physic, or means
restoratiue and preservative, to purge and preserve the heart from leudnes.

But here it will be objected by some, that I speak of things impossible. Who
can do all this, Objection.
will they say? Can any man so serve God that there shall be no leudnes nor
evil in his heart? The heart is deceitful above all things (says Jeremy) who
can know it? Ier. 17.9. Pro. 20.9.
if not know it, much less reform it. And, who can say, my heart is clean
(says Solomon?) And although David that man of God, wished that his ways were
so directed, that he might keep the statutes of the Lord always, Psalm. 119 5.
verse. 10.
and protests that with his whole heart he has sought the Lord: yet by his
grievous falls it is evident that there was much lewdness in his heart: and
therefore he prays that God would create in him a clean heart, Psalm. 51.10.
and deliver him from bloud-guiltinesse. Was David then a man of Belial? or is
every one to take himself for a man of Belial, and Ish auen, a vain person,
that has any wicked imagination or purpose at any time in his heart? Answer.
All this is true, and yet between the heart of Belial, and of a true servant
of God, there is great difference. For first, God speaking of Belial, says not
simply, lewd things have been, or may be in his heart, or go and come by
stealth at unawares, or annoy, or haunt his heart: but lewd things are in his
heart: speaking in the time present, take him when you will, he has always a
lewd heart: to show that there is a continual residence of lewdness, and
devils in him. No man can say his heart is clean, as touching perfection of
purity. No man can say but that lewd things have bin in his heart, have
haunted his heart, and through the deceitfulnes of sin have stolen in, and
gotten a lodging there awhile, like the counterfeit Gibeonites which deceived
Joshua with their old shoes and bottels, etc. and may steal upon him
unawares, as thieves do when a man sleeps: but yet the child of God
regenerate, may say sometimes truly through the grace of Christ: I thank God
these lewd motions, and persuasions, be now gone and put to flight: sin
dwells not in me like a freeholder, much less reigns like a tyrant: these
lewd things have no quiet rest, nor residence in me: Gods Spirit keeps the
hold, and Jesus Christ with his blood and Spirit, does cleanse me from all my
sin, and does make up the breach again which Satan made. And comfortable is
the note that David gives of himself in Psalm. 66.18. If I regard wickedness
in my heart, the Lord will not hear me: to show that though wickedness get
into the heart, so we regard it not, nor like it not, but think the time long
til he be gone again, all is well: so cannot the man of Belial say, for he is
glad of such a guest, he regards lewd things, and delights in them, as in
those that he lives by, and is angry with every man, with every Sermon, with
every sentence, with every word, yea with every look that seems to dislike
of his ways, or that go about to disquiet or disturb his heart, or once to
speak of it, or to meddle withal: yea for fear that any man should come near
him, and touch any thing that is in his heart, he will either sit far enough off
from the Preacher, that he shall not hear him, or have his armor of unbelief
upon him, that whatsoever is said shall not enter: or will shape him a short
answer that shall seem to meddle with him, or to judge of his heart, how vile
soever his life be, saying: O you must not judge: who made you a judge? my
heart is known to God: look to your own: I thank God I have as good a heart
to God, as any of you all: I love not this pricisenes, or this pureness; a man
may be too holy, and serve God too much: what? a man that will live must
dissemble a little, and play the good fellow; and must have some devises in his
head that all the world know not of, etc. And this is Belials reckoning, cast
it over who list, and set every speech in his place, and the Summa totalis, will
be a compound sum, like that which stands upon pounds, shillings and pence,
and this is the sum of all: it amounts just to Atheism, Epicurisme,
Libertinisme, a Christian in name, and a Protestant at large: and the sum of
this point for an answer final to the former objection is this. He that in
truth, and unfeignedly studieth to please God in the part regenerate, may be
said to have a good heart, Act. 23.1.
and a heart reformed. Paul professed that in a good conscience he served God:
and yet in Romans 7. says, I do not the good that I would: I find that when I
would serve God, evil is present with me, etc. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of sin? Then he answers himself: I thank
God through Jesus Christ my Lord. Yet this follows as a heavy burden of his
song while he lived, Evil is present with me, I am led captive to the law of
sin: that is, unwillingly enough: therefore to end, let none think that no
body serves God with a good heart, but he that has no corruption in his heart,
as Anabaptists and Puritanes indeed say: so was it not with David, nor Paul,
nor any of Gods children in this life. And happy is he that now can go home,
and find by this Sermon lewd things chased out of his heart, with a steadfast
purpose to serve the Lord with all his heart.

Now let us pray.
THE VII. SERMON.
PRO. 6.14. He imagines evil continually: Fabricatur malum, says Tremelius,
that is, he forgeth or frames evil.


IN this part of Belials Anatomy, the holy Ghost alludeth to Carpenters or
Smiths, which do by art and skill contriue their work, and of rude stuff
shape out what they list: showing hereby that the man of Belial in like sort,
like an artificer does of the rude stuff of his heart, frame and forge unto
himself in the shop of his own brain what he lists: but yet this
difference is between this artificer and other artificers: they, of that which
was bad, do make something that will be good: he of that which is good, does
forge out matter that is naught: they of that which was deformed, and without
shape, do frame something of good form and fashion: he of that which was of
form good enough, does by his art and skill make a deformed thing: they do
sometime through ignorance or want of experience fail in their workmanship: he
of malice and peevishness, rather then of ignorance, does always fail in his
imaginations; for, he imagines evil continually.

Now then we are come to the ripping up of Belials imaginations, which are
described unto us: First, by their quality, which is bad, for he imagines
evil: Secondly by their quantity: which is great and universal, for he
imagines evil continually.

The evil quality and badde nature of Belials imaginations, will the better
appear, if we consider: first, the material cause of them, which is, lewd
things in his heart: secondly, the formal cause, and that is artificial
forging and framing of them: for of matter and form does every thing consist:
and first, of the material cause of his images. Immediately before, he says,
lewd things are in his heart: now he shows what he does with them; surely
nothing, but of that abundance of lewdness which is in his heart, forge and
frame out evil imaginations, wrong judgments, crooked conceits, pestilent
persuasions, and false resemblances, according to that which is said of man in
the 6. of Genesis, when he had universally corrupted his ways: The Lord saw
that the wickedness of man was exceeding great upon earth, Genesis 6.
and that the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil
continually: Imaginations come of thoghts.
to show that imaginations proceed of thoughts: and if the thoughts of the
heart be evil, the imaginations which come of them cannot but be evil also.
And further, as the stuff is bad, so is the form and fashion also of his
imaginations naught: for, as of lewd thoughts in the heart he imagines, so he
imagines nothing but that which is evil and lewd. And therefore these crooked
conceits of his are called imaginations, Of Belials me^tal images, and why they
are so called.
as if he were an image maker, and they his images or idols: and indeed they
are the images of his mind, and so they may well be termed in two respects:
first, because like images they have show or shape put upon them, both to
credit a bad matter, and also the more strongly to delude the beholder: for if
one should take a block of wood and set it up, and say, that is to be
worshipped for a god, no body would believe that saying. And therefore
idolaters and idol makers, Esa. 46.
do not go so to work: but (as the Prophet Esai shows) they hew it, and
frame it, and make it in shape like a man, or some other creature, and then
cover it with gold; a thing which draws love and delight unto it, and then it
is of more credit and estimation then it was before: for though it be but a
block as it was before in regard of the substance, yet do not foolish
idolaters so call it: but they call it either a god, as the Israelites did
their golden calfe, which they erected in the wilderness when Moses was
absent: Dan. 3.
and as the Babilonians did call that image which Nebuchadnezzar set up: or
else a Saint as the Papists call their images, S. Peter, S. Paul, their Lady,
etc. Even as one in base apparel and of beggarly education is called a clown,
and one of no credit: but afterward being in brave aparel, and wearing rings of
gold, and having a little wealth about him, is called a gentleman, a wise man,
and a substantial man of the parish, though indeed he be as base and rude in
conditions as he was before, and has no more wit the^ before. So the bad and
wretched co^ceits of Belial, must have some color or shape put upon the^, or
else they will be of no credit. Secondly they are called images, because as
images be false and vain, and nothing like the things they are made for, (I
speak now of idolatrous and popish images) so are Belials imaginations: for,
shall we think that the Saints went as they are painted in Popety! And
therefore we truly say of the one: it is as it pleased the painter: and as truly
of the other, as it pleases the forget. Now that which has so bad stuff for
the matter, and so ill favored a fashion for the form, must needs be of a
bad quality: but such are the imaginations of Belial for they are made of the
lewd thoughts of his heart, and forged after a false, fond, and strong deluding
fashion: therefore for the quality thereof they cannot be good: howsoever many
times the wicked are so shameless, that when they have uttered most vile
conceits of others without cause too, yet will not stick to say, that they
judge charitably of them, and think the best, and will not make the worst of
things.

Of Belials masters workhouse warehouse, and ware.
And now a little (by the way) of Belials master, for whom he works: of these
men's warehouses where they lay their stuff, of which they make these images,
and of their worke-houses where these false and vain mental images be forged.
Surely the Lord created the wicked at the first, though not wicked: he
preserves them, and provides for them, though not to be wicked: therefore
they should both in body and soul serve and glorify him, but they do not.
The devil has bewitched them, and taught them to bewitch others: with his
fair promises he has inueigled them, and taught them to inueigle and deceive
others. And therefore (God withdrawing his grace, and turning Satan loose upon
them, and so justly hardening their hearts, and giving them over to themselves)
Satan they believe, and not God: him they obey and not the Lord. Their heart
is Satan's storehouse, their head is his worke-house, they are his apprentises
and bond-slaues, and do work for the Devil all kind of works, saving good
works.

And for every one of his apprentises and iourneymen, Satan has a warehouse
and a shop, after the manner of Merchaunts and great occupiers: for the
Devil is as great a dealer as any in the world, The greatness of Satan.
and therefore has need of many shops, and of many warehouses, of many
factours, and many servants, and of a legion of devils. He has the greatest
but not the godliest Monarkes of the world to rule for him: the learned, but
not the holiest doctors of the world to teach for him: he has the craftiest
but not the conscionablest lawyers of the world to plead for him: he has the
vainest, not the valiantest captains of the world to fight for him: he has
the most rich, not the most religious Merchants of the world to traffic for
him: he has the cunningest and the cruellest usurers and extortioners to exact
for him: he has a legion, yea a million of brokers to hunt for him, to buy and
sell for him, to play the baudes for him, to cousin and deceive for him, and of
bloody mur^herers to kill and slay for him: in every market and shop: he has
some to lie and to swear, and to deceive for him: some setting false colors
upon their clothes by false lights, some learning the trick with the finger:
some pinching others and enriching themselves by false waightes and measures,
and some by extreme prises, exacting upon the buyers, and some purloyning from
their masters, to purchase the gallows here, and hell hereafter if they
repent not. In a word, Satan has more offices and officers, and greater
revenues, and takings, and dealings, and pleasures in his k^nde and kingdom,
then ever Solomon had in his. He is the greatest Monarke in the world. Monarch
(said I?) nay tyrant: for he rules with great wrath and cruelty. Woe to the
inhabitants of the earth that be his subjects. Reave. 12.
And besides all this outward trading, he has many shops and shopkeepers,
warehouses and factors in secret, that all men know not of. Yea, in many he
occupies freely, that spit at his name: and many cry out, that they defy
the devil and all his works, when they do nothing else poor slaves, but
serve him, and do his works. In every wicked man there is a shop, and a
warehouse: the heart is his warehouse, wherein is store of lewd things: his
brain is his shop, and in that does he work and forge out evil images, or
imaginations.

So much in general, of Belials master, his storehouse, and his warehouse,
and his ware. Now in particular (as it were in a bill of parcels) let us see
what wares are stored up in his heart, and what works he frames thereof in the
shop of his brain. There is in his heart store of malice: and of that he
forgeth slanderous reports, impudent lies, and unjust revenge. There is in his
heart store of obstinate wilfulness, and wilful obstinacy: and of that he
forgeth out perverse disputations, and cross languages. There is in his heart
store of envy: and of that he forgeth false suggestions, and impatient
murmurings against the prosperity of his neighbors and brethren: as Esau did
against Jacob because of his blessing, and Achab against Naboth for his
vineyard. There is in his heart store of hatred against the truth: and of that
he forgeth cruel devises against those that profess the truth. There is in
his heart store of disdain: and of that he forgeth reproachful speeches, high
looks, and strange countenaunces against poor simple men. There is in his
heart store of arrogancy and pride: and of that he imagines himself to be the
only man in the world, when he beholds his wealth and bravery, like
Nebuchadnezzar when he beheld his palace. There is in his heart store of
lightness and inconstancy: and of that he forgeth strange fashio^s and new
fangled devises. There is in his heart store of uncleanness, and of that he
frames filthy conueiances for his beastlines, adulteries, and fornications.
There is in his heart store of gross ignorance in the Scriptures: and thereof
he forgeth gross errors, superstitious worshippings, and base conceits of the
Almighty, thinking him to be like them selves, Psalm. 50. There is in his heart
store of disloyalty: and of that he forgeth treacherous practices against his
Prince and Country, and sly conueiances to carry them out with all, 2. Sam.
15.7
like Judas with his kiss, and Absalom with his vow at Hebron. There is in his
heart store of hypocrisy: and of that he frames counterfeit holiness to
cover his wickedness, 1. Kim. 21.9. Pro. 7.14.
like Iezabel with her fast, and the harlot talking devoutly of her vows and
peace-offrings. There is in his heart store of covetousness, and of that he
forgeth deceit, and wrong, and a thousand devises to get the world into his
hands. There is in his heart store of profaneness and ungodliness, and of
that he frames jests against the Preachers of the word, like the scoffing
auditors of Ezechiel. Ezec. 33.31.
There is in his heart love of sin, and thereof he forgeth arguments to
maintain sin withal, and devises how to smite him with the tongue that shall
tell him of it. And as of the lewd stuff that is in their hearts, the wicked
frame and forge out evil imaginations both against God and man: so do they
also misconstrue, and interpret in the worst part, even the most holy things
of God: and of the best intended actions of the godly, do they frame wrong
judgments, and evil surmises, like spiders who make poison of honey. 1. Sa.
25.10
If David in his distress shall send to churlish Nabal for relief, the
foolish churl will imagine evil against David, and not stick to say that he
is run away from his Master, and al to save his purse. 2. Sam. 10.3
If kind David send to visit the wicked King of Ammon, Hanun will imagine that
his messengers come as spies. If John Baptist will not eat and drink with
men, but be strange and austere, then they will imagine and say, Mat. 11.18.
that he has a devil. If Christ come eating and drinking, they will imagine
him to be a glutton, a drinker of wine, and a friend of Publicans and sinners:
so that do what one can, he cannot please the wicked man of Belial. If Paul be
troubled with a viper, then he is a murderer, if he shake off the viper
without any harm, Act. 28.4.6.
then he is a God: so are men commonly in their extremities, whose hearts are
either ignorant or unsanctified. If any cost be bestowed upon Christ in his
members, such as Judas will imagine it to be bestowed in waste. Ioh. 12.5.
In like manner is it now in the light of the Gospel: Ask thy due, thou art
covetous: crauest thou help? then look for a churlish answer. Do thou
offer kindness? thou shall be suspected and ill rewarded for thy good will.
Will thou be familiar with men? they will imagine that thou seek to burden
them. Will thou be merry? thou shall be taken for a scoffer, and without
gravity. Will thou be strange? then art thou lordly, proud, stout, and high
minded. Do thou entreat for peace? then thou art afraid of them: so they will
imagine. Will thou eat and drink with men? they will imagine that thou art
beholding to them, as some think that we are beholding to them for hearing the
Sermon. Do thou talk in private with a woman? they that are lewd will imagine
that thou art lewd with her. Art thou troubled with a generation of vipers as
John was? then thou art a bad man. If thou escape their malice by the goodness
of God, then it was more by thy friends then by the goodness of thy cause. If
thou do any strange and unwonted thing, they will imagine thou workest by the
devil. If the wicked man prosper, he imagines that he has served God well. If
any man be familiar with them who^ they love not, they imagine him to be their
enemy also. If any common calamity happen, they imagine that the Gospel is
the cause of it. If any speed better then they, then they imagine themselves to
have wrong. And thus we see al their civil affairs to be full of evil
imaginations. Now from home let us follow him to church (as they say) and see
if his judgment in matters religious be any better: and first of Belials
imaginations or forgeries, as touching the man of God that teaches, and then
of the matter that is taught. If the Minister speak scholastically, then he
seeks himself: if plainly, then he is no scholar: if he please their humor,
he is the only man, and no man may come near him. If he use to repeat his
doctrine, then he is tedious and wants matter: if his delivery be mild, then
he is afraid to displease: if it be bold and severe, then he is peremptory and
proud. If a man urge the law, then he drives men to desperation: if
mortification, he drives men into melancholy dumpes, and frayeth them out of
their wits. If we urge justification before God by faith in Christ only, then
they imagine that we deny good works. If we preach good works, then we are
Popish: if we teach that men must not pray to Saints, nor for the dead, then
they imagine we deny prayer: if we say that the salutation of the Angel to
Mary is no prayer, then we deny part of the new Testament: if we say the Creed
is no prayer, then we deny the Creed: if we preach against common, vain, and
needless swearing, then they imagine us to be Anabaptists, and deny both the
use of an oath and magistracy: if we speak against gaming, dancing, and other
prophanations of the Lords day, then they imagine that we allow Christians no
manner of recreation. If we preach against any sin that they use, then we
preach of malice and against them: if we teach doctrine which they conceive
not, then there is no edifying in our sermons: if they like it not, then they
imagine that no body else does regard it: if they come to hear us, then we are
beholding to them for their presence: if they will not hear us, yet they
imagine that we must speak though it be to the walls. If they let their
children or servants be catechized by the Minister, then they imagine that they
do their Minister a great part of friendship in gracing of him: if they say
over their stint of prayers, then God is beholding to them, and heaven they
must have of merit. If they hear sermons, then they imagine all is well, as
though God were pleased with eare-seruice only: Ioh. 3.
and always they imagine grossly of spiritual things, like Nicodemus, who
(when Christ spoke of being borne again) imagined that he must go again into
his mothers belly. And as these Belials are themselves, such do they imagine
all others to be, for as to him that has an ague, all things seem unsavory:
so to him that has an evil heart of his own, all men's doings seem to be
evil: to verify the saying of the Apostle in Titus 2.5. Tit. 2.5.
To the pure all things are pure: but to the unclean and impure nothing is
pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled: and that is the cause
why all things seem evil unto them, because their minds and consciences are
defiled.

Objection Answer.
But who are pure? (will some say) are not all men sinners? and does not sin
defile every man's mind? It is true, that all men naturally are defiled with
evil imaginations, Genesis 6.5. but by faith (which is through the grace of God)
in Christ, the hearts of the elect are regenerated, and purified, Act. 15.9.
because it apprehends the blood and spirit of Christ to cleanse us from
sin past, and to preserve us afterward from the dominion (at the least) of
sin to come, like physic restoratiue and preservative. For, where a
justifying faith is, there is a fanctifying grace. And where faith is
Mistress, there is charity handmaid, which is of that excellent nature and
disposition (through the education and instruction of Gods Spirit who begat
her) that she judges the best of every thing that may be well interpreted, 1.
Cor. 13. And so much for the quality of Belials imaginations, which is evil:
for so says my Text, and experience confirms no less, but that he imagines
evil. Now let us consider of the other adiunct of Belials imaginations, Of the
quantity of Belials evil imaginatio^s
and that is, adiunctum quantitatis, an adiunct or circumstance of quantity:
the evil of his imaginations is of an exceeding great quantity: for he does
not only imagine evil, and make the worst or every thing, but he imagines
evil continually.

Continually] says the holy Ghost, to show that the man of Belial is always
at work. This word notes in the wicked man two things. First diligence.
Secondly perseverance in evil. Great is the diligence of wicked men in sin:
for they lose no time: They cannot sleep (says Solomon) except they have done
some evil. Pro. 4.16.
No, Sleep departs from their eyes until they have caused some to fall.
Like gamesters, who cannot find the way to bed until either they have lost all
their money, or caused others to lose all. They continue day and night: they
are as diligent in the service of the devil, as the devil himself is is
hunting after men's souls: for he goes about continually like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour: and so do his men of Belial seek whom to deface
and devour.

This note of continuance comes in like a bar in the arms of the wicked to
put a difference between them and the godly. For though the godly or
regenerate do sometime fall into evil surmises, and bad imaginations, through
natural weakness and corruption of heart, yet they continue not in it. Romans
6.1.
Shall we continue still in sins, (says the Apostle) that grace may abound?
God forbid. No: they dare not continue in a sin, they are ever checking and
controlling their ways, and confessing their sins, and condemning
themselves, and forsaking their evil imaginations. And if they fall again
into the same sin (as oftentimes they do,) it is with a greater detestation
and lothing of the same sin, and with a greater and more earnest striving
against it afterward.

And yet the godly are not so simple, and foolishly credulous, as to believe
every fair tale, or to be in league with every flattering face, or to shake
hands presently with every new acquaintance, nor to trust every promise and
protestation without any manner of trial nor to make the best of that which is
of it self naught, and apparently evil: nor to be free from all suspicion,
where there is just cause to suspect; and in so doing they are not to be
condemned, but rather to be commended: for as charity is not suspicious
without cause, so is it not foolish and blockish when there is cause.

And seeing as our Savior Christ himself has joined the innocence of the Dove,
The wisdom of a Christian.
and the prudency of the Serpent together; simplicity and discretion as a most
fit match, and well beseeming a Christian soul, let no man separate them
asunder, but be simple and wise too. And hereof we have diverse examples in the
Scriptures. Genesis 20.11.
Abraham imagined that in Gerar his wife might be abused, and he slain for his
wifes sake: and not without just cause, for he saw that the fear of God was
not in that place, to show that when good men have to deal with those that
fear not God, they may very justly imagine that they shall not be well dealt
withal. Jacob suspected that al was not well toward him: and not without just
cause, Gen 31.2.
for he saw that his uncle Labans countenance was not toward him as in times
past; and again he marked how Labans sons murmured against him. Genesis 38.15.
Judah imagined Thamar his daughter to be a whore (though he knew not then who
she was:) and not without just cause, for she sat by the ways side with her
face covered, after the manner of whores in those days, and in that country.
The watchmen of the tower in* Israel imagined rightly that it was Iehu who
came toward that place, 2. Kin. 9.20
because his marching was furious, like the marching of Iehu, who belike was
known to be a hot man. All which examples do teach us, that when there is
just cause of suspicion, and likely tokens of danger and evil, we should not
be secure and simple, but wise to see danger, and provident to avoid it: for
that is the part of a wise man (says the Wise man) to see the plague a far
off, and to fly from it, as Eliah saw (by a cloud that arose) rain coming a
far off, and caused the King to provide for it before it came. And someime
the godly have imagined (in good policy) of a thing otherwise then they have
known the thing to be: as Joseph did when he made his brethren believe that he
took them for spies, when he knew them to be no spies. And sometime by the
outward likelihoods, as they conjecture of a thing, and are deceived, as Isaac
by feeling of Jacob in rough skins, imagined it had been Esau: and Samuel by
the countenance and stature of Eliah, imagined that he was the man that should
be the Lords anointed, but he was deceived. 1. Sam. 5.16
So Elijah seeing none to stand for the glory of the God of Israel but
himself, imagined that he in that case was left alone, but he was deceived.

In the imaginations also which commonly men have of themselves, there is great
difference between the wicked and the godly: What imaginatio^s the godly have
of themselves
for the godly being (in some measure) through the grace of God, privy to their
own corruptions and infirmities, do still imagine (and that truly) that they
come short of doing their duty to God, suspecting and fearing their own
ignorance and negligence: as that godly, zealous, and courageous reformer of
religion Nehemiah did, who when he had most exactly and stoutly reformed the
Saboth day, Nehe. 13.22
he desired God to be merciful unto him, even in that point. And though S.
Paul that worthy Apostle of Christ, knew nothing but well by himself in his
ministry, yet did he imagine (and that rightly) that something might be
amiss, and therefore said, 1. Cor. 4.4.
Though I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. And
sometime the godly do imagine that they are forsaken of God, when they are not
forsaken, which fearful conjectures and desperate imaginations do arise,
sometime by the sly suggestions of Satan, through want of faith to resist him
sometime of melancholy impressions in the godly, and those are to be helped by
physic, and good company keeping: and sometime from the affliction and wound
of conscience, groaning under the hand of God, especialy after some relapse into
some old sin again. Which kind of imaginations are to be altered into more
comfortable and wholesomer persuasions by spiritual physic, that is, by the
wise handling, and discreet applying of the promised mercies of God in the
Gospel, tempering therewithal the threatenings of the law, either more or
less, according as the spiritual physician shall see the party more or less
humbled, or not at all, if he be too much humbled and cast down already.

But the wicked being blinded with self-love, What the wicked do being
blinded, bewitched and benu^med.
and bewitched with the vanities of this world, and benumbed with the long
custom of sin, go on still, drinking in sin as the horse drinks in water,
and imagines that he is well, when he is gotten into the fools paradise, and
goes after his filthy pleasures, as a bird to the snare, and like an ox to
the slaughter. Pro. 5. Pro. 5.


Nebuchadnezzar the King of pride strouting himself in his palace, imagined
that he was admired of all the world, but was deluded as it were by his own
shadow, and derided of God and man. In like manner vain men and women (ietting
up and down in the world like hobby horses in all bravery, Hobby horses.
with their trains after them, and pedlers packes about them, with a company
of circumstances in strange and wild fashions) imagine that they are honored
and admired of all men, whereas indeed they are wondered at of the wise, and
almost of all men for their vanity and excess. Again, where there is no
fear, they imagine fear to be, and where there is both fear and shame, and
deadly danger too, they promise unto themselves al peace and security,
suspecting nothing, like the mother of Sisera, and the Ladies of King Iabins
Court, who imagined (and could imagine no otherwise) that the cause of Sisera
his long staying was for no other end but to divide the spoil, Judge. 5.30.
when indeed he was spoiled himself, and that by a woman too. So the rich man
in the Gospel, having gotten much wealth about him, imagined that he should
live many years at ease, but he was deceived for even that very night
following was his soul fetched away. Luke 12.19. Psalm. 55.
Wherein is verified the prophecy of the Psalmist, The wicked (whatsoever they
imagine unto themselves) shall not live out half their days: namely, that
themselves dream of.

Therefore (to shut up this point) as before we have been taught by the names
of Belial, which signify lawlesnesse and profaneness, to look to our
selves, that we be not lawless and profane: by the mouth of Belial, to look
to our speeches, that we walk not with a froward mouth: by the gestures of
Belial, to look to our outward behavior, that it be in sobriety and
simplicity: and by the heart of Belial, to watch over our own hearts, that
lewd things have no residence in them: so now by the imaginations or mental
images of Belial, framed in the shop of his brain, of the lewd stuff in the
storehouse of his heart, An exhortation upon the premises.
let us be admonished to look carefully unto our imaginations, that they be
not evil, false, uncharitable, vain, wrong, and crooked. Let us take heed
that we make not our hearts (which should be the temples of God) Satan's
warehouses or storehouses, nor our heads his shops and worke-houses: let us
learn to judge the best, and always charitably of other men's persons, and
actions, where it is possible to afford a good construction. And where there
is just cause of fear and suspicion, there let us learn to be wise, and not
too simple and careless. Let us take heed that we be not deceived with the
enchantments and bewitching vanities of the world, nor yet blinded with the
false love of our selves. In a word, seeing as the imaginations of Belial are
for their quality evil, and for their quantity incessantly evil: and seeing
that continuance, or dwelling in evil imaginations, and uncharitable surmises,
is here put down for an infallible mark of the man of Belial, and of a vain
man, who is to be destroyed if he repent not, both speedily, suddenly, and
without recovery: let us all (that tender the glory of God, the quiet of our
brethren, and the peace of our own souls) look to our hearts and minds, to our
thoughts, and imaginations, and learn by the word of God, (striving by
continual prayer) to amend, correct, control, and examine all our surmises,
our opinions, and our conceived imaginations, or sinister conceits, which
commonly we frame of our selves, and of others, of our maker, and of our
neighbor: happy is he (not that is free from evil imaginations, for then none
could be happy) but he that having found out his evil imaginations, does
forsake them. And woe be to him (not that has had a false imagining head, or
may perhaps be overtaken with an uncharitable surmise by occasion, for the^ woe
be to all,) but woe be to him that hears what I say, and knows himself to
be guilty, and yet will continue in his evil imaginations, for such a one has
Gods marks upon him, (as we say of him that has the plague) even the marks
of a man of Belial, which is the plague of the soul to utter destruction: for
he imagines evil continually.

Now let us pray.
THE VIII. SERMON.
PROVE. 6.14. He raises up contentions.


THe meaning of these words is this: that where there was no contention, the
man of Belial sows contention: and where contention was either dead, or dying
out: he by rubbing and chafing of it, (as it were) fetches and reuiueth it
again. Contention like a dog and a lion. Stirred up by Belial.
Contention is like a brawling dog, or roaring lion, which being raised up,
will show his furious disposition, and put men both in fear and danger. Now
Belial is one that raises up this dog, and awaketh this lion, to his own
danger, and trouble of others. The sum is this: that Belial is a common
makebate, a sower of discord, an enemy to Christian peace, and one that cannot
fish (as the Proverb is) but in troubled waters. Whereby we may learn, that
an imagining head is good for nothing else but to break up the ground that the
Devil means to sow with the seed of debate and strife. And now the wicked
man's tree bears fruit (such as it is) even bitter contention, The tree of
wickedness.
which is nourished by lewd thoughts in the heart, and watered by the cursed
suggestions of Satan: it buddeth in the evil imaginations of his head: it
blossometh in the counterfeit and profane gestures of his body: it knitteth in
the frowardness of his mouth: it ripeneth in the practice of his life, when he
raises up contentions: it falls and rotteth when destruction comes
speedily and suddenly upon him without recovery. Lo then the fruits of a
wicked heart, and surmizing head. And one thing follows another in order (or
rather out of order:) for lewd stuff in the heart, makes evil imaginations
in the brain, and evil imaginations serve to raise up contentions amongst
men. And the reason is this: evil imaginations or mental images, are false
resemblances, or surmizes that Belial has framed of himself, or of others:
and when they come to light, no body likes of them: all men hate them, all
men reprove them. Belial maintains them, and then Contention the brawling
curre is raised up: of himself he imagines that he is wise, when he is but a
fool, (especially in respect of true heavenly wisdom:) that he is
bountiful, when he is most niggardly: that he is able to do much, when he can
do nothing: and then boasts of himself what he is, and what he can do: as if
he should say: Lo, this is my picture. It is nothing like you, says another.
It is says he: and so dogged Contention is raised up. Of God and his truth he
imagines carnally, superstitiously, grossly, and blasphemously, and
commends it, saying: so is the Almighty, such is his nature: as if he should
say: Lo, this is Gods image, this is his picture. That see others that be Gods
friends,, and religious friends indeed, and they deny it, and detest it: and
then contention is raised up. Of State-matters, and commonwealth matters he
imagines crosly, and after his own pleasure. Also of the Preachers method
and doctrine, he imagines this and that, and frames out a pattern of
teaching himself: thus he should have said, etc. and this he defends to the
raising up of contention. Of every man's actions he imagines evil, descanting
at his pleasure, of this man's dealing, and that manslife, of this man's words,
and of that man's looks, and sets out every man's image as he lists
himself: which when men behold, and see how ilfauouredly, and deformedly they
are set forth, they reprove the forger or counterfeiter. For who can abide to
have a wrong picture made of himself? If it be unlike us in eyes, or nose, or
countenance, or any part else, we scorn it and deface it. Much more are men
moved when they are pictured like beasts, or see a man set forth with a
beasts head: that is a monster, who can abide it? Such a mate is Belial, who
imagines evil, and forgeth pictures (as it were) of every man's doings and
sayings as he lists himself, some after a beastly manner, some after a
monstrous manner, and all after a counterfeit and unchristian manner.

The wicked love to be soothed and flattered
Again, on the other side, as the wicked man delights to set forth every man
after his own device, so can he by no means endure to see himself set forth
in his own colors, and as he is indeed: but loves to be flattered and
soothed up in all his ugly deformities. For when the Minister of God (having
the spirit of God for his instructor, and the word of God for his warrant)
shall paint out the man of Belial in his right colors, though the picture and
the person do agree, yet the wicked are too curious, or too incredulous, or too
peevish to believe it: but will find fault, and say: I am not so bad as he
would make me. Swearing, and whoring, and sabbath breaking, and usury, and
briberie, and vanity, and exaction, and engrossing, and gaming, etc. are not
so ill as we make them: and hence arise contention: for the truth will not be
outfaced. Thus we see the reason of the order that is used here in placing
these words, and how one thing follows another. Now, for the better
understanding of the truth of this matter wherewith the man of Belial is
charged, and for the clearing of such doubts as may arise about it, there are
four things diligently to be considered of.

1. The causes which move him to raise contention. 2. The means whereby he
does raise contention. 3. How great and odious a sin it is to raise
contention. 4. What difference there is between the contentions of the wicked,
and the contentions of the godly.
The causes of Belials contentious disposition, are principally two. First, the
anger and wrath of God. Secondly, his own evil affections. Gods anger is one
cause: for God and he being at odds, Belial cannot be at peace with Gods
children. For he that imagines evil continually, must imagine evil of all
men: he that imagines evil of all men, must also imagine (as he may well
enough) that he is hated of all: he believes no man, and is believed of none:
he trusts no body, and is trusted of none: and being thus hateful and hated,
it grieueth him to see others at unity: and therefore to bring others into his
own case, he raises up contentions between party and party: like the Devil,
who being at enimitie with God, (himself) did not cease until he had set
enimity between God and man. And this mutual or civil dissension does
commonly follow amongst men upon the contempt and neglect of the word of God:
and that is an effect of Gods most just revenging wrath: for when men refuse to
submit themselves unto the Gospel of peace, and so to be reconciled unto God:
it is just with God to give them over, and to set them at contention amongst
themselves, that they may be devoured one of another.

According to that which the Prophet Esaias says: Esa. 57.20.
The wicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dirt. There is no peace unto the wicked says my God: he does not say, that
the wicked do not rest, or will not rest: but they cannot rest: And why?
Because God denies them peace. 2. Tim. 3.13.
And the Apostle says: Evil men shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived. He says not that they may, but they shall wax worse and
worse* and they shall deceive and be deceived: as a thing ordained for them,
this evil shall come upon them. And the wise man says; Pro. 26.21.
As the cole makes burning coals, and wood a fire: so the contentious man is
apt to kindle strife. Therefore whosoever he be that does study contention, and
rejoice to hear of strife, let him fear his estate. If he cannot choose but
contend, and desire it, even for it self sake: let him know, that he is
branded for a wicked man of Belial, and one whom Gods anger does even burn
upon, until it has consumed him.

The second cause which moves him to move contention, are his own evil and
lewd affections, or desires, and chiefly the pride of his heart: as Solomon
says: Pro. 13.10.
Only through pride a man causes contention. And this proud contentious
humor of his, does chiefly respect his own vainglorie, and the furtherance of
impiety and mischief: Let nothing be done (says S. Paul) through contention
or vaineglorie: Phil 2.3.
to show, that the vaineglorious are contentious, and the one feeds and
maintains the other. And this is that which Solomon speaks plainly in the
28. of the Proverbs, verse 25. Pro. 28.25.
He that is of a proud heart stirs up contention; to show, that pride is of
a stirring nature: and a proud heart by stirring of contention may easily be
known. The second thing that Belials proud contentious heart respects, is
(in devilish policy) the more freely to practice his mischievous devises,
imagining that he may the more quietly proceed in his wicked enterprises,
without any question or molestation of himself. Yea out of the contentions of
other men, some have sucked no small advantage. Saul pursued David, till he
heard that the Philistines were come forth to invade and destroy his land, and
then be returned, by which means David escaped his hands for that time: 1. Sa.
23.27. 1. Sam. 23.27.
While there was dissension among the people, no man laid hands on our
Savior Christ, but every man went to his own house. John 7.43. Ioh. 7.43.
Ioh. 8.1.
44.53. and Christ went his way to mount Oliuet: John 8. the first verse. While
the Pharisees and Sadduces were at odds, and divided about Paul's words, Act.
23.6.7.
Paul escaped for that time. Act. 23.6.7. By this policy also did the
seditious that were in the city of Jerusalem, raise a third army (when they
saw the City already divided) to the utter spoil and overthrow of the whole
City: so the contentions of the Citizens was a vantage to the seditious. And
no doubt, but there are many such amongst us, that would be glad to see civil
dissension in the land (which God for his mercies sake, if it be his will turn
from us,) that they might then the more freely follow the spoil, and fall upon
the pray. And by what other policy (I pray you) does the vicar of hell still
hold his place, but by the contentions of Princes and Nations? To this end did
Pope Hildebrand never leave hitching and encroching upon the Emperors right,
The Pope raises contention between Princes: and why:
until he had put him quite beside the cushion (as they say.) And because the
Princes of the world should have no leisure to see the villainies and outrageous
practices that lurk under his triple Crown, much less to call him into
question, and least of all to suppress and deiect him: his practice has been,
and is, to set variance and contention between Prince and Prince, between
nation and nation, that while they are busy in defending of themselves one
against another, he may both quietly hold that which he has gotten, and also
more easily enlarge the borders of his Popedom: and all (forsooth) under the
name of Saint Peter's patrimony: yea, that he with his cup-shorne Clergy may
play Rex, and in time ouerrunne all. Pope Hildebrand.
So Hildebrand, (like a hell firebrand) first by excommunicating of Henry the
Emperor of Germany, set his subjects and him at variance, that they rebelling
against him, and the Pope at the same time excommunicating him, might drive him
to submit himself unto the Pope: which indeed the Emperor most slauishly did,
with his Queen and his child, who waited bare footed and bare legged in a cold
winter, three days and three nights at the gates of that proud Luciferian
Prelate: and at the last was let in and admitted to the Pope, where he was
constrained to yield unto such base conditions as pleased that proud Prelate
to bind him unto, surrendering his Crown and kingdom unto the Pope, and
receiving the same again at his hands. Afterward fearing lest the Emperor
would be revenged of him, for his good entertainment that he gave him, he
excommunicated the Emperor again, and set up Rodulphus Duke of Sueuia in his
place: during which contention, the Emperor was at no leisure to deal against
the Pope, as afterward he was, when he had subdued Rodulph, and was settled
again in his Empire in peace. In the same steps do all Hildebrands
successors walk to this day, setting all Christendom together by the ears,
that in the mean time they may easily get, Why Papists set strife between the
Ministers and Church governors.
and quietly keep, whatsoever he can get. The like practice is taken up by our
homebred Papists both couchant and dormant: who endeavor by all means to set
contention between the Church-gouernours and the Pastors of the Church, about
matters of circumstance, that in the mean time they with the rest of common
adversaries may do what they list, and go whither they list, running through
the country, and spoiling the harvest of the Lords Ministers, like Sampsons
foxes with firebrands at their tails. Satan's drift in raising contention
between
The like policy does Satan still use in filling the Church with needless
stirs, and unkind contentions, by Schismatickes, which rob the Church of
Christ of her children, that the true preaching of the Gospel may by this
means be hindered and stopped. And to what end else of late, has there been
such contention even about some fundamental points of our faith, Teachers*
and the doctrine of the Church: but while men are busy in underpropping the
frame, and to save the whole house from falling, Satan with his leauie of
Atheists, Papists, and Machiuilean politicians may run away with the spoil,
and not be espied. And what other drift has the Devil, in sowing of discord
between the Pastor and people, Pastor and people.
but to hinder the work of the word, still buzzing this into the minds of the
people, that the Preacher is not learned, or else speaks of malice, etc. The
like purpose he has (as we see by daily experience) in raising of contention
between neighbor and neighbor, Neighbor and neighbor.
to break the bands of love, and to breed strangeness and contempt of one
against another, lest that by often meeting in brotherly and kind sort, they
might mutually stir up, and confirm one another in the graces of the holy
Ghost, and in the paths of piety and religion. The like policy has Satan
also in raising of contention between man and wife, Man and wife.
to interrupt their godly prayers, and good courses of Christian exercises,
whereby Gods blessing and favor may be hindered and kept from them: and he in
the meanetime may set in his foot, and work all kind of mischief, wrath, and
uncleanness amongst them. Let us consider well of this, that love to feed (as
it were) upon stoutnesse, and peevish affections, only for maistry sake: let us
learn rather to seek after peace and ensue it, for contention will come fast
enough, like weeds amongst the corn, or as dogs that come out as a man rides,
before they be called. And so much briefly for the first point* namely* the
chief causes why the man of Belial delights in raising up of contentions.

The second point. How.
Now let us come to the second point, and see by what means he does raise
contentions. The means are diverse, but chiefly three. First, talebearing, and
tale-belleuing. Secondly, misconstruing, and taking things in the worst sense.
Thirdly, busy meddling in other men's matters. Of talebearers the wise wan
speaks thus: Pro. 26.20.
As without wood the fire goes out, so without a talebearer strife ceasseth:
Pro. 26.20. to show, that strife is maintained by tales, Of talebearers.
as the fire is by wood: the more wood the more fire: so the more tales the
more strife. And he that carries tales, carries wood like a scullion, or
kitchen boy, to make a bigger fire. They may be compared to rogish pedlers, or
pedling rogues, which go about with light and trifling wares: under pretense
whereof many play the thieves, and do much harm otherwise. But if no body
would look upon their wares, they would have small list to open them: so if no
body would hearken unto talebearers, but would reprove them, either by word,
or by countenance, surely they would not take such a felicity in that trade of
life as they do: Pro. 25.23.
For as the North wind drives away rain (says the Wise man) so does an angry
countenance the slaundering tongue. But these kind of vermin have more
patronage, and better countenance, then honest men: for commonly they tell
their tales as Libellers utter their mind, being ashamed of their names, lest
they should be disproued, and reproved. And their tales commonly go abroad like
fatherless children, or rather like bastards, without fathers known, or
maisterlesse rogues, who hang on every bush a rag that they come at. I will
tell you a thing of such a one (says this base scullion of the devils kitchen)
but I will tell it you in secret, you must keep it to your self, or else I
shall be shent, and get ill will* I will says the other, I pray let me hear
it: and so the innocent party is bought and sold, haled and pulled, rent and
torn, condemned and hanged, Two thieves.

1. The reporter. 2. The receiver.

between two malicious thieves, and he not aware of it. The one robs his
neighbor of his good name, which is better then gold and silver, and the other
is the receiver. Odiosum genus, a hateful brood they are: and deserve hanging
ten times more then he that robs a man upon the high way: for he may make
restitution of that which he stole, but a man's good name cannot be restored
again. No says Machiauel slander thy enemy, and speak all evil of him that
can be devised: (yet cunningly, that it may be believed) if otherwise thou
can not be reue^ged of him: for howsoever he may, and does clear himself of
the slander, yet a scarre will remain do what he can. A devilish practice, and
fitter indeed for Machiauel and his followers, then for any that bears the
face and name of a Christian. This was Absaloms practice, to steal away the
hearts of his fathers subjects, partly by misreporting of his fathers
government, and partly by extolling of himself: a most traitorous and theeuish
practice. In like manner do all aspiring minded talebearers grace themselves by
disgracing of others, to rob men of their friends, which is worse then to rob a
man of his goods: and such if they repent not, must make just account to hang
in hell for it, though they hang not here.

As it is a wicked practice to carrye tales in such obscure sort as has been
showed, Of believing tales.
so it is as bad to believe tales, and to give credit to talebearers without
any further proof and examination of the matter. It has been the undoing of
many an innocent and honest man. Ziba comes to king David with a smooth tale
against his master Miphibosheth, 2. Sam 16.3.4.
David received it, but did not examine it: and giving rash credit unto it,
made no more ado, but presently (without hearing Miphibosheths defense) gave
all Miphibosheths lands unto Ziba, a slanderous and flattering clawbacke. And
though David were as an Angel of God in wisdom and discerning (as the woman
of Tekoah told him) yet he was too hasty and credulous in that matter. Whereby
we may learn that even the bes^ men are subject to this foul fault, and are
guilty of false witness bearing against their neighbor, contrary to the
ninth Commandment: which is done not only by reporting, but also by
believing of false things against our neighbor. And surely men must take heed
of this foul vice, which is of so cursed consequence as we see daily. We had
need (I say) take heed how we believe reports raised against Christian
professors of the Gospel: especially against the zealous Preachers of the
word: because Christ has told us they shall be hated of all men for his names
sake: Mat. 10. Mat. 5.
and that men shall speak all manner of evil saying against them falsely for
his sake. And such as David was shall not want Zibaes enough, in Court, and
country, and city, and every where: every great man, yea every one that is in
authority has such hangbies too many about him, to hurt honest men in their
credit, if they take not heed of them. Surely at another time, David did
passing well, when he forbad the publishing of Saul's death amongst the
uncircumcised at Gath and Askalon, 1. Sam. 31.20.
lest they should insult and rejoice at the death of the Lords anointed, the
king of Gods people: to show, that if we must not always publish even true
things, and that are notoriously and famously known, when the concealment of
the^ may be more for Gods glory: much less ought we to devise, or to publish,
or to credit false rumors and slanderous reports against the Lords anointed,
or any of the Lords people, which tend to no other end but to the dishonor of
God, in defacing of his servants. Ruth. 2.11.
In the 2. of Ruth. ver. 11. there is a notable pattern or example for news
mongers: All is told me (says Booz unto Ruth) that thou have done unto thy
mother in law, since the death of thy husband, and how thou have left thy
father and thy mother, and the land where thou wast borne, and art come unto a
people which thou knew not in times past. By which relation of Booz unto
Ruth, we may learn, that the virtuous acts of good men are to be spoken of to
their commendation and comfort, to the drawing on of others: and above all, and
in all, to the glory of God. And that if we will needs be discovering of men's
lives and doings, we should speak of their good deeds, and virtuous acts, and
not stand raking still in their corruptions, and infirmities, (as the manner of
most men is) and in reporting, not to eclipse their virtues, but to show all to
the full, as he did that told Booz of Ruth: but so will Belial never do.

Taking all things in ill part.
The 2. way which the man of Belial takes for the raising of conte^tions, is a
wilful and peevish taking all things in evil part, and construing them to a
wrong sense: like the malicious Jews who always drew the heavenly words of
our blessed Savior from the right meaning: when he spoke of the temple of his
body: showing how that should be destroyed, and within 3. days builded again:
Ioh. 8.22.
they maliciously construed his words, to be meant of the temple of Jerusalem.
When he spoke of going to a place whither they could not come unto him: they
presently asked if he would go and kill himself. When the blind man (being
restored to his sight by our Savior Christ) did but answer the Jews unto
their question, showing how he came by his sight, and maintained the deed of
our Savior Christ, they captiously took him at the worst, as though he went
about to teach them. John 9.34. Ioh. 9.34.
So do all wicked lawless Belials. Answer their demands and questions, with
some reasons that they cannot gainsay, then we go about to teach them: and then
to a braule. Speak merrily, and familiarly, thinking no harm against any man,
they take it as a deriding, and scoffing at them: and then to a braule. Do but
a little reverence unto them, and then they think that they are despised. Do
much reverence them, and then they take it as if we mocked them. Admonish them,
counsel them, reprehend them, they are aloft straight, and take it that we
command them, that we judge them, that we condemn them: they will not endure
it. Their felicity is great that they take in descanting upon the Princes
laws, upon the Preachers lives and doctrine, and the doings of all men. In a
word, say what you will, do what you can, mean as well as may be meant, be
familiar or be strange, eat or eat not, pipe or mourn, all is one, nothing
is well taken at the wicked Belials hands: and so long, what can be looked for
but contention?

The third way whereby he raises up contention, Intermedling in other men's
matters. 1. Tim. 5.13.
is by busying, and meddling in other men's matters which belong not unto him,
and that before he is called thereunto, whereof some be women, some be men. Of
contentious and busy bodied women the Apostle speaks thus: Being idle, they
learn to go about from house to house, yea, they are not only idle, but also
pratlers, and busy bodies, speaking things that are not comely. Solomon
(speaking of contentious women) says: Pro. 21.9.
It is better to dwell in a corner of the house top, then with a contentious
woman in a wide house. To show, that there is small ease or rest to be looked
for with a contentious woman. And in the 19. 19.
verse he says, it is better to dwell in the wilderness, then with a
contentious and angry woman. To show, that there is more comfort and rest to be
looked for amongst the wild beasts, then among contentions women.

Of busy headed men, some are intermendlers in Church matters, and some in
commonwealth matters. 2 Samuel 6.7.
Of the first sort are such as Vzzah was, who put his hand unto the Ark of the Lord, to hold it up from falling, when he had no calling thereunto. The Lord
was very wrath with him for it, and in his just vengeance stroke him down for
it, even in the very place with present death. If the Lord were so angry with
Vzzah, who in fear and of a good intent did but touch the Ark of God, then
what must they look for, who of a wicked intent, to carpe and cavil,
maliciously and proudly meddle with the holy things of God, and matters of Gods
Church, Pro. 21.27.
without any calling too? The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination (says
Solomon) how much more when he brings it with an evil mind? Even so, the
meddling of the wicked in Gods matters which belong not unto them, is an
abomination: much more when they meddle with a wicked mind, Job. 21.21.
and that also to do hurt thereby. When Peter (of mere curiosity) was
inquisitiue to know what should become of John, 22.
Christ gave him a very round check for his labor, saying: What is that to
thee? follow thou me: To show, that it is a foul fault to neglect our own
callings, and to be curious and inquisitiue about other men's affairs which
pertain not unto us: and God will surely rebuke such curious persons. Yet how
many at this day do imitate Peter in his vain curiosity, or curious vein,
not fearing or regarding the rebuke that they shall have from God for their
labor? What think you of Bishops and their calling (say some?) of this man's
gifts, and that man's teaching say other? Every cobbler and peddler, or tinker,
and prentise must know these things, and have an oar in the Church governors
boat: and hereof arise contentions, and schisms, and factions, and rents in
the Church of Christ. In the mean time examine them how they have followed
Christ themselves (a thing indeed whereunto they are called:) alas they can
say nothing of that matter, their own callings are neglected, they leap in
and out of them at their pleasure, their families and themselves without all
discipline and government. Alas what answer will they make when Christ shall
stay them, and say unto them: What is that to you? follow you me. When Christ
was in a heavenly Sermon against distrustful care for the world, and fainting
fear of persecution, there was amongst his auditors a very saucy, and
unmannerly worldling, whose heart was so much upon his half penny (as they
say) that he could not stay until the Sermon was done, but (interrupting our
Savior Christ) spoke unto him to divide the inheritance between him and his
brother: but mark Christ's answer: Luke 12.14.
Man (says he) who made me a Judge and a deuider of lands amongst you?
Showing, that it was no part of his calling, and seeing that it did not belong
unto him, he would not meddle with all: teaching us thereby also what we are to
do in the like cases.

The second kind of busy headed fellows (whose intermedling in other men's
matters, Satan uses as his bellows to blow the coals of contention) are in
the commonwealth. Of such we have a very lively, yet fearful example in
Absalom, in 2. Samuel 15.2.3. who being a subject, would meddle in the Kings
affairs, and take upon him to govern, to hear and examine men's causes before
he was called, but it turned in the end to his own shame and utter overthrow:
but mark his vile practice: He rises up early, and stands hard by the
entering in of the gate, as though he were a man that preferred the
commonwealth before his own business, and were loath that suitors should
attend too long: 2. Sam. 15.2.3.4.
then he calls men unto him as they went in at the gates, if they had any
matter or controversy before the King, and came to the king for judgment, and
then he questioneth with him in this sort. Of what tribe, or city art thou?
then he enquireth what his suite and matter is, when he hears it, were it
good or bad, he tells him, that his matter is good and righteous, but there
is no man deputed of the king to hear thee. Oh that I were made Judge in the
land, that every man which has any matter or controversy, might come to me,
that I might do him justice. And when any man came near him to do him
obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him. And on this
manner did Absalom to all Israel, that came to the King for judgment: so
Absalom stale the hearts of the men of Israel. Which after grew to an open
treason, and rebellion against the king his father, yet against his own life
through the just judgment of God against him. In like sort at this day it is
amongst us: The practice of petty foggers, and hungry Lawyers.
do we not see many crafty Lawyers, petty foggers, and others of no calling,
wanting work, that can cunningly creep into men's matters, and counsel them
(in show like friends) of mere pity to their cause, and of mere goodwill,
gratis, for nothing, and can teach them which way to be revenged of him that
has done them wrong, and how to maintain suit one against another: when
otherwise (but for such vipers) the parties were most likely to have grown
unto a peace: Mat. 5.
Blessed are the peacemakers (says our Savior Christ) then cursed are strife
makers.

And yet I deny not, but that if men be lawfully called, they may meddle in
other men's matters, We may meedle to make peace, but not strife.
as Counselors may, and Judges, the one to counsel and plead, the other to
determine: yea, God forbid else: otherwise many that are not able to follow
their own cause should have great wrong. And others also may meddle being by
parties requested, or by authority appointed as arbitrators to take up or make
a stay of matters, and so to end strife, and make peace. As every neighbor
will run with water and buckets, to quench a fire when a house burns: so
every Christian ought to do his best endeavor to make peace, and to end strife,
when men are at odds: but he that shall be a means to begin strife, or to
enlarge the breach, is like him that sets a man's house on fire, and
afterward in stead of water brings more fire to the burning down of that,
and the whole city: such a one is an odious man amongst all men, and counted
not worthy to live.

Many of tender conscience are much troubled about this point, namely, what to
do if they see another man do evil, as to swear vainly, to blaspheme Gods
name, or to have any offensive image in his house, or to use any unlawful
recreation, or to spend away the time of holy exercises, as the Preaching of
the word, etc. in profane exercises, and many other things the like, whether
they ought to go unto them and reprove them for their evil or no: A necessary
question.
if they should not, they think that they are accessarie to their evil: and
if they should, much contention and hatred, yea mischief would (as commonly we
see it does) follow upon them, because men unregenerate can by no means abide
to be reproved of their faults, nor hardly the regenerate themselves, except
themselves have received a singular measure of wisdom, and patience, and
withal that they be wisely and lovingly entreated too.

Answer.
Surely in this case men must learn to be wise in the Lord, and take heed that
nothing be done in a preposterous zeal, rashly, and without good warrant and
discretion, least they do more harm then good when they think the contrary.
In this case I suppose that many circumstances are diligently to be considered,
but especially, we are to look before, that we have a lawful calling, or
warrant from God by his word, or some just occasion which may serve in stead of
a calling. We will be ashamed (and afraid too) to go into our neighbors house,
and to search every room of his house, without his leave and consent, and to
examine how he came by this, and where he had that, and to find fault with his
diet, and his household stuff, and to mislike him because every thing is not as
we would have it: for such boldness were a great argument of folly, want of
modesty, and all good nurture: yea it would argue a wonderful impudency,
insolency, and shameless pride: neither would such a one be regarded, but
rather thrust out of the doors by the head and shoulders, and examined like a
suspicious person, by what commission or authority he does so busy himself
in his neighbors affairs which belong nothing unto him. But if a man be sent
for, by the householder, to view his building, or his stuff, or any thing that
is in the house, and required to give his opinion of it, and to correct that
which he shall find amiss, then with honesty, credit and comfort, he may
speak freely.

If I come to a place as a stranger guest-wise, if he shall require me to pray
with him in his family, and to Catechize his family, I have a good calling, I
may do it. Otherwise, I see not that I am bound to thrust my self into those
duties unrequired: if he shall require my judgment in good sort, and earnest
wise, to be resolved about any matter that is about his house, or any offense
committed by himself, or by any of his family, as a household fault, I doubt
not, but that I may safely speak my mind: Or if we be of old and familiar
acquaintance, and so continue in friendship, then as a friend having some
interest in my friend, I think I may in friendly wise contend with him about
that which I see amiss in him or in his family, and admonish him. Or if a
Pastor of a congregation shall see any private disorder, or abuse in any of
his flock, he ought to go unto him, and soberly admonish him. Or if a question
be moved in company, tending to any error, or for the clearing of any doubt, I
do not doubt but that upon occasion thereof (one thing drawing on another) a
man may more safely, freely, and with less offense speak as God shall enable
him for the truth, then otherwise, as many that (of a sudden peremptorily and
rudely) break in upon men, in their private discourses. Or if thou be the
master of a famliy, and hear thy friends at thy table, use ungodly speeches
against religion, or backbiting and offensive speeches of any, whether present
or absent, thou ought to tell them of it, least thou make thy house a
receptacle of ungodliness and mischief. And if thou have so good calling or
occasion as thou have heard before, then thou may and ought to speak
(especially when the case touches the glory of God) though no man else will
speak, remembering what our Savior Christ said, when some carped at his
Disciples which praised him as he rode into Jerusalem: Luke 19.40.
If these should hold their peace, the stones would cry. Or if thou be a man of
great place and authority, and in savor with the Prince and others of high
calling, and see the Church of God in danger, as it was by Hamans wicked
practice, and no body else will step forth to speak in behalf of the
innocent; then ought thou to put forth thy self, yea though thou venture
thy own life in that case, as Hester did: Hest. 4.19.
for (as Mordecai said unto her:) Who knows whether God has brought thee
unto such favor and dignity against such a day? Oh how many are there that
have both good calling, and just occasion offered them many ways, and may have
free access unto Princes, and speak freely, and be heard willingly, whereby
they might do much good unto the poor Church of Christ if they would: but
alas, upon no occasion, and without any warrant they can contend where they
need not, nay where they ought not: and where they should speak there are
they tongue-tied: nay, would to God they did not take all occasions of
hindering good causes, and of betraying the truth.

But otherwise, if thou have neither calling (as a Minister in his flock, or a
master of a family, or a Magistrate in the commonwealth) nor place, nor
occasion justly and fitly offered unto thee: the^ fear to venture (as many do,
who have as they think a great gift in a reprehensiue vein) least it fall out
with thee as it did with the sons of Sceua, who took upon them to do as
Paul did, that is, to cast out devils when they had no such commission nor
power, and it be said unto thee as the devils said unto them: Paul we know,
and Jesus we acknowledge, but who are you? Act. 19.14.
and withal fall upon thee (as devilish minded persons use to do) and drive
thee out naked and wounded. A work both endless, fruitless, and dangerous it
were for a stranger, a plain simple man, or any man else whatsoever, except
he were armed with great power and authority, to go to every one in a fair or
market, that should be heard swearing, or blaspheming, or scoffing, or vainly
disposed. Christ would not meddle with dividing of lands, nor with giving of
sentence against the adultresse, because they were matters which belonged not
unto him. Neither would wise Abigail reprove her husband for his churlishness
toward David, 1. Sam. 25.
when he was in his cups, because then he was not capable of counsel nor
admonition. According to which examples let us walk in all abundance of godly
wisdom, and the Lord shall give a blessing, unto his glory and our comfort.

Now let us pray.
THE IX. SERMON.
PRO. 6.14. He raises up contentions.


IN the former Sermon, to what ends, and by what means chiefly the man of
Belial does raise up contentions. Now it remains that we consider the
greatness of the sin, the more to drive us out of love therewith: and next
the difference between the contentions of the wicked and the contentions of
the godly, because it is not simply unlawful to contend at all. The greatness
of this sin is showed.
Now for the first, the greatness of this sin, namely, of raising up
contentions, and reviving of controversies (after Belials manner) may appear
two ways. First, by considering what testimony God has given of it (or
against it rather) in his word. Secondly, by vewing the scars and harms (as
they say) that this beast has done: that is, by beholding the blessings that
by the means of wicked men's contentions are quite rooted up and destroyed. For
the first, By the testimony of God against it. Pro. 6.16.17.18.
it is said in this present Chapter: There are 6. things which the Lord hates,
yea his soul abhors 7. the haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and the hands that
shed innocent blood, an heart that imagines wicked enterprises, feet that be
swift in running to mischief, a false witness that speaks lies, and him
that raises up contentions among neighbors. Where a man may perceive by his
companions that he is matched withal, what manner of beast the makebate is:
for he goes to be arraigned in the same line with the haughty and disdainful
persons, with liars and murderers, with men whose dexterity is in doing of
mischief, and false witnesses, such as put Christ to death, all birds of a
feather, beasts of one hair, and whelps of a litter. All which the Lord says
he hates, and abhors, and so does he the contentious person: as if he
should say: I do more then hate him, I do hate and abhor him. To show, that a
full cup of Gods wrath is tempered for such to drink of. Oh that all
contentious Belials had grace to consider well of this, that he might repent:
for who can bear the displeasure of a Prince, whose wrath is like unto the
roaring of a lion? Much less can he sustain the fullness of the Princes
wrath, which is death at the least, if not with all extremity. If none can
abide the wrath of a Prince, whose breath is in his nostrils, and has power
but over the bodies and goods of men, then who can endure the wrath of the
Lord, when in all fullness and extremity it shall be powered upon him, and shall
come with this note also, and sign of extreme wrath, My soul does hate and
abhor him: all which is spoken after the manner of men, for our better
understanding, for otherwise and indeed, in God there be no such passions, nor
motions, nor perturbations of mind as there be in men: but these speeches and
the like do show what God in his everlasting counsel and justice has from
eternal decreed, and what (according to the said decree of his) his Majesty
will execute against the wicked.

The second consideration shows the greatness of this sin of raising
contention.
The second thing that shows the greatness of this sin, is (as I said
before) the consideration of those blessings and benefits whereof contention is
the bane and destruction. Yea, if we consider the excellency of those benefits
which by contention and her daughters are taken away, we shall see great cause
why the Lord does hate and abhor him that raises up contentions amongst
neighbors. I say, by her and her daughters, for she is the mother of 4.
daughters, whereof every one does her part in this tragical and untimely
destruction of those benefits which by them we are deprived of. The daughters
of contention.
The daughters of wicked Contention are War, Sedition, Schism, and Brawling:
and every one of these bring forth children like themselves: and whatsoever is
their meat, blood is the drink that they thirst after. Contention is the
mother of war, when she comes among strangers, and goes between nation and
nation, beweene Prince and Prince. Of sedition, when she trauelleth at home in
her own country. Of schisms and rents in the body of Christ when she falls
in the Church, about matters of religion, whether they be of substance or of
circumstance. And of brawles and unquietness, when she is entertained in
families between man and wife: and neighborhoods, between one neighbor and
another. Whersoeuer they come they are the death of 2. most noble and excellent
virtues, namely, of order and of unity. Order is a disposing of all things in
their right place: for the Lord who is a God of order, and not of confusion,
has set amongst men many differences, and degrees of rulers and subjects: of
parents and children: of masters and servants: of husbands and wives: of old
and young, according to the testimony of the Wiseman in Pro. 20.12. The Lord
has made even both these, Pro. 20.12.
the ear for to hear, and the eye for to see. And men's actions are not well
ordered, unless they be well tempered, according to the worthiness and
condition of these degrees. And that cannot be, unless it be done according to
the prescript rule of the law of God, which is the head and fountain of all
good order: for he that is the God of order made a law of order. Now, by
contention and her impes, Gods order is perverted: subjects rule, and Princes
obey: parents yield to their childrens affections: wives domineere over their
husbands: servants bear sway against their masters: and young men despise
their elders. God has distinguished diverse members in one body: one from
another, and set one above another, and placed them all in wonderful manner.
The head as a tower, the eyes in the same as watchme^, the eie-lids as windows
for light, the mouth as a door to let in provision, the tongue as a porter to
call for that which is needful, and to examine that which is doubtful, the
ears as spies to harken and to listen, the hands as seruitours and soldiers,
the feet as messengers and porters to carry and recarry, the teeth as grinders
of natures provision, the palate as taster, the stomach as a cook-roome,
wherein all things are prepared again for the benefit of nature, and the whole
body so to be preserved for the benefit of the soul, who sits within as a
Queen and comma^der, with a Princely company of heavenly attendants called
animales virtutes, the powers of the soul: as reason, and understanding, and
memory, and will, and affections: and all together serving God who made them,
and does preserve them, who redeemeth and repaireth them, to the end he may for
ever glorify himself in their everlasting glorification by Christ in his
heavenly kingdom. All which being beheld in that order that God has set the^
in, do show the high wisdom of God: but being either wanting, or abounding, or
displaced, they make a man not a man but a monster. As when one is borne
without head or eyes, or ears, or hands, or feet, or is borne with two heads,
and many eyes, etc. more then nature requires, or has his ears where his
eyes should be and his feet where his hands should be, etc. In like sort God in
his laws has set down a rule and measure for every thing, which being kept
does make a seemly sight, but being broken, does breed a confused and monstrous
being, whether it be in Church or common wealth, whether in city or country,
in public or in private. Now contention displaceth all, setting (as it were)
the feet upward, and turning the head downward, placing the mouth where the
ears should be, and the hands where the feet should be, and the ears where
the eyes should be: that is he is a speaker when he should be a hearer, A
strange yet a common monster.
he is silent when he should speak, he is an actour when he should be a
beholder, a talker when he should be a doer. So that contention brings forth
no Christans, but monsters. See you one (whether man or woman) co^tending to
talk, when they ought to be silent and to hear others? there is a monster:
for then is their mouth where their ears should be. See you a Minister silent,
when he should preach? there is a monster in the Church, for his ears are
where his tongue should be. See you a Magistrate ruled by his officers, who
should but see out of him? he hold a monster in the commonwealth: for then are
the eyes become head, and all this is a monstrous perverting of Gods order, and
is then commonly to be seen, when wicked contentions have been raised up
against the truth.

Contention destroys unity.
As contentious Belial is the bane of good order, so also is he the destruction
of godly unity, love and concord. For whereas Gods order is perverted and
ouerturned, whether in nature or in grace, the minds of Christians cannot choose
but be distracted and estranged one from another: which is as deformed a
spectacle, as to see the members of a man's body displaced, or torn in pieces.
When S. Luke would set out the fellowship of the Christians in the time of the
primitive Church, he says: They had all one mind, and one heart. To show that
where diverse (but especially contrary) minds are, there can be no society,
except it be such society as is amongst married persons, when the one is a
Papist and the other a Protestant: they are tied together indeed, but it is
like Sampsons foxes, tail to tail, every one looking a contrary way,
striving (with firebrands at their tails) to be parted one from another: and
therefore they strive to be asunder, because of the fire that is kindled
betweeee them, and threatens to consume them. Phil. 2.2.
Therefore the Apostle says: Fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded, having
the same love, being of one accord, and of one judgment, that nothing be done
of contention or vain glory, but that in meekness of mind, every man
think better of another then himself. To show, that if any thing be done of
contention and vain glory (two miserable companions) we shall both grieve the
godly, especially our teachers, and also deprive our selves of peace, and
comfortable society.

What true unity is.
But now it may be demanded: what is Christian unity? Surely, it stands not
in joining our selves together at a table, to eat, and drink, and laugh: it
stands not in gaming and holding together (as many do) in sin and vanity:
nor in a quiet suffering of men to do as they list, without controlment by the
Magistrate, and the Minister, or by others that be in office: nor in partaking
against the truth, and well affected men in religion: nor in scoffing and
deriding (among scorners) honest poor men which fear God (as now adays such
kind of fellowship is counted good fellowship and unity:) for that is
conspiracy rather then unity. But true godly unity consists in cleaving
fast unto him, who above all things is one, and unity it self, and that is
God, in whom is a Trinity of persons in unity of substance, without whose
worship and fear there can be no fear. Therefore said Iehu well, when Iehoram
asked him if he came peaceably* 2. Kin. 9.22.
What peace can that be, so long as the witchcrafts and whoredoms of thy
mother Iezabel are yet great and many? To show, that where sin reigns,
there is no peace to be looked for: neither must Gods children be in league
with such as live desperately in all wickedness without the fear of God. When
Elijah cleared himself, and proved Achab to be the man that troubled Israel,
he used this reason: 1. Ki. 18.18.
for, thou have forsaken the Lord, and his commandment. Thou have forsaken the
Lord, Achab: there is unity gone; and his commandment, there is order gone.
To show, that they which forsake the Lord and his laws, are the only enemies
to unity and order, and disturbers of the peace of Gods people. Therefore true
Christian unity is called the unity of the Spirit. Ephesians. 4.3. Ephesians. 4.3.
To show that we must (more then need must) have no fellowship with any, but
with such as are at unity with the truth, for the Spirit is a spirit of truth.

Now see what an excellent thing Christian unity is: The excellency of
Christi^n unity.
the name of peace is sweet (says a learned man:) if the name of it be sweet,
how much more is the thing it self full of sweetness? as in regard of it self
and it own nature, so chiefly in regard of the sweet fruits and effects
thereof is it most sweet and pleasant. For, where right Christian unity and
peace is, there is a comfortable communion of Saints, as we read to have been
in the Primitive Church, they met often, and rejoiced much. Now what an odious
thing is that which depriueth Christians of such a blessing, and blessed means
of fellowship and great joy? It is called the band of perfection, Col. 3.14.
Col. 3.14.
To show that a man is but a loose Christian without it, and may easily lose,
the graces of the Spirit, that is not bound together with this band. And in
another place, it is said, put on love: to show, that a Christian is in a
manner but naked, and uncomely without it, like a man without his upper
garment. It is like the fruitful ground, wherein small things will thrive
well. Psalm. 133.
David speaks of it as of a thing rather to be admired then to be described.
It is like a precious ointment that fills all the house with a sweet smell,
yea with a savor of life, where it is powered out. It is as the beam in the
wall, as the foundation of the house, as the sinews in the body, and as the
Sun in the firmament, both profitable and comfortable with his light and his
heat. It makes that strong which was weak: that sweet which was bitter: that
straight which was crooked: and that great which was small. It is a large
covering and a comely robe, that covers the multitude of offenses.

Now, he that raises up contentions does but awaken and rouse up a cruel
Lioness with her whelps, to tear all these blessings in pieces. He teareth
in pieces his brothers best garment, the Churches best garment, the common
wealths best garment, and lays all naked to the scorn and laughter of Cham
and his cursed brood. He pulls the sinews of the body in sunder, to the
intolerable pain and torment of all the members. He plucketh the beams out
of the building, and undermines the foundation of Christians joy. He makes
their fruitful ground to become barren: he spilleth the sweet ointment, and
fills the place where he comes with a pistiferous air. They are the worst
people that live, for they are scorners. David makes three degrees of sinners
in the 1. Psalm. Psalm. 1.1. Pro. 22.10.
and every one is worse then other: and the last be scorners. Therefore Solomon
says, Cast out the scorner, and strife shall go out, so contention and reproach
shall cease. Showing by his manner of speech, that there is no more respect to
be had unto a contentious scorner, or a scornful contender, then to dung
which is to be cast out of the doors upon the dunghill. Therefore woe be to him
that raises up contentions between Prince and Prince, as the Pope does:
between the Church and her governors, as the Popish do: between Pastor and
people, as Atheists do: between man and wife, as make-bates do: between
neighbor and neighborr, as tale-bearers do: between plaintiff and defendant,
The makebates annoy themselves.
as busy bodies and petti-foggers do. Woe be unto them (I say) for as they take
away the foresaid blessings from others, so also from themselves: they cannot
make other to fall, but they must fall themselves: He that diggeth a pit (says
Solomon) shall fall into it, and he that rolleth up a stone, Pro. 26.27.
it shall return unto him. He that loves to break hedges, a Serpent shall
bite him. He that pulls the beam out of the wall, pulls the house upon his
own head. He that wishes this Sun out of the world, wishes but a dark and
uncomfortable being to himself. The contentions of the wicked are like the
fight between the dragon and the Elephant. The Dragon, he windeth about the
Elephants legs, and stingeth his belly, but with the fall of the Elephant he is
killed himself. According to this is that which Jeremy speaks in the person
of God: Do they provoke me to anger (says the Lord) and not themselves to
confusion of faces? Ier. 7.19.
Thus was it with Corah and his contentious company, they contended with Moses
and Aron to their own confusion. Thus was it with Absalom, and Seba the son
of Bichri, who troubled David somewhat, Pro. 24.21. Gal. 5.22.
and themselves more. Therefore are we forbidden to meddle or to have any thing
to do with the seditious Pr. 24.21. And S. Paul wishes that they which
trouble the Church of God were even cut off. The difference between the
co^tentions of the wicked and of the godly.
And so much of the greatness of this sin of raising of contention, whereby
both order and unity are taken away.

Now let us see whether it be simply unlawful to contend or no: and if it be
not, then let us see the difference between the contentions of the wicked, and
the contentions of the godly, and what rules are best to be followed in our
contendings, and controversies: that they may tend to Gods glory, and the
maintaining of Gods order and his Churches good. A needful question surely this
is: for, when the wicked would make Christ and his servants very odious unto
the world, they would accuse them of sedition and contention. And Paul is
accused by Tertullus to be not only a mouer of sedition among the Jews, but
even therefore calls him also a pestilent fellow, (...).
yea the plague it self, as the Greek word signifies. Act 24.5. In like
manner are the faithful Ministers of Christ still used, the world continually
charging us (though unjustly) to be busy bodies, troublesome fellows, enemies
to Caesar, sowers of discord, etc. And by no means would they have us to deal
against sin, but to preach plausible doctrine, foolishly and childishly abusing
the saying of S. Paul to Timothy: 2. Tim. 2.24.
The man of God must not strive, but be meek and gentle, etc. But we are to
know that to contend is not simply evil, Ier. 15.
for the Prophet Jeremy says that he was borne to contend with the whole
world: and because he was so accounted, it grieved him, for he cried out in
this sort, Woe be unto me my mother, that I was borne a contentious man, etc.
The kingdom of heaven (says Christ) is not gotten but by striving, yea and by
violent striving too, and we are commanded to strive to enter in at the
straight gate, Luke. 13.24. Luke 13.24.
God is said himself to contend with man, who^ he made, Genesis 6.3. Genesis 6.3.
Psalm. 95.10.
My spirit shall not always strive with flesh And of the Israelites he says:
Forty years have I contended with this generation. Apo. 12.7. 1. Cor. 9.24.
And S. John says that Michael (meaning Christ) had battle with the dragon.
And the Apostle Paul says: So run, that ye may obtain. So that if we contend
against the sins of the world as Jeremy did, and against the devil as our
Captain Christ Jesus did, and to outrun one another in goodness as the
Corinthians did, and as we all should do, then our contending is commendable:
but so does not the man of Belial, for he is threatened to be destroyed, because
like a makebate he raises up contentions (as has been fully declared
before:) to show that his contending is naught and intolerable. Cain and Abel
did both sacrifice, yet not both accepted, because they did not sacrifice both
with a like affection. So the godly, and the wicked do both contend, yet not
both in like manner. The difference stands in matter and manner, which (being
well considered) will put an end to this controversy, and show who be troublers
of Israel: this will clearly appear in the example of Achab and Elijah, the
one a king the other a Prophet. 2. Ki. 18.18. Achab says that Elijah troubled
Israel (this was when they wanted rain in Israel, and when Elijah stood
against the Priests of Baal.) Elijah again tells the king that he and his
fathers house are they that troubled Israel. But what is it to trouble Israel?
let us see: What it is to trouble.
surely it is a borrowed speech: for, to trouble, is nothing else but to mingle
and confound together good and bad, vile and precious, corrupt and pure. Simile.
As we see in a vessel, where liquor is of diverse parts and qualities, some
thick, some thin, the liquid and refined stands above, most clear: the
dregs and gross substance go down to the bottom, and there lie pressed down:
shake the vessel, and the dregs rise up, and all is said to be troubled, that
it is hard in that mixture to see which is the one and which is the other. Even
so is it in the Church of God, and commonwealth of Israel: when superstition
and impiety are advanced, which like muddy and dirty dregs should be kept
down: and on the contrary, pure religion and piety, which (like sweet
wholesome wine) should be kept aloft, and preserved from mixture, is put down,
and mingled with superstition and humane traditions that be contrary to the
word, then all things are said to be troubled, and out of order. Now, when
things fall out thus, there is great difference between the affection and
judgment of the wicked and of the godly. The wicked think things to be then
at best stay, when they with their superstitions and impieties may prevail:
but the godly (having judgment) are of a contrary mind, knowing for certain
by the wisdom of Gods word, that men are then in greatest danger, When men are
in greatest danger.
when the wicked think that they are in greatest peace and safety. And then do
they that fear God, hold things to be well ordered and in peaceable state,
where justice and holiness are preferred, and iniquity and profanesse cast
out, as they deserve. And to these ends both contend: Achab and Elijah contend.
Achab charge Elijah to be a troubler and disturber of the Church and common
wealth, and stands stoutly to prove both: for, as touching religion, nothing
was more acceptable unto that corrupt king (who had sold himself to work
wickedness) then the advancement of idolatry, and with might and maine to
maintain the same. Elijah on the other side, endeavored nothing so much as to
draw the people from idolatry, and to set up the true and pure worship of the
true God: Who troubled Israel.
therefore Achab said that Elijah troubled Israel. And as for the civil state,
that was also troubled, because the king would enjoy his kingdom, with the
commodities of this life, and ruffle it out in all wealth and abundance, which
was much abated for want of rain in the 3. years of famine: therefore the
kingdom of Israel was troubled, both as touching religion, and also civil
government: and this is the substance of Achabs quarrel against Elijah. But
now mark how the Prophet behaueth and acquiteth himself against the king. How
Elijah behaved himself before the king.
He admits nothing unworthy a Prophet and messenger of God: he dealt
constantly, and defended his ministry courageously. He did not cast down
himself at the kings feet: he did not crave pardon for that which he had done:
he did not promise to amend if in any thing he had displeased the king. Not for
that he was proud and arrogant, but because he perceived the kings accusation
directly to impeach the credit of Gods word, as if the trouble that he
complained of, grew from that, and nothing else. Therefore, thou troublest
Israel (says the Apostle) not I, but thou and thy fathers house: for thou have
taken away the true worship of God, and drawest the people to Baal a filthy
idol, by which means thou prouokest the Lord against the land: but as for me,
I recall them unto the God of my fathers, and stand for the laws of God given
in mount Sinai. Therefore I am not he that troubles the land: the controversy
is raised by thy self, for thou contendest with God and his word, which I
stand for.

In like sort may we also answer all Papists and Atheists, How to answer
Papists and Atheists when they call the professors of the Gospel troublesome
fellows.
when they call us troublesome fellows. We stand for the true worship of Jesus
Christ, and the glory of God: we receive the holy Scriptures as containing all
things necessary to salvation, so do not they: we use the Sacraments, not in
part, but in whole, so do not they: not with any Popish eleuations, or
superstitious adoration or kneeling to the Sacrament, as they do: we will not
worship idols, or the creature for the Creator, as they do: therefore not we,
but they are contentious disturbers of the Church of God. Happy is that Church
and common wealth, which is governed by the word of God: then unhappy are those
that follow the inventions of men, and reject the commandments of God. It was
a strong argument that Elijah used, wherewith he brake the kings heart, and made
him to yield. And in other places of the Scripture also is this word
(troubling) used in that same sense: as in Josh. 7.25. Josh. 7.
Achan troubled Israel, because he did (contrary to Gods commandment) take
unto himself (by stealth also) things excommunicate and accursed. Genesis 34.
Simeon and Leui also are said to trouble Jacob their father, because
trecherously they slew the Sechemires, Genesis 34 29. Gal. 1.6.
I marvel (says S. Paul) that you are so soon turned away unto another
Gospel: which indeed is not another Gospel, but some among you trouble you,
and intend to pervert the Gospel of Christ. All which places do show that they
are the troublers of Gods Church, which violate Gods commandments, which
adulterate his worship, which deal falsely with his covenant, which hinder the
course of the Gospel, and labor to draw away men from the love of the truth.

Thus then we see, that all are not to be condemned, which have contended, for
that in every contention there are two parts each contrary to other: and if the
cause of the one be good, the other must needs be bad. They that defend Gods
right, or the Churches right, or their own right, are not to be called
contentious persons, but defendants. And they that complain of wrong offered
to God, or to his Church, or to the common wealth, or to themselves, are not
contentious persons, but plaintiues, as they are termed in law.

Peter Mart. loc. com.
But because the Magistrate (as Peter Martyr says) is Lex animata, a living
law, and represents the person of God, therefore he is to be received, and
obeyed without contending, or resisting, so long as he commands and rules
by the word of God, How the magistrate is to be obeyed.
or by honest and civil decrees, not repugnant to the word of God: and in
things indifferent also he is to be obeyed, although to some they may seem
grievous: even as servants must obey and seek to please not only their
courteous and gentle masters, but also those that are froward and hard to
please. But if he shall command any thing against the word of God, he is not to
be obeyed, for the Apostle says: Act. 4.19.
It is better to obey God then man. And as we ought not in such cases to obey
him, so neither ought we to rebel against him, but meekely to submit our
felues unto such penalties and punishments as he by his laws shall inflict
upon us. Or if he shall give bad example in his own person, or suffer evil
to go unpunished, we may (having a lawful calling thereunto) and ought, to
reprove him for it, or rather to admonish him as a father, Nehe 13.17.
as Paul teaches. Neither can we be justly condemned for contentious Belials,
if in such cases we do lawfully contend against him. Nay more, as impiety must
not be obeyed, so it must be reproved, with all zeal and earnestness of
afaffection (so much as lies in us) by the examples of Christ, John Baptist,
the rest of the Prophets and Apostles, who cannot (without great impiety) be
counted raisers of contention, but sowers of peace, and unity, by contending
for the truth. Moses and Aron troubled Pharaoh, when they told him of his
wicked detaining the Israelites. Josiah, Hezekiah and Asa, good Kings troubled
the idolaters, when they suppressed their groves, their images, and their hill
Altars. Daniel and his fellows troubled Nebuchadnezzar when they told him that
they would not fall down before his image that he had caused to be set up to
be worshipped. So Michaiah troubled Achab, when he told him that he should not
return in peace, if he went to war against Ramoth Gilead. So John Baptist
troubled Herod when he told him that it was not lawful for him to keep his
brothers wife: and all these were (in their time) counted troublesome, Who are
now adays accounted troublesome.
seditious and contentious persons. And so are they (in our time also) counted,
who reprove the abuses and disorders of Princes Courts, the negligence of
Bishops, and the corruptions of their Ecclesiastical Courts, the covetousness
of corrupt Patrones, and Nonresidents, the ignorance of idol shepherds, the
laziness and idleness of others that have knowledge, the cruelty of
La^dlords, the biting of usurers, the vanity of gentlemen, the bribery of
officers, the profanation of the Sabbath, and such like: but what then? He that
has not yet learned, that all me^ as they are affected, will give their
verdict, has learned nothing: and he that has not learned with the forenamed
constant soldiers of Jesus Christ to go through honor and dishonor, through
good report and bad report for the truths sake: 2. Cor. 6.8. has learned but a
little. 2. Cor. 6.8. Tit. 1.9.
The Minister of Christ must not only teach sound doctrine (says S. Paul)
Tit. 1.9. but also maintain the same against gainesayers: to show, that one
cause why the Lord will suffer his truth to be gainesaid, is to try how his
servants will defend it: 1. Cor. 11.19
And there must be heresies (says the same Apostle) that the approved may be
known. The heresy we know is of Satan, and a work of the flesh: Gal. 5.20.
Gal. 5.20. but the good that comes thereof is of God, who does still bring
good out of evil, as he did light out of darkness. Ge. 1.9. Genesis 1.9.
The flint and the steel are violently stricken the one against the other, yet
without this violence there will no fire come: they both wear one another, yet
the benefit of light does recompense the loss of them both. There was a
striving between Jacob and Esau in their mothers belly, which could not choose
but be painful to their mother, yet without this striving they could not be
born, and the birth of the one (being the Lords beloved) was sufficient cause
of joy to his mother, The truth cannot come forth without striving.
though the other had perished in the birth. The Church militant also is our
spiritual mother, in whose body while we live, there is and will be a strife
that the truth may come forth. It is painful no doubt to the members of the
body for a time: yet the birth of truth, the daughter of time, will make a
joyful recompense for all our sufferings. For a woman in travel forgets
all her former sorrows (says Christ) for joy that a man child is borne into
the world Ioh. 16.21. Ioh. 16.21.
And shall not the spouse of Christ forget all her pain, for joy that a child
of God is borne unto the kingdom of heaven? For this cause is the Church
militant compared to a woman traveling in birth, Apo. 12.2.
and pained ready to be delivered. Revel 12.2. To show, how every true
Christian should labor, first to beget Christ in others. Secondly, to conceive
him in himself. Thirdly, to bring him forth, though with much pain and strife
in the flesh. And lastly, to bring him up, and to maintain the truth to the
glory of God. And great reason: for shall we beget children, and not unto God?
Genesis 29.32.
Nay rather, say as Leah said, Ge. 29.32. Give me children, and my husband will
love me: so, give me knowledge, and judgment, and truth, and zeal, and faith,
and love, and repentance, and patience, and humility, and sincerity, the
fruits of the spirit, and Christ will love me: and count it a shame to be
barren in the graces of the Spirit: as women in old time counted it a reproach
unto them to be barren in child bearing. Amongst many other things which the
Lord took grievously against his people the Jews, this was one: There was no
courage for the truth: but for lies, they have bent their toungs like a bow.
Ier. 9.3. Ier. 9.3.
So we have courage also for every thing, saving for the truth. Now to make our
dull beast go more lively, the Lord has left us two spurs to prick him
forward. Two spurs.
In one place he tells us, Apo. 3.15.
Revel. 3.15. there is one. In another place he says: that the fearful: there
is another. Let us think of these, and mend our pace: always provided that we
have with us, for a comfortable preservative in all our conflicts, and for a
foueraign restoratiue in all our faintings, that caveat which Christ has left
us in his Gospel: A preservative.
Whosoever will save his life, shall loose it: there is the preservative: and
whosoever shall loose his life for my sake shall find it, there is our
restoratiue. A restoratiue.
I speak not any thing to animate such tempestuous spirits, that cannot fish
but in troubled waters, (and that for frogs too) but to allay the bitterness
of offense, if our waters be troubled by others, while we fish for men. And
thus we see how the matter that is contended for, puts a great difference
between the wicked and the godly, and shows who are to be counted
contentious persons, and who not though they do contend.

The manner of contending is to be respected.
As there is difference in regard of the matter or subject of their contentions,
so also in regard of the manner of striving, there is great difference. As Iehu
was known to be Iehu by the manner of his marching: so the children of God are
known from the men of Belial by the manner of their contending. The manner of
doing a thing ought always to be respected: for oftentimes it either makes or
marreth the matter. A good matter handled after an ill manner is made evil:
and a bad matter handled after a good manner seems to be good. Wicked Achab
in his counterfeit repentance seems a good convert: and Peter with his
presumptuous aduenturing upon his own strength, had almost marred a good
profession. Act. 24.
Tertullus with an eloquent Oration clad in colors of modesty, humility, and
impudent audacitie, seems to have a good cause against Paul, when Paul by
calling the high Priest a whited wall in his own revenge, made more matter
against himself, and was driven to plead ignorance in his own defense. The
wicked are wise to do evil, and in their contentious proceedings do use great
art and skill, to the great advantage and gracing of an evil cause. And the
godly are oftentimes overtaken in their innocent simplicity, and through
extremity of untempered zeal, do give themselves the foil. The children of
this world (says Christ) are wiser in their kind then the children of light:
to show, that Christians are foiled more for want of godly wisdom then any
thing else. Therefore Christ does bid us to be wise as serpents, and innocent
as doves: as if he would assign us the dove and the serpent to give in a
Christian man's Arms, The arms of a Christian.
to teach us wisdom and innocence: and surely they are the fittest arms for
a Christian that can be. And these two virtues of wisdom and innocence are
two of the fittest and most necessary attendants that a man can have to wait
upon the other graces of the Spirit, and to grace his profession withal. For,
so long as they serve him, he shall be sure to do every man right, and himself
no harm. The wisdom of the serpent.
The serpent will bear many blows on his back, to save his head which may
teach Christians, not to venture their head (as it were) in revenge of every
blow: as many do, that for every trifle will vow to spend their stock and
substance: that will venture their credit, and weary all their friends, to
satisfy their own minds and peevish affections. 4. Things noted in the dove.
In the dove we may observe four things. First meekness, and that appears
in her going: for though in flight she be swifter then other birds, yet in her
going she shows great meekness. Meeknes
Secondly, harmelesnesse, Harmelesnesse.
or innocence: for she is so far from ravening and spoil, that Christ
makes her a pattern of innocence. Thirdly, jealousy: Jealousy.
for none is more jealous over her mate and young ones: which may teach us to
be jealous over the glory of our spouse, and his graces in us. Fourthly,
mourning: Mourning.
therefore Hezechiah said that in his sickness he mourned like a dove: Esa.
38.
so should we, (for we have cause) still to be mourning for the decay of Gods
graces in us, and grieved at the wounds which sin does give us. This mourning
and sorrowing for our own sins, and also for the sins of others, which lie
not in our power to reform, is so necessary, that it is made a mark of Gods
people, in Ezech. 9.4. Set a mark upon the foreheads of those that mourn for
all the abominations that are done in the midst of Jerusalem. Thus then
Christians being armed, clothed and prepared let the^ go on in Gods name to the
battle, and contend with the uncircumcised Giants of the world: but let their
wisdom be like the wisdom of the serpent: let them still have a special
regard to their head Christ, and a special care to defend him in his church:
and let their innocence be like the innocence of the dove, which is covered
over (as it were with silver feathers) with meekness, and lowliness,
harmlesnes, godly jealousy, and continual mourning for their own wants, and
the faults of others which they cannot reform. And thus much in general for
the manner of contending amongst the godly, wherein they differ from the
wicked, who care not for Christ, because he is none of their head: 1. King. 3.
like the harlot that cared not if the child were cut in pieces, because it was
none of hers: whose meekness is haughtines and stern fierceness, bitter
cruelty and cruel bitterness: whose innocentie is spoil and oppression,
whose jealousy is only over their own glory, and whose mourning for sin, is
rejoicing in their own sin, and in the fall of others.

Special rules to contend by
Now seeing as we be come thus far, it were not amiss to set down some rules
in more particular manner, to guide poor simple Christians in their zealous
and earnest contendings and striuings: in following whereof they may have
comfort to their own consciences: and others may glorify God for their wise
and godly carriage of themselves, to the advantage of the truth, and the
disadvantage of their adversaries. To which end we are to know, that every one
that contendeth justly, stands either for Gods matters, or for men's causes.
In striving about Gods matters, it were good to observe these rules following:
(not that I would bind any man to these: but let every man as God gives him
experience, impart his godly advice and counsel for the good of others.) In
Gods matters, In Gods matters.
if the controversy be in public meetings before many, look to thy calling:
if it be in private between thee and a few, look also upon what occasion it
grows, and whether it be offered by thy self or by others: if by thy self,
(especially before thy betters) look how thou fall into it, and use great
modesty (craving both leave to speak, and attention to be heard) with
submission of thy judgment unto men of judgment, patiently hearing them also
with whom thou contendest, as well as thou art desirous to be heard thy self:
and especially use some words of preparation, to draw the minds of the hearers
to a reverent regard of that thou say: left it be otherwise a profane
contention: and do not as many do, who amidst their cups, (when men are
earnestly employed in other pleasant and witty discourses) chop in of a sudden
with some great question of Divinity, using no mean at all to divert and
turn the hearers minds from that vein of mirth whereunto they are settled,
unto a matter of more gravity and majesty, which requires sober and advised
attention. If the controversy be occasioned by others, then mark by whom it
is raised, and to what end: if by profane persons, only to cavil and snare
thee, then reproof or silence is the best answer; according to the counsel of
Solomon: Pro. 6.4.
Answer not a fool in his folly, left thou be like him: and yet answer to his
folly: that is, as his folly deserves: lest he be wise in his own conceit.
If the question arises by those that ate sober and godly: then follow S. James
his rule: Iam. 1.19.
Be swift to hear and slow to speak: that is, put not forth thy self, (as
the manner of many is:) but let others first speak, and be thou required to
speak before thou speak. By this means also thou shall the better be able
to speak to purpose, and with mor ease to go through with the matters: like
him that follows another when the ice is broken before him. It is good also
to look unto thy ability, and not to meddle with a matter that is too high
for thee: as many do, (because they would have men know that they can say
somewhat) when indeed they do but bewray their gross ignorance and pride. This
is David's counsel in his own practice: Psalm. 131.1.
Lord, (says he) I am not high minded, I do not exercise my self in matters
that are too high for me. Then observe order, and avoid confusion: that is,
speak in thy turn, and let not many speak together. Take for example the
Apostles, who (being assembled in a Council at Jerusalem about the matter of
circumcision, and other points of Christian religion) spoke one after another:
Act. 15.7.12 etc.
First, Peter spoke, and then all the multitude kept silence, and then after
him Barnabas spoke, and after Barnabas, James, and all others kept silence. In
the next place, look to the right end of thy contending: and that is
fourefold. First, Gods glory. Secondly, truths victory to the suppressing of
error. Thirdly, thine own comfort and instruction. Fourthly, the edification
of others. To this end avoid all brawling and bitterness, with vaineglorie and
ostentation: and let all things be done in love. Lastly, if you cannot agree,
submit your selves to the judgment of some learned men, thy Pastor if he be
in place, and of ability to judge, or to some other Preacher with him, 1. Cor.
14.29
or without him if he be not in place: Let the Prophets speak two or three,
(says Paul) and let others judge, and the spirits of the Prophets shall be
subject to the Prophets. If the spirits of the Prophets, (that is the
Ministers of the word) must be subject to the Prophets, then much more in
matters of controversy must the spirits of those which are no Prophets be
subject to the learned.

In defending our own causes, What to do in our own causes, etc.
or in pleading the causes of other men: First, let us be sure that the cause
be good, then may we with less offense contend about the same, if we have good
calling, and just occasion, with fit opportunity (as has been showed before:)
For many complain, and contend which have done the wrong: these are like
dogs, which first 1. King. 3.
as though that she had been lies in thee by all possible means) with great
ones: and chiefly take heed, (if thou be a mean person) of having too much
familiarity with three sorts of men. First, thy superiors, especially whose
hearts are not sure and upright toward thee: Pro. 23.6.
Eat not the bread of him that has an evil eye, (says Solomon) for as
though he meant it, so will he say unto thee, eat, eat, when his heart is not
with thee: Surely thou shall vomit up thy morsels, and loose all thy sweet
words. And the poor (says he) speak with prayers, Pro. 18.23.
but the rich answer roughly. And the rich bear rule, much more when the poor
are beholding unto the^: if they borrow, they must be servants unto them. An
Emblem of two pots.
Remember an Emblem or Parable of the two pottes swimming both in one stream:
the one of brass, the other of earth: the brass pot offers great kindness
to the earthen pot, and says: come swim close by me, let us go arm in arm,
so shall we the better stand against the stream: the earthen pot wisely
answered: Not so, for if we two chance to hit one against another, (as very
like we shall if we be so near) then my part is like to be the worse, for I
shall be broken when thou art whole: therefore either like unto like, or else
keep asunder. Secondly, take heed of such as use to speak fair, and carry
hatred in their hearts: Pro. 26.24.25.
For (says Solomon) he that hates, counterfeiteth with his lips, but in his
heart he lays up deceit: though he speak favorably, believe him not: for
there are seven abominations in his heart: that is, many abominations.
Thirdly, avoid as much as thou can furious angry men: Make no friendship with
the angry man, Pro. 22.24.25.
(says Solomon) neither go thou with the furious man: (that is, have as little
to do with him as thou can,) lest thou learn his ways, and receive
destruction to thy soul. Lastly, if thou be wise, and regardest thy own
credit and quiet, contend not with fools and scorners: that is, with wilful
persons, who will conceive no reason: Pro. 26.9.
For if a wise man contend with a foolish man (says Solomon) whether he be
angry or laugh, there is no rest. Many other rules besides these may the wise
hearted Christian prescribe both unto himself and also to others, which by
diligent reading, or conference, or experience will daily appear good unto
him: all which as he does gather them, he may (if he please) add unto these.
And so much shall for this time suffice, to show the difference between the
wicked and the godly in their manner of contending. Happy are ye if ye contend
always: and (as the Apostle says) be earnest in good matters: for that is
good: and contend in a good manner, for then shall ye overcome with credit and
comfort, and not be overcome with grief and shame.

Now let us pray.
THE X. SERMON.
PROVE. 6.15. Therefore shall his destruction come speedily, he shall be
destroyed suddenly, without recovery.


THe description of the man of Belial is past: now follows his judgment: and
that is destruction, speedy, sudden, and irrecouerable. And now he stands
like a thief at the bar, who when he has heard his enditement, and is found
guilty, must then hear the sentence of the Judge according to his desert. As
the malefactor goes from the bar to the gibbet, so the wicked goes from his
wickedness to destruction. This is now the tail of sin which comes last,
but not without a deadly sting. Sin is like the Be, Sin like a Be.
that has both honey which is pleasant, and a sting which is more dangerous
then the honey is profitable: and whosoever will be so foolish and venturous, as
to nourish this Be in his bosom for love of the honey, shall surely be
wounded with the sting, more then the other shall heal again. And therefore
the pleasures of sin are called pleasures for a season: Heb. 11.25. not
pleasures for ever: Heb. 11.25.
because in the end they leave a sting of conscience behind them, which turn
all the former pleasure into lothsomnesse and pain: as it did to the rich and
delicate glutton in the Gosdell. Luke 16.25.
Luke 16.25. and as it was once said to him being in hell, so shall it one day
be said to all the wicked: Remember o ye wicked and ungodly, ye lawless and
vain persons, that you in your life time received your pleasures, and the godly
(because they were contrary unto you) received pains, therefore now are they
comforted, and you tormented. Thus we see how judgment and vengeance comes in
to the wicked like a deep reckening after the feast, to such fools as have
called in for more then they are either able or willing to pay. This reckening
comes last, but it troubles their thoughts, more then all that went before
did comfort them. Pro. 5.3. and
Such a reckening Solomon speaks of in Prou. 5.3. etc. The lips of a harlot
(says he) drop as a honey comb, and her mouth is more soft then oil, but the
end of her is bitter as wormwood, and sharp as a two edged sword: her feet go
down to death, and her steps take hold of hell. Keep thy way therefore far
from her, and come not near the door of her house, lest thou give thy honor
unto others, and they years unto the cruel: left the stranger be filled with
thy strength, and thy labors be in the house of a stranger, and thou mourn at
thy end, when thou have consumed thy flesh and thy body, etc. Such a reckening
does David bring in for the wicked in Psalm. 73. Psalm. 73.5. etc.
They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued with other men.
Therefore pride is as a chain unto them, and cruelty covers them as a
garment. Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more then heart can
wish: they are licentious and speak wickedly of their oppression: they talk
presumptuously. They set their mouth against heaven, and their tongue walks
through the earth: and they say, how does God know it? or is there knowledge in
the most high? Lo, these are the wicked, yet prosper they always, and increase
in riches. Here is their feast past, now comes in the reckening: verse. 18.
Surely thou have set them in slippery places, and castest them down into
desolation. How suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed?
As a dream when one awaketh, o Lord, when thou raisest us up, thou shall make
their image despised. In the like sort does Job bring them in: Job. 21.8.9.
and^*
The wicked grow in wealth (says Job) their seed is established in their sight
with them, and their generation before their eyes: their houses are peaceable
without fear, and the rod of God is not upon them. Their bullock gendreth and
fails not, their cow calueth, and casts not her calfe. They send forth
their children like sheep, and their sons dance, they take their tabret and
harp, and rejoice in the sound of the organes: they spend their days in
wealth. There is one banquet past, now comes in the reckening, and that is
this: Suddenly they go down to the grave. Then to it again they go which are
left behind and, They say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. Who is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what
profit should we have if we should pray unto him? Now follows their
judgment. Often shall the candle of the wicked be put out, and God shall
divide their lives in his wrath: they shall be as stubble before the wind, and
as chafe that the storm carries away. God will lay up the sorrow of the
father for his children: when he rewards him, he shall know it: his eyes
shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
Oh that the wicked (the devils guests) did or could consider this. Oh that we
saw sin in that shape coming toward us, that we see him in, when he goes
from us; then would we as much loath it, as before we loved it: for all sin is
in the end both loathsome and wearisome. Therefore the ungodly being in hell, do
cry out of their folly, and say, how have we wearied our selves in the ways
of wickedness? And to the same agrees the Prophet Esaias: There is no peace to
the wicked, Esa. 57.
says God, but they are as the raging sea. that always casts up mire and
dirt: to show us, that if we would find rest, we must not enter into the ways
of wicked men, for there is no rest in their ways. Pro. 14.13.
And the wise man says, That to the wicked there is sorrow even in laughter:
to show, that the mirth of wicked men is but from the teeth outward. The
Apostle Paul (to show the fruit of sin) asks this question: Romans 6.
What fruit (says he) have you of those things whereof ye are now, ashamed? To
show, that the best fruit that sin brings forth is shame and confusion: as
Adam was not ashamed, until he had transgressed; so is it still with all Adams
posterity.

And here in my text, it is said, that the wicked shall be destroyed. As a
thing that is altogether unprofitable, and much hurtful amongst men, is
destroyed, that is, is either rooted up, or burned with fire, or cast into the
river, or thrown out into the high way for men and beasts to tread upon, or
carried out into the fields for the fowls of the air to devour, or buried in
dunghils and ditches: so shall the wicked be destroyed and come to naught, and
the remembrance of them shall perish from the earth. Why the wicked shall be
destroyed.
And good reason; for, to what purpose should the unfruitful tree stand? to do
nothing but comber the ground? To what use serves unsavory salt, but for the
dunghill? When the brazen serpent makes men to fall from God, what must be done
withal, but break it in pieces? Now, who more unfruitful then the wicked?
therefore when their appointed time is come, they must no longer trouble and
comber the Lords orchard, nor hinder the common wealth of Gods Israel. What
more unsavory then ungodliness? or who more unprofitable then the ungodly?
Therefore, where should their place be but upon the dunghill? Who cause others
to fall from God, but wicked serpents, or serpentine wicked men, with brazen
faces, and iron necks, (as the prophet speaks:) therefore God must needs
break them in pieces, like a potters vessels, and make them like Nebustan,
yea, he shall bruise them with a rod of iron: by which we may see what account
God makes of the wicked, which are lawles, and obstinate, and how little cause
there is why the godly should either esteem of them, or stand in awe of them.

Therefore they are compared to things of most light account in the word of
God* Psalm. 1.
They shall be as chafe (says David) yea, as the lightest or vnprofitablest
chafe, which the wind drives away from the face of the earth. Psalm. 119.
The Lord shall tread them under his feet (says he in another place. Mal. 4.1.
) They shall be as stubble (says Malachi) and the fire of the wrath of the
Lord of hosts shall consume them. All which places do show, that as much
reckning is to be made of chafe, of dirt, of dross, and of stubble, as of a
wicked man that is lawless in his own affections. Whatsoever their estate and
degree be, No respect of persons with God
all is one to the Lord; be they poor or rich, there is no respect of persons
with God: if men be rich or worshipful or noble, or beautiful, or strong, or
witty, or learned: if they be wicked and profane, like Belial, they are but
rich chafe, worshipful dross, noble dirt, strong stubble, beautiful dung:
like Iezabel, who after she had painted her face, was thrown out of the
windows for dogs meat; and what the dogs left, was dung for the earth. Shall
Iezabel escape or be favored, because she is a Queen, and fair without? No,
she shall be more cruelly destroyed, and devoured of dogs, because she was of
cruel and dogged conditions toward the servants of Gods. Shall Achab escape
the bitterness of death, because he is a King? Nay, but as his sword has made
many women childles in Israel: so shall his mother be made childles, and he
shall be hewne in pieces like an ox in the shambles. If Herod will so far
forget himself, as to take unto him the glory that is due to God; even Herod
shall be destroyed of lice. If Nebuchadnezzar will take no warning of his pride,
but hear the judgments of God against him as a dream, surely Nebuchadnezzar
that great and proud King shall be turned forth amongst the beasts. But we be
Christians, and baptized (will some say.) All is one for that: neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. But at
Easter we will be holy, and receive the Sacrament, and then we hope that God
will not destroy us. Yes the sooner for that, if thou be a wicked man. For this
cause (says Paul) are many afflicted, 1. Cor. 11.
and many are dead, because they have received the Lords supper unworthily.
Will you steal, and rob, and lie, and whore, and deceive, and swearefalsly,
(says the Lord by Ieremey) and then come into my house where my name is called
upon? If the Lord does detest the company of wicked men in his house, much
more then at his table. But will God destroy the work of his hands? will he
destroy man, whom he made after his own image? Yea verily: because man through
his wickedness, has defaced that glorious image of righteousness, and true
holiness, he shall be defaced and destroyed himself: Eccle. 7.31.
God made man righteous (says Solomon) but man has found out many inventions.

Thus we see, that there is a time of wickedness, and a time of vengeance: and
when the measure of the wicked is filled up, then shall they be emptied, and
filled with wrath, because they are vessels of wrath. Then shall be fulfilled
the saying of the wise man, in the tenth of Prou. verse 7. Pro. 10.7.
The memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall
rot: to show, that the wicked, who (like Hanun the Ammonite) stunke in the
nosthrils of Gods Israel while they lived, shall be in name when they are dead,
like rotten carrion which lies stinking in a ditch, and every one shall loath
and abhor the sent of him. Pro. 19.9.
The light of the righteous (says Solomon in another place) rejoices, but the
candle of the wicked shall be put out: that is, when they have wasted
themselves out, they shall leave nothing behind them, but a filthy name to
offend the cares of such as fear God, and to shame their posterity, and to
annoy all men: like a stinking snuff of a candle burnt out in the socket,
which is so noisome, that every one shall cry, fie upon it, tread it out.

But this reckening will not come yet (says the wicked to himself) I may
live, and repent when I am old, or when I lie a dying. Indeed so the wicked
mockers and deriders of Gods judgments use to speak, (as S. Peter shows: 1.
Pet. 3.
) Where is the promise of his coming, all things continue still at one stay:
but the Lord is not slack (says the Apostle) as men count slacknesse: when
the sin is full ripe, then will the Lord cut it down, yea, and such wretched
speeches, and ungodly conceits of the Lords long suffering, do ripen the sin
of the wicked blasphemer, and hasten the coming of the Lords hand upon them,
as a blow to a sick man does increase his pain* and also hasten his death.
Indeed the wicked do promise unto themselves a long time, but God says, they
shall not live out half their days. Psalm. 55.23. Psalm. 55.23.
That is, not half the time that they have appointed, or that they dream of:
for when they shall say to themselves, Soul be at rest, thou have goods enough
for many years: Luke 12.19.
the Lord shall deny it, and say, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be
fetched away from thee, etc. Luke 12.19.20. And in the book of Job, it is said
by Zophar (one of Jobs friends) that the rejoicing of the wicked is short, Job.
20.
and the joy of hypocrites is but a moment, 5.
though his excellency mount up to the heaven, 6.
and his head reach unto the clondes: yet shall he perish for ever, 7.
like his dung, and they which have seen him shall say* Where is he? He shall
fly away as a dream, 8.
and they shall not find him, and shall pass away as a vision of the night: 9.
so that the eye that had seen him shall do so no more, and his place shall see
him no more.

A destruction shall come speedily, so also shall it come [ suddenly, Suddenly.
] when the wicked look not for it. The fall of the house upon the Philistines
was sodem to them, when they looked not for it. The fall of fire upon the
Sodomites was sudden to them, when they looked not for it. Death came sodeinly
upon Ananias and his wife, even when they lied to the holy Ghost, and looked
not for it. Did Zimri and Cozbi look to have been pierced through with Phineas
his spear, when they played the open naughtie-packes together? Or did Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram look for the opening of the earth under them, when they
were swallowed up for their rebellion against Moses and Aaron? Or did Jeroboam
look for a leporous hand, when he put it forth against the Prophet of God? Or
did Sisera look for death when Iael took him napping, and knocked a nail
into his head? All these are gone before us, and cry unto us, that we must be
always in a readiness, because the Lord will strike down his trees, no man can
tell when: and they that are not ready for the Lord when his axe comes, shall
be cut down and cast into the fire. This is Christ's caveat: Be ye ready, for ye
know not when the hour is: Mat. 24.
and how we shall be made ready, he shows when he says, Take he^d, Mar. 13.
watch and pray, lest that day come upon you unawares: to teach us, that if we
be careless and look not for Gods visitatio^ it will take us unprovided.

This circumstance of sodainnesse, or judgment unexpected, does make the
destruction of the wicked the more fearful. Do not men start and fear, when
of a sudden they meet with their friends? as oftentimes we do in the dark,
or at short turnings, and sometimes have them overtake us, and speak suddenly
unto us, does it not amaze us? insomuch as many will say, You made me start, my
heart does yet shake in my body, my hair began to stand right up on my head:
much more are men amazed when their enemies suddenly set upon them but most of
all, when some officer comes suddenly upon them from the Magistrate, if their
cause be not the better. But oh what unspeakable fear, and horrible
amazedness of thoughts and senses will there be unto the wicked, when the Lords
hand shall on a sudden be laid upon them, they not once dreaming of any such
matter: as it fell out with Balthashar King of Babylon, when in the midst of
his cups and meriments, he saw a hand writing upon the wall against him.

Objection.
But may we conclude of every one that is suddenly taken away, that he died a
wicked man, and in the number of such as this text speaks of? Surely no:
Answer.
such kind of reasoning is not good, the argument follows not, God will
destroy suddenly the wicked men of Belial: that is, before they look for any
such thing: Fallacia accidentis.
ergo, whosoever dies sudde^ly is a man of Belial: it follows not, for many
times God takes away his children on a sudden in the account of the world, but
not before they be ready for him: and therefore, though they be suddenly
affrighted, yea and smitten down, yet they recover again by Christ in them for
it is not possible for any to perish that is in Christ, or has Christ (the
Savior) in him but of the wicked it is said, they shall never recover
themselves again. The conversation of the godly being in heaven (as S. Paul
shows) they do still wait and look for the coming of the Lord Jesus from
thence: Phi. 3.18.19
therefore the coming of Christ is not sudden unto them: but to the wicked and
reprobates, which will take no warning, but still put off the evil day, saying
(as it is in Esai) Though a plague come, Esa. 28.15.
it shall not come at us: all is sudden to them, and not so sadaine as
fearful. Lots wife was suddenly taken, yet who shall conclude that she is
damned, seeing as God exempted her from those that should perish: but rather
let us think that she was made a pillar of salt, to season us withal.

Enoch was translated, Elias was taken up by a whirlewind into heaven, and yet
here was no sudden coming unto them. The Prophet was devoured of a Lion by
the way as he returned, 1. Ki. 1^.24.
because he had made a stay contrary to Gods commandment: and yet is he
called the man of God, and might be saved. There were eighteen persons at one
time suddenly slain with the fall of a tower in Silo, yet Christ says they
were not greater sinners then they which escaped. One reason of Gods sudden
coming upon his children, to their fear and astonishments, is, to show the
wicked what they for certain may look for: for, If judgment begins at the
house of God (says Peter) where shall the sinners and ungodly stand? 1. Pet.
4.17.
1. Pet. 4.17. And if they do thus unto the green tree, (says Christ) what
shall be done to the dry tree? But Solomon has well decided this controversy
in his book of the Preacher: Eccles. 9.1.2
By no outward thing (says he) can a man know love or hatred, (speaking of the
love and hatred of God) for all things come alike to all, and the same
condition is to the just, and to the wicked. 12. Neither does man know his
time, but as the fishes which are taken in an evil net, and as the birds, so
are the children of men snared in the evil time, when it falls upon them
suddenly. Yet this difference remains between the wicked and the godly,
whenever, wheresoever or howsoever they be suddenly taken: to the godly,
death is a vantage: to the wicked, it is a loss: for then the one changes his
hellish earth for heaven, and the other then changes his earthly heaven for
hell: and therefore of the godly sort it is said commonly, I^h. 1^:
that they sleep when they die* (as Christ said of Lazarus) he is not dead but
sleeps: but of the other it is said* that they perish, and are destroyed. The
one shall recover, the other shall never recover.

Without recovery desperate is that disease, that will never be recovered:
fearful indeed is that estate, which is always fearful. The wicked man
dreameth of long life, and repentance at the last gasp: but what promise has
he of repentance at that time, if he despise the long suffering of God al his
life long, and neglect or abuse the means of repentance? or what charter has
he of his life, one hour longer then he does now live? God may, and will (no
doubt) have mercy upon whom he will: but yet that he will have mercy upon
thee, that go on still in thy wickedness, without any fear of wandering, or
any desire of returning, is more then thou know. He that does so, is
threatened with the contrary: for custom of sin (says S. Paul) breeds
impenitencie, and impenitencie maintains custom in sin, (...). 2.
and both do heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the
just judgment of God. Why did not Cain, and Judas, and Elymas, and Ananias,
and Saul, and Esau, and diverse others repent, that they might have been saved?
If it had been in their power when they had listed (as miserable Papists
dream) doubtless they would have repented: Men cannot repent when they list.
for they were as unwilling (no doubt) to be damned in hell, as any other: but
wicked Balaam knew, and confessed that the end and death of the righteous, is
so blessed, that it is to be wished of all men. No, no: for the most part it
falls out otherwise then men look for, in stead of repenting and confessing
their sins, they lie rauing, and cursing, and blaspheming, and talking leudly
of their wickedness: lying like blocks, and dying like beasts, that so Gods
proverb here may be verified upon them, he is destroyed suddenly without
recovery. And howsoever it be that God is good to Israel, and merciful to
those that call upon his name in truth of heart, and faith in Christ, which
fear his name and keep his covenant, which are displeased with themselves,
and break off their wickedness by righteousness, as it is in Daniel: yet is he
most wise and severe against the obstinate and lawles: against their faces he
has set his bow, and prepared his instruments of war: upon their heads will
he rain fire and brimstone, and storms, Psalm. 7.
and tempests, and snares, this shall be their portion to drink: yea, and as
Job says, Job. 20.12.
When wickedness is sweet in his mouth, and lie hidden under his tongue, when
he sauoured it, and will not forsake it, but keep it close in his mouth: then
his meat in his bowels shall be turned: the gall of Aspes shall be in the
midst of him: he has devoured substance, and he shall vomit it out, for God
shall draw it out of his belly. He shall suck the gall of aspes, the vipers
tongue shall slay him: he shall not see the rivers, nor the floods and streams
of honey and butter: he shall restore the labor, and shall devour no more: for
he has undone many: he has forsaken the poor, and destroyed houses that he
builded not. Surely he shall feel no quietness in his body: there shall be
none of his meat left, therefore shall none hope for his goods. In abundance
he shall be filled with pain, and the hands of all the wicked shall be against
him: when he is about to fill his belly, God shall rain upon him and his meat,
in his fierce wrath. He shall fly from the iron weapons, and the bow of steel
shall strike him through. The arrow shall be drawn out of his body, it shall
shine of his gall, and so shall fear come upon him. All darknenesse shall be
in all his secret places: the fire that is not kindled shall devour him, and
that which remains in his tabernacle shall be destroyed. The heaven shall
declare his wickedness, and the earth shall rise up against him: the increase
also of his house shall go away: it shall flee away in the day of the Lords
wrath. Lo, this is the portion of the wicked man from God, and the heritage of
God for his words. If then this be the portion of the wicked man from God, what
reason have the wicked to hope for salvation, and not to fear destruction? and
how can he imagine that he should recover when the hand of the Lords wrath
shall thus cast him down? if not in this life, then not at all. For from hell
there is no redemption: meaning, for those that are there: Eccles. 11.3 A
Popish error.
And as the tree falls (says the Preacher) so shall it lie: therefore both
falsely and wickedly do the Papists talk of helping and releeuing men's souls
by their Dirges, and Masses, and Mattens, and I wot not what else, after their
departure out of this life. Falsely I say, because they cross the course of the
Scripture, in broching such an error: and wickedly, because by such kind of
vain and false hope, they do strengthen the hands of the wicked, that they
care not for repenting in this life, neither do they regard the judgments of
the Lord when they are threatened, because they hope to be relieved and released
for their money when they are dead.

Therefore is that fire (which shall devour the wicked) called unquenchable,
which it were not, if dirges, and other popish dirt, or any thing else in the
world could quench it. Some kind of fire is quenched with water, some with
vinegar, and some with milk: but nothing will quench Topheth, That is, hell
fire. Esa. 30.33.
which is prepared of old (says the Prophet) even for the King: the Lord has
made it large and wide: the burning thereof is fire, and much wood: the breath
of the Lord, like a river of brimstone, does kindle it. And if his wrath be
once kindled, yea but a little, happy are they that kissed the Son of God
before he was angry: and blessed are all they that put their trust in him: for
as by faith in his blood, they quench the fiery darts of Satan here: so by the
same faith shall they, and do they quench those fiery flames of hell which
shall burn and torment the wicked and unbelievers for evermore. Therefore, if
any here, are, or have been such as have been described by the Anatomy of
Belial, that is, loose, lawless, profane, vain, froward, lewd, surmising,
suspicious, and contentious, let them seek unto the Lord, by timely and
unfeigned repentance: let them embrace righteousness and true holiness, and so
mercy shall embrace them: let them forsake their looseness, their
profaneness, their leudnes, and their vanities, and by a lively faith (working
by love) take hold of Christ, as of the horns of Gods altar, and and so
assuring themselves of Gods love in the merits of Christ, they may escape this
irrecouerable destruction, or else not: for (otherwise) my text says, that
they shall be destroyed speedily, suddenly, and without recovery.

Many uses may profitably be made of this doctrine: but before we come to them,
I think it not amiss to meet with certain objections, that may be made by
Atheists and scoffers, against this that has been said: yea, and which do many
times arise in the minds of Gods dear children, through the weakness of their
faith, in extremity of grievous temptations and sore afflictions. Which
objections, forasmuch as I find them moved, and sufficiently answered by many
learned and godly, but especially by that excellent learned noble man of
France, Plessy de verita. Christ. relig.
Mornay du Plessy, in his book of the trunesse of religion, I will put them
down even as he has done, and for answer unto them, will briefly show you
the substance and effect of his answers, supposing them to be so full and
sufficient to the purpose, that nothing can well be added unto them to more
purpose, or of more sufficiency: surely whatsoever others can* I freely
confess my ignorance, I see not what I can. The first objection is this: if
God be just in his threatenings, and that the wicked shall be destroyed, and
have such a portion of plagues as has been showed out of Job. 20 and other
places of Scripture: 1. Object.
then why have they so much good, Answer.
and the godly so much evil here? To this his answer is, that if by good, we
mean riches, honor, health, etc. the question is absurd; for godliness and
virtue is the true good. The poverty of Lazarus (being a virtuous man) is
better then the wealth of the rich man: the sickness of a wise man with his
wisdom, is better then the health of a fool. What goods soever a man has, he
cannot be a good man, so long as he him self is evil; and these outward things
are common to good and bad. If a man must be termed a good man for having these
goods, then a fool may be termed a wise man in a rich gown. All these false
goods are means to the wicked to make them worse and worse: and riches, to
corrupt them and others: authority, to do violence: health does make them
lusty to do mischief: so the evils which men term evils, are means to the
good to make them better: as poverty serves to bridle lust: baseness to
humble them: encumbrances to drive them to God, and to teach them to succor
others. But why are these goods common? Surely because God cannot be but good,
insomuch as he makes his rain to fall, and his Sun to shine up all. A
father that keeps his heritage for his son, will not apparel him like a
slave, in his servants liueries. Princes make their pay common to al soldiers,
but the garland is given to the valiantest. Kings cast their largess at all
adventure among the people, but their honors and dignities, they bestow on them
whom they do specially favor. So God for his honor will not reward the travels
of his servants with trifles. God being liberal and just, will reward thee
according to his honor, and not according to the baseness of thy heart, and
that for two causes. First, because he regards not thy works, but his own
in thee. Secondly, because the reward is not given according to thy desert, but
according to the worthiness of him that bestows it. A notable speech of
Alexander.
Alexander the great told a seruitour in his wars, that a hundredth crowns
were enough for him to receive, but not for the Emperor to give. Corn, and
food, and raiment, and money, etc. are things common to all, not peculiar to
his children: therefore beg not these as the best gifts. But what are the
goods then that good men have in this life? What be the goods of good men.
Many and excellent: first, they have grace to make their life allowable to God
that knows them. Secondly, in him they repose themselves. Thirdly, they have
peace in their consciences: for if God increase not their present estate, they
abate their desires. Their foes commend their virtues: all the world bemoneth
their wants* those which have the distributing of goods and honors, are blamed
for not considering them. Lastly, the very asking of that question, be thou a
Christian, or a Heathen? is unto them an inestimable treasure.

If God would not give me more, why have I forgone those which I had? Surely
because he saw, that if he had not taken them from thee, they would have taken
thee from him. We pluck knives from children when they cry to have them: we
suffer the Physician to take from us our meats which we love, and to abridge us
of our pleasures, yea and our of blood too; because he has seen our water, or
felt our pulse. And shall not God that made us, and governs us, and knows
best our state, and what is good for us, have that honor and liberty over us
which Physicians have?

Another objection is this: 2. Object.
if it be true that the wicked shall be destroyed speedily, suddenly, and
without recovery: how is it true that Solomon says in his book of the
Preacher. Eccles. 7.17
Chap. 7.17. I have seen a just man perish in his righteousness, and a wicked
man continue long in his malice. And to this agrees in show the complaint of
the Prophet: Esa. 57.1.
The righteous perishes, and noman regards it in heart, and merciful men
are taken away. It should seem that this plague, threatened against the wicked,
takes place upon the godly, for they perish and are taken away in their
righteousness. The answer to this is not hard, Answer.
for death is but the common passage, and what skils it whether we pass it by
sea or by land, by our own corruption, or by the corruptnes of commonweals?
And if God bring his children to that point for one fault, and the judge for
another, what injustice is in God? Oh what a thing were it, if we could see
what fruit the Lord draws out of their death. The child that sees his
father tread grapes, blames him for it, thinking they should be kept, not
conceiving to what end the treading serves: but the father who knows the
goodness of them better then the child, considers that within two months
they would wither and dry away: and therefore to preserve the virtue of them,
treads them: when the child comes to discretion, he museth at his own
folly, and yet as then he thought himself wiser then his father. After the same
manner does the child when he sees his father make conserues of Roses, and
other flowers: he is ready to weep, and is sorry to see them marred, because he
would make nose-gayes of them, which he himself would cast away by the next
morrow. So God that made good men that which they be, he knows when it is
time to gather them, that they rot not on the tree, and how long they may be
preserved in their kind. He will take somefresh and green, to preserve them
all the year long, he will make conserues of their flowers, and wine of their
grapes, to keep a long time after. He will make their savor, their sweet
sent, their strength, that is, their godliness, vprightnes and virtue, to live
after them, which otherwise would be buried. Take for example, the Apostles and
Martyrs: do thou not yet eue^ drink of their liqour? does not their constant
confession make thee to confess Christ? does not their death help thee to
endless life? Could Ignatius and Polycarpus have lived above five or six
years more then they did? and yet, what part of all their ages has lasted so
long, or done so much good, as the last half hour wherein they died?
Therefore let us say, we are but babes, and forasmuch as we perceive the
wisdom of our father to be so great, and our own ignorance so gross: let us
rather confess our weaknesses in all cases, then presume to doubt of his
justice or providence in any thing. But the mischief is this, that whereas we
will not judge of a song by one note, nor of an Oration by one full sentence:
we will presume to judge of the harmony, and orderly direction of the world by
one action therein. And if God seem to hold his peace, and to suffer men to
play their parts, ought we not to have so good opinion of his wisdom, as to
think that he can tell when it is time to pay home? And though he let the
wicked play their part on the stage, and the godly to lie in prison, he can
also provide to end the braueries of the one with just punishment, and the
woeful complaints of the other with joyful triumphs. The world is a kind of
stage play, The world like a stage play.
conveyed to a certain end, by a most excellent maker: whereof we cannot judge
by one act that we see played, but we must tarry till all the parts be played,
which perhaps will not be while we live, nor in many years after. When we read
that Joseph was sold into Egypt, we cannot be angry enough with his brethren:
when he is cast into the dungeon for chastity, thou could find in thy heart
to blame not only Pharao, but even God himself: but when thou see him taken
out of prison to read the Kings dreams, and after as a King in Egypt, a
succor to his father in his old age, and the raiser up again of his whole
house at their need, then thou perswadest thy self that he which made him to
reign in Egypt, did suffer him to be sold int Egypt, and that the discord
which offended thee, and the harmony which delights thee again, proceed
both from one selfsame musition, that is, from one most wise and just God.

Another objection is this. 3. Object.
The wicked fare well at will: therefore they are not plagued and destroyed,
Answer.
as has been said they are. But we are deceived, for rather they have all
misery: for all the good things which we term good, in the hands of the
wicked do turn to evil. Their own sins do work them more mischief, then all
the evils which thou bewailest in good men: for, there is not a greater
mischief then to be wicked, and all their commodities have as little force
against their sin, as velvet pantofles against the gout, or as Diademes
against the headache, or as purple robes against the chollick. What fear do
they sustain in following their wickedness? and so much the more dangerous,
because the most shameless of them all, dares not bewray his disease to the
Physician.

We would change (so foolish are we) our state with a poor caitiue that
plays the King on a stage, with a long gown of cloth of gold, which in the
end he must return home again to the Vpholster, and pay well for the hire of
it, and in the mean time, consider not what rags, scabs, vermin, itch and
scurfe lies hidden underneath it. We would rather go naked then to be clothed:
but what skils it whether a man be tormented in velvet, or in canuas, in gold,
or in iron? be we rich or poor, as soon as we have given over our selves to
vice, we are become slaves unto it: and if it be so, what skils it who we be,
if we be not our own men?

The last objection is, 4. Object.
that the wicked go long unpunished: to which the answer is double. Answer.
First, they may live yet to punish us, who have been scourged by them
already, and yet are never the better. Secondly, it may be a greater
punishment to them, to live after they have done amiss, then to have died in
the deed doing: for now they see: first, that their practices have not
success according to their wills: secondly, that all the mischief they have
wrought is in vain: thirdly, that they have provoked God against them, and the
whole world, to no purpose: fourthly, that they have gotten thereby nothing but
shame, and torment of mind. If God then by his seeming to be slow, do both
amend thee (says Plessy) and punish them, and both at once, then is ^he Lord
still just in his threatenings, as he is in all his works. Examples we have
hereof sufficient in Nero, in Herod, in Cain, in Iezabel, in Jews the 9. a
French King: all which lived after their cruel murders, and massacres, and
were severely punished, though none of those whose innocent blood was spilled
by them, were alive to see the^ punished. The reason is this, God punishes not
as worldly Judges do, to content them that have suffered wrong, or to satisfy
thy revenging mind, or to get himself the name of a good Judge, but because he
hates the evil, which he intends to correct, and will also draw good out of
it. If he should strike at our appointment, then should he be but our
executioner, and we should be the Judges: but God executes his own
judgments, and not ours.

The uses of the former doctrine.
These objections being thus answered, let us now see what good use we may make
of all the former doctrine. We learn from hence: first, David teach us to make
of the wicked man's prosperity: Psalm. 37.1.2.
Fret not thy self because of the wicked men, neither be envious for the evil
doers: for they shall soon be cut down like grass, and wither as the green
herb. Psa. 27.1.2. And the truth of this point is further confirmed by our
Savior Christ, Mat. 11.23.
who says* that Capernau^ was lifted up to heaven, but Secondly, seeing that
the life of the wicked (in regard of their wickedness) is so base and miserable,
and their end so wretched and fearful, let us not desire to live their life,
in regard of their pleasure, but let us chose rather to suffer affliction with
the godly, for righteousness sake: as Moses did, assuring our selves, that as
God does lift the wicked up, to cast them down, and to make them have the sorer
fall: so does the Lord cast his children down, to lift them up again. This
point is confirmed by our Savior Christ, in Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that
mourn now, for they shall be comforted: and this vfe are we taught to make of
the wicked man's end. Psalm. 37.21.22. where David confesses that before he knew
the end of the wicked (which he learned in the house of God) his heart was
vexed at their prosperity, but when he saw whereunto they were going, and what
was their end then he says, that he (in desiring their estate) showed
himself, both foolish, ignorant, and beastly before the Lord. Thirdly, seeing
as these outward Ioh. 9.3.
but for the glory of God. And this use are we taught in Mat. 7.1. Judge not,
lest ye be judged: that is, judge not rashly. And blessed is he (says the
Psalmist) that considers wisely of the poor and needy: Psalm. 41.1.4.
the Lord shall deliver him in time of his distress. Fourthly, seeing Corah,
etc. Number. 16.26. Number. 16.26
nor stand and gaze, or wonder at them (as the manner is,) but learn by their
examples to avoid their ways, Luke 13.3.5.
least we (not repenting) do also perish. Fifthly and lastly seeing as this
fearful vengeance comes upon the wicked in this life for sin: whenever we
feel the hand of God upon us, let us examine our selves for our sins which are
the cause thereof, and not do as the wicked, who never look into that cause,
but into secondarie and outward causes, like the dog who biteth the stone, but
looks not unto the hand that cast it. And as we daily fall, so let us pray
daily and hourly, for the renewing grace of Gods Spirit, that we may rise
again, and recover our selves by true repentance, and lively faith in Jesus
Christ: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all glory and praise
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
PAge 5. line 35. for comes, read commends. p. 10. l. 37. monet, r. mouet.
p. 11. l. 17 two, r. too. p. 14. l. 5. loathsome, r. toothsome. p. 36. l 33.
gave, r. give. p. 49. l. 1. censurers, r. censures, p. 55. l. 10. ias, r. iah.
l. 18. r. Pashur. l. 19 r. Naomi. p. 68. l. 19. r. this is not well p. 89. l.
36. r. buried. p. 92. l. 30 r sinners. p. 94. l. 1. r. attain. p, 96. l. 11.
blot out, Mo marvel though. p. 98. l. 19. r. God will be more merciful. p.
154 l. 16. swimming, r. ^inning. p. 156 l. 27. we, r. were p. 163. l. 15. not,
r. but. p. 170. l. 24. r. do show us how to reform etc. p. 191 l. 32. cannot,
r. can. p. 206. l. 36. is, r. in. p. 225. l. 1, r. we have heard to what ends
etc. Ibid. l. 7. blot out, at all. p. 233. l. 3. Apostle, r Prophet. p. 243. l.
32. r. Nehustan. p. 248. l. 32. out. r. up. p. 250. l. 40. r. upon. p. 253. l.
13. r. into. l. 33. r. so to be clothed.


