CONCLVSIONS of peace, between God and man: Containing comfortable meditations
for the children of God. By W. Burton.

LONDON. Printed for John Hardy, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Tigers head. 1594.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir Richard Martin, Knight, now the second time L.
Mayor of the honorable City of London, and master of her majesty's Mint. T.
C. All increase of honor in this life, and in the world to come, everlasting
happiness.
RIght Honorable, having heretofore received at your honors hands many
favors, altogether undeserved of my part, I have bin studious along time how
to show some part of my thankful mind for the same. But no occasion was
offered me til now that this book coming to my hands to be printed without
any dedication, and the author dwelling far off, I was bold (without his
consent) to present it to your good lordship, as well to show my duty and
thankeful heart toward you, as also knowing what favor your honor has
always borne to such men and their works. The Author is well known, and the
treatise is sweet and comfortable, as your lordship shall find, if your great
affairs will allow you time to peruse it. It rests that I humbly crave
pardon for my boldness, which I hope I shall the easilier obtain, if mine
intent herein be rightly considered. Which is only to testify that I am not
unmindful, nor unthankful in heart, for any benefit received. Humbly
beseeching your lordship to accept it.

Your Honors most hearty and humble affectionat to command, Tobie Cook.

Prou. 7. 1. 2. My son keep my words, and hide my commandments with thee.
Keep my commandments and thou shall live.
THis text contains an exhortation to the faithful and diligent keeping of
Gods commandementes, with a promise of life annexed thereunto. And the doctrine
that is to be gathered from the same, arises partly from the manner of speaking
that is there used, and partly from the exhortation. The manner of speaking is
to be considered in the two first words, My son.

Wherein is to be observed, that whosoever is the party that speaks, he
speaks not like an Emperor nor like a king, nor like a Judge, nor like a
master, of his absolute power, I will and command, etc. But he persuadeth like
a father, most lovingly and tenderly. He does not say, My slave, nor my
ennemy, nor my servant, nor my subject, nor my friend, nor my brother, which
is much: but he says, My son, which is more; a name of love, and a title of
the greatest love that can be.

The love of a Prince is great, the love of a friend is great, the love of a
brother is great, the love of husbands and wives is great, but the love of
father and mother to their children, is like the love of Jonathan to David: It
is wonderful passing 2. Sam. 1. 26
the love of Princes, the love of brethren, the love of neighbors, the love of
husbands and wives, and and passing the love of women and all loves. For
(says Esaias) can a woman forget her child? As if he should say, Esa. 49. 15.
it is impossible. Therefore he that here speaks in the person of a Father,
and says, My son, persuades by all loves, and shows that whatsoever he
counsels or reprooueth, it is not of malice, or envy to hurt us, but of
singular love and care to do us good.

We are further to consider of two principal circumstances: one is of the
person that spoke these words: the other is of the party to whom they were
spoken. Now the question is not of his fatherly affection unto his children:
for of that we are persuaded: nor of his fatherly authority over his children,
for that is granted, nor of his childrens duty toward him, for that is
acknowledged: but now the question of his person, and who it is, that here
says, My son, that he might be reverenced: and who they are to whom this
title of Sons does belong that they might not neglect to do their duty.

If thou knew (says the Lord Jesus to the woman of Samaria) who it is that
says unto thee give me drink, thou would have asked of him, Ioh. 4. 10.
and he would have given thee water of life. So if we knew who it is that
here says, My son, and gives counsel like a father in matters of this
life, we would ask of him, and he would give us counsel to eternal life.

Let us know then who it is that says, My son, whose voice is it? what, is
it the voice of God or of man? is it from heaven or from earth, or from whence
is it? For the better finding out of this point we are to consider that as
these names of Father and Son be often used in this book of Proverbs, so
they are not always the words of one, and the self same party. They are
sometimes to be understood of God and of his Church: as in the 1. chapter, verse
8.

They are sometimes to be understood of Solomon and the members of Gods Church,
as chap. 4. ver. 1. They are sometime to be understood only of David the father
of Solomon 1 Chro. 28. 9
the son of David, as in cha. 4. verse 3. 4. Sometime they are the words of
Bethsheba, Salomons mother unto Solomon her son, as in chap. 30. ver. 1. But
most commonly they are the words of God and Solomon together, and are spoken
to the members of the Church in general, and so they are to be understood,
when there is no manifest difference, as there is in the places before
mentioned.

In this exhortation, these words My son, are to be taken as the words of God
the common father of all his creatures, but especially of his Church in
general, and they are also the words of Solomon a notable instrument in the
Church of God, My son, says God, and my son says Solomon: for this is Gods
word, though Salomons writing, because Solomon writes as the holy Ghost
inditeth, My son, says God, by the ministry of Solomon, naming no body,
because he speaks to every one that will follow his counsel, of what nation,
or of what country, or of what language, or of what years, of what estate and
conditition soever he be, My son, says Solomon in the person of God, naming
no body, yet speaking to all that shall either hear or read his writings, that
at the very entrance, (the doors being of love) they may be in love with the
whole frame of his counsel, and have a delight to dwell therein. My son,
says God, by the ministry of Solomon, that we might perceive what love he
bears to us, and know what duty we bear to him: My son says Solomon in
the person of God, to teach all teachers with what affection to teach the Lords
people, and to show all hearers what account they must make of their teachers.
My son, says God, to teach us that all his care is to do us good; and if we
follow his counsel, it is the better for our selves, he is never the better
for it: and therefore that all our care and study must be to advance him, and
to direct all our actions to his glory, as he has directed his glory to our
good, So that these words My son, are to be considered after a double manner
of speaking; First as spoken by God the first author of them, next as
proceeding from Solomon the minister of God, and so much briefly for the
persons by whom they were spoken.

The persons which are called sons.
NOw we are to consider of the persons that are called by the title of sons,
and because God is first in order, we will first see of whom he speaks, in
this place, when he says, My son, for many be called the sons of God, in
the scripture, and they are of three sorts, some are by nature the sons of God,
some are by adoption the sons of God, and some for their exellencie, are
called the children of God. By nature, none is the son of God, but Jesus
Christ only, who was begotten from all eternity, of his fathers Ioh. 1. 14.
Pa. 2. 7. Pro. 8, 25.
nature, and substance. By adoption all the faithful are his children, whom
God has elected, before all worlds, that he might call them in his time
appointed by the lively preaching of the Gospel, and the effectual working of
his spirit in their hearts, unto the blessed and certain hope of eternal
glory, in the kingdom of heaven, being first justified by the righteousness
of the Lord Jesus christ, the natural son of God. These are called sons by
adoption, or made sons, which before were no sons at all. As if a king
should take in a beggar, nay a traitor and make him his heir, even so did God
with us, and such favor did he freely show to so many of the sons of Adam,
as it pleased him to adopte, and to make his children, wherein appeared the
wonderful love of God to us ward, of which S. John speaks, by way of
administration, Behold, (says he) what love the father has given to us, that
we 1. Ioh. 3, 1.
should be called the sons of God, as if it were to be wondered at, and not to
be expressed.

The Angels are called the children of God. Job 1. 6. and Job 2. chap. and 1
verse. When the children of God stood before the Lord, Satan came also and
stood amongst them. etc. And they are so called, partly for their excellent
state and condition, but principally, for their willingness and readiness, to
do the will of God.

Sometime also the Lord is called our father, in respect of our creation only,
as in Mat. 2. 10. Have we not all Mal. 2. 10.
one father? has not one God made us? and in Esa. 64. 8. But now thou O Lord
Esa. 64. 8.
art our father, we are the clay, thou art our potter, and we are the work of
thy hands. So Adam is called the son of God by immediate creation, in the 3
of S. Luke. the last verse. In this respect God is a common father not Luke 3.
last.
only to all his creatures in general, but to the very reprobate also, for he
created them also, and he made them good says Solomon, but they found out many
inventions, but we shall never find that God vouchsafed to call any reprobat in
the scripture, by the name of his son. Non tam praestanti reprobos dignatur
honor. He did never honor them with so excellent a title. Many are so called
and so accoumpted amongst men, which do judge only by the outward
appearance, but when they come before the Lord, whose ways are not our ways,
and whose thoughts Esa. 55. 8.
are not our thoughts, the case is altered. If any shall object and say that
there is never a father without a child, and that they be relatiues, and
therefore seeing as God is called a father of the reprobate, in respect of
creation, the reprobate may at the least be called the sons of God, though
they be not the sons of God, as the elect are: they are to know, that some
are called fathers in the scriptures, Metaphorically, which were but the first
inuenters of things, and in that respect they are called fathers, as Iaball
the son of Adah, the wife of Lamech is called Genesis 4. 20.
the father of such as dwell in tents, for he was the first inuenter of tents.
And Iuball his brother is called in 21
the next verse, the father of such as play upon the Harp, and upon Organes or
pipes: shall we therefore call the tents Iabals children, or must the organs
and pipes be called the sons of Iuball.

So God is called the father of the reprobate, because he first created them,
but yet they can no more be called the children of God, than the tents might
be called the children of Iabal, or the harps and organs the children of his
brother Iubal.

But when the scriptures do speak of God, as he is a father not only by
creation, but also by adoption, then is the title of sons also therewithal
bestowed upon those whom he has created, because he has also adopted them to
be hairs of his kingdom through Christ, but it is limited only to the elect,
which do receive him by faith, as in John 1. 12. As many as received him, to
the^ he gave prerogative, to be called the sons of God.

So does the Apostle Paul also restrain the title of Gods children only to
the godly. As many as are led by the spirit of God (says he) are the sons
of God. And because the reprobate Romans 8. 14.
and all hypocrites will boast of the spirit, as well as the children of God,
as Zidkijah said he had 1. Kin. 22. 24.
the spirit of God as well as Michaiah, therefore the scripture has put a
difference between the gifts of the spirit, and the spirit of
sanctification: for Saul may have the spirit of 1. Sam. 11. 6.
God, that is, some gifts and graces of Gods spirit, as knowledge, judgment,
courage, strength, policy, wisdom, wealth, etc. as the wicked and
thereprobate may have, to their condemnation, but the spirit of sanctification
or holiness, which works newness of life, and changes both the affections
within, and all the actions without, that is proper only to the elect children
of God indeed.

And least any should deceive themselves, The Lord Jesus has laid down an
everlasting rule; By their fruits you shall know them. And Math. 7. 16.
the fruits of the spirit (says S. Paul) are these, Love, Joy, Peace,
Longsuffring, Gal. 5. 22. 23. 24.
Patience, Goodness, Gentleness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, etc. Against
which there is no law that is to condemn them: for they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and Iustes. But there is a kind love,
and joy, and peace, and suffering, etc. amongst the children of darkness,
because Satan in his members can counterfeit whatsoever God does command, and
there is amongst the members of the Church malignant in show, whatsoever the
church of God militant have in truth, when Satan does change himself into
the likeness of an angel of light, it is a hard thing to discern the one from
the other: therefore has the Lord joined his word and his spirit together, by
which as by a true tuchstone, all false love is discerned from true love: and
all false peace and false joy, is tried from true peace and true joy, and so of
the rest: and therefore is the word called the sword of the spirit, because it
does not try Ephesians. 6. 17.
nothing, nor work any thing ordinarily but by the word of God. And last of
al, least Satan should abuse and delude the children of God, with the manifold
corruptions, imperfections, and rebellious thoughts of their hearts, and make
them conclude thereupon, that they have not the spirit of God. They are to know
that the spirit of God in the elect is not always felt in themselves, nor
perceived in them by others in a like measure, but it is in them as the sun,
which sometime shines and sends forth her light, dispersing the clouds, and
sometimes again is hidden under the clouds. It is in them as the ebbing and
flowing of the sea. It is in them as the waxing and waning of the Moon. It is
in them as the fire when it is kindled, and when it is raked up in the ashes.
And it is within them, as the sap of the tree is in Winter and Summer, sometime
in all the branches, and sometime gone to the root.

And as the elect are like Trees planted by the waters side, which do bring
forth fruit in due season: Psa. 1. 3.
so the same trees have both a summering and a wintering: a spring time, and a
fall of the leaf: when winter come they seem as though they were dead, but in
summer they shall wax fresh and green again. The fruits of the spirit in
the elect children of God, are likewise like the fruit of the tree, which is
first in the sap only, then it comes into buds, and then into blossoms:
whereof some are smitten with blasting, some are nipped with frost and cold,
and some are eaten with worms; but if they escape al these, then from blossoms
they come to be appls: and at the first they are green and lovely, and many do
lust to eat of them, but they are still hard and harshe, but in time they come
to their full growth. And when they are ripe, then are they either shaken down
with the wind, and swine devour them, or beaten down with cudgels, and
thieves do steal them; or if they be fairly gathered, yet are they plucked
from the tree that has borne them, then are they bought and sold: whereof some
perish, and are cast out of doors: the fairest and the sweetest, is brought
either to fire to be roasted, or to the board to be pared and cut in pieces, and
so to be eaten: then the tree is naked and seems to be dead, but the next
spring does fetch all again. So are the fruits of the spirit in the adopted
children of God, first in the sap of faith only which is hidden in the heart:
then it comes into good thoughts, then into good words, then into good
works by degrees: but many times they are nipped and smitten in the bud or in
the blossom: that is either in thoughts, or words, that they never come into
works. The works likewise of the godly are at the first fair and fresh, but
yet hard and harsh: and when they are come to any perfection, they are either
windshaken and devoured by beasts, or smitten with persecution: then are they
bought and sold, and every man handles them as they list. In a word, the
fairest, the pleasantest, and the best of our works must be pared and picked
for dainty mouths and queasie stomachs, and in the end consumed of all, and
then are our labors come to their perfection, wherher they be of Church or
commonwealth, and then do many of Gods children think themselves naked and
dead, but there is no cause why they should: for as all that fruit when it is
so and so handled, do prove that sap is in the tree; so all the fruits of
the elect, whether they perishin the bud, or in the blossom, or in the
ripening, or howsoever they be handled: yet they prove that the sap of Gods
spirit is in them, and the next spring of Gods grace will fetch all again.
But then they doubt of themselves because perhaps they have not so much fruit
as they had, or so much as others have: but there is no cause why they should
doubt of themselves: for though they have not so much as they had, yet it is as
good, and sound as that which they had, it is not counterfeit and fained, but
it is in truth that which it seems to be, and so long they may care, but
they need not to fear the want of Gods spirit in them: for it is not so
material, how much faith, or how much zeal, or how much love, or how much
patience a man has; but how good faith, how good zeal, how good love, and
how good patience a man has: whether the faith, love, zeal, etc. be true, or
counterfeit, from the heart, or in hypocrisy, must be the question. That as
men say of fruit, this is but little, but it is good; here be not many of
them, but those that are of them are very dainty, they are right of such and
such a kind. So the children of God may say, My faith is but little and weak,
my love is not so much as I would it were: my zeal is but little, and my
patience is but small: but it is true faith, and true love, and true zeal, and
true patience, even from the very heart root without dissembling, O Lord
increase it and strengthen it. And thus much for the difference between the
children of God by creation only, and the children of God both by creation and
adoption. And thus much of the spirit of God, both in the one and in the other.

Now let us come to the matter in hand. We have heard who be called the sons
of God. how this title is given to the Lord Jesus, how to Angels, and how to
men has been also declared, but to imagine that in this place it were spoken
to the Lord Jesus, were no less than blasphemy, because he was ever without
sin, and to enquire, whether it were spoken to the Angels or no, were vain
curiosity.

Now if it be man to whom the Lord says, My son, as it is indeed, O Lord what
is man, that thou do speak so kindly to him? or the son of man that thou
do so regard him. Again, if it be spoken to man, how art thou O Man,
gotten into such favor with God, which sometimes thou had lost? How happy
and honorable are those men, which are the sons of God. But is it spoken to
me in deed? what, to sinful and miserable man? and are the sons of Adam
among the sons of God, as Saul was amongst the prophets, is the prodigal son
come home again? is it for him that such costly robes are brought forth? and
is it he that his father went out to meet, and so lovingly embraced? is this
he whom he saluted with such sweet kisses, and tears of joy? was it for him,
that the fat calfe was killed? and is all this feasting and rejoicing for his
return, as though he had never offended? surely so it should seem. But what
shall man now give unto God, for so great love and favor, or how shall we
show our selves thankful, for such kindness undeserved? Surely this is the
Lords doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes, but that our profit may
increase to the further instruction of our iudgmente, and comfort of our faith,
we will by the grace of God, set down certain points, to consider of, and by
this text to be examined. First we will consider how or by what means we are
come into this favor with God, and how we are come by the knowledge thereof.
Secondly we will see the exellencie of the children of God above other men.
Thirdly we will enquire what duty the children-of God do owe unto God their
heavenly father, whereby they may show themselves thankful for such favor
restored. Fourthly we will consider, why the Lord both here and else where uses
these words, My son, Last of all we will see what may be gathered from them
as they be the words of Solomon.

How we are made the sons of God.
NOw touching the First point, if we be the sons of God, then God is our
father, the church of god is our mother, the members of the church be our
brethren, and the kingdom of heaven is our inheritance. This purchase the
father has bestowed upon us, the son has bought it for us, and the holy
ghost has sealed unto us. Of this covenant God is the author, the son of God
is the purchaser, and the spirit of God is the certifier. It is freely
granted, it is fully discharged, it is certainly assured, and shall be for
ever possessed. This prerogative as it is great, so the first cause thereof was
the infinite love of God, in his son Jesus Christ. It is the free gift of the
father, so says the son, Fear not little flock, it is your fathers
pleasure to give you a kingdom. It is the free gift Luke 12. 32.
of the son, so says the Lord Jesus, My sheep hear my voice and follow me,
John 10 27. 28.
and I give unto them eternal life. It is also the gift of the Holy Ghost, so
says the prophet David, Lord let thy good spirit lead me into the land of
righteousness, Psa. 143. 10.
and therefore it is no way merited or purchased by our selves while we live,
nor gotten by any friends for us, when we are dead, (as Papists teach) for
nothing can be more contrary than these, To have it of our selves, and to be
freely given of God.

The evidence or assurance which we have to show for this privilege, is Gods
promise, which is surely ratified in heaven, by the eternal decree of the holy
Trinity, as it were, by an everlasting Act of Parliament, never to be repealed,
whereunto the father, the word, and the spirit, do bear sufficient witness,
If therefore we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater.
The records of this charter and promise, are left among us here upon earth, in
the written word of God, contained in the books of the old and new testament,
whereupon all the faithful must rely, as upon their fathers last will and
testament, and these we are al commanded to search because they bear witness
of the love of God in Christ to our eternal salvation. Therefore if any forsake
this foundation, to build upon reuellations and dreams, (as Anabaptists do)
or upon men's traditions (as the Papists do) or upon the persuasions of their
own hearts (as Atheists do) what do they else but build upon the sands? The
proclaimers and publishers of high prerogative, are pastors and teachers Ephesians.
4. 11. 12
which are appointed to be ministers of the Gospel, truly sent of God, and
lawfully called of Gods church, Ier. 23, 32.
whose badges are knowledge and holiness, whose feet are beawtifull, because
they bring the glad tidings Esai. 52.
of peace.

The seals of this charter are either outward or inward. The outward seals
are the Saeraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, duly administered
according unto Christ's holy institution. The inward seals are two, one is the
spirit Romans 8. 16. Esa. 4. 30.
of adoption, which bears witness to our spirits that we are the sons of
God, and seals up our hearts to the day of redemption. The other is a good
conscience in all things, desiring to live honestly, Heb. 13. 1^.
whereby we know that the spirit of God is in us.

The hand by which we receive it is faith, the closet wherein we keep it, is the
heart, and till the soul may fully possess it, she must lie at the anchor of
hope, and so much for the first point.

The excellency, pleasures, and beauty of Gods Children.
NOw let us take a little view of the commodities and benefits which belong
unto this charter, and privilege of being the sons of God, and then shall
we see the excellency and dignity of Gods children, above all other which be
not the children of God. Their excellent estate and condition does partly
appear in the very names and titles that be given them in the word of God,
where they be called, the citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, a royal
priesthood, a kingly generation, the beloved of God, the spowse of the lamb
Christ, the signet of the Lords right hand, the apple of his eye, the anointed
of God, the friends of God, the brethrenand sisters of the Lord Jesus, his
love, his dove, and his undefiled, the body of Christ, the Lords vineyard,
his holy ones, the saints of God, the servants of the most high: and that
which passes all the rest, the sons and daughters of God. Now (as David said
when he should have married Saules daughter) Seems it to you a light thing to
be a kings son, seeing that I am a poor man, and of small reputation? So
seems it to any, 1. Sam. 18. 23
a light thing to be sons and daughters of God the king of all kings, seeing
we are sinful men, and of no reputation, but deserved rather eternal
confusion.

It is a great matter (as it seems by David's words) to be a kings son, but
he that is son and heir to a 1000. kingdoms, or 1000. worlds, if it were
possible, cannot compare with the sons of God, if they were as naked as ever
Job was, or as poor as ever was Lazarus. The sons of Princes are in great
account with men, but the children of God are in account with God and man. The
children of princes are attended upon by noble men, and guarded with strong men,
yet both but me^ whose breath is in their nostrels, and their hands cannot
accomplish the devise of their heart. The children of God are attended upon by
God himself, whose eye is always over the righteous, and they are guarded by
the angels of God, who for their swiftness are said to have wings, for their
readiness, they are said to stand in the presence of God, and Psalm. 34 15.
for their strength incomparable, or else ask Senacharibs host. ^. Kin. 19. 35


The pleasures of the sons of men are such as the world does afford, carnal
security, worldly prosperity, fleshly delights, beastly sensuality, with
pride and ease, fullness of bread, and such like; the pleasures of the children
of God is such as the world can neither give nor take, as the louc of
righteousness, delight in the law of God, patience in affliction, love Psa. 16.
of the saints which excel in virtue, and such like.

The riches and treasures of the sons of men are gold and silver, houses and
lands, lordships and manners, rents and revenues, and such like, which
thieves may steal, or mothes may eat, or rust may fret, or fire may consume,
or water may ouerflowe, or time may wear, or death may end, but the riches and
treasures of Gods children are, the word of God, Gods favor, forgiveness of
sins, freedom from hell and the devil, liberty with the saints, the spirit
of contentation, peace of conscience, continual joy in the holy Ghost, and a
kingdom of glory in heaven, and such like, which no thief can steal, no rust
can fret, no fire can consume, no water can drown, no plague can infect, no
time ca^ wear, nor death can end. The ornaments which the children of men
have to commend them unto the world, they are of the world, and such as the
word does like of, as gold and silver, silks and veluets, jewels and precious
stones, sumptious and rich attire, beautiful faces, comely bodies, ripe
wits, smooth toonges, etc. These are also bestowed upon many of Gods
children, but they have better ornaments than these. Their lives are adorned
with holiness, and righteousness, with Job. 29. 14.
virtue and religion, their bodies are attyred with chastity and sobriety,
their frontlets are modesty and shamefastness, their robes are gravity and
wisdom, their bracelets are mercy and compassion, their words are the
words of grace, their lips are the doors of knowledge, and their hearts are
the storehouses of understanding.

Before the world in themselves they are black, as though they had lodged
among the pots, but before the lord, in Christ, they are white as the Lilly,
and comely, as the curtains Cant. 1. 4.
of Solomon. Behold (says Solomon) the beloved of Christ is fair, yea behold
she is fair indeed, her eyes are Cant 4. 1. 2, 3, ^, 5, 7.
like the doves, her hair is like the flock of goats, which look down from
the mountains of Gilead: her teeth are like a flock of sheep, in good order,
which go up from the washing, her lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and her
talk is comely, her temples are within her locks, as a piece of Pomegranate,
her neck is as the tower of David built for defense, her breasts are as two
young Roes which are twins, feeding amongst the lillies. She is all fair,
and there is no spot in her. The love of Christ has threescore queens Cant. 6.
7. 8.
and of damseles without number, to wait upon her, the dove of Christ is alone
and undefiled, she is the only daughter of her mother, and she is dear to her
that bare her, the daughters have seen, and coumpted her blessed, yea even the
queens and concubines have seen her, and they have praised her, she looks
forth as the morning fair as the moon, 9
pure as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners.

The rich Jewels of Gods children are sweet fruits of the holyghost, as love,
joy, peace, long suffering, meekness, patience, temperance, Gal. 5. 22.
etc. for the spirit of God is in them, which is a spirit of knowledge and
understanding, a spirit of council Esai. 11. 2.
and courage, and a spirit of the fear of the Lord, by which they are led as
by the hand of God, by it they stand as by the staff of God, by it they are
instructed as by the mouth of God, and by it they are corrected as by the rod
of God.

For want whereof the sons of men are most miserable, when they seem to be
most happy, their abundance seems nothing, their liberty is bondage, their
peace is war, their rest is sorrow, their health is sickness, and their life
is death. Their Prou. 14, 13
laughter is but from the teeth outward. Their feasts are like the feasts Dan.
5. 3, 4, 5.
of Balthazar, and their honor is like the honor of Haman. They fear any
Hest 7.
thing but not sin, they love any thing saving God, they joy in every thing,
so it be not goodness, like the swine which had rather wallow in the stinking
puddles of mire, than in a sweet bed of Roses. They sleep as a drunken man in
the top of ship mast, in a mighty storm, in the Prou. 23, 34.
midst of the sea, their head is fraught with abundance of care, and their
heart with continual fear. Their foes they hate, their friends they
suspect, they trust no body, they have no joy of any thing they possess, they
are a burden to themselves, their whole life is vanity, and vexation of
spirit; when sickness comes, they lie like blocks, they rore like Bulls, and
they die like beasts, and as they served the Devil all their life time, so
they look every hour when they shall go to hell. But the children of God are
most happy, when they seem to be most miserable. Their penny seems a pound,
their pound seems a 100 pound. In want they have abundance, in prison they
find liberty, in sickness they have health, in war peace, in labor rest, in
sorrow joy, in death life, and after death, they possess the kingdom of
heaven. The reason is this, where the spirit of God 2. Cor. 3. 17.
is, there is perfect liberty, where a good conscience is, there is a
continual feast, and where the light of Gods countenance does shine, there is
more joy of heart, than Psa. 47.
when corn, and wine, and oil, is increased. Can the children of the wedding
fast, while the Bride-grome is with Mar. 2. 19.
them? And can the children of God miscarrie, while God their father is by
them? The love of earthly fathers is transitory, and uncertain, like the love
of Saul to David, but whom the Lord loves, he loves for ever. Worldly fathers
do many John 13. 1.
times repent them of that which they bestow upon their children, but the gifts
and calling of the Lord are without repentance. But what? do I go about to set
forth the hid Romans 11. 29.
honors, the excellent state, and the great privileges, of the children of
God? which are given and bestowed, not according to the baseness of our hearts
and affections, but according to the worthiness and honor of his majesty that
adopteth? Verily all that can be said of them, is but a taste of them, and when
we have done, we are to begin again, if we had the time of another world,
and the tongues of men and Angels to help us.

For who can measure the sea with aspoone? who can put the clouds into a
bottell? who can gather the winds in his fist? who can number the sands by
the sea shore, or who can reach the depth of the sea with his arm? let him
that can do these things come forth, and describe the honors, the privileges,
the riches, the pleasures, and the felicities of Gods children, which are such
as no eye has seen, no ear has heard, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
no tongue can utter, and no heart is able to conceive.

What account we must make of Gods children.
But by this small taste we may learn in what account to have the children of
God, because God has the^ in so high account himself: for shall not we
honor those whom God does honor? shall any man hate those whom God does
love? or despise those in whom the Lord does take delight? do not we love them
which love our children, and do not our hearts and hands too, arise against
them which misuse our children? And shall not God who exceeds all fathers in
love, much more love those which love his children? and shall not his heart and
hand too arise in his heavy wrath and displeasure against such as misuse his
children, either in word or deed? If we love any man, we love his children
also, and for his sake we make much of them. If we loved him which begat
(says S. Ioh.) 1. Ioh. 5. 1.
we would also love him that is begotten: That is, if we love God, we will
love the children of God, be they never so poor and base in the eyes of the
world. Therefore if we love not Gods children, we love not God himself, and
if we love not God, we hate him, and if we hate him, how shall he love us?
Alas to let pass the murderers and persecuters of the saints of God in other
countries; how do we think to answer our rash judging and hasty condemning,
our unchristian mocking and taunting, our privy nipping, or bitter jesting,
our uncharitable censuring, and our hard dealing which we use one against
another? and yet all professing one God, one father, one savior, one religion,
and all looking for one kingdom. Are we not all the sons of God, and
children of the most high? How is then that one does hate and hunt another, as
though we were beasts, or rather fiends of hell?

When Joseph's brethren sold their Genesis 37.
brother Joseph, they thought never to see him more; much less did they look
to be told of their cruelty from his own mouth, but least of all did they
dream of any such matter when they should go to Egypt for vittaile so many
years after: but yet so it fell out contrary to all their expectations: And
when they heard him say, (which was a ruler in Egypt) I am Joseph your brother
whom Genesis 45. 3. 4.
you sold, they looked one upon another, as men amazed, but could not tell what
to say for themselves, such shame and confusion did cover their faces, such
fear and dread was on every side: and their own consciences within them were
a thousand witnesses against them. And is it not so with us, when we do evil
entreat our brethren, do we not think that we shall never see Joseph more? but
we are deceived: for Joseph our brother shall appear, not in Egypt, but in
heaven, to our shame and confusion, if we repent not.

Steuens persecuters shall see the Act. 6. 15.
face of Steven, as the face of an Angel. The rich glutton shall see Lazarus
Luke 16. 23.
in Abraham's bosom, when he himself shall lie languishing in hell torments.
The Jews which crucified the Lord of glory, shall one day look upon him, and
see him in glory whom they pierced. And Zach. 12. 10
they which now set Gods children at naught, because they are young men, or
poor men, or more zealous, or more religious, or are not so profane as
themselves, or will not run with them to the same excess of riot, shall one
day see them set upon Math. 19. 28
thrones to judge the nations, and them which hated them.

Then shall the righteous stand in great boldness, before the face of such as
have tormented him, and taken away his labors. When they see him, they shall be
vexed with horrible Wis. 5. 1. etc.
fear, and shall be amazed for his wonderful deliverance. Then they shall
change their minds, and sigh for grief of mind, and say within themselves,
This is he whom we sometime had in derision, and in a parable of reproach,
These are they whom we called fools and asses, puritan knaves, and beggarly
rascals, This is he whom we hated, whom we molested, whom we slandered. On the
other side also, This is he, (shall some say) whom we in the top of our own
conceit, condemned for a time-seruer, and a formalist. This is the Church whom
we schismatickes took for no church at all, but in the pride of our hearts,
and in the furious spirit of a preposterous zeal we counted no better than
Sodom, than Egypt, than Babylon, than Baalamites, and not worthy the name of a
church. Then shall many profane men say, We fools thought his life madness,
and his end without honor. How is he counted amongst the children of God, and
his portion among the saints? Full little do many think of this alteration, and
how soon it may come who knows? Last of all, whosoever looks for heaven
after this life, Psalm. 15. 4.
must while he live make much of such as fear God, says the prophet, he does
not say if they be rich, or if they be in authority, or if they may pleasure
thee, or if they be merry companions, etc. But if they fear God, we must make
much of them, whether they be poor or rich, whether they go in velvet or in
sackecloth, whatsoever they be by occupation or profession, or whatsoever we be
our selves: for the poor receive the gospel, says our savior, Luke 7. 22.
that is, the poor are rich, if they be godly. And so much briefly for the
excellency of Gods children.

The duty of Gods Children.
NOw let us see what God requires of his children, whereby they may in some
poor measure show themselves thankful to his Majesty, for this excellent
estate whereunto he has called them.

As their dignity is great, so their duty must needs be great, because much
is required, where much is Luke 12. 48.
bestowed. Therefore look how many titles, so many duties; how much honor,
so much obedience; and look how much the Lord has abased himself to advance
us, so much are we again bound to abase our selves, that we may advance his
glory, like Abraham, who the more familiarly the Lord did talk Genesis 18. 27.
with him, the more humbly he did cast down himself in the feeling and
acknowledging of his own unworthiness. But what does God require? or what
shall we do? If I be your father, says the Lord, where is my honor. Then
honor is required, and God looks to be honored of his children. Honor thy
father and thy mother, says the commandment, that is, hear them and regard
them, reverence and obey the^, fear them and love them, mantaine them and
their credit to the utmost, defend their persons, and their honest quarrels,
and take their part against all that rise up against them. If such honor be
due to our earthly parents, which are but instruments of our good under God,
what honor is due to our heavenly father in whom our Parents and we do live,
and move, and have our being. Act. 17. 28.


Every one will say that God is their father, and they are Gods children, God
forbid else they say, and yet many of them care not how little they hear his
word except they may hear when they list, or from whom they list: Some say,
urge doctrine, let application alone: some say, teach manners, but let doctrine
alone; and some care for neither of both: some say preach mercy, and not
judgment, we will hear the Gospel, but not the law, and some are indifferent
what they hear, so that it does not touch them. And most men are like
Ezechiels auditors, that do hear as the people use to do, but with their
mouths they jest it out, and as much reckoning do they make of the preacher
and his sermon, as they do of a fiddler and his song, and not so much: for they
will give him the hearing: but they mean to do still as they did, say God what
he will. What do these men say in effect but thus much? O Lord we are content to
be children, and thou shall be our father, so that we may have what we will,
and say what we will, and do what we will: like Naash 1. Sam. 11. 2.
the Ammonite, who would make a covenant with the men of Iabesh Gilead, upon
condition that he might put out all their right eyes, and bring all that shame
upon Israel.

But what says the Lord? If I be your father, where is mine honor? to show
that they cannot be the children of God, which would so dishonor him, and bring
such a shame upon him: therefore where is my honor says God, if you be my
children? In effect it is as much as if he should say, Why do you not listen
to my commandments and obey them. Why do you not receive my instructions, and
bear my reprehensions. But (as though I had no authority over you) will you
cast off the yoke of my government? as though you were wiser than I, will you
cast behind you all my counsels? As though I knew not what I did, will you
censure and control me and my ways? will you appoint me how I shall be
worshipped? must all be as you will? Hiccene honos qui debetur mihi? do my
children thus honor me? or am I a father unto such children? No says the
Lord, I am no father to such, except you will regard all my counsels, and obey
all my laws, and that continually at all Deuteronomy. 6.
times, and faithfully in all places, and Psalm. 119. 46.
constantly before all persons, and wisely according to all circumstances, you
do not yield me that honor which is due unto me: therefore strive unto this, or
else call me no more your father.

Now if we could remember always with what titles of honor the Lord has
honored us, it would make us ashamed to serve the world, or the devil, or our
selves in any thing. When some went about to persuade Nehemiah to fly, he
(because Neh. 6. 11.
he was a Magistrate) answered and said, Should such a man as I fly? So when
Gods children are tempted by the world, or by the devil, or by their own
hearts to commit any sin, or to go against their own consciences in any
thing: Let them say as Nehemiah said, Shall such a man as I yield? shall the
sons and daughters of the most high be so base minded, or so beastly
affected? No, be ye holy, for I am holy (says the Lord) to show that
unholiness does 1. Pe. 1. 15. 16
no more become the Children of God, than God himself: how does it then become
the professors of the Gospel to be blasphemers of their fathers sacred name,
or to be common swearers, or liers, or drunkards, or whormongers, or usurers,
or prophaners of the Lords Sabboths? Then say thus with thy self; Should I be
covetous, or malicious, or envious, or proud, or disdainful, as though my
father were such a one, and loved such things? Should I be familiar with
Athists, or Papists, or Belly-gods, or scoffers at religion, as though they were
my fathers friends, when they be his deadly foes? Should I carry two faces in
one hood? Should I join hands with the enemies of God against his servants
and ministers? Should I stop my ears when God speaks? shall I disobey, when
God commands? shall I venture when God forbids? shall I presume when God
threatens? and shall I distrust when God promises? Is this a life for the
servants of God, if not for his servants, much less for his children. If
the children of God do thus lead their lives, how do the devils children live?

A heathen man being asked, why he did wear such a long bushie beard, he
answered, that so often as he beheld it, he might commit nothinn unworthy the
gravity of the same, he would not be like a Tavern with a bushe at the door,
and no wine within. So now, if any man ask us, why God has given us the
titles of Gods children, and why we are called christians, the church of
Christ, the spouse of Christ, Citizens of heaven, and by such like names, of
love and honor, let us answer (as he did) that so often as we remember our
names and our titles, we might commit nothing unworthy the gravity and majesty
of the same. And that is one special reason why every man has his name given
him in his baptism, that so often as we are called by our names, we might call
to mind our baptism, and what we promised Note.
there? It should seem that the papists, and some Protestants too, which be
popishly affected, do not remember what titles they have, nor by what names
they are called, and therefore they must have puppits and images in their
churches and houses to put them in mind of their duty to God, so some men's
relion and holiness is all in their titles of Gods children, and in the names
of Christians, which only they retain, when all Christianity is banished,
and is not this a shame for the sons of God?

It is counted a shame for a citizen to go like a courtier, or for a courtier
to go like a carter, but if a man put on woman's apparel, or a woman put on
man's apparel, that is an abomination. And shall it not be Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
a greater shame, for the Citixens of heaven, to go after the fashion of the
Courtiers of hell? And if it be an abomination for a man to go in woman's
apparel, what an abomination is it before the Lord, for the children of
light, to put upon them the works of darkness, and to cover themselves with
iniquity as with a garment? and for the sons of God to go in that apparel
which does belong unto the children of the devil.

When the Lord of life was put to death, there was darkness upon the face of
the earth, the veil of the Temple rent, the graves opened, and the dead arose,
and went forth, with other things which were seen before, at the sight whereof
the very enemies of Christ which watched him, were afraid for that they had
done unto him, yea they were constrained to confess and say, Doubtless Mat. 27.
54.
this man was the son of God. So if we be dead with Christ our head, unto
sin, as he was dead for our sins, there will follow a wonderful alteration
in our lives. There will appear such zeal in professing the Gospel, such
pity in releeuing the poor, such patience in bearing the cross, such
faithfulness in performing of promises, such charity in judging our brethren,
such compassion in condemning malefactors, such love in reproouing of faults,
such mercy in forgiving offenses, such sincerity in worshipping of God, such
constancy in defending of the truth, such watching over all our ways, and
such wisdom in winning men to God, that our very ennemies which before did
mock us, hate us, and perseeute us, shall be constrained with shame enough to
say, These were no doubt the children of God, these were good men, these were
true professors indeed: for such fruits and effects do follow their
profession, as are not commonly seen in the lives of others.

Wherefore, to conclude this point. Let not the king go like a Kesar: Let not
the captain run away like a coward: Let not the tree Iud. 9, 9, 15.
loose his fatness, to do as the bramble would do. And let not a christian
live like Antichrist: Let not believers live like infidels, nor let not the
sons of God live like the sons of Satan: But, as in our houses, as in our
apparel, as in our feastinges, as in our furniture, in every thing else, we
strive to have matches, and all our things suitable. So likewise, let us strive
to have our titles, and our lives, our names and our qualities, our profession
and our practice suitable and answerable the one to the other. Finally, let
every one that calls God his father, in the 2. Tim. 2. 19
name of the Lord Jesus, depart from iniquity, least hereafter the Lord Jesus
bid him, depart with the works of iniquity. Here be two departinges. Mat. 25,
41. and 7, 23. Luke, 13, 27.
If we take the first now, we shall be free from the other hereafter: but if
we will not hear now of a departing from iniquity, which we ought, we shall
hereafter hear of a departing with our iniquity, which we would not. The
first is somewhat painful, but it is infinitely gainful. The second is most
fearful, and for ever intolerable. And thus much of the duty of Gods
children in regard of their titles.

Now let us see why the Lord both in this place, and so often in this book of
Proverbs, does use these words, My son, as also, why he does not say, My
sons, in the plural number, seeing he speaks to all the church in general;
but, My son, in the singular number, as though he spoke but to one alone, that
so we may make that use of the^, for which they were left unto the Church.

And least we should think this to be more than need, we are to know, that
as the holiest speaks nothing in vain, so does he not speak any word at
all adventure, but in singular wisdom, and in most excellent order has he
handled every Treatise, and placed every sentence, every word, and every
letter. To great purpose it is don, and ought accordingly to be considered:
for, when heaven and earth shall pass, not one jot or tittle of Matt. 5. 18.
Gods word shall pass: but every word of God endures for ever, and shall
remain as faithful witness in heaven, either with us, or against us in the
day of the Lord: Psalm. 119. 89
Then shall all Gods arguments, and reasons, and persuasions be called forth
to give evidence against us if they do nothing prevail now. Then shall every
word of admonition, and every word of threatening, and every word of love,
and kindness, and every title of honor and dignity come forth, and plead
hard against all such as have turned the deaf ear unto them: yea they shall
also cry loud for vengeance upon all those men which either in word or
deed, have offered them any disgrace, especially amongst their friends
upon the face of the earth like strangers of an other country, when they
catch their foreign ennemies within their own liberties, for every word of
GOD is sent from heaven by God, as Ambassadors of a far Country one after
another to deal for God. Therefore it shallbe wisdom for us to regard them
now and to give them good entertainment, while they remain amongst us, or else
when we travail into their country where they dwell (which will not be long)
and think to find relief at their hands, they will then serve us, as we served
them, and put us in mind of our discourteous dealing against them, when they
were amongst us, as Joseph told his bertheren of their cruelty, against Genesis
45. 3, 4,
him, when they went into Egipte, for succor, where he bare rule, and they had
nothing to do, then were they both afraid and ashamed, and so shall we be
too, if we do not repent.

Well go to then, we will not lightly pass over this preface, as we have don,
as if they were but words of course, for there is more in them then we think
there were, for in deed, there is more contained in these two words, My son,
than (some think) can be gathered out of two chapters, yea ij books. I will
not say the whole book of God, butl et us see, why the Lord uses to speak so
unto miserable men, and why he speaks in the singular number, as to one
alone, when that which he says concerns not only one man, but the whole
church of God, that we may also use them to that end, for which they were set
down.

Surely the Lord of mercy, (knowing where of we be made, and seeing Psa. 103.
14.
that we are but dust, full of weakness and corruption) frames himself in
his word to speak accordingly. And albeit, he sometime utters himself in
fearful words of might and majesty, to show his power and sovereignty over
us, yet sometime again he speaks as a tender father, alluring his children
with sweet words of comfort, and encouragement, for if mount Sinay should
still smoke, and burn with Exodus 20. 19*
fire, Israel would die for fear. If Moses should not cover his face Exodus
34. 30. 33, 35.
with a veil when he comes from talking with God, they were not able to
behold him, If the Lord of hosts should always send strong winds before him,
to rend the mountains, and to split the Rocks in pieces, Eliah himself durst
not come out of his cave, but if a still and a soft voice come after the wind,
the earthquake, and the fire, then will Eliah begin to peep out, and 1.
King. 19. 11 12, 13.
boldly to stand up, but he will not go beyond the entering of the cave, as bold
as he is, and his face must be covered with his mantle too.

Here therefore, and often in this book, the Lord of heaven and earth,
speaks no otherwise, unto his church than a father does to his child, My
son, (says he) yea he takes upon him the person of a father, and speaks
like a father most lovingly, kindly and alluringly, saying My son, partly to
persuade us to hear our duty, partly to encourage and confirm us in the
discharge of our duty, partly to comfort us, when we be in troble for doing
our duty, but principally to teach us, that whatsoever obedience we yield
unto God, we must perform it with a sonne-like affection, and whatsoever
favor God shows unto us, it comes from a fatherly compassion. And lastly
that al our obedience is accepted of him, and all his love, is bestowed upon
us, only because we are his children in Christ, but for no cause of
worthiness that is in our selves.

So that these words, My son, (proceeding from God to men) are words of
persuasion, they are words of encouragement, they are words of comfort, and
they are words of instruction: They are in a word like the tree of life (in
the Revelation) that bears twelve manner of fruit, every month; whose very
leaves Reu. 22. 2.
do serve to cure the Nations.

If any shall say, Can all this come out of these two words? I say to them, as
Philp said in another case to Nathaniel, Come and see. Ioh. 1. 46.


But are they not of power sufficient to persuade? Surely where the spirit of
grace is, they are sufficient: for, when nothing can prevail with a child,
the love and authority of his father shall prevail with him: especially, if
the thing be honest and lawful which is commanded. One word of his fathers
mouth shall persuade more than 1000. of another.

How these words, My son, do serve to persuade, and to move affection.
NOw our heavenly father commands us nothing but things honest and lawful,
neither can he command any thing else; for it is against his nature: but our
rebellious hearts naturally do go against the hearing of them: therefore we
had need of some orator to persuade us, and that might use some good
arguments and strong reasons to move our affections. The Lord does therefore
become that Orator himself, but all the fine eloquence, and all the strong
arguments by which he would move affection, are in these words, My son,
as if he should say, If thou will hear no body, O thou rebellious person, yet
thou will harken to the voice of thy father; if thou will not regard thy Father
which begat thee, and brought thee up, whom will thou regard? Thy father
speaks, hear him. I love thee with a fathers love, therefore hear, I have a
fathers authority over thee, therefore hear me: I have a fathers interest
in thee, therefore regard what I say: I have a fathers care over thee,
therefore give ear unto me. If thou be my son, hear me, and if thou love
me as I love thee, hear me. If thou have felt the power of my love, if thou
have tasted the sweetness of my love, If thou have known the greatness of my
love, which I have shed abundantly upon thee, when I gave Jesus Christ for
thee, I know thou will not stop thy ears, but wilt both regard me and obey
me, whatsouer reasons or persuasions thou have received, or may receive of
the world, or the devil, or thy own false heart, to the contrary. Now when
the Lord would speak all this in one word, he says, My son: Therefore
let us remember that GOD calls us sons, and we call him father: for we
say, Our father, etc. and it suffices. Nay more (says the Lord) Remember that
I call thee not only a son, but my son: and remember that thou have not
only a father, but that I am thy father, no man, nor Angel, nor any person
of mean estate, but the almighty God of heaven and earth, the King of kings,
and Lord of lords, even the King of glory, and the Lord of hosts, mighty in
battle, whose Psalm. 24. 8.
glory is infinite, and his Majesty is incomprehensible, who fills the
earth with the riches of his mercy, Psalm. 104. 24. Psalm. 8. 1. 3.
whose wisdom, power, and goodness does shine in every part of the world,
who tells the Stars, and calls them all by Psalm. 147. 4. 9
their names, whose dwelling is in the Heavens, and the Earth is his
footstool, at whose presence the Heavens and the Earth are moved, and melted,
even such a one is thy Father, and if thou will not be moved when such a one
speaks and calls thee his Son, then it goes hard. Remember again that I
am thy father, and such a one does call thee his son, as might have forsaken
thee for ever, but he did not, he could have destroyed thee in thy sins, but
he did not: he could have made thee a prey to the devil, but he did not: he
could have plagued thee with infinite plagues, but he did not, he could have
shut up thy body and soul in the chains of darkness, in Hell fire for
ever, but he did not. Again he was not bound to make thee his son and heir,
yet he did it: he was not compelled to spare thee, yet he did it, he saw no
reason why he should bless thee so many ways, yet he has blessed thee many
ways: thou could not persuade him, yet he was persuaded: thou had nothing
to say for thy self, yet he was satisfied: thou were his ennemie, yet he
became thy friend: in a word, thou were the child of the Devil, and the
heir of endless perdition, yet he made thee the child of God, and an heir
of everlasting salvation, such a one is thy father: therefore if thou
contemnest the words of such a Father, remember whom thou contemnest. I could
press thee with my power, but I do woo thee by my love. I might have
displaied my flagge of defiance against thee, and have said my rebel; but
lo, I have put out a flagge of truce, and displaied my colors of love, when I
call thee My son, Remember this, My son, and be persuaded. Thus we see
how the Lord does as it were adjure us by the love, and authority of a
father, and by the love and duty of a son, to hear his word, and obey his
commandementes.

Therefore do these two words, My son, run from one to another so often in
this book of Proverbs, whatsoever matter almost he has in hand. Father and
Son, must go before as common Orators to get attention, and to move
affection: to show us that if any thing will draw a man to God, it is the
feeling and consideration of his love in Christ: and he that will not yield,
when he is thus charmed, will he ever be won? And he that shall run from
God, when he sees the white ancient, with the colors of mercy and favor
displaied, when will he come and humble himself to God?

Therefore Solomon says, That loving Prou. 22. 1.
favor is above gold and silver: meaning, that it is not only more worth, but
that it is of greater force, and will bring greater matters to pass, and yet
we know that money will do much: but is not the kings favor without his pay,
better than the kings pay without his favor? and what good shall the goods
of his subjects do him, without their hearts and good will?

This knew the old counselors of Solomon well enough, and therefore when
Rehoboam (who succeeded Solomon) asked them, what course he 1. King. 12. 7.
should take, to win the hearts of the people, they gave him counsel to
speak kindly unto them at the first and they would be his servants for ever,
meaning that some token of love, or show of a kind affection toward them,
would more prevail with them, than any thing else. Shall the hope of Rehoboams
love make his subjects serve him for ever, and shall not the assurance of Gods
love make us serve him, for ever? Shall the kind words of Rehoboam the king of
Ifrael, win the hearts of his people for ever, and shall not the kind words of
Jehovah the king of heaven and earth, win the hearts of his people for ever and
for ever unto himself? besides that Rehoboam had need to speak kindly to his
subjects, or else it is the worse for himself, Jehovah needs not to speak
so, for if we never love him, it is not the worse for him, but for our selves,
yea if we be righteous, we are righteous for our selves, and if we all perish,
God will not loose a Job.
whit of his glory, shall we not then listen unto the Lord when he speaks so
kindly unto us, and has displayed the flagge of Truce, with, My son, the
badge of love upon it. When God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son
Isaac, he was Genesis 22. 3. 10, 12.
ready to do it. So dear was the love of God unto him, but if all the world
besides had persuaded him thereunto, he would never have yielded. God does not
command us to sacrifice our sons, but our sins, least they sacrifice us,
now if we think our selves as much beholding to God as Abraham was, we will not
spare them, though they be as necessary for us, as our right hand, or as
profitable unto us as our right eye. If Judas had been the child Mat. 27.
of God, as he was the child of perdition? would he have sold the love of
Christ for 30 pieces of silver? no, nor yet for 30 thousand worlds, but so it
is with all Hipocrites, and reprobate persons, (which are best known to the
searcher of hearts.) They cannot be persuaded, that God is their father in
Christ, their spirits are not assured by Gods spirit, that God does love them.
They conceive of the Lord, as of their enemy, and therefore as they could
never feel the sweetness of Gods love, in their souls, so they can never
afford him their love in their lives. Whereupon it comes to pass, that the
least temptation in the world, the least fear of man's displeasure, and the
least show of pleasure and profit, do easily persuade them to do any thing
against god, against his glory, against his word, and against his feruantes, as
Baalam did, who served for the wages of iniquity. Number. 23.


But the faithful indeed, hearing Iud. 11.
God calling them his sons and his daughters, (having the spirit of
sanctification, to assure them of their adoption, they (I say) do fall into the
reckoning of Gods unspeakable love in Christ, unto them, (howbeit not all at
one time, nor always alike) and he that is not now, may be hereafter, but when
they consider of it indeed, they do therewithal resolve with themselves, (in
token of thankfulness) to serve the Lord, in righteousness and true holiness
all the days of their life (yet still depe^ding upon God by prayer) and herein
(through Gods grace) they are resolute, whatsoever dislike of men or hinderance
in the world or danger to their own lives, they might purchase for their
labor? And thus we see, what an Orator the love of God is. Therefore when the
Lord says, My son, let us look for no more eloquence, to entice us, nor
reasons to persuade us, for hear is eloquence enough, and reasons inow, and
learning enough, and fathers inow to persuade any man that has the spirit of
God in him, and whosoever does not find the cords of Gods love, and authority
strong enough, to knit his heart unto the statutes of the Lord, he has good
cause to suspect himself as yet, that he is not the child of God.

Why, My son, in the singular number, and not my sons.
NOw we will see, why the Lord says not My sons, in the plural number,
seeing as he speaks to all his children, but My son, as if it concerned but
only one body. This is partly for the particular encouragement and
confirmation of every one in his duty, and partly for the particular comfort
of every one of Gods children, when he shall be troubled for doing of his
duty, for when the Lord in particular shall give every one his charge, then if
any man be offended at him, he may show his warrant, and say thus, Sir the Lord
did not speak generally to all, least one should post it off to another, but
he speaks particularly to me, as well as to another, and therefore I am
discharged: for when the Lord speaks indefinitly meaning none, he excepteth
none. But in this particular kind of speaking, the Lord does bind every one of
his children in particular, wholly to serve him, and none else, so therewithal
he gives us to understand, that he has a special eye and fatherly care over
every one in particular, that is his child, and will surely protect and defend
him as his child against all annoiances watsoeuer, than the which there can be
no greater comfort, whenever the cross shall come.

But we will first see, how they do bind us wholly to God, and afterward we
will see how God has bound himself to us and every one of us, if we be all
his children, as I hope we be.

Some think it lawful to serve God and the world too, to be of this Reiiglon
and of that Religion too, to go to Bethell the house of God and to Bethauen,
the house of Idolitrie. To go with Barnabas and Barrabas, and to join with
Simon Magus as with Simon Peter, and thinking themselves sufficiently
discharged, if they serve God a little now and then, or if they keep their
consciences to themselves, and give God their hearts, like Protestants at
large, which think they need not hear a sermon, because they heard service,
or they need not come in the after noone, because they came in the forenoone;
or like the most, which think, when they have heard a sermon, they are then at
liberty to do what they will, or like those men, which will hear a Mass, and
worship the cross at the least, in other countries, that they may get
commodities thereby, but they will keep their consciences to themselves, as our
church Papists do here amongst us but all these men are deceived for no man
can serve ij. masters. Therefore my good brother when any such temptations do
begin to fawn upon thee. Remember that God does here call every particular
member of the church, his son, and to thee therefore he says, My son, as if
he should say, None may have any interest in thee, but I. Thou art mine, thou
art not theirs, Thy creation is wholly mine, thy redemption is wholly mine, and
thy preservation is wholly mine, and therefore I look that thy obedience, and
thy service, and thy worship, and thy body, and thy soul, and all should be
wholly mine.

And good reason, for do we not owe all to him of whom we have received all? Of
God we have received all that we have: for in him we live, and move, and have
our being: Act. 17. 28.
do we not therefore owe him our life our moving, and our being, eue^
whatsoever we are, or whatsoever we have? And is it not reason that if a man
has bought a thing wholly, and wholly paid for it, that he should have it
wholly to himself? how much more ought the Lord to have the whole service
both of body and soul, seeing he has bought all, and paid for all? Therefore
now, we are no more our own men, but the Lords: therefore he says, My
son, As if he should say again; If thou hearkenest to any, hearken unto
me: if thou beleeuest any, believe me: if thou love any, love me: if thou
fear any, fear me: if thou obeiest any, obey me: if thou stand for
any bodies credit or glory, stand for mine: If thou do praise any bodies
works, praise mine: and if thou returnest thanksgiving to any, return them to
me, and to my use only: for now, by virtue of the league and covenant
wherinto thou and I be entered, thy hearing is mine, thy faith is mine, thy
love is mine, thy fear is mine, thy obedience is mine, thy praises are mine:
in body and soul, and in every part and member thereof, thou must be wholly
mine, and no bodies else, and therefore remember, that I do not call thee, Our
son, as though some other were my partner in thee, but I call thee, My son,
because I Esaias 48, 11.
will not give my glory unto any other.

Will thou be content that thy wife (as Job says) shall grind unto Job. 31.
10.
another, when she is married wholly to thee? Thou will not. And will the Lord
take it in good part if thou divide thy love between him, and another, seeing
he has married thee wholly to himself? No surely, he will not be served by the
halfes, he will be a sole father, and a whole father, or else no father, he
will have thee his son only, or else no son at all: he will have all our
service, or else none of our service. And if the devil has any interest at
all, he shall one day have interest in all, without repentance: for he takes
possession of the whole man by some one member of the body, or by some one
affection of the heart, as men take state of a house by the ring of a door. And
he keeps possession as well by the love of one sin (if it reign in a man)
as by a thousand: even as men keep possession of a house, as well by one man
within, or a child, as by a thousand, if they be not expelled.

God has a remnant in Israel, 1. Kin. 19. 18.
more than Eliah knows of: but they are such as bow not their knees to Baall,
neither do they kiss him with their mouths. If we do but hold up our hands
to an idol (says the Church of God in captivity) do we not deal
deceitfully with Gods covenant, and shall not God Psalm. 44. 17. 20, 21.
search this out? yea though we keep our hearts for God (as we think) so
jealous is the Lord over his glory, that he can abide no halting in religion.

Again, My son, to teach us that we be not our own men, but our fathers,
which is in heaven. If we be not our own men, but the Lords, then we must not
be at our own appointment, but at his in every thing. To every one of his
children, God has appointed a place, and a standing, while he lives in the
world; to some in the Church, and to some in the commonwealth. Our whole task
is appointed by God, how much and how long every one must work in his place,
God must appoint: look how far every one is to go by his heavenly fathers
direction, so far must we go and no further. We must tarry till God does
send us, and no longer: and we must speak all that our father in heaven does
bid us, but no more.

Moses must keep sheep, until Exo. 3. 12. 3.
God send him to Pharao, and then he must go to Pharao, be he never Exodus 4.
10.
so slow of speech: Jonas must not go to Niniuie until he be sent; neither may
he go to Tharsis, when he is sent to Niniuie: Saul must not touch Ion. 1, 2,
3, 4. 1. Sam. 15. 9, 22
the Amalekites, until he be commanded: but when he has his commission from
above, he may not spare Agag though he be a king, neither any of the cattle,
be they never so fit for sacrifice. Balaam must not go when God bid him stay,
though the Number. 22. 12, 13.
king of Moab send for him: neither must he curse, when God does bid him
bless, if he might have mountains of gold for his labor.

And when the Lord does cast any office upon his children, then they Psa. 82, 6.
are not only Gods Children, but also Gods officers, I have said ye are gods:
that is you are of my appointing, and you are in my stead. And then the Lord
says to one, My son, thou art now my Magistrate to rule for me: to another
he says, Thou art now my Minister to teach for me: to another, Thou art now
my Steward to give for me: to another, Thou art now my Captain to conduct for
me: to another, Thou art now my Soldier, to fight for me, etc. But remember
that you are mine still, and not your own, nor at any bodies appointment, but
at mine. And therefore, see that you govern as I have taught you: for your
government is my government, See that you judge as I have appointed you: for
your judgment is my judgment. See that you teach as I have prescribed, for your
doctrine is my doctrine: and see that you fight when I bid you fight, for your
battles are my battles.

When our Savior Christ saw Matt. 22, 21.
Caesar's mark upon Caesar's coin, he bad that Caesar should have his due: but
so, as God also must not loose his right. If Caesar must have that which is
marked out for Caesar, shall not God have that service, that worship, those
officers, and such orders as he has marked out for himself? verily if we give
them, or change them with the world, or the devil, which have no right in
them, we shall follow too, if we repent not.

What shall we do then? why, what if the world say, give me thy heart? Say,
thou may not; it is the Lords already. What if vain plays, and filthy
speech would have me to lend them my ears? deny them, and say, that they
are for the holy things of God. What iflying and deceit would have the use of
my tongue, and sit in the door of my lips? tell them they are be spoken
already, and truth must have the use of both. What if unclean thoughts come
a wooing to thy mind? tell them that thy mind is for holy meditations, and
therefore there is no place for them. What if uncleanness her self, desire
but a nights lodging in thy body, and seat in thy heart, for love or for
money? Tell her that thy body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, and thy heart
is the Lords chair of state, and therefore let her love and her money perish
together with her self. What if covetousness, or usury, or vainglory
come? Whosoever come, shape them all the same answer, though they bring their
friends with them to persuade thee, or authority to command thee: every
one may not come into the kings Courts: every one may not presume into the
presence Chamber; much less into the priuie-Chamber: but none may sit in the
Princes chair of estate, but the Prince only. Neither may the kings officers
be at every bodies commandment. Our bodies and our souls be the kings
courts, all the members of our bodies, and all the powers of our souls, are
the kings officers, wheresoever thou art, thou art Psa. 139, 7.
in his presence chamber, but thy conscience is his privy chamber, and thy
heart is his throne of state. Therefore let not every one in, but let the
fear of God stand in every corner, and at every entry, like the kings guard,
and if any offer to come in, which have nothing to do there, let the guard
tell them that there is no place for them, all is taken up to the kings use.
If that will not serve the turn, thrust them out by the head and shoulders,
and if they turn again upon thee, hew them in pieces, with the sword of the
spirit, yea if thou find Iezabell, in the kings chamber, cast her out at the
windows, and let the dogs eat her, If Haman himself be there, cover his
face and hang him up; for what shall such do, where the Lord of hosts should
sit and reign.

All this is in general, but now more particularly, suppose I be a man of
wealth and countenance likely to bear office in the church of God, or in the
common wealth, what if I be called to the place of a chief Maiestrat amongst
the people, may I not refuse it? Thou art not thy own man, but the Lords, the
calling is not man's, but Gods, therefore thou may not refuse it. But what if
ease and selfeloue would persuade me to buy it for ever? Tell thy ease and thy
selfeloue, that thou art not at their appointment, but at the disposing of thy
heavenly father. If this be not sufficient, tell Genesis 25. 30.
them that Esau sinned in selling his birthright, and if thou should sell
away the government from thy shoulders, thou sellest not thy own right, but
Gods right, the churches right, the common wealths right, the Princes right,
the poor man's right, with the right of the widows, fatherles, and Orphans,
for when God does set a man in that place, all these have interest in him,
therefore let no man buy it off, but rest upon God, least he become more
profane than Esau, but what if trouble and danger be like to follow? then say
as Mordecay said unto Hester, Hest. 4. 14.
what can thou tell, whether God has advanced thee for the deliverance of
his people? and what if thou say, as Hester said to her self, I will take it
upon me, pray you for me, Ver. 16.
and if I perish, I perish, I am not at my own appointment, but at the
appointment of my heavenly father.

But suppose, that I be a minister of God, and set over Gods people, to teach
them the ways of the Lord may I not turn them over to another, if ease or
profit do call me? surely no: for if thou be at Gods appointment, thou must
keep thy standing, and look to that flock over which the holy ghost has made
thee an ouerseer. Act. 20. 28.


What if men's traditions would borrow a room in my study? turn them out, and
tell them, that thy study is only for the law of God, but what if popular
praise and vainglory would persuade me to make a show of painted eloquence,
and humane learning, tell them that thou art not set there to seek thy self,
but Gods people, not thy own glory, but the glory of him that sent thee.

But imagine that I am a private man, and have a trade to live upon, and a
family to look unto? then follow that, but what if I see things out of order
in the church, may I not help to put them in order again? or may I not leave
my trade and become a minister? Surely by prayer and supplication thou may
help, but keep thy standing: for thou art not thy own man to forgo thy place
at thy pleasure. As for the ministry, it is to be born by such as have gifts
and calling for it, as the Arc was to be carried by Levites, and not by Oxen.
But what if the Arc be ready to fall, may not I step to and hold it up? Thou
art not thereunto appointed. Therefore take heed Vzzah, least thou fall thy
self before the Arc. Therefore let 2. Sam. 6. 6, 7
every one keep his place and standing that God has set him in. And if any
body do claim any interest in us, more than our heavenly father has
granted him; let us answer him as our Savior Christ did the devil: Avoid,
for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Matt. 4. 10.
and him only shall thou serve. And thus we see how these words do bind us
particularly, and wholly to our heavenly father, and our discharge when we have
done our duty to God.

How these words My son, do serve for our consolation.
NOw we will see, for the comforting and strengthening of our faith, how the
Lord in these words My son, does bind himself to his children, which thing
(being duly considered) will cause us (through the grace of God) to bear with
patience, whatsoever cross shall fall upon us in the discharging of those
duties which our heavenly father has laid upon us in our several callinges:
yea, if we fall into the reckoning of it, we will not only go cheerfully
away without fainting under the burden, but even despise, and set at naught
all reproaches and slanders, all mockes and iestes, all losses and hindrances,
and death it self for the excellent glory, and glorious liberty of the
sons of Romans 8. 18. 21.
God: for as this white flagge does show us that we are not our own men, but
the Lords; so in the same we may also perceive that the Lord has a special
care over every one of his children in particular. If we be wholly his, then
is he wholly ours: if we be not sons for our selves, but for him; then he
is a father not for himself: but for us.

Therefore, says the Lord, My son, which is all one, as if he had said, I
am thy father, as thou art my son: thou art mine, and I am thine: for there is
no son without a father. My son, if thou do a sons duty to me, I
will have a fathers care over thee, whatsoever is past shall be forgotten, fear
nothing: for thou shall want nothing that I see good for thee. Go through my
business boldly and courageously, and I will stand by thee to the end. If thou
want any thing, tell me, and I will supply thy wantes. If any body do Mat.
28. last. Iam. 1. 5.
abuse thee in word and deed, complain to me, and I will see it redressed. If
thou want wisdom, ask it of me* and I will make thee wiser Psa. 119. 99.
than thy ancients. If thou want Psa. 119, 57.
wealth, I my self will be thy portion. If thou be weak, I will be thy
strength. If thou fall sick, I will be thy physician: and if thou die, I will
restore thee to life again, even to Ioh. 11. 25.
life everlasting. Therefore cast thy whole care upon me, for I will care for
thee, and thy whole provision will I take upon my self: only keep Josh. 1. 8.
thou thy standing, be faithful in thy calling, rely upon me, my son, and
fear nothing.

And further, My son, do not think that my providence is only in general
over all my children, but know that my pro^idence reaches in particular to
every one of my children in what place of the world soever they be. In the
mountains and Psalm. 139.
valleys, by sea and by land, by night and by day: All things are open in my
sight at one instant. And this is the Heb. 4. 13.
cause why the Lord says, My son, as though he spoke but to one, when he
speaks to all that are his children, that all may know what a special care he
has of every one: yea such a care indeed has the Lord over all his children
in particular, that he has numbered all the hairs of their Psalm. 56. 8.
head, he puts all their tears into a bottell, he counts all their
goings, and he regards all their sighs and groans. Insomuch as, a stone does
not lie in their way, but he knows of it, and knowing it, he does so
preserve them, as that they shall not hurt their foot against a stone.

This indeed is sweet and comfortable, but yet for all that we see by daily
experience, that the children of God, do still go by the worst in the world:
and the troubles of the righteous Psalm. 34. 19.
are many and great, but the wicked do prosper as Job says, neither do they
come into trouble as Job. 21. 7, 8, 9, etc.
other men, yea they have whatsoever their heart can wish, and more too, (as
David says) they are not mocked nor flowted at, nor had in Psa. 73. 5.
derision, as the Godly are, etc. Stay thy self, All this is true, and a great
deal more tha^ this, but what then? Yet God is good to Israel for all Psa.
73. 1.
this, and cares for the affliction of poor Joseph, yea what will thou say if
Joseph be afflicted that the Lord might show what care he has of his
affliction? but what? Can the Lord forget his little worm Jacob, which he Esa.
49. 16.
has written in the palms of his hands? Or is there no profit in serving of
the almighty? Let the reprobate make the Job 21. 14. Mal. 3. 14.
conclusion. Thou thy self arta father, and if thy child do thy will, thou will give him good things. If he does transgress thy will, thou will also
correct him, because he is thy child. And shall not the Lord which excels
all fathers in love, much more give his children good Luke 11. 13.
things when they obey him.

Verily he will cause his people to mount upon the high places of the earth, and
Israel shall be fed with the heritage of Iaakob his father, for the mouth of the
Lord of hosts has Esa. 58. 14.
spoken it.

But what if his children do offend him? shall it not be lawful for him to
correct them? Surely whom he loves he corrects, even as a father Pro. 3. 12.
does the child in whom he delights and therefore he corrects them because
he loves them. If his child do sin against him, (as who does not) he will
chasten him with the rods of men, and will visit their sins, with the
plagues of the children of men. So did he deal with Solomon, and he told his
father David how he would use him, but yet 2 Samuel 7. 1^
(says he) I will be his father, and he shall be my son, and my mercy will I not
take from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee. So his
mercy, he will not take away from his children, as he does from the wicked,
whom he has purposed to cast off in the end.

But thou do ask me why the wicked do flourish in this world. I ask thee
again, why do thou set up thy Oxen a fatting? is it not against the day of
slaughter? So does God likewise set up the ungodly and proud men a fatting,
even until their eyes stand out with fatness: but is it not Psalm. 73. 7.
against the day of judgment? Therefore Psalm. 37. 1.
be content, and fret not thy self at the prosperity of irreligious and
profane men, whose life is but a war with God. They have their heaven here,
that they may have their hell hereafter. And what if Capernaum be lifted up to
the heavens, he shall be cast down to the lowest Mat. 11. 23.
hell: and how should he be cast down, if he were not first lifted up?
Again, The Lord will raise his people out of the dust, and set them up Psalm.
113. 7.
amongst Princes: how should they be raised up, if they were not first cast
down?

But why does the Lord suffer the ungodly so to vex his Children? surely,
because they are his rods to whip them withal; but when he has well corrected
his children, and worn his rod to the stumps, the rod shall be cast into the
fire: and as scullions of the kitchen, to scour his vessels of honor, so does
the Lord use all the wicked ennemies of his Church, even the greatest Tirantes
that ever were.

But, why does our heavenly father keep his children so bare and so poor as
they be many times? Never marvel at that: for thou thy self (being a father)
keep thy child bare, and give him never a penny in his purse: thou
put him to school, thou do keep him under, and give him but from hand
to mouth, until he come to years of discretion, and then thou do give him
more large allowance: and when his time is come, he possesses also thy
inheritance and not before. For, if he should possess the inheritance, when
he is a child or a youth, he would wax proud, and perhaps spend it away
riotouslie and wastfullie. So God our heavenly father, sees that if we
should have our hands full, and want nothing, we would wax proud, and wanton,
and forget God (as many do) or we would spend it vainly or maliciously, or
(as S. James says) upon our pleasures and lusts, and therefore our heavenly
father, does in singular wisdom keep us under many times, giving us but from
hand to mouth; yet does he love us never the worse for all that, but the
better: and when the time of re^eshing is come from the Lord, it shall be said
Act. 3. 19.
unto us, Come ye blessed children of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared
Matt. 25. 34.
for you, from the beginning of the world.

But in the mean time, we must look for trouble in the world: for so has
our Lord Jesus foretold us. In the world you shall have trouble (says Ioh 15.
9. Ioh. 16. 33.
he) but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world: that victory is not for
himself, but for the faithful. And as for trouble and affliction, the Lord
does see it good for us, that we may learn the statutes of our God, as the rod
is necessary for the child, without which he would wax brutish, and
barbarous.

The gold is put in the fire, and is Similitudes
made the finer: the spices are braied in the mortar, and do smell the sweeter:
the vine is pruned to the stock, and is made the more fruitful: the grape is
trodden and pressed, and eyeldeth the more wine: the ground is rent with the
plough, and then receives the seed: the corn is first beaten out with the
flaile, then it is tossed with the fan: after that, it is ground in the mill,
and then it is fit to make bread: the cloth is rent, and cut in pieces before
it can make a garment: the finest linen is washed, and wrung, and then is made
white. All these are familiar examples to teach us how necessary affliction
is for the children of God, and how hardly they are made fit for the kingdom
of heaven, without the cross.

Joseph was promised, that he should Examples.
be ruler over all his brethren, but he was not so by and by: he must first
Joseph.
be cast into a pit, then he must be bought and sold, then he must be
tempted and falsely accused, then he must be wrongfullie imprisoned: and after
all this, he shall be advanced. The Israelites were promised the land of
Chanaan which flowed Israelites.
with milk and honny, but it is not given them so soon as it is promised,
they must first serve in Egypt, then they must pass the red Sea, then they
must travail through the wilderness of manifold wantes: then they must fight
many sore battles, and afterward come to Chanaan. It was told David that
he David.
should be king, but he did not presently wear the crown. No David no, thou
must first be a shepherd; then thou must encounter with Goliath the
uncircumcised; then thou must look for Saules hatred; then thou must be
banished Saules courts, and thy own country: and after all this, and a great
deal more, with much ado, thou shall be king. So the Lord has promised us
the kingdom of heaven, whereof Chanaan was a figure and a resemblance, but we
must not look presently to enjoy it: we must first be handled as Joseph was;
then we must be evil treated and oppressed, as Israel was; then we must be
hated and persecuted, as David was, and then we shall have it. The world will
hate us, our foes will hate us, and our friends will hate us, if we fear
God, but God will love us, and that is our comfort: Father and mother will
forsake us, but God will Psa: 27. 10.
take us up, and that is our comfort. Crafty heads will lay snares to take us
in our goinges, but God will break the snare, and our souls Psa. 124. 7.
shall escape: the proud and malicious, will dishonor and disgrace us, but
GOD will honor those that honor him: for fathers are 1. Sam. 2. 30
the glory of their children (says Solomon) how much more shall the Prou.
17. 6.
God of all glory, be a glory to his Children? we must not look to be free
from the buffettinges of Satan, if we were as holy as Paul; but fear
nothing, the grace of 2. Cor. 12. 7.
God, does and shall uphold us. And Satan will sift us, as wheat is Luke 22.
31. 32.
sifted, if we wear as good as Peter, if he may have his desire, but be not
afraid, for I have prayed for thee, says the Lord Jesus, that thy faith may
not fail, yea the Lord does fight for us, and with his loving favor he will
defend his children, as Psa 5. 12.
with a shield.

This is more (I confess) than man can found with the plummet of human reason,
neither is it alwais seen with the eyes of our body. Therefore 2. Cor. 5. 7.
Gods children must learn to walk by faith, and not by sight. And therefore is
our waiting on god made an article of our faith, I beeloue in God the father
almighty etc. That which must uphold our faith is Gods promise, and his
power. So was Abraham vpholden and was persuaded that God would be as good as
his word, though he saw no worldly reason for it, and if we Romans 4. 21.
could give a natural reason for that, as we may do for things of the
world, then were our trusting in God an article of reason, but not an article
of faith. And these two can not stand together, for faith does begin, where
reason does end, that when all means do fail us, yet faith may uphold us, in
the promises of God.

And thus we see, how these two words, My son, do not only persuade us to
here God, and bind us entirely to serve him, without halting in our calling,
but they serve also to comfort us, and to cheer us up, when the cross does
meet us in doing, or rather in neglecting the duties of our calling.

How these words, My son, do serve for instruction.
LAst of all, for our instruction the Lord says, My son, to teach us that if
we do willingly hear him when he teaches us, if we diligently obey him when
he commands us, and if we patiently suffer him, when he corrects us, he
will (no doubt) have a fatherly care over us, he will accept of our sacrifices,
and hear our prayers, he will also be merciful to our sins, and forgive us
our offenses, he will deliver us from hell, and bring us into heaven. But all
this is neither for our hearing, nor for our obaying, nor for our suffering,
nor for our praying, nor for our working, but because we are first his adopted
children in Jesus christ. It is not for any worthiness that is in us, but for
the worthiness of the Lord Jesus, by whose means we are become his sons and
his daughters, we are not therefore made the sons of God, because we hear his
word, because we obey his commandments, because we bear the cross, or for
any other thing that we have done, or possibly can do, (as Papists hold) but
therefore we hear him, and therefore we obey him, and therefore we suffer him,
and therefore we love him, because we are first made his children in the Lord
Jesus.

Our good works are not the cause of our election, but Gods election is the
cause of our good works, for he has chosen us, (says the Apostle) in him that
is in Christ, before the foundation of the world, that we Ephe. 1. 4.
should be holy and blameles before him in love, Therefore we hold again, that
all our poor endeavors are accepted of God, and rewarded with heaven, not
because we have wrought them, our selves, (as the Tit. 3. 7.
adversaries of the grace of God do teach) but because they are sanctified in
the covenant of Gods grace, and washed in the blood of the unspotted Lamb
Jesus Christ, therefore we hold, and hold truly, that all those spots and
blots, which remain in our imperfect obedience, must be covered with the
unspotted holiness, and perfect obedience of Jesus Christ, as with a garment,
that Psalm. 32. 1.
no part of our filthy nakedness may appear in the pure presence of him, whose
eyes can abide no uncleanness, Apo. 3. 18.
or else we can never be saved. Therefore we hold again, and that according to
truth, that all our righteousness, is unclean and polluted, Esa. 64. 6.
in the puddle of Original corruption, in the loins of the first Adam, but it
is cleansed in the pure fountain of Jesus christ his obedience, Romans 5. 19.
the second Adam. It is only begun here, and in part performed, but it shall
be finished, and made perfect in the life to come, and that in Christ Jesus, in
whom all our poor endeavors and small beginnings shall be accepted, that little
good which is in us, is matched with much evil, yea every good Iam. 1. 17.
motion when it comes from the father of lights, is of a brighte and lively
color, but so soon as they come into our vessels, they change their color
and look of another hue. There is never a prayer that we make, but has his
wants of feeling, or want of humbling, or faith, or reverence, or something is
wanting, and it is stained with the contrary. There is never a sermon that we
make, or hear, but has some stain, and pollution in us, There is never a
grace that we say, but is likewise blemished for want of some grace, our whole
service is idle and unprofitable, for when did we talk, without vanity? when
do we give, without some savor or other of Hypocrisy? when do we hear,
without wearines? or when do we pray without tediousness? and when we do pray
for pardon, what toies and fancies do stain our prayers? that when we have
prayed, we had need to pray again, that God would forgive our prayers, for do
we not think least of God, when we pray unto him, and does not our devotion
commonly end with our prayers? If we suffer any thing, is it without some
impatience and distrust? will not a little murmuring and grudging against God,
have a hand in the matter? will we not appoint our heavenly father, either
where to strike, or when, or with what, or how long, or how much, or how little,
or one thing or other: as though he knew not what to do without us? And when
(I pray you) do we rest heartily well contented with his good pleasure and
will? If we obtain any thing which we desired, do we not still desire more
like Achab? If 1. Kin. 21, 2.
we do any evil, alas: how cherefully, how speedely, and how easily do we
commit it, but if we do any good, (woe be unto us) how faintly, how rudely, and
how slackly do we go about it? in our own causes how hoate are we, in Gods
causes how cold are we? in excercises of profaneness how bold? but in the
excercises of holiness, how bashful is the best of us? and (that which God
does most abhor) do we not wax proud of those good things which God does
work in us, and by us, as children are proud of their new clothes, which their
parents do put upon them? or of saying a grace, which with much ado) their
parents have taught them? In one word, that little good that is in us, is it not
matched (as I said) and many times ouermatched with much evil? And that
little that is in us, or done by us, it is of the Lord also that works both
the will and the deed. And when he does reward that, what Philip. 2. 13.
does he, but crown his own gifts in us? and that according to that promise,
and covenant, which he swear to our forefather Abraham, and his seed for
ever. So that we may now safely conclude as (Paul does) It is neither in him
that wills, Romans 9. 16.
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. All this, and much
more being considered, how should we do if we were not first the sons of
God in Christ our Lord? would our works abide the trial of Gods justice? Alas
poor wretches that we are, the least stain of thought (though it were never
consented unto) would send us packing to hell for ever. But now, being first
the sons of God by Jesus Christ, being assured of Gods love in christ, and
pleading nothing but his mercy only, in the merits of Christ, we may be bold
to go unto our heavenly father: for if any man sin, we have an advocate with
the father, Jesus 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
Christ the righteous, whose righteousness pleads for our unrighteousness:
through whose stripes we are healed, and through whose blood Esa. 53. 5.
we may be bold to enter into the holy place: with him the Lord is Heb. 10. 19.
well pleased, in him the Sons of GOD are well accepted; and without him, we
are wholly rejected.

Therefore says Saint John, Blessed Romans 14. 13.
are the dead which die in the Lord: that is, in the faith of the Lord Jesus:
for they shall rest from their labors, and their works shall follow them:
that is, God accepts of them, and their works which are in the Lord, but
none else. By this place our Papists would prove that our works do merit
heaven. But from hence we may gather more truly, that none have a right faith
in Christ, but those which have good works to accompany them, when they dye
in the Lord. But to gather hereupon, that they merit, we cannot: for then
they should go before our being in the Lord, and be a cause thereof: but now
we see, that they follow our being in the Lord. Again, the works do not
beautify the man in the Lord, but the man in the Lord does beautify the
works, as the Temple sanctified Mat. 23. 17. 19.
the gold that was upon it, but was not sanctified by the gold: and as the
Altar sanctified the offering that was upon it, but was not sanctified by the
offering. And this is not because he has done them, but because Romans 14. 23.
they are done in the Lord by faith, (without which whatsoever is done, is
sin) and the Lord in him by his spirit, does sanctify them unto himself.

Last of all, the Argument does not hold, our works are rewarded; therefore
they merit: for then none should be rewarded, but he that did merit first:
then the servant should be before the heir, because he takes more pains
than the other does, and yet the heir has the land, because he was the son
before. So, we are first borne the sons of God by faith in Christ, and so we
are made fellow heirs with him of Ioh. 1. 12.
Heaven: and then follow good Romans 8. 17.
works; not as a cause why we should have the inheritance, but as fruits
following from a thankful mind. But they of the popish Church being no
children, and doing nothing but of servile fear, can do nothing that is good:
for first, they fail in the matter of their good works, putting in practice
the traditions of men in stead of Gods Mat. 15. 9.
precepts. Secondly, they fail in the manner of doing: for that which they
do, is done to a wrong end, and with a wrong affection: for it is too justify
themselves thereby before Luke 18. 11.
God, as the Pharisie did: and therefore this white flagge of truce, My son,
is not put out to them, because they have broken the conditions of peace.

Our Popish merit-mongers are like the elders of the Jews, which went to
Christ in the behalf of the Centurion, for his sick servant. They besought
him instantly (as though they might not be denied) Luke 7. 4. 5.
and they tell him forsooth, that the Centurion is worthy of so much favor,
as that the Lord Jesus should come to him, and heal his servant: for proof
whereof, they allege two strong reasons, (like our Papists) One is, He loves
our nation, Another is, He has built us a synagogue: so plead our Papists; we
are worthy (O Lord) of thy favor, we have deserved so much at thy hands: or
such a one that is now gone has deserved so much, as that thou should
receive his soul: for he loved us well while he lived, he was an honest man,
he made us good cheer, he kept a good house, he filled our bellies, and our
purses too. Besides that, he has built us a stately synagogue, goodly
Churches, and Chapels of ease, he mended our hie-waies, he erected such a
College, such a friery, and such a Nunrie. Again, such a K. John. Prince of
Orange. K. of France
man is a good Catholic, Lord: for he helped the Priest to say Mass, he gave
his consent to the poisoning of such a king, and the murdering of such
another, he did what he could to dispatch all christian Princes, because they
are not of the Popes Religion, so zealous a catholic was he: But Lord he made
a conscience of every thing, he would not eat a bit of flesh, nor so much as
an egg in Lent, or upon a friday, he would never go out, before he had
crossed himself before and behind: his house was never without a Crucifix, nor
his windows without a picture of the Trinity: a number of good works more
he did, which the tally will not hold, and those are for his honest
neighbors, which will give any thing for them. Therefore Lord thou must of
necessity receive his soul when he is dead, or else thou do him great
wrong. And thus we hear how Papists plead, like the elders of the Jews, for
the Centurion and his servants.

But what said the Centurion himself? O Lord (says he) trouble not thou thy
self, for I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my roof: neither
did I think my self worthy to come unto thee: but only speak the word,
and my servant shall be Luke 7. 6.
whole. And this message (says the Evangelist) he sent to Christ by his
friends, as if they which pleaded his worthiness and works were his
ennemies, and not his friends. But how did the Lord Jesus like of this
message? Surely, he marvelled at such humility, and commended the faith of the
Centurion, even by the name of greatfaith, to show that merit-mongers have no
faith at all, except the Devils faith.

Now to end this point. If any man be the child of God in Christ, let him also
become a new creature, and live as becomes the sons of God, let no man say,
If I be the child of God, I need not care what to do, or (as the manner of
many is) GOD is merciful, and Christ died for our sins, what need we fear?
for as there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, so they which are
in Christ live, not after the flesh, but after the Romans 8. 1.
spirit. On the other side, If thou feel thy self a new creatur in Christ,
and transfourmed into the likeness of the sons of God, then faint not under
the cross, for thy heavenly father will bear thee up in his arms, plead not
for thy self, by any thing that is in thy self, but appeal to the mercy of
thy heavenly father, and say, Lord he whom thou love is in want, as the
sisters of Lazarus Ioh. 11. 3.
said to christ for their brother, Lord he whom thou love is sick. And
claim the promise of God thy heavenly father in his son Christ, and then
fear not thy sins My son, says God, for I even I, will do them Esa. 48.
11.
all away, even for my names sake, and for my sons sake, in whom thou art my
son, and in whom I am well pleased. And thus we see al our fear turned into
joy, because we are made the sons of God in Christ.

When a lion roared upon Sampson, the spirit of strength came upon Sampson,
and he rent him in pieces. Judge. 14. 6. 8. 9.
Not long after in the same Lion he found a swarm of Bees with their stings,
but therewithal he found a Hony-combe to feed upon. So our sins and the
Devil roared upon us, and thought to have devoured us. but our true Sampson
Jesus Christ, has torn him in pieces, which went about like a roaring Lion,
seeking to devour us. Now if we look into our own hearts, (which are as a
Lions den) we shall find (after this victory) not a swarm of Bees, (as Sampson
did in the Belly of the Lion) but a swarm of corruptions and sins with
their stings, like pricks in our flesh to humble us, but there withal 2. Cor.
12. 7.
we shall find Honny to comfort us, even a rich Hony-combe of Gods mercies to
feed upon, if the spirit of faith and courage be in us, as the spirit of
strength and boldness was in Sampson, and then we may say plainly, as Sampson
said in a riddle, Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came
sweetness* for what is stronger than a Lion, and what is sweeter than Honey.
But we may say, What is stronger than sin, and what is sweeter than mercy?
What sight more terrible than the black flagge of defiance, with My Rebel,
(the colors of vengeance upon it?) What more comfortable than to see that
pulled in, and the white flagge of truce put forth, with My son, the words of
mercy and peace upon it? My Rebel is gone, My son is come in the steed. The
Lord take away the Rebellions of our hearts, and grant us so to keep his
conditions of peace, that we may be his sons indeed, and find peace to our
consciences for evermore. Thus we see, that as the Lord did once bring light
out of darkness, so our heavenly father has wrought comfort out of sin to
all his children in Christ Jesus, blessed Genesis 1. 4.
be his name for ever. And thus much for these words My son, as proceeding
from God to man.

My son, as being the words of Solomon considered.
NOw if we consider them as they be the words of Solomon, something more may be
gathered from them, for as God was the Author, so Solomon was the publisher,
God is our father indeed, Solomon is but Gods minister, and speaks like a
father to all, that of all he might win some, Solomon was a king, yet he gives
counsel like a Preacher, and teaches men how to order their lives according
to the word of god, and therefore he calls himself a Preacher. So should
rulers and men in authority give their inferiors Eccle. 1. 1.
counsel like Preachers, and though they be not Preachers by office, yet by
their grave counsel and holy advise, they may and ought to be Preachers, and
so should all men be. But now if men speak like Politicians, and can give
crafty counsel to serve all men's turns, they are the men: but if any speak
like a holy Christian, or like a divine, or like a Preacher, he is acconted a
Puritan, a fool, and called a Preacher in derision, well, Solomon though he
be a king, and no Preacher, yet he gives the charge on the Judgment seat like
a divine, and he counsels like a Preacher indeed, but he speaks like a
father, and from a fathers affection, with desire not to show himself, but to
profit his auditors and his readers, therefore see how he tempereth his
counsels, and his doctrine, with words of love, saying, My son, as if that
were the only way to win men to God. So when the Apostle would make Gala. 4.
19.
the Galathians in love with his doctrine, he calls them his children, yea,
his little children, this is to teach al teachers how to make their doctrine
most profitable unto their auditors, they have put upon them the persons of
fathers, therefore with a fatherly affection they must teach the Lords people
and humble them as children, especially weak ones, which are but coming on.
But those that are falling away and sin of malice and wilfulness, are to
be handled after another manner, and therefore it is that Solomon in this book
has so much ado with fools and scorners, though he speak to some as to
babes, and children. And that kind of teaching, is of love too, and from the
spirit of God, yea when Paul ratled up Elymas the sorserer, calling him a man
full of subtlety and mischeife, Act. 13. 9. 10.
a child of the devil, an enemy of all righteousness, and a peruerter of the
straight ways of the Lord, it is said of him that he was full of the holy
ghost. As this does not patronise bitterness of spirit, or unseemly railing
in any: so it serves to prove, that a minister of GOD may sometime (as
occasion serves) deal roundly in laying open of sin, and severely thunder the
judgment of God, neither can we without sin charge him with railing or
malice, or choler (as the manner of some is) to charge the preachers of the
word of God. My son, says Solomon: to teach us that we must speak with a
loving and kind affection, but not with a covetous and vainglorious affection,
if ever we will win men to God: My son, says Solomon, to teach us that
whether we teach doctrine, or correct manners, or reprove sin, or denounce
judgments, we should first see that there be that kind affection in us
toward the parties with who^ we have to deal, which is in fathers toward
their children: and that fatherly love will sweeten all our reprehensions, and
all our admonitions, and make them in time go down into the stomach, if they
were as bitter as any pills, if men be not wholly given over of God. My
brethren, (says S. Paul) in all his Epistles: as if he made as much reckoning
of them as of himself, and to show them that he wished them to do nothing,
but that he himself would help them in it, and do it with them. You have
many instructors, and teachers 1. Cor. 4. 15. 16.
(says the Apostle) but not many fathers, but in Christ Jesus I have begotten
you through the Gospel: wherefore I pray you be followers of me: to teach us
how to make the people become our followers: Oh the love, the patience, the
faithfulness, and the wisdom of a father, how great is it? or ought it to be
toward his children? so great should be the love, the patience, the
faithfulness and the wisdom of the minister of God: As S. Paul teaches
Timothy for want whereof much 1. Tim. 6. 11.
learning and eloquence is showed: 2. Tim. 2, 24. 25.
many arguments and aucthorities are spent, many admonitions and doctrines are
delivered both publicly and privately, by Ministers and Magistrates, and of
all sorts, and little or no fruit come up after, because the affection is not
first sanctified by the spirit of love. This is also a lesson for us, if we be
householders, or masters of families, (for they must be preachers too in their
families after a sort) if we would have our counsel and correction do good,
with those that are under our government: let them see our tender affection,
and a fathers love both in our words and deeds.

In the 7. of Luke it is said of the Luke 7 8.
Centurion, that he had many servants under his authority, and they were
all at his beck, most ready to obey him in any thing that he set them about:
but how did he bring them to any such good order? surely it is said that his
servants were dear unto him: that is, he made a special reckoning of them,
and was a father unto them. So let all masters, make a reckoning of their
servants: for if thy servant can perceive that he is dear unto thee, thou
shall in time work him like wax to thine own mind, except he has sold
himself to work wickedness.

If thou be a husband and would win thy wife to God, or if thou be a wife,
and would win thy husband to God, draw you on one another with the sweet
words of love, speaking kindly one to another, because gentle words do
pacify anger, as water quenches fire. Remember Pro. 15. 1.
what counsel the ancient counselors of Solomon gave unto Rehoboam king of
Israel, that he 1. Kin. 12, 7.
might win the hearts of the people: speak kindly unto them, said they,
and they will serve thee for ever after. So, speak one to another in kind
words, and you will love one another for ever after. Words spoken in season
(says Solomon) are Pro. 25. 11.
like apples of gold with pictures of silver: what words more seasonable than
words of love and kindness? but words of despite and reproach, are always
out of season, and shall never do good. Sometime one word of kindness may
give grace unto all the rest of the speech: and one word of reproach and
despite may spill all thy counsel, if it be never so grave, and godly
otherwise: for a little leaven sowreth the whole lump.

This we see by daily experience, if a man say but (thou) to some one, he
cannot bear it, do (thou me) will he say again? An other again will take
some one word more to heart, than all the rest: oh that same one word (will
he say) went to my very heart. The Jews which hated the Lord Jesus, would
not vouchsafe to give him his name, when they talked of him, or with him; but
to show their utter dislike of him, they used to say, Is this he, or art thou
he that wilt do such a thing, Is not this he, whom they Ioh. 7. 15. 35
go about to kill? They would not say, Is not this Jesus Christ? or the son
of God? Again, whither will he go that we shall not find him? This is a most
despightfull kind of speaking, and does bewray a bundance of malice, that is
hidden in the heart. And is it not so between some Husbands and Wives, and
their neighbors? they could speak one to another, but disdain and anger
will not suffer the one to afford unto the other their names and their titles,
least they should be put in mind of those duties which these names require,
whereout Satan sucketh no small advantage; and these are like the spiritual
Jews. Whereas many times the very name of husband or wife, or brother, or
sister, or neighbor, or son, or servant, or master, does help not a
little to persuade the mind, and to win the affection: yea the very
mentioning of those names does oftentimes leave a print of duty behind in the
conscience. Many think themselves sufficiently discharged if they speak the
truth: It is no matter they think after what manner it be done; thinking to
prevail by boisterous terms, nicke-names, and words of disgrace, but they are
deceived: for if terms of love, and kindness will not prevail, words of
reproach and hatred, shall never prevail, except it be to make things worse,
and this will be the end of it, while they do so unkindly hunt one another,
the devil does hunt them both, until both of them become a pray unto the
devil, like men which make themselves a pray unto the Lawyers, while they
strive to eat up one another at law.

Now on the other side, if teachers must show themselves like Fathers, then by
the same law the people must show themselves like children. If the minister
must for his part seek them with a fathers affection; then they for their
part must not be wanting with a sonnelike affection. His authority for God
binds them to reverence him as the minister of God, and to obey him as if God
himself did command them, for for they are ambassadors for Christ or in
Christ's stead, and do entreat 2. Cor. 5. 20.
us to be reconciled unto God. And in the 2. Cor. 5. 20. the Apostle says that
God does beseech us through them: We must know then, when Gods minister in the
exercise of his ministry does persuade, God does persuade, when he does
threaten us, God does threaten us, when he does promise us any thing, God does
promise it, when he does show patience, it is Gods patience, if he does
forbear thee, God does forbear thee, and all this is done for thy good,
therefore they that abuse the ministers patience, (as he is a minister) do
abuse Gods patience, which God uses toward us for no other purpose, but to
draw us to repentance; which if we abuse to serve our own turn, we do but heap
unto our selves wrath, against the day of Romans 2. 4.
wrath.

Your murmurings are not against us (says Moses) but against God. Exodus 16. 7.
He that receives me, says Christ, etc. Mat. 10. 40.
He that despises you, despises me.

Therefore touch not mine anointed 1. Chr. 16. 22
(says God) and do my Prophets no harm, because they Psa. 105. 15.
are my Prophets, not to prophecy unto me, but for me unto you. Are we now at
liberty (think we) to here them or not to hear them, at our pleasure?
because some speak roughlye, and some smoothlye, may we now (without sin)
censure the preachers of the word, buy and sell them behind their backs, or
gibe and jest at them with our mouths? may we descant and play upon their
words (as the manner of some is) and escape in the end? may we ly in wait for
them and betray them? may we smite them with our tongues, as the Jews do smite
Jeremy? may we think any thing, well gotten that is gotten from them? 2. Sam.
2. 26
Or may we make more account of any, yea of the oddest companion in the world,
than of Gods minister. May any think to do this, and a great deal more,
which is used in the world, and not to be called to account for it one day?
Will there not be bitterness in the end? as Abner said to Ioab. But stay, thou
art a father and have children, and do try by all ways and means to do
them good, what if thy child should mock thee or jest at thee, when thou do
speak in earnest to him for his good, would thou be contented? what if he
should turn his back upon thee in contempt and go his way, when thou call
him? Or what if he should turn again and smite thee, when thou do reprove
him for his fault? but what if he should betray thee into the hands of his
enemies? would not thou think thy cost well bestowed upon him? would thou
take pleasure in such a monster? Nay, would thou not wish rather that he had
never seen the sun? But if a child ought not so to handle his natural
parents which have begotten him, and brought him forth into the world, shall
any man think it lawful so to handle his spiritual father by whom he is
begotten to God, and brought up to the hope of life everlasting.

The eye (says Solomon) that mocketh his father, and despises the Pro. 30. 17.
instruction of his mother, let the Ravens of the valley pick it out and the
young Eagles devour it. But the eye that mocketh the counsel of God his
heavenly father, or despises the instruction of Gods minister his spiritual
father, let the Devils of hell pick that out, and except he repent let the
infernal Spirits devour it.

But some will say, if he were learned as other men be, if he were of years
and gravity as some men be, if he were a good fellow as some men be, if he
would flatter and please as some men do, if he would preach seldom, as some
men do, if he were in place of authority as some men be, and did come with
countenance and credit, as some men do, then would we hear him and reverence
him, and regard him, and maintain him, as now we do not.

Now imagine that thy child should make such an apoligie for himsefe, when he
has dishonored thee, and say, father do not marvel, though I regard you not
more than I do, for you are but a young man, you are but a plain man, you are
but a poor man, you are but a simple man, and have no learning, I have more
learning than you, and can teach you, what though you give me meat and drink,
and apparel, what though you have brought me up to learning, yet it is not in
such plentiful and fine manner as some have, nor you do not handle me so
daintilie, nor make so much of me as some do use their children, etc. Therefore
I care not for you, if you had these properties as you have not, I would regard
you as now I do not. The application hereof I leave to every man's conscience,
but this let every one be assured of, that he which despises Gods minister,
despises his father, and he that betrayeth Gods minister, that begat him to
the faith, betrayeth his father. And will not God be avenged of such unkindness,
yea the heavy judgment of God shall pursue such unkind and unnatural beasts,
until they be rooted out of the earth, and the memorial of them shall perish.
Elisha seeing Elias ready to depart, cried 2. Kin. 3. 12.
My father, my father, the horsemen of Israel, and the chariots of the same, but
now Elah is accounted and used of some, as if he were the sootstooles of
Israel, and the chairs of the same, howbeit Eliah, there be that have thee in
singular account for thy works sake, and be of good comfort, for so long as
the poor widow of Sarepta has any oil left in her cruse, or meal in her
barrel, thou shall not want, and Ioash king of 2. Kin. 13. 14.
Israel will no doubt come and visit Elisha when he is sick, yet some (I must
needs say) are at this point, they will give Ezechiel the hearing, and when
the Preacher has done, he may go shake his ears, as men use their wine
caskes, and fig frailes, when they are emptied, they are turned out of the
doors.

The Physician for his physic, is esteemed of his patients, the lawyer for
his law, is esteemed of his clients, the serving man for his badge is esteemed
for his masters sake, the iester with his jests is esteemed of his companions,
and the fool with his babble, is regarded among fools, and shall not Gods
minister for his works sake, be esteemed of amongst the sons of God? If
Preachers were lawyers, or Physicians, they should be often consulted with and
in better sort than they be, or if Preachers were players, and their black
gowns turned into blew coats with a badge on the sleeue, doubtless the
chiefest of the town would hear them, and they should lack no audience, if
we be sick in body, send for this doctor, and that doctoure: both shall be
heard without controllment, yea, and shall they not use us at their pleasure?
If we have a suit at law, we retain this counselor, and that counselor, we
suspect our own skill, and they shall order the matter as they list, but many
men's souls are sick to death, being ready to yield up the Ghost, and to go to
hell, but the physicians of the soul, are seldom or never sent for, and every
one is able (for the most part) to appoint the preacher his text, how he shall
handle it for matter and manner, this was no fit text (says one) this was ill
handled and worse applied (says another) why does he not preach upon the
Epistle and the Gospel (says another) one says, there he went besides his
text, another says, he stood too long, or he spoke plainly, another says,
he has a bad utterance, and spits much, another says, this is too high for
me, I cannot understand him, another says, this is common stuff, I knew this
before, some say, what has he to do with Maiestrates, must he be meddling with
the Maiestrates office, some say, what need he speak against images, what
hurt do they, some say, he never speaks any Latin, I warrant you he is no
scholar, and another is much troubled in his conscience, because the preacher
has gathered notes out of other men's works, but if he has any notes before
him in his books, to help his memory, Oh, that is a heinous matter, and then
he is fallen into a deep pit indeed, let him get out as well as he can, for
poor Joseph was never in such a pit as this is. Every one is cunning in the
preachers office, if he be never so ignorant, and commonly the more ignorant,
the more presumptuous. The Lord open our eyes, and touch our hearts, that we
may repent, before his wrath flame out upon us, for the great contempt of this
his holy and heavenly ordenaunce.

There is no question but that many things might be better handled than
oftentimes they are. But for the sins of the people it comes to pass, that
many times (if not generally) the Lord does strengthen the meditations of the
minister, he dulleth his wits, and makes his tongue to cleave fast to the
roof of his mouth, giving no edge to his doctrine, no comfort to his studies,
nor any blessing to his labors. But the cause hereof may be, and no doubt is
partly in the speaker, and partly in the hearer, and want of prayer in both is
the cause thereof, this knew the Apostle well inongh, and therefore he does
earnestly exhort the Ephesians in all their prayers Ephesians. 6. 18. 19
to pray for him, that the door of utterance and boldness might be opened unto
him. And again he prays for the Ephesians that God would give unto them, the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of God, and that the eyes
Ephesians. 1. 16. 17
of their understanding might be enlightened, etc. This is to teach both
minister and people to commend one another unto God in prayer, for well may
Jacob prepare a present for his brother Esau, but God must give him, and his
present, favor in the Genesis 32. 11. 13.
eyes of his brother, and that he must pray, for we should pray before we go
out of our houses, that the Lord would be merciful both to our own sins,
and the sins of the teacher, we should pray that God would direct him in the
delivery of his message, and assist us in the receiving of the same, we should
pray that God would sa^ctifie both his affections in speaking, and our
affections in hearing, to the greatest glory of God, and our own mutual
comfort, and that the Lord would give to both all such graces as he knows
best to be most needful for us, we ought not to rush into Gods house as into
an Alehouse, or to a market, the man of God ought not to speak in Gods place,
as if he were telling a tale at the table, for Cursed is he that does Gods
works neglegently, says the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 48. 10.
neither ought we to hear, as if we heard a fiddlers song, but with all fear
and reverence we should come, as into the presence of God, and his Angels, and
so we do, for what health can we have, when we handle the food of our souls
with unwashed hands? What blessing can we hope for, when our sins do call
for a curse? What fruit can we look for, when we sow among the thorns? What
reformation can there be, where there is no resolution to amend? What fear of
God, when we respect only a man? What comfort is there in heavenly things,
when our minds are set upon earthly matters? And finally, what peace can we
possess in our consciences, when our whole life is a war against God? as
Iehu said to Iehoram, What peace can thou look for, 2. Kin. 9. 22.
when the whoredoms and witchcraftes of thy mother Iezabell, are yet great in
number? Therefore let us wash and be clean, that is, let us repent and amend,
and then let us go about the holy things of God.

If we can not be so clean as we should, (as Who can say his heart is Pro. 20.
9.
clean) yet let us take heed that we refuse not the holy things of God, but
strive by prayer, and wait for the Lords work in the use of the same, and
the Lord will in the end fulfill our desire, yea let us strive Genesis 38.
with God, as Jacob wrestled with the Angel, it may be that at the first we
shall be deceived as Jacob was, and if we continue wrestling, it may be we
shall get some more blows than we had before, as Jacob did, and what if we
halt more than we did before, as Jacob did, yet let us continue and not give
over, and be we sure we shall find a blessing in the end as Jacob did, and when
that blessing is gone, let us wrestle again with him and he will bless us
again, yea, for every one that will wrestle with the Lord by prayer, he has a
blessing in store, so often as they come. For the Lord is not like Isaac, who
when he had blessed one of his sons could not bless the other. But when God
has blessed Mat. 5. 3, 4, 5 6, 7, 8. 9.
the poor in spirit, he will bless those that mourn for their sins, when
he has blessed the mourners for sin, he will bless the meek hearted, when
he has blessed them, then he has a blessing for those which hunger and thirst
after righteousness, when he has blessed them, he has a blessing for the
merciful and simple in heart, when he has blessed them, he will bless the
peacemakers, he will also bless the persecuted and those that are reviled,
slaundered, and evil spoken of for righteousness sake, shall be blessed.

And thus have we heard, how to teach and how to learn. And thus much of these
words, My son, both as they be the words of God, and the words of Solomon.

FINIS.

