A sermon preached at Paul's cross on Trinity sunday, 1571. By. E. B.

Imprinted at London by John Awdely. 1576.

printer's device of John Awdeley, a compartment with two naked boys on the
jambs. On the sill the initials I.N. on a shield. (McKerrow 98) I N



A Sermon upon a part of the.iij. Chapter of Paul's second Epistle to Timotheus.
2. TIMOTHEVS. 3.16. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to doctrine, to reprove, to correction, to instruction which is in
righteousness. 17 That the man of God may be perfect, instructed unto all good
works.


AS all the holy scripture is profitable to teach true and sound doctrine to
confute false and erroneous doctrine, to instruct in good and godly life, and
to reprove ungodly and wicked life, that the man of God may be profited and
prepared to every good work as the Apostle says. So right honorable and
dearly beloved in our Savior Christ, if I may make any comparion between
those divine, and heavenly books, the book of Psalms is a most precious
pearl, and a most worthy work containing most sweet and comfortable doctrine
for the soul and conscience of man. And therefore whosoever he was that did
write ye first preface before the commentaries of s. Augustine upon the
Psalms, does not unworthily call this book Registrus totius sacra scripture etc

1. A register of all the holy scripture and a perfection of all divinity. And
s. Augustine himself in his own preface says that this book of the Psalms
is Communis quidam thesaurus bonae doctrine aptesingulis necessaria
Subministrans, that is a certain commune treasure or scholehouse of good
doctrine, Calvin in his preaface before ye Psalms.
ministering fitly to every one those things which be necessary for them. A
certain worthy writer of our age calls this book an Anatomy of the soul,
for that there is no affection, passion, nor motion, unto the which the soul of
man is subject but he may see the same most lively expressed in this book of
the Psalms. For whether we be persecuted by open enemies, or molested by
those that have seemed to be our friends, who have gone up into the temple
with us, Psalm. 41 9 (...) ^5.15,
and have taken sweet counsel together, or whether we be grieved with
sickness, or troubled with the feeling of our sins, or in what other soever
perplexity or distress we be, we may suck out of this book of the Psalms
most sweet and comfortable doctrine either for the amendment of our lives, or
the comfort of our consciences. And therefore S. Augustine says very well, that
this book of the Psalms is scutuma nocturuis terroribus, diurnorum requ^es
laborum, tutela pueris, ornamentum adoiescentibus, Solamen Senibus, mulieribus
aptissimus decor, that is to say, a shield against the terrors of the night, a
rest for the labors of the ^ay, a defense for children an ornament for young
men, I would to God ye young men would seek to stay their frail and slippery
youth with the diligent reading of this book. I would that old men would
solace their wearysome old age with meditating on this book. I would women
would trym, and attire themse^^e not with gold and brodered hear, as the
Apostle. says but with the precious pearls, and jewels that are contained in
this book. Surely S. Iereme in epitaphio Paul has these words. Neque emim
licebat cuique Sororum ignorare Psalmos, and non de scripturis sanctis quotidie
aliquid discere, That is to say, it was not lawful for any of the sisters that
were with Paula to be ignorant of the Psalms, or not to learn every day
somewhat of the scriptures. A godly exercise for women. The same s. Jerome
writing to a gentelwoman called Data, instructing her how to bring up her
daughter writes thus. Turpia verba non intelliga^, cantica mundi ignoret adhuc
tenera lingda psalmis dulcibus imbuator. That is, Let her not hear filthy
talk, let her not learn wordly songs, but whilst her tongue is as yet tender
let it be exercised in the sweet psalms A godly education for children. Here by
the way I must show you, how contrary ye judgment of S. Jerome is to the
opinion of the papists S. Jerome would have not only men, but also women:
not only women but also children and young girls to be exercised and trained
up in the scriptures. The Papists have k^pt the light of gods word under the
busshell of a strange tongue, have taken away the key of knowledge and have
shut up the kingdom of God before men, and neither will enter in themselves nor
suffer others that would. But to return again to my purpose if this book of
the Psalms be so worthy a work, ought not we worthily use it? Yes verily. And
how shall we worthily use it? If we do reverently use it, if we study and
meditate upon it, if we break the shell and get the kernall, that is, if we
seek the simple sense of the holy ghost, and apply the same unto our selves,
either to amend our lives, or to comfort our consciences, if we do thus use it,
we shall worthily and frutefully use it. But I fear me we do for ye most part
abus^ it, we read it, but we little regard it, we do but run over it, we toss
it from one side to another like tennis balls with small comfort to our
selves, and less profit to others. Thus to use gods holy word is not rightly
to use it, but rather to abuse it. For whosoever does use the word of God to
any other end, then to that to the which the spirit of God did indite if, and
the holy prophets and Apostles did write it, do abuse it, and then shall render
an account to God for it. I pray God for his mercy, that our hastye handling of
his holy word, do not hasten his just judgment to deprive us of it. But some
man peradventure may hear say: What mean you to speak thus much upon the
Psalms? Because (dearly beloved) I purpose by the assistance of gods grace
and holy spirit, to entreat on a psalm. for considering that that part of
scripture which is appointed this d^yte be ^^ad for the Gospel has been of late
very largely handeled in very puplike and solemn place by others, and that the
other part of scripture is taken out of the revelation, more meet to be
handeled by a meeter man, and by one that has more learning and leisure the^ I
have for these considerations I say I have omitted them and at this time
present have taken my self to a Psalm.

Psalm. LXXV. We will praise thee O God we will praise thee. For thy name is
nere^ therefore they will declare thy wondrous works.

THis Psalm may be divided into four parts whereof the first conteyneth a
vow and promise of ye godly to praise the name of God, and to declare his
wonderful works, for that his name is ever near both to be are, and also to
save and deliver them.

2. The second part conteyneth an answer in the person of almighty God, wherein
is declared that God when he shall see a convenient time will judge justly, and
although the earth withal the inhabitance thereof be far out of frame, yet he
will stablish the pillars thereof, and bring al to good order again.

3. The third part conteyneth an exhortation to the folish and wicked, neither
to trust ^n their own power, and wisdom, nor to exalt themselves against God
and his people: But rather to consider that al true preferment comes of God,
and he exalts some, and puts down other.

4. The fourth and last part contains partly a co^mination of Gods heavy
judgments, which hang over the wicked, and partly a consolation of his
mercies toward the godly. Upon these four points I purpose by Gods grace to
entreat.

We will praise thee O God. This first part as I have above touched conteyneth
a promise of the people of God to praise the name of God, because he is ever
near to hear them, and his power ever present, and his help ever at hand to
save and deliver the^.

First we have to consider whom we must praise, and to whom we must pray. Even
the Lord our God. It is he only who created and made us, it is he only who
bestows all both spiritual graces, and temporal benifites upon us,
therefore him only must we praise, and to him only pray. Prayer whereof praise
and thanks giving is a part, is the cheifest exercise of a good christians
says, it is our spiritual service, it is the sacrifice of their lips which
confess his name and therefore it is to be offered only to god. But there upon
I will not stand.

Secondly let us consider of whom God must be praised not generally of all men,
but perticularly of some, not of the wicked and ungodly, but of those that
fear God, and walk in his ways, of those that love him, and keep his
commandments, of those that be justified by his grace, and saintified by his
spirit. God will not be praised of a blasphemous mouth, nor of tunge that is
given to swearing. God will not be praised of a dronke^ head, nor a malicious
mind, nor a covetous heart, nor a filthy defiled body. God will not be praised
of those whose feet are ready to run to do mischife, and whose hands are full
of blood. God says by the prophets: When you shall stre^tch out your hands, I
will hide mine eyes from you and though ye make many prayers, I will not hear
you, for your hands be full of blood. In the which place there is meant by
blood, not only the external and outward sheding of blood, but also al kind of
cruelty, extremity, usury, extortion and oppression of the pore. Therefore all
they in whose houses is the spoil of the poor, that beat the people to
powder, as Esaias says: and that pluck of their skins and chop in pieces their
flesh, Mich. 33
as it were for the pot as Micha ^aith: or that eat up gods people as though
^hey were bread, as David says, Psalm. i4. 4
cannot worthily and fruitefully praise God. And ^^ere there such in Judea, and
is there no such in England? Yes to many. Al usurers that byte, yea and undo
their poor brethe^in, be such, all raisers and rackers of rents be such, all
turners of the poor out of their houses and livings: be such, to conclude, all
they yt use any injury or violence against the poor, be such. And if we put
all these together, we shall see that there be enough and to many such. There
was never greater pride, never greater extorcion and oppression to maintain
pride. I do know where of late there has been villages wherein diverse families
have been norished, and men mainteyned, able to serve both the prince and
cuntry. And now all are wrung out, and turned out, and all is annexed to the
demayne of one man to maintain an insatiable cormorant. Thief that thus turn
out ye poor, turn Gods favorable face from them: they turn Gods frowning
face and ireful countenance toward them. Woe be unto them says God by his
prophet, that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no
place for the poor, that you may dwell by your selves in the midddest of the
earth. This is in the ears of the Lord of hosts, so that many houses shall be
desolate, even many and great without inhabitant, Surely if this be not
amended, God himself from heaven will revenge it.

Pro. 21. i3.
Solomon in the proverbs says: he that stops his ears at the cry of the
poor, he himself shall cry and not be heard. If those that be merciles, that
show no pity nor compassion upon the poor, that do not help and reliue them
in their necessity, cannot fruit fully praise God, much more they that oppress
and undo the pore, can nether praise nor please God.

Pro. 28.9.
The same Solomon says: He that turns his ear from hearing the law of the
Lord, his prayer is abominable. By the which we may learn, that as well they
which be careless and negligent in hearing Gods word, as also those wilful
obstinate papists which will not once voutsafe to come ^o the congregation and
hear it, can not worthily praise God. (...)


S. James exhorts us in these words: If any man lack wisdom, let him ask
it of God, which gives to all men liberally, and casts no man in the teeth,
and it shall ^e given him. But let him ask in faith and waver not, for he that
wauereth is like a wave of the sea, tossed of the wind and carried away, nether
let that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. By the which
we be taught, yt they in whose hearts is the root of infidelity who are
destitute of faith by the which we apprehend the mercies of God in Christ, can
nether praise nor please God, for by faith we are grafted into Christ, by faith
we be adopted to be the children of God, by faith Christ dwells in our
hearts, therefore without faith it is impossible to please God. And whatsoever
is not of faith is sin.

Finally all they that work wickedness and live dissolutely without fear of
God, Calvin in his preaface before ye psalms.
cannot worthily praise god. David says: if I regard wickedness in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me. And Solomon says, that the sacrifices of the wicked be
abomination unto the Lord. David also says, that the prayer of the wicked is
turned into sin In the ninth of S. John it is said: God hears not sinners.
But some man may hear say, whom then does God hear? Are we not al sinners,
has not God concludes all under syn: are we not all unprofitable servants?
Whom then shall God hear? I answer (Dearly beloved) that we be al sinners, and
that there is not one that does good, no not one: Yet notwithstanding there are
two sorts of sinners. There be some that sin but they are sorry for their
syns, they have contrite and broken hearts for their sins, they feel the
burden of their syns in their consciences, they travel and be heavy laden with
their sins. These come unto Christ Jesus, and by him are refreshed and eased
of their sins. These believe that almighty God for Christ Jesus sake will be
merciful to their sins, and forgive them their iniquities, And thus by faith
Christ's obedience is made their obedience. Christ's fulfilling of the law, is
become their fulfilling of the law: Christ's righteousness is their
righteousness, and covers all their unrighteousness. So that although they be
unrighteous sinners in themselves, yet before God they be righteous for Christ
Jesus sake I pray God we all may be in the number of this sort of sinners.
These sinners God loves and hears. The eyes of the Lord are over the
righteous and his ears be open unto their prayers.

But there is another sort of sinners, which commit syn without grief of mind,
^r compunctio^ of heart, which delight in syn, and run forward in sin like the
stoned ^orse in the battle, and wallow in wickedness ^yke the sow in the mire.
They have not ^hys lively faith which is an assurance of Gods love toward us
in Christ Jesus, and (...) lively apprehension of Gods mercyes in Christ. These
cannot praise God, nay the ^nger of almighty God hangs over them ^o route
then: out. Let us beware and take ^eede that we be not in number of these
syn^ers. These god hears not, but has as it ^s in the Psalm. Odisti omnes
qui operatur ^niquit^tem, 1. Thou hate al those ye work wickedness. But rather
let us rent our hearts and not our garments, and turn to the Lord our God, who
is gracious and merciful, flow to anger and of great gooones. Here also I will
show you that the papists cannot praise god, and yet they boast much of prayer,
and say that prayer is despised and neglected of us. But I trust any man may
easily perceive partly by the earnest zeal of Godly men in prayer, and partly
by the earnest exhortacions of good men to praise, and lastly by the Godly
books, that we have written or prayer that this is no true report, by them to
deface gods touth, and to bring us into hatred with the people.

In deed as our Savior Christ despised the hipocritical prayers of the
papists, We condemn their unfruitful numbling in a strange tongue, and
their ungodly calling upon creatures which is not warranted but condemned, by
the word of God. But as for true prayer which is a lifting up of our souls,
and a pouring forth of our hearts before God, and an earnest invocation of his
holy name in the only name of his dear son Christ Jesus our savior, we
greatly commend, and earnestly exhort al men unto it.

But howsoever the papists glory in their prayer, I will prove unto you by gods
grace that they cannot frutefully praise God, for how can they fruitefully
praise God who dishonor God, and spoil Christ Jesus of his glory. Christ Jesus
was appointed and anointed of his father to be our king who only should
conquer and overcome Satan, sin, death and damnation, who only should rule
his universal church with his spirit and word, who only should be the head
of his church, and give life unto the same being his body. But the papists
^aue robbed him hereof, for they have deui^ed many other means ^o overcome
sin, (...) Satan, besides Christ. You heard of late ^n this place, how that
the papists affirm that Christ died only for original sin, and that for
other sins we our selves must mak^ satisfaction, you heard also how that
Pigghius the papiste does confidently ^uouch that original sin is not sin,
^ut only so called because it flows and ^ommeth from syn. So that of this
doctrine (...) must needs follow that Christ died for that which is not in
deed sin, but has ^nly the name and title of sin. They ^aue commit the
regiment of Christ's vni^ersall church to one man, who has been ^uer so unable
to ^usteine so great a charge that hitherto he was never well able right ^y to
rule that one city of Rome, nor his col^edge of Cardnals. Him they have made
^ead of the Church, in whom (as they say) ^he unity of the Church consi^teth,
and upon whom the safety of the Church depends, ^o that he which is not in
this Church, whereof the Pope is head, is out of Noes ^rke, and out of peter's
ship, and cannot be ^aued ^ut must needs be drowned. This is th^^^ doctrine,
by the which they deprive Christ Jesus as much as in them lies of that
function unto the which his heavenly father t^o appoint him. Christ was
anointed and appointed to be our only prophet and scholemaister, whom only
we should have as his heavenly father did testify of him saying. Hic est silius
meus dilectus in quo mihi benae complacitum est, ipse andite. 1. This is my
well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. He has delivered unto us
his holy word and gospel which is able to save our souls, and also to make
the man of god perfect prepared to every good work, this he has sealed and
confirmed with his blood. Yet notwithstanding the papists do affirm that all
things needeful and necessary to our salvation, a^ not contained in the
scriptures, but that we must receive many traditions, which yet are but
triffles and believe many unwritten verities. And thus in effect they take from
him the office of being our prophet to instruct us. Christ Jesus was anointed
of God to be our hi^ priest, where with the sacrifice of his body and blood
once offered has paid the price and ransom of our sins, who entered once
into the holy place, and found eternal redemption, who with one sacryfyce once
^ffered has made perfyt al those that shall be saved, Mich. 33
who died once the righteous for the unrighteous, Psalm. i4. 4
and bare our sins upon the wood. But the Papists have brought in a fained
and forged sacrifice of their own devise, auailable (as they say) not only
for the sins of thos^ that are alive, but also for them that are dead. This
feyned sacrifice, as it has no warrant at al in the word of God, so is it a
great derogation to the death and passion of Christ coniured by the Pope:
Peccatum ^rangit vt Christi Sanquis et augit It breaks and greueth sin as
well as the blood of Christ. For thus full rudely or rather blasphemously did
Pope Vrbane run to Fre^erick the Emperor. They say that holy water is
aueileable, ad salutem animae et corporis to the salvation of the soul and
body. They have taught us to say and pray. Jesus bonae per Thoma merita nostra
nobis demitte debita. i. Good Jesus for the merits of Thomas forgive us our
debtes, that is to say our sins. And again. Tu per Thoma sanguinem etc which
in a rude rhyme they thus translated make us Christ to clime whether Thomas did
ascend. Thus we may plainly perceive that the papists ascribe that which is
only proper to the merits and blood of Christ Jesus the son of God, to the
merits and blood of a man, I will not say what manner of man. I read in an
epistle lately written to the senate of Venice, that in that solemn Church of
S. Mark in Venice there be cunningly and costly graued the four pictures of
the four Evangelists, Pro. 21.13
and under every one his peculiar verse. Under S. Matthew this: ablue concta
reae mentis mala sancte Mathee: that is O S. Matthew wash away all the evils of
a gilty mind: and under S. John this: Quo sine sine manes perduc nos virgo
Johannes, that is, O Virgin John bring us thither where thou do abide for
ever. Pro. 28.9.
If this be not blasphemous against God the father and our savior Jesus
christ, I know not what I should count or call blasphemous. Christ was anointed
to be our only mediator betwixt God and man, as the Apostel says. But they
have made many mediators whereof we may well doubt whether some be in heaven or
not. And thus we may sufficiently see that the Papists although they profess
Christ in word, (...)
yet they deny him in deed. Wherefore unless we hate and abhor this
devilish, dam^able doctrine which is repugnant to Gods lord, and iniurous to
Christ's death we can ^e there truly please nor praise God.

Now let us consider how we must praise God: It is here said. We will praise
thee O God, we will praise thee, this repitition is ^n effectual kind of speech,
teaching us, that we must praise God earnestly and not neg^ygently, zealously
and not caresly, feruent^y not coldly. And herein we must tread in ^he steps
and follow the example of our savior Christ, who in the days of his flesh (as
the Apostel says) did offer up prayers and supplications, cum clamore valido
et lachri^mis, with strong crying and tears, to him that was able to save him.
And how we may thus effectualy pray, Calvin in his preaface before ye psalms,
the Apostle teaches us saying, Spiritus interpellat pro nobis ^gemitibus
menarrabilibus. 1. The spirit of God makes intercession for us with gronings
that cannot be expressed, the meaning whereof is as S. Augustine does truly
expound it, that the spirit of God does move and stir up our hearts to pray
unto God with sighs and gronings which cannot be expressed. They therefore
which are sealed with Gods holy spirit, and whom the said spirit does move to
cry Abba father, they I say do pray unto god with deep sighs: gronings The
Apostle in the 12 to the Romans teaches us who be the true worshippers of
God, Spiritu feruentes domino seruientes, being fervent in spirit, and fearing
the Lord. Those be the true seruers and servants of God which be fervent in
the spirit. But the world is now come to that point almost, that it is
counted in a manner worthy reprosse to be zealous and fervent in the spirit. For
if a man calmely and temperately handle gods cause, then he is counted a
wiseman, a sober man, and a discreate man. But if the zeal of Gods house have
eaten him up and touch the quick, he hunger and thirst the reformation of
things that be amiss, then he is called rash, foolish, vndiscreate, and I wot
not what. But I beseech God that all men, especially the ministers and preachers
of Gods holy word may be endewed with the two properties which are commended
in Apollo to be fervent in the spirit, and mighty in the scriptures. Both
these must be coupled together, and not severed a sunder in a minister, for
nether knowledge is sufficient without zeal, nether zeal without knowledge,
For S. Paul does testifye of his cuntrymen the Jews, that they had zeal
toward God, but not according to ^nowledge. And yet in my opinion good zeal
^ith small learning, is better then great ^arning with small zeal.

Now let us consider why we should praise God and declare his marvelous works,
it and hear declared in these words. For thy ^ame is near. The name of God,
that is to God himself, his power and majesty is said ^s be near. First
because he is ready to ^ere our prayers and peticions, Secondly because his
mighty power is ever present ^o save and deliver us. Of the first David ^aith:
the Lord is near do all that call upon ^im in truth. And god promises by the
prophet Esaias to here his people even before they call upon him. I have good
cause to confute the papists, who imagine God to stand a soufe and far of, and
that therefore we must come unto him, as unto a worldly king by the means of
Saints, who in their opinion are nerer unto us then God. But dea^ly beloved
be not deceived there is no saint in heaven nor earth so nere unto thee, as is
almighty God, For as touching the saints which be, are departed this life,
whether they do hear our prayers or know our estate it is to be doubted,
surely S. Augustine in his book de cura pro mortuis ad Paulinum, seems to
conclude, that as we here living do not know what is don in heaven, so that
saints in heaven know not what is done on the earth. And to this purpose he
alleges certain places out of the holy scriptures, First out of the.63,
chapter of Esaias the Prophet, Abraham nefciuitnos, Israel ignorauit nos.
Abraham has not known us, Israel has not known us, thou O Lord art our
Father, and our redeemer, thy name is for ever. Here the Prophet does not
direct his prayer to Abraham nor to Jacob, but only to God, yea and he plainly
professes that Abraham and Jacob did not know their estate, and therefore he
seeks only to God. Another place Augustine aledgeth out of the Psalm, Pater
et matter dereliquerunt me, dominus autem susepit me- My Father and my mother
have forsaken me, but the Lord has taken me up. A third place he writes out
of the book of Kings where Hulda the prophetisse did show king Iosia that he
should be gathered to his Fathers, and buried in peace, that his eyes might not
see the evil which God would bring up on ye people. By these places. S.
Augustine does prove that the saints departed do never hear our prayers, nor
understand our estate. But if I should grant that they do hear our prayers
(which yet cannot be proved by the scriptures) yet does it not follow that they
be nearer unto us then God. Solomon says, Tu solus nouisti corda filiorum
Israel: Thou only O lord know the hearts of the sons of Israel. He only
search the ^arts and reins, and therefore he is nearer unto us then all
saints and creatures. But as touching this matter of Invocation I will say no
more, only this I conclude, we have in the scriptures the express
commandment of God to call upon him. Call upon me (says God) in the day of
thy trouble and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. We have many
promises that our prayers shall be accepted and granted being offered to god in
ye name of our savior Christ as may pear in the text last alleged. And in
Joel it is sand Que cunque in vocauerit. etc. who soever calls upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved. And our Savior Christ says Whatsoever ye ask of
the father in my name, be shall give it you. We have examples of the holy
patriarchs, prophets, and Appostles which prayed to none other but only to
God. On the other part we have not in all the scriptures any one commandment
to pray to any saint, nor any promise that our prayers either made unto the^ or
offered to God in their names, shall be accepted or granted of God, nether have
we any one example of any one Godly patriarch. Prophet, or Apostell that ever
prayed to any other but only to God, and therefore ought we also to pour
fourth our prayers only to God. And this in my judgment might sufficiently
serve any man that will humbly submit himself to Gods truth, and not be froward
and obstinat against the same.

Secondelye Gods name is said to be near, because his power is ever present
to save and deliver his. But here it may be objected. How is Gods power ever
present, when the Godly do greatelye complain after this sort. Why stand
thou a far of O Lord, and hidest thee in dew time, even in affliction? And
again, how long will thou forget me O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hyde
thy face from me Vsque quo domine? How long O Lord shall all the workers of
wickedness triumph. etc I answer that all though God be ever present to save
his, yet he does not show the same, nether do they taste of it, until it seem
^ood unto almighty God, Mich. 3^
and therefore it fo^oweth in the second part, When I shall ^ake a convenient
time I will judge justly. Psalm. i4. 4
^o that we must patiently wait on the lord, and abide the Lords leisure. And
when ^e shall take a convenient time he will judge ^ustly. This just judgment of
God consist^n.ij. points partly in saving and delivering ^is people which fear
him, and partly in ^unishinge and plaginge his enemies: where by the way I
may note that all civil justice (which ought also to be conformed to the
justice of God) consists likewise in these two, points in defending the
good, and punishing the evil. All common wealths (says the philosopher) must
be ruled with Praemio and paena, reward to the good, and punishment for the
evil. And therefore where the good and Godly be punished, or the wicked spared,
there is neither just judgment nor good government.

Here before I proceed any further I must exhort al judges and magistrates by
the example of almighty God to jude justly and severely to punish sin, and
especially I must earnestly move you severely and sharply to punish murder,
and sheding of blood. For men's hands are so ticklish, and their feet so ready
to run to this mischief (as may appear by these stirs and vprores lately
raised which can scarsly be appeased (that unless this enormity be seuerly
punished no peace nor quietness can be preserved. And yet I do not mind to
kindle you to any further severity then God in his law has commanded. Pro.
21. 13
In the.ix. of Genesis we read yt he which sheedeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed again. This was before the law was given. In the law Exodus
21. it is thus said: he shall dye the death. In the.35. of Numeri God
expressly commands that whosoever kills any person the judge shall slay the
murderer through two witness but one witness shall not testifi against a person
to cause him to die. And it follows after ye shall take no recompense for the
life of the murderer, which is worthy to dye, but he shall be put to death. Here
al agreement with the parties is excluded and prohibited of God. And the reason
hereof follows in these words: for blood defiles the land, and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it. In the.19. of Deuteronomie God commands thus: thy eye shall
not spare him, but thou shall put away the cry of inno^ent blood from Israel
that it may be well ^ith thee. Thy eye shall not spare him says God, thou
shall have no pity nor compassion upon him, thou shall not say. Oh he is a
pro^er man, a tal fellow, able to do good service ^o, thy eye shall not spare
him says God. Paul spared Agag, but God did reject him. Achab spared Benadab.
But God plagued him for it. Where the mighty God says kill, shall earth and
ashes say spare? No, the magistrate is appointed to execute Gods law, And not
to dispense with it at his pleasure. The second thing that is to be considered
is that we must put away the cry of innocent blood, by the which we may learn,
that blood wrongfully shed cries for vengeance As the blood of Abell cried
unto God from the ground, and woe be to that land where God is as it were
enforced to take ye sword into his own hand, it is a terrible thing says the
Apostle to fall into the hands of the living God. The third thing that there
is to be noted is, that it may be well with thee, the which admonishes, us
that it cannot be well with that people, where the sheeding of innocent blood
is not punished. God will not be pleased with the Isralites until the heads
that is to say the princes and rulers of the people who had been causers of
that fornicatyon and Idolatry committed with the Moabits he hanged before the son
God will not be pacified with the Isralits, until Athan be stoned. The storm
will not cease until Jonas who was the occasion thereof be thrown over board. And
so surely this realm, and chiefly this City of London will never be quiet
until these Ionasses, these sheders of blood be either throne over bourd or
turned off the ladder. And yet my meaning is not, but that in some cases
slaughter may be committed and the same by death be not revenged. As if a man
slay his neighbor and before did not hate him, God in such cases provided
places of refuge, to the which the stear should flee, and ther^e saved from the
auenger of blood. And also if a man be constrained and extremely urged for the
safety of his own life the magistrate may consider thereof. But my meaning is
that this wilfulnes of whot heads, and lusty bloods is to be restrained and
sharply punished. A crocked word and by and by his dagger on his head, a little
ouerthward answer, and his sword in his side. This is not to be suffered in a
Christian common wealth. But to come (...) my matter, generally I exhort al
judges ^^d magistrates to judge justly, not to turn ^^dgement into wormwood,
neither by vn^st and wrongful judgment, neither by ^elaying and deferring of
justice. And also (...) beware that neither bribery do blind the^ or respect of
persons do move them to judge ^niustly. Justice must have but and eye and not
two, not to look on the cause ^ith the one, and on the purse with the o^^er,
not on the matter with the one, and upon the party with the other, No, Justice
^ust have but one eye, which directly must ^poke upon the cause. Judge
therefore ^stly, for as you judge so shall you be ^udged, and with what measure
you meat ^o other, with the same shall it be measured ^o you again. This can
the poet Phocilli^es (whom I had like to have called a pro^hane Poet, but in
deed he was a divine Poet) teach us in these verses: reject not ^he poor,
judge no man unjustly, for if thou judge wrongfullye, God shall afterward
judge thee, And thus much by the way touching the judgment of man. Now to come
again to my text: when I take a convenient time (says God) I will judge
justly. This just judgment of God I have before touched consists in these
two things in saving and delivering his people, and plaging his enemies. And
when is it a convenient time for God to judge thee justly. Surely it is a
convenient time for God to judge justly in punishing of the wicked when their
sins are grown to a ripenes and fulness, when no admonition will amend them,
when no correction will reclayme them, then I say it is a convenient time for
God to pour down his heavy judgments upon them, When the wickedness of man
was waxen great upon the earth and all flesh had defiled their ways, and God
had appointed the^ a space office score years to repent in, and called them by
the mouth of Noah to repentance and had caused the Arc to be made in sign of
their destruction, when nothing I say could amend them, but they neglected gods
calling, dispise^ his preacher and continewed in their wickedness, then was it a
convenient time for god to execute his just ^^ogementes against them. So
likewise when the cry of the sins of Sodom had ascended up unto heaven, and
they would not be warned by righteous Lot, bu^ rather vexed him with their
unclean conversation, then was it a convenient time, for ^od terrybly to
destroy them, with fire and ^rimstone from heaven. So likewise the Jews, when
God of his great mercy had ^ysen up early (as ye scripture terms it) and had
sent al his servant the prophets unto them, had cried unto them, but they
would not hear him, had called unto them but they would not answer him, but
walked ^n the stubbernnes of their own hearts; and mocked Gods messengers,
misused his prophets, and despised his words. Then when there was no remedy,
it was a convenient time for the wrath of the Lord to arise against them, who
brought the Caldeans upon them, by whom their country was spoiled, their Cities
subverted, their temple wherein they so glorified was raised, their people
destroyed, and the rest carried into miserable captivity. The like may be said
of the Jews afterward, for when neither the divine doctrine which our Savior
Christ taught, nor the wonderful works which he had wrought among them, could
move the^ to acknowledge and embrace him for their only Messiah and Savior,
but they would crucify the Lord of glory, and persecute his Apostols, the^ was
it a convenient time for God to bring the Romans upon the^, by whom they were
miserably and terribly destroyed. Let us dearly beloved be admonished by these
examples to take heed that we walk not in the like stubbernnes, and commit
not the like wickedness as they did, for surely if we do, we shall drink of ye
same cup as they did But when I consider our great unthankfulness toward God,
our great wickedness against God, our backslyding and backstarting from God. I
stand in horror and terror of these heavy judgments which I fear me hang over
us. God for his mercy turn them away from us, and the only way for us to
avoid them, is to turn by true and unfeigned repentance to the Lord our God,
who is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great goodness. Thus you
have heard when it is a convenient time for God to plauge his enemies: Now let
us consider when it is a convenient time for God to judge justly in saving and
delivering his people. When god has sufficiently corrected his people for
their sins, has tried their faith, and proved their patience, and when al
power of man, and all help of flesh and blood fails, then is it a convenient
time for almighty god, to put to his hand, and to deliver them from their
miseries. When God had punished the Is^alites in Egypt, where they were
greuous^y oppressed, Exo. 2.24 Exodus 3.9 10.
and there was no means for man to deliver them, then God heard their ^rye,
considered their sorrows and sent Moses unto them, and delivered them with
(...) mighty hand, and an outstretched arm. And after that they were come out
of Egypt and the Egiptians did pursue the^, the red sea being before them, and
the Egiptians ^ehind them, and no way in man's judgment to escape, then was it
a convenient time for God to stretth forth his mighty hand, Exe. 14.16
and to make a passage for his people through the red sea, (...) to over whelme
his enemies in the same. So likewise when god had plaged the Jews (as ^ have
before touched) with the captivity of ^abylon, at the last when the.70. years
were e^pired, and no hope of deliverance in the sight of man, then God
remembering his promise which he had sworn unto Abraham ^n^ his word which he
had reveled unto ^^ere^ r^moued the heart of king Ci^^s to send home his people
to repair the^^ City, and to build his temple. So, to apply this doctrine
unto our selves, when Go^ for our iniquities had of late b^ought us into the
captivity of Egypt and babylon, and the wild bore of Rome had rooted up the
Lords vyneard, when for the light of the Gospel, we had the light of candels,
for the holy bible, bables and banners, for Gods word, man's triffling
traditions, for preaching, massing, and for our free justification by the mere
mercy and grace of God in Christ Jesus through faith, man's merits and
righteousness established. Yea when not only a foreign prince and proud people
were brought in, unto whom we were like to have been made thral, and thu^ when
there was no expectation of any deliverance from these great miseries, Psalm.
14.4
then was it a convenient time for God seeing ye oppression of the ^^dy, and
hearing the sighs of the poor^ to arise and set them at liberty whom the
wicked had thralled. Then God did (...) us from above and did send us a
gracious prince, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, by whom he has
restored unto us the comfort of his word, destu^^ed us from this foreyne
oppresion and slavery and translated us out of darkness into his marvelous
^ight. I would to God that we would continually remember these great mercies,
which God has stewed us herein. O that we would say with David. What that
(...) render unto the Lord for all his benefits ^wards us? We will take the
cup of sal^ation, and praise the name of the Lord. ^et duty one of us lay. My
soul praise (...) the Lord, and all that is within me praise ^ys holy name, my
soul praise thou the lord, and forget not all his benefits. Let ^s beware
that we provoke not God by our ^nthankfulnes and wickedness to deprive ^s of all
these great benefits. For surely (...) God of his mercy has restored unto us
(...) holy word, so of his justice he may take (...) same from us.

Here ^e may further learn that as God ^^i^ all things in convenient time, so
ought (...) also d^ all things in convenient time. ^ho worldely wise men, much
object this ^onuenient time chiefly against the reformation of religion and
the house of God. O say they it to not yet convenient time, thy ^yme will not
suffer it, the time will not bear it, you must tarry the time? In deed (...)
^^^dued ^s it is very m^^te althings (...) ^^ne in convenient time, so ought we
(...) the other s^^e to take heed that we omit (...) convenient time to do
good in the church (...) of God when it is offered. How dangerous a thing it is
in all kind of matters to let pass opportunity and convenient time, any man may
easily perceive. If the General omit opportunity of time to charge his enemies,
when it is offered, he may loose the victory as we read of sundry others, as
namely of John Frederick the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgraue against Charles
the fift^^ the Mariner take not convenient time of wynd and wether, when he may
have it, he may lose his passage: if the Merchant slyp convenient time of
making his bargain, he may forgo his gains. Therefore the prophet does
admonish us to take oportun^ty of time: Querite domin^m dum prope^st. Seek the
lord whilst he is near, which teaches us that if we do not seek the Lord
whilst we have opportunity when we our selves would we shall not find him Christ
our Savior took this time, I must work (says he) the works of him that sent
me, while it is day. To this also S. Paul does exhort us, Dum tempus habemus
operemu^ bonum, while we have time let us ^o good, I fear me we have omitted
this convenient time. When God at the first did rest o^^ unto us the comfort of
his gospel, then was it a convenient time to have made a ^ight reformation of
religion. But our eye was ^ot then single, nor our doings simple, then ^e drew
not out of the book of God a right ^at, neither laid we a sure foundation of
^ght reformation, we did not then utterly ^bolished all superstitious vanities,
Mich. ^^
which ^ow by Gods just judgment are pricks in ^r eyes: and thorns in our
sides. But here peradventure some men may say all things be well and in good
order, we ought to praise the name of God for this we have, and be thankful
unto the prince. In deed as I doubt not, but all that fear God earnestly
praise the name of the Lord for these his mercies that god may finish that
good work which he has begone by her majesty. So yet we must needs confess
that al things be not well and in right order. For I think that there is no
wise or learned man will hold that popish opinion, that the church is, sine
macula et ruga, without spot or wrincle or that nothing can be bettered or
amended But if any should so say, I would say, that he were either wilfully blind
and would not see, or stark blind, and could not see. And ere I will touch
some abuses which remain in the Church, not as God who sees the secret of
men's hearts knows to maintain any contention which I utterly have and abhor
in my soul, but only to move us to seek some earnest reformation. It is a
misorder that popish priests who have be witched the world, have burnt incense
to the idols of the house of Israel, who have led the people to worship
strange gods, and have caused them to commit fornication with stocks and
stones, should by the virtue of their idolatrous orders remain ministers in the
Church of God. No man says the Apostle takes this honor unto himself, unless
he be called of God as was Aaron, but these popish priests were never called
of God as was Aaron, for they were called to sacrifice for the quick and the
dead, which calling is not of God, for that they have not the warrant of gods
word for it, therefore I conclude they ought not to take this honor unto them.
That zealous King Josiah in his zealous reformation did put down the Chemerims,
that is to say those black priests which had burnt incense in the high places,
and would not suffer the^ to come up to the Alter of the lord which was in
Jerusalem. Even so I say that these popish priests ought not to come up to the
Alter of the Lord which is in Jerusalem, they ought not to remain ministers
in the church of God. These be those dragons of whom you heard lately in this
place which ^uerthrow in the night all that was built ^n the day. Yea these with
their privy presuasi^ns and secret suggestio^ will overthrow more ^n one day or
night, then a Godly learned ^reacher is able to build up in many days. Yea
these will so mumble and tumble up the ^eruice (as they call it) that the poor
people shall get small edification or comfort by it, and therein they have
their hearts desire. and I will add hereto this reason. The ^apistes will not
admit our ministers to ^ay mass, unless they be shaven, greased, and ^rdeyned
again. And why should we then ^dmit their priests to serve in the church ^f
God? has not God commanded us to do unto the great whore of Babylon as she
has done unto us. But here I may rightly make that complaint which Tertullian
in his days made: O me^ior fides natio^um in suam sectum, quae multam
solemnitatem Christianorum sibi vendicat, non dominicum ^em, non pentecosten
etiamsi nossent nobiscum non communicassent, timerent enim Christian
viderentur. Nos ne Ethnici pronu^ciemur non veremur: that is to say: O better
faith of the nations or gentiles toward their sect, who will take to them selves
no solemnity of the Christians, not the sunday, not whitsuntide, neither will
they communicate with us in any other thing that they know for they would fear
least they should seem to be Christians, but we fere not to be counted or
named to be Ethnikes. Eue^ so many A say, O noble papists, O better faith of
the Papists toward their sect, who will none of our ministers, none of our
service, none of our orders, no, not so much as a text of scripture painted on
a wall, but it should be washed out and defaced. But O seely Christians, O
poor protestants, who must be feign to receive their Priests, to be ouerruled
with their Cannon law, to take their Ceremonies, which now (as I have said)
are pricks in our eyes, and thorns in our sides I am persuaded in my
conscience that the word of God would better fructifye among us, and we should
enjoy more quietness, if we did receive as little from them, as they do of us.
And I beseech God if it be his holy will it may be so. But some man may here
say, do you not know that many good men have been deceived, will you have none
such received? Yes dearly beloved my meaning is not, but that Godly and meet
men, having ^nounced their popish orders and satisfied (...) church of God, may
be received and ad^itted to serve in the church of God, Exo. 2.24 Exodus 3.9 10.
but I ^i^ffly speak of those blind guides, and e^mies to gods truth which are
not to be ^rmitted to remain for the ministrati^^ of the word and sacraments.

What should I hear complain of the ^^nd ignorant and unmeet ministers that
^e admitted. I might say much herein, but I ^^yst not now speak of that
whereof I ^^nnot think without great greffe. This on (...) I say, Exe. 14.^6
that this is a great offense to many ^^d a great sclaunder to the word of
God. ^o grant it may be redressed. Here I may ^^mplaine of the great lack of
doctrine, and (...) the preaching of Gods word universally (...) ^od^ in the
country. London has great ^ause to praise god, for that his word is here (...)
plentyfully preached. And if London do ^ot thankfully receive it, and truly
follow ^t, it shall be easyer for Sodom and Gomor^ah in the day of judgment then
for this City. But surely when I come out of the ^untry hither to the City,
methink I come unto another world, even out of darkness in^o light. For here the
word of God is plentifully preached I pray God it may be as ple^tifully
followed. In the country their wonderful great want thereof, that a man may go a
great way, and cannot hear the word of the Lord preached. Here be many good
me^ endued with many good gifts of knowledge, zeal, and godly life, able to do
much good in the church of God. I beseech God for his crucified Christ's sake
that they may be well favored, cherished, and maintained. In the country be
few laborers, Loyterors inow. Here in London as I am persuaded is much good
ground many which receive the word of God with a good and honest heart, and
bring forth fruits, some thirtyfolde, some sixtifolde, Psalm. i4.4
and some an hundrethfolde. In the cuntry for want of tylling and often plowing
(for without o^t plowing, and much labor barren ground will not bring fourth
fruit) there springs fourth brambles, briars and weeds. But here is a misery
to be considered, although there is great lack of profitable pastors and
faithful laborers in the Church. I mean in those cuntries that I have been
in, and I think other contryes be not far unlike, yet notwithstanding there
be mo, then be placed in any charge, or preferred to any calling. I know myself
good and godly men, learned men of long ^ontinuance in the university and able
to do ^uch good in the Church of God, and yet ^ot called in any charge, or
placed over any ^ock. Yea some have told me, that they have ^ene offered many
benefices (as they be cal^ed) and yet they could not have taken one ^nlesse
they had taken part with Judas Is^ariote, or with Simon Magus. But what ^eane
you by that will some man say? For ^^uth either they must have said with Judas
that will you give me? will you give me ^^enty marks or pounds, and take you
^he rest, and so I shall not be able to conti^^ on the chardge, but I will
betray all ^his people to the devil and to you, or else ^hey must have said
with Simon Magus that shall I give you for your benefyce. I ^il give you such a
dish of Apples as Mai^ter Latimar speaks of, or I will give you ^x. or. xl. l.
a year out of it I will give you so much that I shall not be able to give a
poor body a piece of bread. But I will here admonish these patrons that for as
much a^ to them it pertains to place faithful pastors over Christ's
congregations, which can and will feed them with knowledge, and direct them by
example of godly life, if they loking upon their own commodities do not
provide such men, but place blind guides, dum dogs, and lewd hyrelinges, the
people for want of instruction shall perish (for where prophecy that is the
preaching of Gods word fails, there the people perish faith Solomon) but there
blood shall be required at these patrons or rather latro^s, hands. Let them trust
unto it, and look for it. But here is another abuse which is partly an
occasion of the other. Not only papists but also professers yea and preachers
of Gods word do join many liuinges together and place under them careless
Curatos, doing little or no good themselves to diverse of the^. Patrons see this
and gather hereof that they may as well enjoy the benefice as other
ecclesiastical men which come never or seldom to their charge. I cannot tell
what to say hereto, but that both is naught, and that the patron which does
not provide a good man for his charge, and that minister which does not
carefully look to his charge; and diligently feed his slock these both even
the patron and the pastor shall perish, and the peoples blood shall be required
at their hands I am sorry even in my heart that professors and preachers of the
Gospel should so far ouerreach themselves in this behalf, that they ^ust be
reformed and restrained by law. I ^ray God that the state of the Church of
^ngland may be brought to that order that ^her may be to one flock one sheperd,
to one church on Minister, and that all faculties, Mich. 3^
^luralities, residences, and such other abho^inacions may return to Rome from
whence ^hey came. I may here likewise complain ^^w that the liuinges appointed
to maine^^ine the Ministry are made universally ^ayes and spoils for all sorts
of men. They ^aineteyne ^oyes in the university, gentel^en in the Innes of
court, gentelmen and ^awyers in the country, and are commonly ^ade rewards
for serving men. Thus the ^ople pay their deuties to this end that ^^ey may
have a learned man amongst the^ (...) teach and comfort them, and the same be
vngod^^ conveyed to other uses, the people being as ^attered sheep without a
shepherd. This is ^me^table to see so many gatherers of t^eth, and (...) few
preachers of ye word, this had need to ^e reformed, for intolerable abuse is
herein. (...) may here complain of great want of Ecle^asticall discipline and
punishment of sin. (...) hear great complaint here of abroad ^^the ^ountry
that there is either no punishmente for sin, or at the least very little.
Which whether it be through the slacknes of the law which does over rule us,
or by the corruption of them that have the execution of the law in their hands
I will not now say but this I may to truly say that there is great lack of
severe discipline. As for excommunication it is more used for money matters,
then for correction of sin, These and sundry such other abuses and enormities
be the things which grieve good men, and cause them both to pray and to
preach for the reformation of them. It is not a cappe, tippet, or surples only,
which are but small matters, and the smallest of many matters. which are to be
reformed in the Church of England. And yet my meaning is not that small account
should be made of these things For hereof I am well assured that how small soever
they seem, they do no small hurt in the church of God, for to clogge men's
consciences, to hinder the course of the go^pell, to breed contentions among
brethren is no small hurt. S^al things may do much hurt, a grain of a grape
is but a small thing, and yet it killed Anacreon the Poet, a hair is but a
very small thing, and yet it choked on Fabius a senator of Rome a flee is but a
small thing, and yet it straug^ed a proud Pope, yea the proudest I think that
ever was Adrian the.iiij. a contry man ^f our own, a small mote may hurt the
eye, (...) small thing may trouble a good consience, (...) small deal of Leaue^
will Leaven a whole ^mp, to eat meat is but a small thing, yet ^a man eat it
with a douting and repining co^^ience he is condemned because he enteth not ^f
faith. It is a small thing to say Aue to a man ^et S. John says that he which
says Aue, that is God speed to him that brings not ^is doctrine, is
partaker of his evil deeds. christ says that he which is faithful in a
^tle, will be faithful in much, and he that is (...) faithful in a little will be
unfaithful in ^uch. So also the poet says: Vnle^se thou ^ke heed to small
things, thou shall loose ^reat things. Wherefore I would make ^umble suit
and supplication unto those whom I love, reverence, and honor, that ^ood men's
consciences in this case might ^ot be enforced, but persuaded. Surely it (...)
a token of Gods anger and wrath, when the ^outhes of his servants the
prophets be ^opped. It is convenient time that these ^hinges were redressed.
Let us not say as ^he Jews ^id, who after they were returned from captivity
said as appears by the prophet Aggeus, the time is not yet come, that the
Lords house should be builded, but God by his prophet said unto them, is it
time for your selves to dwell in your sealed houses, and this house lie wast?
Even so may I now say, is it time for you to lie in your fair houses, to
seek your own commodites and follow your own pleasures, and not to seek
reformation of religion and the house of God? Let us not defer and put of the
time Solomon says: he that observes the mind shall not sow, and he ye
regards the clouds shall not mow, for either the wind is in the north and
then it is to cold, or else in the south and then it is whot, or else in the
East, and then it to dry, or else in the west, and then it is to well, and so a
man shall never sow. This teaches us that we must not stand to much looking to
the time, and putting of the time, but we must earnestly and zealously go about
gods cause, and God shall bless our travail and give good success unto the
same. Thus you have heard how the church is dissolved and disordered Let us
pray unto God to establish the Pillars of it. Our gracious Sovereign the
Queens Majesty is the principal pillar of this church of England under
Christ. It stands us greatly upon earnestly to pray unto God long to
establish this pillar amongst us. Exo. 2.2^ Exodus 3.10.
For if the strong Sampson the mighty God, should for our syns lay his hand
upon this pillar and pull it down, O Lord what ruin were like to follow. I see
nothing but destruction like to fall upon us, as did upon the wicked
Philistians. All those pastors who are either in chefest place, or endued with
greatest gifts are called in ye scriptures pillars, so James, Cephas, and
John, who were counted to be the pillars gave unto Paul and Barnabas their
right hands of society and fellowship. Exe. 14. i^
Let ^s likewise pray unto God for these pillars that they may all join their
hearts and hands of fellowship together, to fight manfully together to overthrow
the kingdom of Antichrist and darkness, and to establish the kingdom of Christ
among us. The Church of God is called the pillar of truth we ought likewise to
pour out our prayers before God, that this pillar may stand steadfast among us.
And here if I did love digressions and discourses from my matter. I in got
answer the papists who brag much of this place, and cry mightily out
saying, the church is the pillar of truth, we be the church therefore, we be the
pillar of truth, but this reason I will return upon them. The Church is the
pillar of truth, now if they can prove that they be the pillars, vpholders and
mainteners of truth, then must we, and will we grant them to be the Church.
But if they be the pilers of damnable doctrine contrary to Gods holy word,
howsoever they braggs themselves to be the Church of Christ, they be in deed
the Sinagoge of Satan. In the Arc of the Covenant were three things, the tables
of the testament, the pot of Mann^, and the rod of Aaron, which be.iij. certain
signs of the visible Church of Christ. Whereby we may learn, that where the
word of God is truly, preached the sacraments according to Christ's
institution ministered, and Ecclesiastical discipline dewly executed, there is
the church of Christ. Now if the papists can prove, that in there Church true
doctrine grounded upon Gods word has been preached, that the sacraments have
been used and ministered according to Christ's institution, and that discipline
has been rightly executed, then will we recant and revoke whatsoever we have
mainetained or preached, then will we join hands with them. But this they can
never be able to prove, and ther^^e they can never prove themselves to be ye ^e
church of God, which is ye pillar of truth. But to leave this, now I will come
to the ^ird part of my matter, which conteyneth I have before touched an
exhortation of ^e Prophet unto the wicked, to cease from ^eir folly and
wickedness, not to trust to ^uch to their own wisdom and power, not (...)
exalte themselves against God and his people, but rather to remember that all
true ^eferment comes from God, and he exal^^^ some and puts down other, I
said ^o the foolish be not so foolish. etc. First (...) us consider whom the
prophet calls ^^^sh, not those whom we call Morians, ^^tural fools, but the
wicked and ungodly, ^^ho how subtle and crafty soever they seem ^^to man, yet
unto God be very fools. And ^^erfore whom the prophet in the first part ^f the
verse calls fools, in the other part ^e calls wicked, I said unto the
wicked, ^^t not up your horn on hye. So likewise (...) another place. The
foolish shall not stand before thy eyes, thou hate all those that ^orke
iniquity. Whom in the first part the Prophet calls fools, in the second he
cal^eth workers of iniquity. Such fools be those of whom David speaks: Dixit
in sa^iens in cord suo, non est deus: The fool has said in his heart, their
is no God. Those that profess in their words to know God, and in their works
deny him, being abominable; disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate
are such fools. God says by the prophet Hieremy: ^tultus est populus men's, me
non cognouit. etc. My people is foolish, they have not known me, they are
foolish children and have no understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to
do well they have no knowledge. Those that have wit to work mischefe, and none
to do that which is righteous are such fools. They that have not the true
knowledge of God by his word are al together foolish, The beginning of wisdom
is the fear of God, without the fear of God there is no true wisdom.
Re^ecerunt verbu^ deum. etc They have rejected the word of the Lord and what
wisdom remains in them: That which is not grounded upon the word of God is
mere foolishnes. And here I would admonish all men, and especially rulers and
magistrates to beware of carnal councels, and worldly policies, which be not
builded upon God and his word. They which although they seem plausible to the
flesh, because they us the fruits of the flesh and proceed from man's brain,
yet are they not acceptable ^ut rather detestable before God. And in his
justice does often confound them, and turn upon them upon the heads of those
that were the Autors of them. Mich. 3^
He catches the wise in their own craftines. Iosephes Bre^heren hearing that
he had dreamed that his ^ather and they should yield reverence to him, they took
crafty council together to disappoint this matter, and sold him into Egypt.
But this which they thought should have ^ene a mean to have avoided this
their sub^ection to Joseph, God made it a mean to bring the same to pass.
Jeroboam after that the ten tribes were fallen from Robo^^m and had made him
their king, he thought with himself, that if the people did go up ^till to do
sacrifice in the house of Jerusalem, then their hearts would turn again to
Roboam and so forsake him, he took a subtle and politic counsel to make.ij.
Calves, and placed them in Dan and Bethel and said these are thy Gods O Israel
which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and they like Calves went up and
worshipped these calves This counsel redounded to the destruction of ^eroboam
and his posterity, and at the last of the whole realm and estate. The Jews
thinking that if he should suffer Christ our savior to proceed as he had
began, the Romans would come and take away their place and nation, they
thought it good counsel, they procured gods anger and indignation against them,
who for ye same brought the Romans upon them which miserably destroyed the^.
This we see the saying of the poet true. Evil counsel is worst to him that
gives it. Let all men therefore learn to direct their counsels to the glory
of God, and to build them upon Gods word, and then though the rain fall, the
sloudes come down, and the wynnds blow, yet they shall stand because they be
built upon the rock: but if they build them upon the uncertain and v^suce
sands of their own brains, a little blast of wind will easily overthrow them,
for there is no wisdom, understanding nor counsale against the Lord. Submit
therefore your wisdom to the wisdom of God? Even man (says the Prophet) is a
least of his own knowledge the which may move us not to trust to much to our
own wisdom and counsel, but rather to take counsa^^e at the mouth of Go^, and
to say with David, thy testimonies are my delight and my cou^sailers, these
counselors will neither lie, ^atter, nor dissemble, God grant that we may be
counseled by them. Christ our saui^ur said to the rich man that went about to
^nlarge his barnes, and said to his soul, ^oule thou have much goods laid up
in store ^r many years, take thine ease, eat drink and take thy pastime. Thou
fool this night ^al thy soul be taken from thee. Those ^^at be careful for
this scaile and uncertain ^fe and careless for the life eternal, are very
^ples. It is true wisdom first to seek the ^ngdome of God, and all other
things shall (...) given unto us. The virgins which had ^^t oil in their
lamps a^ ye coming of the ^^dgrom, but would seek for some of others, ^^e
called foolish virgins and were shut out This oil I take to be the
righteousness and ^eedes of others. Iustus ex fide sua viuet, the ^ighteous
shall live by his own faith. We ^ust all stand before the t^^^unall seat of
Christ to receive every man according to that he has done in his own body,
whether ^f be good or evil. Solomon says stulti de^ident peccatum, the
foolish laugh at sin. Those therefore that laugh at sin when ^hey be
admonished or reproved are fools, and if God do not give them repentance,
they shall be there where there is no laughing but weeping and gnasshing of teeth.
And he that sits in the heavens shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall
have them in derision. The Prophet says: they altogether dote and are become
foolish, for the flock is the doctrine of vanity. All Papists which not only
worship images, but also make the^ doctors and teachers of the lay people, are
co^uinced by this place to dote and to be foolish, and the prophet Abacuc
says, they be teachers of lies. A foolish thing it is for a man endewed with
wit, reason, and the senses, to fall down before a dum stock or block which has
no reason, nor understanding, which has eyes and seeeth not, ears and hears
not, nose and smells not etc, But these fools with their folly I will let
go, only I exhort the^ not to do so foolishly, but rather to seek for true
wisdom which is joined with the fear of God. Let not ye wicked lift up their
horn, I might here show you how the Pope has lifted up his horn. He will
needs be Christ's Vikar upon the earth, Peter's successor, head of the
universal Church, and bishop of the whole world, is not this to lift up his
head very hye? Yea he will be Dominus deus noster Papa, our God the Pope, he will
have power in heaven, earth, and purgatory, he will forgive sin, and make
Saints, and is not this to lift up his horn very hye? Is not this to exalt
himself above all that is called God? He has made Emperors and kings to kiss
his feet, and hold his styrrop, to wait at the gates of a cyty. ^j. or iij.
days in frost and snow barefooted, he has trodden in their necks, he has
deposed them from their crowns and kingdoms, and has absolved their
subjects from their obedience and loyalty, Exe. 14.^
and is not this to ^ift up his horn very hye? This Romish ^^ul has of late
lifted up his horn against ^ur gracious Sovereign, against this our ^ountry,
and the estate thereof. But Gods ^ame be praised, this Bulls horns are now
sawed, he cannot goare us, this Boores tusshes are now cut, he cannot ra^s us:
And if we will utterly fly and forsake him and all his damnable doctrine, and
depend wholly upon God, he shall never be able to goare us or hurt us, God has
here promised in this Psalm that the horns of the wicked shall be exalted. And
let the Pope look for this yt for as much as he has thus exalted himself,
God will put him down. And although this great whore say that she fitteth like a
Queen, is no widow, and shall see no mourning, yet shall her plagues come at
one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire, for
strong is the Lord God which will condemn her. And the spirit of God by S.
Paul did forshew that the Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth and
abolish him with the brightness of his coming. And let all those that seek to
fly a loft with the wings of vanity, and seek to exalt themselves by
bribery, flattery, or any other ungodly means, know that the Lord God will
throw them down. The Angels which kept not their first estate, but would exalt
themselves either above, or against God, God threw them down into everlasting
chains of darkness unto ye judgment of the last day. Adam and Eve would be
exalting themselves, and would be like unto God, having knowledge of good and
evil, but God pulled them down showed the^ their nakedness, and drive them out
of Paradise. Corah, Dathan, and Abyram would needs exalt themselves against
Moses their godly governor, but God caused the earth to open, and swallow them
up. Absalon would exalt himself against his own father and king, and would have
been king in his place, but God quailed his courage, and he ^me to a shameful
end as he well deserved ^eing hanged in his hear, and thrust throw ^ith
spears. Nabuchadonozer king of Ba^ilon would ascend into heaven and, exalt ^is
throne above the stars of heaven, and (...) like to the most highest, but God
brought ^im down, and made him eat grass like ^^n Ox. Beware therefore of
exalting your ^elues, let God exalt you, for true preferme^t ^ometh neither
from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South but from the Lord: ^e
exalts Moses from keeping of sheep to ^e the deliverer and governor of his
people, ^e exalted Joseph to be governor of Egypt under the king, he chose
David his servant and took him from the sheepefoldes, even from behind the
^wes with young, and exalted him to feed his people in Jacob, and his
inheritance in Israel. God exalted the virgin Mary from low degree to be
mother of our Savior Jesus Christ. Christ calle^ the Apostles from the nets,
and made them pillars of his truth, thus we see that true which Annasaid:
Ichoua pauper^^ facit^^ (...), humiliat^et exaltat. The Lord makes poor and
rich brings low and exalts And that which the Virgin Mary said. Deposuit
potentes de sede, et exaltauit humiles: He has put down the mighty from their
seat, and has exalted the humble and meek. And how daungerously they have
fallen which have ascended very hye. But as I have said to consider that true
preferment comes from God. And here I will admonish all those that be exalted
to any authority to remember who has exalted them, and from what they have
been exalted, and thirdly to what end they are exalted, to acknowledge yt what
power or dignity soever they have, they have it of God, and that to edification
and not to destruction. I might speak much more of exaltation, but the time
will not suffer me, wherefore I will now come to the last part wherein is set
forth a commination against the wicked, that in the hand of the Lord is a cup,
and the wine is red, it is full mixed, and he pours out of the same, all the
wicked of the earth shall wring out and drink the dregs thereof. This word Cup
is often times in the scripture taken in the evil part, for affliction plague
and punishment, as in Hieremie. Babel has been a cup of goulde in the Lords
hand that made all the earth dronken, the nations have drunke^ of her wine,
therefore do the nations rage, that is to say, Babel has ^e a scourge in the
hand of the Lord to ^rge the wickedness of the world. So like^ise Esaias, Awake,
awake, stand up Ierusa^^m which have drunken at the hand of the lord the Cup of
his wrath, thou have drun^^n the dregs of the Cup of trembling and ^ung them
out. And in the Psalm, Pluet ^per impios, upon the wicked he shall rain ^ars,
fire, and brimstone, and stormy tempest, ^is shall be the portion of their cup.
In this ^nse Christ said to his Disciples that were ^spiring to primacye, ye
know not what ye ^ke, are ye able to drink of the cup that I ^al drink of. And
again: Father if it be thy ^yl let this Cup pass from me. So we read (...)
the Apocalips, if any man worship the ^east, and his image and receive his
mark (...) his forhead, or on his hand, the same shall ^rinke of the wine of
the wrath of God, yea ^f the pure wine, which is poured into the ^up of his
wrath, and he shall be tormented ^n fire and brimstone before the holy Angels
(...) before the lamb. So dearly be loved if we ^o not unfeignedly fear God
and stand in awe ^f his judgments, but work wickedness and ^o^mit abominations
in the sight of God, ^urely we shall drink of this cup which is filled with
Gods wrath. For unto the^ (says the Apostle) which are contentious and disobey
the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation, and wrath, tribulation
and anguish upon every soul that does evil: Let us take heed yt we provoke
not Gods anger by our sins. Consider that it is a terrible thing to fall into
the hands of ye living God, wherefore I exhort you dearly beloved, unfeignedly
to repent you of your sins, truly to turn to ye lord your God, to serve him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of your lives, and earnestly to pray
unto god, that ye may drink of ye cup of his mercies in Christ and not of the
cup of his wrath. And this if we will do, god shall be our God, and we his people:
God shall bless us both with temporal benefits, and spiritual graces, and we
shall drink the cup of his great mercies: the which god our merciful father
for his crucified Christ's sake grant us, to whom with the holy ghost three
persons and one true and immortal god be al land, praise and glory both now
and for evermore. Amen.


