A very true pronosticacio^ / with a Calendar / gathered out of the most
ancient books of right holy Astronomers / for the year of our lord
M.CCCCC.xxxvj. And for all years here after perpetual. Translated out of latin
in to English by John^ Ryckes priest.

Cum priuilegio Regali.



printer's device of John Bydell, featuring a compartment exhibiting the seven
cardinal virtues, with Bydell's mark and name below (McKerrow 85) John^ Byddell.
IUSTICIA

Charitas

Fides

PRUDENCIA

SPES

Obedientia

Patientia



To the right noble and godly wise, of the kings noble counsel: to whom his
grace has assigned to examyne english books that are to be imprynted / and
to approve those that are catholyke and profitable to ye christian common
welthe: and other to reprove. Abundance of grace and everlasting health.
When I had red over this little book / which was found cast in a corner
among other pamflets not regarded: which book is named a Pronosticacion / and
that (as is no doubt) most true / and very necessary to be known: my
conscience moved me (though I can but little skyl to entreprise such a thing)
for to translate it out of latin i^ to english / for a more common wealth
Pytie I had to se so good a work / so profytabte a light (as they say Mat. 5.
lu. 8. 11.) to be hydden under a busshell. Wherefore under your judgment and
correction I will be glad to put it upon a candelstycke / that it may be seen to
many / and give light far abroad. which I can not do better, than to
dedycate it unto your goodness / whose godly wysdom and learning, is known to
be so good and circu^specte, that it would not suffer such a thing to go
abroad, but if it were for a common welthe. The common pronosticacions, that
yearly gothe about are but tryfles in regard of this and vain (ye after my
mind) deceyuable and harmefull, to not a few persons, that has credence in
them. How can they tell of things to come / or what shall chance to men here
after. Job. 38. Act. 1. It only depends in the disposicion and power of god
/ which ordreth all things in time and place as it pleases him. God says by
his prophet Esaie xlj. Show you what things are for to come: and we shall
know you to be gods. And in an other place, spekyng to the Babylones. Esa.
47. Let your Augurers of ye firmament, stand and save you, which be hold the
sterres and nombre the months for to show by them, what things are for to
come. etc. Deuter. 28. God promyseth all things to succeed and to come well
to pass, unto all them that believe purely in him and will observe his laws.
And threateth the contrary to miscreauntes and evil doers. Wherefore if they
hap sometime to touch the truth: it is because they se by conjecture the
co^dicions and manners of people, by the sentence of god in holy scripture to
deserve and be worthy, either peace or war, health or sycknes, derth or
plenty, with such other things as they write of in their pronosticacions /
which if they did not in auau^syng them selves, sekyng praise and vain glory
of the world: but referrynge all to the word of god / grounded thereupon / and
not upon their vain aucrours and planets: they might well be herd, and
credence be given unto them, if they spoke not so darkly. Therefore yt men
should not spend their time in vain / it is better that they should leave such
trifles and uncertain sayenges / and lean sadly to this sure and true
pronosticacion, grounded only upon the word of god, most sure fou^dacion,
and of most hye auctorite. In this a man may somewhat learn to know and fear
god / and to have in reverence the holy scripture / wherein only is contained
all things that belongs to the health of souls / and to the godly
administracion and governance of the common welthe / where unto god has called
you. And for a so^me as concerning such things in scripture there are set
forth here in this calendar following, instead of saints days, certain holy
hystoryes, whereby they may perceive the benignite and seuerite / the mercy, and
rygorousnes of god toward mankind. And again, the faith, and incredulite /
the kyndnes, and unkindness of men toward god: what are most specially to be
taken head of in the scripture of god. So that we may learn also, to ascrybe no
thing to our selves, but to refer all things to almighty god ye father, through
Christ. If there be found any thing that is somewhat obscure: let them ask
counsel of those yt be good and well learned. And most specially pray to god
entyerly, yt he will open the sense to us, that we may understand the
scriptures. Luc. 24. Thus I beseech your benignityes, to accept my little
labor, not considering the rude doing: but ye zele that I have to forther
the right ways of Chrystyan living, which shall be with the help of gods
grace, if ye think it worthy to go abroad to his honor and glory, whose grace
and consolacion be ever with you. Amen.

Of the year.
The year has.CCC.lxv. days / and a quarterne / which always every fourth
year makes one day / which is set in ye xxij. day of February.

Of the golden nombre.
The golden no^bre co^teyneth.xix. thus to be counted, that each year from one
to.xix. one nombre must be ascrybed / and in the xx. year, begin again at one.
And in every fourth year, which is called Bisextile or leap year, the.xxij.
day of February, shall co^teyne also the.xxiij. And yt which in ye calendar
is the.xxiij. day / than must be the.xxiiij. wherefore also the dominical lettre
must needs be changed.

Of the Dominicall lettre.
The year of our lord. M.v.C. and.xxxv was C. dominicall lettre. The
year.M.v.C. and.xxxvj. leap year / and B. dominicall lettre, until saint
Mathyes day. And from thens forth A. shall be co^tynued for dn^icall lettre.
The next year.g. Than f. After that.e. And than.d.c. leap year again. And so
contynuynge backwarde every fourth year take.ij. lettres for leap year /
reckoning the first unto saint Mathyes day: and the second all the year
after. And so continue.xxviij. years / as in this table following. And than
begin again / and so for ever.

b.g.f.e.d.b.a.g.f.d.c.b.a.f. a. c. e. g. e.d.c.a.g.f.e.c.b.a.g.e.d.c. b. d. f.

Of the inuencion of Ester and other mouable feestes.
From the.xxj. day of March, unto the xviij. day of Apryll, we have
subscribed golden nombres to the lettres of ye days into this use. Upon what
day so ever the golden nombre of the year falls / always the sunday next
following shall be Ester day. Which had, ye shall easily find, co^tynuynge
upward or downward, lent or septuagesym. The asce^sion or Pentecost.

How to find ye change of ye moan.
If ye desire to find the coniu^ction, or the new moan / we have ordered so ye
golden no^bre (otherwise than it has been in time past) in ye kale^ders: that
where so ever ye find ye golden no^bre for yt year: there is ye change or
coniu^ction. Which found, ye may easily find by division, ye apposicio^ and
the increase or decrease of the moon.

January has.xxxj. days.
K L xix A The Circumcision of Christ. Luke. ij. 1 viij b Adam. Eua. Genesis.
iij. 2 c 3 xvj d 4 v e 5 f The kings. Math. ij. 6 xiij g 7 ij A 8 b Abell.
Cayn. Genesis. iiij. 9 x c 10 d The son in aquario. 11 xviij e 12 vij f 13 g
14 xv A 15 iiij b Noes flode. Genesis. vij. 16 c 17 xij d 18 x e 19 f 20 ix g
21 A Sem / Iaphet / Ham. Genesis. ix. 22 xvij b 23 vj c 24 d 25 xiiij e 26 iij
f 27 g 28 xj A Babylon. Heber. Genesis. xj. 29 xix b 30 c 31

February has.xxviii. days.
L K viij d 1 e The purification of our lady. Luke. ij. 2 xvj f 3 v g 4 A
Abram. Genesis. xij. 5 xiij b 6 ii c 7 d 8 x e 9 f 10 xviij g The son in
piscibus. 11 vij A Loath. Sodom. Genes. xix. 12 b 13 xv c 14 iiij d 15 e 16 xij
f 17 j g 18 A Isaac. Ismael. Genesis. xxi. 19 ix b 20 c 21 xvij d The
beginning of Ver. 22 vj e 23 f 24 xiiij g 25 vj A Esau. Jacob. Genes. xxvij.
26 b 27 xj c 28

March has.xxxj. days.
K L xix d 1 viij e 2 f 3 xvj g 4 v A Joseph and his brethren. Gen^. xxxvij. 5
b 6 xiij c 7 ij d 8 e 9 x f 10 g The son in Ariete. 11 xviii A Equinoctium
vernum 12 vij b Judah and his sons. Gen^. xxxviij. 13 c 14 xv d 15 iiij e 16 f
17 xij g 18 i A Ephraim and Manass. Gen^. xlviij. 19 b The golden nombre for to
fyndde Ester day. 20 ix c xvj 21 d v 22 xvij e 23 vj f xiij 24 g ij The
salutacion of our lady. Luc. j. 25 xiiij A Resurreccion of Christ. Math. 28. 26
iij b x 27 c Pharao and Moses. Exodus vij. 28 xj d xviij 29 e vii 30 xix f 31

Apryll has.xxx. days.
K L viij g xv 1 xvj A iiij Aaron. Moses / and the enchaunters. Exodus
vij.viij. 2 v b 3 c xij 4 xiij d i 5 vj e 6 f ii 7 i g 8 A xvij 9 xviij b vj
The son in tauro. 10 vij c Aaron and Mary. Numeri. xij. 11 d xiiij 12 xv e
iii 13 iiii f 14 g xi 15 xii A 16 x b xix 17 c viij 28 ix d Caleb. Iosue / and
the spies. Nu. xiij. 19 e 20 xvij f 21 vj g 22 A 23 xiiij b Moses and Aaron at
the stone of co^tradiction. Nu. xx. 14 iij c 25 d 26 ii e 27 f 28 xix g 29 viij
A Balaam and his ass. Nume. xxij. 30

May has.xxxj. days.
K L b 1 xvj c 2 v d 3 e The Ascencion of our lord. Mar. xvj. 4 xiij f 5 ij g
6 A Raab. Hiericho. Iosue. vj. 7 x b 8 c 9 xviij d 10 vij e 11 f 12 xv g The
son in geminis. 13 iiij A The coming of the holy ghost. Act. ij. 14 b 15
xij c 16 j d 17 e 18 ix f 19 g 20 xvij A Gabaonytes. Iosue. ii. 21 vj b 22 c 23
xiiij d 24 iij e The beginning of summer. 25 f 26 xj g 27 A A leuyte and his
wife. Iudic. ix. 28 xix b 29 viij c 30 xviij d 31

June has.xxx. days.
K L v e 1 f 2 xiij g 3 ij A Ruth / her sister. Ruth. j. 4 b 5 x c 6 d 7 xviij
e 8 vij f 9 g 10 xv A Anna / Feuenna. j. Samu. j. 11 iiii b 12 c The son i^
cancro. Solsticiu^ estiuale. 13 xij d 14 j e 15 f 16 ix g 17 A Hely / his
sons.j. Samu. ij. 18 xvij b 19 vj c 20 d 21 xiiij e 22 iij f 23 g 24 xi A
Samuel / his sons.j. Sam. viii. 25 b 26 xix c 27 viii d 28 e 29 xvi f 30

July has.xxxj. days.
K L v g 1 A Salutacion of Elizabeth. Luc. j. 2 xiii b 3 ii c Saul. David.j.
Sam. xvi. 4 d 5 x e 6 f 7 xviii g 8 vii A David / Mychol. 2. Samuel. 6. 9 b 10
xv c 11 iiii d 12 e 13 xii f The son in leone. 14 i g 15 A David /
Betshabee.ij. Sam. xi. 16 ix b 17 c 18 xvii d 19 vi e 20 f 21 xiiii g 22 iii A
David / Vrias.ii. Sam. ii. 23 b 24 xi c 25 d 26 xix e 27 viii f 28 xvi g 29 v A
David / Nathan.ij. Samuel.xi. 30 b 31

August has.xxxj. days.
K L xiij c 1 xi d 2 e 3 x f 4 g 5 xviij A Ammon. Thamar. i. Samu. xiij. 6 vij
b 7 c 8 xv d 9 iiij e 10 f 11 xij g 12 j A 13 b The son in virgin. 14 ix c
15 d David. Absolon. 16 xvij e 17 vj f 18 g 29 xiiij A 20 iij b 21 c The
beginning of Autumn. 22 xj d 23 xix e David. Semei. ij. Sam. xvj. 24 f 25
viij g 26 xvj A Cusy. Achitophel. ij. Sam xvii 27 b 28 v c 29 d 30 xiij e 31

September has.xxx. days.
K L ij f 1 g 2 x A Solomon / Adonias. j. Regum. j. 3 b 4 xviii c 5 vii d 6 e 7
xv f 8 iiii g 9 A Ioab / Banaias. j. Regum. xi. 10 xii b 11 i c 12 d 13 ix e 14
f The son in libra. Equinoctium autu^nale. 15 xvii g 16 vi A 17 b Solomon /
his wives strangers. j. reg. xi. 18 xiiii c 19 iii d 20 e 21 xi f 22 xix g 23
A 24 viii b Roboam. Hieroboam. j. Regum. xii. 25 c 26 xvi d 27 v e 28 xiii f 29
ii g 30

October has.xxxj. days.
K L A Achab / Iehu. ij. Regum. ix. 1 x b 2 c 3 xviij d 4 vij e 5 f 6 xv g 7
iiij A Ezechias / Senacheryb. ij. Reg. xix. 8 b 9 xij c 10 j d 11 e 12 ix f 13
g The son in scorpione. 14 xvij A 15 vj b Esayas / Ezechias. ij. Regum. xx.
16 c 17 xiiij d 18 xij e 19 f 20 xj g 21 xix A Manasses. ij. Paralypomenon.
xxxiij. 22 b 23 viij c 24 d 25 xvj e 26 v f 27 g 28 xiij A Hieremias /
Sedechias. Hieremie. xxxix. 29 ij b 30 c 31

November has.xxx. days.
K L x d 1 e 2 xviij f 3 vij g 4 A Danyel. Babylonyes. Daniel. vj. 5 xv b 6
iiij c 7 d 8 xij e 9 j f 10 g 11 ix A The three kings. Herod. Math. ij. 12 b
13 xvij c The son in sagittario. 14 vj d 15 e 16 xiiij f 17 iij g 18 A John^
baptyst. priests. Ioh. i. 19 xj b 20 xix c 21 d The beginning of winter. 22
viij e 23 f 24 xvj g 25 v A John^ baptyst. Herod. Luc. iij. 26 b 27 xiii c 28
ii d 29 x e 30

December has.xxxj. days.
K L f 1 xviij g 2 vij A Peter / Judas. John^. xiij. 3 b 4 xv c 5 iiij d 6 e 7
xij f 8 j g 9 A Barnabas / Ananias. Act. iiij. 10 ix b 11 c The son in
capricorno. 12 xvij d Solstitium hyemale. 13 vj e 14 f 15 xiiij g 16 iij A
Peter / Simon magus. Act. viij. 17 b 18 xj c 19 xix d 20 e 21 viij f 22 g 23
xvj A 24 v b The Natiuite of Christ. Math. ij. 25 c Paulus / Elimas magus. Act.
xiij. 26 xiij d 27 ij e 28 f 29 x g 30 A 31

Otto Brunsfelsius to the christen reder desires plentye of grace.
OF this mine almanak here shall I entreat chryste^ reder, much after an
other form, and far after an other order, than they which boost themselves
to be named conning Astronomers. For whiles they look for to flatter the
affections of some unstable persons, and so to disceyue them, by reason of the
influence of ye bodies above (as they say) which influence, they profess
themselves to know (though by uncertain conjectures) they do teache to
descryue / deuyde or discern one time from an other / and to observe days /
months / and years / of this time yt contynually decays. Therefore I
leaning to the most sure word of god, shall begin this mine almanacke most
true, and ever for to endure, after the will of him, which is most mighty maker
and ruler (not only of stars) but of all things in heaven and earth. And for
a general i^troduction in manner, I set forth first these things to be read
which are written in Deutronomy.xviij. When you shalt enter in to the land,
which the lord thy god shall give the, beware that you learn not to do after ye
abominacions of those nations. And se yt there be found none among you, that
sacryfyeth his sone or daughter drawing them through the fire: either that
asks any thing of them that use wytchecrafte / and observes dremes / or
chatteryng of birds / or that is a sorcerer or a charmer: neither ape counsel
of them that speak with a sprite / or a sothsayer, or that talks with them
that be deed, for to know the truth. For all that do such things, the lord
does abhor. And because of such mischeuous sins, he shall drive them out at
thy coming in. Be perfyte and pure therefore with the lord thy god. These
nations that thou shall conquer, and possess their lands, give ear to
wytches and sothsayers: but thou art otherwise taught of the lord thy god.
Leuit. xx. That person which turns unto wytches and sothsayers / and play
the hoar with them, I shall put my face against him / and destroy him from
amongst his people. Sa^ctifye your selves therefore and be holy. Hieremye.x. Be
not wyllyng to learn after the ways of the gentyles / and be not afraid of
signs or sterres of ye firmament which gentyles do fear: for the laws and
sayenges of people are vain, and nothing to be regarded.

Of these sayings it appears more clear than the light of the mydday, that ye
pronosticacions and foresayinges of all astronomers, are founded but upon
flowing sand and unstable, which the words of god being of so great
efficacite, easily destroys and brings them unto naught. By the which
words of god, we know also for a suretye (according as it is written. Exodus
xx. I am ye lord thy god, a strong gelous lover) that his omnipotent majesty
will not admyt nor suffer, any of his creatures to reygne or rule with him. For
he according to the perfection of his divine word, is sole ye noble ruler and
governor, not only of this year, but also of al times and of all things that
be in heaven, in earth and in hell. Wytnes not Ptolomey of Alexa^dry, Albumaser,
Haly, Meszhulle, Hermes, and such other? but that noble king and prophet
David in the.xxiij. psalm, saying. The earth is the lords, and all that is
therein / the round world, and all yt dwells in it. A lord mighty, strong,
and of great power: he is the king of glory.

Also Iosue.ij. The lord is your god, he is the god in heaven above, and in
earth benethe. Ecclastici.j. There is one most hye maker of all, omnipote^t and
a mighty king and much to be dredde, syttyng upon his trone, a god having
dominion..j. to the Corinth.viij. We know that an ydoll is nothing in this
world / and that there is no god but one / to us only there is but one god,
which is the father / of whom come all things / and we in him / and one
lord Jesus Christ / by whom are all things / and we by him.

To ye Ephe. iiij. There is but one lord / one faith / one baptysme / one god
and father of all / which is above all / through all / and in you all. The
first of Timo. ij. There is one god / and one mediator between god and man /
which is ye man Christ Jesus. etc. To the Hebrews.xiij. Jesus Christ
yesterdaye and to day / and the same contynueth for ever.

Of fruits of the earth.
It besemeth not to cloak or hyde the truth / but rather it is very expedyent
to show it most openly to every man. And because god himself is the very
truth / let us give ear with attente and a diligent mind unto his own
words. In Deutro. xxviij. it is wryte^ thus. If thou wylt harken diligently
unto the voice of ye lord thy god / to observe and do all his commandments,
which I command yt this day, the lord will set the on hye above all
nations of the earth. And all these blessings shall come on the, and overtake
the. If thou shall obey unto the voice of the lord thy god / blessed shalt
thou be in the town / and blessed in ye feldes / blessed shall be ye fruit of
thy body / the fruit of thy ground / and the fruit of thy cattle / ye fruit
of thine oxen / and thy flocks of sheep / blessed shall thy bernes be and thy
store: blessed shall thou be when you go out, and when you co^mest in. Leuit.
xxvj. If ye shall walk i^ mine ordynau^ces, and keep my commandments, and
do them i^ deed / I will send you rain in time and right season: and your
land shall bring forth her increase / and the trees of ye field shall give
their fruits. And corn thresshynge shall reche unto ye wine harvest / and the
wine harvest shall reche unto sowynge ryme: and ye shall eat your bread in
plenteousnes: and ye shall dwell in your ground peasably. Leuiti. xxv. I am ye
lord your god / wherefore do after mine ordynaunces, and keep my laws, and do
them, that ye may dwell in the land in safetye without any fear. And the
land shall bring forth her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell
there in safetye. If ye shall say, what shall we eat in ye seventh year in as
much as we shall not sow nor gather in our increase? I will send my blessing
upon you in the sixth year / and it shall bring forth fruit for three years /
and ye shall sow the eight year / and eat of ye old fruit until the.ix.
etc. If these things were promised unto ye fore fathers: how much more
likewise unto us christyans? For it is the same lord and promyser living for
ever, whose sone Jesus Christ our lord admonyssheth us. Math. vj. saying. Be
not careful / saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink / or wherwt
shall we be clad. For all these things ye unfaithful nations seek besyly for.
Surely, your father in heaven knows yt ye have need of all these things.
Therefore seek first ye kingdom of heaven, and the justice of it / and all these
things shall be mynystred unto you. And it is written in Deutro. viij. as
Christ says. Man lives not only by bread / but in every word that
proceeds from the mouth of god. Math. iiij.

Also Deutro. viij. Take heed and beware that thou never forgete the lord thy
god, and do not regard his commandments laws and ordynau^ces, which I
command the this day / oneles after thou have eaten and filled the full / and
have bylte the goodly houses, and dwelte therein / and have droues of oxen, and
flocks of sheep, and plenty of gold and silver, and of all things: than
beware leest thine heart ryseth and be proud / and forgetest the lord thy
god. etc. Esaye.j. If ye will hear and be ruled, ye shall have your pleasure
of the best fruit of the land: but if ye will not, and provoke me to
displeasure / the sword shall devour you. Esaye. lv. All ye that are at
hurst, come to ye waters. Also you yt want silver, go quyckly: bye that ye
might eat, go your ways and bye wine and milk without money, and without
price or exchange. Wherefore do you lay out your money for ye fode that fedeth
not? and spend your labor about that thing that satisfyeth you not. And
wherefore rather lysten you not unto me, yt your souls might eat of ye best /
and take their fill upon the fattest delycates? Give ear to me, and come to
me, take heed to me, and your souls shall be refresshed. etc.

In the.xxij. chap. Hieremy says unto the evil king Ioacim. Thy father, did
he not eat and drink (that is to say, lived in peace) and kept equite and
justice, that time when he was in prosperity? He judged ye cause of the poor
and nedy / so yt it redowned to his own goodness. And was it not therefore
(says the lord) because he knew and regarded me? but thy eyes and thy heart,
is all given unto auaryce, and blood shedynge and that of innoce^tes / and to
iniust vexacion of other, ronnyng to every unhappy deed. Therefore ye lord said
these things unto Ioacim king of Judah, sone of Iosyas. Neither brother nor
sister shall bewail him and say alas. Nor none shall cry to him, saying alas
lord / alas noble man. He shall be buried as an ass is buried putrifyed / and
cast out of ye gates of Jerusalem. Proverb. xiij. A just and a good man eats
and fulfylleth his appetyte as much as he will: but the belly of an ungodly man
shall never have enough. The prophet psalm. liiij. Cast thy careful mind upon
the lord / and he shall nourysshe the / and shall never suffer a rightwise man
to waver or fall. Psalm. xxxvj. I have been young, and am come to age: and yet
saw I never the ryghtwyse forsaken / or his sede beggyng their bread.

Of sterilite and derth of vytaylles / corn or fruits.
Contrary to these things, god does threten. Leui. xxvj. If ye will not
harken unto me, nor will do all these my commandments / or if ye shall
despise my laws, and contemn mine ordynau^ces / so that ye will not do all
things as I have ordained, but shall break mine appoyntme^t: than will I
likewise do this again unto you. Ye shall sow your sede in vain for your
enemies shall devour and destroy it. I will make ye heaven over you as hard as
iron / and your land as hard as brass: and so your labor shall be spente in
vain. For your land shall not give her increase Nor the trees of the earth
shall give their fruits. I will break ye staff of your bread, that.x. wives
shall bake your bread in one oven / and men shall deliver you your bread
again by weight. Than shall you eat, and not be satisfied.

Deutro. xxviij. And if you wylt not harken unto the voice of ye lord thy god,
to keep and to do all his commandments and ordynaunces, which I command
yt this day: than all these curses shall come upon the, and overtake the.
Cursed shall thou be in the town, and cursed in ye field / cursed shall be thy
barn and thy store. Cursed shall the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
land be / and the fruit of thine oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep. etc. And
the heaven yt is over thy heed, shall be brass / and the land that thou
treadest upon iron. And ye lord shall turn the rain of the land unto powder
and dust / even from heaven they shall come upon the, until you be brought to
naught. Thou shall cast much sede in to ye field, and shall gather but little
in: for the locustes shall destroy it. Thou shall plant a vyneyarde and dress
it, but shall neither drink of the wine, nor gather of the grapes / for the
worms shall eat it. The prophet Agge. j. cha. ye did sow much, and carried
in / but little ye did eat, and were not satisfied / ye drank and had not
enough. And for what cause? (says the lord) because my house is forsaken and
desolate, and you have hyed every one to his own house. And for this the heuens
are prohibit to give dew upon you. And ye earth is forbydde^ to give her
increase. And god shall call drought upon ye land and mountains, upon wheat
and wine / and upon oil, and all things that the earth brings forth.

Of sycknesses.
God sends sycknesses unto men, some time for their sins / and many times
for to quycken their faith, and to exercise their charity and love to god and
to their neighbor To ye Hebre. xij. The lord chastises them whom he loves,
and corrects every sone that he favors. Leuit. xxvj. If ye will not yet be
learned for all this, but shall walk contrarywyse unto me: than will I also
walk contrary unto you / and will punysshe you seven times for your sins.
And when you are fled unto your cytyes, I will send ye pestilence among you.
etc. Deutro. xxviij. If it be so that thou wylt not hear the voice of ye lord
thy god / he shall make the pestilence cleave unto the / until he has
consumed from the land whether thou go for to enjoy it: and the lord
shall smite the with swellynges / with fevers / cold / hot / burning / and with
corrupt air / and blastyng: and they shall follow the until thou perysshe:
and ye lord will stryke the with ye botches of Egypt / and with the emorodes
/ skall and maungynesse: so that you shall never be healed thereof. And the lord
shall smite the with madness / blyndnes / and dasyng of ye mind. The lord shall
smite the with myscheuous botches in ye knees and legs / incurable / even
from ye sole of ye foot, unto ye top of thy heed. Except ye be diligent to
keep and do all the words of this law, that are written in this book / for to
fear this glorious and fearful name of the lord thy god: the lord will
increase thy thy plages / and smite both the and thy seade with wonderful
great plages / and of long contynuaunce / and with very evil sycknesses / and
of long durau^ce. More over, he will bring upon the all the afflictions of
egypt / which you wast afraid of / and they shall cleave unto the. Beside
this all manner sycknesses / and all manner plages, which are not written in the
book of this law / will the lord bring upon ye / until thou be come to
naught: and all because you will not harken unto ye voice of ye lord thy god.

Of war and peace.
The very true peace is only in Christ but in the world / all manner of
myschefe. John^. xvj. These things have I spoken (says Christ) unto you /
that in me ye may have peace / but in ye world ye shall have tribulacion. In
the world is ambicion of honor and dominion, and all desire of their own
profit and of richesse / and inordynate affections of worldly and carnal
pleasures / whereof do spring al strife and battle / which god sends for ye
transgressyon of his laws and commandments. Esaye. j. If ye will be
stubburne, and provoke me unto displeasure: ye shall be devoured with sword.
For so has god promised with his own mouth. Deutro. xxviij. says Moses. If
thou observe ye laws and commandments of the lord thy god: he shall smite
thine enemies that rise against ye before thy face. They come out against the
one way, and flee from the seven ways. And contrarywyse shall he deal with
the, if thou be disobedyent. Also.xxxij. without forth, the sword shall destroy
them / and within the house fear: and that both young men and young women /
and the suckelynges, with men of gray heads.

Job. xix. The venger of iniquities, and of ungracious living, is the sword.

Leuit. xxvi. If ye will not hear me / I shall enduce upon you the sword,
venger of my covenant. Look diligently upon these chapters of
Jeremy.ix.xv.xxix.xlij xliij.xvj.l. And Ezechiel.v.vj.vij.xxxviij. Osee. vij.
Amos. vij.viij.

Baruc. iij. O Israel, what means it that you art in ye land of thine
enemies? the answer follows. Thou have left the well of wysdom. For if you
had walked in the way of god: verily you sholdest have dwelte in peace upon
thine own land.

Of kings and pryncys.
All powers are ordained by god. Romans xiij. wherefore all pryncys ought hyely
for to study and to apply them selves, that they may live and do service
according to ye will of him yt is king of all kings, and lord of al lords,
of whom they take their power. And not only king and kingdoms / but also
princys, and them that be of ye counsel, are ordained of god. Proverb. viij.
If they will have their subjects obedient, loving and to be at rest / it may
not be by their own polycy, strong hand or oppression: but as David says in
the psalm. Thou art he that subduest my people under me. For all things
(heaven, ye world, angels, Paul Cephas, Appollo, the prince, theleme^tes,
time, satan, sin, death, hell) are subject unto us: where we be subject unto
god / having no confidence but only in him. Experience of this they may se in
ye books of Iudicum and of kings.

Proverb. xxj. As the divisions of waters (which were set above the firmament
and underneath, only by gods disposicion) so is the heart of a king in ye
hand of god / what way it please him, he shall make it to bow. Ecclastici. x.
The power of the world is in the hand of god. And all the iniquite and sin
of the people, is abomynable: and when time is, he shall set up a profitable
ruler over them.

How pryncys ought to meke them selves unto the preaching of gods word.
Many notable examples we have in holy scripture of pryncys and kings, how
they have be mekened and fall to repentance through the word of god / namely
Ione the third. The word came to ye king of Niniue / and he rose from his
seat of estate, and kest from him his clothes / and put on sackcloth, and sat
down in the ashes. Also David, monysshed of Nathan, said Peccaui. ij. reg.
xij. and. xxiiij. Eccliastici. x. The seats of proud leders, god has
destroyed and has made to sit in their stead, those that be mylde. The rotes
of proud people (that is richesse) god has made to wyther away: and planted
for them such as were meke, even of the same people. God has destroyed the
good report of ye proud / and reserved ye fame of them that be meke or lowly
in their own conceyte.

David in ye second psalm. Now ye kings be wise and understand: ye judges
and rulers of the land, be content to be monysshed and learned. Let them take heed what is written Sapientie.vj.

Of them that have taken the gospel of Christ.
All they which know and have taken upon them ye gospel of Jesus Christ, sone
of the living god: shall be vexed and exercised with many tentacions and
tribulacions of this world. Joan. xvj. These things have I said unto you:
that ye may have peace in me, in the world ye have affliccion: but be of good
chere, for I have over come the world. In the same chapyter. Verily verily I
say unto you, ye shall be sorrowful and weep / but the world shall joy and be
merry: ye shall be heavy, but your heaviness shall be turned unto joy.

The second to Tymothe.iij. All that will live godly in Jesus Christ / shall
suffer persecucions.

Of the office of good pryncys.
Ecclesiast. x. The dignytye of a wise prince (that is of him that dredeth god)
shall be stablysshed. Ecclesiastes.x. Happy is that land, which has a noble
king. And that also, whose pryncys eat their meat in conuenyent time: and
that for to be refresshed, and not to excess voluptuously. Proverb. xxix. A
ryghtwise king promoteth his land: a covetous man shall destroy it. A king
that judges the poor in truth: his trone shall be stablysshed for ever in
truth.

Of the dignite of evil princys.
This is true, Rom^. xiij. that all power is of the ordinance of god / for ye
sauegard of those that be good / and for ye punishment of them that be evil.
Wherefore we must obey pryncys, also though they be evil and tyrau^tes. The
rod of Assure is nevertheless in the hand of god. Job. xxxiiij. How may he be
healed that loves not equite? what way can you condemn him, which is
ryghtous? which say to a king / thou art apostata / which calls capteyns
ungracious / and makes a false ypocryte to reygne, because of ye ungracious
living of ye people. Proverb. xxviij. For ye sins of the land: there be many
princes of it. And for ye wisdom of a man, and knowledge of those things that
are taught, the life of a capteyn shall be prolonged. A roryng lion and an
hu^gry bear: an ungodly prince over the poor people. A capteyn lackyng
wisdom, shall oppress many by fraudulent vexacion. Therefore let pri^cys
beware lest it chances to them, as did unto Adonibezec. Iudic. j. to
Abimelec. Iudic. ix. unto Pharao. Exodus xiiij. to Hieroboa^. iij. of kings.
xiij. to Iesabell. iiij. of kings. ix. to Agag. j. of kings. xvj. to Roboam.
iij. of kings. xij.xiiij. to Nabugodonosor. Daniel. ix. to Antiocus. j. of the
Machab. vij. to Herod, of ye Acts. xij. and many other.

Of Cytyes.
Those Cities are acursed, that when ye word of god is showed unto them, they
will not receive it, ne take repentance. Math. xj. Woe be to the Chorasyn, woe
be to the Betzaida: for if ye miracles, which were showed i^ you, had be done
in Tire and Sydon / they had repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
Nevertheless I say unto you, it shall be easyer for Tire and Sydon at the day of
judgment, than for you. And thou Capernaum, which art lift up unto heaven:
shall be brought down to hell. For if ye miracles which have be done in the
had be showed in zodom / they had remained unto this day. Math. xxiij.
Jerusalem / Jerusalem, which kyllest prophets and stonest them which are sent
unto ye. etc. Behold your habitacion shall be left unto you desolate. Ione.
iij. God saw ye works of the Niniuytes, which were co^uerred from their
evil way: and he retracted the punishment, that he had thretened to do unto
them. Wherefore you senators and people of chrystyan Cytyes, I desire you all
yt I can, fear god and gladly receive his word / and louyngly cleue thereunto
/ and with that, study for the profit of ye common wealth and brotherly
charity: and all things shall succeed unto you prosperously / not only in this
world, but for ever in the world to come. And chose such officers as have
ye fear of god, and so forth / as it is written Exodi. xviij. For commonly
according to the judge of ye people, such are his ministers And as the ruler
of the City is: such are the inhabytauntes therein.

Of usurers.
Where so ever the common welthe, and brotherly charity, is not regarded
(which is most pryncipally, when usury is exercysed and suffered) the common
welthe can never be well ordered. The lord god prohybyteth usury in many places
of scripture. And how greatly he abhors it, he shows Esaye. v. Woo be to
you that join together house to house, and couple field to field. etc. Abacuc.
ij. Woo be to him that gathers and multyplyeth that which is not his own.
Proverb. xj. He that hydeth up his corn, shall be cursed amongst the people:
and the blessing of god shall come upon the heads of them that sells. God
commands you to lend, if ye will be his chylderne, lokynge for nothing
again. Luke. vj. If ye will se more where it is commanded, look Exodi. xxii.
Leuit. xxv. Deutronomy. xxiij. Ezechiel. xviij. and.xxij. Math. v. Psalm. ix.lx.

That the ungodly should look for no good fortune.
Who so ever seeks for his own profit caryng neither for right nor wrong,
ne regard brotherly charity: he may well be called ungodly / to whom it is
verily assured by holy scripture, that shortly the vengeance of god shall
come upon him.

Job. xxxvij. There shall be taken from the ungodly, their light. Psalm. ix. The
ungodly is trapped in the works of his own hands / and shall be overthrown
in to hell, with all them yt forgete god. Psalm. lxxiiij. god says. I shall
break ye horns of these ungracious: but ye power of ye ryghtwyse shall be
still exalted. Psalm. ciij. Let ye sinners be consumed upon the earth / and the
ungodly also, until none be left alive. Psalm. cxxviij. The ryghtuouse lord
shall kytte of the necks of the ungodly.

How that the ungodly persecute the good.
He is by right called ungodly, which co^temneth gods word, whereby faith
comes in to us, by the which only we be justified and saved. Esaye. lvij.
The ungodly (says the lord) has no peace. Eccle. xxviij. An ungodly man
troubles friends. And amongst them that are in peace / he casts debate.
Christ says Ioh. xv. As they have persecuted me / so shall they persecute
you.

That many with their riches shall fall and be destroyed for the word of god /
namely when it is styfly resysted by pertinacite abomynable.
Luc. ij. Behold, this child (Christ) is put in to ye fall and in to ye
reysyng again of many in Israel: and in to a mark which shall be gaynsayd:
yea and thine own soul shall be perced with a sword / so that ye preuy
cogitacio^s of many men's hertes, shall be made open..j. Pet. ij. This stone
which the bylders kest away / is made the heed corner stone / and a stone of
offense / and a rock to stumble upon, to them that are not content with his
word / nor believe yt, whereon they were set. Math. xxj. And he that falls
upon this stone, shall be broken: and upon who so ever the stone fall, it shall
crusshe him all to pieces.

Of the state of them that be called spiritual, and of the church.
The state of the church / whether it be called of spiritual men / of
religyous / or of monks: it is no pryncys state or dignite / but a
mynystracion or a service: or else their part shall be amongst the kings of
the infydeles. Luc. xxij. He that is greter amongst you / must be as ye
younger: and he that gothe before / must be as a seruer.

The dominyon of ungodly prelates and pastors, shall not be stablysshed.
Hiere. xxiij. The lord says. Woe be to you pastors, that destroy and tear
in pieces the flock of my pasture. etc. Surely, both prophet and priest are
polluted And in my house (says the lord) I have found their malice. For that
cause, their way shall be, as it were slypper in darkness: they shall be
threste at, and fall therein.

Ezechiel. xxxiiij. The lord god says these things. Woe be to the pastors
of Israel, which fed them selves. etc. My flocks have wandered out of the
way in all mountains: and there was none yt would seek for them. etc. Behold
therefore, I my self will require upon my pastors my flock out of their
hands: and I shall make them to cease, that they shall no more feed my flock
/ neither any more shall such pastors feed them selves: and I shall deliver
my flock out of their mouth: and they shall have it no more to their meat.
Look upon Esaias. j. Hiere. ij. xx. John^. x. Math. xxj. zachari. xj. Our lord
grant that the eyes of their heart may be lyghtened / and they converted, and
return to the lord.

Of the common sort of chrystianes.
To the common christen people, if they be of one accord, and agree in unite of
faith and hope in Jesus Christ only, and his gospel / and in fraternall
charity: al things shall succeed at their desire. But if they reyse up them
self contrary to Christ and his gospel / it can be none otherwise, but the
sword, hunger, pestilence, noisome beestes, tyrauntes, and all manner of
sycknesses shall fall upon them / and they shall be given up in to the hands of
their enemies. Deutro. xxviij. Leui. xxvj. Hebr. x. How much more suppose
you, them to deserve worse turmentry, which treads down the sone of god,
and counts ye blood of the testament polluted, whereby he was sanctified / and
despyseth ye spryte of grace? Let all them therefore be of good chere, yt
receive ye word of god. For though they be kept under in this world:
nevertheless in that eternal and heavenly country, they shall have glory, with
perpetual victory and triumph of their enemies: when they shall be turmented
in fire of everlasting malediction. Philip.j. In nothing be ye afraid of your
adversaries / for that which is to them cause of perdicion / is to you cause of
salvation / and that by god.

ij. Corinth. iiij. If so be our gospel be hydden: it is hydden in those that
perysh, in which the god of this world, has blinded the minds of
unbelievers / leest the light of ye glorious gospel of Christ, which is the
image of god, should shine upon them. ij. Corinth. ij. We be a good odoure of
Christ to god, both among them that be saved, and among them that perysshe.

That sedicious persons may look to have nothing prosperous.
He is called sedicious, which sets up him self against his prince (whom
he is bound to obey) though it were so that tyrauntes bear the rowme. For
all power is ordained by god. Rom^. xiij.

Proverb. xxiiij. Fear ye lord (my sone) and the king / and meddle not with
detractours: for suddenly shall their perdicion rise: and who can tell the
ruin of them both? Follow not evil men, neither desire to be with them. For
their mind is occupied about rapyne: and their lyppes talking frauds.

Hieremy.xxviij. Thou have broken treen setters / and for them thou shall make
fetters of iron. Dathan and Abiron, and all sedicious, were punysshed of the
lord As it appears Numeri. xvj. and.iij. reg. xvj. Rom^. xiij. He that
resysteth power, resysteth gods ordinance. Math. xxvj. All that take the
sword / shall perysshe with the sword. Gene. ix. Who so ever shedeth man's
blood / shall have his blood shed again.

That no man should presume to cast of the burden which is laid upon him /
oneles he be laden with an heuyer and oppressed.
Hieremy.xxv. Because ye have not herd my words: behold, I shall send and
take unto me, all the cognacion of the north (says the lord) and
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon my servant: and I shall bring them upon this
land, and upon the inhabyters of it, and upon all ye nations that be about
it, and I shall slay them, and put them as men that were out of their wit, in
to contempt, and in to desolacion for ever. Hieremy.xxvij. And now therefore, I
have given all these lands in ye hand of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon my
servant..j. Corin. vij. Thou art called to be a servant, care not for it. The
Ire and punishment of god was fyerce, because of ye sins of his people. And
therefore he stereth up tyrau^tes, which does him service against his people.
Read Hieremy. xxvij. the last end.

That false prophets, which teach ye liberty of ye flesh are not to be
herd.
Hiere. xxvij. Be not willing to hear your prophets, and sothsayers, dream
reders, augurers, and enchaunters, which say to you. Ye shall not serve the
king of Babylon. For they prophecye lies unto you, that they might make you
far from your country, and cast you out, and that ye should perysshe. In the
same chapter. Hear not the words of your false prophets. etc.

Of Antechryst.
Every one yt speaks against Christ, and cleueth to ye pleasures of this
world that shortly shall perysshe: is Antechryst..j. Johan.ij. It is sure,
that there be many Antechrystes. But the very hye and principal Antechryst, is
begone to be reveled and declared in these our days, by holy scriptures /
which until he be destroyed with the spryte of the mouth of our lord Jesus
Christ / shall rule and rage cruelly in ye world. Daniel.xj. And there shall
fall of them that be well learned: so that they shall be tried by fire, and
chosen out, and made white, unto the time appointed. For yet an other time
shall be: and a king shall do after his own will: and shall be lift up in
pride, and magnyfyed against every god. And shall speak great things against
the god of goods: and he shall prospere till the wrath of god be performed.
For the diffinicion is so set. And he shall not regard the god of his fathers:
and shall be in ye co^cupiscences of women: neither he shall care for any
gods. For he shall rise against al things. And he shall honor the god
Maozim in his place: and shall worship a god that his fathers never knew, with
gold / silver / precious stone / and other precious things.

Of the state of religyon and papystes.
Math. xv. Christ says. All the plantacion which my heavenly father have not
planted / shall be plucked up by the rote. The more they shall enforce to
defend their living before god abomynable: so much more shall their
myscheues and symulacions be made open to all ye world. He that has ears for
to hear / let him hear what are written Johan.v.

Of the reformacion of Christ's church.
Only god knows the christyan church: for it is spiritual, and known
only by the spirit: wherefore to god only which is a spirit, it is entyerly
known. This church, as long as it cleueth fast to the word of god: it can
not but stand sure. if not / soon it peryssheth. How ever so much other
thing is constytute and ordained in counselles of priests / bysshoppes / and
pryncys of this world. For (as we said before) every plantacion that my
heavenly father have not planted, shall be plucked up by the root. Read in the
Acts.v. and to the Romans.xiiij.

Of the Jews.
Of the Jews blyndnes the scripture is full: blessed is he that understand
it, and unto his end does abide the grace and mercy of god. Rom^. xj. My
brethren I will not that ye forgete this mysterye (leest you be hye minded, or
wise in your own conceyte) For blyndnes chanced partly in Israel, until the
fulness of gentyles shall come in / and so the whole Israel shall be saved.
For god is strong enough to graffe them in again.

Of signs of the last day.
Many signs of the last day, whereof Christ makes mencyon, Math. xxiiij. are
seen and fulfilled all ready. Therefore lift up your heads ye christen men /
for your redemption draws nere.

The conclusyon.
THis our pronosticacyon gentle reader, needs no declaracyon of phylosophye
or astrologye, which is of man's inuencyon: for it is founded upon the only
everlasting word of the omnipotent god / whose power no man may resyst / and
under whom they bow and obey, that bears up this world. Job. ix.

Let no man therefore contempne these things / neither resyst the truth openly
known / interpretyng them any otherwise, than our lord Jesus Christ has
interpreted: oneles we be despoyled of the grace and mercy, which we have
obtained by him.j. Johan. iij. But rather let him enforce to apply him fast,
from ignorance and lies unto the trewthe, which is god him self: to whom
only be honor and glory for ever. Amen.

The will of the lord be done. Act. xxj.
To the christen reders.
LO good reders, here may you se, what the cause is of all the punyshmentes,
plages, and myseryes that god sends upon us: that is because we do not
observe the laws of god / nor do not live according to his word. And not as
many both do think and say, that these new laws and new lernynges are the
causes. Is not this new learning the very true word of god? Else let them
come and prove the contrary. But now that light is come in to this world:
they that have be brought up in darkness, love better darkness than light / yea
rather they hate the light, and will not come at it / leest their ypocrysye
and their cerymonyous good works, after the inuencions of men, should appear
naught, and worthy to be reproved.

Those sort would I exhort to come whiles they have light, and believe in it,
leest (remaining here in their inward darkness) they be kest in to the
outward darkness, where shall be ever sorrow and mysery. An other sort there
is (the more pytye) that seem to favor ye light of gods word, and follow
and favor the preachers thereof: but they seek the liberty of the flesh, and
not of the spirit, living after their fleshly lusts, and after the noughty
fashyon of the world, in covetousness / ambicion / pride, with infynyte other
euylles / only sekyng for their own profytes and pleasures / though it be to
their chrystyan brothers great detriment. This comes of inordynate love that
men have to them selves: which is cause of much other evil: and never can
bring forth good fruit of faith / thus contynuynge to the end of their life,
led contynually far out of charity, through their propre love: yet they
think than to be saved by their feigned faith. Which I fear me, for lack of
testimony of good works, shall be disalowed at the day of judgment, when
Christ shall say. I was hungry / and ye gave me no meat, and so forth. This
sort let that other sort from coming to the light. And it is to be
feared, that these co^munycacions in this pronosticacion, shall fall upon us /
not because we forsake obedyence to the bishop of Rome and his laws, which
has led us in to darkness, and out of the right way to godwarde / nor
because of this new preaching after the very word of god: but because the
word is now so often, and so plainly preached unto us / and we remain still
after the old fashyon / as the cities did, where Christ preached, Corosayn,
Betzayda, and Capernaum / whom he reproved and cursed, because they received
not his words, so often showed unto them.

The ground that is well tylled and sown and has often rain in season / and
yet bring forth no good fruit (says saint Paul) is cursed of the owner.
Therefore let us so hear the true word of god / that we may change our
living / and live according unto his word: and I doubt not, we shall
obtain his merciful promyses, and benedictions, that he promyseth to the
kepers of his laws, and live after his word, by the grace of Christ, by whose
merytes and help we may bring all things well to pass / and have not only
these te^porall blessings / but also spiritual / true faith / remyssyon of
sins / preseruacion in grace / and assurau^ce of ye kingdom of heaven. which
I beseech him to grant us. Amen.

This treatise or pronosticacion is seen, read, and examyned by me John^
Hylsey bishop of Rochester.

Plinius in the.xviij. book and.xxxiij. chapyter of his natural hystory. AL
things that are cut / plucked / slypte, or lopped / are best to be done in
the latter end of the moon.

Meddle not with dunge but in the wane of the moon. Most specially dunge your
land in the last quarter. Gelde your pigs / calves / wether lammes, and
kyddes, in ye decrease of the moon. Put your eggs under ye hen at the new
moon. Make your dyches or holes for to plant in / about the full of the
moon at night. When it is full moon, cover the roots of your trees.

In moist places sow your sede / betwixt the new moon and the old / or
about four days before, or after. They will also that ye wenowe your corn
or seeds, and lay them up about the last endyng of the moon. And to sow
seeds whiles the moon is over the earth: and must be pressed when the moon is
under the earth.

Imprynted at London in Fleet street / at the sign of the son by me John^
Byddell.

Cum priuilegio Regali.



printer's device of John Byddell, his mark and initials in white on a black
background, within a circular border (McKerrow 78) John^ Byddell.



