THE MARROW OF THE ORACLES OF GOD.

OR, Diverse Treatises, containing Directions about six of the waightiest
things can concern a Christian in this life.

By N. BIFIELD late Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middlesex.

The seventh Edition.



LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, and are to be sold by P. Stephens, and C.
Meredith. at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard.

1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND most Noble Lady, the Lady Lucie, Countess of
Bedford.
MADAM,
THESE ensuing Treatises, having received their birth at several times, (being
but little Ones) sought them several Guardians to protect them: being now all
jointly to go into the world together to seek entertain meant, they humbly
present themselves unto your Honor; beseeching your general protection, and
your noble admission, to do you and your Noble Family their first
ioynt-seruice, and from thence they are contented to bear their adventure for
their entertainment abroad in the world. And the rather am I emboldned thus to
(end them, with this Petition to your Honor, because in the first conception
of them in the public Doctrine, you were pleased to conceive so good hope of
them, as to desire the profit of their service, as they should be (...) and
fitted thereunto. As they are mine, they are worthy of little respect; but as
they have received spirit and life from the heavenly Word, and will of God: so
they are meet to attend your most retired presence, and to be trusted with the
charge of your greatest treasure, not doubting of your Honors noble and
religious respect herein, I desire to remain

Your Honors Chaplain in the things of Jesus Christ, ^o serve you ever, N.
BIFIELD.

THE BEGINNING OF THE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST.

OR, A Catalogue of sins: Showing how a Christian may find out the evils he
must take notice of in his Repentance.

With Rules, that show a course, how any Christian may be delivered from the
guilt and power of all his sins.

By N. BIFIELD late Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in MIDDLESEX.

Lament. 3. 40.

Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, and are to be sold by P. Stephens, and C.
Meredith. at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard.

1630.

THe Contents of all the six Treatises, thou shall find in the first Chapter
of the first Book.

TO THE MVCH HONORED LADIES, the Lady ANNE CLEAR, and the Lady ANNE PINCH,
and the Lady IONE HERICKE: N. Bifield wishes all increase of the true grace
of Christ, and the blessed fruition of the glory of God in heaven.
Worthy Ladies,
LAmentable are ^he ruins, into which the natures of men are generally fallen
by their sins: which appears especially by the ways men take in the
business of their soul. The most men are clean out of the way to heaven, and
walk in by ways of their own, which are called in Scripture, The ways of
the wicked; The ways of their own hearts; Perverse ways; Dark and slipperie
ways; The way of iniquity. All meeting in that broad way that leads to
destruction, being wholly ignorant of the way of life and peace, yea, the most
of them speak evil of the good way of God, and persecute it. Some there are,
that are so far enlightened, as not to like the common road way of the
multitude; and after some inquiry have found them out ways that seem good in
their own eyes; and they are wonderfully well pleased with their course, but
the issues of these ways are death too, as well as the former. And the more is
this danger increased upon men, because the way of life is but one, and it is a
narrow way, and hard to find, and may be sought by many, and yet not found. Yet
this hope is left unto forlorn men, that there is a way to heaven and happiness:
A way of righteousness and peace, a way of mercy and truth, a way of wisdom:
A way that men may securely and safely walk in; a way, in which Christ will
guide the^, God the Father will keep them, and the holy Ghost lead them by
the hand, and direct them in all the passages thereof. Only it concerns us
to ask the way, with all importunity, of God, and to attend unto the
directions of the Word of God, and apply our hearts, and suffer our selves to
be disposed aright, that our eyes may see the salvation of God. And in
particular we must look to three things: First, that if the Lord show us that
mercy, to direct us in the way, we must take heed that we neglect not, or
despise notthe care of walking in the way. Second ly, that with all diligence
we avoid going about, and make straight stops to our feet. And thirdly, with
all fear watch our selves, that we fall not off with the errors of the wicked,
from the good way of God, and so our latter end be worse then our beginning.

I have undertaken by the assistance of God, and the direction of this, blessed
word, to single out the choicest things I could find in the Scriptures,
concerning the entrance into the way of God, and those first path: which are
called Holy. The substance of these directions I have digested into the
Treatise following: which I dedicate unto your Ladyships, as a testimony of my
thankfulness, for the respect you have showed unto my Ministry, both in your
constant resort unto it in the week days, while you lived in a neighbor
Parish; and in that two of you are pleased to come to live amongst us, and so
are become a part of my charge. As also to manifest to the world my observance
of your Ladyships, for the good report you have amongst the godly for the grace
of Jesus Christ, and your unfeigned love of the truth. Beseeching your
Acceptance, Perusal, and Patronage of these, I take my leave, and commend
your Ladyships to the God of Mercy and Truth, who guide, comfort, deliver,
sanctify, and preserve you all unto the day of Jesus Christ.

Your Ladyships to be commanded in Jesus Christ, N. BIFIELD.
Febr. 12. 1619.
The chiefest things contained in the first Book.
CHAP. I.
THE Contents of all the six Treatises, briefly set down page 1. to the 7.
The persons whom those Treatises do concern. p. 8 Encouragement to the study
of these things. p. 8. to 11 General directions by way of preparation. p. 11.
14.
CHAP. II.
THe Rules that show distinctly what men must do about their sins. p. 14. to
36 Motives to persuade to the care of these Rules. p. 15 Three Rules of
preparation. page 16. 17 Four things deliver us from all sins past. p. 17
About the gathering of the Catalogue of sins. p. 17 About the confession of
our sins p. 22. to 24 About sorrow for our sins, and how ^t may be
attained. p. 24. to ^7 About the application of the promises, and how it may
be done. p. 27. to 3^ The special promise made to such as have-confessed and
sorrowed for their sins. p. 29. 30 How men may know, whether their confession
and sorrow for their sins, be right or no. p. 32. 33. 34 Three sor^s of men
may profit by these Directions. p. 34 Other uses of the Catalogue of sins. p.
35 The misery of such as will not be advised to take a sound course about
their sins. p. 35
CHAP. III.
THE sins against the whole Law: where of original sin, ignorance,
procrastination, vaineglory, security, hypocrisy, self-loue, inconstancy, etc.
p. 37. to 41.
CHAP. IIII.
THE division of the sins against the first Table, and the sorts of sins
against Gods Nature. page 42 to 53 Seven monstrous offenses. p. 43 Of natural
Atheism^. p. 44 And Epicurisme. p. 45 Of the defects of grace, and the
mis-placing of our affections. p. 45 46 How many ways men sin against the
mercy of God. p. 48. 49 and the fear of God. p. 50. 51 and the trust in God.
p. 51. 52
CHAP. V.
HOw many ways men offen^ against the means of God^ worship. p. 53. How many
ways men offend, By not-worshipping. p. 53, 54 By will-worshipping. p. 55 By
Idol-worshipping. p. 56
CHAP. VI.
HOw many ways men sin against the manner of Gods worship. p. 57. Offenses
that may be committed in the manner of doing any part of Gods service. p. 58
Sins en hearing. p. 58 Sins in prayer. p. 59 Sins about the Sacraments. p.
59 Sins about an oath. p. 60
CHAP. VII.
Sins about the time of Gods worship. p. 61. Three secret offenses against
the Sabbath. p. 61. The open breaches of the Sabbath. p. 62, 63.
CHAP. VIII.
THE division of the sins against the second Table. The sins Of wives and
Husbands. p. 64, 65. Of Children and Parents. p. 65, 66. Of Servants and
Masters. p. 67, 68. Of Subjects and Magistrates. p. 68. Of Hearers and their
Ministers. p. 69.
CHAP. IX.
Sins against the persons of men. p. 69 1 By omission. p. 70 2 By commission;
where The sins internal. p. 71. to 74 The sins external: In gesture. p.
74 In words. p. 74 In works. p. 76, 77 How we sin against the bodies of men.
p. 78 How against the souls of men. p. 79. to 81
CHAP. X.
THe sins against Chastity. p. 81 In the gross acts. p. ^2 In the thoughts,
and affections, and senses, and gestures, and words. p. 83 The occasions of
uncleanness. p 84. 85. 86
CHAP. XI.
SIns against the estates of men. p. 86 Internal. p. 86 Exterrnall. Of
omission. p. 87. 88 Of commission, where the several ways of stealing. p. 88.
89 with the aggrauations to p. 90. 91
CHAP. XII.
Sins against the good names of men. p. 92 By omission. p. 92 By commission.
Internally. p. 92 Externally. p. 93. to 99
CHAP. XIII.
OF the sins without consont p. 96
CHAP. XIII.
HOw many ways men offend against the Gospel. p. 97. Sins against Christ. p.
97, 98. Sins against repentance. p. 98, 99 Sins against Faith. p. 100 Sins
against the Spirit of grace. p. 100.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER, containing the Scope of all the Six Treatises, and
certain general things, which by way of Introduction belong unto them all.
FOrthy sake (Christian Reader) I have been willing to prepare for the Press,
Six little Treatises: Which may inform thee of six things, of the greatest
consequence, that I know can concern thee in this life. And though I have
reason to abase my self in the acknowledgement of mine own frailty and
insufficiency for these things, ye^ thou have cause to awaken to the
consideration of the matter which so nearly concerns thee using the help of
this labor, ti^ God afford thee better help from more able instruments. The
matter in all of them is so necessary, that I know not which of them thou
may safely neglect

The first thing which any man The Contents of this Treatise.
disposing himself for the Kingdom of God, will and ought to inquire after,
is, What he should do to be rid of those so many sinne^ he has been and is
guilty of? Rid (I say) from the guilt and danger of them, and from the power
and dominion of them. For the satisfaction of thy conscience in this most
needful question, I have in this first Treatise gathered for thee, out of the
whole Bible, a Catalogue of those sins, which in our repentance God will have
with special notice to be confessed and avoided. And these sins I have set
down, as near as I could, in the express words of the text, that thou
might see the Lord himself describing thy offenses: and so might have no
excuse or doubt, to imagine that it was but the judgment of some men, that
made such things to be thought to be sins. By this course of surueying the
whole Scriptures, I have both found out diverse particular offenses plainly
proved to be so, which I could not observe to be mentioned in any exposition of
the commandments which I had, and also diverse things proved clearly to be
sins, which were only barely ^ffirmed to be so in other writers. I have
likewise plainly showed thee by express Scripture, what course thou may
distinctly take to be rid of thy sins: a course that cannot fail thee, being
grounded on the most evident directions, which God himself has prescribed
unto thee, if thy own slothfulness and proc^astination, or wilful
perverseness binder thee not: And I doubt not but by experience thou will
confess, the course is comfortable and easy, considering the great benefit
and rest thou may bring to thy conscience thereby.

The second thing a man would 2. The contents of the second book.
desire to be satisfied in, (that has been entered into the practice of
Repentance) is, How he might come to be infallibly assured, concerning Gods
favor, and his own salvation; and for answer hereunto, I have in the second.
Treatise gathered out of the Scriptures, signs of Gods own making, by which
men may try their estate, and these such, as both describe wicked men, not yet
in Christ, and such, as describe godly men that shall certainly be saved. And
withal, I have now added directions, how by the help of those signs men may
settle their assurance, and how such as yet want those signs, may attain them.

The third thing every Christian ought to seek satisfaction in, 3. The
Contents of the third book.
is this, How a man that has attained unto the assurance of salvation when he
dies, may comfort and establish his heart against all the miseries and
distresses, which may, and will befall him in this life before his death. And
to this end I have gathered out of the whole Scriptures those admirable
consolations which may be abundantly sufficient to uphold him with much joy in
the worst estate that can befall him. And this is done in the Treatise which I
call the Promises.

The fourth question, a careful Christian, that has thus found 4. The
Contents of the fourth book.
out the gain of godliness, would ask, is this, what he should do in the
whole course of his life to glorify God, who has thus loved him, and given
his Son to dye for him, and purchased such a glorious inheritance for him.
And for answer hereunto, I have likewise out of the Scripture gathered the rule
of Life, which will show him distinctly, how he should carry himself toward
God, and toward men in all parts of his life; how he should behave himself
at home and abroad, in company, and out of company, etc. and all this showed
him by the express words of the Scriptures.

In the fifth place, if a man ask himself what yet he wants that 5 The
contents of the fifth book.
is necessary for his state, he may and ought to bethink himself of this
question; What are those necessary truths, which God has absolutely tied him
to know and believe, without which he cannot be saved, and which are
fundamentally needful for him? To this end I have collected a fifth Treatise,
called the Touching t^ Treatise of the Principles, read the Advertisement,
printed at the end of the Rules of Life, page 640.
Principles: which are an extract out of all the Doctrine of religion: of such
truths in every part of religion, as a man is bound of necessity to know. And
this I have not only proved by Scripture, but showed what uses he may put
such knowledge to, all the days of his life.

The sixth and last thing which 6 The contents of the last book.
ought to be enquired after, is, how a man thus fitted to live the life of
God, may also be cured of the fear of death; and to this end I have published
that Treatise of the Cure of the fear of Death, which shows plain and
comfortable ways, how any Christian may deliver his heart from Whom these
Treatises concern.
those fears.

I suppose that no man that reads this, will conceive, that any of these is
needless. And as I would advise such Christians as abound with ability and
l^isure, to furnish themselves with the labors of such worthy Di^ines, as have
written of any of those subjects: so unto such Christians as have not that
ability or leisure I commend these Treatises, both for their breuity, and the
distinct digesting of the things he would seek after; there being nothing of
mine in these, but the labor of disposing them, the maine substance of them
being Gods own Word, and things devised and invented by God himself. I may
lawfully commend the care and study of these things unto thee, and that with so
much authority from the Lord, as to tell thee, that thou may not safely be
negligent in any of these, if thou consider the worth of them, or thy own n^ed.

If thou say, that here is prescribed a hard tas^e, and so many (...) to the
s^y of t^se (...).
things are to be done, as may make any man afraid to m^ddle with directions
of such variety, and number;

I answer; that in many of these Treatises the way is not made harder then is
required; or in the doctrine of the Church manifested: but rather things are
made more plain, and so more easy. Besides, thou know already, that the
way to heaven is a narrow and straight way, and f^w find it. But especially
thou should weigh with thy self the great encouragements and motines to
abide the hardship and difficulties of any godly and necessary course. Though
the way to Canaan (with the Israelites) were through a solitary wilderness,
yet it should comfort thee, that it is but a way of three days, as they say,
being about to get out of Egypt, God will keep thee at work but a little
time, and therefore thou should not think much of thy pains. And further
think of it, that this is a course of wonderful comfort and safety: when a
Christian follows the evident directions of Gods Word in these most weighty
things, he walks safely: He is in the good way, the way of life, the way of
peace; he is sure to see the salvation of God. To follow those directions
soundly, is to keep our souls. All Gods ways will be mercy and truth to us.
God will cause us to hear his loving kindness in the morning. Our way will be
full of refreshing: Gods ways are ways of pleasure, and if any man set
himself exactly to take notice of Gods will in these things, and will be at
pains to store his heart distinctly in such solid truths: it is certain, the
Lord will recompense his way upon him, God will not cast away the exact man,
till he fill his mouth with laughter, as it is said, Job 8. 20, 21. Sure it is,
that in the study of these things lies the way of eternity, and though thou
think the way to be hard and narrow, yet this may somewhat case thee; it is a
plain way: For the simple may profit by it, as is avouched to be true of all
the courses which God by his Word so expressly required, Psalm. 119. Isaiah 26.
7. and 52. 16. Prou. 8. And besides thou have many helps; the word of God will
not only show thee what to d^e, but it will beget in thee a secret power to do
it; God will teach thee to profit, and the Spirit of God will help thy
infirmity: and God will send his Angels to guide thee in thy way: Christ will
be the Way and the Life to thee. And thou have good company; for this is the
old way, the way of all Gods servants in the substance of the course.

Only before thou set upon any General directions by way of preparation.
of these directions, let me give this general advice, to look to these few
things.

First, thou must give over, and forsake ungodly company; for else it is in
vain to meddle with any religious course, as these places will show thee,
Psalm. 1. 1, 2. Prou. 4. 14, 15. and 9. 6. and 23. 19, 20, and 29 27. Psalm. 26.
2 Cor. 6.

Secondly, thou must get thee into the way of good men, provide 2
for thy self (if it be possible) the fellowship and society of godly
persons, Prou. 2. 20. Isai. 19. 23, 24, 25. For this fellowship will take away
the tediousness of the way, and much preserve thee against giving over; and
their examples will be as patterns for thee, and by acquaintance with them,
thou will be brought into acquaintance with God himself, Isaiah 16. 23, 24. 2
Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. Prou. 2. 20.

Thirdly, thou must remember to pray unto God by all means to 3
direct thee, and show thee the way in all these things, thou must beg a way of
God, and beseech him to remove from thee all lying and deceitful ways, Ezra
8. 21. Psalm, 119. 26. Ier. 2. 33. Fourthly, thou must, when thou come to Gods
directions, lift 4.
up thy soul, and give not way to thine own carnal reason, and the
sluggishnesse of thy own nature, and the deceitfulness of thy own heart: but
let the Lord see thou art willing to do any thing thou can, Psalm. 143. 8.
Bring a Note.
mind desirous to obey in all things. By any means take heed, thou be not like
those complained of, Isaiah 58. 2. that have a great mind to know Gods ways,
and to read all sorts of directions, as if they sought righteousness in a
special manner of care, and yet do not follow any of the courses they so much
desire to kn^w, and seem to commend and like. If ever thou would have thy
soul to dwell at ease, choose out for thy self those ways which God does
teach thee, Psalm 25. 12, 1^. Let the Lord know, that if he will be pleased
to teach thee a sure way, thou will walk in his paths; and to that end,
beforehand beseech him to unite thy heart to his fear, Psalm. 86. 11. Thou
should be of David's mind, to say, O that my way^s were directed to keep
Gods statutes, and then thou would resolve to keep them, Psalm. 119. 5, 8.

CHAP. II.
Showing what rules he must observe, that would be delivered from his sin.

HItherto in general. The first thing then to be done The course to be rid of
sin.
by that Christian that would settle himself in a sound course, to lay as it
were the foundation of his salvation, is to practice those rules that may
deliver him from the horrible danger and distress he is in, in respect of all the power of all the sins he has hitherto committed.

If he consider of the dreadful curses which he is liable unto in Motives.
respect of all his sins, he ought not to think it much to undergo the
hardest task can be enjoined, to make himself capable of the grace of God,
and pardon for so many offenses. And therefore with so much the more
willingness and unchangeableness of resolution, should he with much desire
set upon these rules now to be given, seeing they are but few in number, and
such as he may perform, by the grace of God, with much ease and comfort. And
the more may he encourage his own heart, because when he has done, he may
clearly see he has done distinctly that which God required of him, and that,
with which he is satisfied through Christ. But before he set upon the practice
of these rules, he must in judgment be thoroughly resolved of three things.

First, that Jesus Christ has 3 Things he must be resolved of in his judgment.
made a full and sufficient satisfaction for the sins of all men: As he
became a sacrifice for sin, he paid a price in his blood, sufficient 1
to redeem us, Ephesians. 1. 6. He is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins
of the world, Ioh. 1. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Ephesians. 1. 10.

Secondly, that God is well pleased 2
with this satisfaction made by Christ for our sins, which he declared by that
voice from heaven, Mat. 3 and 17. etc. Yea, he has set Christ forth in the
view of all men, as the propitiation for their sins, Romans 3. 25. and has
sent us the word of reconciliation, and beseeches us by the word, to be
reconciled. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.

Thirdly, that thou may attain unto this redemption by 3
Christ, if thou will practice those things which are required of thee: and
this thou may be assured of, both because Christ is said to take away the
sins of the world, and because God offers this reconciliation in the Gospel
to every creature, and exempts none; and because the Apostle says, If any man
sin, he may have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the
righteous; and besides, thou feel the Spirit of God knocking at the door of
thy heart, and would come in, John 1. 29. Mark 16. 15. 1. John 2. 1.

When thou have thus prepared If we do 4 things we are r^d of the danger of
all sins past.
thy self by these three resolutions, then if thou do these four things
following, thou may be sure to be clearly rid of all danger that can any
way befall thee for thy sins past, though they were never so many or great.

The first rule concerns the 1 Make a Catalogue of thy sins.
examination of thy self, and it is this: thou must take thee a Catalogue of
all the sins thou can discern by thy self, and be sure thou do this
seriously and effectually; and for this purpose retire thy self into some
secret place, and set thy self in Gods presence; and then call to mind all
the sins thou can remember by thy self particularly, write them down as
they come to thy mind; ask thy self this question: What have I done all the
days of my life, which if I were now to dye, would fear me if they were not
forgiven? Take the answer to this question, as thy sins come to thy mind, till
thou can remember no more, so as thou could in the sincerity of thy heart
say, that thou dealest plainly before the Lord, and do not hide any fault;
and out of the liking thou have of any sin, do not forbear to set it
down.

Trouble not thy head with the thoughts of any other thing, till this be done:
and thou need not care for order or phrase in setting it down, but do it
in such words as thou have to utter it in, and be sure to spare none of thy
special known sins, but let the Lord see, that thou art as willing to
indite thy self for them in his presence, as thou art willing he should
forgive them. When thou have in this manner taken a particular notice of thy
sins, then look upon the Catalogue following, and examine thy self
distinctly by it. For this Catalogue will be like a Looking glass from all
parts of Gods Law, to show thee thy offenses. And so thou may observe what
faults thou could not find or remember by thy private examination; and
withal see in what phrase or order to digest thy sins. Let not thy thoughts
trouble thee, but chearefully endure this trial of thy self; and take heed
thou do it not cursorily, but take time enough, and so thou may, if thou will only take one of the Chapters, or two of them, as they lie in the
Catalogue, and no more in a day, till thou come to the end of the Catalogue:
neither needst thou to trouble thy self about such sins as thou do not
clearly see that thou art guilty of, but take only such as thou art most sure
thou have offended in. It is enough in the practice of Repentance, to take
particular notice of known and apparent evils: a general acknowledgement will
serve for the rest. If thou think thy sins be innumerable, and so cannot be
gathered How our sins are innumerable.
into a Catalogue, understand, that the acts of sin are innumerable, but not
the kinds of sin. There is no sin, but it is condemned in the Scripture:
and if there were as many sins as there be lives in the Scripture, yet they
might be numbered; and therefore that speech of David, that his sins were
innumerable, must be understood of the acts of sin; for he might in one sin
be guilty of innumerable acts: as if it were a sin in thought, it might be
committed oftener then can be by us numbered. But in repentance, it is enough to
humble our selves for the several kinds of sins we have been guilty of,
which will not be so many, but they may be easily numbered. The several acts
of the same sin serve but as a general aggrauation of the offense. Only in
this examination look to two things: The one, that thou beseech God by prayer,
to show thee the sins Look to a things.
are most displeasing unto him. The other is, that thou take heed thou leave
not out any special known sins; because else those sins so spared, may
buffet thee a long time after thou have finished this course: and besides, they
may get head and prevail against thee in practice, if by this course they be
not brought under.

Now that thou ought thus The proof
seriously to examine and call to mind thy sins, and that this is one of the
things God requires of thee to be distinctly done, these places of Scripture
do evidently prove, and withal show, that God does take even this beginning of
thy repentance well, Lament. 3. 40. Psalm. 4. 4. Ezec. 16. 43, 61. and 20. 43.
and 36. 31. Ier. 8. 6. 1 Cor. 11. 28. Gal. 7. 3, 4. Job 11. 13. While thou art
doing this, thou shall do well to do no other exercise of Religion at that
time, but only to attend this.

The second thing that God requires of thee distinctly to be 2 Secondly, thou
must confess thy sins particularly in the best words thou can.
done, is the confession of those sins thus gathered into the Catalogue; and
for the performance of this duty, set sometime apart, and present thy self
before the Lord: and if thy memory will not carry all the particulars of thy
offenses, take with thee the written Note.
enditement, and as Hezechiah did with his letter, spread thy Catalogue before
the Lord, and then take unto thee words in the best manner thou can, to judge
thy self for those offenses. Let the Lord know, that it is thy hearts desire
to plead guilty to each of those sins, and in special, urge against thy
self those sins wherein thou have more especially offended. Be not
ouer-carefull for words; the Lord requires thee but to do it in the best
words thou can; only let thy words be the true voice of thy heart, and thou
may be sure the Lord understands the meaning of thy heart. Let no
objection drive thee off from the practice hereof, but do it so, as thine own
conscience may witness with thee, that thou have done it in the best manner
thou can. Now that it is a duty necessarily required, these Scriptures The
proofs.
plainly show, Hos. 14. 2, 3, 4. Pro. 28. 13. Leuit. 16. 21. and 26. 40, 51.
Job 33. 27, 28. Psalm. 32. 5. Ier. 3. 12, 13. Mat. 3. 6. Act. 19 18. Dan. 9.
Neh. 9. 2. Romans 10. 10 1 Cor. 11. 1. Ioh. 1. 8, 9. This is the second duty.

The third thing thou must labor for distinctly, is to conceive 3. Thirdly
thou must seek godly sorrow and not give outr, till thou feel thy heart melt
within thee.
true mourning and sorrow for these sins thus confessed. This is that
sacrifice is so well pleasing to God, and this is every where in Scripture
expressly required, and the promises fastened (diverse of them) upon this
condition, as these places manifestly show, Mat. 5. 4. Iam. 4. 9. Joel. 2. 12,
13. Zach. 12. 12. Isai. 1. 16. Psalm. 31. 9, 10. Isai. 61. 1, 2, 3. Ier. 50. 4.
Ier. 31. 18, 19. Now that thou How it may be attained.
may attain unto softness of heart, I advise thee to take this course:
Resolve with thy self to set some time apart, at least once every day for this
business; and when thou do stand before the Lord with thy former mournful
indictment, and while thou striuest to judge thy self, and to keep an assise
upon thy own soul, beg of God to give thee that soft heart he promised,
Ezech. 36. 26. beg it (I say) of God, but let thy prayers be without
limitation for the time. If the Lord hear th^e not the first time, yet pray
for it the next time again, and so the third day, and so still, till the Lord
do hear thee, and make thee feel thy heart to melt, and (if it may be)
tears to trickle down thy ch^kes before the Lord; yea, put on this
resolution, that thou will never stand before the Lord for any request while
this course lasts, but thou will remember this Petition, to beseech him to give
thee secret sorrow and sensible for thy sins. It may be, the Lord will hear
thee at the first, or in the beginning, while thou art preparing thy self to
speak unto him, or while thou call upon him at the first or second time;
but yet if he do not, persist thou, thy suit is just; and importunity will
overcome the Lord: and this very desire to sorrow being resolute, is a degree
of true godly sorrow. But yet that thou may be sure of it, give not over,
till the Lord hear the letter of thy desire, if it may be. And withal strive
against the perplexities of an unquiet heart; fear not, but that time of the
day which thou setst apart for religious duties, be as earnest as thou can,
and when that is done, go cheerfully about the works of thy calling. Hang not
down thy h^ad like a bulrush, as if thou must do nothing else but sigh and
bemoane thy self, and show a troubled mind in all things: Even the freer and
readier thy mind is, the more fit thy heart will be for this or other holy
employments.

And further know, that the use of this Catalogue is not for ever, nor do I
require this special mourning all the days of thy life, but in this case of
first repentance, by which the body of sin may be removed. Therefore thou
ought so long to use the Catalogue of thy confessions of sins, till thou
feel in some measure this sorrow and melting of heart, which when thou have
attained, eith^r sooner or later, then address thy self to the fourth rule.

The fourth r^le concerns the 4. Fourthl^, thou must the lay h^ld upon the
promises distinctly.
(...) of the Promises, especi^lly the Promises of two sorts. First, such as
show that God has given Jesus Christ to make satisfaction for the sins of
men: and (...) Sorts of promises.
then in special, such promises as show, that through the merit of Christ, he
that has thus confessed and felt sorrow for his sin, shall be received to
favor. Now How this may be done.
for this purpose, thou must get thee a distinct Catalogue of promises made to
such as confess their sins with sorrow and mourning, and in them thou shall
see most plainly unto how much riches and treasure thi^ entrance unto
godlin^sse hat^ brought thee. For the condition of the Promises being alread^
formed in thee by this grace (...) God, thou may safely assure the soul of
so much favor from God in particular, as is expres^ contained in those
promises. Mar^ it, thou as yet dare not claim^ all the prerogatin^s or goo^
things contained in any Promis^ in Scripture,) et thou may safely lay up as
treasure, so much Note.
as the Promises that concern^ confession and godly sorrow d^ assure and estate
vp^n thee, an^ so thou shall find that thou has^ (...) in Christ already for
(...) and rich favors, and may she Gods express Word to warra^ thy claim;
as for example, Go^ 1. A taste of the (...) hap^e of such as have (...) ^arte.
has assur^d thee;

First, that thou shall not be damned, thou may rest upon it, th^se be
plain Scriptures, 1 Cor. 11. 31, 32. Job 13. 18, 19.

Secondly, that God will have mercy upon thee, and love thee 2.
freely, and take away his anger from thee, Prou. 28. 13. Joel 2. 12, 13. Hos.
14. 3, 4. Ierem. 31. 18, 19, 20.

Thirdly, that all thy sins are forgiven thee, 1 Ioh 1. 7, 9. Zach. 3.
12. 10. and so forward to the 2. verse of the 13. Chapter.

Fourthly, that God is at peace, and reconciled, and that thou 4.
have a free right unto his word, and shall find his presence in his word,
Isaiah. 57. 15, 16, 17, 18.

Fifthly, that God will now 5.
henceforth heal the nature of thy sinfulness, Hos. 14. 3, 4.

I do but instance in these few particulars; but I could wish thee to make thee
a full Catalogue, and write out the words verbatim, and learn them without
book, or at least study them soundly to understand them. And for thy ease I
have set down the chief places of Scripture as they lie in order.

Leuit. 26. 41, 42, 44.

2 Kings 22. 19, 20.

Job 33. 27, 28.

Psalm. 32. 5. and 51. 17.

Prou. 28. 13.

Isaiah 57. 15, 16, 17, 18. and 61. 1, 2, 3.

Ierem. 31. 18, 19, 20.

Zach. 12. 10. and so forward to the second verse of Chap. 13.

Hos. 14. 3, 4, 5, 6.

Math. 5. 6.

1 Cor. 11. 31, ^2.

Iam. 4. 9, 10.

Now when thou have written How th^se promises are to be used.
o^t th^se Promises, and do understand the meaning of them, then carry them
into Gods presence, as thou did the Catalogue of sins, and now beseech
God, for Jesus Christ's sake, to incline thy heart to believe these promises of
Grace; and to this end pray unto God from time to time, till the Lord be
pleased to let thee feel life in the Promises, or a clear persuasion; and
withal, beseech GOD by the Spirit of Promise from heaven, to seal up thy
interest herein; and if thou feel the joys of the holy Ghost fall upon thee
in any of these promises, O happy man that ever thou wast borne to such a rich
estate. I say the same of this sensible life in the promises, that I did before
of godly sorrow: It may be, the Lord will hear thee at the first; if not,
persist thou to beg this grace till thou obtainest it. Thou see,
forgiveness of all thy sins, which thou have conf^ssed is promised thee, urge
the Lord with most humble depr^cation to h^are thee for the pardon and
forgiveness of them, f^r the mediation sake of Jesus Christ and his merits,
that sits at his right hand, to make request for poor sinners that seek
mercy. Now when thou have felt the Promises to be any of them spirit and life
to thee, then have thou done this most glorious exercise, and thou have cause
to praise God all the days of thy life, and what thou should afterward
do, the Treatises following will show thee; but for thy more clear
satisfaction, I will answer a question.

Quest. Thou will say, I could take comfort in this course, having done these
things, but that I doubt whether my consession or sorrow be right, or no. For
I find, that wicked men in Scripture have confessed their sins, and mourned
too.

Answ. Thou may evidently try thy confession and sorrow, How we may know
whether our confession be tigh^
by these signs of difference.

First, wicked men have confessed their sins, and sorrowed, but both were
compelled, whereas 1.
thine is voluntarily, and so a fre^will-offering.

Secondly, Cain and Judas conf^ssed sin, but it was not all sorts 2.
of sin, but only the capital crimes known by them, by which they had
shamed and undone themselves.

Thirdly, the sorrows of wicked 3.
men were more for the punishment, then for the sin; nor did they sorrow for
all sorts of sins, but for the sins before described.

Fourthly, their confession and 4.
sorrows were not joined with an unfeigned desire to forsake sin; whereas
this is an infallible sign of true repentance, when a man can as heartily
desire that he might never commit sin, as heartily (I Note this well.
say) desire it, as he would that God should never impute it. When a man can
say before the Lord, that there is no sin, but he (...)
does as unfeignedly desire God to give him strength to leave it and forsake it,
as he does desire that God should forgive him' and not plague him for it: I
say this is such a sign, as was never found in a wicked man in any age of the
world.

Fifthly, the confession and sorrows of the wicked were not 5.
joined with any persuasion of Gods goodness, or any constant desire to find
mercy with God in Jesus Christ.

Thus have I shewe^ thee the directions, which concern this first and most
weighty business that can concern thee.

There are three sorts of men whom this direction concerns. This direction
concern^s three sort^ of men
First, such as never repented. Secondly, such as though they have repented,
yet have not the comfort and assurance of their repentance, who by following
these directions, may make all out of doubt. Thirdly, such as after calling
fall into gr^sse sin^: These have n^ed to recover themselves by the help of
these directions. The Catalogue following may Other vs^s of the Catalogue.
serve for other uses, besides this of a man's practice in his repentance at his
first conversion, or after apostacy: For

1. As in a small Map, a man may here see the sorts of sin, and so may get
knowledge quickly, what evil to avoid, which hitherto he has not taken
n^tice of.

2. It may serve before the Communion, for such as would make a general survey
of their sin^es, in discharge of that examination which the Apostle mention^th,
1 Cor. 11. For howsoever this large Catalogue be not of necessity requisite to
that examination, yet unto such as have leisure and fitness^, it is profitable
for their more abundant satisfaction. The misery of such as will not b^ (...)
to (...) a (...) their (...).


To conclude, if any man that reads these pres^nts, and is guilty to
himself, that he has hitherto taken no sound course about his sins, and
yet will not be persuaded to practice these directions: let him consider, that
so long as his sins be vnr^pented on his part, and vnremitted on Godspart,
the pollution of all the sins he ever committed, still cl^aues unto him; so as
he may justly with the L^per cry, Unclean, vncl^ane: y^a all his sins are
written, as it were with a pen of iron in Gods book of remembrance, and that
he is a mere strang^r from all Gods promises; and lives without God, and
without Christ in the world, and that all he does, even his best works, are
abo^inable to God, and that seas of wrath hang over his head, and unspeakable
woe will be to him in the appearing of Jesus Christ, if he prevent it not by
sound and speedy repentance.

CHAP. III.
The division of Sins, and the Catalogue of sins against the whole Law.

ALl the sins mentioned and condemned in the Bible, may be cast into four
ranks. For they are,

Either sins against the whole 1.
Law, that is, such as may be committed against any of the Commandments.

Or sins against the first Table 2.
of the Law.

Or sins against the second Table 3.
of the Law.

Or sins against the Gospel. 4.


The first sort of sins, are sins against the whole Law, and thus The first
s^rt of sin. Original sin.
he sins that is conceived in sin, Psalm. 51. 5.

That allows not the good he does, Romans 7. 15.

That does the evil he hates, verse 15. 19.

That has not goodness dwelling in him, ver. 18.

That does not the good he would, ver. 19.

That has evil present when he would do good, ver. 21.

That has a law in his members, rebelling against the law of his mind, ver.
23.

That has not knowledge to Ignorance.
do good, Ier. 4. 22. Hosea 4. 6. Isaiah 1. 3.

This is aggrauated,

1. If thou refuse knowledge, and wilt not understand, Job. 21. 14. Psalm. 36.
4. 2. If thou walk not in the light, whilst thou have the light, John 12. 36.
3. If thou hate him that instructs thee, Amos 5. 10. 4. If thou detain the
truth for the love thou bear to wickedness, Romans 1. 18. 5. That will not
understand, though the foundations of the earth be moved, Psalm. 82. 5.
That has present occasion to Procrastination.
do good, and yet puts it off, though but till the morrow, Pro. 3. 28.

That seeks his own glory, Vainglory.
Prou. 25. 27.

That boasts of a false gift, Prou. 25. 14.

That praises himself, Prou. 27. 2.

That is pure in his own eyes, being not washed from his filthiness, Prou.
30. 12.

That causes others to go astray, especially the righteous, Prou. 28. 10.

That calls evil good, or good evil; or puts light for darkness, or
darkness for light; or that puts bitter for sweet, or sweet for bitter,
Isaiah. 5. 20.

That changes the ordinances, or adds to Gods Word, or diminishes ought
from it, Isa. 24. 5. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Prou. 30. 6.

That protects or defends others in sin, Ier. 44. 15.

That sits still, and is at rest ill Security.
sin, Zach. 1. 11. And considers not that God remembers his wickedness,
Hosea 7. 2. and is without fear of Gods judgments, Prou. 28. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
3.

That receives not correction, Incorrigiblenesse.
but proudly hardens his heart, and is wilful in evil, Ier. 5. 23. Ezech.
7. 10. Heb. 3. 15, 16.

That fears reproach for welldoing, Carnal fears.
Isaiah 51. 7. or fears the displeasure of God for breaking man's traditions,
Math. 15. 2, 9. or in things indifferent, makes conscience of sin, where
there is no sin, Romans 14.

That does his work to be Hypocris^e
seen of men, Math. 6. and 23.

That has the form of godliness, but denies the power of it, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

That is a lover of himself, 2. Self-love.
Tim. 3. 2.

That is neither hot nor cold, Reu. 3. 15. Luke. warmness


That does not good with a Vnchearefulnesse.
joyful heart, Deuteronomy. 28. 47.

That esteems the way of the multitude, Exodus 23. 2.

That is not circumspect, but Inconsideration.
foolish and rash, and rusheth upon things without knowledge or counsel, or
consideration of opportunities, circumstances, means or end, Ephesians. 5. 15.
Prou. 15. 22. Ier. 8. 6.

That is childish or unconstant, Inconstancy.
Ephesians. 4. 14. as he is,

1. That is carried about with every wind of doctrine. 2. That has a divided
heart, Hos. 10. 2. 3. That is mutable in his affection to godliness, Gal. 4.
4. That falls away from the truth, or goes back, Ier. 15. 6. Hos. 6. 4.
Isai. 1. 4.
Hitherto of the sins against the whole Law.

CHAP. II.
The division of the sins against the first Table: and the sorts of sins
against Gods nature.

TThe sins against God, forbidden in the first Table of the Law, are of four
sorts.

1. Some against his nature. 2. Some against the means of his worship. 3. Some
against the manner of his worship. 4. Some against the time of his worship.
For the first, the sins against the nature of God, are of two sorts.

1. Some more unusual and personal. 2. Some more usual and natural.
The more unusual sins are such, as are not found amongst Christians, except
it be in such persons only, as are most monstrously vile, such as are,

1. Blasphemy, to reproach God. 2. Idolatry, to worship the creature. 3.
Witchcraft, or the service of the Devil. 4. Atheism, to defend there is no
God, or to desire constantly there were no God. 5. That matchless Pride, for a
man to say he is God, or to exalt himself above all that is called God. 6.
Heresy, to hold after con^ction, errors against the foundation of Religion. 7.
The inward hatred and loathing of God. It shall (...) to have thus touched
th^se sins.
The more usual sins, and such as are found in the most men by nature, are
such as these.

That natural Atheism, of 1. Natural Atheism.
which he is guilty,

1. That customarily spends his time without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. 2.
That conceiues Atheistical thoughts; and of such thoughts he is guilty,
That with inward reasonings, whether there be a GOD, to which his heart
inclines, Psalm. 14. 1.

That says or thinks, God will neither do good nor evil, or that he
neither sees or regards, Isai. ^9. 15, 16. Zeph. 1. 12. Ezech. 9. 9. Job 22.
13.

That says or thinks, there is no profit in serving the Almighty, Job 21.
14. and 22. 17.

That in affliction says or thinks, it is impossible to be delivered, 2
Kings 7. 2.

That has inward boylings about such things as God shows not reason of, Job
33. 13.

That conceiueth rebellious thoughts about the decrees or providence of God,
Romans 9.

Thus of natural Atheism.

The second sin is Epicurisme, 2. Epicurisme
which is showed,

By fullness of bread and idleness, Ezech. 16. 49. Phil. 3. 19.

By living in pleasure, Eccl. 11. 9. James 5. 5.

By vanity and strangeness of apparel, Isai. 3. Zep. 1. 8.

The third sin, is the defect 3. Defects.
of those graces, by which we should cleave unto God; and that also when we
want tha^ life of them should be in us; such are the defects of the warmth of
the knowledge, love and fear of God, and of our ioying and trusting in God,
Psalm. 36. 1. Zeph. 3. (...). Prou. 30. 1, 2. Romans 7. These defects are the
worse, by reason of our impotency and extreme indisposition to seek to mend
those things. And therefore it is an aggrauation of any of these defects, that
men do not stir up themselves to take hold of God, ^sai. 64. 7.

Fourthly, the misplacing o^ 4. (...) of our affections.
our affections, in setting, them upon earthly things, employing our
confidence, fear, joy, or love upon the world, and the things thereof, whereby
our hearts are any way alienated from God, Ier. 17. 5. Isai. 51. 7. 1 Ioh. 2.
15. Math. 6.

Fifthly, Pride: and there is a 5. 4 Sorts of pride.
fourfold pride:

1. Arrogancy, showed

By high looks, or indignation of spirit, Isaiah 10. 12. and 16. 6.

By fearlesnesse of a fall in prosp^ritie, and that boasting hopefulnesse in a
broken estate, Psalm. 30. 6. Isai. 9. 10. Obad. 3.

2. The pride of life, which has in it the secret lifting up of the heart, and
glorying in friends, money, means, houses, riches, beauty, or the like, 1 John
(...). 17. 2 Kings 20. 3. with 2 Chronicles. 32. 25.

3. The pride of gifts, expressed,

By great thoughts of our selves, being wise in our selves, Romans 12. 16.

By fretting with envy at the gifts and respects of others, Number. 1^. 2, 8, 9.

By being ouer-confident of our own innocence, Job 34. 5, 6.

By desire to pry into the secret things of God, being not content with things
revealed, Deuteronomy. 29. vlt Romans 12. 3.

4. Pride in sinning, and so he is guilty,

That dares commit great evils against his knowledge.

That seems wise in maintaining sin, Prou. 3. 7. Psalm. 52. 7.

That hardens his heart against repentance, 1. Sam. 15. 22, 23. Numb. 15. 30,
31. Ierem. 16. 12. Job 34. 37.

That sins with affectation, that glories in it, as he that takes a pride in
drunkenness, Isai. 28. 1, 3.

That frets because he is cro^ in sin, Prou. 19. 3. And thus (...) Pride.

The sixth sin is the neglect (...) 6. How many ways men sin against Gods
mercy.
Gods mercy: and this is the more grievous offense, because merc^ is the most
eminent attribute (...) God. For the sins of this kind worlds of men are
damned i^ hell, John 3. 19.

And against Gods mercy he offends,

That asks wherein God has loved him, Mal. 1. 2.

That abuses Gods blessings, Hos. 10. 1. and 11. 3, 4.

That observes not the mercy of God in his providence, Hosea 2. 8.

That in adversity says, God cares not for him, or has passed over his
judgments, or has forsaken him, Isaiah. 40. 28. and 49. 14.

That enquireth not after God, Zeph. 1. 6.

That believes not Gods premises, through neglect or despair.

That blesses his heart against Gods threatenings, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

That forsakes his own mercy, by trusting to lying vanities, Jonah 2. 8.

That scoffs at the signs of Gods mercy, Isai. 7. 12, 13.

That sacrifices to his own net, ascribing the praise to himself, Hab. 1. 16.

That seeks not to God in his distress, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12.

That says God cannot deliver, 2 Kings 6. 33. and 7. 2.

That answers not when God calls, Isai. 50. 2.

That limits God, Psalm. 78. 41.

That has a spirit of bitterness through discontent, Hosea 12. 14.

That dishonours God by his evil life, Romans 2. 24.

Thus of the sins against Gods mercy.

The seventh sin is resorting 7.
to witches, Isai. 8. 19, 20. Leuit. 20. 6. Deuteronomy. 18. 11.

Eighthly, he offends, that disregards 8.
Gods Works, Isaiah 5. 12.

Ninthly, that lies against God, having professed to have God to 9.
be his God Isai. 29. 13. And so he does,

That opposes the truth and objects against it.

That performs not what he promised in his sickness, or adversity, or at the
Sacraments.

That falls away from the truth.

Tenthly, that fears not God, 10. Offenses against the f^re of God.
or not in a right manner: and so he sins,

That fears God only for reward, Job 1. 9.

That fears God only because of punishment, Hos. 3. 5.

That is not afraid of Gods presence, or threatenings, Psalm. 36. 1, 2. Isaiah
66. 1. Ierem. 6. 10.

That comforts not men in misery, Job 6. 14.

That meddles with changers, or the seditious, Prou. 24. 21.

That in matter of sin is wise in his own eyes, and will not depart from
iniquity, Prou. 3. 7.

That sins, because God does forbear to punish, Eccles. 8. 13. Psalm. 50. 19,
21.

That fears the signs of Heaven, Ierem. 10. 2.

That finds an hardness of heart against Gods fear, Isaiah 63. 17.

Thus of the sins against the fear of God.

Eleuenthly, That trusts not in 11. Offenses against the trust in God.
God, and so he offends.

That asks not counsel of God, Isaiah 31. 1. and 30. 1, 2. but uses carnal
helps.

That says, there is no hope, Ierem. 3. 23.

That trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, Ierem. 17. 5.

That puts his confidence in his wealth, Prou. 10. 15. Job 31. 24.

That leanes to his own understanding, Prou. 3. 5.

That draws not near unto God in adversity, Zeph. 3. 2.

That impatiently desires death, Job 7. 15.

Thus of the sins against trust in God.

Twelfthly, That neglects communion 12
with the godly: he has not God for his God, that is, no^ joined to Gods
people: and this is aggrauated against him,

That in contempt of godliness^ goes in the company of the wicked, Job 34. 8,
9.

That reprocheth Gods people Psalm. 74. 10, 18. Esaias 57. 3, 4.

That accounts the godly as signs and wonders, Esaias 8. 18.

That reioyces in their disgraces, Ezechiel 25. 6.

That forsakes their fellowship, either through carelessness and apos^y, Heb.
10. 25. or through ^hisine, Esaias 65. 2, 5.

That for malice persecutes them, or casts them out of the Church, Esaias 66. 5.

And thus of the sins against the nature of God.

CHAP. V.
Showing how men offend against the means of Gods worship.

THe sins against the means of Gods worship follow, and these are of three
sorts.

1. Not worshipping. 2. Will-worshipping. 3. Idol worshipping.
For the first, he offends in general,

That worships not God, Zac. 14. 17. 1. Not worshipping.


That calls not upon the Name of the Lord, Ps. 14. 4. Esaias 64. 7.

That comes not to the Church 2. Chron. 29. 6, 7.

That prays not in his family, Ier. 10. 25.

That receives not the Preachers of the Gospel, Matthe^ 10. 14.

The aggrauations are, when a man is so far from worshipping The aggrauations.
atight,

That he offers the blind and the lame for the maintenance (...) Gods service,
Mal. 1. 8, 14.

That he deuoures things sanctified, that should be employe^ for the
furtherance of Gods service, Prou. 20. 25.

That forbids Gods faithful Ministers to preach in the Name of Christ, Acts. 4.
17. 1. These. 2. 16

That disswades men from Gods worship, upon preten^ that it is either polluted,
Mal^. 7, 12, 13. or vain, Mal. 3. 14.

That is wayward, or neue^ pleased with all, or any part (...) Gods worship, or
the mean^ thereof, Math. 1^. 16.

Thus of sins of irreligiousnesse, or not worshipping.

Will Worship follows, and so 2 Will worship.
he offends,

1. That deuiseth any thing of himself, to the intent to serve God by it,
Numb. 15. 38, 39.

2. That serves God for custom, or after the old manner, making the example of
Fathers, or fore fathers the rule of his service, 2 Kings 17. 34. Ier. 9. 13,
14 Amos 2. 4. 1. Pet. 1. 18.

3. That fears God after the precepts of men, Esaias 29. 13.

4. That being not a Minister, does the work of a Minister, upon pretense of
necessity or devotion, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16.

5. That urges the lesser things of the Law, and neglects the greater, Math.
23. 23.

The aggrauations are,

To urge menstraditions with The aggrauations.
opinion of necessity, and with neglect of Gods Law, Matthew 15. 2, 3, 9.

To desire to be taught vain things, Esaias 30. 9, 10, 11.

To borrow rites and observations from the professed enemies of God, to add
them as parts of Gods worship, 2 Kings 17. 34. Deuteronomy. 12. 3, 4, 13. Ezech. 11.
12.

Idol worship follows, and so men offend, either first inwardly, 3. Idol
worshipping.
or second outwardly.

Inwardly he offends, that conceiues of God in the likeness of any thing
created, and manifests his offense. If he direct his worship to that likeness,
Comman. 2. Acts 17. 16. 1 John 2. 2^.

Outwardly he offends,

That makes an Image to resemble God by it, Deuteronomy. 4. 12, 15. Esaias 40. 18.

That uses any gesture of love and reverence unto such Images, by whomsoever
made, Hos. 13. 2

That mentions the names of Idols, either by way of swearing or apology,
Exodus 23. 13.

That is present at the Idolatrous feasts, and therefore he much more offends
that is present at the service of the idol, 1 Cor. 10. 21, 22. Exodus 34. 15.
Psalm. 106. 28.

That worshippeth the Image or God in the Image, Comm. 2^ Exodus 32. Judge. 17. 3.

Thus of the sins against the means of Gods worship.

CHAP. VI.
Showing how many ways men sin against the holy manner of Gods worship.

THe sins against the manner of Gods worship follow.

And because it were tedious to reckon up the several sins against each part
of Gods worship, because in diverse things the same offenses may be committed
against any one of the parts of Gods service: Therefore I will briefly touch
the general ways of offending in the manner of any worship of God, and then
more specially reckon the sins against those parts of Gods worship, that are
most usual and ordinary.

It is an offense in any service Sins in any part of Gods worship.
due to God, to serve him

Hypocritically; in show and not in deed, Esaias 29. 13.

Without repentance: to bring the love of any sin to any part of his service,
Esaias 1. 15.

Without delight and willingness, Joshua 24. 15.

Without constancy: to serve him but by ^its, Hosea 6. 4.

Without consideration or reverence, Eccl. 5. 1, 2.

Thus in general.

In particular.

1. He offends in hearing the 1. Sins in hearing.
Word.

That is unteachable, Esaias 28. 9, 10, 11.

That has idols in his heart through lust, or malice, or covetousness,
Ezechiel 14. 7. James 1. 21.

That hears without attention, and comes for custom sake, Eccl. 5. 1. Ezech.
33. 31, 32.

That is not a doer of the word, Matthew 7. 26.

2. He offends in Prayer, 2. Sins in Pray^r.


That prays not at all times, or with perseverance in prayer, Job 27. 10. Luke
18. 1.

That prays without understanding, or power of the Spirit 1 Cor. 14. 15.

That delights not in the Almighty, Job 22. 26.

That regards wickedness in his heart, Psalm 66. 18. Pro. 21. 27. Esaias 1. 15,
16.

That doubts and wa^ers, or is discontented upon false surmises that God
hears him not, James 1. 5, 6. Mal. 2. 13. 3. Sins about the Sacraments of ^he
Lord Supper.


3. He offends in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,

That discernes not the Lords Body, 1 Cor. 11. 29.

That examines not himself before he eats of that Bread, and drinks of that
Cup, refusing to judge himself for known offenses, 1 Cor. 11. 28.

That believes not the operation of God, Col. 2. 12.

That reconciles not himself to such as he has offended by trespassing
against them, Mat. 5.

That despises the Church and people of God, 1 Cor. 11. 22.

4 He offends in swearing, 4. About swearing.
That swears by that which is no God, Ier. 5.

That swears in common talk and fears not an oath, Ier. 23. 10. Math. 5. 34.
Eccl. 9. 2.

That swears falsely, Zach. 5. 4.

That loves false oaths, Zach. 8. 17.

CHAP. VII.
Which shows how men offend in breaking the Sabbath.

HItherto of the sins against the means and manner of Gods, worship, thetime
of Gods worship follows, which is principally the Sabbath.

Now sins against the Sabbath are either more secretly, or more openly.

More secretly he offends, More secret off^nces against the Sabbath.


That remembers not the Sabbath day before it come, to unload his heart of
worldly cares and business, Comm. 4.

That longs to have the Sabbath ouer-past, Amos 8. 5.

That spends the day in idleness.

That flourishes not according to the blessings of God, in respect of the
means on the Sabbath day, Psalm. 92. the title, with verse 13, 14.

That honors not the Sabbath with delight to do Gods work on that day, Esaias
58. 13.

That is unwilling to be informed concerning the authority and service of the
Sabbath. This is to hide his eyes from the Sabbath, as the phrase is, Ezechiel
22. 26.

More openly he offends, The open breaches.


That omits public or private duties, or comes in too late, or goes out too
soon, Ezech. 46. 10. Psalm. 92. the title with verse. 2. Leuit. 23. 3.

That does any manner of work on that day, Exodus 20. 10, 11. and 31. 15.

And thus he offends,

That sels wares, Neh. 10. 31. and 13. 15, 20.

That carries burdens, Neh. 13. 15, 19. Ier. 17. 21.

That travels abroad, Exodus 16. 29.

Yea, he offends,

That works in harvest on that day, Exodus 34. 22. Neh. 14. 15.

That works, upon pretense Note.
it is a light work, Exodus 16. 27, 28. and 35. 2, 3. Numb. 15. 32. Matthew. 12.
1, etc.

That employes his cattle or servants, though he work not himself, Exodus 23.
12.

That finds his pleasures, that is, that uses recreations, Esaias 58. 13.

That speaks his own words, Esaias 58. 13.

That having power, reformes not the abuses of others against the Sabbath,
Nehem. 13. Ier. 17.

The aggrauation is, to do any of these things presumptuously.

CHAP. VIII.
The division of the sins against the second Table; and how men offend in the
Family, Church, or Commonwealth.

HItherto of sins against God.

The sins against man are to be considered, either more specially, or more
generally.

More specially we offend against others, in respect of that relation wherein
we stand as superiors, or inferiors to them; and so men offend,

1. In the Family. The sins
2. In the Commonwealth. 3. In the Church.
In the Family,

1. The wife offends, 1. Of wives.


That is not subject to her husband, or not in every thing, Ephesians. 5. 22, 24.
Col. 3. 18.

That is wastfull, Prou. 14. 1.

That is froward, Prou. 21. 9, 19.

That is idle, Prou. 31. 13.

2. The husband offends, 2. Of husbands.


That loves not his wife, Ephesians. 5. 25.

That dwells not with her as a man of knowledge, 1 Pet. 3. 7.

3. The child offends, 3. Of children.


That disobeyes his parents, Romans 1. 30. Tit. 1. 6. Ephesians. 6. 1.

That uses any vnreuerent behavior, or any way sets light by them,
Commandment 5. Ezeck. 22. 7.

That receives not rebuke or correction with submission and reverence, Prou.
13. 1. Hebr. 12. 9.

That relieues not his parents in their wants, Math. 15. 6.

The aggrauations are, The aggrauations.


To despise their instructions, Prou. 15. 5.

To discover their infirmities, Genesis 9. 22.

To despise their infirmities, either for deformity or infirmity, Prou. 23. 22.

To shame them, or grieve them, Prou. 28. 7. and 27. 11. and 10. 1.

To mock them, Prou. 30. 17.

To curse them, Prou. 20. 20. and 30. 11. Exodus 21. 17.

To smite them, Exodus 21. 15.

To waste their estates, or chase them away from him, Prou. 19. 29.

4. The parents offend, 4. Of Parents


In general, that bring not up their children in nurture and instruction of
the Lord, Ephe. 6. 4.

In particular,

That restrain not sin in them, 1 Samuel 3. 13.

That correct them not, but leave them to themselves, Prou. 22. 15. and 23. 13.
and 29. 15.

That provoke them to wrath by immoderate correction, or rebuke, or intemperate
speeches, Ephesians. ^4.

That provide no^ or them in their callings, or outward estates, or marriage, 1 Timothy 5. 8.

5. Servants offend, 5. Of servants.


That are idle and slothful.

That are disorderly, as

Without reverence and fear.

Without singleness of heart, not as unto Christ.

With eye-seruice, as menpleasers.

Grudgingly, and not from the heart, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8.

That are unfaithful, and show it either by purloyning, Tit. 2. 10. or by
carelessness, when they are such as cannot be trusted in any business, Prou.
13. 17.

The aggrauations are, The aggrauations.


To answer again, Tit. 2. 9. or out of contempt or sullenness, not to answer,
Prou. 29. 19. Job 19. 16.

To run away, Philem.

Through pride and folly to seek to rule, Prou. 19. 10. and 30. 22.

6. Masters offend, 6. Of Masters


That entertain wicked servants, Psalm. 101.

That govern their family negligently, 1 Timothy 3. 4.

That withold what is just and equal, in diet, wages, encouragement, etc.
Col. 4. 1. Iam. 5. 4.

That use indiscreete and immoderate threatening, Ephesians. 6. 9.

Thus of the offenses in the Family.

In the Commonwealth.

1. Subjects offend, 1. Of subjects


That speak evil of their Rulers, Exodus 22. 28. Eccles. 10. vlt.

That are disobedient to them, Romans 13.

That pay not tribute nor custom, Romans 13.

That rebel, or are seditious, 2 Timothy 3. 4.

2. Magistrates offend, 2. Of Magistrates.


That oppress the people by exactions, or otherwise, Prou. 28. 15. Ezech. 45.
9.

That make unjust laws, or execute not just laws, Esa. 10. 1. Ier. 5. 1. Mic.
3. 9.

That are vnrighteons in judgment, either by bribery, or lenity, or rigor,
or covetousness, or wresting the Law, Leuit. 19. 15.

In the Church,

1. The people offend,

That pay not their tithes or 1. Of hearers.
contributions, Mal. 1. 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Gal. 6. 6.

That subject not themselves, but disobey them that have the oversight of them,
Heb. 13. 17.

2. The Ministers offend, 2. Of Ministers.


That preach not, or not constantly: but more of their sins afterward
amongst the sins against the souls of men.

CHAP. IX.
Of the sins against man's person.

THus of the sins against man, considered more especially.

More generally, man sins against man,

Either with consent of his will: or without consent.

The sins with consent, are,

Either against the person of man:

Or the purity of man:

Or the possessions and state of man:

Or the name and praise of man.

The sins against the persons of men, are,

Either against the whole person:

Or against their souls:

Or against their bodies.

The sins against the persons of men generally considered, are

Either by omission:

Or by commission.

1. By omission he offends, 1 By omissi on


That pitties not the afflicted, Job 6. 14.

That relieues not the afflicted 1 John 3. 17. Mat. 25. Job 31. 19

That is implacable, and will not forgive, Romans 1. 29. James 2. 13.

The aggrauations are, The aggrauations


To profess to take no charge of his brother, Genesis 4. 9.

To stop his ears at the cry of the poor, Prou. 21. 13.

To estrange our selves from the very servants of God in their misery, Psalm.
38. 11.

2. By commission, men sin, 2. By commission.
either outwardly, or inwardly.

Inwardly he offends,

1. That enuies his neighbor, Gal. 5. 21. either 1. Envy.


For his wealth, Genesis 26. 14.

For his respect with others, Genesis 37. 11.

For his gifts, Number. 11. 27, 28, 29. 1. Cor. 3. 3.

The aggrauations are

So to envy others, as to desire their restraint, Number. 11.

To envy the very wicked, especially so, as to desire to partake of their
delights, Pro. 24. 1

2. That is angry unadvisedly 2. Anger.
Mat. 5. 22.

The aggrauations.

To be hasty to anger, Eccles. 7. 9. Prou. 14. 17, 29.

To continue long in anger, Amos 1. 11.

To rage, and to be confident without fear or care, Prou. 14 16.

To be incensed against the servants of God, and strive with them, Esaias 41. 11.

To make friendship with the angry man, Prou. 22. 24, 25.

3. That hates and is malicious; 3. Hatred.
which sin is not avoided, though the person thou hate

Be poor, Iam. 2. 6.

Be infirm, and have many weaknesses, Mat. 18. 10.

Yea, though they sin, Leuit. 19. 17, 18.

The aggrauations are,

To increase in anger and hatred upon every occasion, Genesis 37. 8. Ezekiel. 25. 15.

To wish a curse to others, Job 31. 30.

To rejoice at their destruction, Prou. 24. 17. Job 31. 29.

To recompense evil, Prou. 24. 29.

Not to be satisfied with the trouble of those whom he pursues, Job 19. 22.

That hates righteous men, and shows it,

By wishing their evil, Psalm 40. 14.

By rejoicing at their hurt, Psalm. 35. 26.

By gathering sinful surmises into his heart when he comes amongst them, and
then telling them when he comes abroad, Psalm. 41. 6.

By judging uncharitably of their afflictions, Psalm. 41. 8.

Especially, that hates them for this reason, because their works are better
then his, 1 Ioh. 3. 12. and 2. 11.

4. That vexes himself with 4. Worldly sorrow.
worldly sorrow, and causes (...) distraction, Prou. 17. 22. 2 C^ 7. 10. and
uses crying, Eph^ 4. 31.

The aggrauations are,

To refuse comfort; Psalm. 77. (...).

To wish his own death, Number. 14. 2. Job 3. Jonah 4. 3.

Thus of the sins internal.

The external sins are, Sins external.


Either in gesture,

Or in words:

Or in works.

1. In gesture, men offend, by 1. In gesture.
shaking of the head, sharpening of the eyes, casting down of the countenance,
putting out of the finger, gnashing of the teeth, Job 16. 4, 9. Esaias 58. Psalm.
35. 19. and 37. 12. and 5. Genesis 4. 5.

2. In words he offends, that 2. In words.
speaks evil of any man, Tit. 3. 2. Matthew. 5. whether it be

By censuring, Romans 14. 10. Iam. 4. 11. Gal. 5. 15.

Or by reuiling or reproaching, Math. 5.

Or by any kind of piercing bitter words, Pro. 12. 18.

Yea it is an offense, to render reuiling for reuiling, 1 Pet. 3. 6.

To whisper evil of others, though never so secretly, Psalm 41. 7.

To wrest the words of others for evil, Psalm. 56. 5.

The aggrauations are, The aggrauations.


1. To speak evil of dignity, Jude 8.

2. To reproach Gods servants, this is blasphemy, Colossians 3. 8 and it is
worse when men tear their names, Psalm 35. 15. and it is increased when men^
revile Gods Ministers, 1 Corin. 4. 13. 2 Kings 2. 23.

3. To curse the deaf, or put a stumbling block before the blind, Leui. 19.
14.

To deride men in misery, Job 30. 1.

5. To take a pleasure in braw^ing and contention, James 4. 1. Psalm. 52. 4.

6. To have a mouth full of cursing and bitterness, Romans 3. 14. James 3. 9.
and an habit of forwardness and perverseness of lips, Prou. 4. 24. and an
unruly tongue that cannot be tamed, James 3. 8.

7. To boast of his mischief herein, Psalm. 52. 1.

8. To complain of his neighbor in all places, and to be given to it, James
5. 9.

Thus he offends in words.

3. In works he offends,

1. In general, that practiset^ 3. In w^rks.
any way the hurt of the persons of others, either by fraud or violence.

The aggrauations of hurtful practices are,

1. To add affliction to the afflicted, Psalm. 96. 26.

2. To deal unfaithfully with our friend, and to betray him, Psalm. 41. 9.

3. To practice against the righteous, or any way to trouble them, Psalm 37.
12, 14. 2 These. 1. 6. and this receives increase of aggrauation:

If thou practice against them because they follow goodness, Psalm. 38. 19, 20.

If thou wrong them, when thou have received good from them, Psalm. 38. 20. and
the worse, if thou do it daily, Psalm. 56. 1.

If thou mark their steps, waiting for occasion to bring evil upon them,
Psalm. 38. 12. and 56. 6.

If thou set on others to hurt them, out of delight, and with joy, Ezech. 36. 5.

If through dissimulation thou privily betray them, Gal. 2. 4.

If thou abuse them when they are dead, Psalm. 79. 2.

2. In particular.

That is contentious, Romans 13. 13.

The aggrauations are,

Through contentions to be scandalous, Genesis 13. 7. 1 Cor. 6. 1, 4.

To sow discord, Prou 6. 14.

To fall at strife without consideration, especially to bring others in
troubles too, Pro. 17. 14. and 20. 3. and 26. 17. and 19. 19.

To oppress the fatherless in suites, Job. 31. 21.

Thus of sins against the whole person.

Sins against the body follow, Sins against the body.
and so men offend,

1. By fighting, and so he offends that any way wounds o^ blemisheth
another, Exodus 21. 24. Leuit. 24. 19. Exodus 2. 13, 14. Whether he smites in
scorn or in fury, 1 Kings 22. 24 Especially, that hurts a woman with child,
Exodus 21. 22.

2. By murder, and so he offends that takes away the life of another
willingly.

The aggrauations of murder are,

To kill father or mother, 1 Timothy 1. 9.

To kill ones children, 2 Kings 3. 27. though it were done for sacrifice.

To kill Gods servants, Heb. 11. 37. Revel. 16. 6.

To kill himself.

Thus of offenses against the body.

The sins against the soul Sins against the soul.
follow.

Against the soul offend,

1. Ministers: and so he that is ignorant, and cannot teach and warn the
people of their sins, Esaias 56. 10. Ezech. 33.

That is profane in his disposition and life, Ier. 23. 14, 11.

That runs before he be sent, Ier. 23. 21.

That is negligent in his calling, and uses not his gifts, 1. Tim. 4. 14.

That teaches false doctrine, and prophecieth in Baal, Ier. 23. 13.

That preaches peace to wicked men, and strengthens them in their evil
courses, Ezech. 13. 18. 22. Ier. 23. 14, 15, 17.

That teaches unprofitably, doting about vain questions, and strife ofwords,
using railing or oldwiues fables, and prophant conceits etc. or the like
unprofitable matter, 1. Tim. 3. 4, 7. and 4. 7. and 6. 4.

That in his teaching disgraceth and reuileth the godly, Ezech. 13 22. Phil. 3.
2, 18.

2. The people, who may be guilty of murdering either others or themselves.

Others, and so he offends,

That suffers his brother to sin, and does not reprove him, Leuit. 19. 17.

That gives offense and is a stumbling block to the weak, Romans 14. 3. 1 Cor.
10. 32. Math. 18. 6.

That instructs not others when he may and ought.

That makes or partaketh in any Schism in the Church, 1. Cor. 12.

2. Our selves, and so he offends,

That neglects Vision, or the means of knowledge, and grace, Hos. 4. 6.

That is subject to no settled Ministry, but has itching ears, and seeks a
heap of Teachers, 2 Timothy 4. 3.

That is wilful in impenitency, Ezech. 18.

That forsakes the fellowship of the Saints, Heb. 10. 25.

That refuses admonition, 2. Chron. 16. 10. Prou. 29. 1.

That resists the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 8.

Thus of sins against the persons of men.

CHAP. X.
Showing the sins against Chastity.

THe sins against the purity of men follow, and are either more gross and
unusual, and against the light of nature, or else more usual.

The gross offenses are,

1. Buggerie, Exodus 22. 19.

2. Sodomit^ie, Romans 1. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.

3. Incest, Leuit. 18.

4. Poligamy, Mal. 2. 15.

5. The unnatural filthiness of women one with another, Romans 1. 26.

6. Self poll^tion, or the transgression of Onan, Genesis 38. 9.

7. The sins about divorce: so he offends,

That puts away his wife, and not for fornication, Math. 5. 23.

That marries her that is unjustly divorced.

That marries himself again, after he has unjustly put away his wife, Math.
19. 9.

8. Fornication, Ephesians. 5. 3.

9. Whoredom or adultery, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Jude 15.

The aggrauations of whoredom are,

1. To force any to it, 2 Samuel 13. 14.

2. That a man and his father should go into a Maid. Amos 2. 7.

3. To condemn it in others, and yet to commit it himself, Romans 2. 22.

4. To entice others, Genesis 39. 7. Prou. 2. 16.

10. To marry the daughter of a strange god, Mal. 2. 11. Nehe. 13. 27. 2 Cor.
6. 17.

The more usual sins follow:

And so men offend either internally, or externally.

Internally he offends,

That has impure thoughts, Math. 5. 28. Ephesians. 2. 3. 1 These. 4. 5.

That has inordinate affections, and burning lusts, Colos. 3. 5.

Externally men offend,

1. In their senses, as by impu^e looks, Job 31. 1. Matthew. 5. 27. 2 Pet. 2. 14.

2. In their gestures, and so they are guilty of chambring and wantonness,
Romans 13. 13.

3. In their words, by filthy speaking, Col. 3. 8.

4. By using the means, or occasion of uncleanness.

And in respect of the means The means of uncleanness.
of uncleanness he offends,

That makes light of the fornication of others, 1 Corinthians. 5. 2. 2 Pet. 2. 7.

That keeps company with fornicators, 1 Cor 5. 9. Pro. 7. 25.

That gives himself to ease and pleasure, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6. Tit. 1. 12.

That uses lascivious dancing, Zeph. 1. 9. Mark 6. 22.

That uses lascivious books or pictures, 1 These. 5. 22. 1 Cor. 15. 23.

That having not the gift of continency, does not marry, 1 Cor. 7. 2.

That disposes not his children in marriage, 1 Cor. 7. 37.

That sorteth with winebibbers, and the riotous, Pro. 23. 20.

That is desirous of dainties, or any way given to gluttony, Pro. 23. 3. Ier.
5. 7, 8.

That is given to prattling, or idle gadding from house to house, Prou. 7. 11.
1 Timothy 5. 13.

That uses whorish attire, or perfumes, Prou. 7. 10, 16, 17. Zephaniah 1. 8.

That uses the attire of another sex, Deuteronomy. 22. 5.

That beguiles another in marriage by error of person, state, or disease, or
the like, Genesis 29. 25.

That marries without consent of parents, Genesis 26. 34, 35.

That is guilty of drunkenness, or uses excessive drinking, 1. Pet. 4. 4.

The aggrauations of drunkenness, are,

To take a pride in it, Esaias 28. 1

To be mighty to drink wine, Esaias 5. 22.

To continue long at it, Esaias 5. 1^. Prou. 23. 30.

To make others drunk, Hab. 2. 15.

Thus of sins against Chastity.

CHAP. XI.
Showing the sins against man's estate.

THe sins against the estates of men follow, and these are either internal, or
external.

Internal, and so he offends,

That is discontented with his estate, Heb. 13. 5.

That is worldly, and distresseth himself with bootlesse cares about his
estate, Prou. 15. 27. Mat. 6. 25, 34. Luke 21. 34.

That delights not in his calling, Prou. 12. 17.

That is covetous, and in love with the things of this world, Ephesians. 5. 5. 1 Timothy
6. 10. 1 Ioh. 2. 15

The external signs follow, and so men offend both by omission and commission.

By omission he offends,

That employes not the good things he has, James 5. 2, 3.

That relieues not the poor, and so withholds the good from the owner
thereof, Prou. 3. 28.

The aggrauations are,

To forsake the poor, Job 20. 19.

To hide his eyes from the poor, Prou. 28. 27.

That brings not forth his corn to sell, Prou. 11. 26.

That detaines wages, Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Leuit. 19. 13. James 5. 4.

That pays not what he has borrowed, Psalm 37. 21.

That is idle, and neglects his calling, Eccl. 4. 5. And of this sin he is
guilty also,

That with-draweth not his foot from his neighbors house, Prou. 25. 17. 1.
Tim. 5. 13.

That is given to much sleep, Prou. 6. 9, 10.

That is slack in business, Prou. 10. 4. and 15. 19.

That neglects the opportunities of his calling, Prou. 10. 5.

The aggrauations are,

To be pertinacious in the defense of it, Prou. 26. 16.

To be a busie-bodie in other folks matters, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11.

That is slothful in the business of others, Prou. 26.

That prouides not for his Family, 1. Tim. 5. 8.

Thus of sins of omission.

By commission he offends,

That steals, robbes, or pi^fers, which is the sin mentioned in the eighth
Commandment.

That steals by consequent; as he does,

That is an Usurer, Exodus 22. 25. Leu. 25. 36. Deuteronomy. 23. 19.

That is guilty of oppression, Job 31. 38, 39. Amos 4. 1. Prou. 4. 17. Esaias 5.
8. and ^0. 12. especially he that loves oppression, Hosea 12. 7. Micha 2. 9.

That uses fraud in buying and selling, in mete-yard, weight and measure,
Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14, 15. and he is guilty of this sin also,

That sells reffuse, Micha 6.

That makes advantage of the poverty of others, Leuit. 25. 39. etc. Prou. 22.
22.

That takes the Millstone to pledge, etc. Deuteronomy. 24. 6, 12.

That being a buyer, says, It is naught, contrary to his own judgment: and
so likewise on the other side, that being a seller, does commend it for good,
when he knows it is not so, Proverb. 20. 14.

That uses any other fraud, though it be not in buying or selling, 1 These. 4.
6.

And this sin of stealing, is to be extended further also, as,

1. To lesser stealths, as robbing of vineyards, or orchards, or cor^ in the
field, Deuteronomy. 23. 24, 25.

2. To rash suretiship, Prou. 6. 1, 2. and 22. 26.

3. To extremities used in recovering our own rights, Job 24. 3, 4, 9, 10.

4. To not restoring of euillgotten goods, Ezech. 33. 15.

5. To remoouing of Landmarkes, Deuteronomy. 19. 14.

6. To living in unlawful callings, such as begging is, 2 These. 3. 11.

7. To unthriftiness, in following vain persons, or spending prodigally on
pleasures, or diet, Prou. 12. 11. and 21. 17. and 22. 26. and 23. 26.

8. To the concealing of theft, Prou. 29. 24.

9. To the Lordly usage of the borrower, Prou. 22. 7.

The aggrauations of the sin of stealing, are,

To take from the poor, Deuteronomy. 24. 14. Job 20. 19.

To reprove it in others, and yet commit it himself, Romans 2. 21.

To do it under pretense of Religion, 2 Cor. 11. 20.

To oppress strangers, or widows, or the fatherless, Exodus 22. 21, 22.

To bless the covetous, Ps. 10. 3

To commit it in the place of Judgment, by perverting of Justice, or by
extortion, Ezekiel. 22. 12. or by briberie, Amos 5. 12. Exodus 23. 8. or by
refusing to do Justice, Prou. 21. 7.

To steal thy masters goods, Titus 2. 10.

To steal consecrated things, by sacrilege or simonie, Mal. 3. 8. Acts 8. 18,
20.

To steal a man or maid, Exo. 22. 16.

CHAP. XII.
THus of the sins against man's goods.

The sins against men's good name follow: and so men offend by omission, or by
commission.

By omission he offends,

That sets not forth righteousness, Prou. 12. 17.

That does not clear or deliver the afflicted, when he may, Genesis 40. 23.

That disgraceth others, by forbearing their company without just cause, Job
19. 3, 19. Psalm 58. 3.

That is unthankful, 2 Timothy 3. 2.

By commission men offend, internally, or externally.

Internally he offends,

That despises his neighbor in his thoughts, Prou. 14. 21.

That disdaines at the credit and praise of others, as the Pharisees did.

That thirsts after all occasions of the contempt of others, Job 34. 7.

That is suspicious, and thinks evil, 1 Cor. 13. 5.

Externally he offends,

1. In witnesse-bearing; and so 1. In witness bearing.
he offends,

That condemns a man without witness, Deuteronomy. 19. 15.

That bears false witness.

That is fearful to bear witness to the truth, Deuteronomy. 21. 7, 8.

That furthers the evil causes of wicked men, Exodus 23. 1.

2. In lying, Revelation 22. 15. 2. Lying.
and the blame of this sin reaches

To such as use dissimulation, Gal. 2. 13.

To such as speak untruth for fear, Genesis 38. 2.

The aggrauations of lying, The aggrauations.
are,

To love lies, Reuelat. 22. 15. Psalm 52. 3.

To hate those thou haste wronged with thy lies, Proverbs 26. vlt.

To break promise, 2 Timothy 3. 3

To preach falsehoods, 1 Cor. 15. 15.

To say to men in distress, There is no help, Psalm 3. 2. Job 13. 14.

To color sin with pretense of Religion, Mark 12. 40.

3 In slandering and evil reports, 3. Slandering
Exodus 23. 1. which is to be extended also to

Biting jests, Ephesians. 5. 4.

2 To revealing of secret infirmities, Prou. 11. 13. and 20. 19.

3 To the carrying about of tales, Leu. 19. 16. Prou. 16. 28.

To the receiving and furthering of slanders, Ier. 20. 10.

5. To the wresting of men's words, or telling the truth of malice, 1 Samuel 22.
9, 10. Psalm 52. 1, 2.

The aggrauations of slander, The aggrauations.
are,

1. To encourage themselves in an evil matter, and to commune together about
it, Psalm 64. 5.

2 To boast of his wickedness therein, Psalm 52. 1.

3 To slander the righteous, and quiet of the Land, Psalm 31. 18 and 59. 2.
and 102. 8. and 35. 20 and 83. 3. 5. and 4. 2.

4. To raise an evil report of his Parents, Genesis 9. 22.

5 To fill the ears of Princes with clamor, Hosea 7. 3.

6 To be a makebate, or a rayler, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 2 Timothy 3. 3.

4 In censuring and judging, James 2. 4.

The aggrauations are, 4 Censuring


To search and pry for faults in others, that he might censure them, Psalm
64. 9. Prou. 16. 27.

To do it for things indifferent Romans 14.

To censure small faults in others, and to be guilty of great offenses himself,
Matthew 7.

5 In vain-glorie, and minding 5. Vainglory
too much our own praises.

And so also he offends,

That boasts of a false gift, Prou. 27. 1.

That justifies himself overmuch, Job 35. 2.

That boasts of to morrow, Prou. 17. 1.

That measures himself by himself, 2 Cor. 10. 12.

6. In flattery, Psalm 12. 3. Prou. 27. 14. and 26. 26. 6. Flaterie.


7. In justifying the wicked, Prou. 17. 15. and 24. ^4.

CHAP. XIII.
HItherto of the sins with consent of the will.

The sins before consent of the will, are,

1. To want desire of the good and welfare either of himself, or other men.

2 To conceive evil thoughts, Matthew. 15. 19. or cover evil.

3. To delight in the inward contemplation of evil, whether in dreams or
awake, though it be without purpose to act them outwardly, Jude 8. James 1. 14.

Hitherto of the sins against the Law.

CHAP. XIIII.
Showing how many ways men offend against the Gospel.

THe sins against the Gospel may be referred to four heads: as they are
sins,

Against Christ.

Against Repentance.

Against Faith.

Against the graces of the Spirit.

1. He sins against Christ,

That says, he is Christ, Math. (...). Sins against Christ.
24. 5.

That denies directly, or by consequent, that Christ is come in the flesh, 1
John 4. 3. and 2. 23.

That has base thoughts of Christ, Esaias 53. 3.

That says, he has no sin, 1 John 1. 7, 8, 10.

That worships God without Christ, John 17. 3. 1 John 2. 23.

That uses not Christ as his own and only Advocate, 1 Ioh. 2. 2. 1. Tim. 2. 5.

That loves not the Lord Jesus Christ with inflamed affections, 1 Cor. 16. 22.
Ephesians. 6. 24. Philip. 3. 8.

2 He sins against repentance, 2. Sins against repentance.


That confesses not his sins without hiding, distinctly, Prou. 28. 13.
Psalm 32. 5.

That mourns not for his sins, Ier. 5. 3.

That forsakes not his sins, Prou. 28. 13.

Yea he sins against repentance,

That repents fainedly, Ieremi. 3. 10.

That repents desperately, as Cain and Judas.

That repents too late, Job 27. 8, 9.

That repents by halues, and in some things only, as Ahab and Herod.

That falls away from his repentance, 2 Peter 2. 19, 20.

The aggrauations are, The aggrauations.


To be wise to do evil, Ier. 4. 22

To pursue evil, Prou. 11. 19.

To rejoice in doing evil, and make a mock of sin, Proverbs 2. 14. and 14.
9.

To be without shame, and to declare his sin like the Sodomites, Esaias 5. 9.
Ier. 3. 3.

To be incorrigible, Ier. 5. 3.

To fret, because he is crossed in sin, Prou. 19. 3.

To bless himself against the curses of the Law, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

To freeze in security, Zephan. 1. 12.

To refuse to return.

3. He sins against Faith, 3. Sins against Faith.


That believes not in Jesus Christ for his justification and salvation, John 3.
17.

Yea he offends,

That is careless, and neglects the assurance of Faith, Heb. 6. 12. Romans 1. 16.

That in affliction doubts of Gods favor and goodness, Esaias 41. and 49. 14,
15.

The aggrauations. The aggra^ations.


Not to seek after God at all, Zeph. 1. 6.

Not to stir up our selves to take hold on God, when mercy is offered, Esaias 64.
7.

Not to answer when God calls, Esaias 50. 2.

To forsake our own mercy, or scoff at the signs of it, John 2. ^8.

4. He sins against the graces 4. Against the graces of the Spirit.
of the Spirit,

1. That receives the grace o^ God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1.

2. That turns the grace of God into wantonness, Jude 4.

3. That falls away from the grace of God, either wholly, by forsaking the
acknowledgement of the truth, 2 Peter 2. 20. Or in the same measure, by losing
his first love, Revel. 2. 4.

4. That tempts, grieves, or quenches the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.

5. That despites the Spirit of grace, and of malice persecutes the known
truth, which is the sin against the Holy Ghost, Hebrews 10. 26.

FINIS.
THE SPIRITVALL TOVCH-STONE OR, THE SIGNS OF A GODLY MAN.

Drawn in so plain and profitable manner, as all sorts of Christians may try
themselves thereby.

Together with directions, how the weak Christian, by the use of these Signs,
may establish his assurance.

By N. BIFIELD late Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in MIDDLESEX.

2. Cor. 13. 5.

Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith: prove your selves: Know ye not
your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates?

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, and are to be sold by P. Stephens, and C.
Meredith, at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard.

1630.

TO THE MVCH HONORED LADIES, the Lady Ruth Scydamore, increase of peace and
joy in believing.
HOw great the benefit of assurance of Gods favor, and of our own salvation
is, those only know that are either scourged with the conflicts and terrors of
their own doubtings, or that are solaced and established with the sweet dewes
of refreshing that arise from a rooted and well grounded Faith. If men study
assurances so much for their outward possessions in this world, how much more
earnest and diligent should men be to assure Gods love and the inheritance of
the glory to come? There is not a clearer sign of a profane heart, then to
account these cares needless: nor do I know a iuster exception against any
religion, then that it should teach, that when a man has done what he can to
observe the directions of that Religion, yet he cannot be sure he shall go to
Heaven.

But since I know that all that are possessed of the grace of Jesus Christ, do
account assurance great riches, I therefore conceive hope that my pains about
this subject will not be altogether unacceptable: and the rather because in
this present Treatise I have endeavored to express the signs of trial in a
much more easy way then before; and besides have added directions, that show
how a weak Christian may establish himself in his assurance.

I make bold to dedicate my new assay herein unto your Ladyship, You have heard
the substance hereof preached, and received it with much gladness; and in the
private use of these signs, you have been pleased to profess (to the glory
of God) that you have found much contentment and establishment of your own
assurance. Your eminency in the sincere profession and practice of true
Religion, and the shining of the graces here treated of, long acknowledged by
many witnesses, have made you worthy to be publicly observed and praised in
the Churches of Christ: and your great respect and favor showed to me, has
made this way of testifying my thankefulnes, but as a small pledge and
assurance of my desire to do your Ladyship any service in the things of Jesus
Christ. Thus beseeching God to enlarge the comforts of his Spirit in your
heart, and to prosper you in all things that concern the blessed hope of the
appearing of Jesus Christ our mighty God and Savior, ^end and rest,

Your Ladyships to be commanded, N. BIFIELD.

CHAP. I.
Describing the godly man by such signs as discover him to the observation of
other men.

THe signs of the true Christian, that has true grace in this world, and
shall be saved in Heaven when he dies, may be cast into two Catalogues. Two
Catalogues of signs.
The one, more brief: the other, more large. The one Catalogue of signs,
describe him by such marks, as for the most part do outwardly distinguish him
amongst men. The large Catalogue (...) intend especially as a more infallible
and effectual way of trial, as containing such signs as for the most part
are not observed by other men, or not fully, but are known to himself, and
can be found in no reprobate.

For the first Catalogue: the true The shorter Catalogue handled in this
Chapter.
Christian usually discouers himself by these marks.

First, he will not have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness;
he will not walk in the 1 He au^ides the company of the wicked
counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners: He will not sort
himself with workers of iniquity, Psalm 1. 1. and 26. 4, 5. 2, Cor. 6.

Secondly, He will afflict and (...) He is s^rrowfull for his sin.
humble his soul for his sins, mourning and weeping for them till the Lord
be pleased to show mercy and forgive him. He does account his sins to be his
greatest burden. He cannot make a mock of sin, etc.

Thirdly, He labors to be holy (...) He is ^hroughly, reformed ^n his con
^ersation.
in all parts of his conversation, watching over his own ways at all times,
and in all companies, Ps. 50. 23. Esaias 56. 1. 2. Peter 3. 4

Fourthly, he makes conscience 4 He makes conscience of lesser ^ns as well as
greater.
of the least commandments as well as the greatest, avoiding silthy speaking,
and vain jesting, and lasciviousness, as well as whoredom: lesser oaths as
well as the greater; reproachful speeches as well as violent actions, etc.

Fifthly, he loves and esteems, 5 He loves preaching
and labors for the powerful preaching of the word, above all earthly
treasures.

Sixthly, he honors and highly 6 He esteems the go^ above all men.
accounts of the godly, and delights in the company of such as truly fear God
above all others, Psalm. 15. 4.

Seventhly, he is careful of the 7 He is careful of the sancti fication of
the Sabbath.
sanctification of the Sabbath; neither daring to violate that holy rest by
labor, nor to neglect the holy duties belonging to Gods service public or
private. Esaias 56. and 58.

Eighthly, he loves not the 8 He is not in love with the world.
world, neither the things thereof, but is more heartily affected in things
that concern a better life, and so does in some degree love the appearing of
Christ.

Ninthly, He is easy to be entreated, he can forgive his enemies, 9. He loves
his enemies
desires peace, and will do good, even to them that persecute him, if it lie
in his power, Mat. 5. 44.

Tenthly, He goes on in the 10. He is constant in good courses, though
opposed.
profession of the sincerity of the Gospel, and does such duties as he knows
God requires of him in business of his soul, notwithstanding the oppositions
of profane persons, or the dislike of carnal friends, etc.

Eleuenthly, He sets up a 11. He serves God in his family.
daily course of serving God, and that with his family too, if he have any;
and exercises himself in the word of God, as the chief joy of his heart, and
the daily refuge of his life, calling upon God continually, etc.

CHAP. II.
Showing the general division of the signs, and the ways how the signs were
found out.

THus of the shorter Catalogue of signs. Now it follows, that I proceed to
those infallible marks of Election and Salvation. And whereas I have The
occasion of this Treatise.
diverse years since published a Treatise which I called Essays, or Signs of
Gods love and man's salvation: Having observed that diverse have accounted the
manner of setting the Signs down somewhat obscure in diverse parts of the
Book, I will now, by Gods assistance, for the helping of the weakest
Christians, in this Treatise, endeavor to express my self in this Doctrine
of the trial of a true Christian estate, in a more plain and easy course of
ex^mination; and leave both the former Treatise and this new Catalogue unto the
blessing of God, and the free choice of the godly Reader, to use which he
finds most agreeable to his own taste, being both such as are warranted and
founded upon the infallible evidence of Gods unchangeable truth.

In this project then, I consider of the trial of a true Christian The signs
ref^rred to six heads.
six ways.

First, in his humiliation.

Secondly, in his faith.

Thirdly, in the gifts of his mind, with which he is qualified.

Fourthly, in the works of his obedience.

Fifthly, in the entertainment he has from God.

Sixthly, in the manner of his receiving of the Sacraments.

In all which he differs from all the wicked men in the world, so as never any
wicked man could find these things in his condition, which are true of the
weakest Christian in each of these signs.

And that the true Christian may not doubt of his estate, having found these
signs in himself, The infallibility of the signs.
let him consider the proofs annexed to each sign: and that nothing may be
wanting to his abundant consolation, I will tell him, how I found out these
signs, and by what grounds I proceeded.

There are three sorts of places 3. W^ies to find out the signs of a god^y man
in Scripture
in Scripture (as I conceive) which do point out the grounds of infallible
assurance in those that can attain unto them: as first, such places as
expressly do a^firme, that such and such things are signs. As for example, 1
Ioh. 3. 14. Hereby we know, that we are translated from death to life, because
we love the brethren. Here the holy Ghost shows us expressly, that the love of
the brethren is a sign, by which a Christian may know, that he is translated
from death to life: and so the Apostle Paul gives signs to know whether their
sorrow were after God, or no, 2 Cor. 7. 11. So does the Prophet David, Psalm
15 give diverse signs, by which the man that shall dwell in Gods holy hill, may
be known. So the Apostle James tells us, how we may know the wisdom from
above, by reckning the fruits and effects of it, James 3. 17. So does the
Apostle Paul tell us, how we may know, whether we have the Spirit of Christ in
us, or no, Romans 8. 9, 15, etc. Gal. 5. 22. and 4. 6, 7.

Secondly, I find out signs, by marking what graces in man the promises of God
are made unto. For thus I reason: Whatsoever gift of God in man brings him
within the compass of Gods promises of eternal mercy, that gift must be an
infallible sign of salvation. But such are such and such gifts, as the
instances in diverse Scriptures show: And therefore the man that can find those
gifts in himself, shall be certainly saved. As for example: The Kingdom of
heaven is promised to such as are poor in spirit, Matthew 5. 3. From thence
then I gather, that poverty of spirit is an infallible sign. The like I may
say of the love of the Word, and of uprightness of heart, and of the love of
God, and the love of the appearing of Christ, etc.

Thirdly, I find out other signs, by observing what godly men in Scripture
have said for themselves, when they have pleaded their own evidence for their
interest in Gods love, or their hope of a better life. For look how godly men
in Scripture have proved that they were not hypocrites: even so may any
Christian prove that he is not an hypocrite neither. As for example, Job being
charged to be an hypocrite, and lying under the heavy hand of God, pleades his
cause, and proves that he was not an hypocrite, by his constancy in Gods
ways, and by his constant estimation of Gods Word, and desire after it, as
after his appointed food, Job 23. 10, 11, 12. More of this kind thou may
find in the proofs of particular signs.

Now whereas some signs are general, and thou might doubt of the
exposition, namely how that sign is infallible in such and such senses; for
thy establishment herein, thou may observe, that I expound the sign as it
is expounded in other several Scriptures. As for example: The love of the
brethren, is a general sign. Now how shall I know that I have the right love
of the brethren? This I explain, by flying to diverse other Scriptures, wherein
the particular explications of this sign are pleaded.

CHAP. III.
The trial of a Christian by the signs of true humiliation.

THe first way then, by which a Christian may try himself, is to examine
himself about his humiliation for sin, whether it be right or no. For under
this head is comprehended the explication of the doctrine of poverty of spirit,
and godly sorrow, and so in general of repentance for sins.

Now the true Christian in this ^6. Signs of true humiliation.
matter of humiliation, shows himself to have attained that, which no
reprobate could ever attain, and that in diverse particulars, as,

First, He has a true sight and 1. He sees his sins.
sense of his signs. He discernes his sinfulness of life both past and
present, and is affected and payned under the burden of his daily wants and
corruptions, and sees his misery in respect of his sins, Ier. 3. 12. Matthew
11. 28. Matthew 5. 4.

Secondly, He trembles at Gods 2. He fears Gods displeasure.
Word, and fears his displeasure while it yet hangs in the threatenings, Esaias
66. 1, 2.

Thirdly, He renounceth his own 3. He trusts not upon the merits of his own
works.
merits, and disclaimeth all opinion of true happiness in himself, or in any
thing under the Sun; as being fully persuaded that he cannot be saved by any
work of his own, or be happy inenioying any worldly things; and therefore is
fully resolved to seek for the chief good in Gods favor in Jesus Christ
only.

Fourthly, He mournes heartily 4. Hemours
and secretly for his sins; and so he does,

1 For all sorts of sins: for For all sorts of sins.
secret sins as well as known sins; for lesser sins as well as greater;
for the present evils of his nature and life, as well as sins past: yea, for
the sins he has loved, or have been gainful and pleasing to him. Yea, he
grieves for the evil that cleaues to his best works, as well as for evil
works, Esaias 6. 5. Romans 7. Esaias 1. 16. Matthew. 5. 4.

2 For sin as it is sin, and For sin as it is sin.
not as it does or might bring him shame, or punishment in this life, or in
Hell.

3 He is as much troubled for his As much as for crosses.
sins, as he was wont, or now should be for crosses in his estate. He
mournes as heartily for the sorrows that fell upon Gods Son for his sin,
as if he had lost his own and only Son, Zach. 12. 10, 11. or at least this
he strives for, and judges himself, if worldly afflictions do trouble him
more then his sins. Psalm 38. 5.

Fifthly, he is truly grieved and 5. And for the sins of others.
vexed in soul for the abominations that are done by others, to the dishonor
of God, or slander of true religion, or the ruin of the souls of men. Thus
Lot, 2 Pet. 2. 7. and David, Psalm. 119. 136. and the mourners marked for Gods
own people, Ezech. 9. 4.

Sixthly, he is heartily affected, 6. And for spiritual judgments.
and troubled, and grieved for spir^tuall judgments, that reach unto the
souls of men, as well as wicked men are wont to be troubled for temp^rall
crosses; and so he is greiued and perplexed for hardness of heart; (when he
cannot mourn as he would,) and for the famine of the word, or for the absence
of God, or for the blasphemy of the wicked, or the like, Psalm 42. verses 2.
3. and Psalm. 137. Nehemiah 1. 3, 4. Esaias 63. 17.

Seventhly, he is most stirred 7. And is moved.
up to abase himself, and mourn for his sins, when he feels God to be
most merciful. The goodness of God does make him fear God, and hate his
sins, rather then his justice, Hos. 3. 5.

Eighthly, his griefs are such as 8 And ^ee is eased only by spiritual means.
can be assuaged only by spiritual means. It is not sport or merry company
that eases him: his comfort is only from the Lord in some of his ordinances.
As it was the Lord that wounded him with the sight of his sins, so to the
Lord only he goes to be healed of his wounds, Hos. 6. 1. 2. Psalm. 119. 23,
24, 50.

Ninthly, in his griefs he is inquisitiue: he will ask the way, and 9 And is
careful to learn how to be saved.
desire to know how he may be saved. He cannot smother and put off his
doubts in so great a business. He dares not now any longer be ignorant of the
way to heaven. He is not careless, as he was wont to be; but is seriously
bent to get directions from the word of God about his reconciliation,
sanctification, and salvation, etc. Ier. 50. 4, 5. Acts 2. 37.

Tenthly, he is fearful of being deceived, and therefore is not 10 And is
fearful of being deceived.
slightly satisfied. He will not rest upon a common hope, nor is he carried
with probabilities; nor does it content him that other men have a good opinion
of him; nor is he pleased that he has mended some faults or begun to repent:
but repenting he repents still, that is, he takes a sound course to be sure his
repentance be effectually performed, Jeremy 31. 16.

Eleuenthly, he is vehemently 11 And earnestly desires to lead an holy life.
carried with the desires of the sound reformation of his life. His sorrow is
not water but washing; nor is it every washing, but such as makes clean.
Worldly sorrow may have much water, but it makes nothing clean; whereas godly
sorrow always tends to reformation and sound amendment.

Twelfthly, in all his sorrows 12 And trusts upon Gods mercy in his grief.
he is suppored by a secret trust in the mercy and acceptance of God: so as
no misery can beat him from the consideration and inward affiance and hope in
the mercy of God. In the very disquietnesse of his heart, the desire of his
soul to the Lord, and before his presence; though it be never so much cast
down, yet he waits upon God for the help of his countenance, and in some
measure condemns the unbelief of his own heart, and trusts in the name of
God, and his never sailing compassions, Psalm 38. 9. and 42. 5, 11. Lam. 3.
21. Zepha. 3. 12.

13. He is wonderfully inflamed 13 And is in love with God if he hear his
prayers
with love to God, if he at any time let him know that he hears his prayers.
In the midst of his most desperate sorrows his heart is eased, if he speed
well in prayer, Psalm 116. 1, 6.

14. He daily keeps an assise 14 And daily judges himself for his sin.
upon his own soul: he judges himself for his sins before God,
arresting, accusing, and condemning his sins. He confesses his sins
particularly to God, without hiding any sin, that is, without forbearing to
pray against any sin he knows by himself, out of any desire he has still
to continue in it; and by this sign he may be sure he has the Spirit of God,
and that his sins are forgiven him, Esaias 4. 4. Psalm. 32. 5. 1 John 1. 7, 9. 1
Cor. 11. 32.

15 His requests are daily powered 15 And prayers in the holy Ghost.
out unto God. He cries unto God with affection and confidence, though it be
with much weakness and many defects, as the little child does unto the
father, and thereby he discouers the Spirit of adaption in him, Romans 8. 15.
Zacha. 12. 10. Ephesians 3. 12.

16 He is unfeignedly desirous 16 Desiring to be rid of all sin.
to be rid of all sins; as well as one. There is no sin he knows by
himself, but he does desire as heartily that he might never commit it: as Note
this.
he does that God should never impute it. This is a never failing sign, a
fundamental one, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

17. He is content to receive evil at the hand of God, as well as 17 And is
willing to suffer affliction.
good, without murmuring, or letting go his integrity; as being sensible of
his own deserts, and desirous to approve himself to God, without respect of
reward. This proved that Job was an holy and upright man, Job 1. 1. and 2 3, 10.

18. He dislikes sin in all, even 18 He dislikes sin in all.
in those that are near and dear unto him in other respects, 1 King. 25. 12,
13, 14.

19. He is innocent from the 19 Sin reigns not in him.
great transgressions, and keeps himself from his own iniquity. He is not
subject to the damnation of sin. Sin does not reign in him, Psalm. 19. 13. 2.
Sam. 22. 24.

20 He finds a desire to be rid 20 He humbles himself for sin even in his
prosperity
of sin, and to humble himself for it in prosperity as well as adversity.
He leaves sin, before sin would leave him. He forsakes it then, when he
could commit it without apparent danger, Job 8. 5, 6.

22 Or if he be in adversity, his heart is upright, without lying 21 And in
adversity his heart is upright.
or dissimulation. He so seeks the pardon of his sins then, and so
promises amendment, as that he is also careful to practice it when he is
delivered. He is not like the Israelites mentioned, Psalm. 78. 36. 37.

22. He makes a supernatural 2^ He accou^ts of spiritual things as thy best
things.
valuation of spiritual things, accounting them as pearls of the best price,
not too dear bought, if he purchased them with all the worldly things he has;
and contrariwise, accounting himself exceeding poor if he want them, or the
means of them, Mat. 13. 45, 46. Ps. 42. and 63. 1, 3.

23. He has lost his wonted 23. He does not favor the things of the slesh
and the world.
taste in earthly things; his heart is not transported with the admiration of
them, or the inordinate desire after worldly things. He loves not the world and
this life as he was wont to do. Though he use the world, yet he easily
confesses himself to be a stranger and pilgrim here. He gives over the
unnecessary pleasures and profits of this life, Heb. 11. 13. 1 Ioh. 2. 14, 15.
Romans 8. 5. He is weary of the world, and willing to forgo society with the
men of this world, the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 6. 8, 9. and 36. 12. and 26.
1, 2, 3, 4.

24. If the Lord be silent, and 24. He is much grieved if God hide himself.
answer not his desires, but hides his face; his spirit fails, and he is as
one that goes down into the pit: it troubles him as a sore cross; and so
contrariwise, Psalm. 26. 1. and 88. 13, 14, 15. and 143. 7. John 16, 23, 28.

25. If he has been a man subject to boisterous, violent, and 25. Of a Lion
he becomes a Lamb.
hurtful affections, he is now become tame: Of a Lion he is become a Lamb,
and a little child may lead him, Esaias. 11. 6.

24. He has a spirit without 26. His spirit is without guile.
guile, Psalm 32. 2. He is more desirous to be good, then to be thought to
be so; and more seeks the power of godliness, then the show of it, Job 1. 1.
Prou. 20. 6, 7. His praise is of God, and not of men, Romans 2. 29.

And thus much of the trial of his humiliation. The signs of his faith follow.

CHAP. IIII.
The trial of a godly man by his Faith.

FAith is the next thing to be tried in a child of God. And in as much as
there are diverse Why we should try out faith.
kinds of faith, and experience shows in many that give no signs of
repentance, that they will not be beaten from a confident presumption that
Christ dyed for them, even for them in particular: it stands us in hand to try
our persuasion by true rules of Scripture, that so, if it will abide the trial
of the touchstone, we may lay it up as a hid treasure and a wonderful grace of
God; and if otherwise, we may repent us of presumption, as a deceivable sin.

But before I open the signs of this sin, the Reader must be admonished of
three things.

First, that I intend not by these The drift is to show how faith may be
proved, not how it may b^e bred.
signs to show how faith may be bred or begotten in us, but how faith may be
proved and declared to be in us. For it is the promises of God in the Scripture
that breed faith: nor can humane reason believe such great things from God for
any thing that is in us, but only because we see the Word of God assuring
such happiness unto such as lay hold upon them. So that, that which breeds
faith, is the revelation of Gods promises, by his Word and Spirit. Yet
notwithstanding the assurance of faith is much increased and confirmed by the
sight of those signs of the truth of our faith, and other graces of God in us.

Secondly, that I stand not precisely A second c^ueat.
upon the order of these graces of God in us, nor determine that question,
which graces are wrought first in the heart of a man: but that which I have
specially aimed at in the order of setting them down; is to begin at those
that either first appear in a Christian, or are easiest (as I conceive) to be
discerned in him.

Thirdly, that I intend especially The^ note by way of preface.
the trial of such Christians as agree in this, that they are persuaded that
Christ died for them; that so the true Christian may see reason to comfort
himself, that his persuasion is no presumption, as is the persuasion of the
most. It is true, that diverse of the signs of faith here to be handled, will
show faith in the weakest Christian; though he will not yet be brought to
acknowledge any persuasion. For this persuasion may be secretly wrought upon
the heart: as it is when it relieth upon the merits of Christ only for
salvation, though the judgment of the Christian be not resolved against his
doubts.

The question then is, how a Christian may try his persuasion of Gods mercy,
and his interest of Christ's mer^ts, whether it be right or no.

For answer hereunto, I say, The true faith.
that the true Christian does prove his faith and petswasion to be right, by
these signs following.

First, His faith or persuasion was wrought by the hearing of 1. Was wrought by
the Word preached.
the Word preached: And therefore thou must first ask thy self, how thou
come by thy persuasion. For if thou say, thou wast always so persuaded, or
did attain it by mere natural means or helps, thou are deceived. For,
faith is first wrought by the Holy Ghost, in the preaching of the Gospel, as it
is most clear by the words of the Apostle, How shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans
10. 14. And whereas it may be, that many Christians have not observed the
workings of their faith, and have forgotten the time of their conversion, and
have not judgment to discern how the Lord by the ministry of his servants
did change their hearts, and lead them to Christ: therefore when this first
sign cannot comfort, they must try themselves by the rest that follow.

Secondly, He has an high estimation of Jesus Christ. For 2. Esteems Christ
above all things.
the man that has true Faith, accounts all things most base in comparison of
the knowledge of Christ, and the love of God in him. He had rather be sure of
Christ, then to gain the whole world. Christ is more precious then all the
world: Yea, is the only thing in request in the desires of the Christian. Now
Christ is precious only to them that believe, 1 Peter 2. 6. and by this sign
Paul knew that he was grown far beyond himself in his former life, and
beyond all the Pharisees in the world, Phil. 3. 9.

Thirdly, He readily receives 3. Receives the testimony of Gods Ministers
before all the world.
the testimony of Gods Ministers speaking out of the Word, and sticks to it
against all the contradictions of the World. The Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
shows, that this sign will be pleaded and acknowledged in the day of Christ:
Christ, says he, will be made admirable in them that believe.

Now some may say, But how shall we know that we do believe?

Why, says he, you are true believers, because ye received our testimony;
and this shall be to your praise in that day.

Fourthly, He cannot abide 4 Casts out by pocrisie.
counterfetting and hypocrisy. If it be a right persuasion, it is a faith
unfeigned: Unfeigned, I say, as in other respects, so in effect, because it
cannot abide fainting, but with special hatred purges out hypocrisy, which
the persuasion of hypocrites never does, 2 Timothy 1. 5.

Fifthly, This persuasion is 5. Will abide trial.
permanent: it will endure trial, it will hold out in the evil day; it
inclines the heart to cleave to Jesus Christ, even in the fire of tribulation,
in the midst of manifold afflictions, and disgraces, and temptations. It is
like the Gold in the Furnace that perishes not: nor will it barely hold out;
but a Christian by his faith comforts and supports himself in affliction, so
as his faith becomes to him both a breast plate and an helmet: whereas the best
faith, that is not the faith of Gods Elect, will prove but dross, if it be
cast into the Furnace of temptation, further then it is supported by carnal
means and helps, 1 Peter 1. 6, 7. 2 Timothy 1. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Epho. 6. Luke
8. 13.

Sixthly, He will believe all 6. It believes all things.
things, I say, all things that he apprehe^deth to be required, threatened, or
promised in the word. To believe some things only, may be in any other kind of
faith, especially when they are such things as stand with their own reasons, or
wills, or affections, or the common opinion of other men: But this is the glory
of a lively justifying faith, it will give glory to God in all things. What can
God speak, it can believe, so soon as it knows it is spoken of God, though
it be never so contrary to the judgment of flesh and blood, Acts 24. 14.

Seventhly, He will not make 7 Will not make have.
haste. This was the sign given in the Prophet Esayes time: He that believes
will not make haste. He had prophesied of hard times to fall upon all the
people: now this would show amongst them, who were true believers. For those
that trusted in God, would not make haste to use ill means to help
themselves; they would stay their hearts in ^est and quietness, and they would
stay their feet too from running to Egypt or to Ashur, which God had
forbidden, Esaias. 28. 16.

If faith be right, and thy persuasion a sound persuasion, and well grounded,
there are joined with it these things following.

Eighthly, His persuasion is 8. Is accompanied with a pure conscience.
joined with a good and pure conscience; a conscience, I say, that makes him
careful to avoid sin, and do good duties, and to serve God in sincerity,
whereas the persuasion that is in wicked men, is not accompanied with a good
conscience, they do not make conscience of their ways. Now this is a clear
rule of difference, 1 Timothy 1. 5, 19. and 3. 9. Hebr. 10. 22.

Ninthly, He has a spirit of discerning. There is a great deal 9. And a
spirit of discerning.
of light comes into the heart with faith. A man cannot believe, and be
ignorant still. The Christian that is endued with faith from above, is endued
with wisdom from above: so as he can conceive of the things of God that
concern salvation, which the natural man perceives not. Though he may want
still in many knoledges, yet he has skill in some measure to learn how to be
saved. The doctrine of salvation he can now understand, which is taught in the
ministry of the Word; and he now can make some good use of reading the
Scriptures, that before discerned little or nothing in them. The veil that
lies upon the hearts of all flesh, is now taken from his eyes; yea the very
entrance into Gods Word gives light to the simplest believer. He that was
stupid and unteachable before, does now hear as the learned, with an holy kind
of in-sight and judgment, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Psalm 119. 130. Prou. 1. 4, 8. and 9.
4, 5.

Tenthly, He has a witness 10. And the witness of the Spirit of adoption.
within himself, He that believes, has a witness in himself, 1 John 5. 10.
For he has the Spirit of adoption to certify him infallibly of Gods love to
him, and that he is the child of God, Romans 8. 15, 16. and thus the believers
are said to be sealed by the Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. God leaves a
pawn, a pledge with every Christian that shall be saved, to be as the earnest
of his salvation, and this pledge and earnest is Gods spirit. And the Spirit
testifies to the believer, partly by revealing unto him the certainty and truth
of Gods promises in his Word; and partly by printing upon his heart these
saving graces, which distinguish him from all others; and partly by pouring
upon him the joys, which are called the joys of the Holy Ghost, in the use of
Gods Ordinances, as the inward ratification of the assurance of Gods love and
goodness to the believer. Of which after.

Lastly, Faith may be discerned 11. Bears those fruits following.
by many things it works, which are the fruits of it: and by the fruits of
Faith, we may know faith it self. Faith is like the root of a tree, that
lies under the ground, and cannot be seen without much digging; but by the
fruit the tree bears, we may know what kind of root it has, and of what
sort it is. Now the fruits of faith are these that follow, and such like, as,

1. Love to God and the godly: 1. Love
for faith works by love, Gallat. 5. 6.

2. Cleanness of the thoughts 2. Purity of heart.
and affections. For faith purifieth the heart. It makes a man strive after
inward purity, as well as outward: to get a clean heart, as well as clean
hands. It works humiliation for inward sins as well as outward, Act. 15. 9.
and drives a man to seek pardon in the Name of Christ, for all sorts of inward
perturbations and secret evils.

3. Victory over the World. Faith 3. Victory over the World.
over comes the world, 1 John 5. 4, 5. and so it does, when it makes a man
so rest upon God, and his truth and promise, as if he be put to it, to deny the
respect of his own credit, or profit, or pleasures, or the displeasure of
carnal friends, or his hopes in matters of this world; resting satisfied with
the expectation of the treasures and pleasures of a better world, yielding
himself over to be guided by Christ, and his truth, unto the death, Psalm 18.
14. He lives by his faith, Gal. 2. 20.

4. Humility. For a true faith excludes boasting of our own labors, 4
Humility
gifts, or praises; and makes us able, out of the sense of our own vileness,
to acknowledge all the glory to Gods free grace and loune in Jesus Christ,
Romans 3* 27. Gal. 3. 22.

The confession and profession of the truth. Faith will make a 5 Confession.
man speak in defense of the truth: I have believed, therefore have spoken,
says David, Psalm 116: which the Apostles plead to prove their faith also, 2
Cor. 4. 13, 14.

6 The putting on of righteousness, 6 Application of Christ's righteousness.
which is not by the works of the Law done by us. The application of, and
relying upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ, is the proper and only work
of true faith, Romans 10.

7 It opens a spring of graces 7 A very spring of grace.
in the heart of a true Christian: he that is a true believer, is qualified
with sundry heavenly gifts which were not in him by nature; which gifts do
daily discover themselves in his heart, flowing from thence, as if there were a
spring of living water in his belly. Sanctification of the Spirit and faith of
the truth, be inseparable, John 7. 38. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

CHAP. V.
The trial of a godly man by such heavenly gifts as serve him in his journey
to Heaven.

THus of his trial in his humiliation, and in his faith, It follows in the
third place, to try him by his gifts, which are the fruits of faith. The true
Christian differs from the wicked Two sorts of graces in a Christian.
man, in two sorts of gifts: Some of them are such gifts as are bestowed upon
him from above, but serve him only for spiritual use, while he is on the way
in his journey to Heaven, and so only in this life; such as are the sacred
thirst: The love to the word and means of his holiness: The spirit of
supplication: The love of his enemies; and his desire after the appearance of
Jesus Christ. Other gifts he has, which will accompany him home into his
heavenly Country, and abide upon him for ever, and are not abolished by death:
such as are saving knowledge, the love of God, and the love of the godly. First
therefore of those heavenly gifts, which will pass away; and so he is
qualified with fi^e distinct holy gifts, which cannot be found in any reprobate.

The first is, his holy thirst; The holy thirst that is in the godly Christian,
tried by four signs.
which is an heavenly kind of appetite, by which he is carried to the desire
of things above nature; such as are the merits and righteousness of Christ:
the favor of God: the presence of God: the full deliverance from all sin: the
removing of spiritual judgments: the salvation of other men, and the like;
and this thirst is a sign the more infallible:

1 Because it is constant and indelible in this life. There is no part of this
life, but it continues either in the sense of his affection, or in the
judgment of his understanding, so as he accounts spiritu^ll things to be the
best things: and though at some times his affection may be the less moved
after them, yet his appetite is daily renewed, as it is in the hunger or thirst
that is bodily.

2. Because it is industrious. For this holy thirst will guide him to a
careful use of all the means, by which good things may be attained; and does
not breathe it self out only with sudden and vain wishes, or flashes of
desire, Psa. 27. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 2. Psa. 63. 1, 2. Psa. 1. 2. Acts 2. 37.

3. Because it works a constant and secret meditation of heavenly things
desired, the heart frequently seeks after God day and night, Esa. 26. 9. Psalm.
63. 1, 6. For what we desire fervently, we think on almost continually:

4. Because if the Lord quench his thirst, and satisfy his desire in
spiritual things, the soul becomes as a watered garden; and then follows in
him an heavenly kind of satisfaction and contentment, with singular delight in
the soul, and vows and wishes of infinite and eternal thankfulness, Psalm
63. 4, 5. Jeremiah 31. 25, 26.

And thus much of the first gift.

Secondly, The love to the His trial by his love to the Word.
Word is another sign that he is the Child of God, and a clear evidence of
his salvation. Now because all sorts of wicked men may resort to the exercises
of the Word, and those that have but a temporary faith may show a great
estimation of the Word, and find joy in the hearing of it, and show much zeal
in things that concern the word, and may yield some obedience to the
directions of the Word also: it is profitable to consider how the true
Christian may prove that his affection to the Word is more sincere then that
affection which any wicked man can bring to the word. And thus he may find that
his heart is sound in his love to the Word, by these marks.

1 By his manner of receiving 13. Signs to try his affection to the Word by.
it, when he does receive the Word, as the Word of God, and not of men:
setting his heart before Gods presence, and being affected as if the Lord
himself should speak unto him. This no wicked man dares do: he dares not
present himself with the whole intendments of his heart before the Lord. For
this sign the Apostle Paul acknowledges the Thessalonians to be true
Christians, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

2 By his appetite to his Word. For there is in a godly man as true an hunger
after the Word, as the food of his soul; as there is in his stomach after the
food of his body; which shows it self to be the more sincere, because it is
constant; he desires the Word at all times, and as his appointed food daily;
as it is in the bodily appetite, though after feeding, the stomach may seem to
be full and satisfied, yet the hunger reuiues again every day, so is it with
the heart of a Child of God: whereas wicked men regard the Word but by fits,
and in a passion, and then at length fall clean away from the affection to it,
Psalm. 119. 20. Job 23. 12.

3. By his love to them that love the Word.

4. By his sorrow, because other men keep not the Word, Psalm. 119. 136.

5. By his unfeigned estimation of the Word above all worldly things, accounting
it to be an happy portion to enjoy the word in the power and profit of it,
Psa. 119. 14, 72, 111.

6. By his desire and delight to exercise himself in it day and night, that is,
constantly, Psa. 1. 2.

7. By his grief, either for the want of the m^ans by which the Word might be
taught unto him with power, accounting such want of the means to be a sore
famine; or for want of success in the use of the means when he does enjoy it,
Psalm. 42. 3. Amos 8. 12.

8. By the extent of his love to all the Word of God, even the Law, that with
threatening shows him his sin, and searches out his most secret corruptions;
being most affected with that ministry that does most sharply rebuke sin.

9. By his resolution to labor as hard for the food of his soul, as men do,
or he would do for the food of his body, John 6. 27. Amos 8. 12.

10. By the constant sweet taste he finds in it, especially when it is
powerfully preached, Psalm. 19. 10 2 Cor. 2. 15.

11. By the end he propounds unto himself in the use of the word, which is,
that he might not sin: and that his ways might be pleasing to God, hiding the
word in his heart to this purpose, Psalm. 119. 11.

12. By his willingness and resolution to deny his own reason and affections,
his credit, his carnal friends, his profits, or his pleasures in anything,
when God should so require it of him, and upon any occasion to show his hearty
respect of the Gospel, Mark 10. 29. 1 Cor. 1. 18.

13. By the effects of it: as,

1. When for the love he bears to the Word, he will separate himself from the
wicked, that might any way withdraw his heart, or endanger his disobedience,
Ps. 119. 115.

2. When he accounts the Word to be his chief comfort in affliction, and finds
it to be the maine stay and solace of his heart, Psalm. 119. 23, 24, 50, 51, 54,
143.

3. When it works in him effectually the redress of his ways, and freedom
from the dominion of sin, John 8. 32. Psalm 119. 45, 9, 59, 1 Thessalonians
2. 13.

4. When it works in him certain and sensible assurance of heart before God.
This assurance is an infallible sign of the right use of the Word, 1
Thessalonians 1. 5.

And thus of the second gift.

The third gift is the spirit of prayer or supplication, as the Prophet His
trial by his gift of prayer.
Zachary calls it, Zach. 12. 10. and this gift he has above all wicked men,
which he shows many ways: as,

1. He asks according to Gods 13. Rules of trial.
will, 1 John 5. 14.

2. He prays with persuasion that God will hear him. He believes in some
measure that he shall have what he prays for. He prays in faith, Mark 11.
24. James 1. 6, 7. Psalm 6. 9. 1 John 3. 22.

3. He prays in the Name of Christ, and is affected with the sense of his own
vileness, and relies upon the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, John 14,
13. Psa. 86. 1, 2. and 143. 1, 2.

4. He will pray at all times, Job 27. 9. Psalm. 106. 3.

5. He is fervent in prayer: his heart prays: he has the affections of
prayer, James 5. 16. Psalm. 6. 8.

6. Prayer makes him exceeding weary of the world: it gives him such a taste of
his own sinfulness, and of Gods goodness, and of the glory of Heaven, that
he is vehemently carried with desire to be absent from the body, that he
might be present with the Lord, Psa. 39. 12.

7. When he knows not how to pray as he ought, the Spirit prepares his heart,
excites in him holy desires, supplies him sometime with words, sometime with
affections, and sometimes works inward inexpressible groans, which yet it
presents to God, as effectual prayers, Romans 8. 26, 27.

8. He finds an holy rest, and quietness in his conscience and heart, with
spiritual boldness and confidence of trust in God, if he hear him
graciously, and answer him in mercy, Psalm 3. 4, 5, 6. and 116. 17. and 91.
15. Jeremiah 33. 3.

9. He loves the Lord exceedingly for hearing his prayer, and desires to keep
himself in the love of God, Psalm 116. 1. Jude 20. 21.

10. His prayers proceed from an heart that loves no sin, but desires to
depart from iniquity, and to do that which is pleasing in Gods sight, 2 Timothy
2. 19. 1 Ioh. 3. 22.

11. He loves prayer in others, 2 Timothy 1. 21.

12. He strives against deadness of spirit and distractions, as an heavy
burden, Psalm 86. 3. 4.

13 He makes prayer his chief refuge: and he will pray, though prayer be in
never so much disgrace. Psalm 69. 10, 13. and 142. 25.

And thus of the third gift.

The fourth gift is the love of His loueto his enemies tried
his enemies. Any Christian may love such as love him; but to love his enemies,
is only to be found in the true Christian, which he proves by these tokens of
the sincerity of his love:

1. He can pray heartily for them yea in some cases he can mourn and humble
his soul before God for them in their distresses, Psalm. 35. 13, 14.

2. He desires their conversion so unfeignedly, that he is sure, if they were
conuered, he could rejoice in them as heartily, as in those he now much
delights in.

3 He can likewise forgive them their particular trespasses against him; being
more grieved for their sins against God, then for the wrongs they do him,
Math. 6. 14.

4 He can freely acknowledge their just praises.

5 He cannot only patiently endure their reuilings, but can forbear, when he
could be revenged by bringing shame or misery upon them, 1. Peter 3. 9. Romans
12. 14. 1 Samuel 24. 18, 19. yea he does, as he has occasion, strive to overcome
their evil with goodness; being willing to help them, or relieve them in
their misery, and do them any good for soul or body.

The last gift which is found in His trial by the love to the app^aring of
Christ.
the true Ch^istian, while he is in the way in this life, is, His love of the
appearing of Christ, which he shows:

1 By the longing after the time of Christ's coming, whether by death or
judgment.

2 By his gladness at the promises, or signs of his particular or general
commings.

3 By his often meditations of that day, and his hearty prayers for the
hastening of it, Neuelat. 22. 10.

4 By his daily care to dispach all those godly duties which he desires to do
before his death, and accordingly by his willing disposing of his estate, and
endeavors to set his house in order.

And this desire of Christ's coming is apparently the more sincere in him:

1 Because it arises out of his love to God, and his hatred of his own
sins, and his weariness under the observation of other men's sins.

2 Because this desire is accompained with the care of the means, by which he
may be prepared for salvation.

3 Because he is thus affected even in his prosperity, when he thrines in the
world, and is not in any uotable distress.

Hitherto of his trial in such gifts as he is endowed withal in this life
only: his trial in the gifts that will abide in him for ever, follow.

CHAP. VI.
His trial in respect of such heavenly gifts as will not be abolished by
death.

THe gifts that will abide in The trial of his knowledge
him for ever, are these three: Knowledge, the love of God, and the lou^ of the
brethren. These are perfected, and not abolished by death.

And first, in this knowledge, And so he differs from wicked men.
he differs from all wicked men, and so in diverse things: as,

First, in the things he knows: In the things he knows.
he knows the nature of God in a right manner: he knows God in Jesus Christ:
he knows the vileness of his own sins: he knownes after an effectual
manner the mysteries that concern the salvation of his soul: he knows his
own conversion, and the forgiveness of his sins, and the things that are
given him of God, Math. 13. 13. John 17. 3. Ier. 31. 34. 1 Cor. 2. 12. He
knows that Jesus Christ is in him, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

Secondly, In the cause of his 2. In the cause of his knowledge.
knowledge. For flesh and blood did not reveal those things unto him he came
not by them by the use of natural means, but they are wrought in him by the
word and Spirit of God, Matthew ^6. 17. 1 John 2. 27. and 5, 10. 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Thirdly, In the effects of his knowledge: for, 3. In the effects of his
knowledge


1. It breeds in him an unspeakable refreshing and gladness of heart in Gods
presence, Psalm. 36. 9, 10. Psalm 119.

2 It inflames him to a wonderful love of the Word of God above all earthly
things, Psalm 119. 97, 98.

3 It works in him an effectual sauouring and tasting of the goodness of
spiritual things, Romans 8. 5.

4 It inclines him to a constant obedience and practice of Gods will, Prou. 8.
9, 17. John 7. 17. Deuteronomy. 46. It redresseth his ways, Psalm 1^9. 10. 1. John
2. 3. and 3, 24.

5 It bears down pride, and conceitednesse, and frowardness and makes him
humble and teachable, Prou. 3. 5, 6. and 8, 13, 14. James 3. 17.

Fourthly, In the proprieties of 4 In the properties of his knowledge
his knowledge: for,

1 It is infallible: his knowledge has much assurance in many things, with
strong confidence and resolution at some times, especially when he is before
God, 1 These. 1. 5.

2. It is indelible, it cannot be utterly blotted out, it is fast graven in his
heart; contrary doctrine or persecution cannot raze it out, Ierem. 3^. 34.
Ephesians. 4. 13. Pro. 4. 5, 6.

4. It is sincere; for first it inclines him to give glory to God, and receive
all truth as well as any truth. He receives the doctrine of God, though it be
above reason, and against the common opinion of men, or cross his profit, or
desires, or the like. Secondly, it leads him principally to understand his
own way, and guides him to study the things chiefly that concern his own
reformation and salvation, Prou. 14. 8. Col. 3. 16.

And thus he differs from wicked men in his knowledge.

Secondly, in his love to God, His love to God, tried by nine signs
he has these things which no wicked man can attain to.

1. He has a deliberate inward inflamed estimation of God above all things,
accounting his loving kindness better then life, and the signs of his favor
his greatest joy, Psalm. 63. 3, 11.

2. He loves and longs for the Lord Jesus Christ with certain and sincere
affection, Ephe. 6. 24. 2 Timothy 4. 8.

3. He delights in Gods presence, and shows it by his unfeigned love to his
house, Psalm. 26. 8. and by his hearty grief for Gods absence, Cant. 3. 1. and
by his carfulness to set the Lord daily before him, walking in his sight,
Psalm. 16. 8.

4. He hates sin heartily, because God hates it; and he dislikes sinners,
because they hate God; accounting Gods enemies as if they were his own
enemies, Psalm. 139. 21, 22. and 97. 10.

5. He constantly desires to be like God in holiness, being careful to
approve his affection to God, by his obedience to his commandments, so as it
is not grievous to him to receive directions, but serves God with all his
heart, being fearful to displease God in any thing, Ioh. 14. 21. 1 Ioh. 5. 3.
Deuteronomy. 10. 12. and 11. 22. and is more affected with Gods approbation, then all the praise of men, Romans 2. 29.

6. He is much affected with Gods mercy, and the blessings bestowed upon him,
which he thankefully remembers to the praise of Gods free grace, Esaias 63. 7.
Psa. 63. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8. and 107. 22. Job 36. 24. Deuteronomy. 16. 2.

7. He loves all the godly, for this reason chiefly, because they are like
unto God in holiness, as being begotten by him, 1 John 5. 1.

8. He is heartily vexed for any dishonor done to God, as for any disgrace
offered to himself.

9. Finally, He shows it in diverse cases that befail him in his course in this
life: as,

1. If he be put to suffer any thing for Gods sake, he endures it with much
joy and patience, 1 These. 1. 6. Acts 5. 14. John 22. 15 to 19.

2. If at any time he offend God by his own faultiness, he is heartily
grieved and cast down, and does constantly desire to forsake any sin, though
never so pleasing and gainefull unto him, rather then he would displease God,
Math. 26. 75.

3. In all streights and wants, he runs to God, relying upon God, as his
defense, rock, and refuge in all times of troubles, making his moan unto him,
and pouring out his prayers and complaints before him, Psa. 18. 1, 2.

Thus of his love to God. His love to the godly tried by ten signs.


Thirdly, his love to the godly does also distinguish him from all the wicked
men in the world, because here are diverse things to be noted in his affection
to them which cannot be found in wicked men:

1. As first, he loves the godly above all other sorts of men in the world; he
accounts them as the only excellent people, Psalm. 16. 3. 1 John 3. 14. and
affects them as if they were his natural kindred, Romans 12. 9, 10.

2. He loves them not for carnal respects, but for the graces of God in them,
for the truths sake, and because they are begotten of God, 1 John 5. 1. 2 John
1. 2. 3 John 1.

3. He delights in their fellowship and society in the Gospel, as accounting
them the happy companions of this life, Psalm. 16. 3. 3 John 8. Phil. 1. 5.

4. He has a fellow feeling of their miseries: he is in some measure
affectioned to weep with them that weep, and rejoice with them that rejoice;
especially he is glad when their souls prosper, Romans 12. 15, 16. 3 Ioh. 3.

5. His desire is to walk inoffensiuely, as being loath any way to be an
occasion of stumbling, or scandal to any Christian, 1 Ioh. 2. 10.

6. He can bear their infirmities, take things in the best sense, suffer long,
and is not easily provoked: he hops all things, and boasts not himself, nor
enuies not them, nor will receive an evil report against them, 1 Pet. 3. 8. 1.
Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6. but rather makes apology for them.

7. He easily praises them in all places, for their grace or obedience, Romans
16. 19. 3 John 6. Psalm. 15. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

8. His well-doing extends it self to them to his power; he is bountiful,
pitiful, and tender; he has bowels of mercy, according to the occasion of
mercy, either corporal or spiritual. He gladly receives them, and with a
ready mind communicates to their necessities, Philemon 7. 1 Pet. 3. 8. and 4.
8. 1 John 3. 17. 3 John 5.

9. He loves all the brethren. He has not the glorious faith of Christ in
respect of persons, James 2. 1, 2. Ephesians. 1. 15. Col. 1. 4. He can make
himself equal to them of the lower sort, Romans 12. 16.

10. Lastly, he loves them at all times, even when they are in adversity,
disgrace, sickness, or any other misery.

Hitherto of the godly man's trial by his gifts.

CHAP. VII.
The trial of the godly man by his works of obedience.

THE fourth way to try him, is by his works, or by his obedience in his life
and conversation; and so his works excel all the works of unregenerate men
many ways: as,

1. Because what he does, rises out of the love he bears to God and
goodness; and therefore he does good heartily, and not by constraint, or with
repining or delay: yea he is so stirred up with the sense of Gods goodness to
him, that he is much humbled when he has done his best, that he cannot bring
more glory to God, Deuteronomy. 30. 20. Ios. 22. 5. Math. 4. 19, 20. Rom 6. 17.

2. In doing good he has respect unto all Gods Commandments: there is no part
of an holy life, but he desires to practice it; and therefore he will obey Gods
will in some cases when it is against his profit, credit, ease, or the liking
of carnal friends, preferrings Gods commandments above all things, yea life
it self, Ier. 35. Heb. 11. 8. Genesis 22. 12. Prou. 7. 2. Act. 5. 29. Mat. 16.
25. Exodus 15. 26. 1 King. 9. 4. Ierem. 11. 4. John 15. 14.

3. He will do good at all times, and not for a fit; making conscience of his
ways in all companies as well as any; absent as well as present; before mean
Christians as well as before the best; at home as well as abroad, Philip. 2.
12. Gal. 5. 7. 2 Kings 28. 6. Psalm. 106. 3.

4. He makes conscience of the least commandment as well as the greatest,
Mat. 5. 19. James 2. 10.

5. He comes to the light, that his deeds might be manifest, that they are
wrought in God, John 3. 21. He is desirous in all things to be guided by the
warrant of the Word of God.

6. He exercises his faith in the very discharge of the duties of his outward
conversation. He lives by the faith in the Son of God, and commits his way
to God, and trusts upon the Name of the Lord, Gal. 2. 20.

7. He knows that his obedience is right, because God hears his prayers,
and entertaines him graciously, when he calls upon him in secret; whereas God
hears not sinners; and if wickedness were in his heart, God would not regard
his prayers, John 9. 31. Psalm 66. 18.

And thus of his works.

CHAP. VIII.
His trial by the entertainment he has from God.

THe fifth way by which he 5. Six favors God bestows upon him which the
wicked never feel.
may be tried, is by the entertainment that God vouchsafes him in this life,
which he never vouchsafes to wicked men. There are diverse specialties of
favor which God shows to him, and not to any unregenerate man: As,

1. His election in time is a manifest 1. Election in time.
token of Gods election of him before time: the Lord shows that he has chosen
him from enerlasting, when by the power of the Gospel he seizes upon him
particularly, and effectually persuades him to leave the world, and the sinful
society he lived in, and to deuote himself as a living sacrifice unto God.

2. He is baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire: the baptism 2. The
baptism by fire.
by fire, is only proper to Gods Elect: the Holy Ghost at some times falls
upon him, and sets him all on a fire, on a fire I say, both of sudden and
violent indignation at sin, as it is sin; as also the fire of holy
affections, with which from God he frequently and on a sudden is enslamed,
while he stands before the Lord. For besides the affection which a godly man
brings with him to Gods worship, he does feel his heart oftentimes on a
sudden surprised with strange impressions, sometimes of sorrow, sometimes of
fear and awefull dread of God; sometimes of fervent desires after God:
sometimes of strong resolutions of holy duties to be done by him, and the like,
Matthew 3. 11.

3. He feels at sometimes in the 3. Much assurance.
use of Gods ordinances a marvelous work of the Holy Ghost, in respect of much
assurance and strange establishment of his heart, both in the certain
persuasion of Gods love, and the infallible belief of the truth; so as at that
time no danger of death could amaze him, but he could willingly witness his
confidence by undergoing any thing could befall him, 1. Thessalonians 1. 5.

4. He feels at some times the 4. Joy unspeakable
unspeakable and glorious joys of the Holy Ghost which are differing from the
carnal joys or illusions may be found in wicked men, because they are such
joys, as he feels only in the use of some ordinances of God, and such as by
effect make him more humble, and vile in his own eyes, and do inflame him to
an high degree of the love of God and goodness; which illusions can never do.

5. The sanctification of his afflictions 7. The sanctification of his
afflictions.
is another infallible sign of Gods love to him. For God makes his crosses to
become blessings unto him, and work his good, so as he may plainly see, that
it was good for him to be afflicted: and besides, God gives him many times the
experience of his goodn^sse, both by unexpected consolation in his distresses,
and gracious deliverance out of them, Romans 8. 28. Psalm. 119.

6. Lastly, To this place I may refer Gods hearing and answering 6 The answer
of his prayers.
of his prayers; whereas God does not hear sinners, as was showed in the end
of the former Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
His trial by the Sacraments.

THe sixth and last way of trial Six Rules of his trial about the Sacrament
of the estate of a Christian, is by the Sacraments, and in particular by the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For God has appointed the two Sacraments to be
his broad Scales to assure his favor unto his people: and because none but
worthy receivers can be partakers of so great a privilege as the Covenant of
Gods grace, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ: therefore hereby does the true
Christian distinguish himself from all men. For in becoming a worthy
receiver, he does diverse things not only required in communicants, but such
as none but godly men can attain unto: As,

1. He does forgive his enemies, as heartily as he desires God to forgive him
his trespasses.

2. He examines himself, and upon examination he both eats with sour
herbs (that is) comes with some measure of grief for his offenses, and
withal finds as unfeigned a desire, that he might never offend God in anything,
as that God should there assure him of the forgiveness of his sins, and that
he will never punish him for any of them, 1 Cor. 11.

3. The covenant of his heart is to cleave to God, and the care of godliness
all the days of his life, 1 Cor. 5. 8.

4. He is in some measure persuaded of Gods love to him in Christ; and
discernes the Lords Body, so as he is secretly in some degree persuaded of the
spiritual presence of Jesus Christ, and of the operation of God: so as he
believes, that Christ will as certainly nourish his soul, as the outward
elements can any way be fit to nourish his body, Mark 16. 16. Col. 2. 12. 1
Cor. 11.

5. He sometimes feels the Holy Ghost inwardly, setting to Gods Privy Seal by
sudden refreshings, falling like the dew upon his heart, and establishing his
soul before the Lord, Ephesians. 1. 13. 2 Cor. 1. 12.

6. His heart is knit unto the godly more and more, and increases in his
resolution to cleave to them only, and forsake all other professions of men in
the world; loving them unfeignedly, and desiring it for ever to a partaker of
their lot, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.

CHAP. X.
The directions that show him how to get assurance by the helps of those
signs.

HItherto of the signs of the godly man. Now follows the course that the weak
Christian should take by the use of the former signs of trial, to establish
his heart in the assurance of Gods favor, and his own eternal salvation.

My advice is therefore, that the weak Christian that finds want of
establishment and clear assurance, should take the former signs of trial,
and go apart, and set himself in Gods presence, emptying his heart of worldly
distractions, and seriously consider of every rule of trial apart; and gather
out into some little paper-booke so much as in every sign he can clearly
find to be in himself, and that which he durst through Gods mercy resolutely
avouch to be wrought in him by the grace of God. And this I would have him to
do with deliberation, trying himself by one or two of the chief heads at
most in a day, spending no more time about it then he may well allow, without
weariness or dullness.

Now because he may be perhaps discouraged with the observation of diverse
things, which he may find wanting in himself in every sign; he must
therefore take sound notice of the distinction of Christians made by the
Apostle John, 1 John 2. who casts al true Christians into three sorts. Some are
Infants, and either newborn, or but weakly qualified with the graces of
Christ; yet are right, and have true grace in some measure. Others are strong
men, that is, such as have the gifts of the Spirit lively and in their power in
them. Others are Fathers, that is, such as have had long experience in the
powerful practice of godliness, and have been long exercised in all kinds of
well-doing. Now all these three sorts may be supposed to come to these signs.
The weak Christian only takes to a few of the plainest marks in the
explication of each sign. The strong Christian he takes to the most of the
marks. The Fathers they in a manner discern all the particulars of Gods
graces, and the several workings of them. Each of these, even the weak
Christian, may see so much as may stay his heart in assurance, and so settle
his faith and joy.

When there are many signs of one and the selfsame thing, it is sufficient
if it can be demonstrated, though it be but a few ways, seeing every
particular mark being warranted by Scripture, has force to conclude for
assurance, and to prove that we differ from all the wicked men in the world.

Though at the first in reading but a sign or two, thou get but a few things
may comfort thee, yet hold out till thou come to the end of all the signs, and
then thou shall see a fair army (as it were of arguments) to prove thy
election and salvation. For whereas the most and best of us if we be asked
this question, By what marks do we know that we are the true children of God,
and not wicked men? If we answer on a sudden, and by present memory, we can
scarce give two sound reasons to prove the infallibility of our happy estate:
which shows, that the most of ^s live at a great uncertainty. Now he that
has gone through the signs, shall find perhaps twenty, or thirty, or forty
several and distinct arguments or marks, which when he has collected them all
together, may serve to answer all the objections of all the Devils in Hell. The
gates of hell cannot preuale against his faith: which I declare thus: If the
Devil say, Thou art a wicked man, and an hypocrite; thou may readily
answer, that by the grace of God in Jesus Christ thou art none such; and may
put the Devil to prove by the Word of God; that ever any wicked man did attain
to all those signs thou have collected. Which, because it cannot be done,
thou may with much rest and full assurance commit thy self to God, and bind
thy self by Covenant, never more to dishonor him by such vnbe^efe, as to call
his love and his salvation into question. If a threefold cord cannot be
broken, how weak then should thy heart be, if thou should fear thy estate,
unto which God has so sealed, and so many ways marked thee out for himself?

And for thy further satisfaction: after thou have collected thy signs
together, thou may carry them to thy godly Pastor, and desire him to peruse
them, and accordingly give thee his ministerial testimony concerning them in
the name of Jesus Christ, and this may add much satisfaction and rest to thy
conscience.

If in reading any of the signs, thou find any special doubts, at any hand
suppress them not, but seek resolution from doubt to doubt, and from sign to
sign. Thou may gain much profitable knowledge by propounding these cases of
thy particular conscience.

The least gain that can be imagined by this course, is, that whereas before
thou had few evidences or none for thy estate, thou shall now have many of
all sorts: and it must needs be thy own way wardnesse, if assurance follow
not. For these signs will ransacke thee, and try thy very heart and reigns,
and all thy secretest desire and practices.

Yea, this benefit thou may reap by the signs, that they will tell thee all
the days of thy life, how it is with thee, whether thou go forward or
backward. For if by examination now thou gather out all thou can find by thy
self, these will not only lie by thee to help thee against any temptation at
any time; but besides, if thou try thy self again, either against the next
Sacrament, or the next year, thou may discern what ground thou have gotten
or lost. If thou prosper, thou will discern it, by taking in diverse things in
each sign, which before thou durst not acknowledge; and besides, it will
exceedingly show thee what thou want in each grace of God, and so what thou
should set thy self about, and get thy wants supplied. It will at all times
make a true Anatomy of thy estate; which to the well advised Christian ought
to be accounted a matter of great moment.

The God of peace give thee all peace and joy in believing. If thou receive any
good by this Treatise, praise God, and pray for me.

FINIS.
THE SIGNS OF THE WICKED MAN.

TOGETHER WITH Directions that show how the several Gifts and Graces of Gods
Spirit may be maintained.

NEEDFVLL FOR SVCH AS want those Graces, and for such as desire to increase in
them.

By N. BIFIELD late Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in MIDDLESEX.



LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, and are to be sold by P. Stephens, and C.
Meredith, at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard.

1630.

TO THE MVCH HONORED LADY, the Lady Bridget Tracie: Nicholas Bifield wishes
all prosperity in the things of the Kingdom of CHRIST.
MADAM,
BEing destitute of a better gift to bestow upon your Ladyship, to testify my
thankfulness or observance, I present this little Treatise unto you. It may
have more use then it shows for. For if things shine more clearly when their
contraries are set by them; then may this description of the estate of a wicked
man by Signs, serve much to establish the godly in the point of Assurance,
when he sees himself freed from those fearful and forlorn marks. And if
men use to make much of all those directions, by which any gain or treasure
may be certainly compassed, then ought the Directions not to be despised,
that show how the Spirit of God and the Graces thereof may be attained: For by
these directions, both those that want the true graces of Christ, may here
learn how to get them; and such as have them but in weak measure, may by the
same Rules learn how to increase them.

I have been induced to think of your Ladyship in this Dedication, partly in
acknowledgement of the great respect due to the Family out of which you came,
as it has been a principal means of causing the light of the Gospel for
many years to shine in those places where the people had sitten in darkness
and in the shadow of death: And partly drawn by the many praises I have
observed in your Ladyships, since the time of your noble soiourning in the
noble Family you now live in. Your great respect of my Ministry, and your
constant pains to employ your self about religious duties, deserve from me
more acknowledgment then so mean a gift as this can discharge. Madam, you are
happy above many, that God has inclined your heart to bear the yoke of Christ
in your youth, and discern the glory of the spiritual kingdom of Jesus
Christ. Your meekness assures me liberty to beseech you to go on in the good
way of God, and to clean fast with all hearty affection unto the Truth, as
you have learned Jesus Christ. It shall be a great increase of your glory, to
increase in the knowledge and grace of Christ, and (in sound denial of your
self, and contempt of the world) to fashion your self to all the courses, by
which you may be pleasing in the eyes of God, whiles multitudes in the Gentri^
of the land, of both sexes, by following foolish vanities, forsake their own
mercy.

Now the God of peace sanctify you throughout, and so prosper his own work
in you, that your whole spirit, and soul and body may be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, March 9. 1618.

Your Ladyships to be commanded in Christ Jesus, N. BIFIELD.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Preface, showing the necessity of the trial of man's estate; and the
causes why wicked men will not try themselves; and also why diverse godly
persons are negligent herein. Page 119. to 209.
CHAP. I.
Thirty signs of an open wicked man. page 209. to 218.
CHAP. II.
Thirteen signs of an hypocrite. page 218. to 222.
CHAP. III.
Sixteen signs of such Professors as are likely to fall away. page 222. to
226.
CHAP. IV.
Seven arguments of hope, that show a wicked man that he may be saved, if he
will be directed. page 226. to 230.
CHAP. V.
HOw he may get faith. page 230. to 234.
CHAP. VI.
HOw he may get to be poor in spirit. page 234. to 239. How he may attain
godly sorrow. page 239. to 245.
CHAP. VII.
HOw the Spirit of Adoption may be had. page 245. to 247. How he may get alone
to the Word. page 247. to 250. How he may get the gift of prayer. page 250. to
255. How he may attain to the fear of God. page 255. to 256. How he may be
made to love his enemies. page 256. to 258.
CHAP. VIII.
HOw saving knowledge may be gotten and increased, page 238. to 260. How the
love of God may be wrought in us. page 260. to 262. How the love of the godly
may be attained, and how it may be preserved. page 262. to 366.
CHAP. IX.
HOw uprightness and sound sincerity of conversation may be attained. page
266. to the end.
THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN and careful Reader.
HOw necessary it is for all sorts of men in the visible Church, to try their
estates whetherthey be true Christians or no, may appear by the express
charge giuenin the Scriptures concerning it. The Apostle Paul charge men to
examine themselves whether they be in the faith, and whether Christ Jesus be in
them, unless they be reprobates, 2. Cor. 13. 5. And the Apostle Peter would
have all Christians diligently to make their calling and election sure, 2. Pet.
1. 10. And the like commandment lay upon them in the Church of the Jews in
the old Testament, as may appear by that exhortation, Lam. 3. 40. Let us
search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord: and the Prophet David
in this case, charge men to commune with their own hearts, Psalm. 4. 4. How
can men draw near unto God in the full assurance of faith, if they will not be
at the pains to examine themselves? Heb. 10. 22. Or how shall we ever know
that we are of God, or attain unto any confidence of faith, as we ought to
do? 1 Ioh. 5. 19. Ephesians. 3. 12.

How fearfully this point of sound trial is neglected, and how miserably most
men are deceived for want of it, may appear by this observation, which may
usually be made of men in the most places, viz. that many Note.
that are carnal men, say, they are godly; and many that are godly men, say,
they are but carnal. Besides that, a multitude of men, both good and bad, live
in security: the one not caring to get out of so woeful an estate; and the
other not regarding the riches of Assurance.

The causes of this miserable security, may be observed and noted both in
wicked and in godly men.

In wicked men these things may be easily discerned.

1 A lothnesse to examine Why wicked men neglect the trial of their estates.
(...) Because they are afraid all is no^ well.
themselves and try their estates exactly, for fear lest they should find
that they are not in a good estate. Their hearts secretly condemn them, and
they think, if they should take particular notice of their own condition, it
would be found, that they have indeed no true grace in them: and therefore they
rather choose to live in that doubtful estate, then to be put out of doubt, and
made to know, that they have yet no right to the Kingdom of heaven: never
considering that the knowledge of our misery, may be one degree to get out of
it.

2. In such as see all is not well 2. They are slothful.
with them, the cause is slothfulness, mingled with horrible presumption: they
had rather wear out their days in danger, then be at the pains to use the
means for their own repentance and reformation: they will wretchlesly put it
to the venture.

3. Others will adventure upon 3. They rest upon the common hope.
their common hope of mercy: they have certain general confused apprehensions
of mercy in God, upon which they wilfully engage their hopes, without care of
reformation, or the particular warrant of their hopes from the Word of God, and
so miserably perish: their hopes proving but as the house of the Spider: and
the imaginary mercy failing them, they die either as stocks without sense, or
as Judas in horrible despair. Or 4 upon their outward profession of Religion.


4. Others rest themselves upon their outward profession of Religion and some
general things wrought in them, and the good opinion others have of them: and
so being somewhat near the kingdom of God, they are content to rest there, as
the Israelites did near Canaan, though they never possessed it. We see many
think, there needsno more to be sure they are in a good condition, then to
hear Sermons, and abstain from gross outward prophannesse, and to be well
reputed of among the godly, etc. pleasing themselves with the show of
godliness, though as yet they deny the power of it, as having attained to
other righteousness then the righteousness of the S^ribs and Pharisees.

5. In multitudes of men, there Or 5. they (...) eu^l opinions (...) assuranc^.
are seated evil opinions about assurance: They think either it is impossible
to be had, or it is needless, or it is presumption to seek it.

6. All wicked men are hindered 6. They are lett^d by their beloved sins.
by their beloved sins, which they are not willing to part with; but of
purpose forbear the care of heaven, that they may the more securely live in
sin.

Thus of wicked men: It is Why so^e that are godly, neglect the trial of their
estates.
true also, that many godly Christians have been, and are extremely faulty in
neglecting the trial of their estates, and their assurance: and the causes of
this negligence in them are diverse: as,

1. Some are so much misled 1. Evil opinions.
by the surmises of their own hearts, that they think that assurance would
breed security, and that it is a better way to keep their own hearts humble,
to be somewhat doubtful: not knowing, that unbelief is the chief cause of
slothfulness and security: and that the assurance of faith is the chief
means to purge the heart, and quiet the soul, and works effectually in all
the duties of love.

2. In the most, Ignorance of 2. Ignorance.
their own gifts and Gods promises, is the cause: for if Christians did see
distinctly; how far the Lord has brought them by his grace, and withal did
behold the evidences of their faith and hope in Gods promises, they should not
fail of comfort, and establishment of heart.

3. Smothering of doubts and temptations, is a great let in many: 3. Smothering
of doubts and temptations
diverse Christians are secretly, and daily assaulted with certain strange
doubts; which, if they did propound, and get sound answer unto their hearts,
would heal within them, and the work of faith prosper.

4. Some Christians are kept They are wicked o uerm^ch.
without assurance, through the overmuch viewing of their own daily
infirmities in all parts of Gods service: They are wicked overmuch: whereas if
they would study those Scriptures that show how graciously the Lord stands
inclined toward his people, notwithstanding their daily wants, their hearts
would be much eased, and their minds clearly resolved to trust upon the
everlasting mercies of their God.

5. In some, the cause is found 5. Melancholy.
in the disease of their bodies: Melancholy; when it is grown to a disease, is
a most stiff and pertinacious adversary to Comfort and Assurance: it does fill
the heart with so many sad conceits and fancies, and is an humor so
unteachable, that comfort for the most part is as water spilt upon the ground:
And the more difficult it is to remove this let, because usually the parties
possessed by this humor, are so far from seeking help, that they will not be
persuaded that they are troubled with any such disease.

6. Some Christians are hindered 6. Passions.
by their own Passions; they are so froward and unquiet in their dispositions,
that their hearts are daily lifted off from the benefit of settled assurance, by
their own habitual discont^nts. Frowardnes is a mischievous distemp^r, that
weakens both body and mind; and assurance and strength of faith, seldom dwells
in an unquiet mind.

7. Others want assurance, because 7. Neglect of the means.
they neglect the means of assurance: they do not try all things, and keep
that which is good; or they call not upon God daily, fervently, and constantly,
to give them the spirit of revelation, to show them the hope of their calling,
and their glorious inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19.

8. A barren life is an uncomfortable 8. A barren life. 1 Cor. 15. 58
life: and contrariwise, to abound in good works, has steadfastness, and a
secret rest of heart, as an inseperable companion of it.

9. The love of earthly things 9. Too much love of earthly things.
is another great impediment. Many professors have their thoughts and cares so
eaten up with worldliness, that they cannot seriously seek Gods Kingdom, nor
constantly hold out in any course for the attainement of assurance. This degree
of faith requires some degree of the contempt of the world.

10. In some, there lodges some 10. Secret sin.
secret sin, which they know, and do not purge themselves for, and does daily
prevail in them; and this either keeps out Faith, or keeps it down in the
cradle, that it can get no strength. When I say, secret sins, I mean, secret
from others, not from themselves. For sins of mere ignorance God does not
scourge in his servants so, as to withhold his graces from them.

CHAP. I.
Containing the signs of open wicked men.

THe trial of the estates of all sorts of Christians, may be perform^d by
examining themselves by two sorts of signs; some are such as describe the
wicked man, and some such as describe the godly man; and of the trial of the
godly man; I have entreated before. Wicked me^ in the Church are not all of a
sort: for some are manifestly profane and careless of the Kingdom of God;
and some are in outward show, such as profess the seeking of Gods Kingdom,
but yet in deed and in heart are without God and without Christ, and such are
all Hypocrites. Wicked men of the first sort, are discerned by such marks as
these: and so he is a wicked man,

1. That can spend whole days 1 He is a wicked ^an, 1 That lives without God.
or weeks without seeking after God, or Christ; that accounts it no part of
his care to look after God, or any secret acquaintance or communion with God
in Jesus Christ; that lives, as the Apostle says, without God, and without
Christ, and therefore without hope in the world; that seldom or never thinks
seriously of God, Ephesians. 2. 12.

2. That continually shuns and (...) That auoids the society of the godly
strives to avoid the company and society of such as fear God, and in his
heart loves not such as be religious, and makes conscience of their ways.
This man is certainly in darkness, that hates Gods children, as the Apostle
John often shows in his first Epistle; especial when he hates them, because
they follow goodness.

3. That sauors only the things 3. That savors only earthly things.
of the slesh, that finds a taste and relish only in earthlythings, that
places all his contentment in the things of this life, Romans 8. 5. 1 Ioh. 2. 15.

4. That is incapable and unteachable 4. That i^, discernes not the things of
God.
in the things of God and godliness, having the Gospel and the glory of
Religion hid from his heart, so as he sees nothing in the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ to be admired and desired of him; and when he enioyes the means, cannot
discern the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

5. That willingly haunts with 5. That sorts with wicked men.
wicked and profane persons, and delights in them, and chooses them for the
companions of his life, Psalm. 50. 2 Cor. 5. 11.

6. That of malice persecuteth, 6 Tha^ of malice persecuteth the truth.
and reproacheth, and despiteth the known truth, speaking evil of the good
way of God, which he himself has known and ackhowledged before, Hebrews 10.

7. That has in him thoughts 7. That allows himself in Atheistical thoughts.
of Atheism reigning, concerning vile things of God, without sorrow or trouble
of heart for them, or rather desiring he could prove them to be true, wishing
there were no God at all, Psalm 14. 1.

8 That calls not upon the 8 That calls not upon God.
Name of the Lord, who is such a one as wholly neglects this service of God in
himself and his Family, unless it be for fashion sake, without care or
understanding, Psalm. 14. 4.

9 That was never chastened 9 That is not chastened of God.
of the Lord: for they are bastards and not sons, Heb. 12. 7, 8.

10 That can spend his days 10 That never examines himself ^n known sins.
without examining himself, whether Jesus Christ be in him or not: that minds
it not to be sure, that he is in the Faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Ioh. 17. 3.

11 That flattereth himself in 11 That applaudes himself in known sin.
his own eyes, when he is threatened for sin, and blesses himself in his
heart, when his iniquity is found worthy to be hated, Psalm. 36. 1, 2. Deuteronomy. 29.
19.

12 That secretly lothes, and 12. That lothes the Word of God constantly.
contemnes, and in his heart constantly frets at the Word, when it is
conscionably and powerfully preached: that finds in the good Word of God a
deadly savor, 2. Cor. 2. 15, 16.

13 That lives in hypocrisy, 13. That allows himself in hypocrisy.
and knows he dissembles constantly in the service of God, and does not desire
to leave it, nor take any course to resist it, or humble his soul in secret
for it.

14 That desires not the knowledge 14. That refuses knowledge
of Gods ways, and seriously accounts good courses to be unprofitable courses,
Job 21. 14, 15, 16.

15 That having the hand of 15. That in great distresses humbles not himself.
God upon him, and lives in sorrow and misery, and yet never seeks to God,
nor humbles his soul before God, nor acknowledges Gods hand; or if he do,
does not labor to make his peace with God, 2. Cor. 7. 10. Ier. 5. 2, 3.

16. That cannot be touched 16. That care not for the afflictions of the godly.
with compassion, or care for the afflictions of the Church and people of God,
Amos 6. 5. and is merciless, Math. 25. James 2. 13 1 John 3.

17. That has no desire to be 17. That will not understand to do good
taught to do good, but either cares not for Heaven and godliness, or thinks
himself wise enough to find the way without asking, Psalm 36. 1, 3.

18. That is not affected with 18. That is ^esensible of spiritual judgments.
fear or sorrow under spiritual judgments; such as the famine of the Word,
absence of God, hardness of heart, or the like.

19. That is a customary swearer, 19. That is an ordinary swearer.
and repents not of it: God threatens he will not justify such offenders, but
pursue them as his enemies, Commandment 3.

20. That makes not conscience 20. That is careless of Gods Sabbath.
to keep Gods Sabbath: for God has given the Sabbath as a sign between him
and the people in the point of their Sanctification: so, he that cares not to
profane the Sabbath, by that sign is known to be none of Gods people,
Exodus 31.

21. That not only commits 21. That is a worker of iniquity
sins against his knowledge, but serves sin, and is a worker of iniquity,
loves it, defends it, and resolves to continue in it, and places his felicity
in it.

22. That believes not in the Son 22. That believes not in Christ.
of God: as they do not, that either deny his coming in the flesh, or his
person, or his offices, or else rest not upon him for life and happiness,
Math. 16. John 3 17. 1 John 4. 10.

23. That in any one particular 23. That hates to be reformed.
sin, knowing it to be a sin, hates to be reformed, Psalm 50. 17.

24 That has not the Spirit 24. That has not the Spirit of Christ.
of Christ. For if a man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his,
Romans 8. 9.

25 That cannot forgive his 25. That cannot forgive his enemies.
enemies, nor pray for them that hate him, and wrong him, Mat. 6. For if men
forgive not unto men their trespasses, neither will God forgive them their
sins, as is likewise showed by the parable, Math. 18. 32.

26 That loves not God, and 26. That loves not God.
shows it,

First, by an habitual forgetfulness of God, of which before.

Secondly, By his unwillingness to do Gods work, his commandments being
always grievous unto him, and it seems evil unto him to serve the Lord, 1
Ioh. 5. 3.

Thirdly, By insensiblenesse of the dishonor of God.

Fourthly, By loving his pleasures, or profits more then God.

27. That fears not God, and 27. That ^ares not God.
shows it,

First, By not caring for Gods displeasure, so he might escape Gods punishment.

Secondly, By coming into Gods presence constantly, without any awefull regard
of Gods Majesty.

Thirdly, By sinning in secret with all security, being only careful to avoid
the eyes of men.

Fourthly, By contempt of the threatening of God in his Word.

28. That is dead in trespasses ^8. That is dead in sin.
and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. that can be guilty of many and monstrous crimes,
and as if he were a dead man, continues under the burden of them without
sorrow, or fear, or remorse, or care of amendment, Ephesians. 2. 1.

29 The Apostle Paul puts a 29. That is guilty of any of his sins in the
Apostles Catalogue.
number of offenders in diverse gross sins, into a Catalogue, and pronounces
of them all, that without repentance they cannot inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, the Effeminate,
Sodomites, Thieves Covetous persons, Drunkards, Reuilers, and Extortioners: and
so in the Galatians.

30. All those that cannot repent, 30. That cannot repent.
that is, such as cannot pray, nor confess their sins to God, nor bewail
them, nor any way set themselves soundly to reform them.

CHAP. II.
Containing the signs of Hypocrites.

THus of the marks of notorious and wicked men. The signs by which Hypocrites
may be known, follow; and these are of two sorts: Two sorts of these signs.


First, Such as describe them so, that themselves may thereby know themselves.

Secondly, Such as give occasion to men to fear their soundness, and show,
that they are likely to fall away, though for the present they make show and
profession of religion, and do escape much of that filthiness, which is in
the outward lives of others.

For the first, these are the signs of an hypocrite.

1. To profess Gods Covenant (...) Signs of hypocrisy.
with his month; and deny it in his works, Psalm. 50. 16.

2. To do his works of purpose to be seen of men, when he might conceal the
knowledge of them, and does this of purpose, chiefly because he would have the
praise and applause of men, not seeking the approbation, or praised of God,
Mat. 6. Romans 2. 29.

3. To make clean the outside of the platter, and let the inside be foul;
To be like a painted sepulcher: To avoid apparent outward faults, and yet to
harbor a world of wickedness in his heart, without any true repentance for
it, Math. 23.

4. To censure small matters in others, and be guilty of great crimes
himself: To see a moate in another men's eye, and not care to cast out the
beam in his own eyes, Mat. 7.

5. To pretend care of piety toward God, and yet be unmerciful to men; or
neglect works of mercy to the poor, that he is able to do, and yet
unconscionably omits it, Iam. 1. 26.

6. To require many things of others in their practice, and yet make no
conscience of observing them in his own practice: To bind heavy burdens upon
other men's shoulders, and not to touch them with his own finger, Math. 23.

7. To arrogate to himself the titles of godliness, and yet envy and hate
godliness in others, and to endeavor to hinder them, o^ opposethem, that
would enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat, 23.

To praise the dead, or the absent servants of God, and yet despise and
persecute such of Gods faithful servants, as are set over them, and to disobey
them, Mat. 23.

9. To speak fair to men's faces, and behind their backs to revile and
slander them.

10 To draw near to God with his lips, when his heart is far from him: In the
daily service of God to allow himself in the habit of distractions, making no
conscience to worship God in his spirit, Esa. 29. 13.

11. Never in secret to make conscience of prayer to God; and not to cry to
God, except it be in sickness, or great adversity; disregarding prayer in
health and prosperity, Job Chap. 27. ver. 9, 10.

12. With profaneness to neglect Gods commandments, and to be only diligent
to urge and observe men's precepts, or the traditions of men, Mat. 15.

13. To punish, or reprove sin in some, because he hates them; or to forbear
reproves or punishments of others, because he fears or favors them.

CHAP. III.
Containing the signs of such as are likely to be unsound, and will not hold
out.

THus of the first sort of signs of hypocrites: Now follow such probable
signs of hypocrites, as men may take notice of, and do usually foreshew their
falling away at length, though for the present they make great shows. Amongst
them then that 16 Signs of an unsound Professor.
make profession of religion above the common sort of people; these are likely
to be unsound, and not to hold out.

1. That join not themselves to Gods people, but forbear constantly, or
forsake apparently their fellowship, Hebrews 10. 24, 25.

2. That are not careful and desirous to reform their households, and to set
up Gods worship in their Families; that are good abroad, but practice not
godliness at home.

3. That customarily live in any sin known to be so to themselves, without
sorrow or amendment, whether it be in their particular calling, or general
conversation.

4. That constantly and with delight choose out ungodly men to be their chief
companions and friends.

5. That are wilful in the use of the vanities of the world, and will not be
reclaimed from their excesses, or offenses that way.

6. That are stiffenecked, and will not abide reproof and admonition, but show
themselves conceited, and selfe-willed.

7. That are full of rash zeal, and show it by passions, and violent furies
about lesser matters, and yet have some notable faults in themselves, which
they make no conscience of.

8. That are swift to speak, and full of words, and forward to express their
masterlike conceits, when they neither have calling, nor fitness, nor power of
the holy Ghost. The language of an humble Christian, that has Note.
true grace, differs wonderfully from the empty and impertinent language of an
hypocrite, who is seldom assisted with efficacy of matter.

9. That lives inordinately being idle, and attends not the labors of a
lawful calling, that is found ordinarily in his neighbors house, and is
apparently negligent and slothful in the duties of his calling.

10. That is more vexed for want of respect from others, then for his own
disabilities in his conversation.

11. That seems glad of the company of some that fear God, but cannot abide
others, either for the meandness of their place, or because the world
contemnes them, (though without cause, and though there be no just exception
against their sincerity.) They that have religion in respect of persons, love
not any for religion sake.

12. That lives customarily in the sin of swearing, or lying.

13. That is careless of the sanctification of Gods Sabbath.

14. That has had no manner of affliction of spirit for particular sins.

15. That is perti^acious in the ^fence of gainefull and delightful sins.

16. That confirms himself in the customary neglect of some of Gods
ordinances, either public, or private.

CHAP. IIII.
Showing unto the wicked the hope to be saved, if the fault be not in himself.

HItherto of the signs of wicked men, who must be persuaded to abide the
trial without despair; for the signs do not show them, that they cannot be
saved; but only, that for the present they are not in the estate of salvation
actually, which though it may, and ought to be grievous unto them, to consider
in what fearful misery and sin they live in: yet they have reason to know
and believe, that they may be saved as well as others: yea the acknowledgeme^t
of their misery is one step to salvation.

Now that wicked men may not die, but take a course to be saved, two things
are by them to be attained; first, the arguments Arguments of hope.
of hope, that prove they may be saved, and that there is remedi^ for their
misery. Secondly, the rules, that show them what they must do, which being
done, they may be certain of their salvation.

For the first, that they may be saved, these things may hopefully assure^

1. That God has sworn, that 1 Gods oath.
he desires not that the wicked should die, but rather that he should turn
from his ^uill (...), ^d live, Ez^k. 18. 31.

2. That God has with singular 2 Gods Patience.
patience borne with him all this while, and has not laid him beneath for all
his sins, w^o long since deserved hell; and the Lord has taught it too, that
he is patience, that men might repent and be saved, Romans 2. 4. 2 Peter 3. 9.

3. That God offers his grace to 3. The offer of grace to al
all, and has made no exception against any particular man, and therefore why
should thou except thy self from salvation, when Gods grace is tendered to
thee as well as others? God sends his Gospel to every creature, even to all
Nations, Mark Chap. 16. ver. 15.

4. That God has sent his own Son to be a sufficient sacrifice 4.
Suffi^ient satisfaction made by C^st.
and propitiation for the sins of men. He is the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world, John 1. Romans 3. 25. 1 John 2. 1. and in him God
is well pleased, and would have all men know, that he is content to take
satisfaction from Christ, Math. 3. 17.

5. That God has placed them 5. The means continued.
in the visible Church, and does yet continue the mean^s that is able to save
their souls, Acts 20. 32. Iam. 1. 21.

6. That God has declared 6. One only sin unpardonable
himself concerning sin, that there is one only sin that in it self is
simply unpardonable: all the rest may be forgiven.

7. That God has saved as 7. As gr^t sinners saved.
great sinners as they, such as were Manasses, Mary Magdalen, David, Paul: Many
amongst the Corinthians were fornicators, drunkards, raylers, and the like, yet
were justified, sanctified, and saved, 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. And these have
obtained mercy, that in them Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering,
for a pattern to them which should afterward bel^eue to everlasting life, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 16.

CHAP. V.
Shows how faith may be gotten.

THE rules of directions follow. This then is the question: What should a man
do that he may be sure of his salvation, the man, I say, that for the present
does not find the grace of Christ in his heart? I answer: That his principal
care must be to use, all means to get the graces of the godly Christian formed
in his heart: And herein the Lord has showed unto men singular mercy, that as
he has showed ways in his Word; how his servants may discern the graces,
that are so many signs and pledges of Gods love, and their own salvation; so
has he in the same word laid down clear directions, that show how every
grace may be attained, and formed, and nourished in the hearts of men.

And first I will begin with Faith; And the question is, What Quest.
should a man do that he might attain Faith?

He that would believe, must Answ.
observe these rules:

1. He must in the first place 1. He must consider of Gods promises.
betake himself to Gods promises: For without the promise of grace, it is
impossible Faith should ever be formed aright in a man, he must labor to see
what the Lord says distinctly unto sinners: I will instance in that one
promise, Ioh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have life
everlasting. Now his care must be, seriously to mark, and clearly to
understand Gods meaning, which in this promise is to assure salvation to any in
the world that will believe 2. He must take notice of Gods commandment to
believe.
in Christ.

2. He must then consider Gods commandment concerning faith, that God does
require him to believe; and is so far from being displeased with him for
believing in Christ, that for this cause he will damn him in hell if he
believe not, John 3. 18. 1. John 3. 23. He does as exactly require us to rely
upon this course of salvation by Jesus Christ, as he does require any thing of
us in the moral Law: and as we ought not to swear, or commit adultery, or
steal; so ought we not to dare to live without belief in Jesus Christ.

3. He must pray heartily to 3. He must pray for faith.
God, to give him a heart to believe, and to form faith in him; for faith is
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. He should pray over the promises, and beseech God
to incline his heart to rest upon them, as the best treasures in the world: cry
unto the Lord, Lord, help my 3. He must renounce his own righteousness.
unbelief.

4. He must absolutely lay aside all thought of his own righteousness by the
works of the Law, and look only to Jesus Christ, and the righteousness in
him, else he will fail of the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3.

5. He must wait upon the 5. He must wait upon the Word preached.
powerful preaching of the Gospel, as the only outward ordinary means to
beget faith, offering his soul daily unto God, and attending to the Word of
God, ready to obey the motions of the Spirit, knocking at the door of his
heart in the ministry of the Word, knowing that from this ordinance of God,
he is to expect the gift of faith: he should betake himself to it, with
resolution to wait with daily expectation, till the Lord be pleased to send
the Holy Ghost into his heart. And this is a general rule for this and all
other graces of the Spirit: as men love their own souls, so they must provide
to live where the Word of God is preached constantly, and in the power of it:
for from thence they shall receive unspeakable help and furtherance in all
the ways of God, Romans 10. 14.

CHAP. VI.
Showing how true humiliation may be attained.

THus of Faith. In the next place, he must labor for true and sound
humiliation for his sins; and to this end he must distinctly strive to get
formed in him two things: 1. poverty of spirit; 2. godly sorrow: for to these
two belong all the branches of true humiliation.

For the attaining of spiritual poverty, these rules are of great use.

First, make a Catalogue of thy 1 Gather a Catalogue of thy sins, either by
memory.
sins, which thou m^yest ^o, either by memory or by book. By memory thus:
Go aside, set thy soul before the Lord, as if thou werest presently to be
judged of him; call to mind particularly whatsoever thou can remember by thy
self: consider thy want, thy omissions, and commissions of evil, in youth or
riper age, in heart or life, in things that concorne God, or man, or thy own
soul, and disposition, thoughts, affections, words or deeds. Thou may then
see an army of rebellious evils thou have been guilty of. By book thus:
Procure thee the labor of Or by book.
some reverend Divine, that has briefly gathered the sins of every
commandment; and from thence gather out so many sins as thou know by thy
self that thou have been guilty of: lay those sins daily before thy
conscience, and consider how many ways thou have made thy self guilty.

Secondly, consider then the 2. Consider Gods justice.
justice of God, how he hates all sin; which thou may be assured of, if
thou remember how he plagued our first parents, the old world, Sodom and
Gomorrha; how fearfully he neglected the Gentiles, cast off the Jews; yea how
he spared not his own Son Jesus Christ, when he became a surety for other
men's sins.

Thirdly, think of the terrible 3 Think of his threatenings.
woes, and threatenings, and curses which are denounced every where in Scripture
against such offenses as thou art guilty of.

Fourthly, force upon thy self 4 Remember thy latter end.
the remembrance of thy latter end, and thy appearance before the tribunal
seat of Christ, to receive according to all that thou have done in thy flesh.

Fifthly, observe with what judgment the Lord every day 5. Observe Gods judge
ments upon the wicked
fights against wicked men in all parts of the world, sometimes by common
plagues, sometimes by special and particular calamities.

Sixthly, above all things, mark 6. Especially Gods goodness to thee.
with all thy heart Gods goodness to thee in particular, in enduring all this
at thy hands, his blessings, of all sorts daily bestowed upon thee, chiefly
his mercy offered to thee in Jesus Christ, that can be content to forgive thee
all thy debts, so thou be sorry and weary of offending. Nothing can more
break thy heart, then to observe how God deals with thee, even with thee in
particular, that have deserved so much evil at his hands.

Seventhly, Try thy self by a 7. Try thy self by the signs.
particular examination of thine own estate, by every particular of the signs
of Gods children, and then thou may see, what a poor creature thou art,
what show soever thou make in the world, and what natural gifts or praises
soever thou have: for then thou shall find how exceeding empty thy heart is of
solid gifts and the best graces, and that many a poor creature, that makes
little show in the world, has an heart better graced by far then thine.

Eighthly, thou must beg heartily 8. Beg an humble heart of God.
an humble heart of God, and a greater discerning of thine own vileness. The
Lord will be sought unto, and he is ready to be found if thou seek him
constantly and diligently. It is not a small work to break the pride and
stoninesse of thy heart: it needs power from above.

Ninthly, Pruoide to live, if it 9. Live under (...) searching ministry.
may be, under a forceable ministry, where thou may hear such doctrine
daily as will search thy heart, and ransacke thy life, where thou may feel
the Word of God go down into thy heart and reins.

Tenthly, Mark what things 10. W^tch against the things ^hou art naturally
proud of
they are, which by nature thou art proud of, and labor seriously both by
arguments and restraint, to alienate thy affection from them: In particular,
take heed of the snare that is in gay Clothes, delicious fare, worldly titles,
and the like.

Eleuenthly, Shun and avoid 11 Avoid the flatterer.
with detestation the flatterer, and seek unto thee a righteous companion,
that may smite thee for thy fallings, and reprove thee, and not hate thee in
his heart.

Twelfthly, Labor to keep in thy memory and thoughts, 12 Think still of some
of thy worst fruits.
six, or eight, or more, or fewer of thy faults, that thou would be more
ashamed of, and have more offended in, and compel thy self daily to remember
them: this will wonderfully do thee good, and tame thy pride, and make thee
more meek, and more tractable, and merciful all the day after thou have duly
thought of them.

Thus of the way how to get thy spirit to be truly poor and humble.

The next question is, What a man should do to get a soft heart Quest.
and true godly sorrow, that he might be able to mourn for his sins before
God.

1 He must first consider of Answ. 1 Consider Gods promise about a soft heart
Gods promises, who has bound himself by covenant to take away the stony
heart, and give an heart of flesh unto them that seek unto him for it, Ezech.
36. 16.

2 He must daily in the best 2 Daily confess thy sins to God, and beg
sorrow.
words he can, keep a constant course in the confession of his sins before
God, begging of God with all importunity this mercy, that he would melt and
soften his heart; and resolve, that he would never stand before the Lord, but
he would remember this petition always judging himself, giving glory to God.
It may be the Lord will hear at the first or second time of prayer: but if he
do not, thou must resolve to watch and pray still, without limiting God to the
time of effecting thy desire, as knowing that it ought not to seem grievous
unto thee, that the Lord does not presently work what thou prayest for,
considering how long the Lord has called upon thee, and thou did not
answer; and withal, the Lord is well pleased with these preparations in thy
heart, and excepts thy endeavor to mourn, because thou can not mourn.

3 He must observe how the 3 Be thankful for every mercy in prayer.
Lord deals with him in prayer, and be sure with all thankfulness to
acknowledge any mercy God shows him in prayer; as if he make him willing to
pray, or give him words in prayer, or let him feel any joy in the time of
prayer, or that he find his heart in any degree to melt: he should be
wonderful thankful, if he can get but one tear in prayer, or that he find
his heart in any degree to melt; and this observation of Gods goodness letting
him know, that he regards his particular requests, will melt his heart indeed
further, and perhap^ set him all on a flame in desires to praise God, and to
abase himself even to the dust before the Lord, Hos. 14. 3. 1. These. 5. 18.

4. That rule of the Apostle 4 Acknowledge thy faults to other.
James is sometimes of singular use in this case of breeding softness of
heart, and that is, acknowledging your sins one to another: when in secret
we make our moanes to wise and merciful Christians, and shame ourselves for
our special offenses, it many times has melting of heart joined with it: so
as that heart, that before seemed hardened and dry, now easily dissolues into
tears, Iam. 5. 16.

5. To go into the house of 5 Go into the house of mourning.
mourning, may be in this case profitable; resort to such as be in sorrow for
the hand of God upon them, especialy such as mourn through the affliction of
their spirits: converse with humble and tenderhearted Christians. Ecc. 7 2.

6. ^n all the services of God be 6 ^e heed of distraction in God^ service.
sure to draw near to God, and keep thy mind from distraction and hypocrisy:
The Sun cannot have such force to melt the wax, as the beams of Gods presence
have to melt the heart, James 4. 6, 7, 3.

7. The Apostle Paul being a 7 Study the tenth commanment.
sturdy Pharisee, had his heart beaten to power with the fear of the tenth
Commandment, that told him, He must not lust. The knowledge and consideration
of the abundance of sinneguiltinesse he has drawn upon himself by the inward
fruits of his evil nature, killed him outright, brake his pride, and mortified
him, as he at large repeates, Romans 7.

8 Remember the passion of thy 8 Remember the sorrows of Christ for thy sin.
Savior, the poverty, banishment, ignominy, temptations; the apprehension,
forsaking, arraignment, condemning, and cruel death which he suffered for thy
sins: Look upon him that was pierced for thy sake, Zach. 12. 10.

9. If of thy self thou can not 9. Get others to pray for thee.
yet attain unto sorrow for thy sins, get some godly Christian, that is endued
with the gift of prayer, to join with thee in private, that so the Lord may
be pleased to grant in Heaven, what we of him do ask on earth.

10. Lastly, If all other means fail, then set a day a part by fasting; 10.
Use fasting.
for the day of a fast was called the day of afflicting or humbling the soul,
Leu. 16. 29. both because it was the maine duty to be driven after on that
day, and besides, because the Lord usually did bless his own ordinance so, as
he gave an humbled heart to those that sought it of him.

CHAP. VII.
Showing how the Spirit of adoption may be attained, and also how the several
gifts of the Spirit may be framed in us.

THus of humiliation: If follows that I show how he may attain to the other
sacred gifts which are marks of a godly man: as in the first sort of gifts,
how he may attain to the love of the Word, the gift of Prayer, the f^are of
God, the love of his enemies, and the desire of the coming of Christ: But
before I enter vponthese, it is necessary to show him how he may attain the
Spirit of Adoption, which is necessary for these and al other graces

And concerning the Spirit of Adoption, if any ask how it may Quest. How the
Spirit of Adoption may be had.
be attained: Or rather how it may be stirred up in us, that we may feel his
working in us?

I answer, That he is had and Answ. 1 He must pray for it
stirred up by invocation. God is pleased to declare himself willing, and
ready to bestow his Holy Spirit upon men, If they ask him of him by hearty
prayer. He that has given us his Son, will not deny us the Spirit of his
Son, to be given into our hearts, Gal. 4. 6. And this our Savior Christ
assures unto us in the Parable, Luke 11.

9. And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you: Seek, and ye shall
find. Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

10. For every one that ask^th, receives; and he that seeks, find^th* and
to him that knocks, it shall be opened.

11. If a Son shall ask Bread of any of you that is a Father, will he give
him a Stone? Or if he ask a Fish, will he for a Fish, give him a Serpent?

12. Or if he ask an Egg, will he give him a Scorpion?

13 If ye then, which are evil, can give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Ghost to them that desire
him?

2 We must wait upon the 2 Wait upon preaching.
preaching of the Gospel, where the Holy Ghost usually falls upon the hearts of
men.

3 When we feel the motions 3 Cherish the motions of the Spirit.
of the Spirit knocking at our hearts, or any way surprising us, we must with
all readiness open the doors of our hearts, that the King of Glory by hi^
Spirit may enter into us.

The next question is then, Quest. How we may get a love to the Word.
What we should do to get and preserve in us the constant love to the Word?

1 The answer is, First, That we should seek to settle our selves Answ. 1
S^ttle v^der a powerful mi isterie.
under the powerful preaching of the Word; even such a ministry, as does set
out the glory of the truth* and of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

2 We must make conscience 2 Pray God to quicken thee.
of it to pray unto God to quicken us, and inflame our hearts to the love of
his Laws, as David often did, Psa. 119.

3 Take heed of excessive cares, 3 Take heed of worldly cares.
and the ouer-reaching of desires in the emploiments of the world, or the
immoderate use of worldly delights; for those choke the seed of the Word, and
alienate the affections from it; and so does any gross or beloved sin, Heb. 3.
Math. 13.

4 Take heed also of personal 4 And of personal discord with such as fear
God.
discord with such as fear God, especially with thy Teachers; for this does by
secret degrees make the heart careless and negligent, and in some things
wilful; and if it be not looked to in time, will bring men from the liking of
the Word, as they have been drawn from the liking of such as love the Word.

5 Take heed of ungodly company: 5 And of ungodly company
For in such company is quenched the sparkles of liking, when they are
kindled; yea, and the flames of affection are much dulled, in whom they are
best excited, Psalm. 119. 115.

6. Such as find some beginnings 6. And of neglect of the increase thereof.
of desire after the Word, and liking to it, must take heed, that they estrange
not themselves from the exercises thereof: For if they hear, or read but now
and then; either the heart will never be thoroughly heated, or if it be, it
will easily wax cold again: and yet herein some are to be warned to take
heed of disordered excess; for that will breed dullness, as well Or excess.
as neglect: As when they will read daily for diverse hours; or when they
provide unto themselves an heap of Teachers, as some that live in great
Cities, think it Religion to hear all sorts of men, and all the Sermons can
be come unto: As if the power of godliness lay only in the use of the means
of godliness.

7. We must practice what we 7. Practice what thou hear.
hear, and labor to show forth the fruit of the doctrine. He that would be
in love with husbandry, must sow his seed in his ground, and then the gain of
the Harvest will still allure him to like the Trade. If we be fruitless
hearers of the Word, we cannot love it; or if we do, it will be but for a
flash, or small time.

Thus of the love to the Word.

He that would learn to pray, To attain the gift of prayer. 1. Pray God to
teach thee.
must follow these directions:

1. He must go to God in the Name of Christ, and beseech him to give him
words, and by his Spirit teach him to pray. It is God only can make a man
speak a pure Language; For he only can instruct the heart of man, and endue
it with this heavenly gift, Romans 8. 26, Ephesians 6. 18.

2 It will much help him to (...) Join w^h such as can pray
join himself to such as call upon the N^me of the Lord with a pure heart,
^specially in the days of their humiliation, 2 Timothy 2. 22.

3 There are three distinct things: which a man may with 3 How he ^y (...)
himself in euer^ part of prayer.
singular profit propound unto himself in his prayers: Conf^ssion of sins:
Petition for grace: and thanksgiving for mercies received. N^w the weakest
Christian may be, through Gods bl^ssing, comfortably furnished for his own
particular, if he take such a come as this; to go aside, and with all s^cie
and attention of heart before the Lord, ask himself these three Questions.

1 What sins have I committed, Three Questions.
which either now do trouble me, or if I were to dye, would make me afraid?
Let him set them down in a paper, or in his memory distinctly, till he can
can bethink himself of no more. It is no great matter for the order how he
sets them down, so he be sure he have the chief sins, in which he daily
offends, or has offended.

2 What would I have the Lord do for me, if I might have what I wish? let him
set the particulars down, till he can remember no more. As for example, I
would have him forgive me my sins, and I would have him give me strength
against such and such sins, and I would have him give me faith and assurance;
and I would have him give me Heaven when I dye; and so go on with all the
things he feels a desire in his heart to seek of God, till he can remember no
more: and if at any other time he remember some special thing, which he
would further have, which he has not in his Catalogue, let him set it down,
as from time to time he sees cause.

3 What special favors has God showed to me, which I see I ought to take
special notice of? Let him set them down distinctly, whether they be
deliverances, or such and such spiritual or outward mercis, preserving the
memory principally of the chiefest of them.

Now when he has thus furnished these three heads with things that in
particular concern himself, they being all matters of weight, he must now
carry these things, or the chief of them in his mind, and frame his heart to
speak to God in the best words he can get, to signify his detestation of
those sins, his humble requests for those graces, and his unfeigned
thankfulness for those blessings. Howsoever he may be rude or imperfect in
his Language about these at the first, yet exercise will bring him to a
ripeness; and by this course he shall be sure to speak of things that
concern himself nearly; and that God which has taught Parents to regard the
imperfect language of their little Children when they begin to speak unto them,
will himself much more delight to hear the desires of his Servants, that are
grieved, that they cannot speak in a better sort unto him. The profit and
comfort of this course will appear by experience to be exceeding great:
besides it is an easy way, where there is in any a true desire to be at the
pains to learn this Language of speaking to God by prayer; and Gods Spirit
will help and teach the poor Christian, and draw his petitions for him, and
prompt him both with words and affections: And the Christian must know this,
that when he has confessed his sins, and showed what he should have God
do for him, with the best words he could in the truth of his heart, he has
made a most effectual prayer to God.

Thus of prayer.

The awefull of God, and How the fear of God may b^ ^gotten in us.
the reverent dreading of God, may be begotten and increased in us, if we
thoroughly remember and deeply ponder upon:

1. The surpassing glory, and transcendent excellency and perfection of his
Nature, his absolute purity and exact lustice, and Holiness.

2. The wonderful works of God, especially those standing miracles showed in
the hanging of this mighty earth, and those huge heaps of water in the
clouds, and the bounding of these mighty Seas, and such like.

3. His fearful threatenings of all sorts of woes against the transgressions
of men.

4. The terror of the last day, and the dreadfulnesse of death and Judgment.

5. The fearful and sudden judgments which have fallen upon wicked men;
either recorded in Scripture, or reported in Histories, or observed in
experience.

6. Especially, if we think much and seriously of the great goodness of God
to us, how he has striuen with us to overcome us with his mercies.

Thus of the fear of God. How love to our enemies may be excited.


We should strive to stir up in us affection and love to our very enemies, by
such considerations as these:

1. Because Christ, to whom we are infinitely bound, has expressly charged us
to look to this; That we do love our enemies; and therefore for his sake we
should deny our selves, and our own corrupt desires and affections, and strive
to show the truth of our love even toward them that hate and persecute us.

2. There is none so wicked but they have something good in them, and worthy to
be respected.

3. Our enemies do us good, though they intend it not; we ought to like the
very rod that mends us, and regard the water that washes us white, and make
much of the stone that tries us, and the glass that shows us our spots, and
not mislike the tents that search our wounds.

4. If ever God turn their hearts, they will be effectual instruments of our
praise, and Gods glory in the day of their visitation, they will not willingly
bear the shame of their own sinful oppositions.

I forbear to set down the directions for the attainement of the love of the
appearing of Christ, because I have at large handled that point in the Treatise
of the Cure of the fear of Death.

CHAP. VIII.
Thus of the directions that concern the first sort of gifts: concerning the
attainement of the other graces, the directions now follow.

AND first for the attainment How to increase saving knowledge.
of saving knowledge, and the increase of^, these directions are of excellent
use:

1. In hearing or reading the 1 He must be wise for himself.
Scriptures, he must be wise for himself, that is, mark distinctly what he
hears or reads, that may especially concern himself, Prou. (...). 12.

2 He must study those things 2 He must study only profitable things.
exactly, which most concern him, avoiding vain questions, and fruitless
contemplations, and vain ianglings, and controversies: he must especially
labor to know Gods Nature aright, and the distinct manner of Gods true
worship, how he may serve him: he must study to know his own particular
offenses, and Christ crucified as his Savior, with the benefits of his
mediation, and the necessary things that concern his own Justification,
Sanctification, and final Salvation.

3. He must redeem the time, 3. He must redeem the time.
and by forecast and order, provide so, that some time may be daily allowed for
holy studies to recover his former time lost.

4. He must enquire and take 4. He must propound^ his doubts
counsel, he must take heed of smothering his doubts, but must carefully
seek satisfaction to his conscience, as occasion arises. There is more profit
in this rule, then many Christians are aware of.

5. He must take heed of 5 He must not consult with flesh and blood.
consulting with flesh and blood: he must not regard other men's opinions, or
his own carnal reason; but resolve to give the glory to Gods Word, so as to
submit himself to what he shall find therein required to be believed, or
done, or avoided,

Other rules he may find in the directions for the private reading of the
Scriptures: as also in Rules of life.

Thus of saving Knowledge,

That thou may inflame in How the love of God may bewrought in thee.
thy heart the love of God:

1. Thou must avoid with special care, these things: 1. Thou must avoid
forgetfulness of God, and the love of the world.


First, Forgetfulness of God; Thou must not dare to go whole days, or weeks
without communion with God, or remembering his holy presence.

Secondly, the love of the World; We cannot love the Father, while our hearts
dote upon any earthly thing. Of necessity some degree of the contempt of the
world must be bred in us before we can love God.

2. We must labor for a distinct 2. Thou must study Gods praises.
knowledge of the dreadful praises of Gods Nature and Works, as they are
described in the Scriptures, or may be observed by experience. This is a
needful direction, and miserably neglected.

3. We must frequent his house; 3 Thou must frequent his house.
especially when his glory does shine in the power of his Ordinances in his
Sanctuary.

4. We should especially study 4 Thou must study Gods mercies.
the mercies of God, and all the good things he has promised, or given unto
us, that we may after a solid manner cause our hearts to know how infinitely
we stand bound to God.

5. We should observe carefully and daily, our own sinfulnes, 5Thou must
observe thy daily infirmities.
and vileness, and unworthiness: For unless we cast out self-love, we
shall never get in the true love of God.

6. We should pray much; 6 Thou must pray much.
for an holy course in prayer does breed in men a wonderful love of God; and
admiration of that fellowship, which thereby they have with God.

7. We should resort often to 7 Thou must r^sort to experienced Christians.
such as use to speak much of the praises of God, and mark the experience of
Gods wonderful providence, or the glory of his Word.

8. It will much further the 8 Thou must behave thy self lovingly toward the
godly.
love of God, to get and increase in us a loving respect of, and behavior
toward such as fear God, and bear his Image.

Thus of the love of God.

Concerning the love of the brethren, two questions may be demanded: The one,
what we must do to get a hearty love to What we must do to get the love of
the godly.
the godly: and the other, what we must do to preserve it when it is gotten.

For the first, he that would heartily be affected toward all the godly with
a brotherly love, must observe these Rules: 1 Avoid the company of the wicked.


1. He must not haunt with vicious persons, nor go with dissemblers, nor hold
needless society with such as hate godliness and godly persons, Psalm 26. 4, 5.

2. He must much meditate of Gods love to him, and of the 1. Meditate much of
Gods love to us.
great things were done by Jesus Christ, and of those rich mercies are offered
him in Christ, and of the wonderful love that God and Christ do bear to true
Christians, and how glorious they shall be in the kingdom of heaven.

The arguments taken from Gods love to us or Christ's suffering for us, are
often used in the first Epistle of John, to persuade vsto the love of the
brethren, as 1 John 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Psalm 16. 2, 3.

3. He must take notice of 3. Consider Gods Commandemet
Gods peremptory commandment, who requires this of him as one principal
duty, that he love the godly: with an utter disclaiming of him, if he do not
love them, 1 Ioh. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13.

For the second, That he would continue and increase, and abound in love.

1. He must seek, and hold, and For the preseruatlon of our love three things
must be looked to.
not forsake the fellowship that he has with the godly in the Gospel, but make
them the constant companions of his life, Heb. 10. 25.

2. When he finds his affections stirred up, he must make use of all
opportunities, by his deeds to show the fruits of his love upon all occasions
of mercy and welldoing, else affections will dye in him. The fruits of
righteousness must be sowed by practice, 1 Ioh. 3. 18. If affection be only
in show, or in words, or in the conceptions of the heart, and be not expressed
and made fast by the engagements of practice, it will much decay, if not wholly
be lost.

3. He must by all means take heed of discord with any of them, striving with
a resolution to take things in the best part, to believe all things, and endure
all things, suffering long without envy, or rejoicing in iniquity; doing all
things without reasonings or murmurings, or censuring or complaining; avoiding
vain ianglings and selfeconceitednes, begging of God an ability to bear with
the infirmities of others. See further directions about this point, in the
Rules of Life.

CHAP. IX.
Hitherto of the directions that concern the attainment of the sacred gifts of
the mind. Now it follows to show what thou must do, that in all thy ways
thou might walk uprightly, and attain unto sound sincerity of heart and
life.

HE that would walk uprightly, How sound sincerity of conversation may be
formed in thee.
or take a sound course to continue in his uprightness, must earnestly look
to these rules:

1. If thou have been guilty of any gross sin, know it is impossible thy
heart should be upright, till thou have with special repentance humbled thy
self before God for that sin; and that also by conscionable practice thou
keep thy self from the great transgression, Psalm 19. 13.

2. Thou must in a special manner watch and strive against hypocrisy, and
that intwo things chiefly: First, that in thy setting out into religion, thou
fashion not thy course more to get credit then grace. Secondly, that in Gods
service thou by all means avoid distractions, and so resist and check thy
pronenesse of heart thereunto, judging thy self seuercly, when thou so
offendest, till thou be able in some happy degree to serve God with thy
spirit as well as with thy body. The habit of dissembling with God is extremely
dangerous.

3. In thy conversation take heed of that fear full carelessness of the most
(...), showed in the known and wilful practice of sin, upon pretense that
it is but a small offense, or secret. Take heed of the sins of deceit, how
gain of all so ever they might be to thee: thou may together with
uprightness lose the kingdom of heaven, for daring so wilfully to break one
of those little commandments, Math. 5. 19. Take heed in general of a stiff
and wilful heart: they are seldom upright, that are heady and peremptory, and
hard to be persuaded, Iam. 3. 17. Prou. 21. 29. Heb. 2. 4.

4. As much as may be accustom thy heart to the observing of Gods presence;
walk, as before him, Genesis 17. 2.

5. Yield thy self over to be wholly guided by Gods Word; Without knowledge
the mind cannot be good, Prou. 19. 2. and he that walks according to this
rule, shall have peace in his heart and conscience, Gal. 6. 16. Let Gods Law be
the light for thy seete, and the lantern for thy paths. Psalm. 119. Labor
therefore to get a particular warrant for the lawfulness of thy practice in
the occasions of thy calling, either general or particular: where thou
doubtest enquire, so shall thou walk in a sure way, and delight thy self in
much peace.

6. Take heed of idleness, and provide to walk faithfully and diligently in
some honest calling of life.

7. Be sure thou hold a constant course of confession of thy sins to God,
and do it without hiding, or extenuating; judging thy self for every known
sin, and especially praying against, and resisting the sin thou art most
prone unto.

8. Be not well pleased with they self, till thou can approve thy care to
be good at home, as well as abroad; look to this rule, and take heed of
frowardness, and perverse behavior in thy family. Thou will hardly get any
comfortable evidence, that thou art sound at heart, if the usual family sins
reign in thee.

9. Thou might wonderfully advance, and establish uprightness of heart in
thee, if thou would carefully but acknowledge this honor to God in his
Word, that whenever thou did ^le ^hy conscience wounded, or smitten for any
particular offense by the word of God, that then without delay thou would in
secret (...) to God and humble thy self by confession, and from that time
forward remember to strive against that sin: And so like wise when God with
some special glory of ^is tru^ does affect thee in the hearing of some
needful duty to be done, not to dare to delay, but (...) to the obedience of
that good Word of God.

FINIS.
THE PROMISES: OR, A TREATISE SHOWING how a godly Christian may support his
heart with comfort.

Against all the distresses which by reason of any afflictions or temptations
can befall him in his life.

Containing all the most comfortable places through the whole Bible, orderly
digested.

By N. BIFIELD late Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in MIDDLESEX.



LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, and are to be sold by P. Stephens, and C.
Meredith, at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard.

1630.

TO THE MVCH Honored and right worthy, Sir William Throgmorton, Knight and
Baronet, and Sir Francis Darcie Knight: N. Bifield wishes the increase of all
Grace and happiness that, accompanies the love of the Lord Jesus in sincerity.
IF the many crosses and temptations, with which the life of all men, even the
most godly is distressed, b^ seriously weighed, and withal the great
disconsolation that too often surpriseth the hearts of most Christians, be
compassionately thought on: and if withal the singular glory of a godly mind
framed unto immovable rest, and steadfast contentment, be thoroughly conceived
of; it cannot but be manifest, that if a way may be showed how a Christian
may fill his heart with comfort in any condition he can fall into, in respect
of affliction, that such a course is profitable, and all ought to take notice
of it, and with all care and pains employ themselves about it. This by Gods
assistance upon apparent grounds of Scripture I have endeavored to show in this
Treatise, and doubt not but by experience humble and godly Christians will
find much refreshing and establishment of heart, if they apply themselves
distinctly and diligently to draw of the water of life, out of those wels of
salvation, opened for them every where in this role of Gods promises.

This Treatise I present to your Worships, and under the countenance of your
names, desire to commend it unto the Church of God: and this I am induced to do
for diverse reasons* your forwardness in the profession of sincere religion for
many years, the public service you have done in the Country in the
administration of Justice, for the encouragement of the good and reformation of
abuses* your great care from time to time to plant painful and profitable
teachers in the places of your abode, together with the excellent gifts with
which God has furnished your minds, deserve to be freely and publicly
acknowledged in the Church of God; and in mine own particular I have been so
many ways obliged, that with much gladness I embrace this occasion, to let
the world know my desire to be thankful for the many helps and furtherances my
ministry has received from the countenance and endeavors of both your
Worships, as occasion ^h at any time bin offered. Desiring your acceptance
hereof, and praying God to preserve you in his fear without offense, till the
day of Christ, and to enlarge in you the desire and power of weldoing in all
things, I end and rest, Isleworth, Octo. 161^.

Your Worships in the service of Jesus Christ to be co^anded, N. Bifield.

The chief Contents of this Book.
CHAP. I.
THE drist of the whole book is, to show abundant comfort against any
distress. p. 282. Two things taken for granted. viz. both the godly man shall
be distressed and also that comfort may be had in any distress. p. 284. The
worth of those promises. p. 283. 284. To whom the promises belong. p. 284. The
use they will serve for being learned. p. 255. 286. The infallibility of those
promises proved by 13. arguments. p. 288. to 293. The promises sealed four
ways. p. 291. Six rules to be observed if we will profit by the promises. p.
293. 294.
CHAP. II.
Three sorts of promises. p. 295. Sorts of afflictions in which we need
comfort. p. 296. 297. 298.
CHAP. III.
12. Privileges of the godly. p. 300. to 308.
CHAP. IIII.
What is meant by outward afflictions. p. 309. 10. Arguments of consolation to
support us against outward afflictions. p. 3^0. to 319.
CHAP. V.
Men need comfort against reproaches. p. 319. 12. Arguments of consolation
against reproaches. p. 320. to 328.
CHAP. VI.
Many principal objections of the godly about reproaches answered. p. 328. to
335.
CHAP. VII.
Directions in the case of reproaches. p. 335. to 336.
CHAP. VIII.
How the godly may c^fort themselves in case of adversaries. p. 336. to 343.
CHAP. IX.
3. Things taken for granted, about temptations. p. 343. 344. Satan tempts us
five ways. p. 344. 345. 3. Sorts of temptations by suggestion. p. 346. 347. 9.
Occasions of temptation. p. 347. to 35^.
CHAP. X.
How many ways a godly man may comfort himself against temptations. p. 342.
to 356. Six things in Christ comfort us against temptations. p. 353. 354. How
far forth we may pray against temptations. p. 366. How we may know that we
are not overcome of temptations. p. 356. 357.
CHAP. XI.
Two sorts of promises about infirmities. p. 35^. What is meant by (...). p.
359. 9. Arguments of consolation against our daily infirmities. p. 360. to 370.
The goodness of Gods nature showed in four^ things. p. 361, 362. Many things
comfortable in Christ. p. 363. 364. 9. Privileges about infirmities, ass^ed us
in the Word. p. 365. to 368.
CHAP. XII.
Diverse objections about our infirmities answered. p. 370. to 375. About
ignorance diverse comfortable meditations: p. 373. 374. The explication of two
excellent places of Scripture, with the sundry answers of many objections met
withal in all these places, from p. 377. to 385.
CHAP. XIII.
Many consolations to support us against the fear of falling away, taken from
the considerations, 1. Of God. p. 387. to 361. 2. Of Chri^. p. 391. 392. 4. Of
our own estate in Grace. p. 392.

CHAP. XIIII.
Three sorts of ^ost comfortable pr^ises about prayer. p. 393 to the end of the
Book.
CHAP. I.
Containing the Preface.

THe drift of this Treatise is, to show a godly Christian (who is already
assured of Gods favor, and know^s he shall have abundant happiness when h^ dies,
in Heaven) how he may support his heart with sufficient contentment against
all the miseries can assault him from the time of his conversion, till his
death. For this purpose I shall break open a Mine of Treasure. For I intend
from all parts of the book of God to select and set before thee those rich
Promises, which God has there recorded, to be as wells of comfort upon all
occasions.

Two things of necessity must be granted. The one is, That though we have
gotten the assurance of Gods favor, and freedom from the power and guilt of
our sins; yet many things will still aile us, and oppose our consolation. We
shall meet with temptations and afflictions of al sorts, reproaches, adversaries,
trouble of spirit, and such like. The other is, that there can be no such
discouragement, difficulty or affliction but in the Word of God we may have a
sure consolation or direction for it, able every way abundantly to sustain us.

But before I enter upon the unfolding of this great Role of Promises, I must
preface about five things, which tend to make us more fit to receive them.

First, it will be profitable for us to consider briefly the worth of 1 The
worth of the promises Ephesians (...) 6 9
the promises; they are called, the unsearchable riches of Christ, to assure us
that he is a very rich man that has his heart stored with the promises of God
well applied. The Apostle Peter says, that they are great, and precious
promises, P^ 4
which God has given to us. Promises in our hearts, are better then pearls or
precious st^nes in our Chests. They are the inheritance God gives to his people
in this life, and therefore they are called the heirs of promise; a greater
Romans 4.
portion then any King on earth can give to his Child. The very keeping of the
Records of these promises, was a great prerogative to the Jewish nation: and it
is accounted Romans 9.
a singular happiness for the Gentiles, that they may now partake of those
promises. Little do Ephesians. 3. 6.
we know what wrong we do to our souls, when we keep them ignorant of the
promises: and it is one of the greatest offices under the Sun, to dispense
these promises to man, (...) Tim. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 1, 2, 3

Secondly, Before I enter upon 2. To whom the promis^ belong.
the explication of the promises, I must likewise tell you, to whom they
belong, and who they are that have interest in them. For all unregenerate men,
that live in their sins without repentance, are strangers from the (...) of
Ephesians. 2. 12. Gal. 4.
promise. The children of the bondwo^an have no part in the Testament of Grace;
only they that are Christ's, have the benefit of the promises in Christ. The
children of God are the heirs of promise. Gal. 3. 22. Heb. 6. 17.
Men must have godliness, that have the promises ^ither of this life, or that to
come. In short, all those 1 Timothy 4. 8
that have repented them of their sins, and believe in Jesus Christ, may come
to these promises with large h^arts, as knowing that they read and hear that
which they have clear and full interest in.

Thirdly, Concerning the use 3. The use of the promises.
these promises may be put unto all our life long. They will drive ^way
grief, discouragement, or fears that at any time may seize upon us. They will
sweeten all ^ur afflictions. They will exceedingly nurse up and confirm our
faith: and further, they will have (...) singular use in preserving us against
the enticements of the profits, pleasures, and lusts of the world, and against
the cares of this life. Our affections are the feet of our souls, and with the
promises we may be daily shod; so as neither thorny cares prick us, nor foul
pleasures defil^ us, Ephesians. 6. The Gospel shows us still a better project, when
the Devil or the world entice us. And a true reason why many times we are not
able to resist enticements, is, because our hearts are not filled with the
promises, which else would show us so much sweetness, as all other things
would seem but base in comparison of them. When we are tempted with the
pleasures of sin, if we have not a more delightful project to offer to our
hearts, it is easy for us to be seduced. And further, these promises soundly
studied and laid up in our hearts, will breed cheerfulness of spirit, and that
contentation which makes godliness to be so great gain. And besides, they
will daily excite (...) Tim. 6. 7. 8.
in us all encouragements to well-doing; and they do also set out maruellously
the glory and splendor of Gods love, power, presence, providence, and grace
toward us. What shall I say? The promises give us even Heaven upon earth, and
set ou^ the incomparable gain of true godliness; yeaby them we approach so
near unto God, that as Peter says, By them we p^ke of (...) Pc^. ^4
the Di^ne nature.

A fourth thing which I would preface about, is, concerning the infallibility
of the promises: for that may much inflame in us the des^e to store our heart^
with 4 The infa^libilitie of the promises proved by ^waies
their (ha^ing heard of their worth) if we likewise be fully assured
concerning the certain accomplishment of all the good which is contained in
them I suppose (...) ^n doubts, but that if it could be made good, that a poor
Christian might have al those excellent things were contained in all the
promises of the Bible, he were in a matchless estate. Now there are many
things which may put us out of all doubt in that point; mark them heedfully,
for they may do thee singular good.

1 For, observe that the promises are in some Scriptures ca^d in (...) They are
all but a^ o^e promise.
the singular number, the promise: and why so? as for other reasons, so to
assure thee, it is as sure and as easy for God to fulfill all that goodness
contained in all those promises, as if they were but one only promise.

2 Consider the nature of God: (...) From the nature of God.
He cannot lie, it is impossible for him to deny his Word, he may as easily
deny himself. If God have said it, it must needs come to pass. This argument
is used in this point, Titus 1. 1, 2.

3 The antiq^ of these promises (...) From the antiquity of them.
add much to our assurance. The Apostle in T^r. (...). (...). faith, that
these promises were made before the world was: and hitherto in all this time
God never failed of one word of his goodness.

4. We have the writing of God to show for them; they are upon 4 From Gods
writing.
record in the Scripture: and shall we mistrust when we have Gods own hand to
show for it? His Word is true, and righteous altogether, Psalm. 16. 9.

5. Yea we have the oath of God 5 Fromm Gods oath
too, that by two things, in which it is impossible for God to chang^, the
heirs of promise might have abundant consolation, whenever they make
recourse unto the promises, Heb. 6. 17, 18.

6 We have these promises 9 From the messengers sent about them.
preached unto us by Ambassadors sent of purpose, at the com^andement of God,
who has enjoined them to make it manifest, that God will be as good as his
word in all those, Tit. 1. 3. 7 From the ministry of Christ him self.


7. Yea, Christ Jesus himself did employ his ministry, to assure and confirm
the promises made before to the Fathers, as the Apostle shows, Rem. 15. 8. 8
From the death of the Testator.


Yet more, we have the blood of Christ, and the death of the Testator to
confirm this New Testament, and all the promises contained therein, Hebr. 9.
16. so as in Christ they are now all, Yea and Amen: there can be no nay nor
denial of them: they well may be now pleaded in any Court of the Justice of
God.

6 The Ano^uting that is upon 9 From our Ano^uting.
us, may assure us, and establish us. Was there ever any king anointed of God
to be a King, that made doubt of the kingdom? why the anointing of God is
upon our hearts: the graces of the Spirit poured out upon us, are our assurance
that God will not with hold from us our regal pri^edges, if we seek them, 2
Cor. 1. 20, 21.

10 It is some settling to us, to 10 From the exte^ of the promiser.
consider the exte^ of the right to those promises: For God has excepted no
sort of men, but in Christ they may get to have their part in those promises,
as the Apostle shows, Galatians 3. 27, 28, 29.

11 The Law was the only 11 From the time of giving the promise.
thing that might hinder us of the enjoying of the promises. And the Apostle
has proved, that the Law cannot disanull the Promises, in which the Nations of
the earth should be blessed, made four hundred years before the Law was given
on Mount Sinai, Gal. 3. 17, 21.

12 We have the Seal of God to this Writing: Now God has The promise sealed 4
ways.
sealed four ways.

First, in his Council. The Book (...) In his Council.
of his eternal council was written within and without, and it had seven
Seals, to signify that it was perfectly ratified, and though none in Heaven
and Earth could read it, yet for our comforts we know^, that the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, has opened it now, and made
it manifest, Reu. 1, 2, etc.

2. In his Son: For him has God the Father sealed, John 6. 27. 2. In his
Son.
God made all sure, when he sent out Christ; He sealed his Commission in all
things, that concerned the happiness both of Jews and Gentiles.

3. In his Spirit: And thus all 3. In his Spirit.
the believers are said to be sealed by the Spirit of Promise: And this is Gods
Privy Seal.

4. God has sealed to all his promises in the Sacraments, 4. In the Sacraments
which are given us as Gods Broad Seals, and outward tokens and pledges to
confirm our faith.

13. We have the experience also of all the Saints, who in all ages 13. For
experience.
found God as good as his Word, and had ever reason to say as David did, In the
Lord will we praise his Word, Psalm 56. 10. The Patriarchs embraced the
Promises, as the chief stay of their lives in their pilgrimage on earth, Heb.
11. 24. Thus of the fourth point.


5. A fifth thing I would preface about, is concerning certain rules 6. Rules
to be observed if we will profit by the promises.
to be observed, if we would ever receive the sound profit of these promises,
and so we must look to six directions.

1. When we come to these promises, we must renounce our own merits, and all
opinion of our own worthiness, and acknowledge from our hearts, that all the
grace we find in the promises, is in and through Jesus Christ, All the promises
are yea and Amen through him, and only 2 Cor. 1. 20. Romans 4. 14
in him.

2. When we have the promises laid open before us, we must believe Gal. 3. 22.
Romans 4. 16
them, and apply them to our selves, or else they will do us no good.

3. We must be further careful to hide them in our hearts, and to commit them
to memory, that we may be often thinking of them, and musing upon them. It
will not serve the turn that we have them written in the Bible, or in our
Note-bookes, but we must get them written in our hearts too: We must be at
the Ps. 119. ^1
pains to acquaint our selves distinctly with them, and to fill our heads with
store of them.

4 When any thing ayleth us, we must fly to them for-refuge, and cast the
anchor of hope upon them, Hebr 6. 18.
that God himself may see, that our hearts are bent to trust upon his Word.

5 We must never cast away our confidence in them, but wait with patience, and
not limit God to the time, or manner, or means of accomplishment, but hold
fast to his promises, and leave the rest to God, as in many places of Scripture
may appear, especially, Hebr. 10. 36. Romans 4. 21, 22.

6 In short, We must look to it, that we be not slothful and idle, and such
as will not be at the pains to study and commit to memory, and rest upon
these glorious comforts; but we must follow them which through faith Heb. 6.
12.
and patience do inherit the promises.

Thus of the Preface.
CHAP. II.
The division of the Promises.

THe promises may be divided 3. Sorts of promises.
into three parts.

The first may contain such 1. Privileges.
places of Scripture, as show the Privileges of the godly above other men; and
that is one chief way by which the Lord does refresh the hearts of his people,
by assuring them in general of such and such prerogatives, which he will
confirm upon them, and upon none but them.

The second may contain 2. Comforts in affliction.
comforts; that is, places of Scripture which do foretell what goodness the
Lord will show to his people in affliction. For hither-vnto belong all those
promises which are given of purpose for the comforting and supporting of the
godly in all their trials.

The third part may contain such Promises, as are made to certain 3. Rewards
of certain graces.
particular graces in the godly, as promises, made to prayer, faith, trusting
in God, or such like It is the second part of promises, which I intend here
more at large to entreat of. I should show what variety of comforts they are,
with which a godly man may inflame his heart according to the several
distresses may fall upon him, and these may be thus subdivided.

All afflictions are either outward, or inward. For outward Sorts of
afflictions.
afflictions, it were too tedious, and to little purpose, to gather comforts
against every particular cross, and therefore one head may suffice for the
general, viz. the promises or consolations against all outward afflictions.
Now, because godly people are oftentimes more troubled with the storms and
reproaches of the world, which are cast upon them for well-doing, then with the
ordinary afflictions of life; therefore I would in the second place gather the
comforts against reproaches, and withal I would add in the third place,
consolations against adversaries.

Now for inward afflictions; they are the afflictions of the spirit of man, and
arise either from the temptations of Satan, or from the trouble of the
conscience unsatisfied in diverse scruples. I would therefore in the fourth
place show how we might be comforted against the temptations of Satan; and
because the trouble of conscience arises usually either from the burden of
our daily infirmity, or from the fear of our falling away: I would in the
fifth place show how we may be comforted against our daily infirmities; and
then in the last place I would unfold those promises, that may assure us of
perseverance.

Now suppose a Christian soul clearly informed with the knowledge Note.
of those privileges wherein he excels all the people of the world; and withal
that he knew how to comfort himself against any outward afflictions, and had
store of consolations in his heart against the temptations of Satan, and did
know how to support himself against the sense of his daily weaknesses, and
withal were settled and out of fear for falling away; Would you not think
such a one wonderful happy? And this may be here attained unto, if we be not
slothful: and what can in this life be grievous unto us, if we be soundly
fenced in those things? There can be nothing that can seem a misery unto us,
but we may find comforts under some one of these Titles.

CHAP. III.
Showing the privileges of the godly above all other people.

THe first sort of promises, or comfortable places of Scripture, are such as in
general show the happiness of the godly in all estates of life; these I call
Privileges. These are such comforts as are not restrained unto some certain
time, but are such as he is enriched withal at all times. These we ought to
know as the Foundation of all the rest, and we should strive to have them
perfectly in our memories, so as any time we could number them if need were.

Every godly Christian has 12. Privileges of the godly.
twelve privileges, wherein he excels all the men of this world.

The first is, The love and favor 1. The love of God. Eze. 36. ^8 Ioh. 14. 21.
of God: The especial grace of God toward him; this is the foundation of all
his happiness: and if he could order his own heart aright, he would easily
see that he could not be miserable, so long as he was in favor with his
God. If the favor of great persons be so much accounted of, what reckoning is
to be made of Gods favor, who is Lord of Lords? Yea King of all Kings? And the
more should a Christian fill his heart with ioying in this prerogative, if he
consider three 3. Properties in Gods love.
properties in the love of God. For first, It is a free love, he stands not
upon desert: He is gracious, 1. It is free.
looking upon his own goodness, and not on ours, Hosea 14. 4. Secondly, It is an
eternal love, 2. It is eternal.
and unchangeable, God will never be weary of loving him, Ier. 31. 3. His
loving kindness is better then life; for it lasts unto all eternity, without
alteration. The favor of man in this world is mutable; Kings may extremely
loath, whom they yer-while loved with their entirest affection; But in God
there is no shadow of changing, he loves with an everlasting love. Thirdly, It
is infinitely immense, and great, no 3. It is infinite.
affection in any, or in all the creatures in this world, if they could be
fastened upon one man, can reach to the thousandth part of Gods love to us,
Ephesians. 2. 4, 7. Esaias 40. 15, 16. This light of Gods countenance shining upon us,
makes us at all times more rich then they that are increased most in Corn, and
Wine, and Oil, Psalm. 4. 7, 8.

2. The second is, The donation of Christ; Christ is his, God has The second
privilege is, the giu^ng of Ch^t to them.
given him Christ, Romans 8. 32. so as all Christ is his portion: And how is
Christ his? Even in all dearness of relation. He is his Prince, his Priest,
and Redeemer, his Father, his Lord, his Master, his Friend, his Brother, etc.
All these titles are given to Christ, to signify, he is all that, which those
things could shadow out. No Father, Brother, friend, could so love their Child,
Brother, or friend, as Christ loves the Christian. No Lord, Master, Prince, can
so prefer, provide, or care for their Servants, or Subjects, as Christ cares
for the Christian. Look what the favor or power of any of those, or all those
could do, Christ is, and will become much more unto the godly Christian. The
third is deliverance, and that from diverse grievous things


3. The third Privilege is Deliverance: And the Christians deliue^ance is
exceeding great, if he consider seriously how he is delivered from the
kingdom of darkness, from this present evil world, from the hand writing of
ordinances that was against him, from the rigor and curse of the Law, and from
condemnation.

The fourth is free pardon of all The fourth is forgiveness of sin.
his sins past, his soul being washed in the blood of Christ from all his
sins, so as now they are as white as snow, though they had been red like
scarlet, 1 John 1. 7. Esaias 1. 18. What rest and peace would this breed in our
hearts, if we did daily think of it in our particulars, that we had obtained
pardon and remission of all our sins?

The fifth privilege is, the inhabitation The (...) is, the inhabitation of
the holy Ghost.
of the holy Ghost. The soul and body of a Christian, is the Temple of the
holy Ghost, and the Spirit of God does verily and truly dwell within the breast
of a Christian, and that not in a naked presence; but the holy Ghost is there,
to teach him to guide him into all truth, to tell him when he is ready to go
out of the way, on the right hand or on the left, and to comfort him in all
distresses, and to seal the promises to his heart, and to anoint him with the
oil of true knowledge and grace, and to be as a pledge and earnest of his
inheritance, looked for from h^auen, and to teach him to pray when, he knows
not how to pray for himself; and many other excellent benefits he reapeth from
the Spirit of God, whom the world cannot receive. He has for this respect a
very spring of knowledge, and joy and grace in his belly.

The sixth privilege is, the Image The sixth is the restoring of Gods Image.
of God restored in him, by the mighty power of Christ's voice in his first
resurrection, being made now a new creature to God, and so partaking of the
divine nature, in respect of the qualities wherein he does excellently resemble
God.

The seventh privilege is the The 7 is, freedom in Gods house.
freedom of Gods house, and to all the feasts, and divine entertainment which
God makes there, Psalm 36. 9. and 65. 4. Esaias 25. 6. Luke 14. 17. Revel. 2.
The Word and Sacraments are his: he is Gods bidden guest: he may always come
and welcome: The fatness and pleasures of Gods house, oh how sweet are they!
Who can tell the excellency of the Manna that is hid?

The eight privilege is, entrance The 8 is, the hearing of his prayer.
and access, and audience with God in all his suites. He may ask almost what
he will of God, he will not deny him any thing he asks in the name of
Christ. And sure he is worthily miserable, that will not make himself happy,
when he may have what he will ask of him, that is able to give what he can
ask, Mark 11. 24. Ephesians. 2. 10.

The ninth privilege is, The The nin^ is the attendance of Angels.
service and attendance of the Angels. The Angels do pitch their tents about
those that fear God, Psalm. 34. 7. and are ministering spirits to every heir of
salvation, Heb. 1. vlt. Oh the dignity and safety of that man, whom the
glorious Angels do guard and attend upon! The poorest Christian has a better
guard upon him, then the greatest Monarch in the world, that is not a Christian.

The tenth privilege is, the Communion of Saints; he is mystically The te^h is
the c^ munion of Saint*
united in one body to all the worthies that are in heaven or earth, and does
effectually enjoy the benefit of communion of Saints; too large to be here
reckoned up. If it were no more but the profit he has by the prayers of the
godly all over the world, were it not a great favor? Ephesians. 2. 19, and 3. 6.
Phil. 1. 5. Col. 2. 19. besides all the comforts he has in the fellowship
with the godly.

The eleventh privilege is, the The (...). is, the inheritance of the earth.
inheritance of the earth, which is restored to him in Christ, so as he now
possesses that which he has of the earth, by as good a title as ever Adam
held Paradise; yea so, as whatsoever in the whole earth is good for him, shall
not be withheld from him, Math. 5. 5. Psalm. 84 11, 12. Outward prosperity he is
sure of, so far as it is good for him, Job 8. 7. Psalm. 37. 5.

The last privilege is, that Inheritance The (...). is, the inheritance of
heaven.
immortal, incorruptible, and that fades not, reserved for him in heaven;
which for excellency passes all that which ever the eye of m saw, or the ear
of man heard, or the heart of man can conceive, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

Now then, to sum up all this, let a Christian tell his own soul plainly,
and upon clear proof, by the signs of a child of God, that he is in favor
with God, and that Christ is his, and that he has obtained strange
deliverance, and that all his sins are forgiven, and that the holy Ghost
dwells in him, and that the image of God is restored in him, and that he is free
to Gods house, and that he may beg any thing of God, and that he has Angels to
wait upon him, and that he is near of kin to all the Saints in the world,
and that he is Lord of the earth, and that he shall certainly go to heaven
when he dies. Let this, I say, be told to his soul, can he be dismayed? will
not the Peace of God which passes all understanding, keep his heart and
mind, and that constantly for ever?

CHAP. IIII.
Showing how the godly may support their hearts against all outward afflictions.

HItherto of the Privileges. Now it follows, that I should open those
consolations, that may support the hearts of men against all the distresses of
this life. And first I would show, how the Lord is pleased to comfort his
servants in several Scriptures, against all the outward afflictions may befall
his servants in this world.

By outward afflictions, I mean What is meant by outward afflictions. The
godly man may comfort himself against afflictions, by the consideration
such as these; wants, losses, wrongs, troubles, exile, imprisonment,
sickness, fears, poverty, or any other thing, wherewith the life of man is
molested in any condition.

Now there are many excellent ways of abundant comforts against these, or any
of these, as

First, if we consider by the 1. Of the commonnesse of the^.
commonnesse of them, All things fall alike in these things, Eccles. 9. 2, 3.
Every man that is borne of a woman, has but few days, and is full of trouble,
Job 14. 1. Christ had no Disciple, but he is told before hand, He must take up
his cross, and that daily, Luke 9. 23. There can be no affliction, but what
accompanies, or may accompany the nature of man, 1 Cor. 10. 13. The same
afflictions are accomplished upon our brethren which are through the world, 1
Pet. 5. 9. And we have the Prophets and greatest worthies of the Lord for an
example of suffering, Iam. 5. 10. And (...) the godly must through many
tribulations enter into the kingdom of God, Acts 14. 22.

Secondly, if we consider that God takes notice of us, and Of Gods knowledge
of (...) and desires
of all our trials: The Lord knows the way of the righteous, Psalm. 1. 6 None
of our (...) are hid from him: All our desires are before him, and our groaning
is not hid from him, Psalm. 8. 9. and he knows our soul is in adversity, Psalm.
31. 7. And as he takes notice of all our troubles, so he takes notice of all
that is good in us: He knows them that are patient, and trust in him. Na^um
7. Of Gods compassion.


Thirdly, if we consider the wonderful compassion of God in the afflictions
of his people: he does not willingly afflict, but regards us with pity, and
with love thinks of redeeming us, and sends the Angel of his presence to
comfort and save us, and in all our afflictions is afflicted with us, Esaias 63.
8, 9.

Fourthly, i^ we consider Of Gods high estimation of us.
the high estimation that God holds of his servants, notwithstanding their
afflictions. Crosses may make men love us the less, but they do not a i^
discommend us before God. He can take notice of his servants in their
distresses, as well as if they did shine in the greatest outward splendour in
the world. This is the consolation, that GOD speaks to us (even when he
corrects) as to his children; and for that reason we should not refuse his
chastening, Heb. 12. 6. Prou. 3. 11. We may be honorable in Gods sight,
though we be in a most forlorn and despised condition in the world: we may, I
say, be precious in Gods sight, greatly beloved, Esaias 43. 4, 5, 6. The Apostle
Peter shows, that a poor servant, when he suffers hard words and ill usage
from his master, does herein find acceptance with God, 1 Peter 2. 19, 20. Now
this is an instance beyond exception. For, what condition more vile then of a
servant? and what crosses were likely to be disregarded of God sooner, then
these domestical indignities? and yet we see a proof of the regard and love
of God even in those things.

5. Fifthly, if we consider the Of the victory of Christ.
victory of Christ over the world. Our Savior uses this as a consolation; he
tells his Disciples, In the world they shall have trouble, but he would have
them be of good comfort, he has overcome the world, so as now they shall
never be hurt by their troubles. Their crosses may be too hard for the^ to
master, but Christ can order them so, as in him they shall have victory over
them. But of this, more afterward, Ioh. 16. 33

Sixthly, if we consider the Of the holy Ghost comforting us.
presence of the holy Ghost, he is given of Christ and the Father to be our
Comforter; and as our afflictions abound, so shall our consolations also, Ioh.
14. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 4. Now, how shall a man be dismayed, that has Gods Spirit
within him, to hearten him, and assist him, and refresh him, and make glad his
heart?

7. Seventhly, if we consider Of the issue o^t of trouble.
the issue out of all troubles: Many may be the troubles of the righteous, but
God will deliver them out of them all, Psalm 34. 19. If God make us sore, he
will make whole: if he wound he will bind us up again. In six troubl^s he
shall deliver them, and in seven there shall no evil touch them, I^b 5. 18,
19. God will give his people rest from the days of adversity, till the pit be
dug for the wicked, Ps. 94. 13. Light is sown for the righteous, and
gladness for the upright in heart, Psa. 67. 11. It is well said, It is sown; for
though God do not presently give us ease and comfort, yet the harvest will
come, if with patience we rest upon God, and be truly sincere, and keep his
way: God will settle his people, as in the former days, and it may be, do
better unto them, then at the beginning, Ezech. 36. 11. For Gods thoughts
toward his people, are thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give an
expected end, Ier. 29. 11. so as Gods servants shall sing for joy of heart,
when wicked men howl for vexation of spirit, Esaias 65. 14.

8. Eighthly, if we consider the Of the measure of out afflictions.
wond^rfull care of God about the measure of our crosses: For God will not lay
upon man more then right, that he should enter into judgment with God, Job 34.
23. Therefore Jacob should not fear, because God will not make a full and
final end of him, as he will of the Nations, but will correct him in measure,
not leaving him wholly unpunished, Jeremy 46. 28. God does wait to be
gracious to his people, he is a God of judgment, and does not consider what
sin they have committed to deserve affliction, but what strength they have to
bear it: After he has given them the bread of affliction, and the water of
adversity, he will not restrain his mercies from them, Esa. 30. 18, 20. There
is great difference betwixt Gods dealing with wicked men that are enemies to
the Church, and his dealing with the godly. From hence the Prophet asks, Has
he smitten them as he smot them that smot him? And resolves, that God smites
in measure, and but in the branches, he will not cut them up by the roots,
Esaias 27. 7, 8.

9. Ninthly, If we consider the Of the short continuance of them.
short time of these afflictions* Heaviness may be in the evening, but joy
will come in the morning* For Gods anger endures but a moment, but in his
favor is life, Psalm. 30. 5. The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of
the righteous, Psa. 125. 3. For the Lord will not cast off for ever, but though
he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude of his
tender mercies, Lam. 3. 31, 32. For a small moment God may forsake, but with
great mercy will he gather us. In a little wrath hide I my face, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer,
Esaias 54. 7, 8. Hence Christ says, A l^le while, and ye shall not see me. And
again, A little while, and ye shall see me, Ioh. 16. 16. The godly may be in
heaviness, if need require, but it is but for a short season, 1 Peter (...).
6. And Paul says, The afflictions of this life are but light, and for a
moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

10. Lastly, If we consider the Of the good ^ffects of them.
good we get by these afflictions: For God will make all work together for the
best, unto them that love him, Romans 8. 28. The godly may be troubled on every
side, and yet not be distressed: They may be perplexed, and yet have no cause
to despair, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 8. The godly in affliction may be like the burning
bush which Moses saw, which was not consumed: And there are many particulars of
the good they get by their crosses. For affliction is as the fire, only to
refine them, and try them, and make them more bright, Zach. 13. vlt. they lose
nothing, but their dross, and this is all fruit, even the taking away of
their sins, Esaias 27. 9. Besides, they meet with many consolations in
affliction, which otherwise they had not experience of 2 Cor. 1. 7. and
therefore we should count it all joy to fall into many temptations, as knowing
that the trial of our faith works patience; and if patience have her perfect
work, we shall be entire, wanting nothing, Iam. 1. 3, 4. Lastly, the trial
of our faith, which is more precious then gold that perishes, will be found
unto praise, and honor, and glory, in the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
1. 7. and our light and short afflictions will work unto us an eternal weight
of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. and if we endure temptation, we shall receive the
crown of life, James 1. 12. Lo thus we have searched it, and thus it is,
hear it, What thou must do in thy affliction.
and know thou it for thy good, Job 5. vlt. Learn thou therefore in nothing to
be careful, but in all things to make thy request known unto God with giving
of thanks, Phil. 46. And if any man lack wisdom, to know what to do in
affliction, let him ask it of God, who gives liberally, and reproacheth no
man, Iam. 1. 5.

CHAP. V.
How the godly may comfort themselves against reproaches.

HItherto of the comforts against all outward afflictions in general. Now it
follows, that I instance in reproaches, and adversaries.

For reproaches; it is evident, Men need comfort against reproaches.
there is need of consolations, more specially against them, because natural
men stumble at it, when they see Religion censured and scorned, and it hardens
many men, when their hearts are infected with this prejudice, that they hear
this way every were ill spoken of. Sometimes men are dismayed at the disgrace
of sincerity in the general. Sometimes they are troubled for what they
themselves do suffer, or may be in danger to suffer. Sometimes the weak are
scandalized, when they hear or see what others suffer. And it is manifest,
that the best men have been put to a great plunge when they have been laden
with reproaches. This makes Jeremy so unquiet, Ier. 18. 18, ^1. Now there are
many ways, by Thoumaist comfort thy self in the consideration,
which a Christian may establish his own heart against all the scorns and
reproaches of the men of this world.

First, If they consider that God 1. Of the notice God takes of them.
takes notice of all the wrongs of that kind done unto them. Thus David, O
Lord, thou have known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor, mine
adversaries are all before thee, Ps. 69. 19. It eases his heart, but to talk
with God, and tell him that he knows his dishonor.

Secondly, It is an increase of (...). Of Gods great account of us
the comfort, if we further consider that God favors us, and accounts us
dear and honourablt, whatsoever the wicked think of us: And in this argument
the Lord himself pleades withal, Esaias 43. 4, 5. If Gods Face shine upon his
Servants, what cares David for all the reproaches of all sorts of men, even of
his neighbors and familiar acquaintance? It is enough to him, that his best
and next neighbor and friend respects him, Psalm. 31. 11, 12, 16.

Thirdly, Thou may comfort (...) Of thy good report among the godly.
thy self by opposing the good report thou have amongst the godly, against the
reproaches with which wicked men pursue thee. As thou go through ill report,
so do thou through good report: thou have honor as well as dishonor, and
it is a great recompense to obtain good report amongst the godly, 2. Cor. 6.
8. Heb. 11. 2.

Fourthly, were it so that thou 4 Of thy Praise thou shall have in the day of
Christ.
had no honor in thy name on earth, and that well-doing were in no respect
at all: yet this should comfort thee abundantly, that thy faith, and
sincerity, and innocence, will be found unto praise, and honor, and glory in
the revelation of Jesus Christ. Thou shall have unspeakable praise at that
day, 1. Pet. 1. 7.

Fifthly, the same persons that 5 Of praise from them that now reproach thee.
now reproach thee, may be so turned about by the power and grace of God, that
in the day of their visitation they will admire thee, and glorify God for
thee, 1. Pet. 2. 12.

Sixthly, we should be the less 6 Of the small things-thou suf^rest.
troubled with our reproaches, because this is not to resist unto blood. God
deals favorably with us. If we had lived in the days of our fathers, when
to profess the Gospel of Christ, had been occasion of terrible death; then
we might have had some pretense of grieuance: but now in these days, when the
hurt is done only with the tongue of infamous men, it is a great weakness to
be disquieted, Heb. 12. 3, 4.

Seventhly, let us look upon the Of the example of Christ.
author and finisher of our faith, ^en He was exposed to these indignities, and
yet for the glory set before him, despised the shame, and endured the dr^sse,
and is now crowned in heaven, Heb. 12. 2 What should the servant complain of,
when the Lord and Master is called Beelzebub? 8 Of the cause of thy reproaches.


Eighthly, David eases himself, by considering the cause of his suffering. For
thy sake (says he to God) have I borne reproach: shame has covered my face:
The zeal of thy house has eaten me up, and the reproaches of them that
reproached thee, have fallen upon me: When I wept and chastened my soul with
sasting, that was to my reproach, Psa. 69. 7, 9, 10.

Ninthly, Why should we be (...) Of the condition of all the godly.
^oubled at that which is the Lot of all the Saints? We have heard of David
before, how he was standered by many, and on every side, Psalm. 31. 12, 13.
Jeremy complains, That they consulted how to devise devises against him, and
how they might smite him with the tongue, I^r. 18. 18. False witnesses were
suborned against Stephen, and in that case of Religion, Acts 6. 11, 13, 14,
Many and grievous complaints were laid against Paul, Acts 25. 7. Yea, it was
the condition of all the Apostles and the principal men of the Christian
world, to be made a A spectacle to men and Angels, and to be accounted
forlorn, and as the offscouring of all t^ings, 1. Cor. 4. 9, 10, 13. And our
Savior Christ supposes it the case of any blessed man, that men may say all
manner of evil sayings of them, Matthew. 5. 12, etc.

Tenthly, The Spirit of God 10 Of the presence and assistance of the Holy Ghost.
and of glory does rest upon you, 1 Peter 4. 14. Ye have the Spirit of God in
you, what need you care what the world accounts of you? You have abundant
treasure in your hearts, and you have an heroical or divine Spirit in you, And
therefore why are ye troubled about such mean things? And your patience and
their rage, is a sign you are in a happy condition, and have Gods Spirit; and
the Spirit of God which is in you is a Spirit of Glory, and leads you to a
better life. And therefore seeing you are but travelers here, why turn you
again at the barking of every dog? Yea, these reproaches signify, that wicked
men do s^e some glory of God shining in you, which they strive by all means
to vilify and despise, being vexed in their hearts at it.

11. God will certainly take an order with all that reproach 11 Of the
condition of those men that do reproach thee.
his people. For first, he will reckon all their reproaches, as cast out
against himself; and therefore will indite them of blasphemy, Psalm. 74.
Colos. 3. 8. 1. Peter 4. 14. 1. Cor. 4. 13. 1.


Secondly, in his due time he 2.
will put to silence those lying lips which speak grievous things proudly and
contemptuously against the righteous, Psalm. 31. 18.

Thirdly, all that were incensed against the godly, shall be rewarded 3
with shame, which God will power upon them for the contempt with which they
have dishonored his servants, Esaias 41. 11, 14. And to conclude, God will
certainly bring them to judgment for these things; they must make their
accounts before the Judge of the quick and dead that speak evil of other
men, because they will not run with them into the same excess of riot, 1 Pet.
44, 5.

12. Lastly, God will provide for his own innocent Servants. 12 Of the course
God will take for thy clearing and comfort.
His thoughts are not to let his people be ashamed, Mic. 4. 11, 12 And besides,
he will bring forth their righteousness as the the light, they shall be
cleared, Psalm. 37. 6. Job 5. 15. and they shall receive double for all their
shame, Esaias 61 7. and their reward shall be great in Heaven, Mat. 5. 12. For
which reason, Moses accounted the reproaches of Gods people to be greater
riches then the treasures of Egypt, Hebr. 11. 26. And in the mean time there
is an hiding place with God from the strife of tongues, Ps. 31. 20.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein many principal Objections of the godly are answered.

NOw for the better establishment of men's hearts in the former comforts, it
will not be amiss to take off the objections with which many times godly men
do aggrauate their distress above the respect of the former consolations.

1 Ob. If they were ordinary Ob.
reproaches, it would not so much trouble me, but they are vile things which
are objected against me.

Sol. They cannot be viler Sol.
things then have been objected against Christ and the godly. For there have
been objected

Grievous things, Acts 25. 7. Gluttony, Math. 11. 18, 19. Madness, John 10.
20. Blasphemy, Math. 26. 65. Act. 6. 11, 13, 14

Deceiving, John 7. 12. Rebellion, Acts 17. 6, 7. Railing, Acts 23. 4. Schism,
Acts 28. 22. Wickedness of life, 1 Pet. 2. 12.
2 Ob. But base persons do Ob. 2.
revile me, the very scum of the people do scorn me.

Sol. This is no strange thing. Sol.
The abiects gathered themselves together against David, they did tear and
ceased not, Psalm. 35. 15. The drunkards sang of him, Psalm 69. 12. Those that
der^ded Job, were such, whose fathers he would have disdained to set with the
dogs of of his Flock, Job 30. 1.

3 Ob. But I have lived long Ob. 3.
under such disgraces.

Sol. Rest thy self, and fret not Sol.
at the man that prospers in his way, the Lord will find a time to bring
forth thy innocence, as the light, Psalm. 37. 7 Zeph. 3. 18, 19. God will find
a time to get thee praise in every place where thou have been put to shame.

4 Ob. But I am almost buried Ob. 4.
with the almost infiniteness of scorn and reproaches.

Sol. That was no more then was in David's case; He was so Sol.
buried in disgrace, that he was as a dead man, forgotten, and out of mind, Ps.
32. 12, 13. He was a reproach of men. Psalm. 22. 12. A byword, Ps. 44. 14, etc.
A proverb, Ps, 69. 11. A wonder to many, Ps. 71. 7. And the Apostles were a
gazing stock to men and Angels, 1 Cor. 4. 9. 2. Cor. 6. 8.

5 Ob. But great men set against me. Ob. 5.


Sol. That was David's case; Fear was on every side, he heard Sol.
the raylings of great men, which consulted together against him, Ps. 31. 13.

6 Ob. But I am sentenced and accused as an evil doer most unjustly, Ob.
and that publicly.

Sol. So was our Savior Christ, Sol.
and that by a whole Council of men, Math. 27. 1 John 11. 47, 48. And so was
Stephen, Acts 6. 12. And so were the Apostles, Act. 4. 6, 15. and 5. 27. And so
was Paul, Acts 23. 1. The most righteous may suffer as evil doers, 2 Timothy 2.
9. The wicked so compass about the righteous, that many times wrong judgment
proceeded; but this is his comfort, The Lord will not leave him in the hand of
the wicked, nor condemn him when he is judged, Psalm. 37. 32, 33. If God
condeme us not, it matters not for the sentences of unjust men. And the rather,
because God has further promised the godly man, that he will stand at his
right hand, to save him from the judges of his soul, Psa. 109. 31.

7. Ob. But I am by slander cast Ob. 7.
out of the Church, with great pretense of the glory of God.

Sol. The Lord in the Prophet Sol.
Esay's time had observed such a thing as this. For the Prophet tells the godly,
that their brethren had have cast them out, and said, Let the Lord be
glorified. But he assures them from the Lord, that God would appear to their
joy, and their brethren that cast them out, should be ashamed, Esaias 66. 5.

8. Ob. But they which have thus grievously wronged me, Ob. 8.
live in all prosperity, no judgment lights upon them, God does not plead
my cause against them.

Sol. Thou know not how Sol.
God deals with them, God can judge them secretly, and consume them
insensibly, so as the world shall take no notice of it, as the moth eats up
the garment, without making any great rent, Esaias 51. 8. And for this reason,
they are exhorted in that place, not to fear the reproach. Secondly, What
know thou what God will yet do with them? For God has pleaded the cause of
his servants many times by bringing strange judgments upon the wicked. This
Pashur shall be made Magor-missabib, that is, a terror round about, and all
that hear it shall tremble, Ier. 20. 3. God can cloathe thy adversaries with
shame, and cover them with their own confusion, as with a mantle, Psa. 109. 29.

9. Ob. But I am censured by Ob. 9.
good men with much bitterness, as if I were guilty, and there is none to
comfort or pity me.

Sol. So was Job deeply censured Sol.
by his godly friends: And so was Paul of his own hearers, 1 Cor. 4. 4, 10.
Thus David was forsaken in his wrongs, so as none would comfort him, Psalm 69.
20.

10. Ob. But yet one thing much troubles me, that is, that Ob. 10.
since these slanders, the hand of God has been upon me in diverse particular
judgments, and this makes people to think, sure I am guilty:

Sol. So they thought of Paul when the Viper fell on his hand, Sol.
being a man that was before accused, and now sent as it were a prisoner, Acts
28. So they judged of David when he was sick, that some evil disease did
cleave to him, Psa. 41. 8. Yea, this was our Lord Jesus Christ's case, For they
judged him as plagued and smitten of God, Esaias 53. 4.

11. Ob. But the things objected Ob. 11.
against me, are so foul, that when I here those things spoken of publicly or
privately, I blush, and that may cause me to be thought to be guilty.

Sol. This was David's case being innocent: he says, Shame covered Sol.
his face when he bore reproach, Psalm. 69. 7. And his confusion was continually
before him; and the shame of his face covered him, for the voice of him that
reproacheth and blasphemeth, by reason of the enemy, Psa. 44. 15.

CHAP. VII.
Directions in the case of Reproaches.

I Conclude this point concerning reproaches, with certain directions. Four
ways to avoid reproaches.
There be diverse things to be done of us, if we would be rightly ordered in
the case of reproaches.

1. We should shun the company of such as are given to slander: as it is said
of Paul, when diverse were hardened, and spoke evil of the way, he departed from
them, and separated the Disciples, Acts 19. 9.

2. The daily refuge against the scorns of reproaches, must be to get to God,
and hide thy self with him by prayer. When David is thus encountered, if you
ask what he did; he says, when they railed, but I betook my self to prayer,
Psa. 109. 4. and Psalm. 31. 13.

3. Look to thy tongue, be silent, see thou render not reuiling for reuiling,
but rather trust in God, and bless them that curse thee, Psalm 37. 7. 1 Peter
3. 9. Psalm 31. 14. 1 Cor. 4. 12. Ier. 18. 20.

4. Live inoffensiuely, and be sure thou keep Gods way: For if any thing will
medicine their tongues, that must be it, 2 Cor. 6. 3, 8. 1 Peter 2. 12. and 4.
14, 15. Psalm 37. 34. For it may be at length, the same mouth that cursed
thee, will bless thee, and glorify God for thee.

CHAP. VIII.
Showing how the godly may comfort themselves against their adversaries.

HItherto of the consolations against reproaches. Now it follows, that I
should show how a Christian may comfort He may comfort himself from the
consideration
himself against his adversaries, that oppose him in his course of godliness;
and so there are many arguments of consolation.

The first may be taken from 1. Of the common condition of all the godly.
his condition therein, as it is common to all the godly. For this may stay a
man's heart, to know for certain, that every man that will live godly, shall
be opposed, and must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy (...). 12.

The second may be taken 2. Of Gods appointment.
from the appointment of God herein: And this stands of two Branches. First,
That God from all eternity has decreed every man's sufferings this way. Thus
Paul leffeneth the thought of the cross, by pleading that God had appointed
them thereunto, meaning by his eternal Decree, 1 These. 3. 3. Secondly, That
God has likewise appointed the end, and measure, and deliverance out of the
affliction. Thus the Church is comforted, Revel. 2. 10. If it were grievous to
them to know that the Devil should raise up wicked men that should call them
into prison, yet this may refresh them, that God has set the time when they
shall come forth again. It shall be but for ten days. It shall neither be so
long as the Devil and wicked men would have it, for then they must never come
out; nor so little a while as they themselves would have it; for then they
would never come in, or stay but a while: but God will rule, by determining the
time for their good.

The third may be taken from the refuge we may have in God: 3. Of our refuge in
God.
We may always make our recourse to God in all our wrongs, who has promised
to be our refuge, even our refuge in due time, Psalm. 9. 9. If God will receive
us, and hear our moanes, and undertake our protection, it should be no great
thing for us to endure the opposit^ons of (...).

The so^th may be taken from the pre^ion (...) we (...) 4 Of the prediction of
Christ.
bee^ told before plainly what we should expect. (...) may have. p^c: in
(...); bu^ (...) forete^ is, (...) he world ^ee shall (...) troubles ^oh.
(...). 3, (...). you, that we must pr^ide to take up our ^se daily Luke. 9 23,

The s^h may be taken from the de^ ^ce God. has promise 5 Of the d^liuerance
promised.
^vs; so^lius he assures us, The hand (...). the Lord shall be know towa^ds
his ser^s, and his indig^on toward the^ and his enemies, Es^y. 6 6. (...). for
that God will (...) the strength of the ^eous in then ^ble, will be their
salvation out of their trouble^ he will help them and deliver them, he will
del^er them fr^ the wic^ed, and (...) them (...) they trust in any Psalm. (...).
^9, 40. This glory of the Lord shall ^oe known and feared from the East to the
West, that if the enemy com^ like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall chase
him away, Esaias 59. (...). Therefore fear not thou, O worm^ Jacob, for thus
says the Lord, I am thy God, I will sustain thee with the right hand of ^y
Iusti^: Behold, all they that pr^uoke the^, sha^ be ashamed, they shall be as
nothing the men of thy strife shall perish, Esaias 41. 10, 11. For the Lord
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust
to the day of judgment to be punished, 2. Pet. 2. 9. God will deliver the
poor when he cries, the needy also, and him that has no helper, Psalm. 72. 21.

The sixth may be taken from 6 Of Gods judgment upon our aduersarie^
the certain judgment of God that shall fall upon their adversaries: The men
of thy strife shall perish, and they that war against thee, shall be (...) a
thing of no^: They shall seek them and not find them, Esaias 41. 11, 12. All
these curses will the Lord lay upon their enemies, and upon them that hate them
and persecute them, Deuteronomy. 30. 7. All those evil neighbors that touch the
inheritance of Israel, God will pluck them out of their land, and pluck his
people from among them, Ier. 12. 14. The wicked draw their swords, and bend
their bows against the godly; but their sword shall enter into their own
heart, and their bow shall be broken; for the arms of the wicked shall be
broken, and the Lord will uphold the just, Psalm. 37. 14, 15, 17. And besides,
for their full payment, they are reserved unto the day of judgment to be
punished.

The seventh may be taken from the consideration of the 7 Of the effects and
consequents.
effects and consequents of this opposition: For first, hereby we give our
testimony to Christ and the Gospel, when we partake of the afflictions of the
Gospel, 2. Tim. 1. 18. Secondly, these oppositions do as much good for the
present, when Gods servants fall into these troubles, the fruit will be, it
will try them, and purge them, and make them white, till their time be come,
for there is a time appointed, Dan. 11. 35, 36. Thirdly, God may turn the
hearts of the wicked, and make them of Lions and Tigers, to become Lambs, and
no more to do hurt in the mountain of the Lord, Esaias 11. The W^lfe and the
Lamb may come to seed together, and the Lion eat straw like the Bullock,
Esaias 65. 25.

Lastly, we shall gain exceedingly (...) Of our own gain by them.
by these sufferings; for we are assured, that if we suffer with Christ, we
shall reign with him in another world, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. We should therefore
rejoice that we partake in the sufferings of Christ, because we are assured,
that when Christ appe^res in his glory, we shall then be glad and rejoice, 1
Pet. 4. 13.

CHAP. IX.
Of the ways how Satan tempts us, and the occasion of temptation.

HItherto of outward afflictions, and the comforts against them. The inward
afflictions follow; and here in the first place come temptations to be
considered of, even those conflicts which men have in their souls even with
evil angels.

Three things must be granted 2. Things taken for granted.
concerning temptations.

First, that the doctrine of temptations is obscure, because the disease lies
inward in the soul, and is such as the unregenerate world h^th little care of,
or judgment in.

Secondly, that when God leaves his children to be tried by this affliction,
and softens their hearts to feel this combat with devils, it does wonderfully
amaze and disquiet them, and therefore this is a point needful to be handled.

Thirdly, that there is sure remedy in the Word of God, even for this
affliction also.

Now, because this doctrine of temptation is somewhat obscure, I would, before
I entreat of comforts against them, consider of three things.

1. How many ways Satan tempts men. 2. To what things he tempts. 3. What are
usually the occasions he takes of tempting.
For the first, Satan tempts Satan tempts us five ways.
diverse ways.

1. One is, when he tempts God against us, laboring to bring God out of
liking with us. Thus he insinuated the dispraises of Job to God, Job Chap. 1.
and 2. And thus Satan stood at the right hand of Joshua the high Priest, to
resist him before the Angel of the Covenant, Z^hary 3. 1.

2. Another way is, when he appears in some shape, and by voice, or otherwise
terrifies men.

3. When he brings distresses upon men's bodies, o^ other heavy calamities: and
thus also he tempted Job by Gods permission.

4. When he stirs up other men to tempt us: thus he stirred up Peter to
tempt Christ, and dissuaded him from^ his suffering, Mat. 16. And thus he
tempted the woman by means of the Serpent. And thus also he imployeth wicked
men, daily to tempt by evil counsel and enticements.

5. The last and most usual way is, by iniecting, exciting, or suggesting
evil internally within our spirit. This is that kind of temptation I here
especially mean.

For the second, that we may find out the nature of temp^ations, and the
things wh^reabout Satan works, we may referreall the temptations to three
(...). Sorts of temptations by suggestion. 1 T^mptations to blasphemy
sorts.

The first sort of temptations, are temptation^ to b^sphemie* and thus he (...)
when he suggests monstrous things against God, or the Word of God, or the
providence of GOD, or the like.

The second sort are, temptations (...). Temptations to particular sins.
to particular sins, as when he tempts to the denial of Christ, as he did
Peter, and so he tempts to lusts of all sorts. And so the Devil is the father
of lust, John 8. 44. and evil angels are spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians. 6. 2^.
And thus also he tempts to rage or revenge; and therefore the Apostle implies
in his speech about anger, that to give place to wrath, is to give place to the
diu^ll, who usually excites those ^olent passions, Ephesians. 4. ^7. And thus also
he tempts to covetousness, in respect of which sin, the devil is said to
enter into Judas: And thus also he tempts to lying, as in the case of Ananias
and Saphira, Acts 5. And so he tempts men to murder, either of themselves of
others. Temptations to despair.


The third kind of temptation is, temptation of despair, which is, when he
persuades with men to despair of all mercy in God. Thus he made Judas
despair: and in some degree of despair for the time was David himself
entered, Psalm 77.

Thus of the sorts of temptations.

3. Now it is wonderful necessary in the third place to 9 Occasions of
temptations.
take notice of the occasions of temptations. Satan usually tempts not, but
upon some advantage given him, and so there are many things, which as it were,
tempt the devil to tempt men, as

First, solitariness: the Devil Solitarines.
watched to find the woman alone from her husband, and then set upon her. Such
persons as love solitariness, love not their own souls; for they give great
advantage to Satan to assault them and circumuent them, and therefore we
should take heed of it.

The second occasion is security: Security.
when the devil spies that men be careless, and keep no watch over their
own hearts, and are wretchlesse in their courses, and go from day to day, and
fear not evil, then he lies in wait to assault, by iniecting some vile or
base temptation to sin.

The third occasion is Pride: Pride.
when Paul is somewhat lifted up with the consideration of his revelations,
then does Satan take his advantage, and set upon him with his messenger, even
some vile temptation. When we take liberty to make our selves great in our own
eyes, and nourish the pleasing thoughts of high opinion, and self conceit, if
God do not greatly guard us, we are near some desperate assault of Satan.

The fourth occasion is anger. Anger.
The devil seldom forbeares to enter into the heart of the wrathful person,
when anger has set open the door, as was noted before out of Ephesians. 4. 26.

The fifth occasion is dalliance Dalliance with evil thoughts.
with evil thoughts, when the devil sees us play with contemplative
wickedness, and be well content to ^et our thoughts run upon sinful
proiects or imaginations of sins, which perhaps we intended not ever to
commit: this tempts him to employ his skill to put fire to those thoughts, so
long till the whole heart be e^nared by them, to draw us into mischief. These
lusts will draw away, and Satan engendring with them can make them conceive,
etc. James 1. 14.

The sixth occasion is, The 6 Intemperate use of outward things.
intemperate use of outward things. For the Devil walks about as a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour. And when he finds a man excessiuely bent to
the things of this world, as meat, drink, apparel, riches, pleasures, honors,
etc. He sets upon him by some of his methods, to carry him away captive at his
will. Therefore the Apostle Peter wills us to be s^en, if we would prevent him;
implying, that the Devil will (...) the (...), when he finds us intemperate,
(1) Peter 5. 8.

The seventh occasion is, Unsettledness 7 Vnsetled^es in faith
in the assu^ of Gods favor, and our own salvation. We cannot resist the
Devil, if we be not steadfast in the faith, and we give him wonderful
advantage, if we be tossed about like the waves of the Sea, and are unconstant
or careless in manner of our faith; we never bar out the Devil soundly, till
^ve be steadfast in our assurance, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9.

The eighth occasion is, when 8. Trial of faith.
sometimes the Lord will have us tempted, only for the trial of our faith, and
the grace which he has given unto us.

Lastly, The ninth occasion is, a relapse into some gross sin after 9.
Relapse into some gross sin.
calling, which is scourged with hideous temptations, through a secret depth of
Justice in God, who thereby can show how fearful a thing it is so to offend.

CHAP. X.
How the godly may comfort themselves in their temptations.

THE consolations against temptations follow.

A Christian, that feels himself assaulted by the Devil, may raise up in his
thoughts diverse contemplations, able to succou him in his distresses: as,

First, If he consider that this is the case of all the godly, to be He may
comfort himself from the consideration, 1. Of the common condition of the
godly.
tempted. It is no new thing which has befallen him. Thus Paul comforts the
Corinthians, No temptation has befallen you, but what accompanies the nature
of man, 1 Cor. 10. 13. The Apostle Peter hartens them to whom he writes, by
this argumet: The same afflictions are accomplished upon your brethren that are
in the world, 1 Pet. 5. This also the Apostle to the Ephesias ^ffirmes, that
those spiritual wick^dnesse are found even in the most ho^ ^nly places on
earth, Ephesians 6. 12. Il. Apostles themselves were not free from this comba^, and
therefore Paul (...); We wrestle with principalities and powers, etc.

Secondly, If he consider the 2. Of the measure.
measure of them: God will not lay any more upon him, then he is able to bear,
he may fear his own strength, as Paul did, but God will make his grace
sufficient for us, 1 Cor. 10. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Satan is limited, he can go
no further then his chain will reach, and for that cause it is, that we are
taught to pray, that God would not lead us into temptation, as acknowledging
that God does dispose and order the measure of this kind of affliction. 1 Of
the short continuance.


Thirdly, If he consider the short continuance of his temptations; they may be
fierce, but they are not long: God will shortly tread down Satan under feet,
Romans 16. 20. We shall suffer but a while, 1 Peter 5. 9, 10.

Fourthly, If he seriously meditate 4 Of diverse things in Christ: as,
of diverse things in Christ his Savior: as,

First, His example. It should be 1 His example,
less grievous to be tempted, because Christ himself was tempted in all
things, as he is, sin only excepted, Heb. 4. 15.

Secondly, Christ has atchiued an admirable victory over (...) His victory
over the devil.
these principalities and powers, and has triumphed over them, and made a show
of them openly, Col. 2. 15.

Thirdly, There is in Christa sympathy and fellow feeling. He (...) His
sympathy.
is touched with our infirmities, and does much compassionate our case, Hebr.
4. 15.

Fourthly, He has made intercession, 4 His in tercession.
and prayer for us, that our faith might not fail. For that which he assured
to Peter, he performs also for all the elect.

Fifthly, Christ is the true brazen Serpent, which is lift up of God, 5 His
virtue for he. ling us.
that when we feel our selves stung with these fiery Serpents, by looking
upon Christ, we are sure to be healed, John 3. 14.

Lastly, We are sure to be helped and succored by Christ in the 6 His suc cour
combat: He was tempted himself that he might succor them that are tempted,
Hebr. 2. 18.

Fifthly, If he consider the issue 5 Of the ^sue out of temptation.
that God will give: He will give issue out of temptation, 1 Cor. 10. 18. He
will cread down Satan, Romans 6. 20. He will ^stablish us, after we have
suffered a while, 1 Pet. 3. 9, ^0. If we resist the Devil, he shall fly from
us I am. 4. 7, 8 If he lead us into temptations, he will deliver us from
evil, Math. 6. 13. The Lord will break the head of the great Loui^han, the
crooked Serpent, the Dragon of the Sea, Esaias 27. 1.

6. If he consider the effects of 6. Of the effects.
temptation; it is the School of Christ, to train us up in spiritual
souldierie; they cannot hurt us, they make us more humble, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.
They are for our trial, 1 Pet. 1. 7. Satan does but win^ow us, we lose nothing
but our chasse, Luke 22. 31.

Ob. But it seems, temptations Ob.
ar^ a grievous evil, because we are taught to pray against them in a
special manner in the Lords Prayer, which shows that my estate is miserable,
in that I am led into temptation.

Answ. It is true, that we must pray against temptations, and How we may pray
against temptations.
that it is a judgment; but yet no other, then sickness, poverty, or the
like: and therefore we are not to pray against them simply, but with submission
to Gods will; only we must pray absolutely to be delivered from the evil of
temptation, which latter words do restrain or correct the former.

Quest. But when I am tempted, how may I know that I am not overcome of the
temptation?

Answ. Observe thine own heart in the entertainment of How we may know that
we are not overcome of temptations
those vile iniections. If thou abhor them as soon as they come in, and give
no (...) of consent unto them, thou art free. For Christ himself was tempted
by evil cogitations cast into his mind: (for the Apostle says) He was tempted
in like manner as we Note.
are, and yet he was not guilty of the evil of the temptation. It is true,
that for the most part we are infected in some degree or other by it: But yet
it is not impossible for man to be free from the evil of temptation, as that
example shows.

But secondly, thou may know Two signs
whether thou be overcome or no, by two signs. For first, If thou feel the
temptation to be an affliction to thee, and account it an evil day, and art
burdened under it, as if it were a very buffeting of thy body, thou art yet
safe: The Devil has no victory, thou art not led captive, all this while Paul
was worse feared then hurt, 2 Corinthians 12. 7, 8, 9. Secondly, All the while
thou resistest by prayer, and wrastlest with it, and keep thy spiritual
weapons in thy hands, thou art the conqueror; for thou art assured of God, If
thou resist, the Devil will slye from thee in due time. Thou art never
overcome, till the temptation please thee, and thou resoluest to make no
resistance spiritually, James 4. 8.

Quest. But what if I be overcome? Am I not in a desperate cnodition, if the
temptations have prevailed over me?

Answ. Thy case is mournful, but not desperate: For Peter and David were
overcome of the temptation; and though it cost them many tears, yet they were
recovered. Christ has made intercession for thee, and will heal thee, if thou
make thy recourse unto him, and penitently plead for mercy before the Throne of
Grace.

CHAP. XI.
Comforts against our daily infirmitics.

HItherto of the consolations against the temptations of Satan. There remain
two other distresses of the Spirit; the one arising from the sense of daily
infirmities; the other from the fear of falling away, and losing of what we
have.

For the first, There are many ways by which a Christian may fence his heart
against the discouragements that arise from the sense of daily infirmities*

And these promises are of two Two sorts of promises
sorts: For they are either such as give us arguments of coo^solatin in
themselves, or such as withal remove the objections are wont to arise in our
hearts upon some particular consideration of the manner of the infirmities in
us.

By infirmities, I mean defects, What is meant by infirmities.
ignorance, indisposition, fear, discouragements, forgetfulness, omissions,
distractions, particular falls through frailty, some kinds of evil thoughts,
dullness, vnchearfulnesse, doubts, and the evil of our good works.

The Arguments of Consolation The comforts raised from the consideration, 1 Of
thy age in Christ.
are:

1 There are differences in the degrees of the age of Christ in us Some
Christians are but weak, young ones, Lambs, Babes, new formed; and God knows
it, and looks for no more from such, then what agrees to their age. He is a
compassionate Father, that does not require the same power of gifts in a weak
Christian, which he looks for in a strong.

2 It should much ease us to remember, that we are not 2 Of thy condition now
under Grace.
under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. We are delivered from the rigor
of the Law, God now does not expect perfection from us, nor accounts us as
transgressors, because we are imperfect, but has received us to the benefit of
the new Covenant: In which, perfection is only required in Christ, and
uprightness in us.

3 We may be very weak in strength and power of gifts, and 3 Of the
fruitfulnes may b^ in a weak Christian.
yet very fruitful: We may do much good while we are in the Infancy of
Grace, which the co^paris^n of the vine, (to which the godly are resembled)
shows. The Vine is not the strongest of Trees, and yet is more fruitful in
pleasant fruit, then many other Trees, not of the field only, but of the
Garden also. Now the godly are likened to the Vine, Esaias ^7. 2. to show, that
all their weakness not withstanding, they may be^ abundant in pleasing fruit.

4 The goodness of God^ nature should much encourage and 4 Of the goodness of
Gods nature: For he is
comfort us herein: And so if we consider four praises in the nature of God.

First, He is gracious: he stands 1 Gracio^
not upon desert, we may buy of him without money; he can love us for his own
sake, though we be able no way to plead our own merits, Esaias. 55. 1, 2, 3.

Secondly, He is merciful, yea 2 Merciful
mercy pleases him; it is no trouble to him to show mercy, but he delights
in it, Mich. 7. 18.

Thirdly, He is slow to anger Infirmities 3 Slow to anger.
will not provoke him to wrath; he can d^light in us still, though we have many
wants and weakeness^s, Ps. ^05.

Fourthly, He is ready to forgive. 4 Ready to forgine
If^y our too much careles^sse and frequencie in offen^ing he be ^eged to
d^leasure, yet ^e is quickly pacified, a few prayers and tears in the
confession of our faults will turn away all his displeas^re, so as he will
remember our iniquitie^ no more, Psalm (...).

^soly The I^l will s^eng then his own work in us by his 5 Of the hope of
strength.
Spirit; and though grace be but in the bu^, yo^ his bl^ssing shall be upon
^r bud^, and (...) gr^ as the will owes planted by the watercourse: The hopes
of increase, should stay us against the present sense of weakness, Esaias 44.
2, 3, 4.

6. There are many things comfortable Of many things in Christias,
to be thought upon in Christ.

For first, He makes account to 1 His opinion of us.
find us sick, and sinners, he does not expect to find us righteous
altogether: He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance,
Mark 2. 17.

Secondly, We have such an 2 His comdassion.
High Priest, as knows how to have compassion upon those that are out of the
way: He is touched with our infirmities, he does rather pity us, then hate
us for our weaknesses, Hebr. 4. 15.

Thirdly, His intercession couers 3 His Intercession.
our infirmities. If any man sin, we have an Advocate, even Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins. He takes an order in Heaven,
that God shall not be turned away from us, he makes daily intercess^o^ for us.

Fourthly, His blood will powerfully 4 His blood.
cleanse our conscience from the deadness which is in our works, Heb. 9. 14.

Fifthly, He is the Lord our 5 The imputation of his righteousness.
righteousness, and that is his name by which he will be called, Ier. 23. 6.
His perfect righteousness is as truly ours, as if we had performed it our
selves: So as although we be most imperfect in our selves, yet in Christ God
can find no fault in us, nor see any trangression: though our sanctification be
spotted, yet our justification has no blemish in it.

7 The helps God has affoorded The help of the Ministry.
us in his Ministers, may be some ease unto us: though for weakness we be
but ^ambs, yet God has provided for us; he has given us Shepherds to feed
us, and given them a charge to look to his Lambs, as well as his Sheep. The
Church is compared to a nurse with breasts, and we have a promise to suck out of
the breasts of her consolations, Ierem. 23. 4. Esaias 56. 11, 12, 13. John 23. 19.

8 We should especially be Of diverse particular favors God has assu^ed us of.
refreshed with the consideration of diverse particular favors God has assured
us of in his Word: as,

First, That he will not deal with us after our sins, nor reward us after
our iniquities, Psalm. 103.

Secondly, That he will spare us, as a man spares his son that serves him.
No father can show compassion like to that which God will be bound to show to
his children, Mal. 3. 17.

Thirdly, that the smoking flax shall not be quenched, and the bruised reed
shall not be broken; though grace were in us but like the heat in the week
of the Candle when the light is out, yet God has taken order that it shall not
be extinguished, Esaias 42. 3.

Fourthly, That in all times of need we shall have access unto the Throne of
Grace, and obtain a supply of all our wants; so as we may go boldly to ask
what we need in the Name of Christ, and it shall be given us, Hebrews 4. vlt.

Fifth, That he will accept of our desires, and our will to do his service
shall be taken for the deed, so as he will reckon of so much good to be done by
us, as we desired and endeavored to do: our works are as good as Note.
we desired to have them to be: The preparations of our hearts are reckoned
with God as great things, Esaias 55. 1. Ierem. 30. 2. 2 Cor. 8. 12.

Sixthly, That in all his dealing with us, he will use us in all compassion
with a tender respect of our weakness. Our weeping and supplication shall be
accepted before him, and he will cause us to walk in a straight way, in which
we shall not stumble, Ier. 31. 9. In all our afflictions, he is afflicted. In
love, in care, in pity, he will redeem us, and carry us as in the days of
old, Esaias 63. 9. As he has borne us from the womb, so will he be the same
still unto old age, even unto the gray hairs. He will carry us in the arms of
his compassion: He has made us, he will bear, even he will carry, and will
deliver us, Esaias 46. 3, 4. He will gather the Lambs with his arms and carry
them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are with young, Esaias 40. 11.

Seventhly, That he will supply all our necessities out of the riches of his
glory, Psa. 4. 19.

Eighthly, That he will pass by our mere frailties, and take no notice of the
errors of our lives that arise from mere infirmities; There is no God like
unto him for passing by transgressions, Mich. 7. 18.

Ninthly, That he will strengthen us, and make us grow in the gifts bestowed
upon us: The Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of his
Children of Israel, Joel 3. 16. He gives power to the faint, and to them that
have no might, he increases strength: they that wait upon the Lord, shall
renew their strength, Esa. 40. 29, 31 He will be as the dew to his people. They
shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth their roots as Lebanon. Their branches
shall spread, and their beauty be as the Olive tree, and their smell as
Lebanon. They shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, Hosh. 14. 5, 6,
7.

And to assure all this, God would have us to know that he has married us
unto himself, and holds himself tied in the covenant of marriage with all
kindness and faithfulness, to take the care and charge of us for ever, Hosh.
2. 19.

9. To conclude the first sort of Of what God may bring thee to.
promises, what know thou what God may bring thee unto, notwithstanding thy
weakness? He can make thee to multiply as the bud of the field. He can make
thee increase and wax great. He can make thee attain unto excellent
ornaments, Ezech. 10. 7. Since thou art the branch of his planting, the work
of his hand, he may greatly glorify himself in thee, so as thy little one
may be as a thousand, and thy small one as a strong Nation. God can perform it
in his due time, Esaias 60. 21, 22. Though thou have but a little strength, God
has set before thee such an open door, as no man can shut: and God can make
thee stand in the love of the truth, without denying his Name when the hour of
temptation comes upon the World, and many of great understanding fall, Reu. 3.
8, 9, 10.

Hitherto of the principal consolatio^s in the case of infirmities.

CHAP. XII.
Diverse objections are answered.

IT follows that I should answer certain objections which do usually depresse
the hearts of men, and by the trouble of which they neglect the former
consolations.

Ob. Some one may say, My infirmities are the more grievous, because I find
affliction of spirit joined with them. These terrors and passions upon my heart
do dismay me, and make me doubt, those comforts do not belong unto me.

Sol. God may afflict thy spirit and yet be well pleased with thee; yea therefore
thy case is the more comfortable because thou feel the weight and burden of
thy sins, as the places of Scripture following, most evidently and
comfortably show: namely,

Psalm 34. 15. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their cry.

Math. 11. 28, 29. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will ease you.

Takemy yoke on you, and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart, and
you shall find rest unto your souls.

Ierem. 31. 25. For I have satiate the weary soul, and I have replenished
every sorrowful soul. And their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they
shall have no more sorrow: the latter part of the 12. verse etc.

Esaias 63. 9. In all their troubles he was troubled, and the Angel of his
presence saved them. In his love and in his mercy he redeemed them, and he
bare them and carried them always continually.

Psalm 31. 21, 22. Blessed be the Lord: for he has showed his marvelous
kindness toward me in a strong City.

Though I said in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight; yet thou heardest the
voice of my prayer, when I cried unto thee.

Psalm. 103. 9. He will not always chide, neither keep his anger for ever.

Ob. But I offend daily.

Sol. That is clearly answered in Gods promise: For he says, he will multiply
pardon, or abundantly pardon, Esaias 55. 7.

Ob. But I find I grow worse then I have been, my heart is much out of order.

Sol. If there be an heart in thee desirous to return; there is comfort also
against this distress. The Lord will heal thy backe-stiding, if thou take
unto thee words to confess thy falling away, Hosh. 14. 2, 3, 4. Behold (says
the Lord) I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and reveal
unto them the abundance of peace and truth, Jeremy 33. 6. There is healing in
the wings of the Son of righteousness, and ye shall go forth and grow up
as the Calves of the Stall, Malachy 4. 2.

Ob. But I am extremely burdened with my ignorance, this is a continual
grieuance unto me.

Sol. There are many comforts against ignorance.

1. It is a special promise of 8. Constructions. about ignorance in the godly.
God in the new Covenant, that he will write his Laws in thy heart, and he
will make thee to know the Lord: Thou may go boldly to the Throne of Grace,
to beg further illumination of the Spirit of God. This is one of the suits God
cannot deny.

2. God has promised to lead thee by a way which thou have not known: He
will preserve thee by his knowledge, though thou be unacquainted with the way
thy self. He that led his people from Babel to Sion, when they scarce knew a
foot of that long way, will lead thee in the strait way, from Earth to
Heaven, if thou seek a way of God as they did, Esaias 42. 16.

3 We have such an High Priest as knows how to have compassion on the
ignorant. He that required that property of the High Priest in the Law, will
much more express it himself, Hebrews 5. 1, 3.

4. This must be thy glory, and the crown of rejoicing, that though thou be
ignorant of many things, yet thou know God, and Christ crucified, and this
is eternal life, John 17. 3.

5 The Ministers of the Gospel are ours, and therefore if we attend upon the
Word, and continue in it, we shall know the truth: their instructions shall be
daily distilled into thy heart like drops of rain, 1 Cor. 322, 23.

6 The anointing thou have received, shall teach thee all needful things, and
lead thee into all truth, 1 John 2. 27.

7 There is a seed of heavenly doctrine cast into thy heart, which shall even
remain in thee. It is indelible, it cannot be blotted out, 1 John 3. 9.

8 Lastly, Knowledge is the gift of Christ, and as we know that he is come, so
we believe that he will give us understanding, that we may know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: this is
the true God and eternal life, I John 5. 20.

Ob. But we want or have lost the means of knowledge; our Teachers are taken
frem us.

Sol. It is true; Where vision fails, the people faint, but yet:

1 After God has given you the bread of affliction, and the water of
adversity, he will restore Teachers, and no more restrain instruction, Esaias
30. 20.

2. Though thou see no way of help, yet thou know not how God can provide:
He can open Rivers on the tops of mountains, and he makes the wilderness a
standing poole, when his people thirst and cry unto him, Esaias 41. 17. 18.

3. If ordinary means fail and be denied, God will then supply of his
Spirit, and make that means which is left, to suffice for thy preservation and
building up, Philip. 1. 19.

Now that there may be the more abundant support unto our hearts in this case
of infirmities, I will open two places of Scripture that do meet with the most
objections of our hearts.

The first is, Exodus 34. 6, 7. where the Lord proclaims the The full
explication of the words in Exo 34. 6, 7.
goodness of his nature, that all men may take notice of it, and give him the
praise of his rich grace, where he so describes the Lord, that in his titles
he gives an answer to many objections.

1. If thou say, thy infirmities may alienate the Lord from thee:

He answers, that he is Jehovah, always the same, unchangeable. He will not
alter his love toward thee, but love thee to the end: and for the more
assurance, he repeated that title twice, because he knows, we most doubt of
that, and have most need to be succored with that argument, as the foundation
of all our comfort.

2. If thou say, thou have strong inclination to sin, or strange temptations,
or great impediments, or many adversaries and discouragements:

He answers, that he is God, or strong; to signify that nothing shall hinder
the work of his grace toward thee, but he will keep thee by his power, and
makes his grace sufficient for thee.

3 If thou say, He is of pure eyes, and cannot but discern thy faults, and
sin is sin in the sight of God:

He answers, That he is merciful.

4 If thou say, Thou deseruest no such mercy:

He answers, That he is gracious, and does not stand upon desert: He will show
mercy, not because thou art good, but because he is good.

5. If thou say, The daily repeating and renewing of thy sins may provoke
him, though he be merciful and gracious.

He answers, That he is longsuffering.

6 If thou say, Thou have many defects and wants to be supplied:

He answers, That he is full of goodness.

7 It thou say, Thou art ashamed of thy ignorance, which is more then can be
conceived.

He answers, That he is abundant in truth to supply thy defects, and to
perform his promise, though thou have but a little faith.

8. If thou say, Thou do believe that God is all this unto some men; and
that Abraham, and David, and others that were in great favor with God, have
found all this: But for thy self, thou art so vile a creature, and so mean a
person, as it is not for thee to expect such great things of God.

He answers, That he keeps mercy for thousands. He has not spent all upon
David, or the Patriarks, or Prophets, or Apostles, or Martyrs, or Ministers;
but he has an Ocean of goodness still to be showed, without respect of
persons, to all that come unto him for mercy.

9. If thou yet say, Thou art guilty of diverse sorts of sins and that it is
not one offense only, but many that lie upon thee, and some of them such as
thou dare not name, they are so vile.

He answers, that he forgiues iniquity, transgression, and sin, that is, all
sorts of sins, of nature, of weakness, or of presumption.

10. If any other should say, this is a doctrine of liberty, and may embolden
men to sin:

He answers to that, he will by no means clear the wicked, those are
favors only he will declare to the penitent, that are weary of their sins,
and would feign ^ffend no more.

2. The second place is, Ezekiel. The full explication of the words in Ezekiel ^6.
^5, etc.
36. 25. to the 37. where many objections are evidently answered, the
consolations being fitted of purpose, so as every word almost preuents some
doubt might arise in men's minds: as

1. Ob. I am exceeding loathsome, and a creature extremely filthy in respect of
my sins.

Sol. I will power clean water upon you; that is, I will wash your souls in
the fountain of my grace, and both forgive you, and sanctify you.

2. Ob. Oh it cannot be that any means should do me good, I am so totally
defiled.

Sol. Ye shall be clean: it is easy for God to cleanse us, it is our own
unbelief hinders us: God has promised our cleansing.

3. Ob. O but my sins are great and gross sins, I have offended more
grievously then other men.

Sol. From your Idols and from your filthiness will I cleanse you; though thy
sins were as great as idolatry in the first Table, or whoredom in the
second, yet God can forgive and sanctify thee.

4. Ob. But my nature is so bad, that if I were forgiven, I should off^nd
again.

Sol. A new heart will I give thee; Where God forgiues our sins, he gives us
another disposition, and change our natures, verse 26.

5. Ob. O, but I am so ignorant I cannot but offend.

Sol. A new spirit will I put within you; He will give us understanding and
wisdom.

6. Ob. But I am so dull and hard-hearted, that I am not sensible of my own
distress and wants, and cannot be affected with the excellency of the
goodness or promises of God.

Sol. I will take away the stony heart out of your body; God will cure us of
hardness of heart.

7. Ob. But if my heart were softened, and that I had some feeling, it would
grow hard and senseless again.

Sol. I will give you an heart of flesh.

8. Ob. O, but if all this were done for me, yet I know not how to order my
self, and what to do to go on in a religious course of life.

Sol. I will put my Spirit within you, verse 27.

9. Ob. If the Lord do give me his Spirit, yet I fear I shall not be ruled by
it, but offend and grieve the Spirit of God, through ignorance and want of
strength.

Sol. I will cause you to keep my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments,
and do them. The Lord will work our works for us, and teach us to obey, and
give us power to do what he commands.

10. Ob. I find a maruailous unfitness in the very things of my outward
estate.

Sol. Ye shall dwell in the land; the Lord will bless us in outward things,
as well as in spiritual.

11. Ob. But when I come to use the creatures, me thinks I see such
unworthiness in my s^e, that I am almost afraid to meddle with them.

Sol. I gave the land to your fathers: you hold these outward blessings, not by
your deserts, but by my gift; and my gift is ancient, I bostowed these things
on your fathers.

12. Ob. It may be so; our fathers were in covenant with God and more eminent
men, and more worthy then we.

Sol. Ye shall be my people, and I will be your God; Gods covenant of grace is
with the fathers, and their generations after them* if he have been the fathers
God, he will be thy God also, and thou shall be of his people.

13. Ob. O, but I find such daily sins, and I am polluted in every thing I
do: I am many ways unclean.

Sol. I will also save you from your uncleanness. God will multiply pardon, he
will forgive us, and comfort us against our sins after calling.

14. Ob. But how shall I believe all this? for I see, God has plagued us by
famine, scourged us with great want, which still lies upon us.

Sol. I will call for the corn, and increase it, and lay no more famine upon
you, and I will multiply the fruit of the trees, and the increase of the
field, etc.

15. Ob. But there is no condition on our part?

Sol. Yes, for all this shall be done unto you, when you remember your own
evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loathe your selves
for your iniquities and for your abominations. These comforts belong to us,
when we are thoroughly displeased with our selves for our faults. And besides,
for all this must the Lord be sought unto; we shall obtain all, or any of
these, but we must ask first, verse 31. 37.

CHAP. XIII.
Showing how a godly man may comfort himself against the fear of falling away.

HItherto of the comforts against our daily infirmities. The consolations
against the fear of our falling away follow.

We may three ways comfort our selves against this fear, namely, if we
consider God, or Christ, or our selves.

1. In God there are two things of excellent observation, both of them expressed
in the Scriptures. The first is, that he has undertaken to preserve us from
falling away. The second shows us distinctly, how he will perform this.

For the first, that God will keep us from falling away, we have four things
to assure us.

First, the promises of God directly Four things may assure us that God will
keep us from falling away. 1. His promises.
to that end: for he assures us, that his Elect shall enjoy the work of their
hands, and shall not labor in vain, Esaias 65. 22, 23. The smoking week shall
not be quenched, nor the bruised reed broken, Esaias 42. 3. Not one of them
shall be lacking in the whole flock, Ierem. 23. 4. God will build them. and
not pluck them down, he will plant them, and not pull them up, Ier. 24. 6. He
will confirm us, in and to the end, that we may be 1 Cor. 1. (...), (...)
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: for God is faithful, who has
called us to the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Secondly, the Decree of God, 2. Hi^ ^cree.
concerning which the Apostle says, That the foundation of God remains sure:
he knowe^h who are his. Though Hymeneus and Philetus fall away, yet none that
call upon the name of the Lord, and depart from iniquity, can ever be lost, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

Thirdly, the attributes of God: 3 Three attributes in God, viz.
and so there be three things in God may wonderfully settle us against this
fear. The one is his faithfulness. The other is his power. The third is his
immutable love: All three are laid to pawn for the performance of this
preservation, and so pleaded in Scripture. For his faithfulness, the Apostle
thence concludes, that the His faithfulness.
godly shall be confirmed to the end, as was alleged before, 1. Cor. 1. 8,
6. and so he reasons writing to the Thessalonians: The Lord is faithful, who
shall stablish you, and keep you from evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. And of the power
of God these places speak, we are His power
kept by the power of God to salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. I know (says) Paul whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him against that day, 2 Timothy 1. 12. Now unto him that is able to
keep you from falling (says Jude) and to preserve you faultlesse before the
presence of his glory, with exceeding joy: to the only wise God our Savior be
glory, and majesty, dominion, and power, now and ever, Iud. 24. And for the
love of God, His love.
that it is unchangeable, there is apparent proof, Whom he loves, he loves
to the end, John 13. 1. so as we may be confident in this, that he which has
begun a good work in us, will perform it till the day of Christ, Philip. 1. 6.

Fourthly, we have the seal of 4 His seal
God for it, and he has given us earnest, that we shall certainly enjoy the
inheritance purchased for us. And thus every one that believes, is sealed by
the holy Spirit of promise, which is our earnest, Ephesians. 1. 14, 15. and
therefore, we shall be established, 2 Cor. 1. 22.

Now for the second; If any ask how God will do this?

I answer, that the Scripture shows how this will be performed thus: For

1. God will not cast off his people, What God will do to keep us from
falling away.
he will never forsake his inheritance, Psalm. 94. 14. 1 Samuel 12. 22. For the
Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his Saints, and therefore they are
preserved for ^uer, Psalm. 37. 28.

2. God will put his fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from
him: For this is his Covenant with his people, that he will not turn away from
them, to do them good, and he will put his fear into them, that they shall
not depart from him, Ier. 32. 40, 41.

3. To make all the surer, he will put his Spirit into them, which shall lead
them into all truth, and cause them to keep his statutes, and to do them,
John 14. Ezech. 36.

4. He will uphold them, and order their ways, and keep their feet, that they
fall not. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in
his way: Though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast down: for the Lord
vpholdeth him with his hand, Psalm. 37. 23, 24. He holds our soul in life,
and suffers not our feet to be moved, Psalm. 66. 9. He will keep the feet of
his Saints, 1 Samuel 2. 9.

5. Lastly, God will work their works for them, and continually assist them
with his presence, and blessings, Esa. 26. Ezech. 36. Phil. 2. 13. And thus the
comforts that we may gather from God.

Now secondly, in Christ there Three things in Christ may comfort us
are three things may minister much establishment in our hearts against this
fear.

1. His intercession: he has specially prayed for us, that God 1. His
intercession.
would keep us from evil, John 17. and therefore is able to save us to the
uttermost, because he ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7. 15.

2. The consideration of his office 2 His office here in
herein. It is his work to be Omega as well as Alpha; to be the finisher of
our faith, as well as the author of it: He is the end as well as the beginning,
Revel. 21. 6. Heb. 12. 2.

3. The power of Christ. None 3 His power.
can take us out of his hand, John 10. and as was said before, he is able to
save us to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25.

Thus of the consideration of Christ also.

Now thirdly, in our selves we 3 Things in our selves may comfo^t us
may look upon three things, as we are in the estate of grace.

For first, we are borne again to a lively hope of an immorall inheritance
reserved for us in heaven: Our new birth intitles us to heaven, and it is kept
for us, and our hope is lively, 1 Pet. 1. 3.

Secondly, our seed abides in us: It cannot be blotted out. He that is borne
of God, sins not, because his seed remains in him, 1 John 3. 9.

Thirdly, eternal life is begun in us, John 17. 3. Now if it be life eternal,
how can it end? How can we fall away from it? Natural life may end, but
Splrituall life can never end.

CHAP. XIIII.
Promises that concern Prayer.

HItherto of Promises that concern affliction. And in as much as my purpose
was but to fence the godly man (settled in his justification) against the
grieuances which might befall him in respect of afflictions, during the time of
his pilgrimage here, I shall end with the discourse of those promises: saving
that I will give a taste of the last sort of promise, viz. such as are
encouragements to holy graces or duties.

I will not instance in the promises made to the love of God, to meekness, to
such as seek God, to the love of the word, and the like: but only I will open
the promises made to the prayers of the godly, and the rather, because
Christians are most troubled about their prayers.

The promises that concern Those promises referred to three he^des.
prayer, may be referred to three heads; For either they are such as assure us
that God will hear the prayers of his servants; or they show us, what in
prayer he will hear: or else they describe the wonderful goodness of God in
the manner how he will hear. For the first, that the Lord will certainly hear
prayer, these places of Scripture do most comfortably assure us.

Esaias 58. 9. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry,
and he shall say, Here I am.

Math. 21. 22. And whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe, ye shall
receive it.

John 14. 13. And whatsoever ye ask in my name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son.

1 John 5. 14, 15. And this is the assurance that we have of him, that if w^
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have
the Petitions that we have desired of him.

Job 22. 27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him; and he shall hear thee, and
thou shall render thy vows.

Job 33. 26. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he
shall see his face with joy, for he will render unto man his righteousness.

Psalm. 34. 15, 17. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears
are open unto their cry.

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of their
troubles.

Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and
thou shall glorisie me.

John 15. 16. That whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may
give it you.

John 16. 23. And in that day shall ye ask me nothing: Verily, verily I say
unto you, whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.

For the second, it may much comfort us, if we consider that God will not only
hear our prayers in general, but our voice, Psalm. 5. 3. Our very desires,
Psalm. 10. 17. Our tears, Psalm 29. 12 The very naming of Christ shall not be
done without regard, 2. Tim. 2. 19. Our groaning, Psalm. 102. 20. When we are
destitute of words to express our selves, our groaning, our tears, yea the
very desires of our hearts is an effectual prayer to God. He does not look
what we do say, but what we would say. If we come like little children, and
but name our Fathers name, and cry, making moan, it shall be heard.

3. But in the third point appears the wonder of his compassion: For

1. God will hear without despising their prayer, Psalm. 102. 17.

2. He will not reproach them, nor hit them in the teeth with what is p^st, or
their present frailties, Iam. 1. 5.

3. He will prepare their hearts too; he will as it were help them to draw
their petitions, Psalm. 10. 17.

4. He takes delight in hearing their prayers, Prou. 15. 8.

5. He looks from heaven of purpose to hear their groans, Psalm. 102. 19,
20. his ears are open, there is not the least impediment in his hearing, Psalm.
34. 15. It is his very nature to be a God that hears prayers; It is not
contrary to his disposition, Psalm. 65. 1, 2.

6. He thinks thoughts of peace, to give an end, and expectation, Ier. 29.
11, 12, 13.

7. He will be plenteous in mercy, to them that call upon him, Psalm. 86. 5.
Iam. (...). 5. He gives liberally.

8. He will answer them, and sometimes show them wondrous things, which they
know not, Ier. 33. 3.

9. He will refresh them also with much joy and comfort of heart: He will be
many times as the dew unto their hearts, Job 33. 26.

10. It is a singular compassion, that he will hear every one that comes with
petitions to him, he will except no man: all shall be heard: whosoever asks
shall have, Mat. 7. 7. Luke 11. 10.

11. It is yet more compassion, that God will hear them in all they ask,
whatsoever they desire of him in the Name of Christ: They may have what they
will, Mark 11. 24. John 15. 7.

12. The Spirit shall help their infirmities, when they know not what to pray
for as they ought, Romans 8. 26.

13. God will crown the prayers of his Servants with this honor, that they
shall be the signs both of their sanctification, and of their salvation, John
9. 31. Romans 10. 13. If God hear their prayers, he will receine them up to
glory.

14. Lastly, The Lord shows a wonderful compassion in the very time of
hearing prayer: he will hear in the morning, Psa. 5. 3. In the very season,
the due time, when we are in trouble: yea so, as he will in our affliction in
a special manner let us know, that he is our God, and that he will deliver
us, Zach. 13. 9. Psa. 50. 15. and 91. 15. He is ready to be found, Psalm. 46. 1.
Daniels prayers were heard from the very first day he made them, Daniel 10. 12.
Yea God will hear us while we speak unto him, and answer us before we can
express our selves unto him many times, Esaias 65. 24. Yea the Lord hears the
prayers of his people, even when they think they are cast out of his sight,
Psalm 31. 22.

FINIS.
THE RVLES OF A HOLY LIFE.

OR, A TREATISE CONTAINING the holy order of our lives prescribed in the
Scripture, concerning our carriage Toward God, Toward men, Toward our selves.



With general Rules of Preparation, that concern either the helps or the
manner of a holy conversation.

By N. BIFIELD late Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in MIDDLESEX.

Psalm 50. vlt.

To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
God.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for Robert Allot, at the sign of the Bear in
Paul's Churchyard.

1630.

TO THE NOBLE AND RELIGIOUS Lady, the Lady Mary Vere, increase of joy and peace
in believing.
MADAM,
IT was most truly said by the Apostle of the Gentiles: Godliness is great
gain; Importing thereby, that if a man would be incited to the care to get any
thing, for the profit might come thereby, it should be godliness. No skill in
the world being comparable to that skill of being able to lead a godly life,
for the sure and speedy, and matchless gain it will bring unto a man. For
(besides that it only has the promise of a better life) godliness were to be
desired, and with all possible diligence to be sought after, for the very gain
of it in this life. For (to omit the consideration of the favor it breeds with
God, and the unspeakable treasures of the grace of Christ, which always go
with it) it were to be desired for the immediate effects it works upon men in
it self. For if men love themselves, what should they desire more then that
which tends to make themselves perfect? What should it advantage a man to have
all things good about him, if himself be ill and vile? If men, that were
only guided by the light of nature, could (some of them) see clearly, that
nothing was so good for a man, as to live well (when yet they knew no other
living well, then what was prescribed in their naked and natural Ethickes)
then how much more happy must it be for a man to live a Religious life, by
which he is brought more near to God himself, and far above the condition
of any natural man? Yea if there were no more to be had by it, but the peace
and rest it brings unto a man's heart, it were above all outward things to be
desired. For no man walks safely, that walks not religiously; nor can any
actions of men produce any sound tranquillity and rest of heart, but such
actions as are prescribed by true Religion. What shall I say? If for none of
these, yet for it self were a godly life to be had in singular request. For
if men, with much expense of outward things, seek but the skill of diverse
natural and artificial knowledges, and think it worth their cost but to be
able to attain these skills; how much more ought man to be at the pains, yea
and cost too (if it were required) to get this admirable Skill, to live a
religious life? This most gainefull subject is entreated of in this little
Volume. I may truly say, that almost every sentence in this little Treatise
leads us to much and rich treasure, if the promises belonging to each duty
were annexed thereunto: And therefore no Christian that loves his own soul,
should think much of the pains of learning or practicing these Rules.

I shall not need to exhort your Ladyship to the hearty care of those things
you have been taught of God (long since) to profit, and have learned Jesus
Christ, as the truth is in him: your sincere profession and practice has many
witnesses; and since you believed the Gospel of Salvation, and were sealed by
the Spirit of promise, you have a Witness within your self, which will not
fail in life or death to plead your abundant consolation. When I entreat of
piety, righteousness, mercy, and temperance, I entreat of things you have
above many profited in.

I have presumed to dedicate these Directions to your Ladyship, and not without
reason: You have heard the preaching of them with special attention, and have
bin a principal perswader to have them published for the common good. Being
many ways bound to acknowledge your Ladyship amongst my best hearers and
friends, I cannot but beseech your Ladyship to accept of this small testimony
of my unfeigned observance of your many praises in the Gospel, and as a pledge
of my thankfulness of all your works of love to me and mine.

The God of Glory, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, make you abound yet
more and more in all the riches of his grace in this life, and fill you with
the comforts of the blessed hope of the appearing of Jesus Christ.

Your Ladyships in the service of Jesus Christ to be ever commnaded, N. BIFIELD.

THE Contents of the whole Book.
Chapter 1. page 441. to the 448.
THe Scope of the whole Book, is, to show briefly the choysest Ru^s of life of
all sorts.

Some objections against this course answered, and the warrant and profit of it
showed.

The easiness of the course, with some general Directions.

Chap. 2. p. 448. to 470.
THe Rules are either general or particular.

The general Rules concern either the help^s to an holy life, or the manner
of well-doing.

He that would prepare himself to an holy course of life, must do diverse
things, and avoid diverse things.

The things he must do are these:

1. He must be sure he has repeuted, and does believe. 2. He must get
knowledge how to do well: and that he may attain knowledge: 1. He must
esteem it. 2. He must not consult with flesh and blood. 3. He must redeem the
time. 4. He must be wise for himself. 5. He must be swift to hear. 6. He
must study only profitable things. 7. He must strive to increase in knowledge.
8. He must propound h^ doubts. 9. He must be rightly ordered toward his
Pastor, to pray for him, and obey him, and not discourage him.
3. He must avoid ill company. 4. He must resolve to practice these rules.
5. He must order his outward calling so, as he be freed from all needless
encumbrances. 6. He must keep company with such as do live well. 7. He must
not be a servant of man. 8. He must accustom himself to the thoughts of the
coming of Christ. 9. He must not regard what the multitude does. 10. He must
carefully remember, to be in all things thankful to God. 11. He must study
to be quiet. 12. He must be careful to go on in a direct course. 13. He must
read the Scriptures daily. 14. He must be careful to preserve his first love.
15. He must especially strive for such good things as would make him more
excellent in his place and calling. 16. He must be often in the duties of
mortification. 17. He must observe the opportunities of well-doing. 18. He must
be careful of keeping the Sabbath. 19. He must often meditate of the examples
of the godly that excel in holiness. 20. He must daily pray God to direct
him.
Chap. 3. p. 470. to 475.
THus of what ee must do: what he must avoid follows: and so he must take
heed,

1. Of (...). 2. Of rashness. 3. Of carnal confidence. 4. Of ^asting to be
rich. 5. Of distrustful f^ares. 6. Of adding to, or taking from the Word of
God. 7. Of contempt of reproof. 8. Of beholding of vanity. 9. Of the
beginnings of sin.
Chap. 4. p. 475. to 491.
NIne things to be ever in our minds, that in general concern the manner of
well-doing: for in all good works we must show:

1 -- 1. Zeal. 2 -- 2. Sincerity, which has in it: Truth, Respect to all
Gods commandments. A right end, Obedience without obi^cting, Obedience in all
companies.
3. Constancy, when we do good. Without weariness. Without discouragement.
Without resistance. Without wavering. Without declining.
4. Fear. 5. Simplicity: which is, To rest upon the word for the form of
holiness and happiness. To be harmless. To be simple concerning evil. To
love goodness for it self. To be meek and lowly minded. So to fear God, as
not to envy the wicked.
6. Circumspection, which has in it, A respect of lesser commandments,
Abstaining from appearance of evil, Observation of the circumstances of
things, Vnrebukeablenesse, Avoiding evil when good might come of it.
7. Growth, which has in it, Abounding in goodness. Finishing of holiness.
Progress.
8. Moderation, to be neither just nor wicked overmuch, which is expounded at
large.
Chap. 5. p. 491. to 499.
THus of the general Rule: the particular rules concern either God, or other
men, or our selves.

Our whole duty to God, concerns either his love, or his service.

The love of God must be considered either in the foundation of it, or in the
exercise of it.

The foundation of the love of God, is the knowledge of God.

The Rules about the knowledge of God, concern either the right conceiving of
his Nature, or our acquaintance with God.

That we may conceive aright of the Nature of God:

1. We must cast out all likenesses. 2. We must strive to conceive of him
according to his special praises in his Word. 3. We must bring with us the
faith of the Trinity. 4. We may help our selves by the thinking of the
Godhead in the humane Nature of Christ. 5. We must get cure for Atheistical
thoughts.
That we may be acquainted with God.

1. We must prepare our hearts. 2. We must beg acquaintance by prayer,
praying with all our hearts, and early, and constantly. 3. We must give our
selves to God.
Chap. 6. p. 499. to 515.
THus of the foundation of the love of God: the Rules that concern the
exercise of our love to God, either show us how to manifest our love to God: or
how to preserve it.

We manifest our love to God,

1. By auouching him to be our God. 2. By providing him a place to dwell with
us. 3. By loving Jesus Christ. 4. By walking with him, which has five things
in it. 5. By honoring God: and we honor him, By seeking his kingdom first.
By open profession of his Truth. By grieuing for his dishonor. By directing
all our actions to his glory. By suffering for his sake. By honoring such as
fear him. By hating his enemies. By speaking of his truth with all reverence.
By free will offerings. By praising him: where diverse Rules.
6. By trusting in him: and this trust in God we show: By relying upon his
mercy for our salvation. By committing all our works to his blessing. By
believing what he says. By staying upon him in all distresses, praying to him,
and casting our care upon him, and relying upon his help, Without leaning to
our own understanding, Without murmuring, Without fear, Without care, Without
using ill means.
7. By obeying him.
In the manner also of our manifesting our love to God, we must do it,

1. With feruencie. 2. With fear: and our fear of God we show, By awful
thoughts of God. By departing from evil. By all reverence of mind. By not
fearing men. By remembering his presence. By trembling at his judgments. By
humility in the use of his Ordinances. By the reverend use of his very Titles.

Chap. 7. p. 515. to 522.
THus of the manifestation of our love to God: for the preservation of our love
to God.

1. We must separate our selves from all others to be his. 2. We must beware
that we forget not God. 3. We must edify our selves in our holy faith. 4. We
must pray in the holy Ghost. 5. We must wait for the coming of Christ. 6. We
must seek his special presence in his Ordinances. 7. We must preserve the
Truth, he has delivered to us. 8. We must study his praises. 9. We must
study to rejoice in God, which contains in it 4. things: where eight rules to
obtain this ioying in God.
Chap. 8. p. 522. to 525.
THus of our love to God: his service follows, and the rules about the service
of God, concern either the parts of his service, or the time of it.

The rules that concern the parts of Gods worship, and either general to all
parts, or special.

Nine things to be remembered in all parts of Gods worship:

1. Preparation. 2. Godly fear. 3. Penitencie. 4. Grief that others serve not
God. 5. That all be done in the name of Christ. 6. Precedencie before other
businesses. 7. That we serve him with all our hearts. 8. Desire to please him.
9. Detestation of what might draw us from his service.
Chap. 9. p. 525, to 531.
THe special Rules concern either his public service or the particular parts
of his service: Unto the public service,

All must come,

With special reverence,

And zeal: and this zeal to be showed six ways.

And with our consent.

With special gladness before God,

And trusting in his mercy,

And thankfulness for all successes.

Chap. 10 p. 531. to 536.
THe special parts of Gods worship, are,

1. Hearing: where the rules concern us. 1. Before hearing. A resolution to
deny our own wits and affections. A meek and humble spirit.
2. In the time of hearing: Special attention. Proving of the doctrine.
3. After hearing: 1. Meditation. 2. Practice.


Chap. 11. p. 536. to 543.
2. THe Sacraments, which are, either Baptism or the Lords Supper.

Concerning Baptism we have diverse things to do:

1. About our children to present them to Baptism, In due time. In faith. With
thankfulness.
2. About our selves, to make use of our own Baptism. In case of doubting. In
the case of temptation to sin, where our Baptism serves for use three ways:
In the case of doubting of our perseverance.
3. About others to acknowledge the Baptized.
Chap. 12. p. 543. to 546.
COncerning the Lords Supper, we are charged with,

1. Examination. 2. The discerning of the Lords Body. 3. The showing forth of
the death of Christ. 4. The vows of loving the godly. 5. Reconciliation. 6.
Vows of holy life.
Chap. 13. p. 547. to 550.
3. PRayer: about which the Rules are, 1. Thy words must be few. 2. Thy heart
must be lifted up: which has three things in it: understanding, freedom from
distractions, and feruencie. 3. Thou must use all manner of prayer. 4. Thou
must persevere in prayer. 5. Thou must be instant, without f^inting or
discouragement. 6. With supplications for all sorts. 7. In all things thou must
give thanks.


Chap. 14. p. 550. to 554.
4. REading the Scriptures: the rules are: 1. Read daily. 2. Meditate of what
thou read. 3. Confer upon it. 4. Resolve to obey.


Chap. 15. p. 554. 555.
5. Singing of Psalms: the rules are, 1. Teach one another by Psalms. 2. Sing
with the heart. 3. Sing with grace. 4. Make melody to the Lord.


Chap. 16. p. 555. to 558.
6. Vows: the rules are, 1. Before thou vow, consider. 2. When thou have vowed
defer not to pay.


7. Swearing: the rules are, 1. Swear not by any thing which is not God. 2.
Swear in truth. 3. Swear in judgment. 4. Swear in righteousness.


Chap. 17. p. 558. to 560.
8. FAsting: the rules concern, 1. The strictness of the abstinence. 2. The
humbling of the soul.


Chap. 18. p. 560. to 566.
HItherto of the parts of Gods worship. The time follows, which chiefly is the
Sabbath: and the rules about the Sabbath, concern,

1. The preparation to it: End thy work. Avoid domestical unquietness.
Cleanse thy self.
2. The celebration of it, where is prescribed, 1. Rest from all work. 2.
Readiness and delight. 3. Care and watchfulness. 4. Sincerity to be showed.
By doing Gods works with as much care as our own. By observing the whole day.
By ausiding the lesser violations of the Sabbath.
5. Faith, by trusting upon his blessing. 6. Discretion.

Chap. 19. p. 566. to 570.
HItherto of the Rules that concern our carriage toward God. Toward man
follows: and so either toward all men, or toward some men.

The Rules that order us in our carriage toward all men, concern either
righteousness or mercy.

The Rules that concern righteousness, either order us in company or out of
company.

In company, we must be ordered, either in respect of Religion, or the sin of
others, or the way how to carry our selves inoffensiuely.

For matter of Religion, look to it,

1 That thou take not up the name of God in vain. 2 That thou avoid vain
ianglings, about doubtful disputations, or curious questions, or unprofitable
reasonings. 3 If thou be asked a reason of thy hope, answer with all reverence
and meekness. 4. Let thy communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay.
Chap. 20. p. 570. to 574.
AS for the faults of others,

1. Justify not the wicked, nor condemn the righteous. 2. Converse without
judging. 3. Walk not about with tales. 4. Reprove, but hate not. 5. Pass by
frailties. 6. Give soft answers.
Chap. 21. p. 574. to 582.
THat thou may converse inoffensiuely, thou must look to three things,
humility, discretion, and purity.

Unto the humility of thy conversation, bel^ng these rules:

1. Be soft, show all meekness to all men. 2. Harken to the words of those
that are wise. 3. Stand not in the place of great men.
Unto the discretion of thy conversation, belong these rules.

1. Speak what is acceptable. 2. Avoid those that cause divisions. 3. Make no
friendship with the angry man. 4. In the evil time be silent. 5. And
communicate not thy secrets. 6. Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house. 7.
Restrain thy passions. 8. Bless not thy friend with a loud voice.
Unto the paritie of thy conversation, belong these rules:

1. Refrain thy tongue from evil. 2. Especially avoid filthy speaking,
foolish talking and jesting. 3. (...) re^elling and drinking.
Chap. 22. p. 582. to 584.
OVt of companie^

1. Conceive love to all men. 2. Pray for all sorts of men. 3 Provide to live,
Honestly, without scandal. Justly, without deceit. Peaceably, without strife.

Chap. 23. p. 584. to 592.
THus of righteousness. Mercy follows: and unto Mercy is requisite,

1 Willingness. 2 Labor. 3 Laberalitie. 4 Humility to be showed five ways.
5 Faith, in two respects. 6 Discretion, in four respects. 7 Sympathy. 8
Sincerity, in fi^e things.
Chap. 24. p. 592. to 601.
THus of the Rules that order our carriage toward all men. Toward some men,
follows: as they are either wicked, or godly.

As for the wicked.

1. Hold no needless society with them.

2. When thou must needs come into their company, carry thy self wisely, that
thou may, if it be possible, win them: and to this end show, 1. Thy
mortification. 2. Reverend speech in matters of God and Religion. 3. Meekness
of wisdom. 4. Reservedness, in eight things. 5. Mercy. 6. Vndauntednes in a
good cause. 7. Patience. 8. Love to thy enemies.


Chap. 25. p. 601. to 608.
THus of our carriage toward wicked men. In our carriage toward the godly,
the sum of all is, Walk in love: and the particular Rules concern either
the manifestation of our love unto them, or the preservation of love to them.

Six ways to manifest our love to the godly.

1. By courtesy. 2. By receiving them. 3. By bearing their burdens. 4. By
provoking them to good duties. 5. By faithfulness in their business. 6. By
employing our gifts for their good.
Chap. 26. p. 608 to 613.
FOr the preservation of our love to the godly, some things are to be done, and
other things to be avoided.

The things to be done, are,

1. Labor to be like minded. 2. Follow peace. 3. Cover their nakednesses. 4.
Confess your faults one to another.
Chap. 27. p. 613. to 618.
TEn things to be avoided:

1. Suites in Law. 2. Dissimulation. 3. Conceitednesse. 4 Rejoicing in
iniquity. 5 The minding of our own thigns. 6 Fickleness. 7 Vainglory. 8
Judging. 9 Evil words and complaining. 10 The forsaking of their fellowship.
Chap. 28. p. 618. to 622.
OTher Rules which concern only some of the godly.

1 Such as are fallen. 2 Such as are weak. 3 Such as are strong. 4 Such as are
especially knit to us in friendship.
1 Those that are fallen, are either fallen from God, or from thee; from God,
either grossly or by infirmity; and so are guilty of foul vices, or extreme
omissions.

1 Warn them, and reprove them. 2 If they mend not, avoid them. 3 If they
repent, for give them.
Toward such as are fallen from thee, by trespassing against thee, observe these
rules:

1 Either speak not of it; or so, as thou vex not as it. 2 In great wrongs,
two things are to be done: First, When the trespass is secret, reprove him
privately: If he mend not, reprove him before witness: If he yet mend not,
make the Church acquainted with it: If he will not then a^nend, hold him as an
Heathen or a Publican. Secondly, If he repent, forgive him, as often as he
says, it repents him.

Chap. 29. p. 622. to 625.
2 Toward such as are weak.

1 We must not entangle them with doubtful Disputations concerning
Ceremonies, or things indifferent. 2 We must bear with their weaknesses. 3
We must not offend them. 4 We must encourage and comfort them. 5 In things
indifferent, we must suffer a little restraint of our own liberty to please
them. 6 Toward strong Christians.
First, We must acknowledge them.

Secondly, We must set their practice before us as examples of imitation.

Thirdly, We must submit our selves to them to have their judgments in all
doubtful thing,

Fourthly, How we may carry our selves toward our special friend.

1 Never forsake him. 2 Give him hearty counsel. 3 Be friendly to him. 4
Communicate thy secrets to him. 5 Love him with a special love.
First, As thine own soul.

Secondly, At all times.

Thirdly, It must be a sincere love that looks not for bribes.

Fourthly, It must be such a love as will reach to his posterity, if need be.

Chap. 30. p. 625. to 631.
RVles that concern our selves, are of two sorts.

1 Either our general, or particular calling.

Concerning our general calling.

1 Our Faith. 2 Our Repentance. 3 Our Hope.
1 Concerning our Faith, we must be expert in the Catalogue of Promises, that
concern infirmities, mentioned in the third Treatise. Our judgment must be
established particularly in the Doctrine of the Principles expressed in the
fifth Treatise.

2 Concerning our Repentance, one Rule is of singular use, and that concerns
the Catalogue of present sins, mentioned in the first Treatise.

3 Concerning our Hope, four things:

1 We must pray earnestly for the knowledge of the great glory is provided
for us. 2 We must use all diligence to perfect our assurance of Heaven when we
dye. 3 We must accustom our thoughts to the daily contemplation of Heaven,
that our con^ersation may be in Heaven. 4 We must strive to enable our selves
for the expectation of the coming of Jesus Christ, and to be able to wait for
his coming.
Chap. 31. p. 631. to 6. 6.
Seven things to be avoided in our particular calling.

1 Slothfulness. 2 Unfaithfulness. 3 Rashness. 4 Passion or perturbation. 5
The temptations of our calling. 6 Worldliness. 7 Profaneness.
Chap. 32. p. 636. to 640.
HOw we must carry our selves in affliction.

Eight things to be avoided:

1 Dissembling. 2 Shame. 3 Impatience. 4 Discouragement. 5 Trust in carnal
friends. 6 Perplexed cares. 7 Sudden fears. 8 Carelessness of thy ways.
Five things to be done in the time of affliction.

1 We must pray, and call upon the Name of the Lord. 2 We must bear our
cross with patience and contentation. 3 We must use all good mean^s for our
deliverance. 4 We must be sure to show our trust in God, and cast our burden
on the Lord. 5 We must show our obedience to God four ways. First, By
submitting our selves to Gods will. Secondly, If we judge our selves, and
acknowledge our sins to God. Thirdly, If we be constant in the good ways of
godliness. Fourthly, If we learn more righteousness, and are made by our
crosses to do holy duties with better affections.

CHAP. I.
Containing the Preface, which shows the drift, warrant, profit and use of the
ensuing Treatise.

THE only thing intended The scope
in this Treatise is, to collect for thy use (Christian Reader) those
directions scattered here and there in the Scripture, which may, throughout the
whole course of thy life, tell thee, what thou must do in the right order of
thy conversation: how thou should behave thy self toward God, and how thou
should carry thy self toward men, in all the occasions of thy life: in
company out of company: in all duties either of righteousness or mercy: and
how thou should dispose of thy self in affliction, and out of affliction,
at all times.

And thou may be the more encouraged to study and practice Thy warra^.
these rules, because thou have the most express and apparent word of God to
warrant and require thy obedience herein.

Be not so profane, as to think, that here is more to do then needs, or that
I burden the lives of Christians with a multitude of unnecessary Precepts,
and so make the way harder then it is: For I require thy obedience in nothing
thou have not reason to be persuaded to be enjoined thee by the pure Word of
God: and thou must know, to the confusion of thy security, that he that will
walk safely, must walk by rule, Gal. 6. 16. He is yet in darkness, and
walks on in darkness, and sees not what he does, or whither he goes, that
does not make the Word of God the light unto his sect, and the Lantern unto
his paths, Ps. 119. There is an holy order of life commended in the godly, Col.
2. 5. And Gods promises are made to such as will dispose of their whole ways
aright. A loose conversation is an ill conversation; and if ever we would see
the salvation of God, we must be at the pains to dispose of our ways, and to
see to it, that we dispose of our ways aright, Psalm. 50. vlt.

The benefit thou may reap The profit of the course.
by this Treatise, is much every way, if the fault be not in thy self: for
here thou may briefly behold the substance of a godly life; thou may in a
short time inform thy knowledge in that great Doctrine of practical
Divinity: But especially thou may by the help of this Treatise, see a
sound way how to beautify thy own conversation, with the addition of diverse
rules, which perhaps, hitherto thou have not taken notice of: God has promised
much peace, and comfort unto such as will walk according unto rule, Gal. 6.
16. Yea he has promised, that they shall see the salvation of God, that
dispose their way aright, Psalm. 50. vlt. It is true, it is a greater labor to
travail in the way, then to show it; but yet it is a greater benefit to be
showed the way. Howsoever, it may not be denied, but it is a greater glory to
observe these Rules, then to know them, or prescribe them.

It may be thou will object, that the Rules are so many, thou can The
easiness of the course.
never remember them, and so not profit by them. I answer:

If I have made the Rules no more in number then God has made them in his
Word, thou may not find fault with me.

Secondly, No man that is to learn any Trade or Science, but he meets with
more directio^s then he can on the sudden reach to, or practice, and yet he
reiects not his Trade or Science, because in time he hopes to learn it all.
Would we put on a resolution to serve a Prentiship to Religion, and to work
hard one seven years: Oh what work would we dispatch! How many Rules and
knowledges would we grow skillful in! But alas, after many years profession of
Christianity, the most of us, if all were put together, have not done the
work that might have been done in few days.

Thirdly, I answer, that it is not Mark this direction.
necessary thou should lay all these Rules before thee at once, but mark
out certain choice Rules, so many as thou can well remember, and strive, by
daily practice, to bring thy self to some kind of dexterity in observing
them. There be some Rules of each kind, which, if thou be a true Christian,
thou know and obseruest already: These thou may continue to observe
still, without loading thy memory about them. Now if those be omitted, then
consider of the rest that remain, which of them do most concern thee, or
would most adorn thy practice and profession, or are such as thou never
hitherto did make conscience of: Extract or mark out so many of those at
that time, as thou would in daily practice strive to attain, and when thou
have learned them, then go on, and prescibe to thy self new Lessons. To a
carnal mind all the way of godliness is impossible, but to a godly and
willing mind, all things, through the power and assistance of God are possible.
God will accept thy desire and endeavor, and will add strength and might, and
encourage thee in all his ways. By prayer thou may form any grace in thee,
by reason of the power the Lord Jesus has to prevail for any thing thou do
ask the Father in his name.

The last benefit may come to thee, if thou daily read these directions, is
that they will quicken thee to a great care of weldoing, and give thee cause to
walk humbly with thy God, and abase thy self for thine own insufficiency.
The Lord give thee understanding in all things, and unite thy heart unto his
fear always, that thou may observe to do, as he commands thee, and not
turn from the good way all the days of thy life.

CHAP. II.
Containing such Rules as in general, men must take notice of as preparations
and furtherances to a godly life.

THE Rules of a holy life may The rules of life are either general or
particular.
be cast into two ranks: the first containing such rules as are General: and
the other, such as are Particular.

The general rules are likewise The general rules concern either, The helps
to a godly life.
of two sorts: some of them concern certain general preparations, helps, or
furtherances to an holy life, without which men in vain begin the cares or
endeavors of a reformed life. And some of them comprehend those necessary
rules which are to be observed in the manner of doing Or secondly, the* manner
of well doing.
all holy duties, and so are of singular use to be always remembered, when we
go about any service,

Of the first sort there are many Who so will address himself to an holy
course of life.
rules; for they that will address themselves to order their conversation
aright, must be soundly careful in the observation of these directions
following.

1 He must examine himself about his faith and repentance; he must be sure
he is reconciled to God, and has truly repented himself of his sins, 2
Cor. 13. 5. For unless he be a new creature, he is no creature, but a dead
man, and so utterly unable for the practice of these rules following: And
without God we can do nothing; and without God we are till we live by faith.
Besides, the pollution of our hearts or lives drawn upon us by the custom of
sin past and present, will so infect all we do, that it will be abominable
to God, and so lost labor.

This is the first Rule.

2. His next care must be to learn the knowledge of the rules of life. We
can never practice what we know not; and therefore our next care and pains
must be to get the knowledge of Gods ways distinctly and effectually into our
heads and hearts. Our direction must not be in our books, but in our heads:
and a Christian must have his rules always before him, that so he may walk
circumspectly, by line and level, Ephesians. 5. 15. understanding the will of God
in what he is to do. He is in the way of life, that has and keeps
instruction, how to live, Proverbs 10. 17. whereas he that will not be at the
pains of getting instruction, erreth, as Solomon says: And therefore we must
take fast hold of instruction, and not let her go, but keep her for she is
our life, Prou. 4. 13. Knowledge then, of necessity must be had, or in vain
we go about to live well. Now this is such a rule, as must not slightly be
passed over: and it is not enough thus in general to require knowledge, but
withal, I would show certain choice rules to be observed by us, if we would
take a sound course to attain knowledge. He then that And he that would
prosper in seeking knowledge must observe nine Rules
would prosperously seek sound knowledge, must remember these directions.

First, he must esteem knowledge, and labor to frame his 1. He must esteem
knowledge
heart to an high estimation of it, accounting it as great treasure, accounting
the getting of wisdom above all gettings, Prou. 4. 7. We must seek for
knowledge as for silver, and search for her as for treasure, and then with
wonderful success shall we understand the right fear of the Lord, Prou. 2.
4, 5. else our labor will be blasted and fruitless, if we bring mean
thoughts to the exercise of directions for the attaining of knowledge.

Secondly, he must take heed 2 He must not consult with flesh and blood.
that he consult not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. 16. He must not regard
other men's opinions, or his own carnal reason, but resolve to give glory to
God and his Word, as willing to believe or do whatsoever the Lord says unto
him.

Thirdly, he must redeem the time, Ephesians. 5. 16. Inasmuch as he 3. He must
redeem the time.
has lost so much time past, he must now provide to allow himself convenient
and certain time to be spent this way for the attaining of knowledge; else to
study by snatches and uncertainly, will be to little or no purpose. To
complain of ignorance, will not serve the turn, nor will the pretense of
worldly business excuse us: and therefore we must buy so much time of our
occasions as may be competent for the supply of our wants in knowledge.

Fourthly, in seeking knowledge, 4. He must be wise for himself.
he must be wise for himself, Prou. 9. 12. He must strive to understand his
own way, so to be careful to know the generals about Religion, as his
special care be in all things to refer what he reads or hears, to the
particular directions of his own soul. This is a rule of singular use, if it
could be beaten into men's heads; and for want of this, many Christians, after
long pains and much time spent, have been found exceeding ignorant.

Fifthly, he must be swift to 5 He must be swift to hear.
hear, James 1. 19. with all frequencie and attention, making use of the
public ministry, striving with his own heart against deadness and
drowsinesse, and removing all impediments might be cast in his way from the
world or his worldly occasions, observing all opportunities for hearing,
especially when he sees the heart of his Teacher enlarged, and the power of
doctrine more then at other times or in other things.

Sixthly, he must avoid vain 6 He must study only profitable things.
questions, and fruitless contemplations, Tit. 3. 9. 1. Tim. 6. 20. 2 Timothy 2.
23. When the light of doctrine was so great in the Primitive times, this was
one practice of Satan, to draw aside the studies of Christians from necessary
and solid truths, to Genealogies, or quarrels about words or vain
controversies, falsely called oppositions of science. We must therefore be
warned of this method of Satan; and till we know clearly the ways of life,
allow our selves no time for more remote studies, or fruitless controversies.
What riches of knowledge might some Christians have attained to, if they had
spent the time (they have employed about controversies, genealogies, and
general knowledge) in the sound building of themselves up in such things as
their s^ules apparently stand in need of?

Seventhly, he must not rest satisfied 7 He must st^ue to increase in knowledge
with a small measure of understanding; he must not give over when he has
gotten a little knowledge more then he had: he must desire to increase in
knowledge, and never be well pleased with himself, while he is but a child in
understanding, (...) Cor. 14 20.

Eighthly, he must enquire and 8 He must propound his doubts.
take counsel, he must propound his doubts daily and carefully. He that would
know much, must ask much; he must break off that wretched silence he is
prone to, and provide, if it ^ee possible, to enjoy the favor of some one or
more, that are able to resolve his doubts from time to time. This rule has
incredible profit in it, if it be rightly practiced, Prou. 15. 12. and 20. 17,
18, and 27. 9.

Ninthly, and lastly, he must be 9 He must be rightly ordered toward his
Pastor.
rightly ordered in respect of his Pastor. For the principal means of
knowledge, is assigned of God to be in the ministry of his servants: and
therefore if we would attain knowledge, we must dispose our selves aright
toward our Teachers; and to this end we must look to it.

First, that we pray for them, 1. To pray for him.
that their word may run and have free passage; and that God would make them
able to open unto us the mysteries of his will. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1, 2, Col. 4. 3.
Ephesians. 6. 19.

Secondly, we must keep then 2 To obey him.
directions, and make conscience of it to be careful to obey them; in what
they command us in the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 2.

Thirdly, we must take beede of discouraging them: for this is not profitable
for us. For the more cheerful and comfortable their hearts are, the more apt
they are to find out profitable things for us, Heb. 13. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 16. 10,
11.

And thus of the first and second The third rule. He must get out of evil
company.
rule.

Thirdly, he that would redress his ways aright, must get out of the way of
wicked men: he must give over evil company and sequester himself from the
counsel and society of carnal and profane persons. The necessity of this rule
is, both proved and urged in these and many other Scriptures; Prou. 4. 14.
Psalm. 1. 1. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Ephesians. 5. 7, 8.

Fourthly, he must bring a 4 He must resolve to practice.
mind full of care, and desire, and resolution to practice the rules when he
has learned them: he must, as the phrase is, observe to do Gods will, Deuteronomy.
5. 32. He must be watchful and diligent; he must ponder upon the ways of God,
bewaring lest he either neglect or forget to do them, Deuteronomy. 6. 17. and 32.
46. and 8. 11. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Prou. 4. 26. We must follow after righteousness,
1 Timothy 6. 11. and bind directions as signs upon our hands, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 8.
If we could be thus awakened, this rule would breed us unspeakable good in
our conversation.

Fifthly, he must endeavor to 5 He must settle his outward estate.
settle his head and his estate, in respect of his worldly affairs. It is a
singular help to godliness, to reduce our outward callings in order: and
every days experience shows, that confusions in worldly business breed
miserable neglect in Gods service. And therefore he that would profit in an
orderly course of life, must provide to use the world so, as he may serve the
Lord without distraction. He that would run a race, abstaineth from all
things that might encomber him. No man that warreth, intangleth himself with
the affairs of life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a
souldur. And therefore we may not think it much, if in our spiritual course,
God lay some restraint upon us, in respect of the cares and encombrances in our
outward callings, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 35, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 25.

Sixthly, he must walk in the 6 He must keep com pany with the godly.
way of good men, both setting before him their practice, as patterns of
imitation, as also by conuersing with them, that thereby he may gather
encouragement, and help in well-doing. He is deceived, that thinks to go
alone, and yet go prosperously in the course of a godly life: He may profit,
and learn by many things he hears, receives, and sees among the godly,
Prou. 2. 20. Phil. 4. 8, 9.

Seventhly, he must not be the servant of men, 1. Cor. 7. 23. Other 7. He must
not be the servant of men.
men's humors must not be the direction of his practice. H^ must so depend upon
persons by hopes to get any thing by in this world, as he be not thereby
hindered in works of Religion, knowing, that he is Christ's freeman.

He must haste to, and look for 8. He must look for the coming of Christ.
the coming of Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 3. 12. He must often remember his latter
end, and daily set before his eyes the coming of Christ, striving to stir up
in his heart the desire after Christ, praying for it, and dispatching those
works that may prepare him thereunto. The remembrance of our accounts in the
day of Christ, will wonderfully quicken men to the care of well-doing; and the
cause of viciousness, and miserable neglect, and procrastinations of many, is,
their forgetting of their latter end. A great reason why the directions about
godliness are not entertained, is, because men put far away from them the Day
of the Lord: whereas the remembrance of the revelation of Jesus Christ, would
put spirit and life into us. He dares not say from the heart, Come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly, that is not resolved diligently to work the works of Christ.

9. He must not stay for company, (...) H^ must not regard what the multitude
does.
but rather choose to run alone; or with a few, then hazard the loss of the
Crown. Our life is a race, and as in a race men stay not for company, but
strive who may run foremost: so it is in the race of godliness: He must so
run as he may obtain: he must set out with the first, and run as it were
for his life: As he must make use of the society of the godly, so he must
not stay, till his carnal friends and acquaintance will set out with him: He
must be of Joshua's mind, that if the whole world will live in wickedness and
profaneness, yet he and his house will serve the Lord, 1. Cor. 9. 24. and
14. 12. Joshua 24. 15.

Tenthly, he must in all things give thanks; when God gives 10 He must in
all things give thanks.
him success in any thing, or prospers the means to him, and helps him with
victory over any sin, or strength to perform any duty, or bestows upon him
any spiritual blessing, he must remember to praise God in the name of Jesus
Christ. This will quicken him: Daily thankfulness will breed daily alacrity
in well doing. He that will not be thankful for beginnings of success in the
practice of holy duties, will not hold out: This is the special will of God in
Christ, that we should in all things give thanks, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.

11. He must study to be quiet, 11. He must stu^y to be quiet
and follow peace with all men, meddling with his own business, and avoiding
all occasion of contention, that might distract him in his own course. A busy
body is as good as no body in respect of sound progress in sanctification. It
is an excellent skill to be able Note.
to avoid the intanglements of discord; especially he must provide to have
perfect peace with the godly. Though God be able to sanctify the oppositions
of unreasonable men, yet we must take heed of drawing needless troubles upon
our selves; for that makes us neither to be; nor to be accounted the more holy,
but contrariwise. The Apostle could not speak unto the Corinthians, as unto
spiritual men, but as unto carnal; at the best, but Babes in Christ: and the
reason was, because there was strife, and envy, and division amongst them,
Heb. 12. 14. Mark. 6. vlt. 1 1 These 4. 11
Cor. 3. 3.

12. His eyes must look straight, 1 He must k^epe a strict co^rs in following
only profitable things.
and his eyelids right before him, Prou. 4. 25. He must take heed of going
about, and fetching of compass in religion, Ier. 31. 22. He must be still
amy^ at the mark of the high price of his calling: being sure that the things
he employeth himself in, tend directly to the furtherance of his salvation,
and not lose his time in unprofitable studies, or practices, proceeding from
one degree to another, till he come to a ripe age in Christ.

13. He must be conversant in (...) He must be (...) daily in the reading of
the holy Scriptures.
the Scriptures, and be familiarly acquaint^d with them, that they may dwell
plenteously in him: For those good words of God have not only light in them to
direct us, but power also to assist us to do what they require, and by the
daily reading and h^ring of them, we shall be excited to more care of
well-doing: we must exercise our selves ^n the Word day and night; and never
let them depart out of our hearts, but keep our hearts still warm with the
heat that comes from them, never suffering the warmth to go out through our
long forbearance of the use of them, Col. 3. 16. Psalm. 1. 2. Josh. 8. Esaias 8.
16, 20.

14. He must carefully (...) in (...) first love, Revel. 2. 4. The 14 He must
k^pe his first love.
Lord is wont at some times or other, about the first conversion of a sinner,
to show himself with such power in his ordinances, and to reveal unto him such
glories in the merits and gifts of Jesus Christ, and the happiness of his
estate in him, that his heart is thereby fired to a cheerful liking of the
means of salvation, and of godly persons, and to a wonderful desire of God,
and care to please God. Now he that would prosper in a Christian course, must
be wonderful careful to preserve affection, and this spiritual love in his
heart, and watch against, and resist the first beginnings of decay, or
coldness, or declining in his heart, and take heed of suffering his heart to
be drawn away by the deceitfulness of sin, or the enticements of the world.

15. He must covet earnestly the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12. vlt. There 15 He must
covet the best gifts.
are some duties in piety, or Mercy, or Righteousness, which in respect of
our places do most concern us, and would in a more special manner adorn our
particular profession: so are there some gifts which do advance our communion
with God, and do make us more profitable amongst men. Now these things we
should study, and earnestly labor to frame our selves to, and to express them
more effectually in our conversation. This no doubt is the reason why the holy
Ghost does in the Scripture make Catalogues of certain special duties, or
graces singled out from the rest, and sitted to the conditions of the people
who are written to: and this would be a singular advantage to us, if we also
would single out to our use some few of the chiefest virtues or duties which we
would daily set before us, an^ strive by prayer and all holy endeavor to
fashion them to the life in our hearts and lives.

16. He must renew often his 16. He must often
mortification; man's heart is like humble his soul be fore God.
fallow ground, which is not fit to receive seed, till it be broken up, and at
best it is like a garden which will often need weeding. If we do not at some
times in special manner humble our souls before God, worldly cares, or
carnal delights will ouer-grow our desires and our practice, and choke the
seed of the Word received by us: we must keep under our bodies, and bring
them in subjection, and be often dragging our lusts to the cross of Christ,
there to crucify them. Our practice is like to sowing, which presupposes
plowing before, Ier. 4. 3, 4. Hosh. 10. 12. 1. Cor. 9. 27.

17. We must watch for the opportunities 17 He must watch for the oppor
tunities of w^-doing.
of well-doing, and take heed of procrastination: he must seek righteous^esse,
and haste to it, he must not put it off till to morrow, Esaias. 6. 8. Prou. 3.
28. and 2. 4. Amos. 5. 14.

18. He must remember the 18 He must be (...) of sanctifying the S^bbath.
Sabbath Day to sanctify it. The commandment concerning the keeping of the
Sabbath, to sanctify it, is placed in the midst between the two Tabels, of
purpose to show that the keeping of the Sabbath, is a singular help to all
piety and righteousness; and God has promised a special blessing to the
obseruers of the Sabbath, and gives strength by the rest of that day, ^he
better to perform holy duties all the week after, Commandment, 4. Esaias 38.
1^.

19. He must meditate much on the example of the godly of all 19. He must
often think of ^he example of the godly that have exc^lled.
ages, and strive diligently to learn their ways, and to quicken himself by
the thought of their care, zeal, and sincerity. And thus he may also
profitably set before him the examples of such of his own acquaintance, as
excel in the gifts of Christ, and fruits of weldoing. The example of good men
should be as forcible to draw us to good, as the example of evil men is to
incline others to evil: we have been compassed about with a cloud of
witnesses, who have lived in all ages of the Church: we must therefore stand
in the ways and see, and ask for the old way to walk in it, and with all
gladness follow any that are fit to be guides to us therein, Hebr. 12. 1.
Ier. 12. 19. and 6. 16.

20. He must go daily to him that 20. He must daily seek (...) way of God.
teaches to profit, begging of God to show him a way, and to lead him by his
Spirit unto the right practice of every holy duty, even to guide him in the
plain path, Esaias 48. 17. ^sal. 27. 11.

Thus I have s^t down those rules which are general helps unto godliness,
and must be attended by a Godly Christian.

CHAP. III.
Showing the things that are to be avoided by such as would order their
conversation aright.

NOw before I proceed unto the rules that concern the manner of weldoing, I
will add to the former directions, nine Cautions, or nine things which a
Christian must take heed of in He must ^oide,
his practice of holy duties: As

First, he must take heed of wretchlesnesse, or a scornful 1. Carelesness^.
carelessness of his own ways: he must not despise his ways, as if he cared
not how he lived, or rested satisfied to be still as he was: this
carelessness proves the bane of many a soul, whereas He that keeps his
soul, keeps his way, Prou. 19. 16. and 2^. 8.

2. He must take heed of precipitation, or rashness, or too Rashness.
much haste: this is the ground of much false zeal, and the cause of strange
evils in the presence of some Christian: but the godly Christian must learn of
Solomon to prepare his work in the field, and then build his house: he must
get sound knowledge of the warrant of his actions, and guide his affairs by
advice, and with serious preparation fit himself to the doing of what he is
sure is good. He that hastes with his feet, sins: what is done rashly,
cannot be done well: Prou. 19. 2. As procrastination is a great vice; so
precipitation is no virtue, Prou. 24. 27. and 28. 26.

3. He must have no confidence 3. Carnal confidence.
in the flesh, he must not rely upon his own wit, memory, reason, desires,
virtues, praises, or power; but all his comfort and affiance must be in the
merits, intercession, virtue and assistance of Jesus Christ his Savior, Phil.
3. 3.

4. He must not haste to be rich, 4. Have to be rich.
for the desire of money is the root of all evil: and they cannot be at
leisure for good duties, that are so eager to compass great things in the
world, Pro. 23. 4. and 28. 20.

5. He must take heed of the 5. Distrustful (...).
snares that rise from distrustful fears: There is a snare in fear, Pro. 29.
25. There are many fears will assault a man that resolves to live well; as the
fear that he cannot do good duties; the fear that God will not accept what
he does; the fear lest men should scorn him, or contemn him, or lest he
should lose the favor of his friends, or such like. Now against all these must
the godly mind be armed, and take heed that those fears prove not great
hindrances to him; and especially take heed of that unbelief, or counterfeit
humility, by disabling himself, or mistrusting God contrary to his nature and
prom^

6. He must take heed of adding 6 Adding to, or ta king from the Word of God.
to or detracting from the word of God: He must not imagine more sins then God
has made; that is, not trouble himself with fear of offending in such things
as God has not in his Word forbidden: and so likewise he must not impose upon
his own conscience, or other men's, the necessity of observing such rules of
practice as God never prescribed. This caution would ease the hearts of many
Christians, if it were discreetly observed and applied, Pro. 30. 6.

7. He must take heed of hardening 7 Co^te^p of reproof
his neck against reproves: Pro. 26. 1. He must needs run into headlong
evils, that is so proud as not to hear advice, or to reject reproves; and it
will be a singular furtherance to an holy life, to be easy to be entreated to
leave his offenses, and to mend his errors.

8. He must take heed of beholding 8. Beholding vanity
vanity David. prays, that God would turn away his eyes from beholding
vanity. He that would forsake vanity, must avoid the presence of vain
persons, and the too much contemplation of vanity, shunning the reading and
discourse of the enticement of others unto any sin, Psalm. 119. 37.

9. And lastly, he must take 9. The be ginning of sin.
heed of the beginning of evils in his own heart: he must keep his heart with
all diligence, for there on comes life. His practice will be easy to him, if
he resist sin in the beginning, and drive out Satan from his holds, within
his soul; whereas he cannot but be much entangled and encumbred, that allows
himself in the secret entertainment of contemplative wickedness; he must
watch his heart, and strive for inward purity, Prou. 4. 23.

CHAP. IIII.
Containing the general Rules to be remembered in the manner of doing all good
duties.

HItherto of the first sort of general Rules. The second sort concerns the
manner of welldoing. There are diverse things in the general, which are to be
observed of the godly Christian in all good duties, which he ought There are 5
things to be still remembered, which concern the manner of well-doing.
to have perfect in his memory, and such as he might bring with him at all
times to form his heart in respect of them, to beget in him that holy m^ner of
carrying himself, which is requisite unto the acceptance of the good things
he employeth himself in: and the rather should he be moved to the care of
learning and expressing of these things, because the matter of good duties may
be done by wicked men, as they were by the Pharisees, and yet all abomination to
the Lord. That therfeore he may not lose that he works, he must strive in
every good action to express these nine things following in the manner of his
behavior.

The first thing required in the Zeal with continual willingness and feruen cie.
manner of every holy duty, is, Zeal. It is not enough that he do the duty,
but he must do it affectionately, bringing with him the stirring of the
desires of his heart, answerable and agreeable to the duty he would perform.
Zeal has in it two distinct things, willingness and feruencie. It must not
seem evil to him to do Gods work; and in doing it, he must lift up his
heart, so as he perform it with all his might, and with all his soul: and
this he does, when either he brings an heart delighting in good works, or
when he judges himself for what deadness, or distraction, or unwillingness
he finds in himself: he is accounted zealous, when he striue^ for it, and
lifts up his soul against the impediments which burden him. This zeal is
n^cessary; Christ died to redeem a people unto himself, not only that would
do good works, but that would be zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14.

2. The second thing required 1. Sincerity which has in it five things.
in the manner of good duties, is sincerity; all his actions must be done in
the sincerity of his heart. The life of a Christian is like a continual
Passe-ouer: Now this Feast, he must keep always with the unleavened bread of
sincerity, 1. Cor. 5. 8.

Now this sincerity he must show diverse ways, as,

1. By the truth of his heart, as 1 Truth.
it stands opposed to hypocrisy: he must not talk of well-doing, or seem to
do it, but he must do it indeed.

2. By his respect to all Gods 2 Respect to al Gods
commandments; when he can say commandments.
with David, I esteem all thy precepts, concerning all things, to be right,
and I hate every false way. He that is truly sincere, accounts that every
word of God is good, and desires to yield obedience in all things. He has not
his reservation, or exception. He does not with Herod give himself liberty to
lie in the wilful breach of one commandment, resting satisfied to have
reformed himself in other things. And he would have God to forgive him all his
sins, so his heart desires to forsake sin, and so he desires also to do
every part of Gods work.

3. By propounding the glory of 3 Right end.
God, as the chief end of all his actions: His praise must not be of men; nor
must he do good duties for carnal ends, 1. Cor. 10. 31.

4. By obeying without expostulating, 4. Obedience with out expostulation.
though God give no apparent reason of his commandment. Thus Abraham showed
his sincerity, when God bade him go out of his own country, though he knew
not whither he should go, Heb. 11. 8. This is to obey simply, because God has
commanded it.

5. By obeying absent as well as 5. Obedience in all places.
present, in all companies as well as one. This praised the sincerity of the
obedience of the Philippians, Phil. 2. 12.

Thus of sincerity, which is the second thing required in the manner of
well-doing.

3. The third thing is constancy: He is blessed that does righteousness The
third thing required in the manner of welldoing, is constancy.
always. Doing righteousness will not serve the turn, but it must be at all
times, Psalm. 106. 3. Our righteousness must not be like the morning dew. It
is not sufficient to do good by fits; we are no day-labourers, but Gods hired
servants. He that is righteous, must be righteous still, Romans 6. 19. Revel. 22.
11. There must be continuance in welldoing, Romans 2. 7, 8.

Now to be constant in well-doing, And he is constant, that does good duties.
it is to do good duties.

1. Without weariness. It is required as a thing necessary to the manner of
well-doing, that we be not weary of it, and that we faint not, Gal. 6. 9.
This we must strive for by prayer.

2. Without discouragement; we (...) Without discouragement.
must lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, and make
straight steps to our feet. How much hinderance to well-doing,
discouragement is, may appear by this similitude: Feeble knees will dispatch
but a little space of the journey, and hands that hang down, are not fit for
work: great is the hinderance comes to many by their discouragements and
aptness thereunto, which arises usually from pride, and the dregs of worldly
sorrow, and ought much to be resisted by true Christians, Heb. 12. 12, 13.
Josh. 1. 6, 7.

3. Without impediment: that is' notwithstanding all the impediments 3.
Notwithstanding impediments.
may be cast in the way: judgment should run down as waters, and
righteousness as astowing stream; we should overcome all difficulties. You
cannot stop the flowing stream, though you cast in great logs or stones, yea
though you would go about to dam it up; and such should be the resolution of a
godly Christian, Amos. 5. 24.

4. Without wavering or uncertainty. 4 Without wavering.
It is uncertain running the Apostle impliedly forbids, 1. Cor. 9. 26. Our
life is like a race: Now in a race it is not enough that a man run now and
then, though he run fiercely for the time; he must not trifle and look
behind, and stand still at his pleasure, and then run again, but he must be
always running: so ought it to be with us in the race of godliness. It will
not serve the turn to be good by fits, and to be forward in good things only
at sometimes, and then be careless, and off the hooks, as we say, at other
times.

5. Without declining or going back. Job comforts himself against 5. Without
declining.
the aspersion of hypocrisy, by this, that his foot had held on his steps,
and Gods ways he had kept, and not declined, nor had he gone back from Gods
commandments, Job 23. 11, 12. Though he had not made such progress as he
desired, yet this was his comfort, he had not back slided by Apostasy.

And thus of the third thing also required in the manner of well-doing, which
is Constancy.

4. The fourth thing required, is fear: thus Prou. 28. 14. The 4. Fear.
man is blessed that fears always. And 1. Pet. 1. 17. and 3. 2. Our
conversation must be with fear. This fear excludes rudenes, carelessness,
conceitednesse, pride, and the like, and includes reverence, lawful regard of
Gods holiness, or holy presence, (whom we should set always before us) and the
fear of the deceitfulness of sin, and our own corrupt dispositions, and
the care to avoid all occasions of offending God or men.

The fifth thing is Simplicity. Simplicity which is,
This is so necessary, as the Apostle mistrusted most the subtlety of the
devil, in beguiling Christians of this simplicity which they had in Jesus
Christ, 2. Corinthians. 11. (...).

Now this simplicity contains in it distinctly diverse things.

1. A resting in those forms of holiness and happiness which 1 To rest upon
the Word for the forms of holiness and happiness.
God has prescribed, when a man desires no more to make him happy, then what
God has offered and given in Jesus Christ, 2. Corinthians. 11. 3. and when he
accounts nothing to defile him, but what God has forbidden, and nothing
needful to be done by him, what God has in his word required.

2. A Doue-like innocence, and 2 To be harmless
harmlesnes, when the Christian shows a desire to be injurious to no man, but
rather to seek the good of others, as well as his own, 1. Cor. 10. 24.

3. An ignorance of the depths 3 To be simple concerning evil.
of Satan, and the methods of sin, when he is not cunning in sinning, but
simple concerning euili, no way desirous to get subtle excuses, or arguments to
defend himself in evil, Romans 16. 19.

4. A love of Godliness for it 4 To love goodness for it self.
self, and hatred of sin, as it is sin.

5. Meekness of Wisdom, 5. To (...).
^mes. 3. 13. which is showed three ways. First by lowlines^e of mind, when a
man is not conceited, or wise in himself, but retains a sense of his own
unfitness; and unworthiness, Job 37. 24. Secondly, by silence from his own
praises, Prou. 27. 2. Thirdly, by avoiding vain ianglings, which arise out of
envy, or contempt of others.

6. The preserving of himself 6. Fear God, and not envy the wicked
in the fear of God, notwithstanding the prosperity of evil doers, not
envying the wicked, that has success in his way, Prou. 23. 17.

The sixth thing required in the The sixth is circumspection, which has five
things in it.
manner of well-doing, is Circumspection, Ephesians. 5. 15.

Now he walks circumspectly or exactly:

1. That makes conscience to observe the lesser commandments as well as the
greater, Math. 5. 19.

2. That abstaines from the very appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.

3. That with discretion looks to the circumstances of things to be done, as
time, place, persons, order, and the like: that does not only do good, but is
wise to do good, Romans 16. 19.

4. That lives without rebuke, and is unspotted of the world, Phil. 2. 15.
James 1. vlt. that is not guilty of any scandal, and gives no just cause to
the wicked to blaspheme, but prouides for things honest in the sight of all
men, 2. Cor. 8. 21.

5. That will not do evil, though good might come of it, Romans 2. 8.

The seventh thing required in the manner of well-doing, is The 7 is growth or
increase.
growth and increase: We must not only get grace and knowledge, and do good,
but we must grow in the grace and knowledge of Which has three things in it.
Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 3. 18. and this growth should have in it distinctly
three things. 1 Abounding in goodness.


1. Abounding in good works, or a more frequent practice of al sorts of
duties, that we have opportunity and power to practice, 1. Corinthians. 15. 58.
Coloss. 1. 10.

2. The perfecting of holiness, 2. Perfecting of holiness.
2. Cor. 7. 1. or the ripening of our gifts, and finishing of the good things
we begin, not leaving off till we have accomplished them in some good measure
and manner.

3. Progress, so as our 3. Progress
works be more at last then at first.

And all this we should strive for, both that so our profiting might appear,
1. Tim. 4. 15. and we may be fit to be an example to (...) T^m. 4. 2. 1
others, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 7.

The eighth thing required in the manner of well-doing, is Faith: we must
walk by faith in all our actions, 2. Cor. 5. 7. Now 8. Faith.
faith is employed partly in taking notice of Gods will, as the warrant of our
actions, and partly in ouercomming the difficulties of well-doing, making us
hold out, though we be scorned, or disgraced, or opposed in the world, and
raising up our hearts to believe Gods assistance, notwithstanding our own
weaknesses, and partly in trusting God for the success, believing Gods
promises.

The ninth and last thing required The last is moderation.
in the manner of well-doing, is Moderation. This rule is expressed in these
words, Eccles. 7. 16. Be not just over much, The place in, Eccles. 7. 16.
expounded.
neither be thou wicked over much. Now for the sense of these words, we must
know in the negative, that this place is most profanely alleged by such as
produce it as a reproof of strictness of life, and the refusal of the
excesses of the time.

There are many things said to give a sense of those words.

1. Some refer these words to Justice, either Distributive, or Commutatiue,
and that either in the case of a private person, or of a Magistrate. A private
man must neither stand too much upon his right, nor yet suffer his innocence
to be too much wronged. A Magistrate must not be too severe in a
selfe-conceited justice, not yet too remiss in sparing or favoring
wickedness.

2. Some think it restraines curiosity and carelessness, as if the sense
were, Be not curious to pry or search into secret things, that are not
revealed: for he that will be searching into Gods majesty, may be oppressed
by his glory: nor yet be so careless, as not to take notice of the truth
revealed.

3. Some thus: Exceed not by too much preciseness on the right hand, or by
too much profaneness on the left hand. On the right hand they go out, that
bring in works of supererogation, and such as worship God after the precepts
of men, and such as tie men's consciences to observe or avoid things without
warrant of Scripture, and such as say they have no sin, and need not the
grace of God.

4. Lastly, the fittest interpretation is theirs, that expound the words in
this sense, Be not just overmuch, that is, think not too highly of thy self
in any thing thou do well, nor yet be wicked overmuch, that is, account not
too vilely of thy self, denying Gods gifts in thee, and refusing the just
comforts thou should take to thy self; aggrauate not against thine own
soul thy weakness above reason and measure.

CHAP. V.
Entreating of the rules that concern our carriage toward God, and in
particular about the knowledge of God.

HItherto of the general The division of the particular rules.
rules: The particular rules that concern the right ordering of our
conversation, may be cast into three heads, as they direct us in our carriage,

1. Toward God. 2. Toward men. 3. Toward our selves.
All the rules that concern The subdiuision.
our duties to God, may be cast into two heads: For they concern either the
love of God, or the service of God. This is an exact division; for all we owe
to God, is fitly comprehended in these two, Love and Service, and the Scripture
so diuides in these and the like places, Commandment 2. Deuteronomy. 11. 22. and 30.
16. Josh. 22. 5. Esaias. 56. 6.

Now that we may be rightly ordered in respect of our love to God, we must
consider of this love either in the foundation of it, or in the exercise of it.
The foundation of our love to God, is the true knowledge of God, 1. Chron. 28.
9. The rules that con cerne the right knowledge of God, of (...). sorts That
w^e ^ay conceive ^right of Gods nature.
So that in the first place we must soundly inform our selves concerning this
knowledge of God. Now the rules that concern the right knowledge of God,
concern either the right conceiving of his nature, or our acquaintance with
God, when we do aright conceive of him. That we may conceive aright of Gods
nature:

1. We must exclude out of our thoughts all likenesses, so as 1 We must cast
(...) all likenesses
men do not think of God, representing him by the similitude of any creature:
He that forbids Images of him in Churches, forbids it also in our heads,
Commandment 2. Esaias 40. Deuteronomy. 4.

2. We must strive to conceive 6. We must conceive of him according to his
praises.
of him according to his praises declared by his works, or in his Word. This
is an excellent and easy way to think of God. Since our hearts cannot conceive
his nature, we should fill them with the impression of his praises, and
according to them direct our affection and service to him: as I would bring
this mind to prayer or any other service of God, I cannot make any resemblance
of the divine substance, whom I am about to serve: yet this will I do, I will
remember that he that I pray unto, is most wise, most omn potent, most just,
most gracious, etc. Thus God proclaims himself by his praises, Exo. 34. 6.
where God himself shows us a way how to conceive of him. 3. We must believe
the Trinity of Persons.


3. Thou (...) silence thy reason, and exalt thy faith in the point of the
Trinity, which must be conceived of necessity, because all service is due to
the whole Trinity. Now thou need not to strive to resemble the Trinity in
any likeness in thy mind, but only bring faith to believe that thy God is
three in one.

4. It may yet help thy understanding 4. Thou may conceive of God in the
Humane Nature of Christ.
to conceive, that God is in Christ, and the fullness of the Godhead dwells in
him bodily: and therefore when thou come to worship, thou may set before
thy mind the Humane Nature of Christ, adoring the Godhead in him, as
conceiving of God in that humane nature thou think of, Col. 2. 9. Ioh. 17. 3.

5. That this may be the more 5. Thou must resist Atheistical thoughts
clearly and comfortably done, thou must labor by sound advice and direction,
to expel out of thy head those secret and rebellious Atheistical thoughts,
which arise in thee about his nature, Decrees, Attributes, or Works. Men must
take heed of smothering these objections, but seek help against them in time.

Thus of the knowledge of God, as it concerns the right conceiving of his
Nature.

There is required further such 2. Of acquaintance with God
a knowledge, as brings us acquainted with God: we are commanded to acquaint
our selves with God, Job 22. 21, 22.

Now, because it is an exceeding That thou may be aquainted with God.
hard way for a mortal man to find out God, so as to enjoy familiarity with
him: therefore I will add some directions about it: For if thou would
acquaint thy self with God,

1. Thou must prepare thy 1. Thou must prepare thy heart.
heart for this Vision of God, by driving out filthy and unholy thoughts and
affections: For without holiness no man can see God. The pure in heart shall
see God, Math. 5. 8. Hebr. 12. 14. 1. Chron. 19. 3. God delights to show
himself familiarly in a clean heart.

2. Thou must beg this acquaintance 2 Thou must beg it by prayer.
by prayer: if thou seek it of him earnestly, though God be in himself
invisible to mo^tall eyes, yet he will show himself to the eyes of thy mind;
pray for his acquaintance, and he will be acquainted with thee: This is to ask
after the Lord, and to seek God: if we seek him, he will be found, Psalm.
105. 3, 4. But then we must remember three things.

1. To seek him with our whole hearts, we must pray with great earnestnes and
desire, Psa. 119. 10

2. To seek him early, and while 2. We must believe the Trinity of Persons.
he may be found, Hos. 5. 15. Esaias 55. 6. God offers acquaintance in his
Ordinances, and sometimes comes near, and knocks at men's hearts, and works
greater impressions upon them, now if thou would call upon God heartily, he
would show thee his presence.

3. To seek him constantly; we must seek his face continually: 3.
both til we find it, and after we have had acquaintance with him, it must be
continued: we must not think much, if we be put to pray often and long,
before we ataine such an incomparable benefit.

4. Thou must give thy self, 4. Thou must give thy self to God.
soul and body, to God seriously, and from thy heart, deuoting and promising
to spend thy days in his service, and then he will reveal himself unto thee,
Rom 12. 1, 2.

5. Thou must wait upon his Ordinances, and watch how the Lord speaks unto
thee, either by his Word, or by his Spirit: For in them he shows himself to
men, and conuerseth with them.

6. It is a great furtherance to our acquaintance with God, to keep company
with his Household; for with them he dwells: and by conuersing with them, we may
occasionably often see God, 1. Ioh. 4. 6, 7, 8, 12.

Thus of acquaintance with God.

There are other things to be Other things about our knowledge of God.
further noted concerning our knowledge of God, such as these:

That when we attain unto any acquaintance with God, we must never rest, till
we know him to be our God, Col. 2. 2.

That it must be our daily care to increase in the knowledge of God, laboring
to plant in our hearts a more large and affectionate contemplation of the
glories of Gods Nature and Love.

That above all earthly things we should glory in it, if we attain some
happy admission into Gods presence, and ability to conceive of God, and to
be acquainted with him, Ier. 9. 24.

CHAP. VI.
Rules that order us about the manifestation of our love to God.

HItherto of the Rules that concern the knowledge of God, as the foundation of
our love to God: The Rules that should order us in the exercise of our love to
God, follow; those are of two sorts: for either they concern the manifestation
of our Rules about the exercise of our love to God.
love; or our preservation in the love of God: we must show our love to God,
and we must keep our selves in the love of God, Jude 21.

In our manifestation of love to God, we must look to both the matter, (as
the thing whereby;) and also the manner how we should express our love to God.

For the first, there be diverse excellent Rules to be heeded of us in our
practice, in observing whereof we may soundly prove S^en ways to manifest our
love to God
the truth of our love to God: if we say we love God, we must show it by these
things following.

1. We must avouch God to be 1. By auouching him to be our God.
our God, Deuter. 26. 27. and so we do, if we do not only make choice of God
above all things to set our hearts upon him, but also maintain our choice, by
a constant refusal of all idols in the world, even all things which might
entice us to love them in stead of God, by sound affection and practice
declaring our resolution to cleave to God, as our sufficient happiness, though
all the world follow their profits or pleasures, etc.

2. We must provide and prepare 2 By providing him a place to dwell where we
dwell.
a place for God, that he may dwell with us, wheresoever we dwell, Exodus 15.
2. It is a sign of our true love to God, why we cannot live without him. He
that can be content to live in any place where he is not powerfully present in
his ordinances, shows no love to God. It should be our chief care to seat
our selves so in the world, as the Lord and his presence may be provided for,
that he may reign amongst us by the Scepter of his word.

3. We must show our love to 3. By showing our love to Jesus Christ.
God, by our love to the Lord Jesus the Son of God: we must kiss the Son,
Psalm. 2. vlt. And if any man love not the Lord Jesus, he has not the Father,
1. Cor. 16. 22 We show that we love God, when we highly esteem Jesus
Christ, and make much of him in our hearts, and strive to fire our affections
toward him; and this must be our care through the passages of our life, to
form in us the love of the Lord Jesus, that we may long after him, and have
the desires of our souls after him and his coming.

4. We must show our love to God, by walking with him, Genesis 4. By walking with
God.
17. 1. Mic. 6. 8. The Lord does not account it a sign of love to offer to him
a thousand rams, or rivers of oil: but this is it that pleases him, To humble
our selves to walk before him.

Now we walk with God diverse ways.

1. When we set the Lord always Men walk with 5. ways.
before us, remembering his holy presence, and not daring to go alone without
thinking of God, Psalm. 16. 8.

2. When we nourish the motions of the Spirit, and retire our selves of purpose
to entertain them.

3. When we daily have recourse to those means by which the Lord is pleased
to converse with men, and not rest in the base use of the means, but strive to
find out the Lord in his holy presence, in every ordinance of his, Psalm 63.
1, 2.

When we use our selves to Soliloquies with God, taking all occasions to speak
to God by prayer, and private meditation of things offered to us, out of which
we could extract matter for frequent ciaculations, lifting up our hearts upon
the very first motions of good unto God, Psalm. 63. 5, 6.

5. When our hearts are fired with longing desires after his presence of glory
in heaven, 2. Gor. 5. 8.

Thus of our walking with God.

6. We should manifest our 6. By honoring God.
love to God, by honoring him: For this is one special way by which God
requires to have our love showed to him, Mal. 1. 6. Now there are many ways by
which in our conversation, we may declare our desire to honor to ways of
honoring God.
our God: as,

1. By performing the care of businesses that concern his Kingdom, above all
other businesses, and showing our respect of the duties of the first Table that
concern God, before the duties that concern men in the second Table: we
honoring him by seeking his kingdom first: First (I say) in the precedencie
of time, and first, in respect of the measure of our affections, Math. 6.
showing a desire to please him rather then all the world.

2. By making a bold and open profession of Gods truth upon all occasions,
without fear of oppositions or snares of the world.

3. By grieuing heartily for the dishonor done unto him, by the blasphemies or
profaneness of his enemies, Psalm. 42. 3.

4. By directing all our actions to his glory, striving in all things to order
them so, that some way God may be praised by us or others, 1. Cor. 10. 31.

5. By our willingness to suffer any thing for his sake, though it were
extremities, even the loss of all worldly things, yea and life it self, if it
were called to it.

6. By honoring them that fear his Name, and are begotten of him, and bear
his Image, receiving them, and making much of them, and defending them for the
love we bear to God himself, Psalm. 15. 4. 1. Ioh. 5. 1.

7. By hating them that are his enemies, as if they were our own; conceiving
more dislike of them for dishonouring God, then for any wrongs they could do
unto us, Psalm. 139. 21, 22.

8. We honor God when we speak of the Oracles of God with all reverence, as
may become the nature and glory of them, Commandment 3. 1. Pet. 4. 11.

9. We honor him by gifts bestowed upon him, when we bring to him our
free will offerings, such as are the first fruits of all our increase, when out
of all things wherein God has prospered us, we with gladness consecrate a
part for the furtherance of his worship, or the maintenance of his poor:
Proverbs 3. 6. Esaias 60. 6.

10. We honor him, when we praise him. One usual way by which we honor great
persons in the world, is by taking all occasions to magnify them, by
commending their virtues, or their worthy acts: And this is likewise one great
way of honoring God; and therefore with sorrow for our neglects herein, we
should study his praises for the time to come, and strive for language to be
able readily to do so.

Now God is praised diverse Rules about the praise of God.
ways: some of them belong not properly to this place, and therefore I will
but touch them.

We praise God:

1. When we keep and observe carefully the solemnities set apart for his
praise; as when we celebrate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is
therefore called the Eucharist, because it is to be performed as a thanksgiving
and praising of God.

2. When daily we take all occasions in private to bless God for his daily
mercies: But let these and such like pass, as not proper to this place. We
must praise him in our discourse to others. This is required of us in many
Scriptures, Psalm. 33. 1. Job 36. 24. Psalm. 96. 4. But because this must When
we commend God, diverse things are to be observed.
not be done cursorily, diverse rules are to be observed: As,

1. That we may praise him effectually, we must wisely consider of his
works, and so of his nature, to extract from thence sound arguments of praise,
Psalm. 64. 9.

2. We should do well, for this purpose, to keep Records, and Register up the
special glorious works of God, Job 36. 24. and 37. 14. Psalm. 78. 7.

3. When we do praise him, it must be done with our whole heart, speaking of
his praises with all possible affection, and not as if we speak of ordinary
things, Psalm. 9. 1.

4. We must thus praise him, not once, or for one work of his, but we must
praise him for all his works, especially his wondrous works, Psalm. 9. 1. and
105. 1, 2. and 106. 2.

5. We must praise him from day to day, and continue to do it, while we live,
Psalm. 63. 4. and 96. 23.

6. This is a duty that all the kindreds of the people are bound to: All the
people must praise him, Psalm 148. 12, 13. and 96. 6, 7, 8.

Thus of the fifth way of showing our love to God: and that is by honoring him.

The sixth way by which we must show our love to God, is 6 By trusting in him.
by trusting in him; as men show, whom they love most, by relying most upon
them, and their favor and help. Now there are diverse cases, in which we must
show our trust in God.

1. By relying upon his mercy How we must show it that we ^rust God.
for our justification and salvation: and in this we should most use our
trust, as being in a business that most highly concerns us, Esaias 44. 24, 25.

2. By committing all our works to him, for assistance in them, or success of
them: This is to commit our way to God, to be careful to seek his assistance
to help us, to do our duty, and then to leave the success of all to his
blessing, Psalm 37. 3, 5. Prou. 16. 3.

3. By believing all that he says is true, whether h^e pro^, threaten, or
comfort by his wo^, upon all occasions believing his Prophets, 2. Chron. 20. 20.

4. By staying our hearts upon him in all our distresses. Now in the time of
distress we may How we may prove that we trust God in distress.
prove, that we trust in God diverse ways: As,

1. By running to him, and pouring our hearts before him, making our moan unto
him, Psalm. 18. 2. and 62. 8, 10. Look amongst men, to whom we first run to
make our moan in our distress, and that person is he whom we most love, and
trust: so is it toward God.

2. By casting our cares and burdens upon him, Psalm. 55. 22.

3. By not respecting the proud, and such as turn aside to lies, Psalm. 40. 4.

4. By relying upon his help, In relying upon God in affliction.
^oel 3. 16. Esaias 50. 7. But then we must observe, how we must rely upon
Gods help: for there are many things we must cast cut of our hearts in
affliction. When we have been with the Lord, and committed our selves to him,
we must rely upon We must avoid five things.
him.

1. Without leaning to our own understanding, or wilful inclination to follow
our own courses, and proiects, Prou. 3. 5.

2. Without murmuring, or repining at our condition, or vexing our selves at
the providence of God toward us, Psalm. 37. 7.

3. Without fear, that is, without mistrustfull fears, and servile
perturbations, imagining evils, which the Lord has not brought upon us, Psalm.
3. 6. and 27. 1.

4. Without using ill means to get out of distress, Amos 5. 4, 6.

5. Yea, lastly, without care, that is, without distrustful carking cares,
Phil. 4. 6.

Thus of the sixth way of showing our love to God, and that is by trusting in
him.

The seventh and last way, by which we must show our love 7 By obeying him.
to God, is, To obey him: For this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments: Neither is the sign in this, that we do what God requires for
the matter, but that his commandments are not grievous unto us: We love God,
if we love to do his work, and if we lift up our hearts in his ways, setting
upon his work with a special readiness, and strength of desire, and more
then ordinary care, 1. Ioh. 5. 2. 2. Chron. 17. 6. and 19. 2.

Thus of the matter, that is, the thing by which we must show our love to God;
the manner also is to be considered: For in all those things which we would
do at any time to prove our love to God, we must look to the manner how we
do them, as was a little touched before: Now distinctly we must bring to the
declaration of our love to 2 Things in the manner of showing our love to God.
God, two things;

1. Feruencie. 2. Fear.
For the first, we must love 1. Feruencie.
God, and show it in feruencie of ^ur love. How? Even with all our hearts, and
all our souls, and all our might, and all our understanding. Our hearts must
be more inflamed, then they are in showing love to Wife, Children, Friends,
Parents, etc. We must love God above all, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. and 30. 6.

For the second, we must love 2. Fear.
God, and show it too, but it must be with fear. Howsoever with men, true love
casts out fear; yet God being so infinite in glory and majesty, we must
love him, but yet with fear. Now that this may not be mistaken, I will set
down the particulars of this fear.

We must show our fear:

1. By entertaining lawful Eigh^ ways by which we show our fear of God.
thoughts of his dreadful Majesty, casting out all vile, mean, and vain
thoughts of him, Dan. 6. 26.

2. By departing from evil, that might any way displease him: being tender in
this point, not daring to presume, or plead impunitie, or freedom from danger,
but in all things desire to avoid what might anger him, Prou. 3. 7.

3. By using all terms of hearty abasement of our selves, when we come
before him. Thus Abraham calls himself dust and ashes; and thus we should
humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, 1. Pet. 5. 6.

4. By doing his will, without fearing man, or any other creature, Esaias 8. 12,
13.

5. By a daily and reverent remembrance of his continual holy presence.

6. By trembling at his judgments, Psalm. 4. 4. Hab. vlt.

7. By the humble using of all the means of communion with God; using his
Ordinances with all convenient reverence, attention, and abasement of our
selves, Mal. 2. 5.

8. Lastly, by the reverend use of his very Titles, fearing that great and
fearful Name of the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.

CHAP. VII.
Rules that concern the preservation of our love to God.

HItherto of the Rules that concern the manifestation of our love to God: The
rest of the Rules serve to teach us, how to preserve in us this love to God.
Now that we may continue in our love to God, we must observe these rules:

1. We must separate our selves from all others, to be his, Leuit. 20. 26.
avoiding fellowship with the servants of a strange god, that might any way
entice us from the love of God; yea we should so much alienate our heart^ from
all idols, that we should not make mention of their names, and therefore daily
confirm our hearts in that purpose to clean to God alone, Mal. 2. 11. Exodus
34. 11, 14, 15. and 23. 13. Act. 11. 23. Josh. 23. 8.

2. We must beware, that we forget not God, nor go too long without
effectual remembrance of him. They that can live whole days and weeks
without any care to think of God, may be sure their hearts are void of the
love of God; and as ever we would continue to love God, we must be careful
every day to remember him, and think upon him, Deuteronomy. 6. 12. and 32. 18.

3. We must labor to edify our selves in our most holy faith; we must build
up our hearts in the assurance of that wonderful love God has showed to us:
and this will preserve and keep us in our love to him again, Jude 20.

4. We must pray in the holy Ghost, as is showed in the same place: prayer
preserues acquaintance with God, and exceedingly quickens the heart; and
besides, draws from God new pledges of his love to us, which may serve to
kindle our affections toward him.

5. In the same place another rule is imported: and that is the daily
expectation of the coming of Christ: for the terror of that Day will move us
to show all possible love to God, and so will that singular glory we are
assured to receive in that day.

6. In the use of all Gods Ordinances, we must be careful to seek out the
face of God, which is that special presence of his grace. For the love of God
will decay in us, if once we come to use the means only for form, and an
outward show, Psalm. 105. 4. And if we miss of God in his Ordinances, we must
never be quit, till we find him whom our soul loves, Cant. 3. 1. Psalm. 63. 1.

7. We must preserve the truth he has delivered to us; yea, we must contend
for it: for sound do^rine laid up in our hearts, will preserve in us soundness
of affection to God, Jude 3.

8. We must get Catalogues of Gods praises in particular, and fill our hearts
with the knowledge and contemplation of them.

9. If we would be preserved in the love of God, we must labor to attain to
the ability to rejoice in God, and delight our selves in God. A wife that
would increase her love to her husband, must strive to solace her self often
with her husband, and to form in her heart a special delight in him: So must
we do to God. This is miserably neglected, and yet exceedingly necessary.
Nor is it an ordinary joy we should take in God, but we should joy in him,
first, with all our hearts: secondly, not for a time, but always, every day;
nor with common, but with exceeding joys, Phil. 4. 4. Psa. 37* 4. and 68. 3,
4. and 105. 3. Now that this About rejoicing in God.
point may be the better understood, I will consider of two things: first,
what it is to delight and joy in God: secondly, what we should do that we might
delight, and take pleasure in God.

For the first, this delight in What it is to rejoice or delight our selves in
God.
God has in it four things distinctly.

First, a spiritual satisfaction, or contentment, arising from the assurance
of Gods love to us, as ^ing enough, that he regards us; thus David says, his
soul was ^tisfied as with marrow, Psalm. 63. 5. and 149. 2.

Secondly, a joyful entertainment of all passages of love between God and us;
especially in the use of his Ordinances.

Thirdly, a delightful contemplation of God and his mercies.

Fourthly, a glorying in God, and extolling of his praises, as by discourse, so
by singing of Psalms, 1. Cor. 1. 31. Psalm. 33. 1. and 105. 3. and 68. 3, 4.

Now for the attainment of the ioying in God:

1. We must mourn often for our disabilities herein, and pray What we must
do that we might be able to joy in God.
to God to form this delight in us.

2. We must restrain carnal joys, and cares: for the excess of both does
exceedingly dull the heart, and withdrawes it care of delight in God, Phil. 4.
4, 5, 6.

3. We must exercise our selves with all the joy we can in the Word of God,
Psalm. 119. 14, 16.

4. We must take heed of listening to Objections against the love of God to us,
whether they arise from Satan, or our own flesh.

5. We must often observe the miseries of the wicked, in comparison of our
happy estate in Christ, Hab. 3. 17, 18.

6. We must seek a delightful conversation with the godly.

7. We must take heed of domestical evils, our home sins, the corruptions
that would daily prevail in us, Job 22. 23, 26.

8. We must restrain our own belief about the acceptance of the good
duties we perform; and to this end we must take heed, that we be neither
just overmuch, by attributing too much to our selves: nor yet wicked overmuch,
in condemning all we do, as hateful to God. For this last does maruellously
hinder us from ioying in God.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing general Rules about Gods service.

HItherto of the first sort of Rules, that concern o^r carriage toward God,
namely, those tha^ concern our love to God. Now the second sort of Rules
follow, and that is, those Rule^ about the service of God.
that concern the service of God; and these may be cast into two ranks: for
they either concern the parts of Gods worship, or the time of Gods worship.

The Rules that concern the parts of Gods worship, are either general, which
bind us to the good behavior in all parts of Gods worship; or else certain
specialties of Direction, that concern some part of Gods worship only.

Now for the general rules, 9. Things to be remembered in eu^ry part of Gods
worship.
we should know and remember, that there are nine things to be looked to, and
brought to the practice of every part of Gods ^orship.

The first is preparation: we must i^ some sort confer with ^ur own hearts,
and prepare ^m, before we go before God to do any service, Job 11. 13. Psalm.
4. 4. Ezech. 7. 10.

Secondly, we must come with ^ll reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28. Psalm.
2. 11.

Thirdly, we must perform the service in repentance for our sins: We must
not come before God in the love of any sin; if we do, we lose our labor,
and God will loathe our works, Esaias 1. Job 11. 14. We must have clean hands,
and a pure heart, or else no service of God will be accepted, Psalm. 119. 11.
and 24. 4.

Fourthly, it must grieve us, that others will not serve God, Psalm. 119. 139.

Fifthly, we must perform every service in the name of Christ, or else it
cannot be accepted, b^ r^ason of that evil that clean to our best works:
whether w^ pray, or give thanks, or whatsoever we do, we must do it in the
name o^ Christ, Col. 3. 17.

Sixthly, in every service of God we must, as near as it may be, give God the
first praise, preferring the respects of God and his worship, before our
selves, or the regard of others: we must serve him betimes, seeking God in the
first places, Job 8. 5. Matthew. 6. 34. Psalm. 5. 3.

Seventhly, when we do any service to God, we must do it with all our
hearts, with as much willinguesse as may be, so as it may appear, that we
love to be his servants, as the Prophets phrase is, 1. Sam. 16. 7. 1. Chron.
28. 9. Esaias 56. 6.

Eighthly, in all service we must strive so to serve God, that we may please
him: not only careful to do t^ duty, but careful of Gods acceptati^. (...)
good duties being chies^ careful to see Gods appro^ation, not caring so much
for the pr^ise of ^as as the praise of God. ^n every part of Gods worship our
praise m^st be of God an^ not of men, Heb. 12. 28. Romans 2. 29.

Ninthly, we must clean to God, with detestation of all things o^ persons
that might a^ way draw us away from his s^uice, Deuteronomy. 13. 4, 5.

CHAP. IX.
Showing how we should carry our selves in Gods house.

HItherto of the Rules to be observed in all parts of Gods worship generally.

The special Rules concern, Rules about the public worship of God.
either Gods public worship in his house; or else the particu^ar parts of Gods
worship each by themselves.

The godly Christian ought with all care to lay before him the Rules that bind
him to the good behavior in Gods house, and to strive to fashion his nature
and practice, as may become the glory of Gods public service and presence;
and so there be diverse things which in a special manner he must look to, in
performing Gods public service.

For concerning these public duties, these rules must be observed.

First, that all sorts and degrees 1. All must come.
of men must appear before God publicly to do him homage and service. None
must be spared or freed; men, women, and children must all take notice of it,
that they are bound hereunto, Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12.

Secondly, we must come our selves with all possible reverence, 2. With all
possible reverence.
and look to our feet when we enter into the house of God, and strive to show
before all men our most careful respect of God and his holy Ordinances. For
God will be sanctified in them that come nigh him; and he looks for it at our
hands, by our reverent behavior, to be glorified before all the people, Leu.
10. 3. Eccl. 5. 1. We should then show a most holy fear of Gods name and
presence, Psalm. 5. 7.

Thirdly, in public duties that 3. And zeal
of the Prophet David should be true of us: The zeal of Gods house should eat
us up, Ps. 69. 9. and this And this zeal we should show six ways.
special zeal we should show,

1. By loving Gods house above all the places in the world: Our hearts should
be fired in us in the respect, that we may truly say with David, O how I love
thy house, Psalm. 2^. 8.

2. By confirming our own hearts in a resolution, to resort to Gods house with
joy and gladness, notwithstanding the scorns and oppositions of worldly men
and persons.

3. By stirring up others with all importunity to go up with them to worship
God in Sion, Esaias 2. 2.

4. By making haste to Gods worship, going to the house of God with the first,
and with willing hearts, with an holy thirst after the means, flocking and
flying thither as the clouds, or as so many doves to their windows, Zach. 8.
22. Psalm. 110. 3. Esaias 35. 1. and 60. 8.

5. By forwardness and cheerfulness, in contributing toward the maintenance
of Gods house and service in the means thereof, Esaias 60. 8, 9.

6. By grieuing heartily, because other men neglect or contemn the house of
God, and have no more mind to keep Gods law, Psalm. 119. 136.

Thus of that special zeal we should show about Gods public worship.

Fourthly, we should in all 4. With one consent.
public duties serve God with one consent and one heart. There should appear
in Gods servants a wonderful desire of unanimity and concord. They should
serve the Lord with one shoulder, that when they speak to God, it may be as
the voice of one man; when the Lord speaks to them, they should hear with one
heart. It is a marvelous glory in Religion, when people can come once to this,
to serve the Lord with one shoulder, Zeph. 3. 9.

Lastly, in the 52. Psalm. v. 8, 9. Three other rules gathered out of the Ps.
52. 8, 9.
we may gather three other rules, which in a special manner fit us for a
right behavior in Gods house.

First, we should always be as green Olive trees in the house of the Lord.
Howsoever it go with men in the world, yet when we come before the Lord, our
hearts shall rejoice and revive, and our spirits be fresh and cheerful, and
our affections should be healed of all the cares or distempers were before in
them: Gods Ordinances should have such a power over us, as to make a sudden
fresh spring of desires and holy thoughts in us. There is this power in the
Ordinances of God to effect this, if the fault be not in us: I mean, when
these Ordinances are exercised in the power and life of them.

Secondly, we must trust on the mercy of God, bringing an heart ready to
believe every good Word of God: resolving, that if the Lord will speak
comfortably to his servants, we will not dishonor his consolations, through
carelessness, or unbelief; but receive them with all our hearts, and establish
our selves in the safe-keeping of his good Word.

Thirdly, we must resolve to be thankful, with all tenderness, for all
experiences of Gods presence and goodness toward us in the means, vowing with
David, to praise him for ever for them. And if the Lord do withhold his power
and presence for a time, so as we feel not the effectualnesse of his
ordinances: yet we should resolve without distemper, to wait upon the Lord,
and observe him according to the seasons of his grace.

CHAP. X.
Rules that order us about hearing of the Word.

THus of the rules that we must observe in all public service of God. Now
there be certain special rules which must be particularly heeded in each
part of Gods worship by it self. And first I will begin with Rules that order
us in hearing the Word of God.
those rules, which we must more specially observe in hearing the Word of God,
and these are of three sorts.

1. Some bind us to the good behavior, before we come to hear. 2. Some at
the time of hearing. 3. Some after we have heard.
1. Before we come to hear, we must bring with us two 1 Before we come
things.

1. A resolution to deny our own wits, reasons, opinions, and conceits, and
empty our heads of all persuasion of our own skill, to judge in the things of
the kingdom of God, being ready to believe and think in all things, as God
shall teach us out of his Word. We must be fools, that we may be wise, 1 Cor.
3. 18. humbling our selves at his very feet to receive his Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 3.

2. We must bring with us a meek and quiet spirit, a mind quieted from
passions, lusts, and perturbations, and at rest from the turmoyling cares of
this world. The Word is able to do great things in our hearts, if we receive
it with meekness, James 1. 21.

Secondly, at the time of hearing, 1. In the time of hearing.
we must look to two rules.

First, we must hearken without distraction: we must hear, as if it were for
our lives, we must incline our ears, and shake off all impediments arising
from our own drowsinesse, prejudice, or vain thoughts, or distracting
objects, Esaias 55. 3. Psalm. 116. 113.

Secondly, we must prove all things, and keep that which is good. We must
hear with judgment, and hearken for our selves, having special care to look
to that doctrine which in particular concerns us, to lay it up in our hearts,
and apply it effectually. This is a rule of singular thrift in godliness. If we
did mark what sin in us the Lord reproues, or what comfort is speedily fitted
to our hearts: or what direction does specially concern us: He No^.
has an honest memory that will be sure to keep these things, though he
forget all the rest; and he has a wretched memory, and heart too, that
forgets these things, though he could repeat all the Sermon verbatim.

Thirdly, after we have heard, two things also must be further 3. After we have
heard
done.

First, we must by meditation labor to make those things we have heard, which
concern us, fast, that they run not out of our minds, and we must take heed
that neither the devil steal away the good seed, nor our own heart through
negligence forget it. Neither is this a work for an hour after, to keep
these things till we may repeat them to others, but ought to be our daily
work, especially the week after to think so often of them, till there be a
sure impression of the Word in our hearts, Hebr. 2. 1, 2.

Secondly, we must yet further see to it, that we be doers of the Word, yea we
must observe to do, as the phrase of the holy Ghost is. It is the wisdom of
God so to dispose of his ordinances, that we receive our directions by parcels,
and there is a time of interim between Sabbath and Sabbath, Sermon and Sermon,
that we might in that space learn to frame our selves to the obedience of the
truths received, that so we might be ready to receive new lessons from the
Lord. The surest way for the husband man to keep his seed, is not to lay it
up in his ba^, but to cast it into the ground: for what is sowed, he may
receive again with advantage; or if he might fail of an harvest from his
seed in nature, yet godly men shall never fail to receive what they sow by
practice, with increase. So much of the truth, as is put into practice, is sure
for ever; the rest may be lost: and it is a singular help to a Christian, if
he set upon his obedience while the doctrine is yet fresh in his mind; for
delay will compass him about with many difficulties, and he will want those
inward incitations, that might stir up his heart with power and strength to
obey.

CHAP. XI.
Rules about the Sacrament of Baptism.

THus of the rules of our carriage about hearing: Next we are to consider, how
we are to order our lives in respect of the Sacraments: The Sacraments are two:
Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

The duties we are bound to Rules about Baptism.
in respect of Baptism, concern either

1. Our children. 2. Our selves. 3. Others.
For our children, it is our duty to present them unto Baptism, 1. About our
children.
but withal we must look to it, that it be done in due time, and with faith
and thankfulness to God. In due time, so as thereby we signify our great
estimation of Gods mercy to our seed, and our great desire to have the Covenant
sealed, even unto them. We must also bring them to Baptism with says in Gods
covenant. The Lord has bound himself to be our God and the God of our seed*
Now it is our parts to give glory to God, and to declare before the Lord our
persuasion of his goodness, and claim to that part of his Covenant. By faith
we plead our right, whereas by unbelief we give God occasion to neglect our
seed. I add also, with thankfulness, because we ought with great joy and
acknowledgement of the free grace of God to behold our seed admitted, in the
sure covenant of mercy and salvation with our selves, and ought to think that
God has done more for our children, to admit them into the covenant by
Baptism, then if the greatest person on earth had made upon them the assurance
of some great estate of maintenance or preferment.

Secondly, for our selves, we 2. About our selves.
must make conscience of it, to make use of our own Baptism, and that
throughout the whole course of our life: It is given us as a seal of Gods
promises, and as a vow of our obedience, and so we must make use of it all the
days of our life, especially in three cases.

First, in the case of doubting and In (...) things.
fear of the forgiveness of our sins; or of the salvation of our souls:
for Baptism saves us, that is, effectually assures us of our salvation; and
we do not offend in trusting Gods promise made in his word, and signed and
sealed in Baptism. As certainly does it save our souls, as the Arc saved the
bodies of Noah and his household; so as we cannot miscarry, if we leap not out
of the Arc into the Seas of water. Let us stick to our Baptism, and then we
are safe: The washing in Baptism did assure the washing of our souls by the
blood of Christ for our sins. If I be tempted to doubt of my salvation, I
must say to my own soul: Has not the Lord provided me the Arc of Baptism
to preserve me from the seas of his wrath? And if I doubt the forgiveness of
sins, I must say^ Has not the Lord washed me ^om my sins by the blood of
his Son? Did he not show me so much in Baptism? We sin shamefully, in that
we do not make this use, but neglect the confidence Baptism should work in
us, as if the Lord had but dallied with us, or that Baptism were but some idle
Ceremony, 1 Pet. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 29. Acts 22. 16.

Secondly, in the case of temptation How Baptism may help us against sin.
to commit sin: we ought to fight against sin by this mighty weapon of our
Baptism, and so we may do by diverse Arguments: As

First, in my Baptism I have made a vow to God, that I would cleave to him in
Jesus Christ, and renounce the world, the devil, and sin: and shall I break
my vow to God, that would be ashamed to break my promise to men?

Secondly, my Baptism was the Baptism of repentance: and shall I yet live in
sin? My body was washed: and shall my soul be still impure? Mat. 3. 11.
Mark. 1. 4. Acts 13. 24.

Thirdly, by Baptism I was assured of the virtue of the death of Christ to
kill sin in me: and shall I not believe the operation of God, that he can
deliver me from the powerful temptations, or inclinations to any sin? Shall
I not seek strength of Christ? or shall I betray my self to the devil and
the flesh? In Christ I am dead to sin, and shall I yet live therein? Romans 6.
1, 3. Col. 2. 12.

Thirdly, our Baptism must be used against the doubts of perseuering, or
whether we shall be kept unto salvation, and whether our body shall be raised
again at the last day: for God has assured all this unto us in our Baptism,
that we have our part not only in the death of Christ, but also in the
resurrection of Christ: and if Christ be raised in us, Christ can dye no more,
either in himself, or in our hearts, and the same power that raised him out of
the grave, will also raise up our bodies at the last day, as is pleaded, Romans
6. 10. etc. Galat. 3. 27, 28. 1 Cor. 15. 29. 1 Pet. 3. 21. If we be baptized
and believe, we shall certainly be saved, Mark. 16. 16.

Thus as it concerns our selves.

3. In respect of others, we are 3. In respect of others.
bound to the good behavior in Baptism: as to acknowledge the communion of
Saints; so are we tied to preserve our selves in all brotherly love with the
godly, who wear the same Livery with us, and are Soldiers pressed to the same
war, and have taken upon them the same holy Vow with us: we are bound in
Baptism to love them, to stand for them above all other people, and to live
with them in all holy love, to our lives end, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 12. 1^.
and 1. 13. Gal. 3. 27, 28.

CHAP. XII.
Rules about the Lords Supper.

HItherto concerning Baptism: The rules that concern Rules about the Lords
Supper.
the Lords Supper follow.

Now concerning this Sacrament, we are charged with these things.

First, Examination, 1 Cor. 11. 1. We must examine our selves
we must examine our selves, and so eat and drink: Examine our selves, so as
we be sure there be no sin in our hearts and lives, which we have committed,
but we are desirous to forsake, and do unfeignedly judge our selves for it,
being as desirous to forsake, as we desire God should in the Sacrament forgive
it.

Secondly, The diseerning of the 2. We must discern the Lords Supper.
Lords Body and Blood: so coming to partake of these outward signs of Bread
and Wine, as we withal know and believe the presence of Christ; and that God
does as effectually give Christ to the soul of the believer, as he gives Bread
and Wine to his body: yea, we must thus discern and believe, that he is there
offered and given unto us also, and that God does not delude us, but as truly
gives us the Body and Blood of Christ, as he does by the Minister give us the
Bread and Wine, 1 Cor. 11.

Thirdly, The showing forth of the death of Christ: This is a solemnity, 3. We
must show forth Christ's death.
where we must intend to make a solemn remembrance of the Passion and Death of
our Savior, not only in being present at the breaking of the Bread and
pouring out of the Wine, but in raising up in our heart a thankful
remembrance of his grievous sufferings and death for our sins, Math. 26. 1.
Cor. 11.

Fourthly, Fellowship and loving 4. We vow to cleave to the godly.
communion with the godly, which we both signify, and vow in the Sacraments,
and testify before God and men, that we will cleave unto them above all the
people in the world, as being the same bread with us, even members of the same
mystical Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.

Fifthly, special reconciliation 5. We must be reconciled.
with such as we have offended, bearing malice to no man, and desiring and
seeking peace with all sorts of men, Matthew. 5. Romans 12.

Sixthly, and lastly, The vows of sincerity, resolving to keep this 6. We vow
an holy life.
feast all our life in the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, even to
spend our days in all uprightness of heart, and unfeigned hatred of all sin
and hypocrisy, 1 Cor. 5. 8.

CHAP. XIII.
Rules about Prayer.

THus of the Sacraments.

The Rules concerning prayer follow; where besides Rules about prayer.
the general Rules that belong to all worship, these things in special must
be heeded concerning prayer.

1. Thy words must be few, Eccl. Thy words must be few.
5. 1, 2. and the reason is, because God is in heaven, and thou art on earth.
He is full of majesty and wisdom, and thou art an infirm and sinful
creature. Length of it self does not commend prayer; we must speak as becomes
the Majesty of God, without vain repetitions and bablings; pattering over of
the same things is not pleasing to God: as affectation is ill in any thing, so
much more ill in prayer. This rule may be unsavory to the taste of some that
are transported with rash zeal: but let them take heed of will worship; the
words are so plain in the text, as they must inform themselves about them:
The Lord knew what was fittest for us, when he gave us this charge.

2. Thy heart must be lifted up 2. The heart must be listed up.
in the performance of this duty: this is often imported in diverse Scriptures;
and this lifting up of the heart has diverse things in it.

1. Understanding: thou must be advised what thou prayest for, and know thy
warrant, that what thou ask is according to Gods will, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Ioh.
5. 30.

2. Freedom from distractions: thy heart must be cleansed from passions and
lusts: thy prayer must be without wrath, 1 Timothy (...). 8. And as the
distractions arising from passion must be avoided, so must al other
distractions.

3. Feruencie, or the stretching out of the affections according to the matter
of prayer; thou must express the affections of prayer: for God looks at the
prayer of thy heart, not at the prayer of thy lips only.

3. Thou must pray with all 3. Use all manner of prayer.
manner of prayer, according to the occasions of prayer. Thou must pray at thy
set times daily, and thou must pray also with eiaculations (as the Divines call
them) that is, those sudden and short speeches to God, when thy heart is moved
upon special occasion. Thou must use Supplications, Deprecations,
Intercessions, Confessions, giving of thanks, or the like, according to thy
necessities, or the other occasions of thy life. Thou must strive to get a
fitness and language to speak unto God for thy self in thine own words, as
may best express the desires of thine heart, Ephesians. 6. 18.

4. Thou must continue and persevere 4 Thou must persevere in prayer.
in prayer without ceasing: prayer must be the work of thy whole life, not an
exercise for a fit, for a day or two, or a week or two, or a month or two:
thou must make conscience of prayer always, Ephesians. 6. 18. 1 These. 5. 17.

5. When thy prayer is grounded 5. Thou must be instant without fain ting or
discourage. ^tat.
upon Gods will, thou must be instant and not faint, or be discouraged. Thou
must pray without doubting and wavering, as resolved never to cease praying,
till God hear and show mercy. It is baseness of mind, not humility, to be
quickly discouraged: if God entertain us not according to our expectation or
liking, we must not be weary of seeking to God, but set upon prayer, with a
resolution to take no nay, Luke 18. 1. Iam. 1. 6.

6. Thou must remember supplication 6. With supplication for all Saints.
for all Saints, especially to pray heartily for Magistrates and Ministers,
especial those under whose charge thou art, Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. 1 Timothy 2. 1.

7. Thou must look to it, that 7 In all things give thanks.
in all things thou give thanks. Let the Lord see the truth of thy heart
herein, that what thou obtainest from God, especially by prayer, thou will with
all gladness remember and acknowledge: this Rule must by no means be
forgotten, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. Col. 4. 2.

CHAP. XIIII.
Rules about reading the Scriptures.

THus of the Rules that concern prayer. There remains the reading of
Scripture, and singing of Psalms, as the other part of the ordinary worship of
God.

Concerning the reading of Rules about reading the Scripture.
the Scriptures, I will instant in one place of Scripture only, which
contains the charge given to Joshua, Cha. 1. 8, 9. which comprehends the
substance of the necessary directions about private reading. I say necessary;
for godly men may, and have advised diverse courses for reading of Scripture,
which are not absolutely necessary, but arbitrary, as may stand with the
leisure and capacity of the persons that will read; such are those directions
that show how many Chapters may be read in a day, and what things may be
observed in reading, etc. which, as they may be profitable to many Christians,
and expedient too, yet they must not be understood so, as that those persons
sin, which read not so often, or so many Chapters, or the like. The things
therefore that must necessarily be observed by such as can read the Bible, I
take to be these.

First, they must exercise themselves 1 Read daily.
therein daily, they must constantly be employed therein; and if their
occasions interrupt them at some time, they must redeem it at other times.
This is the praise of the blessed man, That he exercises himself in Gods Law
day and night, that is constantly, Psalm. 1. 2.

Secondly, in reading they 2 Meditate of what thou read.
must meditate therein, that is, they must observe profitable things as they
read, attending to reading, and marking what the Lord says unto them by that
part of the Word which they read. This is that meditation which is chiefly
required of Christians, to get into their hearts good thoughts from the matter
they read of, so as they may the better be enabled to employ their thoughts
all the day after.

Thirdly, the Word of God must 3. Confer upon it.
not depart out of their mouth; they must make the best use of it they can, in
conference to speak of it to others, for the edification of themselves and
others.

Fourthly, they must observe 4. Resolve to obey.
in their reading what the Lord says unto them, that concerns their practice.
They must observe to do according to those holy directions they read of. They
must bring a mind desirous and resolved to let the Word of God both inform
them and reform them, making conscience of it, to let God direct them by his
holy Word read, and not only by the word preached to them: their lives must
be bettered by their reading; and to that end they must observe the chiefest
things they can out of their reading, to remember them in their practice.

CHAP. XV.
Rules about singing of Psalms.

THe rules that concern the singing of Psalms, are summarily comprehended in
that place, Coloss. 3. 16. and they are these.

First, they must teach one another Rules about singing of Psalms.
by their Psalms and Hymns and spiritual songs. They must learn to profit,
and make good use of the holy matter contained in the Psalms they sing.

Secondly, they must sing with their hearts; they must attend to the matter
they sing of, and lift up their hearts, as well as their voices.

Thirdly, they must sing with grace in their hearts: they must employ the
graces of Gods Spirit in singing of Psalms, as well as in prayer, or any other
ordinance of God.

Fourthly, they must make melody to the Lord: They must direct their songs to
God, and to his glory, and not use them as mere civil employments, but as
parts of Gods service.

CHAP. XVI.
Rules about Vowing and Swearing.

HItherto of the Rules that concern the most usual part of Gods service:
there are other parts of Gods service, which are to be used but at certain
times, and upon special occasions, and these are Vows, and Oaths and Fasting.

The rules about Vowing are The rules about vowing.
briefly comprehended in that place, Eccl. 5. 4, 5. and they are chiefly two

First, before thou vowest, consider: consider, I say, thine own strength,
whether thou be able to do it: and consider also the end, that it be to Gods
glory: and consider the matter, that thou vow not things unlawful: and
consider what may be the events of thy vow, for all vows being made before the
Angel that takes notice of all covenants, it will be in vain afterward to
plead; It was an error, thou wast mistaken: God may be angry at thy voice,
and destroy the work of thy hands: Be not rash therefore, to cause thy flesh
to sin therein.

Secondly, when thou have vowed thy vow to God, defer not to pay it; be sure
thou perform it: it is a grievous offense to break a lawful vow: Better it
is thou should not vow, then that thou should vow, and not pay.

Thus of vowing.

Concerning the Oath, when thou art called to swear, thou Rules about swea
ring.
must observe these rules.

First, that thou swear not by any thing which is not God, Ier* 5. 7.

Secondly, that thou swear in truth, that is, that thy conscience know, what
thou swearest is true.

Thirdly, that thou swear in judgment, that is, with due consideration of the
nature of God, and with sound deliberation, not rashly, diligently weighing all
things that belong to the matter thou swearest about.

Fourthly, that thou swear in righteousness, that is, about lawful things,
and just matters: Thou must not swear to do unjust things, as David swear to
kill Nabal: nor must thou swear about impossible things, or about things that
are doubtful and uncertain, nor in the form of thy oath must thou use such
words, as be contumelious to God, or express not sufficient reverence to the
Divine Majesty, as they that wickedly swear by any part of Christ, or such
like.

CHAP. XVII.
Rules about Fasting.

THus of Vows, and Swearing; Fasting follows. Now if we would keep a
religious Fast unto God, we must observe these two Rules.

First, we must look to the The rules about a religious fast
strictness of the abstinence of the day of our Fast; for so we must abstain
from all sort of meat as well as one, and from our costliest apparel, and
from recreations and usual delights: We must keep the day, as we keep the
Sabbath, in forbearing our own works, Ion. 3. 6, 7. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Joel 1. and
2. Leuit. 16. 29.

Secondly, the time must be sp^t in religious duties, as a Sabbath, especially
in the exercises that concern the humiliation of the soul, in renewing of our
repentance, for the obtaining of pardon of sin, or some special blessing of
God, or the preventing, or remoouing of some great judgment of God.

The former rule concerns only the ceremony, or outward exercise of the body:
but this rule contains the substance of the duty, without which a religious
Fast is not kept unto God; who regards not the hanging down of the head like
a bull-rush, if the soul be not humbled before God for sin: Leuiticus 16.
29. Joel 1. 14. and 2. 16, 17.

CHAP. XVIII.
Rules about the Sabbath.

HItherto of the Rules that concern the parts of Gods worship: The rules that
concern the time of Gods worship, follow: and this time especially is the
Sabbath Day.

Now the rules that bind us Rules about the Sabbath.
to the good behavior concerning the Sabbath, concern either the preparation
of the Sabbath, or the manner of performing holy duties on the Sabbath.

The preparation to the Sabbath, 1. The preparation to it.
contains in it these things.

First, the ending of all our works on the six days, as God did his, Genesis 2.
2.

This example of God is set down, not only to show what he did, but to
prescribe unto us, what we should do, as is manifest by urging this example in
the reason of the commandment. We must then take order to finish the works of
the week days with such discretion, that neither our heads be troubled with
the cares of them, nor our hands tempted to work about them on the Sabbath Day.

Secondly, the preventing of domestical grieuances, and perturbations, Leuit.
19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father, and keep my
Sabbath. Discords and contentions, and heartburnings in the members of the
family, extend their infection and hurt, even to the profaning of Gods
Sabbath. The Lord looks not to be served aright in his house, if people live
not quietly, and lovingly, and dutifully in their own houses.

Thirdly, we must cleanse our selves, that we keep the Sabbath, Nehemiah 13.
22. Which place, though it speak of Legal cleansing, yet it shadows out that
Moral and perpetual care of cleasing our selves, that ought even to be found
in us. And thus we do cleanse our selves, when we humble our selves, that we
may walk with God, confessing our sins, even the sins of the week past,
and making our peace with God, through the name of Jesus Christ.

Thus of the duties of preparation: 2. Of the celebration of the Sabbath.
Now for the manner of keeping the Sabbath, the rules prescribe unto us these
things:

1. Rest from all your works, whether they be works of labor, or works of
pleasure. Works of labor the Scripture instanceth in such, as are selling of
victuals. Nehemiah 13. 15. Carrying of burdens, Ier. 17. Iourneying from our
places, Exodus 16. 29. the business of our callings done by our selves, our
children, servants; or cattle, which the words of the Commandment forbid? And
as works of labor, so also works of pleasure are forbidden, Esaias 58. 13.

2. Readiness and delight. We should love to be Gods servants on this day,
Esaias 56. and consecrate it with joy, as a glorious privilege to us, Esaias 58.
13. abhorring weariness, or a desire to have the Sabbath gone, and ended, Amos
8.

3. Care and watchfulness. We must observe to keep it, Exodus 31. 16. we must
take heed to our selves, that no duty be omitted, and that we no way profane
it, attending our hearts, and our words, Ier. 17. 21.

4. Sincerity: and this sincerity we should show diverse ways.

First, by doing Gods work with as much care as we would do our own; or
rather showing more care for the service of God. They had their double
sacrifices on the Sabbath, in the time of the Law; and we should study, how
we might please God in especial manner on that day, choosing out the things
that might delight him. God has taken but one day of seven for his work; and
shall we not do it willingly? Further, if we respect our selves, shall we
not be as careful to provide for our souls on the Sabbath, as for our bodies
on the week days?

2. By observing the whole day, as well as a part, and keep the Sabbath in our
dwellings, as well as in Gods house: God requires the whole day, and not a
part. As we would be contented our servants should work for us only an hour
or two in the six days: so neither should we yield less unto God, then we
require for our selves. Nor will it suffice to serve God by public duties in
his House, unless we serve him also by private duties in our own dwellings,
Commandment 4. Leuit. 23. 3.

3. By avoiding the lesser violations of the Sabbath, as well as the greater,
especially not transgressing of contempt, or wilfulness in the least things we
know to be forbidden. The Prophet instanceth, Esaias 58. 13. We must not speak
our own words. Thus of sincerity.

5. The fifth thing required of us, is Faith: we must glorify God by
believing, that he will make it a day of blessing unto us, and perform that
blessing he has promised, accepting our desire to walk before him in the
uprightness of our hearts, and passing by our infirmities, and frailties. We
many times disturb the rest and Sabbath of our souls by unbelief,
Commandment 4. Genesis 2. 2. Exo. 31. 13. Ezech. 20. 20. and 46. 2, 5.

6. The last thing is Deprecation: we must beseech God, when we have done our
best, to show us mercy, and spare us for our defects and weaknesses. Thus we
must end the day and reconcise our selves to God, that the Rest of Jesus Christ
may be established in our hearts, Nehe. 13. 22. And thus of the rules that
bind us to the good behavior in respect of the time of Gods worship.

CHAP. XIX.
Rules that show us how to carry our selves, when we come into company, in
respect of Religion.

HItherto of the Rules that concern our carriage toward God.

Now it follows, that I break open those directions, that Rules that direct
our carriage toward men.
should bring our lives into order in respect of men: And these rules are of
two sorts, for either they are such as bind us to the good behavior toward
all men, or such as order our conversation toward some men only, as they are
considered to be either wicked or godly.

The rules that concern all Toward all men.
men, may be cast into 2. heads, as they belong either to righteousness or to
mercy.

The rules that belong to righteousness, order us either in company, or out of
company.

The rules which we are to And so 1 in company.
observe in company, concern either,

1 Religion, or 2. The sins, and faults of others: or 3. Our own inoffensiue
behavior toward all men.
For the first; when we come With due r^spect of Religion.
in company, we must be careful to be that which may become the glory of Gods
truth, and the Religion we profess, that weetake not up the name of God in
vain: and thus we shall rightly order our selves, if we observe these rules:

First, to be soundly advised, before we fall into discourse of Religion, not
doing it till God may be glorified by it. A wise man concealeth knowledge; but
the heart of fools will publish foolishness: It is a great discretion to know
how to conceal knowledge, as it is to know how to use knowledge.

Secondly, avoid vain ianglings Avoiding vain ianglings in three things
and contradictions of words, such as are,

1. Doubtful disputations about Ceremonies, and things indifferent, which may
entangle the weak, and keep them from more necessary cares and knowledge,
Romans 14. 1.

2. Curious Questions, about things that are not revealed in the Word, Romans 12.
(...). Be wise to sobriety.

3. Unprofitable reasonings, such as were those about Genealogies, in the
Apostles time, 1 Timothy 1.

Thirdly, if thou be asked a reason of the hope that is in thee by such as have
authority to require it, or need to seek it, then answer: But be sure to
remember two things; namely, that thou answer with all reverence, as may show
how much thou art affected with the majesty of Gods truth, and withal with
meekness, that is, without passion or frowardness: and without affectation,
or conceitednesse, or wilfulness in our own opinions, 1. Pet. 3. 15.

Fourthly, let thy communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay: otherwise customary
and vain swearing, is a most damned sin, and such as God will surely plague.

CHAP. XX.
Rules that show us how to carry our selves in company, in respect of the
faults of others.

THus of our carriage in company in respect of Religion. How we must behave
our selves in company concerning the faults of others.
Now concerning the faults of others, we must observe these rules:

First, we must never in our discourse justify the wicked, or condemn the
righteous; all excess in words is evil, but this is an abomination to the
Lord: We must ever honor those that fear the Lord; and as for vile persons,
they are to be contemned, Psalm. 15. 4. Amos 5. 15. Prou. 17. 15.

Secondly, let thy conversation and discourse be without judging, Math. 7. 1.
Iam. 3. 17. It is time exceeding ill spent, that is spent in censuring of
others. And the rather should we take heed of judging, if we consider how
the holy Ghost has matched that sin in that place of James, we must be
without judging, without Note.
hypocrisy: as if he would signify, that great Censurers are commonly great
Hypocrites; and as any are more wise, they are more sparing of their censures.

Thirdly, thou must not walk about with tales; take heed of tale-bearing: He
goes about as a slanderer that reuealeth a secret, though it be true he
speaks. It is a maruelious evil custom that many have, to fill up their
discourse with the report of the frailties of others, which they by some means
or other come underhand to know: this is an ^uill frequently condemned in
Scripture, and yet more usually practiced, as if it were lawful to speak of
anything which they know to be true: Thou shall not walk about with tales, nor
stand against the blood of thy neighbor: a strange connection, by which the
Lord imports, that this talebearing is a kind of murder; and it is true in the
case of many a man, thou were as good lay violent hands upon him, as with that
licentiousness of words to divulge tales concerning him, Pro. 20. 19. and 11.
13. Leuit. 19. 16. And for the better strengthening of this rule, thou art yet
charged to look to thy ears too, as well as thy tongue; thou must not receive
evil report against thy neighbor, but make it appear thou art not pleased
with such tales, Psalm. 15. 3. Yea, thou art forbidden the society of such
persons as carry tales; thou must not meddle with tale-bearers, nor with such
a^ flatter with their lips: certainly such creatures commonly flatter the
present, and reproach the absent, Prou. 20. 19.

Fourthly, if thou do know an offense in any with whom thou conuersest, thou
shall not hate him Reprove, but hate not.
in thy heart, but rather reprove him plainly. For, he that rebukes a man,
shall afterward find more favor then he that flattereth with his tong^,
Leuit. 19. 17. Prou. 28. 23.

Fifthly, as for the mere frailties Pass by m^re frailties.
of others, hold thy tongue, pass by them. A fool despises his neighbor,
but a man of understanding will hold his peace, Prou. 11. 12. Commonly they
that have most defect in themselves, are aptest to contemn others for their
weaknesses: but a wise man must so distinguish of the faults of others, that
he cover mere frailties, and learn of God to pass by the infirmities of his
servants. The Antithesis shows, that a wise man does not only hold his
tongue, but restrain his thoughts from thinking the worse of others for such
infirmities.

Sixthly, against the passions and wrongs of others thou must arm thy self
with a soft answer, and be sure thou render not evil for evil, Prou. 15. 1.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 15. or rebuke for rebuke, 1 Pet. 3. 9.

CHAP. XXI.
Rules that show us how to carry ourselves in company, and not give offense.

THus of our carriage toward Rules that concern the inoffensiuenesse of our
carriage in company.
others in company, as it respects their faults. Now follows the third sort
of rules, which order our behavior toward others in company in respect of
inoffensiuenesse. It ought to be our principal care to carry our selves so, as
no body may take offense at us.

Now these rules may be directed to their heads, as they concern, 1. The
humility, of our behauior toward others. 2. The discretion, 3. The purity

We must carry our selves humbly, discreetly, and honestly in our conversation
with others: so shall we converse with much amiablenesse and reputation.

First, unto the humility of An humble behavior has three things in it.
our conversation, belong these Rules.

First, be soft, show all meekness to all men, restraining the inordination 1.
of thy heart, endeavoring to show thy self gentle, and peaceable, and
harmless, and easy to be entreated, Tit. 3. 1, 2. Prou. 8. 13. Iam. 3. 13.

Secondly, thou must bow down 2.
thine care, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thy heart, to get
knowledge, and profit thy self by others, Prou. 23. 12. This is the same with
that of James, Be swift to hear, and slow to speak, Iam. 1. 19.

Thirdly, put not forth thy 3.
self, nor stand in the place of great men, till thou be called, Prou. 25. 6.

In general, concerning humility, the Apostle Peter's phrase is much to be
noted: he says, we should clothe our selves with humility: which notes both
the great measure of it, it should cover all our actions, and also the
continuance of it. When we go amongst men, we should stir up our hearts, and
fashion our selves to express his grace, and not dare to be seen without
humility, Note
no more then we would be seen without our clothes. Humility hides our
nakedness, and pride and passion lay it open to the view and contempt of
others.

Secondly, neither is humility all that is required to make our 8 Rules that
concern discretion in our behavior.
conversation without offense or provocation; but we must also carry our
selves discreetly; and to this end there are these excellent Rules.

First, thou must consider to speak what is acceptable, and avoid what may
irritate; there is singular use of this rule, if it were followed, Prou 10. 31,
1^. and 13. 3.

Secondly, thou must mark those that cause division and off^nces, and avoid
them, and shun the society of such, Romans 16. 17, 18. This will breed thee much
peace, and deliver thee from much suspicion in others.

Thirdly, thou must make no friendship with the angry man; for either by much
conuersing with him, thou may learn his ways, or else it will be a snare to
thee, that thou shall neither know how to keep his favor, nor yet how to
break off from him, without much unrest and inconvenience, Prou. 22. 24, 25.

Fourthly, it is a great discretion in evil time to be silent. In things
wherein thou may endanger thy self, and not profit others, it is thy best
way, and a wise course, to forbear speech of such things, Amos 5. 13.

Fifthly, so likewise it is thy discretion in matters of dangers to forbear the
communicating of thy secret to any, though thou might be tempted to a
persuasion of trust in those to whom thou would reveal them. It may often
repent thee to have spoken, but seldom to have held thy peace, Mica. 7. 5.

Sixthly, withdraw thy feet from thy neighbors house, lest he be weary of
thee, and hate thee: this is an excellent rule given by Saloman, Prou. 25. 17.
If thou would converse with reputation, take heed of idle gadding from house
to house, when thou have no occasion or employment: thou may draw hereby
much secret contempt and loathing of thee, when thy emptiness and vanity shall
be thereby discovered. An empty conversation, that has in it no exercise of
pierie or virtue, if it be frequent, occasioneth secret, and unutterable
scorn.

7. Restrain thine own passions in conuersing. There are none so wise, but if
they show their passions of immoderate anger, fear, grief, yea, or joy, they
discover much weakness in their disposition, which would be covered if they did
bridle the excess of their passions. A wise man covers shame, when a fool
is presently known: It is the best praise not to have such weaknesses; but the
next to this, is by discretion to bridle our selves, so as we may hide our
weaknesses from breaking out.

Lastly, thou may make good use of that direction of Solomon about thy
friend, Bless not thy friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning;
for it may be accounted a curse to thee: Take heed of flattery, which in
stead of effecting thine own ends, may bring thee out of all respect. He does
not forbid the just praise, and encouragement of friends, but the intending of
praise of purpose to the uttermost notice of thy friend, (this is to praise him
with a loud voice) and the affectation of preventing others in praising; and of
doing it in such things as are not yet su^iently known to be praiseworthy,
and to set ones self so to praise, as if he studied to do nothing else, but
humor his friend; especially if it be but once perceived, that thou do it
but for thy own ends. It is a great part of wisdom, to know how to speak of
the praise of others, so as neither sinister ends be intended, nor the
humouring of those we praise: to do it sparingly and seasonably, is a great
discretion.

And thus of the Rules, that make our conversation amiable, in respect of
discretion.

Thirdly, that our conversation Three rules that concern the purity of our
conversation.
may not be hurtful and offensive, we must look to the purity of it: and so
these rules following are of singular use.

First, in general, Refrain thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they
speak no guile, Psalm. 34. 13. For he that keeps his mouth, keeps his
soul, Prou. 21. 23. Take heed of the usual vices of the tongue: for thereout
may come much mischief, and discontent to thy self and others.

Secondly, in particular look to thy self carefully, that thou avoid those
three evils mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 4. viz. filthy speaking,
foolish talking and jesting. By jesting he means those biting jests, that
under pretense of showing wittines, or conceit, do secretly leave disgrace
upon the persons whom they concern.

Thirdly, avoid with detestation the excess in drinking and reuelling, and
suffer thy self upon no pretense, to be drawn to give way to thine own
practice in them, 1 Pet. 4. 3.

CHAP. XXII.
How we must carry our selves out of company.

THus of thy carriage in general in company. Now out of company thou must
look to these things.

First, thou must fashion thy 1. The rules that order us out of company.
heart, by the use of all good means, to the love all sorts of men. This
(...), love of men, is a virtue little thought on, yet greatly necessary, as a
foundation of all practice in conuersing with others, and we should labor to
abound in love toward all men, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12.

Secondly, remember to pray for all sorts of men. This is a precept given us in
charge by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 1. and belongs to this place, and we ought to
make conscience of it according to the occasions of our callings, or
acquaintance with other men: we should even in secret seek to profit our
neighbors by praying for them.

Thirdly, we should provide, even out of company to order our affairs so, as
that we may live

1. Honestly, without scandal, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Phil. 1. 10. 2. Justly, without
deceit or fraudulent dealing, Leuit. 19. 35, 36. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. 3. Peaceably,
without strife with any, if it be possible, Prou. 3. 29, 30. Zach. 7. 10. Heb.
12. 14.
CHAP. XXIII.
Rules about work of Mercy.

HItherto of the Rules that concern Righteousness: Mercy follows. Now in
showing mercy, diverse things are charged upon v^.

First, willingness. We must 8. Things required in showing mercy. 1.
Willingness.
give cheerfully: For the Lord loves a cheerful giver. We must love mercy,
as well as show mercy. Our hearts should be ever answerable to our power. We
must be ready and prepared to show mercy, abhorring delays and putting off
of time, or seeking excuses: Our ears should be open to the cries of the
poor. Yea (rather then be behind hand) we should sell, that we might give
alms, Mich. 6. 8. 1 Timothy 6. 18. 2 Cor. 9. 4, 5, 6, 7. Prou. 22. 22, 23. Luke
12. 33. Prou. 3. 27, 28.

Secondly, Labor and Diligence. (...). Labor.
We should take pains, and work hard according to all the occasions of mercy.
This is the Apostles phrase: God will not forget your work, and labor of
love, Heb. 6. 10. We must be forward to do those works of mercy, that require
our pains and travel about them, as well as those we may do and sit still, 2
Cor. 8. 16, 22.

Thirdly, Liberality: We must 3. Liberal^ ty.
open our hands wide, Deuteronomy. 15. 8. we must be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6.
18. We must not give sparingly, 2 Cor. 9. 6. we must give to our power, and
sometimes beyond our power, 2 Cor. 8. 2. we should desire to answer the
expectation had of our bounty, especially the expectation of our teachers that
know us and our estates, 2 Cor. 8. 24. we should strive to abound in this grace
also, as well as in other graces of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 8. 6. we should give to
seven, and also to eight, Eccl. 11. 2. we must give good measure, yea and
pressed down, Luke 6. 30.

Fourthly, Humility. There is 4. Humility. Humility showed five ways in doing
works of mercy.
great use of humility, in showing mercy. Now we should show our humility
diverse ways about mercy: As

First, in helping others, without exalting our selves, and domineering over
them. The rich must not think to rule the poor, and to command them, as if
they were their vassals: we should so show mercy, as not to stand upon terms
of their beholdingness, to whom we show mercy, Prou. 22. 7.

Secondly, in not despising the poor; we must not think of them meanly, and
contemptuously, because they stand in need of our help, whether it be in body
or mind, Proverbs. 14. 21.

Thirdly, in accepting exhortation, showing our selves willing to be called
upon, and stirred up to mercy, 2 Corinthians 8. 17.

4. By our penitencie, when we go to God, after we have done our best, and
confess the corruption that cleaues unto us, even when we have showed our best
desires to communicate to others; and withal striving to plow up the fallow
ground of our hard hearts, that we may be more fit to express the bowels of
mercy, Hos. 10. 12.

Fifthly, the Macedonians showed their humility in this, that they prayed the
Apostle to accept their gift, giving themselves also to be disposed of to the
Lord, and unto them by the will of God, 2. Cor. 8. 5.

Thus of the Humility to be showed in doing works of mercy.

A fifth thing required in showing mercy, is Faith; and 5. Faith in two
respects.
faith is needful in two respects.

First, to believe Gods acceptance of the mercy showed. For a godly Christian,
that is not vainglorious, has so mean an opinion of his best works, that
he finds need to fly to Gods promises, and da^es not trust upon his own
goodness. Now God has promised to accept of that we do, if there be a
willing mind: The will is accepted for the deed, 2 Cor. 8. 12.

Secondly, to believe the success and reward from God, and that we shall not
lose by what is so expended. Though the persons to whom we show mercy, should
be so ungrateful, that it were as bread cast on the waters: yet we ought to
believe, that our seed cast on the waters, shall bring us a plentiful harvest,
Eccles. 11. 1. And it is certain, whatsoever the persons be, yet what is
given, is sowed. And if the Husbandman do not think his corn spoiled that
he casts upon his land, no more ought a Christian to think that to be lost
that is given to the poor. Nature may disappoint the hope of the Husbandman,
but in works of mercy, there is no venture, but a sure increase from the Lord,
2. Cor. 9. 9, 10. and therefore our faith should make us get bags to put up the
certain treasure we shall gain by mercy from the Lord, Luke 12. 33.

A sixth thing required in showing 6. Discretion in 4. things.
mercy, is discretion; and discretion should show it self.

First, by distributing our alms in the fittest course we can, having a
principal respect to godly poor. He that shows mercy, ought to have a good
eye, Proverbs, 22. 9.

Secondly, by observing our own ability, so to ease others, that we burden
not our selves, 1. Cor. 9. 14, 15.

Thirdly, by taking heed, that we spend not upon the rich by needless
entertainments, what oughtto be bestowed upon the poor, Prou. 2^. 16. Luke ^4.
13.

Fourthly, by avoiding scandal, or giving offense, that no^ blame us in our
abundance, but providing things honest in the sight of God and men, 2. Cor. 8.
20, 21. yet so as we endeavor in an holy life and discreet manner to provoke
others by o^zeale, 2 Cor. 9. 2.

A seventh thing required in 7. Sympa thy.
showing mercy, is Sympathy, Pity, a Fellow-feeling of the distresses of
others, being like affectioned, and laying their miseries to heart* Heb. 13. 3.
Col. 3. 1^. Romans 12. 16. Job. 30. 25. There should be bowels in our mercy.

The last thing is Sincerity. 8. Sincerity in five things.
Now this sincerity should be showed diverse ways, As,

1. In the matter of our alms. It must be of goods well gotten. For God hates
robbery, though it were for burnt offerings, Esa. 61. 8.

2. In the manner we must show mercy, without wicked thoughts, or grief of
heart, Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8. to 12. and without hiding our selves from the poor,
Esaias 58. 7. and without excuse to shift off the doing of it, Prou. 24. 11, 12.

3. In the ends. That we do not our works to be seen of men, or to merit of
God: but with an unfeigned desire to glorify God, and make our profession to be
well spoken of, and show the true love and pity we bear to the creature in
distress, Matthew. 6. 2 Cor. 9. 19.

4. In continuing our mercy, not forgetting to distribute, but still remembering
the poor, Heb. 13. 16. Galath. 2. soundly performing the^ mercy with
constancy, which we have purposed, wil'd, or promised. It were an excellent
order, if Christians would follow the Apostles rule, Every week, as God has
prospered them, to lay aside for the poor, 1. Cor. 16. 2. 2 Cor. 8. 11.

5. In the kinds of mercy, that we be ready to show spiritual mercy, as well
as corporal; and in corporal mercy to do good all the ways we can, as well
as one way: As by lending, protecting, releasing, visiting, and giving; and
thus to the poor, to such as are fallen into decay, and to the strangers also
as many Scriptures require.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Rules that show us how to carry our selves toward wicked men.

HItherto of the Rules that concern all men: now the particular rules direct
our carriage either toward wicked men, or toward godly men.

Our conversation toward wicked men may be ordered by these rules:

First, we must avoid all needless society with them, and shun their
infectious fellowship, especially Needless socretie with them must be avoided.
we must take heed of any special familiarity with them, or unequal yoaking
our selves with them, by marriage, friendship, or leagues of amity, Psalm 1.
1. 1 Cor. 6. 17. Ephesians. 5. 7, 11. Prou. 23. 20. and 4. 14, etc.

Secondly, when we have occasion Great wisdom required in conuersing with
them.
to co^uerse with them, we must study how to walk wisely toward them, so as
we may be so far from giving scandal, as, if it be possible, we may win
them to glorify God and his truth in our profession. It requires much skill to
order our selves aright in those things that are to be done in the presence of
wicked men, or in such things as must come by report unto them, and their
scanning. Now there are diverse things of admirable Diverse things that affect
the hearts even of the worst men, are:
use in our carriage to put them to silence, and to take them in their
consciences, at least to think well of us: Such as are:

2. Mortification. A sound care 1. A mortified life.
to reform our ways, and true hatred and grief for our own sins, will
cause many times wicked wretches to say of us, that we are the people of the
Lord, Esaias 61. 3, 8. I say, a sound care of reformation; for to profess a
mortified life, and yet in any thing to show that we can live in any fault
without repentance, this prouokes them exceedingly to speak evil of the good
way of God. Therefore the first care of a Christian, that would be rightly
ordered toward wicked m^n, must be to live without offense, and to discover a
true mortified mind, and an heart broken for sin.

Secondly, to speak with all 2. Reverend speech of Religion.
reverence and fear, when we entreat of matters of Religion, much amazeth the
profane conscience of a wicked man; whereas cursorie discourses of such grand
mysteries, and empty and vain ianglings do exceedingly occasion a confirmed
wilfulness and profaneness in such men, 1. Pet. 3. 16. and Prou. 24. 26.

Thirdly, it is a most winning 3. Meekenes of wisdom
quality in all our carriage, to show meekness of wisdom, to express a
mind well governed, free from passions, and also from conceitednesse,
frowardness, affectation, and the vain show of what we have not in
substance. For each of these have in them singular matter of irritation, and
provoke wicked men to scorn, and hatred, and reuiling.

Fourthly, there is an holy kind of Reservedness, which may adorn the life of
a Christian, in his carriage among wicked men: and this Reservedness is to be
showed,

1. In not trusting our selves too 4. Reservedness in four things.
far with them, not believing every word, not bearing our selves upon every
show of favor from them. For as too much suspicion of them breeds extreme
alienation, if they perceive it; so credulity is no safe way, Prou. 14. 15.
Ioh. 2. 24.

2. By abstaining from judging of them that are without. It is a most
intemperate zeal, that spends it self in the vain and bootlesse censure of
the estate of those that are without. Those censures have in them matter of
provocation and nothing of edification. It were happy for some Christians, if
they could with the Apostle, say often to their own souls, What have I to do
to judge them that are without? 1 Cor. 5. 12, 13.

3. By studying to be quiet, and meddle with our own business; casting about,
how to cut off all occasions, by which we might be tangled with any discord or
contention, or much business with them. It is a godly ambition to thirst after
this quietness of life, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11, 12.

4. By our silence in evil times; always avoiding all such discourses, as
might bring us into danger, without any calling for our own edification, or
the edification of others. Many a man has smarted sorely for want of this
bridle for his tongue, when his words could do no good to others, and much
hurt to himself, Amos 5. 13. David held his peace while the wicked were
present, Psalm. 39. 1.

5. In forbearing to reprove scorners, Prou. 9. 7, 8. and 23. 9.

6. In seasoning their words with salt, so as they discover no vanity,
lightness, vainglory, malice, or desire of revenge, or the like faults in
their speeches.

7. In answering the fool, but not according to his folly, that is, not in
such pride, passion, or reuiling fashion as the fool objects in, Prou. 26. 4,
5.

8. In getting out of their company, when we perceive not in them the words
of wisdom. If we see they grow once to be perverse, outrageous, or wilful
in any notorious offense of words or works, we must get from amongst them.

Thus of the eight ways wherein we should show reservedness: they are of
excellent use, if men would study them, and practice them.

5. Mercy is amiable even in 5. Mercy.
the eyes of wicked men: and merciful Christians, that are full of good works,
do bring a great deal of honor to religion. It is true Religion and
undefiled, to visit the fatherless and widows, and to be unspotted of the
world. A conversation that is unrebukable, and full of mercy also, cannot but
be very honorable: whereas Religion it self, when it is ^ated in the breasts of
such Christians as have forgotten to show mercy, and not study how to be
doing good to others, is exceedingly darkened in the glory of it, and many
times extremely ill spoken of. A true Christian should hold it a great
disparagement, that any Papist, or carnal man in the world (in equal
comparison) should put them down for either the tenderness or the abundance
of works of mercy, 1 Peter 1. 12. Math. 15. James 27.

6. When we have cause and a 6. Vndauntednesse in a good cause.
calling to speak for the truth, or to reprove sin, it is an excellent
grace to be undaunted, and free from s^ruile fears or flattery. To give place
to wicked men in Gods cause, or to fear their faces in the quarrel of
Religion, or to show a mind that would repent of well-doing, or that basely
would stoop some way to honor ungodly persons for our own ends, is so far
from gaining true favor with euill-minded men, that it makes them to scorn
and hate us and Religion so much the more: whereas a godly man, that is
vnmoucable, and refuses to praise the wicked, or justify the ungodly; and
when he has cause, will contend with them, as Salomons Phrase is, and not be
like a troubled fountain, or acorrupt spring: he may for the time receive ill
words from the wicked, but his heart is afraid of him, and his conscience does
admire him, Prou. 24. 25. and 28. 4. and 25. 26 1 Cor. 16. 22.

7. The like advantage is 7. Patience in affliction.
brought to the conversation of a godly man, when he can show like patience and
firmenes of mind in bearing all sorts of afflictions and crosses. Patience in
affliction, makes a great show before a wicked man, that well knows how unable
he is so to carry himself, 1 Pet. 3. 14.

Lastly, to love our enemies, and show it by our suies in forgiving them, or
being ready heartily to please them, and to overcome their evil with
goodness: To pray for them when they revile and persecute us, is a
transcendent virtue; evil men themselves being Judges, Luke 6. 27. to 31. Pro.
10. 22.

CHAP. XXV.
Rules that show us how to carry our selves toward godly men.

THus of our carriage toward the wicked. How we should carry our selves toward
the godly, follows to be considered of.

The sum of all is, that we must walk in love. If we can soundly discharge
our duty to the godly, in respect of loving them unfeignedly, and heartily, and
constantly, we perform all that is required of us toward them. And this love
to the godly is so necessary, as that it is imposed upon us, as the only
commandment given by Christ, who in one word tells us the substance of our
duties, Ioh. 13. 34. Ephesians. 5. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 14.

Now the rules which in particular bind us to the good behavior in respect of
our love to the godly, concern either the manifestation of our jove to them;
or the preservation of our leave to them.

We must show our love to Six ways of manifesting our love to the godly. 1 By
courtesy.
the godly diverse ways:

First, by courtesy and kindness toward them, and that in a special manner,
being affectioned toward them with a brotherly love and kindness. No brethren
in nature should show more kindness one to another, then Christians should,
Ephesians. 4. 32. Romans 12. 10.

Secondly, by receiving and entertaining them: we must receive 2. By receiving
them
one another, and be barbarous one to another; and this with entirenesse of
affection Negatiuely, it must be without grudging, 1. Pet. 4. 9. Affirmatively,
we must receive one another, as Christ received us into glory, that is, First,
without respect of desert; We have done nothing to deserve heaven; yet Christ
has received us to glory: So, though the godly have not pleasured us any way
greatly, yet because they are the children of God, we should make much of
them, and entertain them gladly. Secondly, not thinking any thing too dear
for them: Christ has not ennied us the very glory of heaven, and therefore
what can we do to the brethren, that should answer the example of Christ? Romans
15. 7.

Thirdly, by bearing their burdens; for so we should fulfill the 3. By bearing
their bur. thens.
Law of Christ, Galat. 6. 2. There are two sorts of burdens press the godly:
One inward, such as are temptations, and their own corruptions; the other
outward, such as are afflictions of all sorts. Now in both these, this rule
holds; for when we see a godly Christian mourn and lament his distress in
respect of his ^firmities, or temptations, we must bear his burden, not by
soothing him in his sin, as if it were no sin, but by laying his grief to
our own hearts, and striving to comfort him with the promises of God. This is
not to make our selves guilty of their sins, but to help them out of their
grief by consolation, out of their sin by direction. Note, Note.
that this is charged upon us, when sin is a burden to them, not before; for
till then we are rather to reprove them, or admonish them: But then we are to
ta^ notice of this rule, when they confess their sins, and are weary of
them, and sorry for them. And thus also in their outward burdens we must
bear them, by comforting them, and aduising them, and helping them, and
showing our affection to them, as if it were our own case, so far as we have
a calling, and power to help them.

Fourthly, by considering one another, 4. By provoking them to good duties.
to provoke unto love, and good works, Heb. 10. 24. Note the duty, and the
manner how it is to be done: The duty is, to stir up others all we can, to
the increase of love and abundance of all good works: the manner is showed two
ways; First, we must provoke them to it, both by example, and by exhortation,
and all good ways, that might fire in them the desire of welldoing. Secondly,
we must consider one another, we must study the estates of others, their wants,
impediments, means, gifts, callings, etc. and accordingly apply our selves for
the best advantage to help them forward. It is not enough to do it
occasionally, but we must meditate of it; and castabout, how, where, and when
we must yield this help, and encouragement, and furtherance.

Fifthly, by doing whatsoever we 5. By faithfulness in all their business.
do for the godly, heartily, and with all faithfulness, as if it were for our
selves, or our own brethren, or kindred in nature, not being slothful in
service; or such as disappoint the trust reposed in us: we should do all
things we undertake for them, with all sidelity and care, 3 Ioh. 5. Romans 12. 6,
7, 8, 9, 11. Yea, we should care for their good and profit, as we would care
for the good of the members of our own body, for such are they to us in the
mystical body of lesus Christ, as the former place to the Romans shows.

Lastly, we should show our 6 By enjoying our.
love to the godly, by employing gifts for their good.
the gifts of our mind, as may be best for their good: As every man has
received the gife, he must so minister the same, as good Stewards of the
manifold grace of God. There are diversity of gifts in the godly, as knowledge,
utterance, prayer, and the like. Now these are given to profit withal, 1 Pet.
4. 10. 1 Cor. 12. As for example, The lips of the wise must disperse knowledge,
Prou. 15. 7. So when Christians meet together, as any have received a
doctrine, or a Psalm, or an Interpretation: so must he minister it for the
profit of others, 1 Cor. 14. 26. and so must we help one another by prayer,
either absent, or present, 2 Cor. 1. 11.

CHAP. XXVI.
How we should preserve our love to the godly.

THus of the rules that concern the manifestation of our love to the godly.
Now there are further diverse things to be observed for the preservation of our
love to them: and these may be cast into two heads: for, they are either such
things as we must do; or such things as we must avoid.

The things that we must do What we must do to pr^serue our love to the
godly. We must labor to be of one judgment with them.
to preserve love, are these:

First, we must strive to be like minded in matters of opinion; many discords
or abatements of affection grow among Christians for their offenses of opinion
in diverse things. It is true, that difference of Judgment should not cause
difference in affection: If we cannot be of one mind, yet we should be of one
heart: yet we see the contrary, and therefore every Christian should make
conscience of it, to be so wary and so humble in his opinions, especially in
things doubtful, or not so necessary, as to take heed of admitting what might
show dissent from the godly; or if he must needs dissent, yet to be very wary
how he discover it to the vexation or entanglement of others. Now because this
is very hard to persuade Christians unto; mark how vehemently the Apostle
speaks of it, Romans 15. 5, 6. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you
to be like minded, that ye may with one mouth and one mind glorify God. We
must learn of the Apostle to pray fervently for this, that our natures, and
the natures of others, with whom we converse, may be fitted hereunto: and, 1 Corinthians. 1. 10. the Apostle adi^res them by the name of Jesus: I beseech you
brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no diuions amongst you, but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. And in the Epistle
to the Philippians, Chap. 2. ver. 1, 2, 3. he urges them with strange
vehemency, to import the necessity of this duty: If, says he, there be any
consolation in Christ, or any fellowship of the Spirit, or any bowels of mercy,
be like minded, having the same love, being of one mind. And certainly, this
earnestness in requiring this duty imports, that some perverse Christians will
smoke one day for their presumption, and waywardness, and pride of opinions.

2. We must follow the things 2. We must (...) peace.
which may make for outward peace; and to this end we must labor to show all
meekness in our carriage, and long-suffering in forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, Ephesians 4. 2, 3, 4.

3. We must strive to hear (...). We must cover their weakness.
our affection to such a degree, as that it may be able to cover the
infirmities of others: He must get a covering love, that will live constantly
in the love of the godly: A love, that will cover a multitude of faults, 1 Pet.
4. 8. Prou. 10. 10.

4. We must confess our faults 4. We must confesseour faults one to another.
one to another, James 5. 16. It does exceedingly preserve love, if men, when
they have offended, or wronged others, would quickly, and easily, and heartily
acknowledge their offenses. Nor does this rule hold in case of trespass only,
but when we have not wronged others, yet discrcetly to complain of the
corruption of nature that cleaues to us, and the infirmities which daily
trouble us. This does work not only compassion, but great increase of
affection in others toward us: For acknowledgement preuents their secret
loathing of us for such frailties if they should discern them. And besides, it
makes them the willinger to give us leave to reprove their faults, when they
see we are as willing to reprove our own; besides the ease it brings to our
own hearts many times to make our moan to others, when our consciences are
troubled.

CHAP. XVII.
What we must avoid, that our love may be preserved.

THus what we must do to 10. Things to be avoided.
preserve love; Now further that love may be preserved amongst the godly,
these things following are to be avoided.

First, Suits in Law; A Christian 1. Suits in Law.
must have many considerations of his cause, before it can be lawful for him
to go to law with his brother. These kinds of contentions are most unnatural
amongst Christians; and prove not only scandalous in respect of others, but
extremely grievous and poisonous to themselves, 1 Cor. 6. 1, 4.

Secondly, Dissimulation: our 2. Dissimulation.
love must be without faining, in deed, and in truth; not in show, or in
words, Romans 12. 9. 1 John 3. 18.

Thirdly, Conceitednesse. This (...). Conceitednesse.
is a vice that extremely vexes others, and alienateth affection: we must not
be wise in our selves, but rather in lowliness of mind esteem another better
then our selves, and show it both by making our selves equal to them of the
lower sort, and by going before others in giving Honor and Praise, Romans 12.
10, 16. Phil. 2. 3, 4. Pro. 12. 15.

Fourthly, rejoicing in iniquity. 4. Rejoicing in iniquity.
Our love must be holy and pure, if we would have it preserved. It must have
nothing in it that is unseemly, nor must it be an affection, that will take
pleasure in the vices or faults of those with whom we co^uerse, 1 Cor. 13. 5, 6.

Fifthly, the minding of our own things: we must not study for our 5.
Worldliness and self-love.
selves, and our own ends only in conuersing, 1 Cor. 13. 5. The meaning is
not, that we should leave our callings and our houses, to spend the greatest
part of our time in our neighbors houses; but he prohibits, 1. Worldliness,
and excessive cares about our business, and the things of this life, which
hinders needful society with the godly: and secondly, he forbids self-love
in conuersing, when men in all things aim at their own profit, or pleasure,
or credit, and do not as well seek the good of others: we may mind our own
things, but not only.

6. Sixthly, Fickleness and Inconstancy: 6. Fickleness.
we must look to it, that brotherly love continue, Heb. 13. 1. and to this end
we must look to the leuity of our own natures, and strive to make good by
continuance, the affection we have conceived and professed to others. Some are
of such unconstant dispositions, that they will love vehemently for a fit, and
suddenly fall off without reason, but not without singular shame and blemishing
of their reputations. For such tempers are hardly fit for any society. Now
this must be repented of, and reformed.

Seventhly, we must take heed 7. Vainglory.
of vainglory, and over eager desire of credit and estimation above others.
For this is the cause of much unrest in our own hearts, and of much
interruption in brotherly love. And why would thou be so highly esteemed of?
Thou considerest not the hard task thou layest upon thy self, to be ever
careful to answer that great praise, or estimation thou desire: Nor markest
thou, how thereby thou art made to offend against thy brother: by envying him,
by backbiting, or other ways of provocation, nor yet how little this commends
thee to God, Gal. 5. 26.

Eighthly, take heed of judging 8. Judging
thy brethren, not but that thou may say, that sin is sin, but look to
thy self in two things:

First, that thou censure not thy brother about things indifferent, or
doubtful: such as ceremonies were and are. This is flatly forbidden, Romans 14.
3, 13.

Secondly, that thy suspicions transport thee not to condemn thy brother for
hidden things, the things of darkness and counsels of the heart: till thou be
sure of the fault, or offense, thou may not judge, or censure, 1 Cor. 4. 5.

Ninthly, if there be any occasion of grieuance, that love may be renewed, or
preserved, look to two things:

First, that thou render not reuiling 9. Evil words and complaining.
for reuiling, 1 Pet. 3. 9.

Secondly, that thou grudge not against thy brother, or by whispering deprave
his actions, or back-bite him, or complain against him to his disgrace, in
things where the right is not apparently discovered; Iam. 5. 9.

Lastly, if thou would preserve thy self in the love of the 10. Forsake not
their assembly.
godly, then thou must take heed of forsaking the assembling together of the
Saints: Thou must preserve all ways of exercising the Communion of Saints, and
hold fellowship with them in Gods House, and in your own dwelling:
Profaneness must not draw thee from the Temple: nor worldliness from
society, and loving, and profitable conversation with thy godly friends and
acquaintance, Heb. 10. 25.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How we must carry our selves toward such as are fallen.

HItherto of such rules of conversation, as direct us in our carriage toward
the godly, considered in general. Now there are other rules which concern
only some of the godly: namely

1. Such as are fallen. 2. Such as are weak. 3. Such as are strong. 4. Such as
are especially knit unto us in friendship.
For the first, those that are fallen, are either fallen from God, or fallen
from thee. Such as are fallen from God, are either fallen grossly and of habit,
or by infirmity and suddenly.

Those that are fallen grossly, are either guilty of soul vices, or else of
extreme omissions, such as that which the Apostle instanceth in, of idleness,
and the general neglect of their callings.

Now toward both these, thou How we must carry our selves toward such as are
fallen from God.
must be thus ordered.

First, warn them in the beginning, and reprove them sharply, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

Secondly, if they mend not, avoid them, withdraw thy self from them,
converse not familiarly with them, let them not be the companions of thy life,
1 Cor. 5. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14.

Thirdly, if they repent, forgive them, and comfort them, left they be
swallowed up of grief, 2 Cor. 2. 7, 8.

Now if they be fallen by infirmity, either they are likely to offend again,
or not. If they be likely to fall further, save them with fear, pulling them
out of the fire, Jude 23. but if not, th^n restore such a one with the spirit
of meekness, comfort him, deal gently with him, Gal. 6. 1.

Thus of thy carriage to such as are fallen from God.

As for those that are fallen How we must carry our selves toward such as
trespass against us.
from thee, by trespassing against thee, thou must observe these rules of
carriage toward them.

First, in slighter wrongs do all things without reasonings or murmurings:
either speak not of it, or so, as thou show no repining or vexation about it,
Phil. 2. 14.

Secondly, in great wrongs, thou must do two things:

First, observe the method of our Savior Christ: when the trespass is secret,
go and tell him of it between thee and him: if he mend not, then take two or
three other discreet godly persons with thee, and tell him of it again. If he
yet mend not, then divulge it, and acquaint the Church with it; either seek a
public sentence upon him from authority, or acquaint the godly generally with
it. And if these courses will not amend him, then abandon his society, as if
he were an Heathen or a Publican, Math. 18. 15.

Secondly, if by any of these courses he repent, forgive him; yea, and that as
often as he says, it repents him, if he should do thee many injuries, Luke
17. 3, 4.

CHAP. XXIX.
How we must carry our selves toward the weak Christian, etc.

THus of thy carriage toward How we must carry our selves toward weak
Christians.
them that are fallen.

Toward weak Christians we must be thus ordered:

First, we must take heed, that we entangle them not with doubtful
disputations in matters of ceremonies, or things indifferent, Romans 14. 1.

Secondly, we must get the skill to bear with their weaknesses and mere
frailties, Romans 15. 1.

Thirdly, we must be wonderful careful that we do not offend them, or cast
any stumbling blocks in their way, Matthew. 18. 1 Cor. 10. 32.

Fourthly, we must encourage them, and comfort them, and support them all we
can, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

Fifthly, in things indifferent, we must not think it much to cross our selves
to please them, and to suffer a little bondage in the restraint of our liberty,
rather then vex them, especially for the furtherance of their souls in the
means of their salvation, we should become all things to all men, Gal. 5. 13.
1. Cor. 9. 20, 21, 22.

3. Toward strong Christians, How we must carry our selves toward the strong.
we must be thus ordered:

1. First, we must acknowledge such, 1. Cor. 16. 18.

2. We should set them and their practice before us, as patterns and examples
of imitation, Phil. 3. 17. 1 These. 1. 7.

3. We should submit our selves to such, to let them advise us, and admonish
us, and withal should submit our judgments in things doubtful to theirs, 1
Cor. 16. 16. How we must carry our selves toward our special friend.
1 Pet. 5. 5.

4. Toward thy friend, thou must be thus ordered:

1. Never forsake him, Prou. 27. 10. 2. Give him hearty counsel, Prou. 27. 9.
3. Be friendly to him, Prou. 8. vlt. 4. Communicate thy secrets to him, John
15. 15. 5. Love him with a special love.
1. As thine own soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 2. Let thy love be at all times, even in
adversity, Prou. 17. 17. 3. It must be a sincere love, that looks not for
gifts or rewards, Prou. 19. 6. 4. It must be such a love as will reach to his
posterity also, if need be, 2 Chronicles. 20. 7.
CHAP. XXX.
Rules that concern our selves: and so first in our general calling.

HItherto of the rules of order in respect of God, or our neighbors. Now
follow the rules that concern our selves. And these are of two sorts. For they
are either such as order us at all times, or such as order us in the times of
affliction.

The first sort concern either ^ur general, or private calling.

The rules that concern our How we must carry our selves in our ^enerall
calling. 1 In matters of faith.
general calling, as in this place they are to be considered of, concern
either, 1. our Faith, 2 or ^ur repentance, 3. or our hope.

1. The rules that concern our Faith (supposing the Christian to be informed
in the things contained in the former Treatises) are only these two.

First, thou must be expert in the Catalogue of Promises, that concern
infirmities, mentioned in the third Treatise. For those will preserve thy faith
in Gods favor, against the daily experience of frailty and infirmity in thy
self. For thou may by them see, that thou have no reason to doubt of the
continuance of Gods love to thee, only because of thy many weaknesses. For in
those promises, he has and does declare, how graciously he is inclined to his
servants, and passes by their frailty, and ac cepteth their desires and
endeauours, etc. This rule will prove a maine support of the contentment of thy
life: and therefore let not Satan make thee either despise, or neglect it.

Secondly, thou shall do well to establish thy judgment particularly in the
doctrine of the Principles, expressed in the fifth Treatise; and by sound
learning of them settle thy self, so as thou be no more carried about with the
wind of any contrary doctrine. It should be the labor and care of all good
Christians to keep the pattern of wholesome words, 2. Tim. 1. 13. 2 About thy
repentance.


Concerning thy repentance, as now it is to be urged upon thee after thy
assurance, one rule is of singular use, and that concerns the Catalogue of
present sins. By the directions in the first Treatise, I suppose thou have
delivered thy self from the body of sins, so as the most of those evils
mentioned in the first and great Catalogue, are shaken off, never to be
committed again, and so thou have no more to do about them, but give God
thanks for thy deliverance from them through Jesus Christ. Now because after
thy first repentance there will remain some corruptions, which as yet are not
rooted out; thy course for thy whole life, for these remainders of sin, would
be this: Make thee a Catalogue of thy present sins, even of such evils as thou
find thy self yet daily prone unto. Examine thy self seriously to this
end: it may be thou will find 6. or 8. or 10. or more, or fewer evils, which
yet hang upon thy nature and life. Thy course for the use of this catalogue may
be this: I suppose thou art instructed so far, as to know the profit of daily
calling upon God: Now whereas in prayer thou do, or ought to make
confession of thy sins, in stead of a more general confession, use still thy
Catalogue, that is, labor every day to judge thy self distinctly for those
sins that do presently annoy thee: Hold on this course constantly, till thou
have gotten power against al, or any of them, and as thou find virtue
against any of them, so alter thy Catalogue, giving thanks for the sins thou
gettest head against, and putting them out of thy Catalogue. The pains is
little, it is once done for a long time, and thy memory will easily carry thy
special present faults. Besides, this distinct daily remembrance of thy
present sins, will make thee more watchful against those sins; and thou
may once a year, or once a quarter, or before every communion, examine thy
self anew, and mend thy Catalogue, by putting in any corruption which thou
discouerest then, or at any time, to arise anew in thee, and putting out such
evils as by prayer thou have gotten victory against. Thus may thou see the
state of thy soul distinctly all the days of thy life, discerning when thou
go forward or backward. Besides, this course of daily judging thy self,
keeps thee out of the danger of any wrath of God.

Concerning thy hope, there 3 About thy hope.
are four things for thee to do.

First, pray constantly and earnestly, for the knowledge of the great glory is
provided for thee. Thou must form the admiration of heaven in thee, by prayer:
for naturally it is not in us, Ephesians. 1. 18, etc.

Secondly, thou must use all diligence to perfect thy assurance of heaven, when
thou die, Heb. 6. 12. 1. Pet. 1. 13.

Thirdly, thou must strive to accustom thy thoughts to the daily contemplation
of heaven, that thy conversation may be in heaven, Phil. 3. 20.

Fourthly, thou must strive to direct thy heart, and enable thy self to the
expectation of the coming of Jesus Christ; thou must labor for that skill
distinctly, to be able to wait for the coming of Jesus Christ, and to show
that thou love his appearing, 1. These. 1. 10, and 2. These 3. 5. Gal. 5. 5. 2.
Tim. 4. 8.

CHAP. XXXI.
Rules that order us in our particular calling.

THus of the rules that concern 7. Things to be auoi ded in our particular
calling.
thy general calling: In thy particular calling there are seven things to be
avoided.

The first is slothfulness, and thou art guilty of this sin, both when thou
do not the labors of thy calling, and when thou obseruest not the reasons,
and opportunities of thy calling, Prou. 10. 4, 5. And that thou may be free
from this sin, thou must avoid together with it the occasions of it: And so
thou must avoid, 1. The love of sleep, Prou. 20. 13. 2. Good fellowship, and
haunting of Alehouses, and Tauernes, and keepi^g company with dissolute
persons, Prou. 21. 17. 3. Wandering from thine own house, even that unnecessary
going from house to house, though it be not to places of ill fame. Fourthly,
thou must take heed of pertinacious entertainment of doubts and objections
about thy calling: thou should be afraid of excuses for idleness,
especially to be so selfewilled, as to be glad of any thing may seem to
patronize thy slothfulnes, Pro. 20. 4. and 15. 19. and 26. 16. And therefore to
conclude this rule, when thou art about thy calling, what thou do, do with
all thy power, Eccl. 9. 10. and rest not in words or prattling. He is not
diligent, that brags much of what work he can or will do, but he that does it
indeed, Pro. 14. 23.

The second sin to be avoided (...). Vnfaithfuln^sse.
in thy particular calling, is unfaithfulness, Pro. 20 6. and so thou must
take heed of breach of thy promise in thy dealings with men, Psa. 15. 4. and
also thou must take heed of all deceitful courses, all ways of fraud and
coozenage. It is an hateful thing in men, when they are such as cannot be
trusted, either because they make not conscience of keeping their words, or
because they will use so much cunning and deceit, and dissimulation and lying
in their dealings.

The third sin to be avoided, 3. Rashness.
is Precipitation, hastines, and unadvised rashness, rising out of the leuity of
men's minds, or their wilfulnes. Providence and wise diligence is wonderful
requisite unto a right ordering of our selves in our callings, Pro. 21. 5.

The fourth sin to be avoided, is Passion, or perturbation; 4 Passion.
and that has in it both vncheerfulnesse and unquietness. Vnch^erfulnesse,
when men are not content with their callings, or gifts, or estates, 1. Cor. 7.
17. Unquietness, when men are froward, and carry themselves peeuishly, or
cholerickly with those that are about them. This sin of frowardnes is
vehemently censured and condemned in Scripture, Pro. 11. 29. Psa. 37. 8. Pro.
16. 32. and 19. 11. and 25. 28. whereas God requires a quiet, contented and
merry heart, Pro. 17. 22. Eccl. 9. 7, 8.

The fifth thing to be avoided and shunned, is the Temptations 5. The
temptations of thy calling.
of thy calling; every calling in the world is assaulted with certain
temptations, and they are usually of two sorts; For first, in all callings
there are certain unlawful courses held for gain by wicked men, which we
call the sins of such a calling. These unjust courses thou must learn to avoid
and abhor, and so exercise thy calling, as thou shun those sinful courses
used by wicked men in that calling. Secondly, every calling is assaulted with
crosses and afflictions: now in these afflictions the devil is wont to tender
ill counsel, to persuade to sin, or the use of unlawful means, or other
sins of distrust in God: all these thou must avoid.

Sixthly, thou must take heed of worldines, or setting thy heart upon those
earthly things thou art to deal with in thy calling. Thou must ever be ready
to confess, and show it by thy practice, that thou accountest thy self to be
but a stranger and Pilgrim in this world, Heb. 11. 13. and if riches increase,
thou must look to it, that thou set not thy heart upon them, Psalm. 62. 10.
Thou must use the world, but not love the world, 1. Ioh. 2. 15. Thou may and
ought to be careful to do the duties of thy calling; but thou must in
nothing be careful about the success, but submit thy self in all things to
God, Math. 6. 1. Cor. 7. 32. Thou must behave thy self like a weaned child,
Psalm. 131. 1, 2. Take heed of eating too much honey, Pro. 25. 16, and 27. 1, 2.

The seventh, and last thing 7 Profaneness.
thou must avoid, is profaneness, which is to use the works of thy calling
without exercising thy self in the Word of God, and daily prayer for Gods
blessing upon thy labors, and the creatures thou art to use, Psalm. 90. 1. Tim.
4. 3, 4. Genesis 24. 11, 12, 26, 27.

CHAP. XXXII.
How we should carry our selves in the time of affliction.

THus of the Rules of carriage which concern thy self at all times: Now
follow the How we must carry our selves in a^liction. 8. Things to be avoided.
Rules that show thee how to behave our selves in time of affliction and
adversity. When thou art in affliction, thou must consider what thou must
avoid, and what thou must do.

Thou must avoid eight things.

First, Dissembling: Make not 1 Dissembling.
thy self poor, when thou ar^rich; nor sick, when thou art well, Prou. 13. 7.

Secondly, Shame. Be not ashamed 2. Shame.
of that condition God brings thee into: bear thy crosses with spiritual
magnanimity; account not thy self dishonored by Gods hand, who does all for
the best, 1. Pet. 4. 16.

Thirdly, Impatience: grieve not 3. Impatience.
at Gods works: sorrow not after the world: Fret not at God or man; Refuse not
Gods chastening, but with patience bear what is laid upon thee: It is the
Lord, let him do whatsoever he will with thee, Prou. 3. 11.

Fourthly, Fainting, or discouragement 4 Discouragement.
of heart: Live by faith; call not Gods love into question: keep thee in the
good way, Pro. 24. 10.

Fifthly, Trust not upon carnal friends: Rely not upon man, 5 Trust not in
carnal friends.
but upon God: Trust not in the arm of flesh, Prou. 27. 10.

Sixthly, Too much Carefulnes 6 Perplexed cares.
for the means how to get out of affliction: Commit thy way to God, and put
thy trust in him; use all lawful means, but distress not thy heart with
bootlesse cares: Cast thy care upon God, for he cares for thee, Phil. 4. 6. 1
Pet. 5. 7.

Seventhly, Sudden fears. Be not so amazed with the first tidings, 7. Sudden
fears.
or beginnings of any affliction, discover not such want of faith, as to be
guilty of those violent passions of fear; Gods love is unchangeable; and
though heaven and earth should go together, yet God will be with thee; He
will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, Prou. 3. 25.

Eighthly and lastly, carelessness 8. Carelessness of thy wates
of thy ways. Be not secure in sinning, but let thy crosses melt off some of
thy dross, and draw thee near to God: Go not on boldly to sin without
regard; if the Lord have any quarrel against thee, humble thy self and depart
from iniquity, Pro. 14. 16.

The things then thou must do 5 Things to be done in the time of affliction.
on the contrary side, are these: When thou art in affliction, thou must do
these things:

First, thou must pray, and call upon the name of the Lord; as these express
Scriptures require, Iam. 5. 13. Psalm. 50. 15. 1. Cor. 4. 12, 13.

Secondly, thou must bear thy crosses with patience, and contentation, lam 1.
4. 1. Pet. 3. 15. Esaias 5. Phil. 4. 5, 6. 2. Cor. 6. 8. Pro. 12. 9.

Thirdly, thou must labor for wisdom, to know how to carry thy self
discreetly, and to use all good means for thy deliverance, Iam. 1. 5.

Fourthly, thou must be sure to show thy trust in God, and cast thy burden on
the Lord, Iam. 5. 7, 8. Nahum 1. 7. Psalm. 27. vlt. and 37. 7. and 55. 22.

Fifthly, thou must show thy obedience to God; and that thou do,

1. If thou submit thy self to Gods will, Heb. 5. 8.

2. If thou judge thy self, and acknowledge thy sins to God, Hosh. 5. vlt. Job
36. 8, 9.

3. If thou be constant in the good ways of godliness, Psalm. 37. ^4.

4. If thou learn more righteousness, and art made by thy crosses to do holy
duties with better affections, Esaias 26. 10.

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the READER.
REligious Reader, be pleased to take notice of the purpose and intention of
the reverend Author of these Treatises, which he has more fully expressed in
the beginning of this Book, and in the sixth page directs to the use of his
Treatise of the Principles of Religion; a Work well approved, and acceptable
with good men: Which Book should in order follow next after the Rules of a
holy Life. But the Authors purpose has been hitherto disappointed, by reason
the right of Printing these Treatises did belong to several men. Which
inconvenience is now provided for; all the whole six Treatises being to be had
entire in one Volume, if thou be not wanting to thy self.

Thine in the Lord, Adoniram Bifield.

THE PRINCIPLES, OR, THE PATTERN OF wholesome Words:

Containing a Collection of such Truths as are of necessity to be believed unto
Salvation, separated out of the Body of all THEOLOGY, Made evident by
infallible and plain proofs of Scriptures.

And withal, The several uses such Principles should be put to, are
abundantly showed.

A project much desired, and of singular use for all sorts of Christians.

By N. BIFIELD late Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in MIDDLESEX.

The fourth Edition, corrected and amended.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for Robert Allot, at the sign of the Bear in
Paul's Churchyard.

1630.

This is the Title of the Treatise mentioned in the Advertisement: The Treatise
it self ought to follow in this place.

THE CVRE OF THE FEAR OF DEATH.

Showing the course Christians may take, to be delivered from those Fears
about Death, which are found in the hearts of the most.

A Treatise of singular use for all sorts.

By N. BIFIELD late Preacher of Gods Word at isleworth in MIDDLESEX.

HEB. 2. 15.

He died, that he might deliver them, who through the fear of death, were all
their life time subject to bondage.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, and are to be sold by P. Stophens, and C.
Meredith, at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard.

1630.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and Noble Lady, the Lady Anne Harrington: Grace and
comfort from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, be multiplied.
MADAM,
When I had seriously bethought my self, in what Doctrine especially to
employ my Ministry, in the place in which the Lord had by so strong and
strange a providence settled me: Amongst other things, I was vehemently
inclined to study the Cure of the Fear of Death; both because it may be
usually observed, that the most men are in bondage, by reason of these Fears;
as also because I am assured, that our lives will become: more sweet, yea, and
more holy too, when the fear of death is removed. And the rather was I
incited hereunto, because I have observed some defect about this Point, in the
most that have written about Death. I am not ignorant of the censure which many
may give of this project, as accounting it an impossible thing to be effected:
but my trust is, that godly and discreet Christians will restrain censure,
when they have thoroughly viewed my reasons.

My unfeigned desire to do service unto Gods Church, in relieuing such
Christians herein, as are not furnished with better helps, has emboldened me
to offer this Treatise also to the public view. I have presumed in your Honors
absence to thrust forth this Treatise under the protection of your Honors name:
and withal, I desire heartily to testify my thankefulnes for the many favors
showed unto me and mine, while your Honor was pleased to be my hearer. I should
also much rejoice, if my testim my (concerning the singular graces God has
bestowed upon you, and the many good works in which you have abounded in the
places of your abode) might add any thing either unto your Honors praises in
the Churches of Christ, or unto the establishment of the comfort of your own
heart in God, and his Son Jesus Christ.

I have not made choice of your Honor in this Dedication, for any special
fitness in this Treatise for your Honors condition, in respect of your age,
or absence in a place so far remote; for my earnest trust is, that God will
add yet many years to your happy life on earth: and besides, I have had
heretofore occasion to know how little you were afraid to dye, when the Lord
did seem to summon you by sickness.

That GOD, which has ennobled your heart with heavenly gifts, and so made you
an instrument of so much good and contentment unto that most excellent
Princess with whom you now live; and toward whom, you have showed so much
faithful observance, and dearness of affection, and carfulness of
attendance; even the Father of mercy, and God of all consolations, increase in
you all spiritual blessings, and multiply the joy of your heart, and make you
still to grow in acceptance, and all well-doing.

Humbly craving pardon for my boldness herein, I commit your Honor to God, and
to the Word of his Grace, which will build you up to eternal life: resting

Your Honors in all humble observance, N. BIFIELD,
Isleworth, July 14. 1618.
The chief Contents of this Book.
THE drift is, to show how we may be freed from the fear of Death. page 6. 35
First, it is proved by eight apparent Arguments, that it may be attained to.
page 655. to 660 Secondly, it is showed by fifteen Considerations, how
shameful and uncomely a thing it is for a Christian to be afraid to die, page
660. to 670. Thirdly, the way how this fear may be removed, is showed: where
may be noted, An exhortation to regard the directions. p. 670, 671 Two ways of
Cure: the one, by Meditation; the other, by Practice. p. 671. 1. The
Contemplations either serve to make us to like Death, or else to be less in
love with life, page 672. Seventeen Privileges of a Christian in death, page
670. to 685. The contemplations that show us the misery of life, are of two
sorts: for either they show us the miseries of the life of nature; or else, the
miseries that do unavoidably accompany the very life of grace, p. 685. etc.
The miseries of the life of nature, from p. 8^. to 693. The mi^eries of a godly
man's life are twofold: which appears both in the things he wants, and in the
things he has while he lives, page 693. etc. Six things which every godly
man wants while he lives, p. 694. to 698. What should make a godly man weary
of life, in respect of God, page 698. to 704. And what in respect of evil
angels. p. 704. etc. And what in respect of the World, p. 706. etc. And what in
respect of himself. p. 721. etc. Eight aggrauations of Gods corrections in
this life. p. 702. Eight apparent miseries from the world. p. 706. etc.
Fifteen manifest defects and blemishes in the greatest seeming felicities of
the world. p. 712. to 721. Many aggrauations of our misery, in respect of
corruption of nature in this life. p. 721. etc. The remainders of the first
punishments yet upon us. p. 725. The remoouall of the Objections men make about
death, from whence their fear arises, and these Objections are answered. p.
7^7. 1. About the pain of dying, where are ten answers. p. 721. etc. 2. About
the condition of the body in death. p. 733. 3. About the desire to live longer
yet. p. 736. 4. About the pretense of desire to live long to do good. p. 740.
5. About casting away of ones self. p. 472. 6. About parting with friends. p.
745. etc. 7. About parting with wife and children. p. 747. 8. About leaving the
pleasures of life. p. 748. 9. About leaving their honors of life. p. 750. 10.
About leaving their riches. p. 753. etc. 11. About the kind of death. p. 756.
The second way of curing the fear of death, is by practice, where seven
directions are given: from p. 757. to the end.
THE CVRE OF THE FEAR OF DEATH.
CHAP. I.
Showing the Scope and parts of this Treatise.

THat which I intend in this The drift of the whole Treatise.
Treatise, is to show how a godly man might order himself against the fear of
Death; or what course he should take to live so, as not to be afraid to die.
This is a maine point, and exceeding necessary. Life is thoroughly sweet, when
death is not feared: The pr^ followin^ these dir^ ctions.
A man's heart is then like Mount Sion, that cannot be moved. He can fear no
enemy, that does not fear death. As death is the last enemy, so it works the
longest and last fears: and to dye happily, is to dye willingly. The maine
work of preparation is effected, when our hearts are persuaded to be willing
to dye.

Now in the explication of this The parts of the treatise.
point, I would distinctly handle three things.

First, I will prove, that to live without fear of death, is a thing may be
obtained; one may be delivered from it as certainly, as a sick man may be
cured of an ordinary disease.

S^condly, I will show, how uncomely a thing it is for a Christian to be afraid
of death: that so we may be stirred up the more to seek the cure for this
disease.

Thirdly, I will show by what m^anes we may be delivered from the fear of
death, if we use them. Of the two first more briefly, and of the last at large.

CHAP. II.
Proving, that we may be cured of the fear of Death.

FOr the first: That the fear of Eight arguments to prove we may be helped
against the fear of death. Christ died to this end
death may be removed: and that we may attain to that resolution, to be
willing to dye, without lothnesse, is apparent diverse ways.

First, it is evident, Christ dyed to deliver us, not only from the hurt of
death, and from the devil, as the executioner; but also from the fear of
death too. Now Christ may attain to the end of his death, unless we will deny
the virtue of Christ, and his death, and think that, notwithstanding, it
cannot be obtained, Heb. 2. 14, 15. And the more apparent in this, because in
that place he shows, that there is virtue in the death of Christ, to cure this
fear of death in any of the Elect, if they will use the means: For as our sins
will not be mortified, though there be power in the death of Christ to kill
them, unless we use the means to extract this virtue out of the death of
Christ, so is it true, that the fear of death may be in some of Gods elect:
but it is not because Christ cannot deliver them; but because they are
sluggish, and will not take the course to be rid of those fears. The
Physician is able to cure them, and usually does cure the same disease; but
they will not take his Receipts.

Secondly, the Apostle entreating of the desire of death, says, 2. It was
intended in our regeneration.
That God has wrought us unto the self same thing, 2 Cor. 5. 5. We are again
created of God, that we might in our selves aspire unto immortality; and are
set in such an estate, as if we answered the end of his workmanship, we should
never be well, till we be possessed of the happiness in another world: which
he shows in those words of being absent from the body, and present with the
Lord, verse 8.

Thirdly, the prophesies have run on this point. For it was 3 This cure has
bin foretold.
long since foretold, that Christians knowing the victory of Christ over
death, should be so far from fearing death, that they should tread upon him,
and insult over him: O death, where is thy sting? etc. Esaias 25. 8. Hosea 13.
14. 2 Corinthians 15. 54, 55.

Fourthly, it is a condition that Christ puts in, when he first admits 4 We
were bound to it when we were admitted to be Christ's Disciples.
Disciples, that they must deny their own lives: and not only be content to
take up their cross in other things, but their lives must not be dear unto
them, when he calls for it, Luke 14. 26.

Fifthly, We are taught in the 5 It is taught in the Lords Prayer.
Lords Prayer, to pray, That Gods kingdom may come: And by this kingdom, he
means the kingdom of Glory, as well as the kingdom of Grace. Now, in that
we are taught to pray for the kingdom, it shows, we should desire it, and
that by prayer we should be more and more heated in our desires.

Sixthly, we are borne again Lively hope does include it.
to a lively hope of our inheritance. Now if we be afraid of the time of our
translation thither, how do we hope for it after a lively manner? A desire of
going to heaven is a part of that Seed cast into our hearts in our
regeneration, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

Seventhly, we have the example Examples of such as have attained to it.
of diverse men in particular, who have desired to die, and were out of fear in
that respect: Genesis 49. 18. Jacob waited for Gods salvation: and Paul resolves,
that to die, and to be with Christ, is best of all for him: Phil. 1. 21, 23.
yea, in Romans 7. 24. he is vehement; O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of Death? Sim^on prays God to let him dye, Luke 2
29. And the Prophet in the name of the godly, said long before Christ: O that
the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! Psalm 14. 7. And we have the
example of the Martyrs in all ages, that accounted it a singular glory to die:
And in 2. Corinthians 5. 2, 7. the godly are said, to fight for it, that they might
be absent from his body, and present with the Lord; and so do the first fruits
of the holy Ghost, those eminent Christians mentioned, Romans 8. 23.

Lastly, not only some particular godly men have attained 8. The whole Church
taught to seek.
to this, but the whole Church is brought in, in the 12. Chapter of Revelation,
praying for the coming of Christ, and desiring too, that he would come
quickly: And 2. Timothy 4. 8. The love of the appearing of Christ, is the
Periphrasis of the child of God.

Thus of the first point.

CHAP. III.
Showing how uncomely it is to fear Death.

FOr the second, how uncomely a thing it is in Christians to fear death, may
appear many F^ene R^asons why it is an uncomely thing to be afraid to dye.
ways.

1. By the fear of death we shame our Religion; while we profess it in our
words, we deny it in our works. Let Papists 1 We shame our religion.
tremble at death, who are taught, that no man ordinarily can be sure he shall
go to heaven when he dies. But for us, that profess the knowledge of
salvation, to be astonished at the passage to it, shows (at least) a great
weakness of faith, and does outwardly give occasion of disgrace to our
Religion.

2. By that which went before, we may see how uncomely it is to be afraid of
death: For thereby we disable the death of Christ: we frustrate the end of
Gods workmanship: we stop the execution of the Prophesies: we renounce our
first agreement with Christ: we mock God in praying that his kingdom may
come: we obscure the evidence of our own regeneration; and we transgress
against the example of the godly in all ages.

3. Many of the Pagans greatly 3. We are worse then some Pagans.
settled their hearts against the fear of death by this very reason: because
there was no being after death; and therefore they could no more feel misery
then, then before they were borne. And shall we Christians, that hear every
day of the glorious salvation we have by Christ, be more fearful then they
were? Let them fear death that know not a better life.

Shall we be like wicked men? 4 Wicked men dye unwillingly.
Their death is compelled; shall ours be so too. They by their good wills, would
not lose their bodies in this life, nor have their bodies in the next life: but
since God has made us unlike them in the issues of death, shall we make our
selves like them in the lothnesse to dye? Let Felix tremble at the doctrine of
death and judgment, Acts 24. 25. but let all the godly hold up their heads,
because the day of their redemption draws nigh, Matthew 24. etc.

5. Shall we be afraid of a shadow? 5 Death is but a shadow.
The separation of the soul from God, that is death, if we speak exactly: but
the separation of the soul from the body, is but the shadow of death. When
see we men trembling for fear of spiritual death, which is called the First
Death? and yet this is far more woeful then that we call the bodily death.
But as if the death of the body were nothing, the Scripture calls damnation, The
second death, never putting the other into the number.

6. This fear is called a bondage 6. It is a bondage to fear.
here in this text: And shall we voluntarily make our selves vassals? Or shall
we be like slaves that dare not come in our Masters sight?

7. If we love long life, why are we not much more in love 7. If we love this
life, why not eternal life?
with eternal life, where the duration is longer, and the estate happier? Are
we not extremely insatuated, that when God will do better for us then we
desire, yet we will be afraid of him?

8. Shall we be worse then children, or mad men? Neither 8. Are we worse
then children and mad men?
of them fear death; and shall simplicity, or Ideotisme, do more with them,
then reason or Religion can do with us?

9. Do not all that read the story of the Israelites (in their 9. We make
our selves like the Israelites, or rather more absurd then they.
passion desiring to be again in Egypt, and violently murmuring at the
promise of going into the Land of Canaan) condemn them of vile ingratitude to
God, and folly in respect of themselves? For what was it for them to live in
Egypt, but to serve cruel Taske-masters about brick and clay? And was not
Canaan the place of their rest, and a Land that flows with milk and honey?
Even such is the condition of all that wish life, and are afraid to dye. What
is this world but Egypt, and what is to live in this world, but to serve about
brick and clay? Yea, the Church, that is separate from the world, can find it
no better then a barren wilderness. And what is Heaven, but a spiritual
Canaan? And what can death be more, then to pass over Jordan; and
victoriously ouercomming all enemies to be possessed of a place of matchless
rest; of more pleasures then Milk or Honey can shadow out?

10. Adam might have had 10. Is not death ordinary?
more reason to fear Death, that never saw a man die an ordinary death; but
for us to be affrighted with death; that see thousands die at our right hand,
and ten thousand at our left, and that daily, is an inexcusable distemper. The
gate of Death is continually open, and we see a prease of people, that daily
throng into it.

11. When Moses had cast 11. The example of Moses.
down his Rod, it turned into a Serpent; and the Text, noting Moses
weakness, says; He fled from it: But the Lord commanded him to take it by
the Tail; and behold, it became a Rod again. Even so death at the first sight
is terrible, like a new-made Serpent, and the godly themselves, through
inconsideration, fly from it: but if at Gods commandment, without fear they
would lay hold upon this seeming Serpent, it will be turned into a Rod again;
yea, into a golden Scepter in our hands, made much better by the change.
Neither do we read, that ever at any time after Moses had any fear of this
Serpent, when he had once known the experience of it. And have we offen, by the
eyes of faith, seen the experience of this great work of God, and shall we
still be running away?

12. It is said, Romans 8. 12. that all creatures groan, waiting for 12 The
example of al creatures.
the liberty of the sons of God: and shall we be worse then bruit beasts?
Does the whole frame of nature, as it were, call for this time of change; and
shall man be so stupid, or carried with such senseless fears, as to shun his
own felicity?

13. Consider whether it be 13. It is better we go to death, then that death
should come to us
more commodious for us, that Death come to us, or that we go to Death. For one
thing is certain; it is vain to shun that which cannot be avoided. For it
is appointed unto all men once to die, Heb. 9. 27. What man is he that lives,
and shall not see death? Psalm. 89. 48. Death is the way of all flesh, Josh. 24.
Now this being granted, let us consider of it: Death is like an armed man, with
whom we must once fight. Now if we be advised, and will go to Death, we must
get on our armor beforehand, and so the encounter will be without danger to
us, because the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God, and we are
assured of victory through Jesus Christ. On the other side, to tarry till Death
come unto us, is as if a man that knows he must fight with a sore adversary,
would through slothfulness go up and down unarmed, till he fall into the
hands of his enemy, and must then fight with him at such disadvantage.

14. It is most uncomely to 1^. It is uncomely to fear that which is common
and ce^taine
fear that which is both common and certain. Death, of all afflictions is
most common. For from other afflictions it is possible some might be free; but
from death can no man be delivered: and God of purpose has made that most
common which is most grievous, that thereby he might abate the terror of it.
It is monstrous foolishnes, to strive in vain to avoid that which never man
could escape. And to teach men their unavoidable mortality, the Lord clothed
our first Parents with the skins of dead beasts, and feeds us with dead
flesh, that as often as we eat of slain beasts, we might remember our own
end: and shall we be ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of this
truth? Is this such a lesson as cannot be learned? Shall we be so stupid, as
daily to pass by the graves of the dead, and hear their knels, and yet be
untaught and unarmed?

15. Lastly, shall we be afraid 15. Shall we be afraid of an enemy that has bin
soossen vanquished
of such an enemy as has been overcome hand to hand, and beaten by Christ,
and thousands of the Saints? especially if we consider the assurance we have
of victory. In this combat every Christian may triumph before the victory,
(...) Corinth. 15. 55.

And thus much of the two first points.

CHAP. IIII.
Showing that a Christian is many ways happy in death.

NOw I come to the third point, which is the maine thing here intended; and
that is the means how we may be cured of the fear of Death: and in this we
had need all to attend with great carfulness. The disease is stubburne, and
men are sluggish, and extremely loath to An exhorta^ion to attend upon the
mean^s of cure.
be at the trouble of the cure; and Satan by all means would keep us from
remembering our latter end: and the world affoords daily distractions to pluck
us away from the school of Christ herein, and our own hearts are deceitful,
and our natures apt to be weary of the doctrine, before we put in practice any
of the directions; and we are apt to a thousand conceits, that it is either
impossible, or unnecessary to attend this doctrine, or the like. Yea, it may
be, it will fare with many of us, as it does with those that are troubled with
the raging pain of the teeth; their pain will cease when the Barber comes to
pull out the tooth: so it may be you may find this deceit in your hearts, that
you will not feel. the fear of death, till the discourse of the medicine be
over; and so let it be as water spilt on the ground. But let us all awake, and
in the power and strength of Christ, that died to deliver us from the fear of
death, let us lay all the plasters close to the sore, and keep them at it,
till it be thoroughly whole.

There be two ways then of curing this fear of Death: The 2. Ways of curing
the fear of Death. 1. By contemplation 2 By practice.
one is by contemplation: The other is by practi^. There be some things if we
did choose them out, soundly to think of them, would heal us wonderfully.

There be some things also to be done by us, to make the c^re perfect. If
contemplation be not available, then practice will without fail finish the
cure.

The contemplations are of two sorts: For either they are such The ways of
curing this fear by contemplation.
meditations as breed desire of Death, by way of motive, or they are such as
remove the objections, which cause in man's mind the fear of Death. For the
first, there be two things, which if they be soundly thought on, will work a
strange alteration in our hearts. The one is, the happiness we have by death.
The other is, the miseries we are in by life.

Can any man be afraid to be happy? If our heads and hearts were filled with
arguments, that show us our happiness by death, we would not be so senseless as
to tremble at the thought of dying.

Our happiness in death, may be set out in many particulars, The happiness of
a Christian (...) death, showed 17. ways. 1. Death i^ the haven.
and illustrated by many similitudes, full of life and virtue to heal this
disease of fear.

1. Death makes an end of all the tempests and continual storms, with which
our life is tossed: it is the Haven and Port of rest: and are we so mad as to
desire the continuance of such dangerous tempests, rather then to be in the
Haven whither our journey tends?

2. Death is a sleep: For so 2 It is but a sleep.
the dead are said to to be asleep, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. Look what a bed of rest
and sleep is to the weary labourer, such is Death to the diligent Christian.
In death they rest in their beds from Job 14. 12.
the hand labors of this life, Esaias 38. Revel. 14. 13. And was ever the weary
labourer afraid of the time when he must lie down and take his rest?

3. The day of Death is the day 3. It is the day of receiving wages.
of receiving wages, wherein God pays to every godly man his penny. And does
not the hireling long for the time wherein he shall receive wages for his
work? Job 7. 2. And the rather should we long for this time, because we shall
receive wages infinitely above our work; such wages as was never given by man,
nor can be, if all this visible world were given us.

4. In death the servant comes to his freedom, and the heir is 4 Then the
servant is free, and the heir at full age.
at his full age; and it is such a liberty as is glorious: never such a
freedom in the world, Romans 8. 21. Shall the heir desire to be still under
age, and so still under Tutors and Governors? or shall the servant fear the
day of his freedom?

5. In death, the banished return, 5 Then the banished return.
and the Pilgrims enter into their Fathers house. In this life we are exiled
men, banished from Paradise, and Pilgrims and Strangers in a far country,
absent from God and heaven. In death we are received to Paradise, and settled
at home in those everlasting habitations in our Fathers house, Luke 17. Ioh.
14. 2. Hebrews 11. 13. And can we be so senseless, as to be afraid of this?

6. Death is our birthday; we 6. It is our birthday.
say falsely, when we call Death the last day. For it is indeed the beginning
of an everlasting day: and is there any grieuance in that?

7. Death is the funeral of our 7. It is the funeral of our vices, etc.
vices, and the resurrection of our graces. Death was the daughter of Sin,
and in death shall that be fulfilled: The daughter shall destroy the mother. We
shall never The dissolution of the body.
more be infected with sin, nor troubled with ill natures, nor be terrified
for offending: Death shall deliver us perfectly whole of all our diseases, that
were impossible to be cured in this is the absolution of the soul.
life, and so shall there be at that day a glorious resurrection of graces:
Our gifts shall shine as the Stars in the firmament; And can we be so
sottish, as still to be afraid of death?

8. In death the soul is delivered 8. Then the soul is delivered out of
prison.
out of prison: For the body in this life is but a loathsome and dark prison
of restraint. I say, the soul is restrained, as it were in a prison, while it
is in the body, because it cannot be free to the exercise of it self either
in natural or supernatural things: For the body so rules by senses, and it is
so fiercely carried by appetites, that the soul is compelled to give a way to
the satisfying of the body, and cannot freely follow the light either of Nature
or Religion: The truth, as the Apostle says, is withheld or shut up, through
unrighteousness, Romans 1. 28. I say, it is a loathsome prison, because the
soul is annoyed with so many loathsome smells of sin and filthiness, which by
the body are committed. And it is a dark prison; For the soul looking through
the body, can see but by little holes, or small casements. The body shuts up
the light of the soul, as a dark Cloud does hide the light of the Sun; or
as the interposition of the earth does make it night. Now death does nothing,
but as it were a strong wind, dissolve this cloud, that the Sun may shine
clearly, and pulls down the walls of the prison, that the soul may come into
the open light.

9. The liberty of the soul in 9. Showed by another similitude.
death may be set out by another similitude. The world is the Sea; our lives
are like to many Galleys at Sea, tossed with continual Tides or Storms: our
bodies are Gally-slaues, put to hard service by the great Turk the Devil, who
tyrannically, and by usurpation, does forcibly command hard things. Now the
soul within, like the heart of some ingenious Gally-slaue, may be free, so as
to loath that servitude, and inwardly de^est that tyran^ but yet so long as it
is tied to the body, it cannot get away. Now death comes like an irresistable
Giant, and carries the Galleys to the shore, and dissolues them, and sets the
prisoners free: And shall this glorious liberty of the soul be a matter of
terror unto us? Had we rather be in captivity still?

10. In this life we are clothed 10. It is but to put off our old clothes.
with rotten, ragged, foul garments: Now the Apostle shows, that death does
nothing else but pull off those ragged garments, and cloth us with the
glorious robes of salvation, more rich then the robes of the greatest Monarch,
2. Cor. 5. 2, 3. It is true, that the godly have some kind of desire to be
clothed upon: They would have those new garments, without putting off their
old: but that is not decent, for a Prince to wear (without) gorgeous attire,
and (underneath) base rags. To desire to go to heaven, and not to die, is to
desire to put on our new clothes, without putting off our old. And is it any
grieuance to shift us, by laying aside our old clothes, to put on such rich
garments? We are just like such slothful persons, that love well to have good
clothes, and clean linen; but they are so sluggish, they are loath to put off
their old clothes, or foul linen.

11. In the same place, the Apostle 11. it is but to remove out of an old house.
compares our bodies to an old mud-walled house, and to a rotten tent; and our
estate and heaven, to a most glorious and Princely palace, made by the most
curious workman that ever was, and it is such a building too, as will never be
out of repair. Now for a godly man to die, is but to remove from a rotten old
house, ready to fall on his head, to a sumptuous palace. 2. Cor. 5. 1. Does
that Landlord do his Tenant wrong, or offer him hard measure, that will have
him out of his base cottage, and bestow upon him his own Mansion house? No
other thing does God to us, when by death he remoues us out of this earthly
Tabernacle of our bodies, to settle us in those everlasting habitations, even
into that building made without hands in heaven, Ioh. 14. 2. Luke 17.

12. A man that had never 12. The seed cast into the ground, is not spoiled.
seen the experience of it, perhaps would have thought, that the seed cast
into the ground, had been spoiled, because it would rot there; but Nature
having showed the return of that grain with advantage, a man can easily be
cured of that folly. The Husbandman is never so simple, as to pity himself or
his seed; he says not, Alas, is it not pity to throw away and mar this
good seed? Why, brethren, what are your bodies, but like the best grain? The
bodies of the Saints are Gods choicest corn. And what does death m^ unto Gods
grain, then cast it into the earth? Do we not believe our bodies shall rise
like the grain, better then ever they were sowed? and are we still afraid?

13. Paul says, he would be 13. Then we shall be in Christ.
dissolved, that he might be with Christ, Philip. 1. 2^. In which words he
imports two things in death. First, that there is a dissolution of the soul
from the body: and secondly, that there is a conjunction of the soul with
Christ. Now, which is better for us, to have the body, or to have Christ? The
same Apostle says elsewhere, that they are confident in this, they had rather
be absent from the body, and so to be present with the Lord; then to be
present with the body, and absent from the Lord, 2. Cor. 5. 7, 8.

Now the true reason why men fear death, is; because they look upon the
dissolution only, and not upon the ^oniunction with Christ.

14. In the 1. Cor. 9. 24. our 14 It is but to come to the and of the Race, and
receive the prize.
life is compared to a race, and eternal life to a rich prize; not a
corruptible, but an incorruptible Crown. Now death is the end of the race; and
to dye, is but to come to the goal or race end. Was ever Runner so foolish, as
to be sorry, that with victory he was near the end of the race? And are we
afraid of death, that shall end the toil and sweat and danger of the running;
and give us, with endless applause, so glorious a recompense of reward.

15. In the Ceremonial Law, 15. It is our Iubilee.
there was a year they called the year of Iubilee: and this was accounted an
acceptable year; because every man that had lost or sold his lands, upon the
blowing of a trumpet returned; and had possession of all again; and so was
recovered out of the extremity in which he lived before. In this life we are
like the poor men of Israel, that have lost our inheritance, and live in a
manner and condition every way straightened: now death is our Iubilee, and when
the trumpet of death blows, we all, that die, return and enjoy a better
estate, then ever we sold, or lost. Shall the Iubilee be called an acceptable
time, and shall not our* Iubilee be acceptable to us? Esaias 61. 2.

16. Death is the day of our 16 I^ is the day of our Coronation.
Coronation: we are Heirs apparent to the Crown in this life; yea, we are
Kings elect, but cannot be crowned till death, 2. Tim. 4. 8. And shall not
that make us love the appearing of Christ? Is a King afraid of the day of his
Coronation?

17. To conclude this first part 17. Consider the glory to come.
of Contemplation: If we did seriously set before our eyes the glory to come;
could our eyes be so dazeled, as not to see, and admire, and haste to it? Ask
Paul that was in Heaven, what he saw; and he will tell you, Things that cannot
be uttered; Happiness beyond all language of mortal man. If there were as
much faith on Earth, as there is glory in Heaven; Oh how would our hearts be
on fire with fervent desire after it! But even this faith is extremely wanting:
it is our unbelief that undoes us, and fills us with these servile and sottish
fears.

And thus of the Meditations taken from the happiness we enjoy by death:
which should make us conclude with Solomon* That the day of Death is better
then the day when one is E^l. 71.
borne.

CHAP. V.
Showing the misery of life in wicked men.

NOw it follows, that I should break open the miseries of life; the
consideration whereof should abate in us this wretched love of life.

The miseries of life may be The miseries of life two ways considered.
two ways considered: for they are of two sorts; either such miseries, as load
the life of Nature, or such miseries as do molest the very life of Grace. The
miseries of a natural life showed thr^e waves.


The miseries that accompany the natural life of man, while he remains in the
state of Nature only, who can recount? I will give but a brief touch of some
heads of them.

First think of thy sins; and so three dreadful things may amaze Three
dreadful considerations about sin. 1. Thou art guilty of Adams sin.
thy thoughts. For first, thou art guilty of Adams sin; for by that man,
sin came in upon all men; even the guilt of his sin: Romans 5. 12. Secondly,
thy nature is altogether vile and abominable 2. Thou wast conceived in sin;
which is like a Leprosy hard to cure.
from thy birth, thou wast conceived in sin, Psalm. 51. 5. And this stain and
leprosy hangs on fast upon thy nature, and cannot be cured but by the blood of
Christ only, Heb. 12. 1. And this is seated in all the faculties of thy soul.
For in thy Mind, there is Ignorance, Spread over thy* whole soul* or in thy
mind.
and Impotency to receive knowledge; and a natural approouing of evil and
error, rather than the truth and sound doctrine. Those ways seem good in
thine eyes, which tend unto death, 1. Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8. 7. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Pro.
14. 12. And this thou may perceive by this, that thou art not able to think
a good thought, but can go free, for days and weeks, without any holy
cogitation; and besides, thy mind is infinitely prone to swarms of evil
thoughts, Genesis 6. 5.

Again, if thou behold thy An^ in thy Conscience.
Conscience, it is impure, polluted, without light, or life, or glory in thee;
shut up in a dungeon, excusing thee in many faults, and accusing thee for
things are not faults, but in thy conceit: and when it does accuse thee for
sin, it rages and falls mad with unbridled fury and terrors, keeping no
bounds of Hope or Mercy.

Further, if thou observe thy And in thy Affections.
Affections, they are altogeth^r impotent in that which is good, there is no
lust in thee after that which is good; and yet they are all out of order, and
prone to continual, rebellion, against God, ready to be fired by all the
enticements of the World, or the Devil, Gal. 5. 24. Thirdly, unto these add
thy innumerable 3 Innumerable Actual sins.
Actual sins, which are more then the hairs of thy head; multiplied daily
in thought, affection, word, and deed; the least of them deserving hell fire
for ever: thy sins of Infancy, Youth, Old age; sins of O^ission and
Commission; sins in Prosperity and Adversity; sins at Home and Abroad;
sins of Infirmity and Presumption. If David looking upon his sins, could
say, They have so compassed me, and taken such hold on me, that I am not able
to look up: Oh then, if thou had sight and sense, how might thou much
more cry out of the intolerable burden of them? and the rather, if thou
observe, that many of thy corruptions reign tyrannically, and have subdued thy
life to their vassalage, so as thou art in continual slavery to them.

Thus is thy life infested with these unspeakable inordinations: and thus of
the first part of thy infelicitie in life.

Secondly, if thou observe, but The punishments inflicted upon wicked men.
how God has avenged himself upon them, and what yet remains unto thee, how
can thy heart sustain it self? For

1. Thou art a banished man, 1. They are banished from Paradise.
exiled from Paradise, and made to live without hope to return thither: The
best part of the earth thou shall never enjoy.

2. The earth is cursed to thee, 2. The earth cursed.
and it may be a woeful spectacle to see all the creatures subject to vanity,
and smitten with the strokes of God for thy sin, and groaning daily round
about thee.

3. Look upon thy most miserable soul, for there thy mind 3. Their souls in
woeful distress.
and conscience live shut up with darkness and horror. The Devils have within
thee strong holds, and live entrenched in thy thoughts, Ephesians. 4. 17. 2. Cor.
10. 5. Thy heart is spiritually dead, and like a stone within thee, Ephesians. 2.
1. Ezech. ^6. 26.

4. Thy body is wretched 4 And so the^r bodies.
through deformities and infirmities, diversely noisome to thee with pains that
grieve thee, either in respect of labor or diseases, unto which thou art so
prone, and there is no part or joint of thee, but is liable to many kinds of
diseases, Deuteronomy. 28. 31, 22. Genesis 3. 19. And of the labors of thy life, which
is but the least part of thy bodily miseries. Solomon says, All things are
full of labor, who can utter it? and for that reason, life is but a vanity and
vexation, Eccles. 1. 8.

5. If thou look upon thy outward 5. And so their estates in four respects.
estate in the world, with wh^t fearful frights may thy heart be griped? If
thou consider.

1. The common, or gen^rall, 1. Common plagues.
or public plagues (with which God fights against the world) as wars, famines,
earthquakes, pestilence and yearly diseases, inundations of waters, and
infinite such like.

2. The particular crosses, with 2. Particula^ crosses.
which he vexes thee in particular, either with losses of thy estate, or the
troubles of thy family, Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 16. etc.

3. The preterition of God, restraining 3. Neglected of God.
many good things from thee, so as thou wantst many of those blessings of all
sorts which yet God does bestow upon others, Esaias 56. 1, 2. Jeremy. 5. 25.

4 The cursings of thy blessings; 4 Their blessings cursed.
when God blasts the gifts of thy mind, that thou can not use them for any
contentment of thy life, or makes thy prosperity to be the occasion of thy
ruin, Malach. 2. 3. Eccles. 5. 13. This is a sore evil.

Lastly, consider yet further what may fall upon thee, in respect of which thou
art in daily danger. There are seas of wrath, Fearful things that may befall
them.
which hang over thy head, John 3. 36. and God may plague thee with the terrors
of conscience, like Cain, Genesis 4. 14. or with a reprobate sense, or the spirit
of slumber, Romans 1. 28. Romans 11. 8. strong illusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. or such
other like dreadful spiritual judgments: besides many other fearful
judgments, which thy heart is not able to conceive of, as painful diseases
in the body, or an utter ruin in thy estate, or good name: but above all other
things, the remembrance of the fearful judgment of Christ, and the
everlasting pains of hell, with a miserable death, should compel thee to cry
out: O men and brethren, what shall I do to be saved, and get out of this
estate?

But because it is my purpose here chiefly to persuade with godly men and not
with natural men; and because death it self is no ease unto such men as live
in their sins without repentance, who have reason to loath life, and yet have
no cause to love death, I pass from them, and come to the life of godly men,
and say, they have great reason to loath life, and desire the day of death.

CHAP. VI.
Showing the miseries of godly men in life.

NOw the miseries of the godly A go^ly man has great cause to be weary of
life, if he consider. 1. What he wants. 2. What he cannot avoid. 6. Things
every go^ly man wants, while he lives h^re in th^s (...). 1. (...)* (...) ^f
God.
man's life are of two sorts: for either he may consider what he wants, or what
he has in life, for which he would be weary of it.

I will give but a touch of the first: consider of it; in this life there are
six things, among the rest we want, and can never attain while we live here.

The first is, the glorious presence of God; while the body is present, the
Lord is absent, 2. Cor. 5. 8. And is not this enough to make us loath life?
Shall we^ more esteem this wretched car^asse, then our glorious God, whose
only presence in glory shall fill us with eternal delight? O the vision of
God! If we had but once seen God face to face, we would abhor that absence
that should hinder the fruition of such unspeakable beauties, as would enamour
the most secure heart to an unquenchable love.

The second thing we want in 2 Fellowship with his best friends.
life, is the sweet fellowship with our best friends: A fellowship matchless;
if we either consider the perfection of the creatures, whose communion we shall
enjoy; or the perfect manner of enjoying it. Who would be withheld from the
congregation of the first borne, from the society with innumerable Angels, and
the spirits of just men? Alas! the most of us have not so much as one entire
and perfect friend in all the world; and yet we make such friends as we have,
the ground of a great part of the contentment of our lives. Who could live
here, if he were not beloved? Oh, what can an earthly friendship be, unto that
in heaven; when so many thousand Angels and Saints shall be glad of us, and
^ntertaine us with unwearied delight. If we had but the eyes of faith to
consider of this, we would think every hour a year till we were with them.

Thirdly, in this world we want 3 The perfection of his nature.
the perfection of our own natures: we are but maimed and deformed creatures
here; we shall never have the sound understanding of men in us, till we be in
heaven; our holiness of nature and gifts will never be consummate, till we be
dead.

Fourthly, in this world we want liberty: Our glorious liberty 4. Liberty.
will not ^e had here: a thing which the spirits of the best men have with much
sighing longed after, Romans 8. 21, 22. Oh who would live in a prison, a dungeon,
rather then a palace of royal freedom? It has been impliedly showed before,
that we are many ways in bondage here.

Fifthly, we shall ever want here 5. Contentment.
fullness of contentment. If a man live many years, so that the days of his
years be many, if his soul be not filled with good, Solomon says, an
untimely birth is better then be. And it is certain, if a man live a thousand
years twice told, he shall never see solid good to fill his heart, his
appetite will never be filled, Eccle. 9. 3, 6, 7. There is nothing in this life
can give a man solid and durable contentment; but a man finds by experience,
vanity, and vexation of spirit, in what he admires or loves most: and shall
we be so ottish as to forget those rivers of pleasures that are at Gods right
hand? Psalm. 16. vlt.

6. The sixth thing we want in 6. The Crown.
this world is our Crown, and the immortal and incorruptible inheritance
bought for us with the ^loud of Christ: and shall not ^ur hearts burn within
us in ^onging after possession? Can we ^sire still to live in wants, and to be
under age? What shall move us, if such an incomparable crown cannot move us?
We that sweat with so much sore labor for the possession of some small
portion of earth; shall we. I say, be so sluggish, as not to desire, that this
kingdom, which our Father has given us, might come quickly upon us* or are we
so transported with spiritual madness, as to be afraid to pass through the
gate of death, to attain such a life? What Prince would live uncrowned, if he
could help it, and might possess it without wrong or danger? and what great
heir would be grieved at the tidings, that all his lands were fallen unto him?

CHAP. VII.
The miseries of a Christian in respect of God in this life.

THus of what he wants in this life. Secondly, he ought to be as much troubled
to think what he has, and cannot avoid while he li^es: and thus his life is
distressed, and made unlovely, either if he respect God, or the evil angels,
or the world, or himself.

For first, if he respect God, there are two things should Life bitter in
r^spect of God di^ers ways.
mar the taste of life, and make it out of liking. The first is the danger of
displeasing of God: who would live to offend God* or grieve his H. Spirit? or
any way to make hi^ angry? Th^gh this reason will move little in the hearts of
wicked men, yet it is of singular force in the heart of an humble Christian,
who as he accounts Gods loving kindness better then life: so he finds nothing
more bitter, then that he should displease God: that God (I say) who is so
great in majesty, and has showed himself so aboun^nt in mercy to him. It
would lie as an heavy load upon our hearts to (...) of the displeasing of our
best friend; specially if he were a (...) person, or a Prince. How much more
should we desi^ to be (...) of tha^ condition (...) may displease our good
God; and to be there, where we are sure never to anger him more? The second
thing that should (...) look with (...) upon life, (...) God ^oth con^ally
(...) the things of this life: The Lord does of purpose so watch us, that when
he sees us settle any contentment in life, he drops in some thing, that makes
all extremely bitter. And those correctio^s of God should be the more noted, if
we consider but diverse aggrauations about them, as

1. That God will correct every Eight aggrauations of the miseries of li^e, in
respect o^ the co^ctions of God.
son whom he loves, none can escape, Heb. 12. 7.

2. That a man is usually most opposed and crossed in that ^ee loves best.

3. That a man shall ever want what he wishes, even in such things as other
men do not w^. There is a secret vexatio^ cleaues unto man's estate, that their
hearts run upon such things which cannot be had, but in the callings of other
men. The countryman praises the Citizens life; and the Citizen is full of the
praises of the Country: and so is there in all men a liking of the callings of
other men, with a dislike of their own, Eccles. 6.

4. That there is no discharge in that war, but that a man must every day
look for crosses. Every day has his grief, Eccles. 8. 8. Luke 9. 24. Man. 6.
vlt.

5. That God will not let. us know the times of our corrections, but executes
them according to the unchangeable purpose of his own counsel: so as they
come upon us as a snare vp^n a bird. For this reason Solomon says: That the
misery of man is great upon him, because there is (...) time for every purpose,
which cannot be avoided, nor can man know before hand, that which shall be;
for who can tell him, when it shall be? Eccles. 8. 6, 7, 8. and 9. 12.

6. That no man knows either love or hatred, by all that is before him. A
godly man can have no such blessings outwardly, but a wicked man may have them
in as great abundance as he: nor does there any misery fall upon the wicked in
outward crosses, but the like may be^all the godly. All things come alike to
all: there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked; to the clean, and
vnclean^, to him that swe^eth, and to him that (...) an ^ath; as is the good so
is the (...). This, says Solomon, is an evil among all things that ^e done
under the Sun, that there is one ^uent unto all, Eccles. 9. 1, (...), (...).

7. This bitterness is increased, because God will not dispose of things
according to the means or likelihoods of man's estate. The race is not to the
swi^, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet br^ad to the wise, nor riches to
men of understanding, nor yet ^our to men of skill, but time and chance happens
to them all, Eccles. 9. 11.

8. That besides the present miseries, there are many miseries to come; so as
it is an argument to prove the happiness of the dead, that they are taken away
from the misery to come, Esaias ^57. 1, 2. Which should likewise move us to love
life the less, because we know not what fearful alterations may come, either
in our outward estate, (...)* (...) ters of Religion. What (...) were we in, if
war should come upon us, with all the desolation^ and terrors that accompany
it? What if the (...), should come again? or we be let in, the hands of the
violent? or God fight against our estates* by (...), or inundations, or the
like? Who can tell what fearful alterations may bee^in Religion? And is it
no^ best to be in heaven, and then are we safe? Besides, the miseries may fall
upon our own bodies, or our children, or friends, etc. And these things should
(...) life as we ^espect God.

CHAP. VIII.
The miseries of life, in respect of evil angels.

NOw secondly, let us turn our eyes to the evil angels, and then these things
may affright us.

1. That they are every where 1. The world full of devils.
up and down the world; in the earth, air, seas; no place free. Those fiery
serpents are every where, in the wilderness of the world. We lead our lives
here in the midst of innumerable dragons; yea, they are in the most heavenly
places in this life: the Church is not free from them. A man can stand no where
before the Lord, but one devil or other is at his right hand, Ephesians. 2. 2. and
6. 12. Zac. 3. 1. Job 1. And sure, it should make us like the place the worse,
where such foul spirits are: the earth is a kind of hell in that very respect.

Secondly, it should more trouble 2. Our conflict with devils.
us, that we must of necessity enter into the Conflict with the devils, and
their temptations, and to be buffeted and gored by them.

A man that knew he must go into the field, to answer a challenge, will be at
no great rest in himself: But, alas, it is more easy, a thousand fold, to
wrest^ with flesh and blood, then with these Principalities and Powers, and
spiritual wickednesses, and great Rulers of the world, Ephesians. 6. 12.

Thirdly, besides, it adds unto 3. Their subtilty and cruelty.
the distress of life, to consider of the subtlety and cruelty of these
devils, who are therefore like the crooked Serpent, and Leuiathan, and Dragons,
and roaring Lions, seeking whom they may deuo^re. Though these things will
little move the hearts of wicked men; yet unto the godly mind, the temptations
of life are a grievous burden Thus much of evil angels.

CHAP. IX
The misery of life, in respect of the world.

THirdly, consider but what the world is, in which thou live; and that either
in the apparent miseries of this world, or in the vexations that accompany the
best things the world has to offer to give thee. First, for the apparent
miseries:

1. It is exquisitely like a wilderness; 9 Apparent miseries (...) in this
world. 1. Like a wildern (...). (...). like Egypt.
no man, but for innumerable wants, lives as in a desert here.

2. It is a true Egypt to the godly; it continually imposes hard taskes, and
servile conditions. Life can never be free from grievous burdens and
inexorable molestation.

3. This world is verily like 3. Like Sodom.
Sodom, full of general and unspeakable filthiness: All the world lies in
wickedness; scarce one Lot to be found in a whole City, or Parish. If God
would seek but five righteous men; that are truly or absolutely godly, they
are not to be found in the most assemblies in the world; nay, in the Church
too.

4. Yet more; this world is a 4. Like a P^st-house
very P^st-house, spiritually considered. Every man that a godly man comes
near, has a mischievous plague sore running upon him, yea, the godly
themselves are not without this disease: so as there i^ a necessity, as it
were, to infect, or be infected, still in all places, or companies. Oh who
would love to live in a Pesthouse, that may dwell in a place for ever free
from all infection?

5. Yet more, this World, why, it is a very Golgotha, a place 5. Like a very
Golgotha.
of dead men; we live amongst the Graves: almost all we see, or have to deal
with, are but men truly dead. Alas, what should we reckon of the life of men's
carcasses, when their souls are In this world the dead bury the dead.
dead, and both soul and body sentenced to eternal death? Almost all that we
meet with, are malefactors, under sentence, ready to be carried to execution;
the wrath of God hanging over their heads, and unquenchable fire kindled
against them; and shall we be so besotted, as to love the dead more then the
living? or the society of vile and miserable malefactors in a prison, rather
then the fellowship of the glorious Princes of God, in their Palace of endless
and matchless bliss?

6. Why should we love the 6 It hates VI
World that hates us, and casts us off, as men dead out of mind? Are we not
crucified to the world? Galat. 6. 14. and do not wicked men hate us, and envy
us, and speak all manner of evil sayings of us, because we follow good? The
World loves her own, but us it cannot love, because we are not of this world.
Can darkness love light? or the sons of Belial care for the sons of God?
In this world we shall have trouble; and if we found not peace in Christ, we
were of all men most miserable, Ioh. 15. 19. Eccles. 4. 4. Ioh. 17. 14. 2 Cor.
6. 17. Ioh. 16. 33. And if they hate us for well-doing, how will they triumph,
if our seet do but slip? We should desire death, even to be delivered from
the fear of giving occasion to the world to triumph, or blaspheme in respect
of us. Yea, so extreme is the hatred of the World, that a just man may perish
in his righteousness, when a wicked man prolongs his days in his wickedness,
Eccles. 7. 17. and 8. 4.

7. Do we fall into any special misery in this world? why, behold 7 It will
not help us, if we be in misery.
the tears of the oppressed, and there is none to comfort them. We are either
not pitied, or not regarded: or the compassion of the world is like the
morning dew, it is gone as a tale that is told our mystery will last, but there
will soon be none to comfort us. Miserable comforters are the most that can
be had in the world, and for this reason Solomon praised the dead, that are
already dead, above the living, that are yet alive, Eccles. 4. 1, 2.

8. There is usually no Christian, but in thi^ wo^ld he has 8 Every Christian
has some special misery.
some special misery vp^n him, either poverty, o^ deb^* (...) disease in his
body, or the (...) etc.

9. We daily ^ffet the ^se of our friends, that were the companions of our
life, and the causes of contentment to us. Now who would tarry behind them, or
esteem of this world, when they are gone from us?

And thus much of the apparent miseries of this world.

CHAP. X.
The vanities of the seeming felicities of the world.

NOw it follows, that I should entreat of the vanities that cleave to the
seeming felicities of the world, and prove that there is no reason to be in
love with life for any respect of them.

The best thing the world can What the seeming feli^ties of the world are.
make show of* are Honors, Credit, Lands, Houses, Riches, Pleasures, Birth,
Beauty, Friends, Wit, Children, Acquaintance, and the like. Now there be
manythings which apparently prove, th^re can be no sound contentment, or
felicity in these: For,

1. All things be full of labor, who can utter it? Ecclesiasticus 18. Men
must gain the Fifteen arguments to prove the vanity of the best worldly
things. 1 All full of labor.
blessings of the earth with the sweat of their brows: there is seldom any
outward blessing, but it is attained with much difficulty, pains, or danger,
or care, or grieuance some way.

2. How small a portion in these things can the most men 2. A small portion
that is attained.
attain? If the whole world were possessed, it should not make a man happy;
much less those small parcels of the world, which the most men can attain,
Eccles. 1. 3.

3. It is manifest, men cannot 3. Men cannot agree about the good that i^ i^
them, which should be best.
agree about the chief good in these things. Life is therefore apparently
vain in respect of these things, because there are almost infinite proiects,
and variety of opinions: and in all these successions of ages, no experience
can make men agree to resolve which of these things have felicity in them. Who
knows what is good for a man in this life, all the days of his vain life,
which he spends as a shadow? Eccles. 6. 12.

4. In all these things here is nothing now, but it has been; 4. Nothing.
the same or the like to it. Now things that are common, are out of request,
Eccles. 1. 9, 10. and 3. 15.

5. The world passes away, and 1. The desire after these things will not last.
the lusts thereof: the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the care with
hearing. If a man live many days, his soul is not filled with good; the
desire after these things will vanish; men cannot love them still: Our life is
spent in wishing for the future, and bewailing of the past; a loathing of what
we have tasted, and a longing for what we have not tasted: which, were it
had, would never more satisfy us then that we have had. Hence it is that men
wearying themselves in seeking of variety of earthly things and yet cannot be
contented. The vexation that cleaues unto them still, breeds loathing. We are
like men that are Seasicke, that shift from room to room and from place to
place, thinking to find ease; never considering, that so long as the same Seas
swell, and winds blow, and humors are stirred, alteration of place will not
profit. So it is with us; so long as we carry with us a nature so full of ill
humors, and that the pleasures of the world have so much vanity in them, no
change of place, or delights can satisfy us: Seeing there are many things that
increase vanity, what is man the better? Eccles. 6. 13.

6. How can these earthly things satisfy, when the nature 6 Their ^re is va^e.
of them is so vile and vain? They are but blasts; a very shadow, which is
something in appearance, but offer to lay hold upon it, thou graspest nothing.
Man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain. He that ^ueth
silver, shall not be sati^fied with silver, Eccles. 1. 9. Psalm. 39.

7. Besides, there is a snare in all these earthly things; they are 7. The am^y
of the world is ^he enm^ty with God.
like pitch to defile a man; there is ever one temptation or other lodged under
them; and the fruition of them, and desire after them, breed may nolsome lusts
in the soul, 1. Tim. 6. 6.

8. These outward things are 8. All subject to van^ty or violence. Ma. 6. 19,
1^. They may be lost at the very seat of i^ ^gement. (...) ^6 1^. and 4 1, 2
also all uncertain, and transitory: Riches have wings, and will suddenly fly
away: and Fame is but a blast: and the glory of man is but as the ^wer of the
field, which is to day, and tomorrow withered. The fashion of this world
passes away: and at the l^st day they shall all be burnt (...) consumed in in
the fire: I mean 9 T^y w^ ^ot help v^ ^n the (...) day.
these senseless things, we now set our hearts upon, Esa. 40. 6. 1. Cor. 7. 31.

9. There is no support in these things, in the evil day they cannot help us,
when the hour of temptation comes upon us.

10. A man may damn his 10. The love of them is ^amnable.
own soul by two much liking of these things: the abuse of them may witness
against men in the day of Christ: Iam. 5. 1. and Phil. 3. 19.

11. In these things there is 11. One condition to all.
one condition to all; as it falls to the wise man, so it does to the fool,
Eccles. 2. 14.

12. All things are subject to 12 God wi^ dispose
Gods unavoidable disposing. Let man get what he can, yet God will have the
disposing of it; and whatsoever God shall do, it shall abide; to it can no man
add, and from it can no man diminish, Eccles. 3. 1.

13. A man may have all abundance 13. A man may want an heart to use them.
of these things, and yet not have a heart to use them. Evil is so set in the
hearts of the sons of men, and such madness cleaues unto them, that they
cannot take the contentment of the things they have; and so they be worse then
an untimely fruit, Eccles. 6. 1, 7. and 9. 3.

14. Every day has his evil; and 14. The evils of life ever ^ingled with them.
afflictions are so mingled with these outward things, that their taste is daily
marred with bitterness which is cast into them; no day without his grief: and
usually the crosses of life are more, then the pleasures of living; so as they
that rejoiced, ought to be as though they rejoiced not.

15. Lastly, if all these considerations 15. Thou art mortal
may not suffice, then remember that thou art mortal; thy life is short, it
passes as a dream, it is but as a span long, thy days are few and evil; all
these things are clogged with a necessity of dying. Life was given thee with a
condition of dying, Genesis 47. 9. Job 14. 1. Thy life passes like the wind,
Job* 7. 7. Yea, our days consume like smoke, Psalm. 102. 3. All flesh is
grass, Esa. 40. 6. And hence arise many considerations deduced Our mor tality
aggrauated by 4 considerations.
from the head of our mortality: For,

1. All these things are but the 1 All ^hou ha^t (...) but the provision of a
Pilgrim.
necessaries of thy Inn: Thou art a stranger and a pilgrim, and can enjoy
them but as a passenger; thou can carry nothing out of this world but in all
points as thou cammest into the world so must thou go hence, Eccles. 5. 13,
14, 15.

2. The time, place, and manner 2 Thy death is uncertain.
of thy death is uncertain: there is no time nor place, but man may dye in it;
the Court, the Church, the Camp: yea the very womb is not excepted. There is
but one way to come into the world, but there are a thousand ways to go out;
and therefore the possession of all things is wonderful uncertain.

3. When thou die, all will be forgotten, there is no more remembrance 3.
When thou die, all will be forgotten.
of former things, nor shall there be any remembrance of things which are to
come, with those that (...), Eccles. 1. 11. (...), in the days to (...)
^gotten. Yea, (...) forgotten in the (...) he has done right; Eccles. 8. 10.
For this very reason Solomon hated life, Eccles. 2. 17.

4. When thou die, thou shall 4 Thy case in death, whether thou die with, or
without issue.
die either without issue, or leave children behind thee. If thou dye without
issue, how have thou been* infatuated in seeking these outward things with so
much care and toil, and could never say to thine own soul, For whom do
I^rauell, and defraud my self of pleasure? Thou gatherest these things, and
know^st not who shall enjoy them. Eccles. 4. 8. If thou die and leave issue;
thou may be frighted and amazed with one of these things. For either thou
may be d^spisest while thou live, of those for wh^m thou endurest ^ore
travel, so as they that shall come after thee, do not rejoice in thee,
Eccles. 4. 15, 16. Or else thou may leave the fruit of thy labors to a
fool, or a wicked wretch. For who knows whether he that shall rule over thy
labors, shall be a wise man or a fool? This very consideration made Solomon
hate all his labor which he had taken under the Sun; and he went about to
make his heart despair of all his labors, that he should use all his wisdom
and knowledge for attaining of great things, and yet might be in danger to
leau^ all for a portion to him that has not labored in wisdom: and all this
is vexation of spirit, Eccles. 2. 18. to 24. Or else thou may beget
children, and thy riches perish before thy death, and then there is nothing in
thine hand to leave them, Eccles. 5. 14.

CHAP. XI.
The miseries of life, in respect of our selves.

THus have we cause to be weary of life, in respect of God, the evil angels,
and the World. Now if there were none of these to molest us, yet man The causes
in our selves why we should not be in love with life: as.
has enough in himself to mar the liking of this present life. For,

1. The remainders of corruption 1. The remainders of corruption of nature.
of nature still lie like a poison, a leprosy, a pestilence in thee: thou art
under cure indeed but thou art not sound from thy sore, thou art La^rus still.
This very consideration made Paul weary of his life, when he cried out, O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? Rom 7.
And if in this respect we be not of Paul's mind, it is because we want of Paul's
goodness and grace. And thus corruption of nature is the more Which is the
more grievous.
grievous, if we consider either the generality of the spreading the
infection, or the incurablenesse of it, or the ill effects of it.

For the first, this is a leprosi 1 Because it is spread all over us.
that spreads all over. There (...) no sound part in us, our (...)* our
memories, our wills and affections: yea our very consciences are still impure
within us: there is no good nature in us in any one faculty of our souls, but
there is a miserable mixture of vile infection.

Secondly, this is the worses, because this is incurable. There 2 Because in us
v^curable.
lies upon us a very (...) of sinning, we cannot but offend. Of the flesh it
is well said, I can neither live with the^, nor without thee. The flesh is an
inseparable ill companion of our li^* we can go (...) to (...) it, etc.

Thirdly, if we consider but some of the effects of this corruption 3. 4
Effects of (...) of nature in us. 1. Civil war within us.
in (...) as*

1. The eiuill war it causes in our souls: there is no business can be
dispatched, that concerns our happiness, without a mutiny in our own hearts.
The flesh is a domestical Rebel, that daily lusts against the Spirit, as the
Spirit has reason to lust against the flesh, Galatians 5. 17.

2. Secondly, the insufficiency 2. Insufficiency for our calling
it ^eeds in us for our callings. The greatest Apostle must in this respect cry
out, Who is sufficient for these things? Though Gods wor^e be all fair work,
yet we see that every man is extremely burdened with the defects and
mistakings, and insufficiencies which befall him in his course of life.

2. It works a perpetual madness (...). A stirring kind of madness.
in the heart of a man, in some respects worse then that of some lunatickes:
For they are mad at some times of the year, only, or chiefly; but man is
seldom, or never free from this inward madness of heart. Solomon says, The
heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their hearts
while they live, and after thnt, they go to the dead. Now this madness
appears in this, that men can never bring their hearts to a settled
contentment in the things they enjoy, but death coms in upon them, before they
know how to improve the joy of their hearts in the blessings they enjoy,
whether temporal or spiritual. This vile corruption of nature diffuseth gall
into all that a man possesses; so as it marreth the taste of every thing.

4. It fills our hearts and lives with innumerable evils; it ingenders, 4.
Swarms of evil thoughts and actions
and breeds infinitely swarms of evil thoughts, and desires, and abundance of
sins in men's lives and conuersations, so as godly David cries out;
Innumerable evils have compassed me about, and I am not able to look up. They
were more then the hairs of his head, therefore his heart failed him, Psalm.
40. 12.

5. It is continualy madness, to be^ray us to Satan and the world, in all the
occasions of our life.

6. It will play the Tyrant, if it get any head: and lead us capti^e, and give
wretched laws to the members: yea, every sin, which is the brat bred of this
corruption, is like a fury to fright and amaze us: there is a very race of
devils bred in us, when Satan and the flesh engender together in us.

2. And as we are thus miserable 2. In respect of the remainders of the pu
nishment of sin.
in respect of the remainders of corruption, so are we in respect of the
remainders of the punishment of sin upon our spirits: Our hearts were never
fully free since the first transgrssion, our minds are yet full of darkness;
that eue^ godly men do seriously cry out, They are but as beasts; they have not
the understanding of men in them: And in many passages of life they carry
themselves like beasts, Psalm 32. 9. Eccles. 3. 18. The joys of Gods presence
are for the greatest part kept from us: our consciences are still but in a kind
of prison: when they go to the s^at of judgment to give sentence in any
cause, they come forth with fetters on their legs, as prisoners themselves;
besides the many personal scourges light upon our souls in this life.

3. Lastly, the very condition of our bodies should not be ouerpleasing 3 If
we respect the condition of our bodies.
to us: our deformities, and infirmities, and the dangers of further diseases,
should tire us out, and make us account it no lovely thing to be present in the
body, while we are absent from the Lord. And thus of the miseries of our lives
also. Now it remains that I should proceed to the second sort of
contemplations, that is, those that are remoouals: namely, such meditations, as
take off the objections, which are in the hearts of men.

CHAP. XII.
Comforts against the pain of Death.

THere are in the minds of all men certain Objections, which if they could be
removed, this fear of Death would be stocked up by the very roots. I will
instance in some of the chief of them, and set down the answers to them.

Some men say, they should not Ob. 1.
be afraid of death, considering the gain of it, and the happiness after
death, but that they are afraid of the pain of dying: It is the difficulty of
the passage troubles them.

For answer hereunto, diverse things would be considered of, Sol.
to show men the folly of this fear.

First, thou likest not death, Teareasons to show the folly of men, in
pretending the fear of the pain of death.
because of the pain of it. Why? there is pain in the curing of a wound, yet
men will endure it: And shall death do so great a cure, as to make thee whole
of all thy wounds and diseases, and art thou so loath to come to the Cure?

Secondly, there is difficulty in getting into an Haven. Had thou rather be
in the tempest still, then put into the haven?

Thirdly, thou likest not death, thou say, for the pain of it: Why then
likest thou life, which puts thee to worse pain? Men object not at the pains
of life, which they endure without death. There is almost no man, but he has
endured worse pains in life, then he can endure in death, and yet we are
content to love life still: Yea, such is our folly, that whereas in some pains
of life we call for death to come to our succors; yet when we are well
again, we love life, and loath death.

Fourthly, we are are manifestly mistaken concerning death; for 4.
the last gasp is not death. To live, is to dye; for how much we live, so
much we die: every step of life, is a step of death. He that has lived half
his days, is dead the half of himself. Death gets first our infancy, then
our youth, and so forwards: All that thou have lived, is dead.

Fifthly, it is further evident, 5.
that in death there is no pain; it is our life that goes out, with pain.
We deal herein, as if a man, after sickness, should accuse his health of the
last pains. What is it to be dead? but not to be in the world. And it is any
pain to be out of the world? Were we in any pain before we were borne? Why
then accuse we death, for the pains our life gives us at the parting? Is not
sleep a remembrance of death?

Sixthly, if our coming into the world be with tears; is it any wonder, if
our going out be so too?

Seventhly: besides, it is evident that we make the passage more difficult, by
bringing unto death a troubled and irresolute mind: It is long of our selves
there is terror in parting.

Eighthly, consider yet more, the humors of the most men. Men will suffer
infinite pains for a small living, or preferment here in this world: yea we
see, soldiers for a small price will put themselves into unspeakable dangers,
and that many times at the pleasure of others that command them, without
certain hope of advantage to themselves. Will men kill themselves for things
of no value; and yet be afraid of a little pain to be endured, when such a
glorious estate is immediately to be enjoyed in heaven?

Ninthly, let not man pretend 9.
the pains of death; that is but a ^igge-leafe to cover their little faith:
For they will languish of the Gout, or Stone, a long time, rather then die one
sweet death with easiest conditions possible.

Tenthly, if none of these will 10.
persuade, yet attend, I will show (...) a mystery: Fear not the pains of
death: for first, death 1.
is terrible, when it is inflicted by the Law; but it is easy, when it is
inflicted by the Gospel: the Curse is taken off from thee; thou art not under
the Law, but under Grace: And besides, for this cause did Christ die a terrible
an^ 2.
(...) cursed death, that every death might be blessed to us. And further; God,
that has greatly loved thee in life, will not neglect thee in death: Precious
in the fight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints. What shall I say against
the terror of death, but this Text of the Apostle? Thanks be to God, that has
given us victory through Jesus Christ. He has pulled the sting out of Death:
O Death, where is thy sting? 1 Cor. 15. 55.

Lastly, thou have the Spirit of Christ in thee, which will succor 3.
and strengthen, and ease thee, and abide with thee all the time of the
combat. Why should we doubt of it, but that the godly dye more easily then
the wicked? Neither may we guess at their pain, but the pangs upon the body:
for the body may be in grievous pangs, when the man feels nothing, and the
soul is at sweet ease, in preparing it self to come immediately to the sight
of God.

CHAP. XIII.
Comfort against the loss of the body in death.

OH! but in death a man is destroyed, he loses his Ob. 2.
body, and it must be rotted in the earth.

Sol. 1. It has bin showed before, 1.
that the separation of the soul from God, is properly Death; but the
separation of the soul from the body, is but the shadow of Death: and we have
no reason to be afraid of a shadow.

2. The body is not the man: 2.
the man remains still, though he be without the body. Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, are proved to be living still, by our Savior Christ, though their
bodies were consumed in the earth; and God was their God still. It is true,
Death seizes on thy body; but a Christian, at the most, suffers but aliquid
mortis* a little of death.

Death is like a Serpent; the Serpent must ea^e dust: now death therefore can
feed upon no more but our dust, which is the body, it cannot touch the soul:
whereas wicked men suffer the whole power of death, because it seizes both
upon body and soul too; and in their case only it is true, that death
destroys a man.

3. Grant* that we lose the body in death, yet that, ought not 3.
to be terrible; for what the body is, it has been before showed: It is but a
Prison to the Soul, an old rotten House, or a ragged Garment; it is but as the
Bark of a Tree, or the Shell, or such like: now what great loss can there be
in any of these?

4. This separation is but for a time neither; we do not for eu^r 4.
lose the body, we she have our bodies again, they are kept safe for us till
the day of Christ. Our graves are Gods Chest's, and he makes a precious account
of the bodies of ^is Saints, they shall be raised up again at the last day.
God will give a charge to the earth to bring forth her dead, and make a true
account to him, Revel. (...). And God has given the assurance of this, not
only in his Word, by promising it, but in his Son, whom he has raised from
the dead. If any say, What is that to us, that Christ's body is raised? I
answer, it is a full assurance of the safety, and of the resurrection of our
bodies: for Christ is our Head. Now cast a man into a River, though all the
body be under water, yet the man is safe, if the head be above water; for the
head will bring out all the body after it. So it is in the body of Christ:
though all we s^nke in the river of death, yet our Head is ^isen, and is above
water, and therefore the whole body is safe.

5. It should yet more satisfy us, if we thoroughly consider, that 5.
we shall have our bodies again much better then now they are. Those vile
bodies we lay down in death, shall be restored again unto us glorious bodies,
like the body of Christ now glorified, Philippians 3. 21. And therefore death
loses, by taking away our bodies; we have a great victory over death: The
grave is but a furnace to refine them, they shall come out again immortal and
incorruptible.

CHAP. XIIII.
The desire of long life confuted.

OH! but if I might live long, I would desire no more: Ob. 3.
If I might not dye till I were fifty or threescore years old, I should be
contented to dye then.

Sol. There are many things may show the vanity and folly of men, in this
desire of long life* For,

1. If thou art willing to die at Nine argu ments to show the van^y of men in
desiring to live long.
any time, why not now? Death will be the same to thee then, it is now.

2. Is any man angry and grieved when he is at the Sea in a 2.
Tempest, because he shall be so quickly carried into the Haven? Is he
displeased with the Wind, that will soon set him safe in the Harbor? If thou
believe that death will end all thy miseries, why art thou careful to defer
the time?

3. Till thy debt be paid, time 3.
will not ease thee, thy care will continue; and therefore thou were as good pay
at the first, if thou be sure it must be paid at all.

4. In this world there is neither young nor old. When thou 4.
have lived to that age thou desire, thy time past will be as nothing. Thou will still expect that which is to come; thou will be as ready to demand
longer respit then, as now.

5. What would thou tarry here so long for? There will be 5.
nothing new, but what thou have tasted; and often drinking, will not quench
thy thirst: thou have an incurable dropsy in thy heart, and these earthly
things have no ability to fill thy heart with good, or satisfy thee.

6. Would thou not ^dge him a sot, that mournes because 6.
he was not alive an hundred years ago? And thou art no better: thou
mournest, because thou can not live an hundred years hence.

7. Thou have no power of the 7.
morrow, to make it happy to thee. If thou die young, thou art like one that
has lost a Die, with which he might as well have lost as won.

8. Consider the proportion of time thou desire to thy self, reckon what
will be spent in sleep, care, disgrace, sickness, trouble, weariness,
emptiness, fear; and unto all this add sin: and then think, how small a
portion is left of this time, and how small good it will do thee. What can
that advantage thee with such mixtures of evil? It is certain, to live long,
is but to be long troubled; and to die quickly, is quickly to be at rest.

9. Lastly, if there were nothing else to be said, yet this may suffice, that
there is no comparison between time and eternity. What is that space of time
to eternity? If thou love life, why do thou not love eternal life? as was
said before.

CHAP. XV.
Of them that would live to do good.

But I would live long to do good, and to do God service, Ob. 4.
and to benefit others by mine example.

Sol. First, search thine own Six reasons against their pretense* that would
live long to do good, as they ^ay.
heart: it may be, this pretense of doing good to others, is pleaded only,
because thou would further thine own good. Thou would not seek the
public, but to find thine own particular.

2. God that set thee to do his 2.
work, knows how long it is fit for thee to be at the same; he knows how to
make use of the labors of his workmen: He will not call thee from thy work,
till it be provided to dispatch his business without thee.

3. It may be, if thou be long 3.
at thy work, thou would mar all; thy last works would not be so good as
thy first: it is best to give over, while thou do w^ll, etc.

4. If God will pay thee as much for half a day as for the whole, art thou not
so much the more to praise him?

5. It is true, that the best comfort of our life here, is a religious
conversation: but thy Religion is not hindered by going to heaven, but
perfected. There is no comparison between thy goodness on earth, and that in
heaven. For though thou may do much good here; yet it is certain, thou
do much evil here too.

6. Whereas thou perswadest thy self, that by example thou may mend others,
thou art much mistaken. A thousand men may sooner catch the plague in an
infected Town, then one be healed. It is but to tempt God, to desire
continuance in this infectious world, longer then our time: for the best way is
to get far from the contagion. I^ diverse fresh waters fall into the sea, what
does that to take away the saltness of the sea? No more can two or three Lots
reform a world of Sodomites.

CHAP. XVI.
Why men may not make away themselves to be rid of the miseries of life.

Ob. 5. But then it seems by this, that it were a Ob. 5.
man's best course to take away life, seeing so much evil is in life, and so
much good to be had in death.

Sol. 1. I think, the most of us 1.
may be trusted of that danger. For though the soul aspire to the good to
come, yet the body tends unto the earth, and like an heavy clog weighs men
downwards.

2. That is not the course; we must cast the world out of our 2. Against self.
murder.
hearts, not cast our selves out of the world. It is both unseemly and
extremely unlawful. It is unseemly: for it is true, we ought willingly to
depart out of this world; but it is monstrous base, like cowards to run away
out of the battle. Thou art Gods soldier, and appointed to thy standing; and
it is a miserable shame to run out of thy place. When Christ the great
Captain sounds a retrait; then it is honorable for thee to give place.
Besides, thou art Gods tenant, and do hold thy self as a tenant at will:
the Landlord may take it from thee, but thou can not without disgrace
surrender at thy pleasure; and it is extre^me slothfulness to hate life, only
for the toils that are in it. Secondly, and as it is unseemly, so it is
unlawful, yea damnable. It is unlawful: for the soldier that runs away
from his Captain, offends highly; so does the Christian that makes away
himself: and therefore the commandment is not only, Thou shall not kill
other men, but generally, Thou shall not kill, meaning neither thy self, nor
other men. Besides, we have no example in Scripture of any that did so, but
such as were notorious wicked men, as Sa^l, Achitophel, Judas, and the like.
Yea, it is damnable: for he that leaves his work before God calls him,
loses it, and besides incurres eternal death. As the soldier that runs
away, dies for it, when he is taken: so the Christian that murdereth himself,
perishes; I say, that murdereth himself, being himself.

CHAP. XVII.
Why we should not be troubled to part with our friends.

MIght some other say, I Ob. 6
could more willingly dye, but me thinks it is grievous unto me to part with
friends and acquaintance; I cannot willingly go from my kind^ed and my
familiars; life is sweet in respect of their presence and love and society.

Sol. It is true, that unto some minds this is the greatest contentment of
life of any thing; but yet many things must be considered: For,

First, amongst an 100. men, scarce one can by good reason 4. 6* Reasons about
parting with our friends in death.
plead that, I mean, cannot say that he has so much as one sound friend in
the whole world, worthy to be reckoned, as the stay of his life.

Secondly, those that can plead felicity in their friends, yet what is it? one
pleasing dream has more in it, then a months contentment which can be
reaped from thy friends. Alas, it is not the thousandth part of thy life* which
is satisfied with delight from them.

3. Thou s^st thy friend^ drop away from thee from day to day; for either they
dye, or they are so far remoo^d from thee, that they are as it w^e dead to
thee; and since they are gone, who would not long to go after them?

4. The friends that are left, are not sure to thee: men are mutable as well as
mortal; they may turn t^ be thy foes, that now are dearest unto thee: or if
they fall not into terms of flat enmity, they (...) grow full and wea^e of
thee, and so careless of thee.

5. If none of these would satisfy thee, yet what are thy 5.
friends on earth, to thy friends thou shall find in heaven? This is an answer
beyond all exception.

6. Lastly, by death thou do 6.
not lose thy friends neither, for thou shall find them, and enjoy them in
another world to all eternity; and therefore thou have no reason forthy friends
sake to be loath to dye.

7. But might some one say: Ob. 7.
All my grief is to part with my wife and children, and to leave them,
especially in an unsettled estate.

1. Have thou forgotten the Sol. 1.
consolation that says, God will be a father to the fatherless, and a Judge,
and a Protector of the widows cause? He will relieve both the fatherless and
the widow, as many Scriptures do assure us, Psalm. 146. 9. and 68. 6. Pro^. 15.
25.

2. Thou leauest them but for a time; God will restore them to thee again in a
better world.

3. Thou gainest the presence of God, and his eternal conjunction, who will be
more to thee, then many thousand wives, or children could be. He can be hurt by
the loss of no company, that finds God in Heaven.

CHAP. XVIII.
Why we should not be sorry to leave the pleasures of life.

But might some other say: My heart is sorely vexed, Ob. 8.
because in death I must part with the pleasures of life?

There are many things might quiet men's minds in respect Sol. Five arguments
against the (...) of life.
of this objection: For thy pleasures are either sinful pleasures, or (...)
pleasures: if they be (...)* (...) ^west thy hatred of God by loving them, and
heapest up wrath upon thin^ own soul, by living in them. But say, thy
pleasures be lawful in themselves: yet consider,

First, that the pains of thy life 1.
are, and will be greater both for number and continuance, then thy pleasures
can be. No pleasure at once, ever lasted so long as the fit of an Ague.

2. Thou forgettest, what end 2.
they may have: For thy pleasures may go out with gall. For either shame, or
loss, or evil sickness may fall upon thee: or if not, yet thine own heart
will loath them; as they are vanity, so they will prove vexation of spirit:
Thou will be extremely tired with them.

3. Thou art far from giving 3.
thy life for Christ, that wilt not forgo the superfluity of life for him.

4. That in thy delights thou 4.
show the greatest weakness; so as thou may say of Laughter, Thou art
mad, Eccles. 2. 2.

5. That death does not spoil thee of pleasures: for it brings thee to the
pleasures that are at Gods right hand for evermore, Psa. 16. vlt.

CHAP. XIX.
Why we should not be loath to leave the honors of the world.

9. IF any other object the Ob. 9.
lothnesse to leave his honors, or high place in the world: I may answer
diverse things.

1. Why should thou be so in love with the honors of Sol. 1. Five
observations abo^ the honors of this world.
this world, if thou but consider how small the preferment is, or can be? ^e
whole earth is, but as ^e (...) point and ^nter, in comparison with the
circumference of the whole world besides.

1. Now in true judgment, it is 1.
almost impossible to discern, how a man should rise higher in a Center. If
thou had all the earth, thou were no more exalted, then to the possession of
a full point; a little spot in comparison: and therefore how extremely vain is
thy nature, to be affected with the possession of less then the thousand
thousandth part of a little spot, or point?

2. Consider seriously the 2.
thraldom, which thy preferment brings thee unto: Thou can not live free,
but still thou art fettered with the cares, and fears, and griefs that attend
thy greatness. There is little difference between thee and a prisoner, save
that the prisoner has his fetters of Iron, and thine are of Gold; and that his
fetters bind his body, and thine thy mind: He wears his fetters on his legs,
and thou thine on thine head; and in this thou art one way less contented then
some prisoners: for they can sing for joy of heart, when thou art dejected with
the cares and griefs of thy mind: If thou had a Crown, it were but a
Crown of thorns, in respect of the cares it would put thee to, etc.

3. Say thou should get never so high, thou can not protect 3.
thy self from the miseries of thy condition, nor preserve thy self in any
certainty from the loss of all ^hou enioyest. If thou were as high as the top
of the Alps, thou can not g^t such a place, but the clouds, winds, storms,
and terrible lightnings may find th^e out, so as thou would account the
lower ground to be the safer place. Thou stand as a man on the top of a
pinnacle, thou can not know, how soon thou may tumble down, and that
fearfully.

4. If thou should be sure to enjoy the greatness of place 4.
in the world, yet thou art not sure to preserve thine honor; for either it
may be blemished with unjust aspersions, or else some fault of thine own may
mar all thy praises: For as a dead Fly may mar a whole Box of Ointment,
so may one sin thy glory, Eccl. 10. 1.

5. Thou losest no honor by 5.
dying: for there are Crowns of Glory in Heaven, such as shall never wither,
nor be corrupted; such as can never be held with care or envy, nor lost with
infamy.

CHAP. XX.
Why it should not trouble us to part with riches.

10. IF thou be infected with the love of riches and Ob. 10.
that thou art loath to dye, because thou would not be taken from thy estate
and outward possessions; then attend unto these considerations.

1. Thou came naked into the world; and why should it grieve Sol. 1.
thee to go naked out of the 1. Seven mo^ues to leave the love of riches.
world?

2. Thou art but a Steward of what thou possessest: and therefore why should it
grieve thee to 2.
leave, what thou have employed, to the disposing of thy master?

3. Thou have tried by experience, and found hitherto, that contentment 3.
of heart is not found, or had by abundance of outward things. If thou had
all the pearls of the East, and were master of all the mines of the West, yet
will not thy heart be filled with good: by heaping up of riches, thou do but
heap up unquietness.

4. Riches have wings: thou may 4.
live to lose all, by fire, or water, or thieves, or suretiship, or injustice,
or unthrifty children, or the like.

5. They are riches of iniquity. There is a snare in riches, and nets 5.
in possessions; thy gold and silver is limed up, or poisoned. It is wonderful
hard, and in respect of men, impossible for thee to be a rich man, but thou will be a sinful man, especially if thy heart be grown to love money, and
haste to be rich.

6. Thou must leave them on^, and therefore why not now? Thou 6
can not enjoy them ever, and therefore why should thou trouble thy heart
about them?

7. By death thou make exchange 7
of them for better riches, and shall be possessed of a more euduring
substance: Thou shall enjoy the unsearchable riches of Christ: thou can never
be fully rich, till thou get to heaven.

Might some one say: I should not (...) death, were it not that Ob. 11.
I know not what kind of death I shall dye: I may dye suddenly, or by the
hands of the violent, or without the presence or assistance of my friends, or
the like.

1. Since we must dye, it is the lesser matter what kind of Sol. 1.
death we dye: we should not so much look how we dye, as whither we shall
go when we are dead.

2. Christ dyed a cursed desth, 2.
that so every death might be blessed to us: For he that lives holily, cannot
dye miserably. He is blessed that dies in the Lord, what kind of death soever
it be.

CHAP. XXI.
Showing the cure of this fear of death by practice.

HItherto of the way of curing this feeare of death by meditation. It remains
now, that I proceed to show how the cure is to be finished and perfected by
practice; for there are diverse 7 Things tha^ cu^e the fear of death in
practice.
things to be heeded by us in our daily conversation, which serve exceedingly
for the extinguishing of this fear, without which the cure will hardly ever
be soundly wrought for continuance.

The first thing we must frame (...) The contempt of the Word.
our lives to, for this purpose, is the contempt of the World: we must strive
earnestly with our own hearts, to forgo the love of worldly things. It is an
(...) thing ^o be willing to dye, when our hearts are cleansed of the love of
this world. We must leave the world before the world leave us, and learn that
lesson heartily, To use the world as if we used it not. Neither ought this to
seem too hard a precept: for they that strive for masterie, abstain from all
things, when it is but to obtain a corruptible crown; how much more should we
be willing to deny the delights of this world, and strive with our natures
herein, seeing it is to obtain an incorruptible crown? 1. Cor. 9 24, 25.

We must learn of Moses, who brought himself to it willingly, to ^orsake the
pleasures of Egypt, and to choose rather to suffer affliction with Gods people,
then to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11. 26.

And to this end, we should first How the contempt of the world may ^ee wrought
in us.
restrain all needless cares, and business of this world, and study so to be
quie^, as to meddle with our own business, and to a^idge them into as narrow a
scantling as our callings will permit. Secondly, we should avoid, as much as
may be, the society with the favorites and minions of the World: I mean such
persons, as admire nothing but worldly things, and know no other happiness
then in this life; that speak only of this World, and commend nothing, but
what tends to the praise of worldly things, and so to the enticing of our
hearts after the World: And withal, we should sort our selves with such
Christians, as practice this contempt of the World, as well as praise it, and
can by their discourse make us more in love with heaven. Thirdly, we should
daily observe, to what things in the world our hearts must run, and strive with
God by prayer to get down the too much liking and desire after those things.
Fourthly, we should daily be pondering on these meditations, that show us the
vanity of the world, and the vileness of the things thereof. Thus of the
first medicine.

Secondly, we must in our practice soundly mortify our beloved 2. The
mortification of beloved sins.
sins: our sins must dye before we dye, or else it will not be well with us.
The sting of death is sin, and when we have pulled out the sting, we need not
fear to entertain the Serpent into our bosom. It is the love of some sin,
and delight in it, that makes a man afraid to dye; or it is the remembrance of
some foul evil past, which accuses the hearts of men: and therefore men must
make sure their repentance, and judge themselves for their sins, and then they
need not fear Gods condemning of them. If any ask me, how they may know when
they have attained to this rule; I answer, When they have so long confessed
their sins in How we may know when sin is mortified.
secret to God, that now they can truly say, there is no sin they know by
themselves, but they are as desirous to have God give them strength to leave
it, as they would have God to show them grace to forgive it. He has soundly
repented of all sin, that desires from his heart to live in no sin. And unto
this rule, I must add the care of an upright and unrebukable conversation. It
is a marvelous encouragement to dye with peace, when a man can live without
offense, and can justly plead his integrity of conversation; as Samuel did, 1 Samuel 12. 3. and Paul, Acts 20. 26, 27. and 2 Cor. 1. 12.

Thirdly, Assurance is an admirable 3. Assurance
medicine to kill this fear: And to speak distinctly, we should get the
assurance first of Gods favor, and our own calling and election; for hereby
an entrance will be ministered into the Heavenly Kingdom: And therefore have I
handled this doctrine of the Christians assurance, before I meddled with this
point of the Fear of Death. Simeon can dye willingly, when his eyes have seen
the salvation. Fear of death is always joined with a weak faith; and the
full assurance of faith, does maruellously establish the heart against these
fears, and breeds a certain desire of the coming of Christ. Paul can be
confident, when he is able to say, I know whom I have believed, and that he,
is able to keep that which I have committed to him, 2. Tim. 12.

Besides, we should labor to get a particular knowledge and assurance of our
happiness in death, and of our salvation: We would study to this end, the
Arguments that show our felicity in death. And to this purpose, it is of
excellent use to receive the Sacrament often: For Christ by his Will,
beq^eathed heaven to us, Ioh. 17. and by the death of the Testator, this Will
is of force, and is further daily sealed unto us, as internally by the Spirit,
so externally by the Sacraments.

Now if we get our Charter sealed and confirmed to us, how can we be afraid of
the time of possession? He is fearelesse of death, that can say with the
Apostle, Whether I live or dye, I am the Lords, Romans 14. 8.

4. That charge given to Hezekiah, 4 The setting of our houses in order.
concerning the setting of his house in order, Esaias 38. is of singular use for
this cure. Men should with sound advice settle their outward estates, and
dispose of their worldly affairs, and according to their means provide for
their wife and children. A great part of the fear and trouble of men's hearts
is over, when their Wills are discreetly made: but men are loath to dye, so long
as their outward estates are unsettled and undisposed. It is a most
preposterous course for men to leave the making of their Wills to their
sickness: for besides their disabilities of memory, or understanding, which
may befall them, the trouble of it breeds unrest to their minds; and besides,
they live all the time in neglect of their duty of preparation for death.

5. We may much help our 5 To make fri^nds with riches.
selves, by making us friends with the riches of iniquity: we should learn
that of the unjust Steward, as our Savior Christ shows. Since we shall be
put out of the Stewardship, we should so dispose of them while we have them,
that when we dye, they may receive us into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.
An unprofitable life is attended with a servile fear of death.

6. It would master this fear, 6. A frequent meditation of death.
but to force our selves to a frequent meditation of death. To learn to dye
daily, will lessen, yea, remove the fear of dying. Oh this remembering of our
latter end, and learning to number our days, is an admirable rule of practice.
It is the forgetfulness of death, that makes life sinful, and death terrible,
Deu. 32. 29. Psa. 90. 12. And we should begin this exercise of meditation
betimes; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12. 1. This is
that is called for, when our Savior Christ requires us, and all men, so to
watch: and here in lay the praise of the five wise Virgins, Matthew. 25. 3. Thus
I^b will wait till the time of his change come, Job 14. 14. And of purpose
has the Lord left the last day uncertain, that we might every day prepare. It
were an admirable method, if we could make every day a life to begin and end,
as the day begins and ends.

7. Lastly, because yet we may find this fear cumbersome, and 7. Hearty
prayer for this thing.
our natures extremely deceitful; there is one thing left, which can never
fail to prevail, as far as it is fit for us; and that is hearty prayer to
God for this very thing. Thus David prays, Psalm. 39. 4. and Moses, Psalm. 90.
13. and Simeon, Luke 2. 19. And in as much as Christ dyed for this end, to
deliver us from this fear, we may sue out the privilege, and by prayer
strive with God to get it framed in us. It is a suite God will not deny them
that ask in the name of Christ, because it is a thing that Christ especially
aimed at in his own death.

To conclude then; we have proved, that it is possible to be had, and most
uncomely to want it; and likewise the way has been showed how both by
meditation and practice, this Cure may be effected. If then it be not wrought
in any of us, we may here find out the cause in our selves: For if we would
hereby be soundly advised and ruled, we might attain to it all the days of
our life, to sing with the Saints, that triumphant Song mentioned both in the
Old and New Testament: Oh death, where is thy sting? O hell, where is thy
victory? so as we are now the conquerors through him that loved us, and gave
himself to death for us, even Jesus Christ the righteous; to whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost, be all praise in the Churches, throughout all ages
for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.

