THE SEVEN VIALS Or A brief and plain Exposition upon the 15: and 16:
Chapters of the Revelation, very pertinent and profitable for the Church of God
in these last times.

By H. B. Rector of Saint Matthews Friday-street.

Reve: 19.19, 20. And I saw the Beast, and the Kings of the Earth* and their
armies, gathered (...) to make war against him, that sat on the Hor^^ (...)
against his army: And the Beast was taken, and with him the False Prophet, that
wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them, that had the Mark of
the Beast, and them that worshipped his Image. Th^se both (...) into a Lake of
fire burning with (...)*

LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling (...) Red-crosse-street. 1^28.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES, KING OF GREAT Britain, France, and
Ireland; Defender of the Faith, etc.
Dread Sovereign.
DIOGENES, the more he was by Antisthenes the Philosopher threatened and beaten
from his school, Aelian. li. 10 cap. 16.
the more ardently he frequented it, saying to his Master, Do you but beat, I
will find you a head; nor shall you find so hard a club, as therewith to drive
me away from your Philosophy. What he did and suffered for Philosophy's sake,
the like or more am I ready to sustain for the service and honor of Your
Majesty. No discouragements can beat me from this resolution; no not death it
self. So prevalent i^ my affection, as my insufficiencies (best known to my
self) cannot restrain it. Yea though I was told Your Majesty was lately
offended with me. But I answered, No; J had no reason to believe it. For first,
J knew well the gentle disposition of your royal breast, guided by such a
dextrous judgment, is not easily incensed, where there is no just cawse. And J
am sure I daily enjoy the influence of your favor, though not the gracious
aspect of your face; for even the feet do live, and move, though remote, by
the Heads breathing. You are the breath of our Nostrills. And as J told my Lord
of London, at my first examination about Isreal's Fast, All that I had done, was
for Gods glory, the service of my King and Country, and the Church of England,
whereof we were members; and for which I was ready (if need were) to lay down
my life.

And now gracious Sovereign, J am bold to present Your Majesty with such a
piece, as no Prince in Christendom, but Your self, can justly challenge the
dedication of it, if the meannesse of the Presenter do not extenuate the worth
of the Present. It contains a most divine Prophecy, of the pouring out of the
seven Vialls, Revel* 16: which, according to that ability vouchsafed me of
Christ, the least and last of all his servants, J have endeavored to open. It
pertains to Your Majesty by a proper right. The full accomplishment of this
Prophecy is like to fall in Your gracious Reign (which God prolong) to make it
glorious to posterity. And surely when J compare the fulfilling of this
Prophecy with those many Princely indowments, which Your God has enriched Your
Royal Person with, J am so much the more confirmed in this my persuasion. Such
a zeal, such love of the truth, such a peerless, and Princely wisdom, such
a magnanimous spirit, were not planted in Your noble breast for nothing. So as
I dare boldly conclude, as was said to David* Your Majesty shall do great
things, and prosper. Nor speak J by conjecture. This Prophecy will clearly
evidence the same. Clear it is, (though for the present it seem clean
contrary) that the destruction of Antichrist, with his whole power and
confederacy is now near at hand. And for proof and persuasion thereof, J wish
it stood with Your Majesty's good pleasure and leisure to read over this
Prophecy. It is but the expense of a few hours, but may exercise Your best
meditations and noblest thoughts for many days, many years after. This whole
book of the Revelation is a Prophetical Chronology t^ the end of the world.
Of it Christ pronounces, Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the
words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein; for
the time is at hand. How much more is this verified of this last and most
famous Prophecy in this book, toward the full consummation whereof these our
present and last times draw on ^amaine. Your Royal Father, of blessed memory,
even in his youth, wrote a most exquisite Paraphrase of this whole book; from
whose bright torch all along I have been bold to borrow light for my dim
candle.

But me thinks I hear some suggest, O Sir, this book is not licensed. But
whose fault is that? The Authors? Or the Licensers? I could wish, that such
suggesters would confess the true cawse, why Orthodox books are so borne
down, as they may not be licensed. For Popish and Arminian books are
licensed; but the contrary, such as are written in confutation of them, and are
according to Gods word, and the doctrine of the Church of England, may not be
allowed. So that I humbly submit it to your Majesty's impartial judgment to
determine, whether the Printer, for printing such a book as this without
license, or he that should license such Orthodox books, and will not,
according to authority in that behalf, be more worthy of censure. And certainly
they that suppress Orthodox books, would they not also stop Preachers
mouths, that they should not speak the truth? Yes certainly^ For, may it
please your Majesty to understand, how even your Majesty's honor suffers in
this case. For whereas upon a Proclamation published in your Highness name,
June 14. in the second of your Reign, expressly forbidding any preaching, or
printing of such Doctrines, as were repugnant to the Doctrine of the Church of
England established, we all hoped, that all Arminian and Popish Doctrines would
be hushed, and silenced; we by experience find it quite contrary: for the
Arminians shamelesly alleging that all their doctrines are according to the
Church of England, under this pretense they would suppress all truth, as
forbidden by your Royal Proclamation. Which if it were true, it should not be
lawful any more to preach the Gospel, then to print books in defense of it.
So that some are neither afraid, nor ashamed to say, in plain terms, that
they must license no books against Arminius. Good God, what pitiful times
do we live in, and how different from former, as I was bold to tell my Lord of
London? But I trust your Majesty will vindicate your honor herein. Gods truth
expressed in Scripture is no changeling. This is that, which we call the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and no other. This has been sealed by the
blood of so many Martyrs, witnessed by so many Worthies of our Church, for
almost this fourscore years without intermission, whose writings no time
shall blot out, and ratified by so many Acts of Parliament, as not all the
Devils in hell, nor all the Arminians on earth, shall be able to disanull it.
The Gospel shall flourish maugre all opposites, even until all the seven
Vialls be poured out, which shall be in the utter destruction of Babylon, as is
clear by this Prophecy. In vain do they attempt to discountenance the truth,
by branding and blaspheming it as Puritanicall, rebellious, and the like. This
truth which we profess, makes your Royal Diadem both firm and glorious.
Herein we appeal to your own clearest judgment, whither those who profess
themselves Arminians, or those, whom they reprochfully call Puritans, do more
honor and maintain your Kingly Soverainty It is Gods own Prerogative, that
he cannot be unjust, although he be Omnipotent. Princes are called Gods, but
they are not so essentially. And theirs comes nearest to Gods Prerogati^e, the
greater power they have over their wills and affections, to do nothing but what
is just, according to law and conscience, the only rules of all justice. No
man ever better defined, or distinguished betwixt a lawful good King, and an
usurping Tyrant, (they be his own words) then the most judicious King James,
of blessed memory, in his Basilicon Doron, the second part, in the beginning.
Also in his speech in Parliament, 1603: toward the end; and in his Speech to
the Lords and Commons of the Parliament at White Hall, 1609: toward the
beginning. And suffer me (Gracious Soverain) to allege two or three of his
Royal Sentences, for the confutation of all Sycophantizing Flatterers, that
labor to set at odds, and in a most perilous opposition your Prerogative, and
Laws, and so c^nsequently your Royal Person, and loyal People. In these our
^imes (says he) we are to distinguish between the state of Kings in their
first Original, and between ^he state of settled Kings and Monarchs, that do
at this time govern in civil Kingdoms So that his Majesty having mentioned
the Bishops Sermon then, wherein he had spoken at large, and in general of the
power of Kings; the King adds this qualification of his own, saying, If I had
been in his place, etc. I would have concluded as an Englishman, etc. putting
so, a difference between the general power of a King in Divinity, and the
settled, and established State of this Crown and Kingdom. And a little after:
In such Kingdoms, The King binds himself by a double Oath to the observation;
of the fundamental laws of his Kingdom: Tacitly, as being a King, and so
bound to protect as well the People, as the Laws of his Kingdom: and
expressly, by his Oath at his Coronation so as every just King in a settled
Kingdom is bound to observe that paction made to his People by his Laws, in
framing his government agreeable thereunto, according to that paction which God
made with Noah after the Deluge, etc. perpetual and invilable. And therefore a
King governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerates into
a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to rule according to his Laws. Therefore
all Kings, that are not Tyrants, or perjured, will be glad to bound themselves
within the limits of their Laws; and they that persuade them the contrary, are
Vipers, and Pests, both against them* and the Commonwealth. So the most
judicious King. Thus they that would seem the Kings most intimous and entire
friends, by opposing his Power against his well settled Laws, are by King James
his verdict, no better then Vipers, and Pests, and that both against the King,
and Commonwealth. Vipers eat through their Mothers Bowels, and Pests destroy
and sweep away all. And the Lord ever remove far from your Majesty such
Vipers, such Pests. Would they turn the Prerogative into a Derogatiue, and the
best and most religious King in Christendom into a Tyrant, and one perjured?
God forbid. But the Lord our God, who has given us such a Son to sit upon
such a Fathers Throne, established by justice and mercy, ever keep the Kings
heart from being infected by any such Pests. Herein let your Prerogative Royal
ever most gloriously shine forth in manifesting your Majesty to be like your
self, a most righteous and religious King over a free people, in governing
them according to your just Laws established, and most unlike to a Tyrant over
slaves. Thus your Majesty so nobly acquitting your Kingly honor to the
Parliament now assembled, and before all the world; and vindicating your Royal
reputation, from all those, whom your Royal Father of blessed memory calls
Vipers and Pests; pronouncing a woe to such, saying, Woe b^ (...) him, that
divides the Weal of the King from the Weal of the Kingdom, since the hearts
and riches of the People, are the Kings greatest Treasure: what infinite love
does it win of all your loyal subjects, and what a terror will it strike into
your enemies? This happy Union of affections between Prince and People, the
Head and the Body, shall make you invincible, and victorious, amiable to your
friends, terrible to foes, Honorable with all. Go on therefore in this your
Honor, most renowned Sovereign; your zeal to God in maintaining his Truth, in
suppressing Arminian Heresy, in supplanting all corriuall-Idols, being joined
with your just policy, and truly Kingly government of the best people in the
world: shall so fasten you to God, and him to you, and your people, that the
generations succeeding, shall have cause to call you blessed, and heaven shall
at length welcome you with a crown of glory; all which is the daily and
dutiful prayer of

Your Majesty's most faithful Subject and Servant, HENRY BVRTON*

Chap. 15. As a Preface to the 16. Chapter.
THis last book of the holy Bible was purposely penned for these last times,
as to forewarne, so to fore-arm Gods people against the last and extremest
perils. And since we of this generation are fallen upon the extremities of the
world, this book was never more seasonable for any age to be opened, and
applied* ^hen for this of ours. And so much the rather, because we have
survived to see with open eyes the accomplishment of most of the Prophecies of
this book already, so that we may more confidently write or speak of the
things therein contained, then those that lived in former ages. And seeing of
all other parts and passages of ^his book, none are so punctual and pregn^nt
in se^^ing forth the present times, together with the next immediately
foregoing, and that which is imminently to ensue, then these two Chapters, the
15. and 16. I have therefore made special choice to spend my best meditations
upon them, and that for two principal causes. First, for ministering
consolation and courage to ^he dejected and disconsolate people of God,
drooping and hanging down their head, as if they were ^he on^y sheep appointed
for the slaughter: and for admoniti^n, or else terror to their vowed enemies,
or false friends, to be well advised what they go about, least they br^ng an
old ^ou^e upon their (...) plagues and punishments which (...) to the utter
confusion and perdi^ion of the great Antichrist, and all his confederates. It
(...) the ^^ying of that royal and pe^r^lesse Paraph^a^^ King James of happy
memory, in his Epistle to the Church Militant, before his Paraphrase. This
book I (...) a special^^ an^ on against the haereticall wall of our common
adversaries the Papists. And least any should object, that (...) is so obscure
and allegorique, King James in the Argument of this Book.
(to use the words of that royal Pen,) that it is in a manner unprofitable to
be taught or interpreted: his Majesty easily puts it by, (...) that thi^ book
of it self proves how profitable it is for this age* seeing it is the last
Revelation of Gods (...) and prophe^y that ever was, (...)*
or shall be in the world. Being (...) also (says he) to comfort (...), that
might otherwise (...), becau^^ of the greatness of temptation from the (...)*
and his followers; and therefore in the vision of the (...) declared (says the
King) what plagues shall light upon the Pope and his followers. Nor need we be
dismayed with the ^eare of obscurity, for the title of the book is, The
Rev^l^tion of Jesus Christ. Nor need we think it unprofitable to be read or
expounded: for in the very front of the book is prefixed, Blessed is he that
reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things
which (...) written therein, for the time is at hand. And if the time were at
hand then, how much more now? This book being written by the last surviver of
all the Apostles, and not revealed unto him, till the last of his old age*
which was near upon the hundredth year of Christ* nor yet generally revealed
unto the Church, till so (...) time after: See Be^a his Preface to the
Revelation.
all arguing, that the principal use of thi^ book was specially reserved for
us, upon whom the end of the world are come.

Now to pa^^e by all further circumlocutions, or preambles, come we directly to
our matter intended: where^of though the chief substance and (...) comprise^
in the 16. Chapter, yet finding the (...) thereunto, and to be a^ a key to
(...) the (...) thereof, it is requisite that we take this key along with us.

In the 15. Chapter, Chap. 15*
verse 1. we have certain motives unto our better attention to this ensuing
Prophecy* as first, John's testimony* I^ and the evidence of it* I ^aw; the
fairest witness: thirdly, the object, a (...): and what does more affect man's
curiosity, at least, then to see signs. And this sign in heaven, seems to be
that, which Christ calls the sign of the Son of man (...)* Mat. 24.30. not
only because it appears after the general darkening of the Gospel, and the
falling or Apostasy of many stars in the Church* ver. ^^. but also, because
these vialls are the evident forerunners of the second coming of Christ; as
will appear more fully in this ensuing treatise. And fourthly, the place
where, in heaven, namely in the Church of God, which both in this book, and
throughout the new Testament is usually understood by heaven, as the kingdom
of heaven for the Gospel and ministry thereof in the Church: And this sign in
heaven may well be taken for the sign of (...) Son of man, mentioned Matthew:
24. as will more and more appear in the progress of this Prophecy. Fifthly,
this sign is great and mavelous; which if we apply to the admirable breaking
forth of the Gospel in the beginning of these 7. Vials, we cannot but be
amassed with the marvailous greatness of it. Sixthly, this sign is more
particularly described and set forth under 7. Angels, who are the Ministers of
God in his Church, as Chap. 1. and 2. and 3. of this book Ministers are
Angels, as much to say, as Messengers, so that the name of Angel, and these 7.
too, may a little awaken our attention, and raise the contemptuous world to a
more high estimation of this sacred Calling of Gods Ministers, lest the
disesteeme of their persons may be a stumbling blo^k to men to fall foul upon
a disrespect of the message it self. Seventhly, These 7. Angels bring with
them the 7. last plagues, because in them is filled up the w^ath of God.
Extrem^ malorum scire, to know aforehand the last and worst of plagues, is a
good remedy against them, if not altogether to prevent, yet at least the better
to brook them.

In the second verse, (says John,) And I saw as it were a Sea of Glass
mingled with fire, and them that had gotten the victory over the Beast, and
over his Image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on
the sea of Gl^sse^, having the harpes of God. And (ver. 3.) they sing the song
of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and
maruailous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways* thou
King of Saints: Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify thy name, for
thou only are holy; for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy
judgments are m^de manifest*

In these words is plainly intimated the estate of the Church of God, when once
the 7. Angels begin to power forth the last plagues. Therefore they immediately
follow upon the vision of the 7. Angels; upon whose execution of their message
great joy is brought to the Church of Christ. K. James in his Paraphrase.
The glassie Sea mingled with fire is a lively emblem of this world, whose
glory is but as glass, bright, but brittle, dum spl^ndet frangitur; and it is
mingled with fire, which signifies the consumption of the wicked world, which
as glass is molten and melted with fire, as Peter speaks (2 Pet. 3.12.) the
elements melting with fervent heat. Upon this molten fiery glassy Sea do stand
the servants of God: who are Victors over the Beast, and (whereof we read Chap.
13.15, 16, 17.) having the harpes of God, (to wit instruments of praise,) (...)
they sing the song of Moses, Exodus 15.
and of the Lamb. This spea^^ (as is very frequent in this book) (...) and
directs our eyes to that solemn thanksgiving of ^ose^ and Israel for their
miraculous victory (...), and their deliverance fr^ the captivity* upon the
^anks of the red Sea, resembled here by the (...) Sea mingled with fire, which
makes it appear like the red Sea. That the song of the Lamb is here added, it
teaches us to apply this to the spirituall-deliverance of the Church of God
from that spiritual Egypt, to (...) that by the power of Christ the Lamb of
God, (...) that Paschall Lamb, at the sprinkling of whose blood, (...) Israel^
typical deliverance from their corporal ^a^tivity, And for this cause, is
this song sung to the (...) of God Almighty, by whose only power and mercy, we
with the whole Church reformed, were delivered from, and are conquerers of the
Beast, etc. This may put us in mind by the way, that as we have a great share
in this deliverance and victory over Popery (...) to be (...) more careful to
keep this song of thanksgiving (...) and take those harpes into our hands,
which our forefathers most of them were feign to hang up upon the willowes in
Babylon, and in stead of singing, sat them down and wept. Nor have we less
cause to express all thankfuln^sse to God for our deliverance from Babylons
captivity, then Moses and Israel had for theirs from Egypt; our^-being no
less miraculous (if we consider the weak means, whereby it was wrought) then
that was. For what was one poor Luther, and those few that seconded him, to
the whole world of Ponti^icians, and (...) Papal power where with he was to
encounter.

Others understand by this glassy Sea mingled with fire, the pure Christalline
word of God, which in the ministry thereof is mingled with the fire and
efficacy of the Holy Ghost, by the means whereof the spiritual Babylonians
are overthrown, as the Egyptians were in the red Sea, which was a type of
Baptism. Let the Reader ^ake his choice, or rather both, since (...) are
agreeable to the analogy of the Prophecy.

And if we understand it of the world, we may note all so, how though Gods
servants be compassed about with flames of fire as it were, standing upon this
glassy sea, yet they do with all their cheerfulness sound forth the praise of
God in the Gospel, the Lambs song* while Popish fire and faggotts have
prevailed no more upon Gods servants, but to inflame them with greater zeal^ to
sing the song of the Lamb^.

It follows (ver. 5.) And after that, I looked, and behold the Temple of the
Tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven was opened. And (ver. 6.) the seven
Angels came out of the Temple, having the seven plagues, clothed in pure and
white Linen, and having their breasts girt with golden girdles. And (ver. 7.)
one of the four Beasts gave unto the seven Angels seven golden Vialls, full
of the wrath of God, who lives for ever and ever* and (ver. 8.) the Temple was
filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power, and no man was
able to enter into the Temple, till the seven plagues of the seven Angels
were fulfilled.

In these words the Holy Ghost descends more particularly to set forth the full
equipage and addressemen^ of the ensuing Prophecy, and that in a manner full of
majesty. First, the Place, whence the seven Angels come, namely the Temple of
the Tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven, which upon their going forth, is
opened. This ought to be well marked, as pointing us to the very particular
time, wherein these seven Vials began to be powered out, which is a matter of
special moment. Now for the meaning^* we know that the Temple of Solomon, and
Tabernacle of Moses, were both types of Christ, and of his Church; but the
Tabernacle more properly of the Church Militant, the Temple of the Triumphant;
here ^oyned together: [ the Temple of the Tabernacle of Testimony*] to note the
Church of Christ Militant, whose part is triumphant in the eternal Temple in
heaven: or else, to note the heavenly and triumphant-like estate of Christ's
Church on earth, now vindicated from, and made victorious over the Beast. The
opening of this Temple, shows a more clear manifestation of the Testimony of
God, now revealed in the pouring out of these Vials, in the Ministry of the
Gospel, as we shall see anon. Well, out of this Temple come the seven Angels
having the seven plagues, being adorned and furnished with all requisite graces
and indowments, fitting for so sacred a ministration. They receive their seven
golden Vials at the hands of one of the four Beasts. This referres us to the
Fourth Chapter of this book, which place alludes to the first chapter of
Ezechiels Prophecy, to the four Beasts there. And it is commonly received of
the Ancients, that these four Beasts were a type of the four Evangelists.

According to this sense we are to understand that these 7. Angels, the
Ministers of the Gospel powering out their Vials, received their Vials, to
wit, their authority and power from the Gospel of Christ, whereon all our
Ministry is grounded. Some understand by these four living creatures, or
Beasts, the ministers of the Gospel, who in all ages deliver and propagate the
word of their ministry from hand to hand, to the succeeding ages. Nor wanted
there, even before Luther ever appeared against the Pope, sufficient witnesses
in all ages, that opposed the man of sin, and stood up for the truth. And among
many other, famous was that Prophecy of John Huss, when he was burned at the
Counsel of Constance, for witnessing the truth against the Church of Rome,
(enough by the way to stopp the clamorous mouths of Papists, who object, where
was your Religion before Luther?) who at the stake uttered these words, That of
the ashes of this Goose (says he) shall rise a Swan, Canon. Chronic. lib. 5.
which they should not burn, as they wasted the poor Goose; adding moreover.
Post (...) after a hundredth years, you shall answer God and (...)* Now in the
Bohemian tongue, Huss signifies a Goose, and Luther a Swan. And just a hundred
years after the end of that Counsel of Constance, began Luther publikly to
preach against the Popes Indulgences. So that here we may note* how Luther
received his Vial as it were from the hand of John Huss, a witness of the
Gospel of Christ^ and that by a remarkable Sundry others also prophesied of
this great reformation of Religion, as Nic. Cusanus Card. Ioh. Lich^enbergiu^,
Ioachim Abbas, Hildegardis, Brigitta, Andreas Prolus, Johannes Hil^en, qui
quidem and annum mutationis assignasse fertur. See Abrah. Bucholcerus his
Chro^ology, Anno 1517.
Prophecy. And were not John Wicklifes works also burned at the same Council ^
and two other worthy Bohemian Martyrs? And did not John Wicklife our Country
man (by whose means the Bohemians received the Gospel) instruct his scholar
John Huss therein, and Huss others, as Zizca, and so downwards? And was not
Luther himself made Doctor by Andreas Carolostadius at Wittenberge* Thus we
could go up by every Century and age all a long even* from Luther to the
Apostles times, to prove the lineall and uninterrupted descent of that Gospel
and truth, which we profess; The obstrepe^ous Jesuits know it well enough,
and might well spare us that labor, but, only least they should be drawn so
dry, as to seem to be able to say nothing for themselves, or against us. But
we build not our doctrines upon genealogies, but upon express, and
authentical Records of Scriptures, above all exception. So that from this
book of Scriptures do these 7 Angels take their seven Vials.

But what is meant by Vials? They are vessels bigger then ordinary drinking
cupps, See Brightman in Cap 15. Apoc.
such as we call Goblets; some take them to be as bigg as Kettles. But I take
it, the Holy Ghost here alludeth to those incense-cups, Exodus 23.29. translated
Phialae in the vulgar latin, which were made of pure gold as here. And in
chapter 5.8. is mention of Vials full of the odours of the Saints. To which
comparing the Vials full of plagues here, we may note their two fold use: one,
for the benefit of the Church, another, for the punishment of her enemies; as
we read of the Censers, Chap. 8.3, 4, 5: out of which went first the odours of
the Saints prayers, and after that thence were powered forth of the hot coals
of the Altar upon the earth, whereupon insued sundry plagues upon the wicked.
In a word then these 7. Vials, here powered forth, do signify nothing else,
but the ministry of the Gospel, whereby salvation, the savor of life unto
life is brought to Gods people, but contraly damnation, the savor of death
unto death, even the wrath of God is revealed upon the Beast and his followers,
which withhold the truth in unrighteousness. This will appear evidently, in
the proper place anon.

It follows, (ver. 8.) And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of
God, and from his power, and no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the
seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled.

This verse propounds a matter very remarkable. The smoke here from Gods glory
and power filling the Temple, alludes to the Tabernacle of Moses, and Temple of
Solomon, which at their dedication were filled with a ^isible symbol of Gods
presence and glory, Exodus: 40.34, ^5. and 1 King. 8.10, 11. Here it imports thus
much unto us, that upon the pouring forth of the Vials, God ^halbe present with
his Church, in a more conspicuous ^anner, and manifestation of his glory and
power, in ^he revelation of the mystery of his will, then ordinary, God being
now about to magnify his glory and power ^n his Church by the ministry of his
word in such wise, that it shall be as smoke in the eyes of all the enemies of
^he truth, so as they shall not be able to endure this glo^^ of God, being so
mightily guarded also with his po^er. The like we read of in Esa: 6. where when
the lord was about to give to Esaias a commission, together ^^th gifts and graces
for Prophetical ministration, he (...) unto him a vision of his glorious
presence, his (...) filling the Temple; signifying, the presence of (...) glory
and power does then fill his Church, when the word of God shines forth in
prophecy and preaching. And as it was then upon the preaching of that
Evangelicall Prophet, or Prophetical Evangelist; so is it here upon the
execution of these seven Angels ministration.

And (to note the excellent condition of the Church upon the first pouring out
of these Vials) we are to observe the allusion of this filling the Temple with
the glory of Gods presence, to the Dedication both of the Tabernacle of Moses,
and of the Temple of Solomon, at which time both of them were thus filled.)
This plainly shows, that at the great restoration of the Church of Christ,
begun at the first Vials pouring out, the Church of Christ shall be, as it were
anew dedicated in a most solemn and magnificent state. An excellent and
pregnant Type whereof we have in that Restoration of the Temple in Jerusalem,
upon the Jews return from the Babylonian Captivity; whereupon there was a
solemn^ Dedication of the Temple, the anniversary Feast whereof was kept by
that people of God, unto the very first coming of Christ, the true Temple.
Just so here. The Church of Christ upon the return of Gods people from the
spiritual Babylonian Captivity, is restored, repaired, and anew dedicated, the
memorial whereof shall be without interruption, solemnly kept of Gods people,
until the second coming of Christ in his full glory. And the Temple was
filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power, and no man was
able to enter into the Temple, till the seven plagues of the seven Angels
were fulfilled.

Again, it is said here, that none might enter into the Temple, till the
seven Plagues of the seven Angel were fulfilled. Hereby is signified, not
that no man ca^ all this while enter into the Church; but that the pre^sence of
Gods glory and power shall fill his Church, hi^ Gospel and Truth shall prosper
and prevail, (...) all the malice and might of the enemies, from the (...) to
the last of these seven Vials; that is, the Gospel shall flourish, in despite
of all the maligners thereof open or secret, until Antichrist and his kingdom
be ruined, which shall be at the pouring out of the seventh Vial.

Here then is solid and sweet comfort to all the lovers of the truth, that
though they see never so many machinations and attempts, either for strong
invading, or subtle undermining of the truth; yet Gods glory and power will not
part from his Temple, nor shall the owl eyed enemy be able to seize upon it,
or to enter into it; but this glory and power of God shall rest and reside in
his Church to beautify and protect it, yea to fill and furnish it with all
glorious graces, until the wrath of God in these seven last plagues be
emptied upon the Beast, and his confederate brood, to their utter confusion.

CHAP. 16.
ANd thus having from this Promontory of the 15. Chapter taken a general
survey of the 16. Let us now descend to a more particular view and search of
this seavenfold mystery: And the Mysteries of this book run much upon seavens.
To omit others, three ^here are very remarkable, yea coherent and correspondent
among themselves: 1. of the seven Seals: Chap. 5. and 6, and 7. Chap. 8. and
4. and 10. and 11.15.
2. of the seven Trump^tts: 3. of the seven Vials: in each whereof is laid
down the different estates of the Church and her enemies, in their several
ages; the last of the ^eaven Seals bringing on, and in, the first of the
seven Trumpetts; and the sixth Trumpet inducing the first ^f the seven Vials.
Such a sweet harmony there is be^weene these sacred instruments of the Temple.
But we ^asten to ou^ present purpose. Yet before we enter vp^n the 16. Chapter,
let us take these few instructions by (...) way, as general directions to the
clearer opening ^f it. First, that the whole Chapter in general is my^^ically,
and after a spiritual and Allegorical manner to be understood and interpreted
all along. Secondly, th^^ if any desire the particular time, when* or where
about every particular Vial is powered out, let him observe in what time they
are or were most clearly and fully ^^ccomplished, and he may safely conclude,
that then was the special time of their pouring out. Thirdly, though each
Vial have an orderly and successi^e pouring out, yet in some degree they have
a certain ri^^ from the pouring out of the first. Fourthly, each Vial once
evidently in its own proper place powered ou^, it ceasseth not, but runs
along in its strength, until the seventh and last plague be powered out,
wherein they have all their full confluence. Fifthly, whatsoever is written in
every Vial, is to be understood as a special symptom, proper to the time of
that Vial. Lastly, that all these seven Plagues light upon the Church of Rome,
and her followers mainly.

Ver. 1. And I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven
Angels, Go your ways, and power out your Vials of the wrath of God upon the
earth. In this first verse is set down the commission of the seven Angels: It
is given by a great voy^^ out of the Temple. This is Christ's voice, who
governs and appoints all things in his Church. And it is a great voice* the
matter whereof is of great consequence and importance, and therefore worthy of
our greatest and best attention: And who shall not go, when he says, G^^ your
ways. So that hence, even from Christ's direction do these seven Angels
receive their charge. They ar^ bid to power out their Vials upon the earth. The
Earth i^ the general object of these seven last Plagues. By it are meant all
those, who are of the earth, earthly minded* earthly affected; opposite to
those, whose* conversation is in heaven. But more specially are meant here all
those of the Church of Rome* described in the (...) verse, such as have the
mark of the Beast, and worship his Image. And so all the seven plagues of the
seven Vialls are poured out upon all Papists expressly* so much of the
Commission: Now follows the execution thereof.

VIAL. 1. And the first went, and powered out his Vial upon the Earth, and
there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men, which had the mark of the
Beast, and upon them which worshipped his Image.
The Kingdom of the Beast is the earth, from which he rises, chap. 13.11:
upon which the first Vial (and so all the rest) is powered. The consequent
effect whereof is, a noisome and grievous sore upon the men* which had the
mark of the Beast, and upon them which worshipped his Image. The Beast marked
are all the Popes sworn v^taries and vassalls, which avow and profess
themselves to be his special creatures, and Cattle; as his Cardinals,
Priests, Friars, and so forth. They that worship the Beasts Image, are all
common Papists, high and low, which adore the supreme power and authority of
the Pope, even all Emperors, Kings, and States of the world, wherein he
bears the Image of the Imperial Sovereignty, which was ever resident in the
Roman Emperors. Hereof read chapter 13, where the first Beast rises out of
the sea, being meant of the Roman Empire, which grew from the intestine
dissentions of the Nations: the second Beast arises from the earth, that is
from the peace, plenty, and prosperity of this world* this was the Pope* who
erected and invested in himself the exact image of the former Beast, assuming
all Imperial power and sovereignty over the world, as once the Emperor had;
and so causing all upon pa^ne of death; to worship this Image, that is, to
acknowledge, that the Pope has all plenary power, that he is exalted above
all that i^ called God* or that is worshipped, to wit, over all Kings and
Keasars, and whatsoever is sacred on earth, humane or divine, so verifiyng that
Prophecy of the Apostle, 2. Thessalonians 2. that the Pope is that very MAN of
sin, that son of perdition, that great ANTICHRIST. Thus we see who they
be, upon whom the pouring out of this first Vial has its proper operation
and effect; which is, there fell upon them a noisome and grievous sore? What
may this mean? Where or when shall we see such scabs and sores upon the
Papists, as fell upon the Egyptians, when Moses scattered about the Ashes? To
which yet this Vial poured forth has special allusion.

In the Egyptian plague none of them escaped, no not the Magitians and
Priests. But as they, who are here plagued, are of the spiritual Egypt (as
Rome is compared, Chap. 11.) so we are to understand this, not of a corporal,
but of a spiritual sore; and that either in doctrine, or life. So that in a
word, the pouring out of this first Vial, is the first breaking out of the
Gospel in a glorious manner, whereby the grievous and noisome sores of the
Church of Rome and her followers, both in life and doctrine, come to be
discovered, so as they become noisome and grievous not only to the world, but
even to the patients themselves, who now, like a galled beast, grow very
impatient, fling and ^ume, as being made sensible of them against their wills.
When came this to pass especially? When* Ask not me; do but compare the time
of Martine Luther, and the state of the Church of Rome thereupon, with the
pouring out of this Vial, and the consequent sore that fell by way of
discovery, upon the Beast-marked, and his Image worshipers; and you will easily
conclude, both how and when this was fulfilled. Was it not a grievous sore,
that Luther first fell foul upon, namely, papal Indulgences, selling of
pardons for all kind of sins, to those that would give most? Thus began the
first Vial to be poured out, while hereupon Luther was stirred up by ^ mighty
Divine providence to begin to display the Gospel more and more, by the light
whereof was said to fall upon all Papists a noisome and grievous sore; not
because that Church was not formerly deeply affected and infected therewith:
but because it began upon the preaching of the Gospel to be discovered, which
before in a great measure lay hid, being covered with thick darkness: It being
the property of the word of God, the more it is opened, the more to discover
all kind of sins, the sores of the soul and conscience. Till this light brake
forth in Luthers time, all Romes Ecclesiasticke body, though full of sores, yet
was sensually secure, and senseless of them; and though conscious of them in
some measure, yet she cared the less, while the world could not so easily note
them. But now all comes to light. Whereupon Rome was so vexed, and even
Christian Princes so offended with her vlcerousnesse, that the world began to
cry out for reformation. The Pope flings out his terrible thunderbolts against
Luther, and other Preachers of Reformation. When this would not do; he
descends to a willingness, that though against his will, to have his German
Clergy reformed, far enough off from Rome; at the least wise to begin a
Minoritis, but not a Maioritis, as the Emperor Sigismund pleaded at the
Council of Constance; upon which difference, the Reformation brake off, not
finding where to begin. Still a general Council was urged, both by Luther and
the German Princes, Hist. Council. ^rid.
together with the Emperor. The Pope uses all pretenses and shifts to put it
off. Above twenty years pass over the heads of four Popes successively, and
upon the fifth, from the first appeal to a general Council, till it came to
be summoned and settled upon. Nor was Pope Paul the 13. wantting for his part
to invent shifts to delay it: who being as artificial a dissembler, as his
Predecessor, pretend^ a great desire to reform his own Pontifical Court;
and (to prevent the trouble of the Council, by anticipa^ion) he exhorts his
Cardinals to begin the reformation at themselves first. A fair hope. But it
is noted by the author of the history of the Council of Trent, that for this
purpose he appointed three Cardinals, neither the most religious, nor the
quickest for dispatch, but very slow and deliberate. But not to hold the world
too long in suspense, in the expectation of this solemn reformation, he blasts
it in the very budd. For Alexander Farnesius his nephew of his base son
Petrus Aloisius and Guido As^anius Fran. F^rza, another Nephew of his base
daughter Constantia, the one sixtene years of age, the other 14, two tall
striplings, I wis, his fatherhood creates for Cardinals; answering those that
objected their tender years, that himself, now in his decrepite ag^, would
easily recompense in his old years, what was therein wanting to them. And so
to this goodly issue, came all this solemn Reformation. But perforce at length
all is devolved upon the Council of Trent, an Assembly of many learned
Doctors, sufficient, if any, to invent some salve for Babylons sores. And they
say pretily to it; for in that Council you shall find no less then eleven or
twelve very solemn and formal Decrees de Reformatione: Ier. 51.9.
And when all is done, nothing is Reformed. Thus is verified that of the
Prophet Jeremy, W^ would have cured Babylon, but she An item by the way to all
those that living under the Gospel, and yet refuse to have their sores cured
by it, which preaches Christ who has healing under his wings that such are to
be reputed no better, but as the corrupt limbs of the Beast.
would not be cured. Nay, to show her case is desperate, that Council comes
with her Index expurgatorius, wherewith to expunge and purge out all such
books, as either descry the nature of her diseases, or prescribe remedies for
the same. Thus to this day, from the time of Luther, we see grievous sores
stick close to that whole Pontifician body. Although the corruptions of the
Church of Rome, were not altogether vndiscovered before Luthers time; God still
raising up some from time to time, to cry out against Babylon, as John
Wickliffe in his works writ against her manifold errors and abuses, for which
they merited the fire at the Council of Constance: but they never came so to
be ransacked and ripped up, as by Luther, and since his time. He began to search
their sores to the quick, and laid them open with a witness, that it is
impossible so much as ever to draw the least skin over them, to hide or cover
them, much less to cure them.

As for the bodily sores, which fell upon those of the Church of Rome, upon the
pouring forth of this first Vial, I list not to touch them. Erasmus
complains of Luther for two things, that he touched too much the Bishops
Myters, and the Monks bellyes. And surely a ^rievous sore fell upon many of
them in this kind; ma^y a Bishop lost his Miter, and many a Monks fatt belly
^egan now to pinch for it. Nor are we willing to touch those Cardinals sore
backs, being beaten and pitifully (...) up and down the streets of Rome by the
Caesarean ^ouldiers, who then had surprised it, while their Clement. 7.
head ^as beating his brains how to get out of prison, where (...) was now
pent; and all this done, within the time ^f the pouring out of this Vial. I
list not (I say) be a ^aile in such sores. Enough is said to clear the
pouring ^ut the first Vial, both when, and how, by whom, and upon whom it
began to be poured.

The second Vial powered out out. And the second Angel poured out his Vial
upon ^he Sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man, and ^uery living soul
died in the Sea.
As in the former Vial we have seen Romes spiritual ^ores; so here we are to
search for spiritual seas. It is v^all in Scripture, (to which for
interpretation this Pro^hecy all along sends us) to shadow out the doctrins of
(...) word of God by waters. As Eze* 47.3, 4, 5. The waters (...) the Sanctuary
by degrees became a huge Ocea^. Esaias applies and expounds it, Chapter 11.9.
speaking of the light of the Gospel in Christ's time, he says, The earth shall
be^ full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. So Abac:
2.14. And Esaias 55.1. In Exodus 15. Ye have 12. fountains, typing the doctrine
of the 12. Patriarchs, and 12. Apostles. Now as seas are in the good part taken
for the doctrines of Christ in the forecited places; so here, in the evil
part, for the corrupt doctrines of Antichrist. At the blast of the second
Trumpet, the third part of the sea is turned into blood: here the whole Sea.
Which notes the difference between the state of Romes doctrines before the
Council of Trent, while as yet they were in their growing, and as now they
became, in, and after the Council of Trent. Before the Council of Trent there
was some fresh water to be found in the doctrines of that Church, some truth,
some means of ^alvation left, for those that could search and find it out, and
follow it, seperating the fresh and clear water of truth from the blood of her
abominable idolatries, and other impious doctrines, while as yet the rule of
faith, to wit, the Scriptures, remained entire: but in and after the Council
of Trent, wherein the Rule of faith is altered, humane Traditions and
inventions coming in for an equal share with the Scriptures, and shouldering
them for the wall, and driving them into the very Kennell, now the Sea is
turned altogether into blood. In this Council the whole doctrine of the
Gospel is turned vpside down. The justifying and saving faith is utterly
excluded, abandoned, and accursed. Justification by works takes place. The
Mass, a new, propitiatory, unbloody sacrifice for all sins, for quick and
dead, foysted in for Christ's only sacrifice once made, yea humane
satisfactions in stead thereof. All Idolatries are ratified. The Sacramental
Cup, the lively resemblance of Christ's blood shed for our sins, (without
which is no redemption, no lif^ in us) is for ever most sacrilegiously cut off
from Christ's sacred institution. No man must read the Scriptures, but the
sworn vassalls, and that according to the sense of the Church of Rome, whose
Oracle is the Popes breast, and that variable, as may best suit to the present
occasion, and commodity of that Church. The vulgar Latin Translation, though
in comparison but a blundered stream, is preferred before the pure original
fountains the Hebrew and Greek; though it contain many absurdities and
falsities, which may not be corrected. The Index Expurgatorius, established in
that Council, is to quench all truth. Therein man's free will is established,
and Gods free grace abolished: Predestination and Election undermined, and
overthrown. And the ^ike. Thus is that Sea altogether blood, yea as the blood
of a dead man, corrupt, filthy gore, whereof every living soul in that Sea
dies. So that upon the pouring out of the second Vial upon the Sea of Romes
doctrines, ^oncluded upon in the Council of Trent, they are be^ome altogether
mortal and deadly, bainefull to the ^oule, yea whereof every living soul in
that Church di^th. This began evidently to appear by the Learned Chemnitius
his Examen, and other learned Ministers of ^he Gospel since that time; by
whose preaching and writings, and opening of the word of God, that Church (...)
convinced to be now altogether Apostaticall, as King ^ames calls her. For in
that Council she has altoge^her denied the faith, and that with Anathema, so
as she (...) become worse then an Infidel, utterly excluded from ^ll communion
with Christ; for without the true and ^^ving faith in Christ, no union with
him, and so no ^ommunion. No salvation then henceforth, (I still ^eane (and
note it well) from the Council of Trent, and ^ownward hitherto) no salvation in
the Church of ^ome; every living soul therein dies. The Sea of her ^^ctrines
is become like the Asphaltite, or Mare m^rtu^^, or dead Sea, wherein every
living creature dies. ^his is then another of the spiritual Aegypts plagues.
So that this second Vial was not powered ou^, ^^ill the Council of Trent, not
before. The Council of Trent putting a maine bounder and odd, between the
state of the Church of Rome before and after it.

Before the Council of Trent, there was some fresh water for our forefathers,
to refresh their lean and languishing souls, and to waft them to heaven,
while as yet the rule of faith remained entire, and the faith of Christ was not
utterly destroyed and cashered: but after that Council, all is turned into
blood, yea as the blood of a dead man, not a drop of fresh water to be looked
for, but a dead lake of most abominable corruption, and stinking putrefaction.

Let them therefore no more object to us our forefathers, what became of them
before the Reformation. Surely if any thing but good befell them, they might
thank the Church of Rome for it; if they perished, it was through the blood
they sucked from that Strumpetts breasts. Nor are we answerable or accountable
for the salvation of our forefathers. If they were led by dumb idols, If they
perished in the Religion of Popery, therefore must we? Does not the jealous God
visit the iniquities of the idolatrous fathers upon the children, to the third
and fourth generation of them that hate him? But blessed be God, who has long
ago pulled us out of that bloody Sea, wherein they were plunged. Yea blessed
be God, who before the Council of Trent, before that Sea was altogether turned
into bainfull blood, God provided a remedy for them and us; one Vial was powered
out by the preaching of the Gospel, to give men warning to fly from Romes
plague^ sores. And fifteen years before the conclusion of that wicked
Council was the pure fountain of the Gospel restored in England in King
Edward the sixth his days* and four or five years before the end of it, the
Gospel was reestablished in the blessed reign of the (...) renowned Queen
Elizabeth. Never (...) us then with our forefathers; we hope, that before the
Council of Trent God provided for them some freshwater, as he did for the
Israelites in Egypt, while the cursed Egyptians had nothing but bloody waters
to drink.

But in the mean time, O all ye Papists, weep not, take not care so much for
our forefathers, as for your own souls. You are as poor fishes enclosed in
the dead Sea, in the Sea of Romes doctrines, where you drink in nothing, but
as the blood of a dead man, whereof every living soul that drinks th^^eof,
dies. Your case now is desperate, infinitely worse then that of our
forefathers before the Council of Trent. Oh that you had so much life left,
yea some dropp of humane sense and reason, as to perceive your ruefull
condition. That you perceive it not, is it not a clear proof of this
Prophecy, that every living soul in that Sea dies? Are not those dead fishes,
that discern not between stinking blood and fresh water, yea between the
brackish Sea, and the sweet Rivers? But I wonder most, how you, living in this
Church of England, where the fresh Rivers of life do flow, that ever you would
prefer the bloody Sea of Rome before them. But I read of the Mare mortuum,
or dead Sea of Sodom, that if a Lantern, Isidor. li. 13. c^. 3. de Lacis and
Stagnis. Barthol. de Proprirets. lib. 13. cap. 13.
without a light in it, be cast upon it, it by and by sinketh down, and is
seen no more: but a Lantern with a light in it, fleeteth above, and sinketh
not. How true this is* I dispute not: But I am sure it is the lively Emblem of
a Papist, who has put out the light of his reason and understanding, or of the
foolish Virgin, who has a Lamp without Oil, much more without light: You
rejecting the Gospel, there is no light in you, and so it is no marvel, if
cast upon the Asphaltite of Romes corrupt and bloody doctrines, (which City is
called spiritually Sodom, Chapter 11.8.) you sink ever head and ears, and
drink your bane. Whereas if you did but nourish the light of reason and of
Gods word in your souls, you should never sink into the dead lake, being
sustained by the heavenly light. This is that light, which preserves Gods
elect fishes from the mortal and mortiferous Sea of Rome; whereon though
perforce they be cast, yet are they not swallowed up of it?

But you will object, or some for you, Is there no salvation, no spiritual
life to be found in the Sea of Romes doctrines? No salvation within the verge
and bosom of that Church?

For answer, ye may beeliue the Scripture here. It plainly says, that that
Sea is become as the blood of a dead man; so that every living soul therein
dies. And what is more plain, then that the Church of Rome according to the
conclusions and Canons of Trent, is this bloody corrupt sea^ They have
expressly denied the faith, they have excluded the word of God as the only
rule of faith, (as we have showed:) and what salvation then is left in that
Church? God forbid, you will say^ God forbid? But that will not serve the
turn. You must come out of Babylon (as the Scripture exhorts you) that ye be
not partakers of her sins and punishments. The Jesuits indeed are clamarous
in your ears, No salvation out of the Church. And herewith they dazzle your
eyes, while you want judgment to put a difference between the Church of
Christ, and the now Church of Rome. Out of the Church of Christ there is no
salvation. That is most true. But the Church of Rome is now no true Church of
Christ. Why so? She denies the faith of Christ: she denies salvation and
justification by the faith of Christ.

Now that Church, which denies the only means of salvation by Christ, is no
true Church of Christ, but such, as wherein salvation is not to be expected.

But the Church of Rome denies the only means of salvation by Christ, yea
accurse^h it, to wit, the justifying and and saving faith of Christ.

Therefore the Church of Rome is no true Church of Christ, but such as wherein
no salvation is to be expected.

But you object again; As for us, we do not know, or are acquainted with the
particular doctrines of the Council of Trent, we are not learned to define, or
disstinguish between Faith and Faith, it suffiseth us to believe, as the
Church beleiveth: and if we err through ignorance, we hope that will not
altogether prejudice or hinder our salvation. And some of the Church of
England, and those no small ones, have said, that they do not deny salvation
at least, to some ignorant silly souls, whose humble, peaceable obedience
makes them safe among any part of men, that profess the foundation, Christ.

Answ. You believe you wot not what, and yet you hope, that will not hinder
your salvation. But you believe as the Church belieueth. You mean, as the
Church of Rome believes. Well. And the Church of Rome tells you in her
Council of Trent, that she belieueth no otherwise, she admits of no other
faith, then that which the Devils and damned in Hell have. If any dare deny
this, he will but bewray his shameless ignorance in this point. But being
ignorant, silly souls, whose humble peaceable condition makes them safe among
any part of men, that profess the foundation Christ, are they not in the state
of salvation? This indeed may seem a good indulgent Doctrine to nuzzle silly
Papists in their ignorance, and blind religion, while they carry themselves like
humble and peaceable men. But they profess the foundation Christ. What is it
generally to profess Christ and particularly to have no interest in him? What
is it to profess the foundation, and not to be built upon it? And who can be
built upon Christ, but he that has a lively faith in Christ? To believe as the
Church of Rome belieueth, is only to have a general historical faith, that
Christ is the Redeemer of mankind, the Savior of the world. Thus far the
very Devils believe. But that Church forbids any man to believe in
particular, that Christ is his Redeemer, his Savior; that he is justified
from his sins by Christ alone, and that his sins are forgiven only for his
name sake. This no Devil can believe, no Papists may believe upon pain of
Anathema, and damnation. Therefore though they profess the foundation Christ,
in the general, yet wanting a special faith in Christ to apply his merits for
the remission of their own sins in particular, how are they safe in any part
of men professing the foundation, Christ? May a man then be saved, nay is he
safe, to wit actually saved, living in any part of men professing the
foundation, Christ? No matter then, what religion a man be off, so in general
it profess the foundation, Christ, and a man be humble and peaceable, though a
silly ignorant. Thus all Heretics are in the state of salvation, if humble and
peaceable men; for they hold commonly and generally the foundation, Christ. But
know, O all ye silly ignorant Papists, that living here, where the Gospel, the
only means of saving knowledge, and of saving faith is preached, all your
silly ignorance, all your pretended humble peaceablenesse shall never save your
souls, but shall aggravate your condemnation so much the more, by how much you
contemn the living fountains of salvation, and choose to your selves to drink
in the bainfull Doctrines of that bloody Sea of Rome. Indeed those silly
ignorants that live in Spain, Italy, and so forth, where the Inquision
restraines them from the means of better knowledge, may have some plea for
their ignorance; and God may show mercy upon their silly souls; but for you
that are English Papists, and pretend ignorance, the more you go about to
excuse your ignorance, the more you accuse and condemn your pride and
arrogance, that can so scorn and villifie the precious word of God, which
while you do, it makes your damnation out of measure damnable. And while you
contemn the Gospel, how can you be either humble, or peaceable ^ for it is
the Gospel of grace and peace, which who so rejects, is a proud and factious
heretic.

But another of you objecteth: What do you tell us of the Council of Trent?
What though it be like such a Sea, as ye tell of, all like the blood of a dead
man, in which every living soul dies? But we here in England do not come to
drink in that blood; we have our Ghostly Fathers, who broach and bring to us,
no such drink, as you talk of, but such as carries good reason with it to be
wholesome for the soul.

Answ. It is indeed an observation of Dr. Sheldon, once a ^eminary Priest, but
now a worthy Convert, Dr. Sheldon in his Miracles of Antichrist. ch 8. toward
the end.
and lear^ed Minister of the Church of England, that the subtle Priests and
Jesuits in England, having to deal with people, not so ignorant, as in
foreign parts, where the Gos^ell is wanting, but such as have heard at least
in some measure of the grosnesse of Popery, as of their Image ^orship, the
robbing of the cup from the people in the ^ucharist, and the like: do
therefore tenderly and wa^ly attemper their Doctrines to their Disciples among
(...); until such time, as they be grown to have more ^rong stomack^, to be
able ^o take down and digest (...) grossest meat, without any curious
dressing. As a ^entlewoman, obiecting to a Jesuit their taking away (...) the
Cup in the Sacrament, as a grievous Sacrilege, (...) told her plainly, that
their Church was belyed, ^hey did it not, for proof at the Sacrament, he
ministers (...) her the Cup. She tells her Minister of it; who per^eiving the
Jesuits iugling, told her, it was certainly (...) Cup unconsecrated, that he
gave her. Whereupon ^ee pressing the Priest about it, he was forced to con^^sse
the truth, that indeed it was so. Thus can these ^hostly fathers play fast and
loose with their credulous ^^sciples, that must take all their sayings upon
trust. ^hus Romes Fishers show the silly fish at first, nothing but the bait,
till they have gotten her fast upon the hook. But what kind of holy water all
Papists may expect from their Ghostly Fathers* the pouring out of the Third and
4. Vial will plainly declare.

But before we proceed to the third Vial, for the fuller confirmation of what
has been said of the state of the Church of Rome, whose Sea of doctrines is
all turned into mortal blood, in this second Vial: it will be very requisite
here to discuss one question. Whether the Church of Rome be either a true
Church, or a true visible Church. A Question of so much the greater moment, by
how much some by their no small authority* and no less renowned opinion in the
Church, do so sway the balance on that side, that many ill affected, and of
the adverse party, taking the advantage, are (...) to catch the word out of
their mouth* and to say* (...) they, Thy Brother Ben^ad^d, Thy Mother Church of
Rom^* Which advantage how perilous it is in these luke warm* indifferent,
neutralizing days, is not hard to determine. And Popery has learned to get
over the style again (...) enough, without our help. And though it were true*
that the Church of Rome were a true Church, yet the countenancing or pressing
of it in these times might very well to be spared. Bu^ why then (say they) do
other cry down the Church of Rome for no true Church at all* Surely this were a
fault, if it were an untruth. For, giu^ the Devil his due as we say. It is
good therefore th^^ all men be well advised in this point, ^n speaking (...)
the Church of Rome Pro or Contra, as a true Church, o^ no; it being a matter
not to be maintained by (...) wit, or quaint rhetorical discourse, but upon
sound ground, and substantial demonstration.

Now for the more clear and full, yet brief discussio^ of the point, it shall
suffice only to answer such Argu^ments as are used for it; whereupon the
positive trut^ will easily be concluded: wherein I must crave pardon having to
deal in so weighty a cause, and with (...) mighty Authors, as have already
tanquam ^ Cathedra defined it. But God forbid, that the Trial of Truth should
depend upon the opinion of any man's person, though never so great, or esteemed
in the opinion of the learned. My brethren, (says Saint James) have not the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons.
And, as Saint Augustine against Maximinus an Arrian Bishop* said, Nec tu mihi
Ariminense, nec ego tibi Nicenum Concilium obijc^am* ^um ego illi, tuque isti
non detinearis: sed Scripturis testibus communibus agamus, res cum re, causa
cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet. Neither do thou object to me the
Council of Ariminum, nor will I object the Nicene unto thee, seeing neither I
am bound to the one, nor thou to the other: but let the Scriptures be common
witnesses or vmpires to us both; let thing with thing* cause with cause, reason
with reason plead. Nor let any man here impute presumption to the weakness or
unworthiness of my person, as though I took a pride to be meddling with such
high matters, and wherein great ones are interessed. Alas, God knows I take so
little pride herein, that my heart is even torn in sunder, to ^ee the ruefull
rents of the Church of God, and the Truth so opposed, so oppressed. And when
Gods glory suffers, pardon me, if I profess my self a poor Defendant. Yea my
Profession, not only as a Christian, but much more as a Minister of the
Gospel binds me to it. And I know, that God regards no man's person. And as
the Proverb is, Cucullus non facit Monachum. And were it not a matter so
nearely concerning the Glory of God, and the salvation of men's souls, I had
far rather sit me down in safe and sweet silence, wherein I should have the
more opportunity to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, then any way stand up to
contend. But it is Gods quarrel, and that, against Babylon. Peace is
beautiful indeed, but there is a, What peace? In which regard, Christ the
Prince of Peace said, I came not to send peace into the earth, but a sword. As
fair as Peace is; we must not make an Idol of it. We must keep Christ's
Peace. And in these perilous days, it being almost as dangerous to be
ignorant of the Mystery of Iniquity, (since it is the next way to be led into
it) as of the Mystery of Godliness: (and he that is ignorant in the former,
may well suspect his knowledge in the latter:) let no man think it labor
superfluous, or presumptuous, to search out the true Mystery of Popery. But (I
say) in this place a kind of Necessity has imposed this task upon me.

Now the first maine Argument, which would conclude the Church of Rome to be a
true Church, is, because (say they) A man in that Church may be saved. For,
Out of the Church no salvation: Therefore the Church of Rome must be a true
Church. But who are they that may be saved in the Church of Rome? My Author
expresses, An honest ignorant Papist; or, some ignorant silly souls, etc. Yea
and this is delivered in the name of our Church, or at least, of all those,
that being affected to the Church of Rome in some good measure, would seem to
be the Church of England. Take we the Authors words: We acknowledge, an honest
ignorant Papist may be saved. And, we have not so learned Christ, as to deny
salvation to some ignorant silly souls, whose humble peaceable obedience makes
them safe among any part of men, that profess the foundation Christ.

Answer. This makes well for Popish Ignorance when all fails. This also gives
liberty to any religion, so it profess the foundation Christ, that therein a
man may be saved. And surely if a silly, ignorant, idolatrous Papist may in
this his religion be saved, in what religion may not any silly, ignorant soul
find salvation?

But here two Questions would be resolved. 1. Whether any Papist, by his
religion may be saved.

For resolution, the Author ranks all Papists into two sorts, either Learned,
or silly Ignorants: for the Learned he confesses, it is very hard for them to
be saved: but if ignorant, more eas^e. So then if a Papist be saved, he may
thank his ignorance. And indeed the Doctrine of Popery, conferring nothing to
a man's salvation, but altogether against it, it is safest to be ignorant of
that religion. But Christ the Foundation is there professed. Well. But how will
Popish ignorance teach a man to be saved by Christ? Faith comes by hearing.
And without faith, no salvation by Christ. But all Papists, though never so
silly, yet are taught this lesson at their fingers ends, even to hate and
abhor the Preaching of the word of God, whereby they should believe in
Christ. They call it Heresy. How then is it possible for such to be saved,
be they never so humble and peaceable men? Or as if a Papist, though never so
simple, could be humble. There can be no greater pride, then that which he
takes in his ignorance: (as his Ghostly Fathers teach him,) preferring it
before all the knowledge of Christ. And can he be peaceable, whose chief
Article of his Creed is, to believe and hold the Pope to be supreme over all
Kings and Princes, whom he must rather obey, then them? This is the Beasts
mark, Revel. 14: 9.
which who so receives, (says the Holy Ghost) shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God. No Papist then, as a Papist, can be saved. And of Babylon, (says
God) Come out of her my people, least ye be partakers of her sins. Revel. 18.
Babylon is the Dominion and Religion of the Beast, of Antichrist. Nothing then
therein to be expected, but the punishment of Babells sins.

The second Question: May not a simple Papist, In the same book. page 72. It
is the saying of another Author, like to the former, in the same book.
misled by education, or long custom, or over-valuing the soverainty of the
Roman Church, and so in the simplicity of his heart embracing them, find mercy
at Gods hand, by a general repentance, and faith in the merit of Christ,
attended with charity and other virtues?

Answ. Here the state of the former question is quite altered. By faith and
repentance, no doubt, not only an ignorant, silly idolatrous Papist,
professing the foundation Christ; but even an Infidel, Turk, or Jew, opposing
Christ, (though no such Idolaters, as Papists be) may find mercy at Gods hand,
and so be saved. But withal, this ignorant silly Papist believing and
repenting, must necessarily thereupon repent him of all his Idolatries, as well
as of all his other sins. Yes, (says the Author) by a general repentance
and faith. What a strange doctrine is this for a learned Doctor (and more then
so) of the Church of England to teach? Does he not deserve to be the Popes
white son for it? Surely Bellarmine himself with the whole rabble of
Pontificians could say no more, but when they have done all, shuffle salvation
i^ the pack of a general repentance and faith; as Bellar. de Iustificatione,
li. 5. ca 7. Propter incertitudine^ propria iustitiae, and periculum inaenis
gloriae, tutissimu^ est fidutiam tota^ in sola Dei Misericordia, and
benignitate rep^nere. By reason of the incertainty of our own righteousness,
and the pe^ill of vain glory, it is most safe to put a ma^s whole confidence in
the sole mercy and favor of God. Yet he quallifies this sentence, saying Not
as though we were not to trust to our good works, as if they were not our true
righteousness, or were not able to sustain and undergo the judgment of God,
etc.
Bellarmins, Tutissimum est etc. But does this general repentance include
Idolatry, with all Popish Trumpery, as things to be repented of? If nor, such
Repentance shall never bring him to salvation. But if it do include them, then
by faith in Christ's meritts he comes to be saved, not as a Papist, but as a
true believer, renouncing Popery. And then no Godamercy to his Popery, or to
his silly ignorance.

My conclusion is (to be brief) No Papist, as a Papist* whether learned or
ignorant, can be saved. My reason is, because Popery denies the saving Faith
of Christ, as in the Council of Trent. Again, they want the means of Faith,
as the Preaching of the Gospel. Therefore Ordinarily they are not within the
compass or verge of salvation^ If they be saved then, while they abide in the
midst of Babylon, it must be extraordinarliy, by Gods special mercy, and work
of his spirit, which indeed is not tied necessarily to the means, though
ordinarily it be^ This Spirit then working saving Faith in the soul (without
which faith no salvation) this (...) such a Faith, as the Church of Rome
disclaimeth, abandoneth, accurseth. Therefore such a one is saved, not as a
Papist, but one so beleiving, as he is accursed, and by Anathama shut out of
the Church of Rome, and that by the solemn and definitive sentence of the
Council of Trent. If then, by the peremptory doctrine of Trent, or of the
Church of Rome, no Papist, as a Papist, can be saved: If the Church of Rome
cannot yield salvation to any in it, but altogether denies, yea accurseth the
very means: it follows as a conclusion undeniable, that, the Church of Rome
is no true visible Church of Christ. For only in the Church of Christ is
salvation to be found.

But says some, this is a hard sentence. Yea and our first Author for one, It
is malicious and rash. Is it malicious and rash, or uncharitable to speak the
truth? Why should any learned man be so wedded to his charity, as to divorce
himself from sound judgment, and right reason in any thing? Or, as though
that could be right charity, which is not guided by true judgment. Yea such
charity, as calls evil good, has but a woeful reward.

But others, would not have it denied, that the Church of Rome is a true
visible Church, though not a true believing Chruch. What if we should deny
this, that the Church of Rome is a true visible Church? Must we at the first
dash be censured as men transported with zeal, out of a d^testation of the
Church of Rome, as if it were all error, no Church, as affecting nothing more,
then an utter opposition to their doctrine and Ceremony, because theirs?
Because theirs? That Is not it: but because wholly Antichristian, therefore we
detest the Whore. And for my part, I had rather some fire-sparkling zeal, yet,
guided with right judgment, should even transport me with a detestation of the
Church of Rome, as a false Church^ then that I wot not what charity without
zeal, without sound judg^ment, should so far possess me, as to acknowledge
the Church of Rome for a true Church, yea or yet for a true, or truly visible
Church. And yet, under correction, I see no such difference between these two,
but that if we yield the Church of Rome to be a true, or truly visible Church*
we may as well call it a true Church. For how can we call that a true Church,
which is not truly visible? And if a Church be truly visible, what letts,
that it should not be a true Church of God, at least in man's judgment? For
that which demonstrates it a true or truly visible Church, must also evince it
to be a true Church. As also the same author calls the Church of Rome a true
Church, as well as, a true visible Church.

But let it be tried, whether zeal in denying, or charity in affirming the
Church of Rome to be a true Church, or a true, or truly visible Church, have
more reason on their side. First, I prove the Church of Rome to be no true, or
truly visible Church. A true visible Church has the true marks of a true
visible Church* But the Church of Rome has not the true marks of a true
visible Church: Therefore the Church of Rome is no true visible Church. The
mayor is undeniable, for a visible Church is not possibly known, but by the
proper marks of visibilitie. The Minor I prove from Romes own confession, and
the doctrine of the Church of England compared together. For the doctrine of
our Church (if the Homilies contain any part of it) in the second part of the
Homily for Whit s^nday, after the definition of the true Church of Christ,
these words are added: The true Church of Christ has always three notes or
marks, whereby it is known Pure and sound Doctrine: the Sacraments ministered
according to Christ's holy Institution: and the right use of Ecclesiastical
Discipline. And it is inferred thereupon. Now if you will compare this with the
Church of Rome, not as it was in the beginning, but as it is presently, and
has been for the space of nine hundred years and odd: you shall well perceive
the state thereof to b^ so far wide from the nature of the true Church, that
nothing can be more* etc. But now these three marks or notes of ^ true visible
Church, Bellarmine the mouth of the Church of Rome, expressly disclaimeth as
proper marks of the Church (improper indeed for the Church of Rome) and
therefore he allows them not so much as the place of a cipher among all his 15
Marks or Notes of the Church. Therefore, seeing the Church of Rome disclaimes
those notes of a true visible Church, which our Church acknowledges as
necessary and proper to know the true Church by: why should any, much less an
Antistes of the Church of England, affirm the Church of Rome to be a true
visible Church. But can Bellarmine show it to be a true visible Church, by all
his 15 notes? Surely when he has done all, he is feign to confess, that all
these marks cannot yet demonstrate, or make it evidently true, that it is the
true Church of God, but only evidently credible. If the Church of Rome then
cannot demonstrate it self to be a true Church (and no marvel, since it wants
the right demonstratiue marks) why should we take the pains, or be so
^fficious, as to pin a true visible Church upon her sleeue? Nay if we go to
their Baptism, the only Relic, esteemed of some sufficient to mark Rome for
a true Church: yet even that, by Romes own Doctrine and confession, will not
prove so. For, the efficacy of Baptism (as of all their Sacraments,) they hang
upon the Priests Intention at the words of Consecration. Now because no man can
be certain of the Priests Intention, Andreas Vega li. 9. de Intertitudine
Gratiae, cap. 41.
Vega (who was a great stickler in the Council of Trent) thereupon infers
that no man can be certain of his salvation, because he is not certain whither
he was rightly Baptized or no, in regard of the uncertainty of the Priests
Intention. From whence I conclude thus. That which no one Papist can
demonstrate, not all Papists together can demonstrate: But not any Papist can
demonstrate himself to be a true member of ^he Church, because he cannot
demonstrate, whether he be ^^uely Baptized or no, or whether the Sacrament of
Baptis^e was a mere nulliti^ unto him for want of the Priests Intention:
therefore, not all Papists together can demonstrate themselves to be of the
true Church; and consequently, the Church of Rome, consisting of so many
particular members, cannot demonstrate her self to be a true Church. Yea, it
may come to pass also, that in one age the Church of Rome may quite loose the
Essence of a Church, for as much as her Sacrament of Ordination, depends upon
the Ordainers Intention, which if wanting, the whole Ordination is frustrate,
and so his whole Ministry; and so downward. And that which may befall one, may
befall all. So that to help all, there is need of a great deal of charity, to
hope well of the Priests Intention, and so the best yet of the Church of Rome.

But pass we to the rest. It is alleged: Neither for the chafe do we leave
the floor of God, neither for the bad fishes do we break his Netts.

Answer. But if the floor be not now Gods floor, but Antichrists floor,
wherein nothing is to be found, but chafe: and if the Netts be no other, but
such as catch only the bad fishes, which is not the property of Gods Netts:
then such a floor, such netts are altogether to be abandoned. And whither that
floor, or those netts be Antichrists only, and not Gods, shall appear more
fully anone^

Again, it is alleged: All truth, wheresoever it is found is Gods, not ours,
as the Kings coin is current, though it be found in any impure channel.

Answer. All truth is Gods. True. But when the trut^ of God is turned into a
lie, and this lie put for Gods truth, the case is altered. Again, if a man
take the Kings coin, and beat it into a thin leaf, using it only to guild
over brass, or some other base mett^l, which he stamps with the Kings
counterfetted Image or superscription o^ the one side, and with the Image and
superscription on the Kings emulous enemy on the other side: what good subject
of the King will take it for curr^nt, and not rather appeach him for a Traitor,
that shall wittingly tender, or much more obtrude and avouch it for the Kings
coin, And only such coin is current in the Church of Rome. We know that Gods
coin, his pure silver and gold have they taken and melted in the Popes Test,
and have beaten it into thin leaves, for no other use, nor purpose, but only
to overlay their dross, or base metal, to make it the more current with the
world, one side being stamped with Christ's Image, and superscription, and with
Antichrists on the other: yet so, as the Pope is the only King, by whose
authority such coin is made current. Who knows not, that the Pope denies
authority to the Scripture in all things, saving in the matter of Christ's
Vicarship, or Peter's supremacy? This usurpation he can be content to father
upon the authority of Scripture, though the Scripture utterly disclaimes it.
And what is all this, but to guild over all those his base metals of false
Doctrines, that so they may pass for the more current catholic coin? Thus
Gods truth is used but as a bare pretense, to color over the Popes lies.

They allege again another comparison. Fundamental truth is like that
Maronaean wine, which if it be mixed with twenty times so much water, holds his
strength.

Answ. The comparison is pretty* if it did hold water. But what if into the
Maronaean wine, twenty times so much poison be put? What strength then will be
found in it, but that the drinker shall find it a potion of strong poison?
Again: Take the Maronaean wine, and extract the spirits out of it, and what is
it then, but a dead vappa? Such is that truth which is now in the Church of
Romes keeping, the nature, force and strength of it is quite abolished, by
their mixing of twenty times so much of poisoned human, or rather diabolical
Inventions with it; yea, they have in their Romish Limbeck, so extracted all
the life-spirits out of the pure wine of Gods word, as they have left it a
mere dead Vappa full of their dreggs and Lees. For have they not guelt the
Scriptures of their divine authority, and native sense of ye spirit of God, no
other spirit breathing in them, but such as blows from Roman E^lus his breast?

Another comparison: The Sepulcher of Christ was overwhelmed by the Pagans,
with earth and r^bbish, and more then so, over it they built a Temple to their
impure Venus; yet still in spite of malice, there was the Sepulcher of Christ;
and it is a ruled case of Papinian, that a sacred place loses not the
holiness with the demolished walls, no more does the Roman loose the claim of
a true visible Church, by her m^nifold and deplorable corruptions.

Answer. Indeed at Rome was once the true spiritual Temple of Christ, as once
the material in Jerusalem: but how the Church of Rome may be proved to be a
true visible Church, because once it was so, by this comparison, I see not. As
for Papinians ruled case, of a place once sacred, but now ruined; yet, because
once, still sacred: it may serve a simple Papist to feed his superstition
withal, to whom all sacred Relics are so relishable; but how a sound
Christian may edify his faith upon such a comparison, I cannot savor. True it
is, Jerusalem and Iudaea is still called the Holy Land; but is it therefore
still sacred, because so called, or because so adored of superstitious
Pilgrims? Bethel was once a Holy place, when Jacob erected there his Altar for
Gods worship: was it therefore holy still, when Ierob^ams golden Calfe was
erected there? Do not all sound Divines know, that places are not further, nor
longer sacred, then the use remains, whereupon at first they began to be
sacred? Put off thy shoes from thy feet, (said the Lord to Moses:) for the
place whereon thou stand is holy ground. Now what made it holy ground? Was
it not the Lords presence shadowed in the burning Bush? But after that the Lord
disappeared, and Moses was sent away, I never read any more of that place,
called sacred. Peter speaks indeed of the Holy Mount, wherein the Lord was
transfigured: but the holiness is referred to the Lords presence, for whose
sake it was said to be holy; and not for any holiness infused into it, or
affixed to it by any solemn Act of Consecration. And who will say, that
Jerusalem, once called the holy City, because there was the true Church of
God, is still the true Church of God; or that the place is still as sacred, as
ever it was, notwithstanding of the Lord accursed? But ye will say, the case
is otherwise now with Jerusalem; then with Rome.

For it follows: If the Church of Rome were once the spowse of Christ, and
her adulteries are known, yet the divorce is not sued one.

Answer. Is not the Divorce sued out? Perhaps not in a legal formality. But
what if this once spowse of Christ, not only play the open whore, but
professes her self to be the married wife of another man; what shall we say
in this case? Is this woman still the spowse of her former husband,
notwithstanding she is become another man's both whore and wife, though she has
not sued out a Legal Divorce? Thus stands the case with the Church of Rome.
Once she was Christ's spowse^ but now she is Antichrists spowse and strumpet.
But Antichrist, the Pope, is only AEnaea^ Sylvius 7. Co^me^^. de Council. Basil.
Christ's Vicar-bridegroome to his spowse on earth. What man going into a
strange Country leaves a Deputy husband with his wife, till his re^^rne,
giving him ^^ee power to perform unto her all the offi^es of a husband? As
Thomas de Corsellis spoke in the Council of Basil, about the Popes usurped
Vicarship over Christ's spowse: No body substitutes a Vicar in such ^^nt, as
that he will submit his spowse unto him. But what ^f Christ, the first husband,
come and challenge his ^powse again, seeing though he find her play the whore,
and married to another; yet this second marriage was before ever a Divorce was
sued out, and so a Nullity? ^ndeed the Lord is very merciful, even to receive
that ^powse, who has gone a whoring from him. As Ierem. ^.1. They say, if a
man put away his wife, and she become another man's* shall he return unto her
again? Shall not that Land be greatly polluted? But thou have played the Harlo^
with many lovers; yet return again to me says the Lord. But if the Divorce
be sued out, then you will say, she ceasseth to be a spowse to he^ former
husband. Well. And is not the divorce between the Church of Rome and Christ
yet sued out? Yes certainly, and that on both parties. First, on the Church of
Romes part. Has she not openly in the face of the Court of men and Angell^
taken out a writ of Divorce from Christ, and a license to be married to another
husband? When, say you* In the Council of Trent, say we. It is the duty and
property of Christ's spowse to hearken to her husbands voice only, and to honor
him. For ( Psalm. 45.11.) He is thy Lord, (speaking to his spowse, the Church,)
and worship thou him. And in the Transfiguration on the Mount, which was a type
of Christ in the state of glory in heaven, this voice came, This is my beloved
Son, hear him: Luke 9.35. Christ then in heaven must only be heard of his
spowse here on earth. But the Church of Rome, once Christ's spowse, in the
Council of Trent has taken out a bill of divorce, and has emancipated her
self wholly to the Pope as her husband, to hear him in all things, from that
time forwards. And this Divorce is ratified by the Bull of Pope Pius 4. super
forma iuramenti professionis Fidei, in the end of the Council: The words of
the Bull are: First, Apostolica^ et Ecclesiastic^^ Traditiones, reliquasque
Ecclesiae observationes et constitutiones, firmissime admitto et amplector.
Apostolic and Ecclesiastic Traditions, and other observations and
constitutions of the Church, I do most firmly admit and embrace. That Is for
Traditions. Then it is added: Item sacram Scripturam, i^xta eum sensum, quem
tenuit et tenet sancta Matter Ecclesia, cuius est iudicare de vero sensu, et
interpretatione sacr^rum Scripturarum admitto, etc. Item, I admit of the sacr^^
Scripture, according to that sense, which the Holy Mother Church has and does
hold, to whom it pertains to judge (...) the true sense and interpretation of
the sacred Scriptures, etc* But what Church is this, that takes upon her to be
the Judge and interpreter, to allow what sense she pleases to the Scriptures?
A little before* Credo v^^m Sancta^, Catholicam et Apostolicam Ecclesiam: I
believe one Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church. This is Matter Ecclesiae:
the Church our Mother. But which is she? Look a little after. Affirmo Sanct^m,
Catholicam et Apostolicam Romanam omnium Ecclesiarum Matrem, et Magistram
agnosco: I, affirm and acknowledge the Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Roman
Church to be the Mother, and Mistress of all Churches. Well, we have found out
who is the Mother and spowse; namely, the holy, Catholic Apostolic Roman
Church: But where is the Father, the Husband? Not far off; in the very next
words he stands. ^oupled and hand-fast with his wife: Romanoque Pontifici,
^eati Petri, Apostolorum Principi^ Successori, ac Jesus Chri^ti Vicario verum
obedientiam spondeo, ac iuro: And I (...) and swear true obedience to the
Bishop of Rome, the Successor of blessed Peter, and Prince of the Apostles,
and Vicar of Jesus Christ. Here is then the second marriage made up* And is
there any reservation of obedience or* ^ubiection left for Christ the former
husband? No ^urely^ all is betrothed absolutely to his Vicar, the se^ond
Husband. But yet we see not the Divorce quite ^ewed out, no public, express,
formal abr^nuncia^ion and abjuration of the former Husband. But read a ^ittle
further: Caetera item omnia a sacris Canonibus, Oe^umenicis Concilijs, ac
precipue a sacrosancta Tridentina Sy^odo tradita, definita, et declarata
indubitanter recipio, at^ue profiteor, simulque contraria omnia atque haereses
quas^unque ab Ecclesia damnatas et reiectas, et anathematiza^as, ego pariter
damno, reiicio, et anathematizo: hanc ^eram Catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo
salvus esse ^otest, quam in presenti sponte profiteor, et veraciter tene^,
^^dem integram et inviolatam vsque ad extremum vitae spitum constantissime (Deo
adiuvante) retinere et confiteri, ^^que a meis subditis, vel illis, quorum cura
ad me i^ munere (...) spectabit, teneri, deceri, et praedicari, quantum in me
erit, curaturum ego idem N. spendeo, (...), (...) iuro, sic me Deus adiuvet, et
haec sancta eius Evangelia* Item, all other things by the sacred Canons, and
general Councels, and chiefly by the sacro-sanct Council of Trent, delivered,
defined, and declared, I do undoubtedly receive and profess: and together
with all things contrary thereunto, and whatsoever Heresies condemned, and
rejected, and Anathematized of the Church, I in like manner condemn, reject,
and accurse: This true Catholic faith, without which none can be saved, which
here I freely profess, and truly hold, the same I will be careful most
constantly (by God^ help) to retain and confess entire, and inviolate until
my very last breath, and that also, as much is in me lies, it may be kept,
taught, and preached of my subjects, or those, whose Cure shall in that behalf
to me appertain, I the same N^ do promise, vow, and swear: so help me God,
and these (...) holy Evangels. Lo here: is not this a ^olemne Divorce sued out,
and as solemnly sworn to? Is not Christ here as solemnly renounced, as we in
our Baptism renounce the Devil and all his works? But not expressly. No^
Expressly all those doctrines are pronounced as Heresies, which are condemned
by Canons and Counsels, but chiefly by the sacrosanct Council of Trent. And
what are those Heresies? Are they not the very Doctrines o^ the Scriptures,
which we profess and maintain? These the Church of Rome renounceth, not
admitting or interpreting the Scriptures, but only according to the limited
sense of the Church of Rome, the maine Oracle whereof is the Pope. Why then
shall any man say, that the Divorce between the Church of Rome and Christ* is
not yet sued out?

Objection. But it is sued out but on the one side, who, without just cause on
Christ's part, has taken out an absolute and peremptory Divorce, choosing the
Pope for her only husband, whose only voice she will hearken unto. And the
Divorce being upon no just cause, and upon a false ground, it is of no ^orce,
and so ^etteth not, why the Church of Rome may not yet be Christ's spowse, if he
will claim her.

Answer. No? is it not of force, when publicly and ^olemnly sworn to in open
Court, inviolably to be ^ept? but yet if any will needs require a proof on
Christ's part, that he has also publicly given the Church of Rome a bill of
Divorce: let him but search (...) Gods Records. In the book of the Revelation,
does ^ot Christ openly d^clare the Church of Rome to be a ^^eat Whore, that
Whore of Babylon, Rev. 17. And in the ^. chapter, the bill of Divorce, and that
by a voice ^^inly heard from heaven, saying, Come out of her my peo^^^, that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive (...) of her plagues? Is
not here a plain bill of Divorce, ^ven by Christ to the Church of Rome, that
wh^re, that ^^^rituall Babylon, (she that says, I am no widow: being ^^rried
to another man) since Christ now separates his ^^ne people, his own Spowse out
of Babylon, Come out (...) my people? And this divorce on Christ's part came
(...) of force, upon the Council of Trent, when now the church of Rome having
long played the Wh^re, yet (...) her second marriage to another husband was
so^^nely concluded, and Christ excluded. Now therefore ^^rist gives her the
bill of divorce also, in pronounc^^g her a strumpet, and separating his spowse
from her, (...) hence forth to have no communion with Her. that need be said
more to prove this Divorce, and that (...) both sides? Is there any Minister of
the Church, of ^ngland, that while he affirms the Church of Rome, to (...) a
true Church, or a true visible Church, or the Spowse of ^^rist: yet will or
dare say, that the Church of Rome is (...) that Whore, that Babylon, mentioned
in the Revela^^^n? I dare say, there is none, if together with lear^^ng, he
have more love of the truth, then of the world (...) his heart. Yea, even he
that says, The Church of Rome (...) true visible Church; will confess
withal, that She is Babylon, and the Antichristian Church. Now if she be
Babylon, Christ ownes her no longer for his Spouse: (...) out of her my people.

But here follows a distinction: As it is a (...) Church, we have not
detrected to ^old communi^^ with a (...) Babylon, we can have nothing to do
with it.

Answ. I must here crave pardon, that this distinct^^on took not place, till a
day after the fair: for we ha^^ newly packt away Babylon for a naughty pack
(here confessed by those, who yet affirm she is a true visib^^ Church;) and
Christ has disclaimed her for his spo^^^ bidding his Spowse to come from her.
And so, I say this distinction, comes too late, after the sentence of (...)
divorce is given on both sides. Therefore, as whom (...) does join together,
let no man separate: so, whom God ^^^parateth, let no man join together. When
Christ ^aith Come out of Babylon my people: Let not us say, we (...) not to
hold communion with the Church of Rome. Ye^ (...) this case, no distinction
will serve to join us together again in one communion. Herein we must not
(...) to the voice of any man, be he never to Reverend, ^^fore and against the
voice of Christ: But Christ (...) peremptorily, Come out of her my people, and
that upon a severe penalty, or peril, least ye be partakers of (...) sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues: Let us there^fore in this case follow
Pythagoras his lesson to his scholars, not to look our face in the glass by
the (...) light, but by the Sunshine: Thus if we be of Chr^^^ spowse, we will
hear his voice alone, saying, Come of Babylon my people; and no voice of man,
saying to (...) contrary. By what distinction (I pray you) can an (...) and
chaste Matron sa^ue her credit, by keeping company, having communion with a
notorious strumpet? Will say, As she is a woman, a creat^^, of the same flesh,
and (...) as bearing the Image of God, I detre^^ not to hold com^^^ with her:
but as she is a whore, I can have nothing to do (...) her? What a confused
distinction were this? Would (...).

(...) in the next place, that charitable profession of (...) Luther is
alleged, who says Luther in Epist. ad 2. Pl^b. de Anabapt. cit. a Cremer^
defalsa relig. I^theran.
(...). Read Doct. Field of the Church, book. 3. chap. 47. Let but him in that
place be the vmpire.
(...) (...) breast is the spirit, sense, authority, sum, and all. And
allowing no other Scripture but the vulgar Latin, a language unknown to the
vulgar; what is it, but a mere shell? They have the Creeds, but the shell
only, while they deny the faith. Yea they profess the Catholic faith, but
they have only the shell of it, to wit, the historical faith, common to them
with the very Divell^: the kernel they have not, to wit, the true affiance in
Gods mercies apprehended, and Christ's merits imputed to justification. This
faith the Council of Trent accurseth. So that in that whole Council ye shall
nor find in the Counsels own word once, Credere in Deum, to believe in God:
least they should admit of the saving faith, whereby only a man can say, Credo
in Deum, I believe in God: wherea^ the historical faith can lay only, Cred^
De^, or Deum, I believe God; as the Divel^s believe and trembl^^ (...) Thus
have they no more but the shell of faith, and so the shell of the Creed. They
have the Sacraments. What say I? The Sacraments? No surely* among all their
seven Sacraments have they any more, but the bare broken shell of Baptism
only? For the sole efficacy and (...) of it they ^ang upon the Priests
Intention, and not upon the spirit of God, and his word, and true faith in the
baptized. As for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they have utterly abolished
it, and turned it into m^ere Accidents without substance, joined with an
imaginary Idol, wrought by virtue of the Priests Intention. Thus we see, that
there is no more left of the Church of Rome, but an empty cracked shell; and
therefore it is now no more either a true Church, or a true, or truly visible
Church.

But to conclude this discourse, to the aforesaid allegations, a vouching the
Church of Rome for a true, or true visible Church, is added an Apologeticall
advertisement to the Reader; beginning, Nothing can be so said, or done, but
may be ill taken. Now God forbid* But is it well said or done, to affirm that
the Church of Rome is yet a true, or a true visible Church (...) the Reverend
Author judge indifferently, having well weighed the former reasons, whether we
do ill or no, in taking this his saying ill; or whether we had not reason to
have expected an ingenious Palinody, (...) Augustin^ like Retractation, rather
then such an Apology; which whether it be rather to be pitied, then any
uncharitableness in the Reader, in taking such a saying ill, let judicious
charity it self judge. Nor need we stretch the saying, to imply, that the
Church of Rome is a true believing Church. Suffice it we except against any
being, yea or visibility of a true Church in the Synagogue of Rome. But the
Reverend Author referres Visible, (...) outward Profession; to some essential
Principles of Christianity, neither of them to sound^ (...). Grant the
Romanists to be (...), and we cannot deny them the name of (...) Church.

Answer. Now, under (...) Profession a sufficient mark of visibility for a
Church? This is none of those marks, which the Church of England takes notice
of a Church by (...), shewe^* Again, the Scripture calls (...) Synagogue of
Satan, who call themselves Jews* (...) The Samaritan^s sometimes professed
themselves to be of the Jews Religion, (...) Antiq. 11. c^ 8.
having their Temple n^are the Mount Garisim. They had their Priests also, who
(...) how they should fear the Lord (...) Lord: (...). 17.28.
but withal (...) the manner of the Nations. 33.
Did they not then (...) the worship of the Lord? Surely they did (...) were
they therefore a visible Church? Nay, says the Scripture there* They neither
fear God, etc. So the Church of Rome professes to fear the Lord, 34.
but (...) like to the Nations; so that it will follow, she neither fears
God, nor does after his laws, etc.

Object. But she holds some essential Principles of Christianity. Answ. So
do the (...) this day, they hold the Old Testament. Object* But withal they
deny Christ expressly. Answ. So do the Papists implicitly, and by their own
express doctrines of Trent have no more communion with Christ, then the Jews
have. Nay Papists do expressly abjure the doctrine of Christ, as we showed
before in the Popes own Bull: how do they then any more hold Christ, then the
Jews.? But, Grant the Romanists to be but Christians, how corrupt soever, and
we cannot deny them the name of the Church. But why should we grant them that,
which never a Papist is able to demonstrate to us, or yet undoubtedly to
persuade himself of? He is not certain of the Priests Intention in his
Baptism, no nor yet of the Bishops Intention, by whom that Priest was
ordained; no nor of that other Bishops Intention, by whom the Bishop was
ordained Priest. Therefore no Papist can be sure, whether he be a Christian, or
no. And why then should we grant them to be Christians? Although for the bare
name of Christians, and of a Church, we will not much stand with them, so they
do not hereupon, nor any for them* incroach and challenge the being and
reality, yea or the very visibility of a true Church. No no^ to say, That we
are all the same Church by virtue of our outward vocation, whosoever all the
world over worship Jesus Christ the only Son of God, the Savior of the world,
and profess the same common Creed: Nor, That which Rome holds with us, makes
it a Church: Nor, That Rome holds the foundation directly: Nor, That because
those things were affirmed twenty years ago, therefore now they must be true:
nor, that if any be otherwise minded, he shall do more wrong to his cause,
then to his Adversary: nor, that sundry of our i^dicious Divines were of this
mind: nor, In that she holds the founda^i^n directly, she is a true Church.

For first, does the Church of Rome worshipp Jesus Christ, who for Christ
worship the Beast, and his Image, bearing his mark? Secondly, do they hold
the same Creed, that deny the Faith without which they cannot say, the first
word of the Creed, I believe in God* Thirdly, what foundation do they hold
directly with us For other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid
Jesus Christ. We showed before, that they have nothing of Christ, but the
shell, the shadow, the Pope is the kernel if any. Nay do they hold more of
Christ directly, then the very society of Devils do: Yea, or so much as they?
The Devils hold that Jesus Christ is God and man; they believe, and tremble.
They Devils believe not, that Christ's body can be made of a piece of bread, he
knows it well enough to be but one of his own iuggling tricks, which his
Romish Disciples learned of him? The Devils dare not deny, that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh. Yea, he openly confesses him to be the Son of God: I know
thee who thou art, even the Holy one of God Do the Romanists so much? No, they
are of that Spirit of Antichrist, that denies that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh. How? He that makes Christ of a Piece of bread, denies him to be come
of the Virgin Mary. If Christ have a body made of bread, and yet this body the
same, that was borne of the Virgin Mary, then it follows directly, that with
the Manichees they allow Christ no other, but a mere imaginary fantastical
body, sliding down from heaven, as Dianae^ Image that came from Jupiter. For
is not that a mere phantasme, which they worship in the bread? A body natural
it is not, which wants both substance, quantity, dimensions, flesh, blood, and
bone, and all other properties, which a man's natural body ought to have.
Therefore in directly saying, This is Christ's body, they deny Christ's true
natural body, which he received from the blessed Virgin, and so deny
directly, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. How do they then directly
hold the foundation? And yet this is not simply to hold the foundation, (...)
profess that God is man: for then the society of Devils might claim to be a
Church: but directly to hold Jesus Christ so to be come in the flesh, as
therein to suffer and satisfy for our Salvation, becoming our Christ, our
Jesus, Redeeming us from our sins, by imputing his merits to us* that our
sins might not be imputed to us, which were imputed to him, by whose stripes
we are healed, by whose Righteousness imputed we are perfectly justified in the
sight of God. Does the Church of Rome directly hold this foundation? Nothing
less. Yea she directly, not by consequence only, directly (I say) she denies
and destroys this foundation. How, or where? In the Council of Trent, Sess.
6. Canon. 10. Si quis dix^rit homines per ipsam Christi iustitiam form^liter*
iust^s esse: anathema sit. If any shall say, that men are formerly just by the
righteousness of Christ; let him be accursed. Is not this a direct and flatt
express denial of the foundation? And in the 11 Canon, If any shall say, that
men are justified by the sol^ imputation of Christ's Righteousness* or by sole
^emission of sins, otherwise then See the 7. chapter of the same Session.
by inhere^t righteousness in us obtained thereby; or also, that the grace
whereby we are justified, is only the favor of God: let him be aco^rsed. What
more direct denial of the foundation? Is not this the foundation, That Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners? And how? Who his own self bare
our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sins, 1 Pet.
2.24.
should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed. Nay, says the
Council of Trent, directly, We are justified by our inherent righteousness, and
so our stripes are healed, Sess. 6. cap. 7. Can 10.11.
and not by the righteousness of Christ simply imputed. Therefore come out of
her my people, least ye be partakers of her sins.

Fourthly, Let not antiquity in the holding of an opinion, prescribe against
Truth, Opinions ancient, O that Saint Ambrose words alleged by our Reverend
Author* might here take place: Nullus pudor est ad meliora transire: then I
hope he will be otherwise minded, then to say He that demeth the Church of Rome
to be a true Church, or a true visible Church, shall (...) to his cause, then
to his adversary. Then he will no longer (...) the judgment of Consuetudo sine
veritate ^etustas err^ris est. Quod verissimu^ illud antiquissimum. Tertull.
particular person (...) wherein our Reverend Mother Church of England* has in
her public doctrine resolved the contrary, Among who^ there are, who say more
to prove the Church of Rome no Church, then any true Church as the Reverend
Bishop of Chichester in his direction to know the true Church, the Deane of
Gloucester once, Doctor F^^ld Of the Church, book. 3 c. 47. Dr: Whitakers and
others, famous and learned of ^ur Church.
while she denies to the Church of Rome, the true marks of a visible Church,
those very marks which the Church of Rome her self disclaimeth. So shall our
Divine Seneca partake also of great S. Augustines praise, while by an humble
and ingenuous Retractation, he shall both purge away the st^ine, and put a more
glorious luster to his most sweet, pious, and, for their kind, unparalleled
works.

And for me, a poor, unworthy Minister, I hope his meek and sweet spirit,
having well waighed my reasons, and pitied my weaknesses, will be pleased to
excuse me of any transportation of zeal, unless herein I have exceeded the
bounds, in presuming so far upon the patience of such a Reverend Antistes of
our Church. But I trust he will not impute this to any arrogance of spirit,
when it shall appear, it is to vindicate Christ's truth and glory, against the
Synagogue of the proud Antichrist*

Thus having showed the Church of Rome, or rather the Synagogue of Antichrist
to be no true Church, nor a true or truly visible Church, nor a Church, but a
Sea* whose doctrines, as waters, are turned all into the blood of a dead man,
so that every living creature therein dye^h, no Salvation, no life to be found
in Babylon: proceed we to the next Vial.

The Third Vial powered out. V. 4. And the third Angel poured out his vial upon
the Rivers, and fountains of waters, and they became blood; And I heard the
Angel of the waters say* Thou art righteous O Lord, which art, and wast* and
shall be, because thou have judged thus. For they shed the blood of Saints and
Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. And I
heard another out of the Altar say, even so, Lord God Almighty, true and
righteous are thy judgments.
All Rivers (says the Preacher) come from the (...), and thither return.
Rivers then, sent out from the Sea, Eccles. 1.7.
do here signify all Romes Emissaries, See King James his Paraphrase.
as all Seminary Priests and Jesuits, who, as Rivers, do convey and diffuse
the Sea-waters of Romes doctrines to all Countries, and parts of the earth. And
this Vial holds the like proportion to the third Trumpet, as the second Vial
did to the second Trumpet. For the third part of the sea blood; Chap. 8.11.
here all: and for the the third part of the Rivers imbittered; here all are
turned into blood; for the same reason alleged in the former Vial. Only here
seems to be a little difference between the Seas blood, and this of the
Rivers: for that is as the blood of a dead man; this blood only, without other
addition. Yet, at the best, blood it is. Here then are meant not only all
those, that have written large Commentaries upon the Council of Trent, as
Vega, Soto, Catharinus, Andradius, Bellarmine, etc. who with their
Philosophycall, and Aristotelian Divinity, and Schoole-nicities, and quaint
distinctions, have labored to give a fairer luster to the black gore-blood
thereof, and to propine it to the simple and subtle both, in Babylons golden
cup, as Doctors ministering poisoned pills gilded over: but (as I said) all
Priests and Jesuits, (whom King James calls the last brood of the Devil) who
by their active motion, as Rivers, (the voluminous works of their Rabbis,
being but as great vnwealdy ponds, and standing lakes, in comparison) run more
curr^ntly through the world. And in this one particular, note how the Council
of Trent it self has turned the Rivers of Romes doctrine, I mean her
writers, which before the Council were but as it were a third part blood, now
all into blood; namely, by their Index Expurgatorius, cancelling and letting
out what purer waters they find in their writings (as might ^e showed by many
famous instances) so that now all their Rivers must run nothing but blood.

And these may well be resembled to Rivers, for sundry respect^* For first, as
all Rivers have their original from, and final course to the Sea: for all
Romish Emissaries must divulge no other doctrine, but such as they derive from
the Sea of Trents doctrines^ and their course must tend to the enriching of the
Sea of Rome. Secondly, as Rivers (like Fama malum, quo non aliud velocius
vll^^m. Mobilitate viget, viresque acquirit eundo. Parva me^u prim^, mox sese
attollit in auras. Ingrediturque so^o, and caput inter nubila condit. Virgil.
AEne.
Fame) are small in the beginning, but running along, grow greater and greater,
till they power their full channells into the Sea: so all Jesuits, though at
first they arise like poor brooks, yet by their long current they come to
return full streams of commodities to the Sea of Rome. Thirdly, as Rivers are
of an incessant, and indefatigable motion, Labituret labetur in omne volubilis
aevum: so are the most industrious, active, and unwearied Jesuits. Fourthly,
Rivers are full of windings: so Jesuits (like the Serpent) are full sly of
insinuations, by means whereof (as Rivers) they traverse the greater tract of
ground the more easily. Fifthly, Rivers usually run along the fartest soyles,
and fairest meadows: and do not Jesuits so? Sixthly, Rivers in their spring
are but weak, but being suffered to run along, by their strong and swift
current, bear down all obstacles that come in their way; so Jesuits at their
first arrival, when the Sluices or Sinque ports are not well stopped, are but
weak in the beginning, but in tract of time they grow impetuous, and
intolerable. Seventhly, Rivers cannot brook the abundance of rain-waters from
heaven, but being troubled therewith, by the stirring of their own mud, they
discontentedly swell over their banks, and so cause inundations on every side:
No more can these Rivers of Rome brook the plentiful showers of the heavenly
rain of the Gospel, but their muddy malice being troubled therewith, the more
it raineth, the more they swell, and no banks can contain or content them,
but over they will, to bring a deluge over all. In a word, Rivers are pleasant,
have a gentle gliding motion; but if a man will commit his small vessel to the
guidance and convoy of the stream, it will ingu^^h him at length into the
all-devouring Ocean. And such is the pleasant and plausible current of
Jesuitical persuasions, and fair motions, that if a man will pin his soul
upon his sleeue, he will carry it hand smooth into the bottomless gulf of the
infernal Lake.

But herein unlike to Rivers. For first, Rivers, though they come from the Sea,
yet passing through the narrow veins, and secret pores of the earth, they put
off all their brackishnesse: but these, as they come from a Sea of blood, so
they run blood. Secondly, Rivers refresh all places, and the weary travailour
especially: but these are bainfull wheresoever they come, and so far from
refreshing the weary Pilgrim, that is bound for the heavenly Jerusalem, that
they poison the soul of him that drinks of them, sending him down to the
Mare mortuum, the Lake of Sodom. Thirdly, Rivers are many ways commodious to
the parts they run by, importing necessaries, and exporting superfluities:
but these are no way commodious, only bringing in false wares, or Babells
toys, for which they carry away the riches of the land, and that which is most
precious of all, poor seduced souls of men. In a word, Revel. 18^13.
Rivers breed and feed plenty of good fish for the use of men: but these are
full of netts to catch, and bainfull intoxicating baits to kill all the fish,
that come within their Channel.

The sum is; the pouring out of this third Vial, is to discover the deadly
and dangerous doctrines, which (of all other) Romes Emissaries, Jesuits do
broch and vent in all Countries. Yea the confirmation of this Ignati^n, or
Igniferian Order, the Devils last brood, (as King James calls them) by Pope
Paul 3. in the time of the Council of Trent, does plainly point them out, for
those special Rivers here, which derive their bloody waters immedatly from
that bloody sea. Their doctrines are bloody, in a twofold respect. First, in
that they cause and procure infinite blood-sheds in the world, not sparing the
sacred blood of Kings and Princes, and of all Gods Saints and servants.
Secondly, in a spiritual regard, by killing the souls of those, that drink
in these bloody waters, in stead of the pure fountain water of the word of God.
And this is specially that blood here meant. It is no less mortiferous, then
that of the Sea, in the former Vial, whereof every living soul therein,
dies. For what other doctrines do the Jesuits bring, but such as are
agreeable to those of Trent; all blood? Though they smooth it over never so
artificially, yet all is but Babylons cup of poison, and of all abominations,
only ministered and served in, in glistering gold of gloseing glosses.

For this cause, is added here an acknowledgement of Gods justice, upon those
that drink of this blood, to wit, all Papists. Thou are righteous O Lord, etc.
because thou have judged thus; for they shed the blood of Saints and Prophets,
and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. God is still the
same righteous God, that ever he was, and will be to the end, notwithstanding
the prevalent impotent spirit of all-daring Atheism, wherewith the world is
now toward the end possessed; wherein is verified that of Saint Peter, 2 Pet.
3.3. etc. When shall come scoffers, walking after their own Iusts, saying,
where is the promise of his coming? Well, howsoever the daft world little
discern or dream of it, the righteous God is still a pouring out the Vialls
of his wrath upon the vessels of wrath, fitted to destruction. Mark it well
Gods righteousness is here magnified, for revenging* the innocent blood of his
Saints, cruelly and prodigally spilt by their bloody persecuters, those of the
Church of Rome mainely, which being made drunk with the blood of the Saints*
and of the Martyrs of Jesus, as Chapter 17: therefore they have blood given
them to drink, for they are worthy. So righteous is God* to recomp^nse blood
to the bloody. As Q^eene Tomyris, having in a bloody field, vanquished Cyrus,
Hero dot. in ^^ lib. 1.
and slain him, she chopped off his head, and putting it into a Vessel, full of
blood, (for Cyrus had formerly slain her son) she said, Now satiate and
glutt thy self with blood, which, living, thou did so much chirst after. The
like may the spowse of Christ say to Rome and her followers, who for their
cruel massacring and marryring her innocent sons, have now blood in bowls,
yea whole Rivers, given them to drink, for they are worthy.

But he that will discern the fearful plague upon all Papists, must with
David go into the sanctuary of the Lord* he must be an Angel from the Altar,
he must have a spiritual eye to discern it. For does any Papist so much as
once dream, that he is a drinker of blood; That all his religion, and the
practice of it, all his adoring of, or before his gaye pictures and images, all
his invocating of his bead-rowle of Saints, all the Masses he hears, all his
or her turning over their devoute beads, all their Ave mari^s* and Agnus D^^es;
all their shrifts, confessions, and absolutions, all their whipping chere in
Lent, when they let themselves blood, all their confidence in the Popes
pardon^, all their falling down at the tinkling of the bell, when their little
God almighty is solemnly carried abroad, all their trust in selfe-merits, and
distrust in Gods mercyes, as they are enjoined, and a rabble of infinite more
pretty knacks, so pleasing and plausible to flesh and blood, which at the
ripest age has not overgrowne the state of little children, being altogether
affected with all such baby play, as their mother Babell has invented for her
children: that all this should be a drinking of blood? Yes. So says the spirit
of God here. That which they esteem their only bliss, is their only have.
These Doctrines which Romes fishes drink in like water, yea as wine, is no
other then filthy corrupt gore-blood. Oh fearful condition I Well may such be
reckoned among one of the seven last plagues poured out of the Vials of the
wrath of God. That being properly a plague, which tends to the perdition of the
soul, different from other afflictions, which may amend their patients. For
how can false and corrupt doctrines ever bring a man to reformation, and
repentance, when they corrupt his very intellectualls, where by his moralls
should be guided? But it is in vain to inculcate this in the ears of dead
fishes, which living in the flesh, are so spiritually dead, as they can never
be so persuaded, that they are those, to whom God has gipen blood to drink.

No? will they not believe it? But here is a reason added, forcible enough to
persuade even common sense: for they are worthy? For they have shed the blood
of Saints and Prophets. See King James his Paraphrase.
They* Who? who, but the Church of Rome? Who, but Popish persecuters? who, but
Babylon, drunk with the blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus?
Chap. 17.6.
But how is this appliable to the Papists here in England? Did this generation
(at least wise) ever shed the blood of Martyrs and Saints? If no, how is God
righteous in giving them blood to drink? How are they worthy? The last Martyrs
of Jesus, that suffered in England, were they not in Queen Maryes days? And
is not that generation of persecutors quite extinct? How then can the hands of
Papists in these days, be said to be imbrued in the blood of the Saint^? But
what if their hearts be imbrued in it, at least by assent, affection,
approbation, allowance of the cruelty of their forefathers, who had a hand in
slaying of them* But perhaps our Papists will say in this case, as the Jews in
the like, If we had (...) in the days of our Fathers; we^ would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. Yet even hereupon Christ
tells them* wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves, tha^ ye are the children
of them, which killed the Prophets, fill ye up then the measur^ of your
Fathers. But these Jews built and garnish^d (...) Sepulchers of those
Prophets, whom their forefathers had slain; a sign, that they honored the
memory of the Prophets. And who seem more to honor the ancient holy Martyrs,
not only in erecting, and adorning their Sepulchers and Shrines, yea and
adoring of them too; then all Papists do? In this kind the Papists do exceed
the Jews infinitely. How then may it be said of them, fill ye up then the
measure of your Fathers? Or, how may this Vial be poured on Papists as a
vengeance, that they should be found worthy to drink such blood? At least
wise, our present English Papists will say, they are not the offspring of
those, whose hands were imbrued in the blood of Martyrs. Yea, they will deny
those to be Martyrs of Christ, who were put to death in Queen Mary's days.
Here are two things to be answered* we will answer the last first. It is
shameless impudency to deny those to be Martyrs of Christ, who were then put
to death for religion. And for what other religion, then that same, for which
the Old Martyrs were persecuted and slain? We will challenge all Papists in
the world, that they are not able to show any difference in all the maine
grounds of religion, between these lat^er, and those ancienter Martyrs. Which
till they shall do, let them not envy the honorable name of Martyrs of
Christ, to such as were slain by the purple Whore. To the former we answer,
that perhaps many Papists in England were not the very natural offspring of
those Fathers, who persecuted the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days. Yet I dare be
bold to say* that all the Papists now in England are the spiritual offspring
at least of those persecuters. Do they not imitate them in the same Romish
faith, (yea and that Iesui^ed too, which was then but in the bud) which those
persecuters then embraced? And did not Christ call the Jews, sons of the
Devil, because they imitated his works? But yet happily our English Papists
will say, if we had lived in the days of our forefathers, we would not have
put these men to death. But let such take heed they speak it not in the
hearing of their Ghostly ^ather; least he impose upon them some sharper
penance, and stricter discipline, for their want of Romish zeal, and
Jesuitical spirit. No, nor yet for so saying, let them look for more credit
to be given them of us, then Christ gave to the Jews; who told them plainly,
that for all their protestation, and pretense to the contrary, yet they were
guilty of the blood of all those Prophets, whom their forefathers had killed.
That upon You (says he) may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth,
Mat. 23.35.
from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, son of
Barachia^, whom Ye slew between the Temple and the Altar. Whom Ye slew? Did
these Jews (to whom Christ now spoke) slay Abel and Zacharias, who were killed
so many generations past? 2 Chronicles. 2.22. See Calvin on Matthew. 23.35.
Was not this Zacharias slain in King Io^^ his reign? how then did these
Jews slay him, and the rest of the old Prophets, even unto Abel? Surely
because they repented not of the cruel actions and affections of their
forefathers, who slew those Prophets, who retained and nourished the same
spirit of cruelty and disaffection toward the true Prophets: witness their
carriage toward Christ himself the Prince of Prophets. How did they entreat,
intertaine him? Did they not in fine put him to death? And if they did this to
the green tree, was it likely they would have spared the dry, and those
ancient Prophets, who spoke of Christ, and whom, for witnessing the truth,
their forefathers killed, as these did Christ, for the same cause? And did the
A^ostles and Disciples of Christ speed any better at their hands? How say these
Jews then, If we had lived in the days of our forefathers, we would not have
been partakers with them, (no* in no sort) in the blood of the Prophets? A
likely matter indeed, that these murderers would have spared the old Prophets,
who were so beastly cruel to the innocent Lamb, and Son of God.

Let this example of the Jews (who justly brought themselves under the guilt
of all the inn^^ent blo^^^shed from the beginning of the world, by their
imitation of their forefathers cruelty* by following them in their wicked
faith, and affections, and hatred of the truth) admonish all our English
Papists, and mind them whose sons they be, that shed the blood of the
Martyrs; for being their sons, at least (and that in the worst kind) by
spiritual propagation of the false and Antichristian faith, and by the
imitation of their inveterate hatred to the truth of the Gospel, and to those
that preach and profess it, they become thereby guilty of all the blood of
those Martyrs, who were slain for the self same faith and truth, which we of
the Church of England at this day profess and avow: and consequently, ye are
found to be worthy to drink the most bainfull blood of Romes deadly doctrines,
(the fearfullest plague, that ever could befall you) to your eternal
perdition, without speedy repentance, and conversion to the truth. Nay (which
my pen trembles to set down) Papists are found to be copartners with the
Jews, in crucifying even of Christ himself, whom they so persecute in his
truth, and in his members* for which cause (says the royal Paraphrast) they
are partners with Judas in the death of Christ. Read for this purpose the 11.
chapter of this book, together with King James his Paraphrase upon it. Nor can
any Papist, though never so full of subtle shifts* shift this Scripture off
from himself, and all those of the Church of Rome. There is nothing more
clear, (no, not the Sun when it shines brightest in the Summer Meridian) then
that the Pope of Rome is that Beast Rev. 13. and the Church of Rome that
Babylon, drunk with the blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus,
Chapter 17: all Jesuitical sophistry cannot avoid it. And if Papists durst but
look upon this Scripture, it would make their hair stand on end, to see in
what a deplored state they are, (...) upon them mainly (the Beast-marked, his
Image-worshippers) all these seven Vialls, one in the neck of another, pour
forth their plagu^s, never ceassing, till they have fulfilled the wrath of God
in the final and fatal ruin and desolation of that whole Synagogue of Rome,
which now approaches, and hastneth on apace.

It is added: And I heard another out of the Altar say, Even so, Lord God
Almighty, true and righteous are thy iudgement^. These word^ are a confirmation
of the former. This voice is but inculcated, and ingeminated, to rowse up the
Infidel and Atheistical world to take notice of Gods truth and
righteousness; of his truth, concerning all those Prophecies in his word
denouncing destruction to the enemies of his Church, which we have in a good
part seen, and for the rest shall be no less certainly in their due time
accomplished: also, of his divine, exact, impartial justice, by recompensing,
leg^ Talionis, like for like, like punishments and judgments for like sins;
like spiritual thirst after the blood of the Saints, who follow the truth to
their salvation, with like spiritual drink of the bainfull blood of
pestilentiall doctrines, and lies, which all Papists drink in, to their
damnation.

But why, Another from the Altar? Surely I cannot conceive the reason hereof,
unless it be this. We all know what infinite havoc the Church of Rome has of
a long time, and daily does make of the blood of Christ, upon their Popish
Altar. Have they not even stopped and dried up that fountain of his blood, set
open for Israel and Judah, for sin and for uncleanness? have they not robbed
the poor people of the Sacramental Cup, which should be a fresh memorial,
and effectual application of that sin purging blood to every faithful
receiver? Have they not hereby evacuated that covenant of the New Testament,
which was ratified and sealed with the blood of Christ, without which is no
remission? Have they not thus torn away the seal from the Testament of grace?
Have they not in stead thereof erected a new unbloody sacrifice of a
fantastical enchanted body* which they notwithstanding mo^^ blasphemously and
senselesly call their Propitiatory sacrifice for the quick (...), and a (...)
all sore^? Do they not thus account the blood of the covenant, which should
sanctify them, an unholy thing? Do they not thus trample under foot the
Son of God* And that even then, when they would seem most of all to elevate
him in their fained Host upon their Altar? Their very Alltar (as holy, as they
would make it (...) be) ^o deeply stained with the guilt of Christ's blood spil^
upon it. Therefore here is one sent from the Altar of God (even from Jesus
Christ, our only Al^ar, on whom we offer up the Calves of our lips) who
mightily magnifieth the truth and justice of God^ in giving spiritual deadly
blood to them to drink, who (have upon their Idoll-Altar taken away and
disanulled that only Propitiatory blood of Christ. which he has left to his
Church, for every faithful man to drink spiritually by faith, to the
consolation of his conscience, the confirmation of his faith, and the salvation
of his soul. Thus just and true is God, every way, at every turn, to meet
with his enemies, and to pay them home with their own coin.

The Fourth Vial powered out.
Our Countryman M. Brightman in his Commentary, coming to this fourth vial,
says, Hactenus ^^c ipsa temp^ra, in quibus praes^^tes v^^mus. Ad ^an^ enim
^^que (...) nostra s^cula process^runt* reliqu^ quatuor sunt nobis expectand^,
(...) diff^ci^^^r est indagatio* Hitherto (says he) come these t^mes, wherein
we n^w live. For even unto this Vial have our ages reached the other four
behind (...) to expect, whereof (...) disquisition will be more difficult. So
he. Yet himself not only attempts the ope^ing of the subsequent vials, but
^^imates and excites (...) faithful Ministers to employ their best pains and
studies therein* as in a work most beho^^full for the Church of God in these
l^st times.

But that he should say, he lived not to see this fourth Vial powered out,
(...) somewhat strange. Was it, because living (...) the Cataracts of N^bis, ^^
could not hear the noise of it? Or, because his eye was so near the object,
as he could the worse discern it? Or, as Paul's eyes at his conversion were so
(...) with the glorious light, that for a time his sight was wholly suspended?
So happily Mr. Brightmans eyes, overcome with the Suns bright beams shining so
full upon him, whereon this fourth Vial is powered, could no^ discern what it
meant* or transported with the beauty and glory thereof (as Peter was with that
excellent glory in the Mount) in saying, Thus far are our times come: Luke* 9*
wist not what he said. And (as it is usual) we can better and more safely
behold the Sun wi^h ou^ backs toward it, in a vessel of clear settled
water, then by daring to look or sta^e upon that goodly glorious body with
opposite and open ^ace* And many times for want of due consideration in making
a right use of the resplendent prosperity of things present, either by too much
doting upon it, or by unkindly envying of it, or by some discontented humor in
a fickle affectation of change, ^e come to loose the due estimate, and so the
true fruit^on of them. But to our fourth Vial.

Indeed, I must acknowledge, that for a few days I was not a little puzzeled,
and amazed about the ^eaning of this Vial poured out upon the Sun. I could
find no satisfaction in many Interpreters, which I had seen; but after much
contending with the only Author and Revealer of all secrets, by prayer, I began
with an Eagle eye to pierce (...) this Sun, and the my (...) of it, even to a
strong assurance. Afterward this (...) resolution gathered the more strength,
being seconded by some learned Authors, whom I had not seen, Mr. Patricke
Fo^^es.
(...) consulted with before, whose judgment concu^ring, gave me comfort, that
my opinion was not singular. But that which most of all sealed my warran^, was
the royal Paraphrast King James of happy memory, whose excellent judgment
upon this Vial seems to me a clear ray and beam of this Sun; and a^
whose sacred and luminous torch we may be bold to light our candle. Only I have
adventured to point out the pouring out of this Vial to the particular times,
which this surviving generation has in a great part been so happy, is to see
it accomplished; King James wrote his Paraphrase upon* the Revelation, before
he was twenty years of age.
and in which time also the Royal Paraphrast did write his peerless
exposition.

And the fourth Angel poured forth his Vial upon the Sun, and power was
given him to scorch men with f^re; and men were scorched with great heat, and
blasphemed the name of God, which has power over these plagues, and they
repented not to give him glory. I doubted a long time, how the Sun here might
be meant of the Gospel of Christ, because thereupon the Vial is powered, and
we find in the rest, that every Vial poures out a plague on the object where
it lights: as, the first, upon the earth; the second, upon the Sea; the
third, upon the Rivers, and so in the rest. But I find the Sun to be exempt
from the like plague, in sundry respects. First, because the Sun is a
heavenly body, but the plagues are all powered out upon the earth: ver: 1.
Secondly, it suffices, that the Sun is hereby made an instrument of Gods
wrath, upon the wicked; whereupon it is added here: And power was given unto
him to scorch men with fire. Thirdly, the Sun scorcheth most in his highest
elevation, when it shines clearest, and is least eclipsed with clouds, or the
like. Now in all these respects, the Sun is an Emblem and resemblance of
Christ, the Mal. 4.2.
Sun of righteousness, displaying his beams and rays in the preaching of
the Gospel, which the clearer and brighter it shines, the more it scorcheth
those, that either openly oppose it, or privily seek to suppr^sse it, or set
their face against it: while he has healing under his wings for all them,
that wisely and timely betake themselves under the shady refreshing of Gods
Mercy-seat. Besides, in the time of the fifth Trumpet we read, that the smoke
out of the bottomless Pit did darken the Sun and Air. Chap. 9.^.
Where, by the Sun is clearly meant the light of the Gospel, obscured by
Papal Egyptian Mysts. Nor is it unusual in Scripture to compare the
knowledge of Gods word to the Sun, Mic. 3.6. Therefore night shall be unto
you, that ye shall not have a vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that ye
shall not divine, and the Sun shall go down over the Prophe^s, and the day
shall be dark over them. Meaning, that the knowledge* and light of Gods word
should be res^rained, which in Amos 8:11: is called, a famine of the word of
God. So Esaias 30.26: speaking of the restitution of the Church, specially in the
time of the Gospel, says, The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be seuenfold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and
heals the stroke of their wound. Here by this sevenfold brightness of the
Sun, is plainly meant the great light and prosperity of the Church, which
comes by the preaching of the Gospel. So also Cant. 6.9. the Church is
likened to the Sun, for her excellent brightness. And Psalm. 19, the Prophet
under the glorious lights of heaven, but especially the Sun, in his admirable
motion, and glorious light, and comfortable, by inlightening all places of the
world, nothing hid from the heat thereof; does set forth the glory of the
Gospel, universally shining over the earth and heaven, as both the Apostle
applies it ( Romans 10* 18*) and the Prophet himself in the 2. part of the Psa.
at the 7. verse, and so forwards. So that no place is left for doubting, that
by the po^^ing out of this Vial upon the Sun, to which power was given to
scortch men with fire, is meant nothing else, but a special time and state of
the Church of Christ, wherein the Gospel should flourish in a most resplendent
brightness, even as the Sun at high noone in the height of summer, bringing
forth also an outward state of prosperity, peace and plenty, as attendants upon
it, or as a plentiful harvest follows the Summer-sunne.

But where, or when (will some say) began this Vial to be poured out? Surely,
if we begin at the first Vial, and so come along downward to this, it will
(as the star that pointed the Wise men to Christ, the Sun of righteousness,
gloriously risen upon our Horizon) lead us directly not only to the time, but
in a manner, to the very place, where we have seen this verified. Although we
may not go about strictly and precisely to restrain it to any particular
point of time, or place, since this Vial is poured upon the Sun, which
signifies the general happy estate of the Church since the ^ime of that
eximious Reformation, by the preaching of the Gospel. Notwithstanding, if we
can pitch upon and point out any special place and time, where, and when this
has been most eminently and completely verefied, we may boldly conclude, that
there, and then began this Vial to be poured out upon the Sun, according to
our former general note of direction. Indeed the Sun of the Gospel, when
first it began to display his more glorious beams from under the du^kie clouds
of Popery, as in the beginning of the Reformation (though still in all ages
before Luther, even in the thickest Egyptian Sun-darkening foggs, there was
some light in Goshen, which the Stars, Gods witnesses and Ministers,
ministered unto it) it was as the Morning Sun, not shining so clearly at the
first, through the interposition of vaporous errors, and not fully dispelled,
but for a good space waded under some c^owds, now breaking forth, as in King
^^ward 6. his reign; now eclipsed again, and withdrawing his light, Sangui^
Martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
as in Queen Mary's reign; only the fires of the Martyrs yielding light to
Gods hidden people, during that sad Eclipse: but no sooner was this clowd
blown over, Nubecula orat, and pertransibat.
the blessed and glorious Queen Elizabeth succeeding; but now eftsoone began
the pouring out of this Vial to manifest it self. For the first Vial
discovers Romes grievous and noisome sores, beginning at Luther: the second
Vial shows the Sea of Romes doctrines to be all become as the blood of a dead
man, which fell out upon the Council of Trent, and not before: The third
shows all their writers, and brochers of Romes doctrines, as Rivers flowing
from that Sea, to run all with blood; this was after the Council of Trent:
and now comes the fourth Vial poured upon the Sun, which falls pat upon the
blessed reign of Queen Elizabeth, when now the Sun of the Gospel begins to
be mounted toward his Summer Meridian, his direct beams growing more and more
poten^, dispelling the clouds of Popish superstition, growing withal so hot,
as they which bear the Beasts mark, are no less impatient of it, then beasts
are of the Suns heat in the height of summer. And when the Popes Bulls came
bellowing against her, his (...) here in England, as so many Ince^diaries,
laboring not only to kindle an unkindly division between the Head and
Members, the Prince and her subjects, but often times to attempt her sacred
Person: the good Queen was forced by Act of Parliament to make strong and
wholesome Laws against such a bloody brood, while they grew more and more mad
at the bright sunshine of the Gospel in her glorious and prosperous reign.
In that time it was, when King James of happy memory writing his noble
Paraphrase, wherein he shows this Sun in the fourth Vial to be meant of the
flourishing state of the Gospel, did as it were with his finger point to that
glorious state of the Church, wherein (...) Princely pair of peerlesse
Potentates did reign. And it is added, And men were scortched with great heat,
and blasphemed the name of God, which has power over these Plagues. Now in
what age or state of the Church has the whole hierarchy of Rome been so
nettled and stung, so inflamed and fired with envy and rage, then in the
blessed reign of that Queen, where in with exceeding heart-burning they saw
the Gospe^l so gloriously to flourish and shine, and withal both the Church
and state interchangeably and equally partaking of those admirable blessings,
which began to be so multiplied upon this land from that time forward. Yea what
clowd, either of any discomfiture, or of the least dishonor, amidst such
numerous and potent enemies of hers, did once so much as shadow the glorious
beauty of her royal Crown, or of Christ's cause maintained by her?
Notwithstanding all opposition, the Sun hol^s on his glorious shining to the
amazement of the world, to the impatient torment of the Suns enemies. How did
their impotent malice vent it self in sundry attempts both open and secret,
abroad and at home, by sea, and by land, against her sacred person and state,
to have dimmed and darkened, yea quite to have extinguished the glory of all,
as if they would Giant-like have pulled the Sun from his sphere? But through
his power and protection, that gives power to this Sun to shine, and has
power over these Plagues, all their proud attempts proved but as arrows shot
against the Sun, and retorted back again upon their own heads.

They also blaspheme the name of God, who causes his blessed Sun so powerfully
to sl^ine. Did they not say upon that miraculous discomfiture of the Spanish
invincible Armado in 88, that God was now turned a Lutheran* Was not this to
blaspheme the name of God? Yea besides, what vile and ignominious aspersions
did they cast upon the sacred person and illustrious name of that Excellent
Queen, and her Religion; calling her at the best an Heretic, and her
religion heresy* Was not thi^ also a blaspheming o^ the name of God, of his
truth, of his Gospel, of his anointed Vicegerent, and whatsoever thing sacred
Gods name is stamped upon?

It is added, And they repented not to give him glory: even him, whose
miraculous power they could not but see and acknowledge, not only in
preserving, but in prospering, that renowned Queen throughout her whole happy
Reign, in all her brave and princely designs for the maintenance of the
Gospel, and the professors of it, at home and abroad, for rooting out of
Popery and Idolatry, (but especially of Seminaryes and Jesuits, those
ringleaders and incendiaries) as neither meet to roost in the sunshine, but to
be cast out to the (...) and ba^ts, those birds of darkness, as Esaias prophesied
of those Idols, Esa, 2.20: nor yet safe to be harbored in the pure Church of
God, to provoke the eyes of his glory, whose iealosie is there most inflamed,
where Dagon dare perk up by God's Ark. For the eyes of the Lord run to and
fro throughout the whole earth, 2 Chronicles. 16.9
to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward
him. How then could her religious reign but become the object of envy to all
hers and Gods enemies? How could it but prosper on every side, while her maine
care and study was, with an upright, and vnhalting heart, to maintain the two
maine pillars of every well settled Christian state, to wit Edw. 6* at his
Corona^ion being presented with 3. swords, told them, those were not enough he
must have one more: whereat they marvailing, he told the^ he meant the holy
Bible, the sword of Gods Spirit, without which, quoth he, we are nothing, nor
can do any thing. Remains. Vis vnita f^rtior. To turn the hearts of the
Fathers to the Children, and the hearts of the Children to the Fathers lest I
come, and smite the earth with a curse, Mal. 4. If God be with us, who can be
against us, To. 8.
true Re^igion, and the Laws of the Kingdom, being the strong sinews, which
not only combine and fasten us to Gods protection and favor, but unite the
Head and Members, Prince and people, in one entire body, whereby the whole
becomes invincible? This made her enemies even madd withal; when they saw,
joined with her z^ale, and her semper eadem for religion, her wisdom in a
grave and wise Counsel, like that of 1. King. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc.
Salomons, who for all his wisdom, Hen. 8. would use to wish that when his
Counselors came to sit in Council, they would commit simulation, and
dissimulation and partiality, to the Porters lodge. Remains. Like I^^l^oes
Judges M^n of courage, fearing God, dealing uprightly, and ha^ing
covetousness: Exo. 18. Like David's Worthies, and I^hoshaphats men of valor.
yet had his Kingdom governed* by his sage and old Counselors, whose
faithful and mature advise, if his son Rehoboam had followed, he had not
hastily lost the greatest part of his kingdom: When they saw her equity in her
learned and religious Judges, whom not their moneys in buying and selling of
Justice, but their better merits advanced to those sacred seats of judgment:
when they saw her masculine magnanimity in her captains and martial men both
for Land and Sea-service, being persons picked of purpose for their worth,
valor, long experience, religion, and loyalty to God, their Prince and
Country: When they saw, that all their enchantments, and Jesuitical plotts
delibe^ated upon in their set and solemn Conclaues, whereby they would have
all the world swayed and steered, and which cannot work, but by Serpentine
insinuations into impotent and As Iezabel, and Athaliah.
feminine passions, could not once work or impose upon her masculine spirit,
but that it was constantly guided by the Pole-starre of right judgment and
wisdom in all her affairs,; when they saw they could not by all their
subtle wiles work any unkindly division or disaffection between her Majesty
and her subjects, but that they contended in a sweet emulation, Hoc Reges hab^^
magnificum et in g^^s, nulla quod ^ap^^^d^es, prodessemiseris, supplices fido
lare, protegere S^nec. Traged. 7.
her Majesty in a truly majestic, and motherly affection to her loyal
children, they in a sincere and pious obsequiousness, as well to love, as to
obey her: when they saw they could not by any magic spells, so work upon the
time of that virgin-raigne, as to beget some sprightfull all-daring spark,
Esto mihi solu^ arbiter verum, iure, ac nomine ^egio. (...) de Rege, lib. 4.
Aliquid hi^ laxa^? totum ami^tis E^ est imp^ran^: ratio, vt non aliter (...),
quam si vni reddatur Tacit. ^. Annal Communis custodia Principatus, neminem
vnum magnum facere. Ar^st. 5. Polit. Se^per periculosu^ privati hominis nomen
supra (imo iuxta) Principis attolli. Tacit.
who like some Phaeton, or fresh water Pilot, durst aspire to undertake the
sole guidance of the Chariot of the Sun, or Stern of State, to the
hazarding, or certain hastening of the combustion, or shipwreck of all in one
bottom: When they saw they could not by any purchase under hand for toleration
of their execrable curse-causing Idols, restrain or darken the beams of that
Sun shining upon all her government: when they saw they could not with all
their Indian gold, be^ot the more noble English brains, and loyal hearts of
her most indeered and entrusted Attendants, Pau^i, Reges, non R^gna colunt.
Coli^ hic Reges, cal^et vt omnes: Perdaique aliquos, nullumque levet. Tantum vt
noceat, cupi^. esse potens. Senec. Traged. 10. S^are omnes debemus, tanquam in
orb aliquo Reip. qui cum iam versatur, eam diligere partem debemus, ad quaem
nos idius vtilit^s, salusque converterit. Cu. pro Plan^. semper officio
fungitur, vtilitati hominu^ consulens, and societati. Cic. Offic. lib. 3.
I^psius.

The hearts and riches of the people are the Kings greatest treasure. King
James in his speech 1609.


but that they preferred the honor of their loyalty to their Prince and
Country, before their private ends, were they never so profitable, if withal
dishonest: when they saw, that her Majesty had a richer Mine of gold and silver
in England, caused by the influence of her sun-like gracious religious and
righteous government, in the bowels of her freeborn English subjects true
hearts and affections, while in one Parliament time they would sweat her more
subsidiary treasure, then all the American slaves can force from the Indian
Mines to supply their gold-thirsty Master in a whole voyage: when they saw it
was in vain to go about to persuade her religious heart to admit of Hen. 3.
King of England, his usual practice.
any Papal dispensation from all those sacred oaths, which she had solemnly
taken for the maintenance of the Laws of her Kingdom, the only bond to secure
it from invasion: when they saw, that they could not work the noble frame of
her government to the mould and conformity of their Mystery of Iniquity, but
that all her counsels and actions were fairly and squarely carried, Ne quid
insidiose, ne quid simulate, ne quid falla^^ter. Cic. Offic 3. I^psius Polic.
li. 4. Nam per fraudem and dolum regna evertuntur. Aristot. Polit. lib 5.
Presertim, si publicus vsus, salusque suadea^; quae semper cum Principis vs^,
ac s^lute co^iuncta. Communis vtilitatis derelictio contra naturam est, non
solum rationem. Lipsius. ibid.
the Mysteries of State standing most sound, while upon most opposite terms
with the Mystery of Iniquity: When they saw, they could not cause a jar in
that sweet harmony between her Nero stulte verebor; esse cum faciam, D^os?
Sen. Hoc plu^ verere, quod licet tantum tibi. N. Inertis est, nescire quod
liceat sibi. Sen. Id facere l^u^ est, quod decet, non quod licet. N. Ferrum
tuetur Principem: se. Melius ^ides.
Prerogative royal, and the fundamental Laws of her Realm, but that still
Violenta nunquam imperi^ r^tinentur diu: moderata dura^t. Sen. Troas.
they went hand in hand together, to the contentment of all her friends, but
terror of her enemies, which (^s her enemies knew full well) if they should
stand upon terms of opposition, would hurt and hinder each other; Ne. D^cut
tinuri Casarem. Se. A^ melius dilig^. Ne. Iussisque nostris pareant Se. Iusta
impera.
the Prerogative Royal being like a tall gallant ship, which cannot sail,
without plenty of waters, nor against the wind and tide, but with extreme
difficulty and toil of the Master or his Mate, and their Mariners, forced to
fetch about for this point, and that point, Et errat long^ mea quidem
sententia, Qui imperiu^ credat graviu^, aut stabili^^esse: vi quod fit quam
illud quod benficio adiungitur. Terent. Hea^ton.
and yet hardly make any way; good Laws established being as the Seas, wherein
the Prerogative Royal may sail at pleasure, and that most steddily, while
through a just Ballasse, or balance it passes as well lowly under, Po^entia
medio^riter exercita, omnia ^^aesita conservat. Casaris dictum apud Dion, li 43
Contra, Qui impudenter, et passim in omnibus potentia abutitur, is neque veram
benevolentiam, ^^que firmam securitatem invenit. Ibid. Lipsius. lib. 4.
as loftily above water, so that going a long with the wind and tide of the
Laws, it is wafted so much the more both sweetly and swiftly by the easy and
gentle motion of the Pilots hand, being thus every way helped, no way hindered
by the current of the stream, while the Laws run in the full tide of good
execution; whereas, if it will make head against the stream of Laws, and the
kindly gayle of good affections, breathing forth from the Laws vnviolated, it
can make but small speed, and that to the great inco^brance and toil of the
steerer and his Mariners about him: when (I say) they saw all this, and much
more, as so many beams streaming from that Gospell-sun whereon in her reign
this Vial began more eminently and remarkably to be poured? No marvail, if such
power were given to this Sun to scortch men with fire; no marvel, If the
envious man did fume and rage, and though they saw with open eyes the mighty
hand of Divine protection and blessing upon her sacred Person and, State though
the light of the Gospel shined never so clear, round about, yet had they not
the grace to repent of all their Antichristian heresies, gross Idolatry, their
often and miraculously frustrated treasons and trecheryes, frauds, and forces,
to give God the glory. But as the Egyptian Magitians, though they confessed of
the fourth miracle, and the third plague of lice, Digitus Dei est hic; This is
the finger of God: And as Julian the Apostate, pulling the mortal dart out of
his bowels, Exo. 8.9.
though therein he saw and felt the hand of Divine revenge, yet he uttered his
confession thereof with the voice of blasphemy, Vicisti Galilaee: and so
breathed out his blasphemous spirit in a desperate impenitency: So here the
Magitian Apostates, or spiritual Egyptian Priests, though they could no^ but
confess the power of God in his perpetual protecting of that royal
Personage, and prospering her in all her affairs of Statee, which they had
vainly sought so many ways to defeat and deface: to this day have they
obstinatly persisted in their blasphemy and impenitency. Then which, what can
be a more fearful sign and mark of a reprobate mind, and of a conscience
ceared and sealed up to condemnation, when men wilfully resist the manifest and
known truth? Even as Iannes and lambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the Truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith. But
they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest unto all men,
as theirs also was. 2. Tim. 3.8.9.

The Fifth Vial powered out. And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the
Throne of the Beast, and his Kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed
their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their
pains, and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.
We have beheld in the foregoing Vial, the Sunn^ mounted to a high pitch,
which at the decease of the Royal Lady of ever blessed memory* seemed to be
come to the summer solstice, entering the sign of Cancer: and now behold, in
the pouring out of the Fifth Vial, the sun as it were in his retrograde* coming
Southward, wherein he redoubleth his heat and luster (never any age producing
such a Noble company of reap^^s, learned divines and Preachers, under the
auspicious influence of such a Royal Mecenas, as the succeeding K. James, of
happy memory) having prepared, and now presenting a fair and fruitful harvest
to Him, who is like to the Son of Man, coming in with a golden Crown, and a
sharp sickle, and sitting upon a white cloud, of a peaceable government, to
whom an Angel out of the Temple cries, Thrust in thy sickle, and reap, Chap.
14.14, 15.
for the time is come for thee to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe.
Thus is our Sun continued without setting, from that Peerlesse Queen, to a
Peerlesse King, in whose peaceable reign this Fifth Vial comes to be poured
out, and that so eminently and remarkably, as there is no place left of making
the least scruple of it.

And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Throne of the Beast: some
turn it, upon the (...)* (...) the vulgar Latin, super sed^^^ Besti^* It
mat^ered not much, whether we translated S^a^, or Throne, so as we understand
it right, and not, as some, to ^ake the City of Rome it self to be meant by
the sea^ of the B^ast, and so the darkening of it, to signifi^ the utter
demolishing and destroying of it. But first, darkening is not emphaticall, or
significant enough to import a final downfall. A state may be much darkened,
and yet ^ubsist still. The darkening of Christ's Kingdom and Gospel* of the
Sun and Moon (mentioned chapter 9.^) by the smoke out of the bottomless
pit, did no^ i^ port the utter extinguishing o^ them, (...) (blessed be God) we
have seen in the former Vial, and still do see the glory of the Sun to
break forth in a greater brightness, then ever i^ did before in any age of
the Church. Again, to take Throne or Seat here, to b^e literally meant of the
City of Rome it self, where indeed the Beast ^itteth, were to offer some
violence to the whole tenure of this Chapter, which admits not of any
literal interpretation rigidly, being wholly allegorical and mystical: and
in those things especially, which either cannot admit of any other
interpretation, then mystical* or else, where, though the literal may in some
sort be received, yet the spiritual (if any) is to be preferr^d. Besides, the
Pope may have his throne, his ^eat in any other City, then Rome, as once he
had for many years a^ Avignon in France, where the Pope kept his Court: so
that by Seat or Throne, here, we must necessarily understand that usurped
sovereignty and supremacy, which the Pope has assumed, and erected over all
imperial and regal thrones. See the Royal Pa^aphrast K. James.
This is that throne or seat, which by ye pouring out of the 5. Vial, is
darkened. And, that seat signifies Dominion or Rule, is agreeable to the
Scripture phrase else where, as Chapter 18.7. where Babylon says, I sit a
Queen, etc. As much to say, as I reign and rule as a Queen. And even Platina
uses this Phrase familiarly, in the lives of the Popes, saying, such a Pope
sat so long, that is, reigned as Pope so long; so that the seat or throne here
has a larger extent, then to be confined to the walls of the City of Rome,
since it comprehends the whole unlimited and boundless domination of the
Pope, which he has stretched not only over the whole earth, or Empires
thereof, but over hell it self. And that the Popes usurped power is meant
hereby, the next words evince; for upon the pouring out of this Vial upon the
seat of the Beast, his Kingdom is darkened. But the sense is clear enough.

Now, ^lthough in all ages (which the Reader must still understand, while we
point out the most specall time of the pouring out of each Vial) there have
not wanted witnesses pouring out their Vialls in some measure upon the Throne
of the Beast, to wit, by detecting the Popes usurped Supremacy, and so
convincing him to be the Beast, the Antichrist, whereof if any desire a
particular view, I refer him to Catalogus testium veritatis, to Philip
Morney, L. du Plessis, his Mysterium iniquitatis, to Henry Bullinger in his
Preface to his learned Exposition of the Revelation, and others: yet we have
with our eyes seen this fifth Vial poured out upon the Throne of the Beast
most effectually, and apparently in the time and reign of King James of happy
memory. What a clowd of witnesses did that time produce, of learned Divines,
who both by their writings and preachings have darkened the Beasts Throne,
proving and convincing by evident and invincible arguments, the Pope to be a
most egregious usurping Tyrant, that Man of sin, that Son of perdition,
that Antichrist, that Beast? And was it a marvel to see such a Clowd, when
there was such a Sun, whose influence might raise it up? Was it a wonder to
see so many brave Champions marching in the field, bidding battle, and laying
battery to the Beasts Throne, when they had such a royal General to lead
them, and as it were to give the first and bravest on^e^? Yea, who (...), may
challenge to be the Angel, who poured out this Vial. And who so fit to
encounter such a highly elevated, but Mystic Throne, as he, in whom the
po^ency of a great Monarch, and the pregnancy of a most judicious Divine, might
well stand in emulation, and strive for Mastery? And what a golden Vial^ of hot
coals has he poured out upon the Beasts Throne? How has his royal quill,
struck through* dimmed and darkened the Papal Kingdom? And this, no^ only by
his excellent and peerlesse Par^phrase of this whole book, but especially (and
that which mainly butteth upon the Beasts Throne) in that most renowned
Premonition; TO ALL MOST MIGH^Y MONARCHS, KINGS* F^^E PRINCES, AND STATES OF
CHRISTENDOM, JAMES BY THE GRACE OF GOD, etc. Therein every man may see this
fifth Vial punctually poured out upon the Usurped Throne of the Papacy. Had it
been but a declaration of the state of Antichrist, by some private Person,
though a learned Divine, published for the use of Gods Church in general, it
might well have claimed a great part in this Vial; but being such a
Premonition, bearing the name of such a mighty Prince; yea so judicious and
learned, that many ages, no nor any can show the like; and dedicated even to
all the mighty Monarchs, and Princes of Christendom whether members of the
Church of Rome, and subject to the Beasts Throne, or otherwise Free* What a
wonderful dash must such a royal pen impact upon all the external
simple-seducing, and tender-eyes-dazeling Pomp of Pontifician or Papal
usurpation? And that, not only if we look upon the front of the Premonition,
being imbellished with the most illustrious Names (as the Emperor Rodulph) and
Titles of all Christian Monarchs and Kings, enough to quell the Beast, or to
make him look pale with a fearful jealousy of his Throne: but when we look
within this goodly Garden of Princes independent jurisdiction, but only from
God, and his word, and observe how it is both beau^ified and fortified with
Palisadoes, to debar the Beast from breaking in upon it, and so from cropping
the strong fragrant Basil, signifies King.
Basil growing therein, or from trampling it down with their proud Paw: When we
do but weigh those excellent arguments, and demonstrations, which his Majesty
has most divinly concluded from sacred Scriptures, Counsels, authentic
Records and Histories ancient and modern, proving the Popes usurpation in it
self to be most Antichristian, and the very Character and Mark of the Beast,
as the Apostle has described him, 2 Thessalonians: 2. Oh that all Potentates and
Prin^^s would but once take heart of grace to read and seriously ruminate upon
that royal Premontion! But as yet it is hid from their eyes. Nevertheless,
when the veil shall be taken from their eyes, (as shortly it shall) to see the
Mystery of iniquity unmasked, and all the Popes power but as a painting upon
the wall, then shall they not only discover the Beasts Throne to be (as we
already see it) darkened: but shall be principal Agents and Instruments
themselves utterly to demolish the Beasts throne, hating the Whore, and making
her naked, eating her flesh, and burning it with fire, Chapter 17.16: through
very indignation, that they had been so long bewitched and besotted with her
sorceries, and made drunk with the Cup of her abominations. For God has put
in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their Kingdom unto
the Beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled. Chapter 17.17.

In the mean time, how mightily is the Beasts throne darkened upon the pouring
out of this Angels Vial? How is the luster and splendour thereof waxed pale?
who, reading this princely premonition (together with other learned Divines
writings in that reign especially) begins not at least to disrepute this
glittering Throne? Who does not discern it now to be a very Puff, or
Mushrome, growing from the fatt warm soil of the earth (the place whence the
Beast comes, chapt. 13.) and that in the night time of dark ignorance, and
sleepy security, and now like the Thistle in Lebanon, to strout it self over
the Cedars in Lebanon, the Kings and Princes of the earth, as the only Lord
Paramont, and God over all?

And is it a wonder then, that all they, who bear the Beasts mark, and adore
his Image, who so much admire and dote upon his glistering Throne, are even
madd at the pouring out of this Vial, so as they gnaw their tongues for pain,
and with that dog Becanus, and that distorted Tortus, do belch out blasphemies
against the God of heaven, and his sacred Lieutenants here on earth? They gnaw
their tongues for very spi^e, that they cannot with any probable, or colorable
arguments uphold the dignity of the Beasts throne, against so clear evidence
of his Antichristian usurpation. And this we may well deem to be one reason,
that now of late days all Ie^uiticall penns have been so still and quiet; For
they are so beaten from all those thickets, wherein the Beast was wont to
harbor, and that of late especially by that Royal huntsman, as that they have
no more left, but their tongues to gnaw upon now, all the painting upon the
Whoores face, and about the Beasts throne, is so marred by the touch of this
fift^ Vials fervor poured upon them, as that her old rivelled wrinkles, and
the rotten posts of the varnished Throne are displayed to all, that have but
their eyes open, or in their head. And no doubt, but the while they do in
their ^earts blaspheme the God of heaven. And that for two reasons here
annexed: 1. because of their pains. 2. of their sores. We heard of their sores
upon the pouring out of the first Vial, sores in doctrine, and sores in
manners; and now again their sores are mentioned, and that for two reasons. 1.
importing, that their old sores still stick upon them, and are not all this
while healed: 2. That they come to be more and more discovered, to the greater
exasperation of their pain. But yet, for all this, though they be mightily
convinced of their desperately diseased estate, though they see and feel the
glory of the Beasts Throne, so darkened, that uneath it is like to recover its
former estimation with the world, but is declining, and drawing near to the
utter downfall: yet (says the spirit) they repented not of their deeds. O
Jewish obstinacy, upon whom the wrath of God is come ^o the uttermost! O
Egyptian, and Pharaonicall obduration, that having seen and felt the Divine
hand, so heavy upon you in so many sore passed plagues, and the evidence of
Gods word and Angels darkning all your glory: yet you will persist in your
impudency, and so fill up the measure of your rebellions, vntil^ the remnant of
the Vials of the last and utmost plagues of G^ds wrath be poured, and even
emptied out upon you.

The Sixth Vial powered out. Ver. 12. And the sixth Angel powered out his Vial
upon the great River Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up, that the
way of the Kings of the East might be prepared.

Ver. 13. And I saw three unclean Spirits, like Froggs, come out of the mouth
of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet.

Ver. 14. For they are the Spirits of Devils, working miracles, which go forth
unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of the great day of God Almighty.

Ver. 15. Behold I come as a Thief in the night, Blessed is he that watches,
and keeps his garments, least he walk naked, and they see his shame.

Ver. 16. And he gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrew
tongue, Armageddon.


Having found the former Vialls so punctually fulfill. I^k in our forepassed
times, and that also in such an exquisite successiue order, as has been
showed; this present sixth Vial does challenge the next turn to be poured out.
Not that the former Vialls are now ceased, and so call in, and give way to
this. For all these Vialls are so poured out, as, like to Ioshuaes spear
stret^hed forth, Josh. 8.^6.
they are not called in again, nor cease their several consequent effects,
till the very last of them be poured out, which shall end in the utter ^uine
and confusion of Antichrist, with all his Adherents, and partakers. For still
the noisome and grievous sores (the issue of the first Vial) are upon all
those, that have the ^east^ Mark, and worship his image, as incurable: still
the maine Sea of Romes docttines continues altogether as the blood of a dead
man: still, the Rivers issuing from the same, of the like nature, blood: still,
the Sun of the Gospel (maugre all his malignant opposites) shines
gloriously (blessed be God, who has power over these plagues) scortching the
Adversaries with fire of spiteful envy, though the light thereof will not
lead them to repentance: still, the fifth vial, darkening the throne and
Kingdom of the Beast, is in force, and shall never with all their Index
Expurgatorius be expunged; and now follows in order the pouring out of the
sixth Vial, ratifiyng the former five, and preparing the way for the seventh,
when all the plagues in a full confluence shall be accomplished.

In the words of this Vial we may observe four general branches: 1. A
preparation to Babylons ruin: v. 1^. 2. An Agency for the mustering together
of Babylons forces to fight the great battle, ver. 13.14. Thirdly, Christ's
watchword to his soldiers, ver. 15. Fourthly, the place where the maine
battle is fought, ver. 16.

First, for the Preparatiue to Babylons destruction; ver. 12. And the sixth
Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River Euphrates, and the water
thereof dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared.

In these words two things seem very obscure, and full of difficulty: as 1.
the great River Euphrates* 2. the Kings of the East; But for the first, it is
well known, that the ancient heathen City Babylon, situate between Assyria
and Chald^a, so famous in Scripture for Captiving of Gods people, was strongly
fortified by that great and goodly River Euphrates, by means whereof it was
impregnable. For neither had Darius won it, but by the horrid and unnatural
stratagem of (...), one of his Nobles: Nor Cyrus, the first vanquish^^ of it,
but by a rare devise of draining the River above by sundry artificial sluices,
giving his men in charge, whom he left before the City, that when they should
(...) to be decreased, and four (...) they should (...) take the opportunity,
wade over, and suddenly (...) Babylon in her deep security, which fell out
accordingly. But here is not an artificial draining, but some miraculous
drying up of the great River Euphrates* by divine hand, as Ier. 50.38. Or as it
was in the (...) and Jordan, whose waters, miraculously driven, back yielded a
dry passage to Gods people on foot. The meaning here is, that the maine defense
and fortification of the Mystical Babylon, upon the pouring out of this sixth
Vial* shall be so miraculously exhausted* as that a free and easy way is made
for her fatal and final destruction. Euphrates being also a word, that
signifies a strong fortification. And what has b^ne this spiritual Babylons
supporter all this while? What but profound ignorance? But now this deep River
is in a manner dried up. The light of the Gospel has so unmasked the whole
Mystery of iniquity, that a man may see the bottom of it. All their arguments,
which formerly were very current* and plausible with the credulous world, are
now at a N^nplus. They are now forced to put up their pipes, to silence their
pen^s (as we see of late all hushed on a sudden, as it were miraculously, all
amute) betaking themselves to their pikes and sword^* as we shall see by and by
in the next branch of this Vial. If we should go about to branch Euphrates
here into the several derivations, as either from the Hebrew, signifying to
fructify, or from the Gr^^ke* either from (...), to exhilarate, or (...), or
(...), to speak or argue well, all would meet again in the channel of
ignorance, which being dried up, now all their Profit and pleasure, all their
subtilt^e of Arguments fall away. But we need not seek after artificial
derivations of Euphrates here, as Cyrus once did, for the taking of Babylon. If
the Reader will have but a little patience, he shall perhaps see Euphrates
quite dried (...) when once he has (...), and concocted the other concurring
circumstances of this ^ial. For this great mystical River being miraculously
dried up* mak^ way for the Kings of the East. Who are those? Some understand,
that Rome shall be ruined by Eastern Kings* some, that hereby (...) the
conversion of ^he Jews, and Ma^umetans, inhabiting most in the East. And to
make the easter way to it, they dispatch Rome it self out of the way, in the
fifth Vial, as we touched before. So that they understand here the very
litteral^ River Euphrates of the old Babylon* which (say they) shall be
miraculously dried up, to give the Jews pa^^age to return to their Jerusalem,
and there profess Christ, and Christian Religion. But, first, this sorts not
with the fifth Vial, the Beasts throne and Kingdom still standing, though
darkened. Secondly, neither does this exposition, being too litterall* bear
Analogy to the uniform tenor of these Vialls, all of them having especially a
mystical interpretation. Nor is the City of Rome only, but the whole
Pontifician hierarchy, here comprised within the compass of Euphrates. So that
the sense is, the whole Kingdom of the Beast, upon this sixth Vial; is drawing
on apace to the utter ruin, and that by the Kings of the East, who are
mystically to be understood. The old Babylon was destroyed sometimes by the
Kings of the East, as the Persians and Assyrians; sometimes by the Kings of the
West, as the Chaldeans; in (...), by the Kings of the North, as Alexander of
Macedon* But here the Kings of the East, who shall conquer Mystical Babylon,
are all those, wh^^ (Chapter 17.14.) being on the Lambs side, are described to
be the called, and chosen, and faithful. These are Kings, so styled in
Scripture, as Chapter 1.6. and elsewhere. And they are called Kings of the East
mystically, in (...) Christ the Sun of righteousness, arising unto them with
healing under his wings. Mal. 4. As Esaias also speaks of Christ, and his Church.
Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee. For behold the darkness shall cover the ^arth, and gross darkness the
people* (...) the Lord shall rise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon
thee* and the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to ^he brightness of
thy rising. Esaias 60.1, 2, 3. This Prophecy (no doubt) did point to the birth of
Christ, that Sun of righteousness arising, and very likely also to those
sages o^ wisemen of the East, the first fruits, and type of the
Gentile-Church, who came to worship him, and who by their Prince-like
deportment, and the rich gifts which they presented to Christ, did easily show
themselves to be no less then great men, yea Princes or Kings; which is very
agreeable to Esays Prophecy, The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to
the brightness of thy rising. But howsoever, sure I am, that by faith in
Christ, they are spiritually Kings of the East, as being sons of the
resurrection, who are compared to the Morning light, Pro. 4.1^.
that shines more and more until the perfect day. Thus as there were Kings of
the East to entertain Christ at his first coming in humility: so (...) a way
is prepared for the Kings of the East, the elect o^ God, to meet Christ at his
coming in Majesty, as in the pouring out of the seventh Vial, wherein the
Lord shall abolish that wicked one with the brightness of his coming. And it
was an Angel ascending from the East, who had the seal of the living God,
wherewith he sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads, Chap. 7.^, 3.

Indeed the Beast-marked, and those that worship his Image, are not a little
superstitions in observing of the East; they cannot pray, but with (...) the
East, as if they were Jews, (...) of the Messiah* (...) worshipping the Sin
toward the ^^st* But what have the children of light to do with superstitious
rites of the children of darkness?

Again* in the second place* by the Kings of the East, we may understand all
those earthly Kings* who formerly being made drunk with the Whores Cup* C^^.
17.13.17.
and having their eyes dazeled, yea blinded with the golden luster of it, had
given their power, strength and Kingdom unto the Beast: but now, Gods word and
will being to be fulfilled, and the time of their Babylonian confederacy and
captivity expired, they having their eyes enlightened with the Sunne-beams of
the Gospel, are now admitted into the number of the Kings of the East, Gods
called, and chosen, and faithful, with them to hate the Whore, and make her
desolate, and naked* to eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Chap. 17* 16.

But for the general Conversion of the Jews, so c^^dibly expected of many,
wh^^soever ^ither probable or demonstratiue Arguments may be brought for it
from Scripture, yet this place seems not so pregnant for it Nor do I love to
controvert it* (...) est ut (...) ^randum est vt fiat. I^ is indeed generally
held both of ancient and modern Divines Saint Augustine says, Aug. Qu. Euang.
Qu. 33. To 4.
Erit quandoque aperta v^cati^ I^d^^tum i^ salute Evangelij. But whether in
loci^ sui^ (...), or (...) he determines not. This I am persuaded of, tha^
what, or howsoever their calling shall be, if it shall come i^ upon the
fulness of the Gentiles, su^ely it is more then probable that it is very
near at hand, forasmuch as the Gentiles seem to become to the f^ll height, to
a high water, if not rather beginning to veil, and (...)* For men of all sort^
will not for all the preaching and pressing of the Gospel, stir one foot
from their habitual and predominant reigning sins, to increase the Tyd^ with
the flood of repentance toward God, being read^ rather with the backsliding
st^eame of Apostasy, to fall back again into the (...) and (...) Sea of
Marab, and of all rebellion against God.

But in a word (to resolve this kno^ here) the drying up of Euphrates, that so
the way for the Kings of the East may be prepared, is a clear all (...)
borrowed from the estate of the heathen Babylon, and here applied to the
mystical Babylon. In Scripture we read, that when God was about to destroy the
former Babylon, Ier. 50.38.
he threatened to dry up her waters, specially Euphrates, her chief defense.
And when he is abo^^ to deliver his people, and destroy their enemies, the
Aegyptian^, he dries up the Sea. So here he gives us to understand, what he
is about to do concerning the mystical Babylon, and the spiritual
Egyptians, namely to bring upon them even upon the whole Papal Hierarchy,
utter dest^^ction, and to work a mighty and marvelous deliverance for his own
people. This must need^ be the express and cle^re meaning of the Holy Ghost in
these words. Nor are we to pitch our eyes upon any real, or visible Euphrates,
or upon the external forces and powers of the mystical Babylon, ^s though
they were mean^ in this Vial to decay, or be dried up. Let no man imagine, that
by the great River Euphrates here dried up, is meant the previous ruin of the
house of Austria, so making way for the ruin of Rome. For certainly they must
fall both together, as the Oak and the I^i^ clasping each other. The ruin of
the house of Austria, is not to be a forerunner, but a concomitant of Babylons
fall. Nor is it possible for the Papacy to stand, if once the power of Austria
were shaken. Rome, Spain, Fran^e, and all their confederate powers may stand
together in their full strength, and yet the great River Euphrates, upon the
pouring out of this Vial* be said to be dried up.

How can that be, will some say; Qu.
Or when is this Vial poured out, that way should be made for the ruin of
Romes Hierarchy?

There are too many (...) now adays. And I (...) wise, but unhappy Statesman
of this Kingdom said, Sir Walter Raleigh in his Preface toward the end.
that whosoever in writing a modern history, shall follow (...) too near the
^eales, it (...) happily strike out his teeth. And who knows not, that the
pouring out of ^ot coal^^ up* on a furious and outrageous Beast, may make him
^ick, and fling about him? And though his Beastly head seem pretty remote, yet
he wants not his brood every where, ^eady to revenge his quarrel, and
returns to him that meddleth, as hot coals as he brings. And besides,
would th^^e not be found mockers enough (of whom Saint Peter speaks) who, if a
man should apply this Vial to these times, would be ready to break out (...)
to profuse laughte^* That the Mystical Babyl^^ should now begin to be said to
have her great River (...) dried up, her chief strength and forces decaying
and declining, and so making way to her destroyers, the Kings of the East, the
sons of the Gospel: what more ridiculous? What more incongruous, or contrary
to all common sense and reason? The Pope and his p^^ty get ground every day,
prevail and prosper in all their attempts; the Protestants side goes to the
wall^, and talk you of a present declination, drawing on to the destruction of
the Papal power? Can you (...) any likelihood, that his great River Euphrate^
in (...) up, when but of late days (to omit the (...) confluence of other
Rivers, as the rich Elu^*) (...) been enriched and enlarged with the
co^fluence of the sweet Rhi^^ now falling into it, who^e (...) who fair
Polatinate?

But what have I to do to satisfy such men, (...) the estimate of divine
Mysteries, according to (...) low scantling of common sense and opinion? (...)
will they say, if the very swallowing up of the noble Rhine, prove in the end
the drying up of the great Riv^^ Euphrates? Do we not know, that judgment
must begin at the house of God* And what followe^ upon i^, but the utter
perdition of the Gospel? And do they not know, that before how ^ur go^^^
humility, and (...) high mind before a f^ll* And is not the present presumption
of Babylon, and of her party, a pregnant pre^age of her speedy ruin? How soon
did [ Is now this great Babel] turn the proud King thereof a grazing? Dan. 4.
And when that insolent Tyrant Belshazzar was a quaffing, and profaning those
sacred vessels, the spoils of the Lords Sanctuary, how suddenly appeared the
handwriting upon the wall, Men^, Mean, T^ke^, (...)? Dan. 2^, 26, 27, 28, etc.
Let the proud King of the Mystical Babylon, read the interpretation, and apply
it. How does Babylon at this present triumph and pride her self in the sacred
spoils of Gods people? Now is she drinking healthes to her lovers in the full
bowls of her late conquests over the poor Protestants; and to fill up the
measure of her drunkenness, she has already swallowed down at one gulp the
blood of all the flock of Christ, even to the last drop, through the wide
gulf^ ^f her bottomless confidence, and in^ari^ble thirst. Babylon then being
arrived at the top of all presumption* is not this a presage of her sudden
downfall? Was it not just so in the punishment of heathen Babylon? And ^ust so
shall it be in the mystical Babylon, wh^^ says the Scripture: She says in
her heart, I sit (...), and (...) widow, and shall see no (...)* Rev. 18.7* ^.
Therefore shall her plagues ^^me in one day, death and mourning, and famine,
(...) she shall be utterly burnt with fi^e: For strong is the Lord God who
judges her, And I pray you tell me (you that have learned but your ABC in Gods
book, and a^e not altogether transported with the groundless and unnatural
Aphoris^es of Atheism^) where is a man's strength and safeguard become, when
once he i^ possessed, with the proud spirit of carnal presumption^ Does not
God then forsake a man, and expose him ^o ruin, when once he is come to his
full height of confidence in his own strength? And when is ^he (...) bursting,
then when it is swollen so bigg, as it cannot be stretched any further? It is
(...) present case* And where God utterly forsakes, is not the great River
Euphrates of a man's defense dried up* And we know^ that all, and chiefly great
Rivers defensi^^ to Citie^ (...) States, are special defenses given of God,
and come neither from the art nor industry of man. The hearts of Kings are in
the hand^ of the Lord, as the Rivers of (...) he turns them which way soever
^e will. So that the drying up of the great River Euphrates is he^^ to be
understood of the removing of the limits and bounds, which the Divine, and all
limiting providence has prefixed for the continuance of Antichrists dominion.
And now the time being near the expiration, therefore upon the pouring out of
this Vial is Babylons, Euphrates said to be dried up, because God is about to
accomplish his will in her destruction. It being the proper work of God to dry
up Rivers, to determine the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his
own power. So that the mention of drying up Rivers, as Euphrates, gives us to
expect, the delive^^nce of Gods people is at hand, as we see in the dryng up of
the Red sea, and of Jordan. This is a matter of special (...), to be
apprehended by faith of the people of God which the enemies by sense cannot
apprehend. Therefore is (...) wr^pped up in a mystical phrase of speech. On
the contrary* is not the present deiection and affliction, yea in a manner the
deplored, and (if (...) apprehension may be judge) desperate condition of
Christ's (...) afflicted f^llow^rs, a good sign, (...) deliverance is not far
off* What say you to the state of Israel in Egypt, and that even then, when
Moses was sent to fetch them out by ^ strong hand (as now in this V^^l God is
about to delive^ his people from the Beasts) when now (upon Moses hi^ coming)
they began to be in worse case, and harder bondage, then ever before, their
Taskmasters are more severe and strict, then ever; the poor caitiffes must
make good their intolerable task, and daily tale of brick, and yet now they
are denied straw, which formerly was allowed them; they are now (poor souls)
scattered over all Egypt, to go scrape up stubble in stead of straw. Is this
the way to be delivered? Yea, do they not exclaim upon Moses and Aaron, as
Mockers, and makers of them more vile and miserable, and in stead of delivering
them, to plunge them into more deep, intolerable, and inextricable bondage?
But patience a while. Give God leave but to work, and to use his own means,
without prejudicating his manner of doings; suffer him to magnify his power
upon Pharaoh, and his Egyptians, in inflicting his mighty plagues upon them:
and then behold the salvation of the Lord. Exodus 14.16. Lo here, the Egyptians
(the while) did more domineere and triumph over the poor Israelites, then
ever, their more grievous pressures put them further off from all hope of
deliverance: and yet all this was a beginning and preparatiue to that Egyptian
wrack in the Red Sea, which was taught to give Gods people a safe convoy. And
what shall we say to the estate of Israel in Gideons days, who when the
Angel came and saluted him, saying, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of
valor: He answered, Judge. 6.
Oh my Lord if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us, and where
be all his miracles, which our fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord
bring us up from Egypt? But now the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us
into the hands of the Mideanites. And what marvel was it? Baalls Altar and
Grove were among them, yea and that near unto Gideons fathers house. But God
by night warnes Gideon to throw down Baalls Altar, which his father had made,
and to cut down the Grove by it, and offer sacrifice of peace unto the Lord.
Here then was the maine obstacle of Israells welfare first removed. Hereupon
Gedeon marches in his might, goes on, and prospers: Now a Barley Cake smites
the Midiani^^s tents; now a handful of men, even three hundred with their
swords and lamps dare surround the enemy, and give that huge host a miraculous
discomfiture, even without stroke-striking; for fear of whom twenty thousand
of Israel being faint-hearted had forsook the field, and retired home. Thus
God can help at a pinch, even against al liklihoods, and when his enemies are
in the height of their presumption, and his own people at the lowest ebb of
strength and means to help themselves; when once Baalls Altar is cast down.
Hilary says, proprium esse s^lius Ecclesiae, vt tunc vincat, cum caeditur:
tunc intelligat, cum arguitur: tunc secura sit, cum deseritur: tunc obtineat,
cum superata videtur: It is the Privilege of the Church, then to vanquish,
when it is wounded: then to understand, when it is reproved: then to be secure,
when it is forsaken* then to obtain the victory, when it seems to be
overcom^. Need we now to apply these examples to our present purpose? Who so
dull, as to require it? Does he not see Israel every where to go down the
wind, and to be come in a manner to the very precipice of ruins? Do not the
Egyptian Taskmasters every day vex them more and more? Is there not now (in
all appearance) less hope of deliverance, then ever? But what then? Is Gods
hand therefore shor^ened, that it cannot sau^? Shall outward appearances
prescribe or limit his power? Or shall the most extreme difficulties prove
impossibilities to his Omnipotency? Or is not God the same God still to
Israel? Or is he not still good to Israel? Or does he afflict them, because
he ha^es them* Or does he humble them, that he may for ever cast them off, and
not rather thereby to take occasion, to raise and restore them in due time? Or
does he suffer the Beast, the Antichristian power to prevail and prosper,
using him as a rodd to scourge his foolish and wanton children, because he
loves or favors the Antichrist, his mortallest enemy? Yea is not this
cruel rodd reserved and destinated to the fire, so soon as the Father has
thereby disciplined his Children, as now they humble themselves, repent of
their sins, reform their ways, remove the stumbling blocks, and
provocations of Gods jealousy, fall down; and with greater fervency and
importunity of strong cries solicit their offended Father, and so shake off
from them that drowsy security, and lethargy, wherewith the world is so
desperately possessed? And in the mean time, is the Beast so senseless, (and
so senseless he is) as not to discern these seven last Plagues of Gods wrath
to fall upon his marked ones only, even as the ten Plagues fell upon the
Egyptians, and not upon his own Israelites? Gods Israel indeed is sore
afflicted and humbled, but all the Plagues light upon the Beast, and his Crew.
Afflictions admonish and occasion Israel to repent, to humble themselves, to
seek reconciliation with their heavenly Father; thus afflictions are good
Medicines and Monitors for their betterment: whereas on the other side, the
Plagues which fall upon the brood of the Beast, work in them no repentance at
all, but cause them to utter their impatience, and to belch out their
blasphemies, as effects issuing from the filthy source of their superabundant,
and incorrigible corruptions.

Shall I say then that this sixth Vial is already begun to be powered out? That
needs not neither: though if we did, the former example might stay our faith
from falling into the pit of incredulity, in case those two blind guides in
divine ways, carnal sense, and humane reason, should take upon them to
conduct it. But yet least so hard a morsel might overcome the weak stomach,
before it be better concocted: proceed we to that which follows in this
Vial; which if we find not plainly enough fulfilled in these our days, it
will be in vain for the best Orator to go about to persuade it.

The second Branch therefore of this Vial, is an Agency dispatched for to
prevent the Kings of the East from the surpri^all of Babylon. See the Royal
Paraphrast K. (...).
Ver. 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like Frogs come out of the mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet; for they are spirits of Devils working miracles, which go
forth unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to
the battle of the great day of God Almighty. In this Agency we have first the
Agents: described, first by their nature, noting their singular activity and
agility, as also subtilty and pregnancy of wit, being called spirits: and what
place so closse, what walls so thick, what sinque ports so well watched, as can
keep out spirits? Secondly, for their numerosity, Three, a number of
perfection: it imports abundance of them in the time of this Vial. Thirdly, by
their quality, unclean. Fourthly, by a similitude, like Froggs. Fifthly, by
their commission, armed with a threefold authority, they come out of the mouth
of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet. Secondly, the execution of their Agency, which is set down,
first, in the extent of it, they go forth unto the Kings of the earth, and of
the whole world. Secondly, in the intent of it, to gather them together to the
battle of the great day of God Almighty. And lastly, by what means they
persuade the Potentates of the earth, to wit, by working miracles, namely false
miracles, forasmuch as they are the spirits of Devils. Nor are we to omit
John's testimony concerning this brood, saying, And I saw etc: which gives us to
note this Agency, as a thing very conspicuous, and evident to the view of (at
least) every spiritual Beholder* ye^ so palpable, as that the very external
sense, the eye, may easily observe it. And this invites us to a special
attention of this whole matter. The drying of the great River Euphrates was not
with [ I saw] for that is a matter of faith, not of sense.

Now for these Agents, who ever they be, the Royal Paraphrast says, they are
Ecclesiastical Factors, and Agents, as the Devils last brood. Every man with
half an eye may plainly see whom he meant* unless the brood of Arminians as
later, come in to claim their Copyhold. Henry Bullinger writing his excellent
Commentary upon the Revelation about seventy years age, understands by these
Factours the Popes Legates a latere, who negotiated in all Kings Courts their
Masters cause. It was indeed an application very suitable for those times of
his, wherein this last brood was scarcely hatched. Whom if he had lived to see,
as our times have done, he would no doubt have recanted his error; he would
have excused the Popes Legates, as of a more leaden mertall, then to be
compared to such active spirits, as here are; and to be too much laden with
their Pontificiall Pomp and train, to act or attempt any rare projects, or
dexterous atchieuements, as we have seen acted by these nimble froggs. The
Legates still could not come to Court, but in at the broad gate, in the view of
all* but these sprightfull froggs can creep or skip in at the Wicket, or
backdore, and negotiate more business by lurking in some corner or skirt of
the Court, then the Legate with all his Train. Nor was it so profitable to the
Beast, to maintain a pompous Legate in every Kings Court, unless as Cardinal
Campei^^, he could come with his Sumpters stuffed with old shoes, and carry
them home again laden with old gold, England having been of old the Popes
best Exchange for such Merchandise: but this last brood, these unclean
spirits, these Froggs (what shall I call them) use to come as naked over, as a
Frogg, not sumptuous (except when they metamorphose themselves into the Court
fashion, or like Ruffians thereby to cover and color over their Frog-like
nature, (...) they should be known for ^pyes, make bares, pragmaticall
incendiaries, poysoners of the very air, where they breath, and most
artificially palliated Traitors, and enginers of all mischief) but nimble to
practice all juggling ^eates for their Masters advantage.

And not unfitly do they resemble froggs. First, the frog is an ^^nclane
crea^^re, conversant about the muddy puddles: so these* Therefore called
unclean spirits, both in regard of their original, breathed out of three
foul mouths, the foul F^end, the foul Beast, and the false Prophet, as foul
as the ^est* as also for their own natural uncleanness, their very
consciences being defiled.

Thirdly, in regard of their doctrine, which they breath into their Disciples,
which, for all their false pretenses, can never purge men from their sins,
but leaves them more unclean.

Fourthly, in that they do mingle, and meddle themselves with all secular
courses, but chiefly with State-businesses, as King James says, which by their
wicked counsels clossely inspired, they wholly pollute and defile, whereby
they become sinful acts, and impious resolutions. But in the last place (not
the least) they prove unclean spirits, by working a general effect of
uncleanness and profaneness in all sorts and ranks of men, and that through
their audacious and clamarous, croaking and crying down of all piety and
sanctity of life, branding not only the true religion of Christ, but the power
thereof in our sanctification with hypo^^icrisy, or some odious nickname of I
wot not what heresy. Whereby it comes to pass, that he that refraineth from
evil, makes himself a prey, and he that runne^ riot in all kind of iniquity
and profanesse is accounted the best Christian. These unclean spirits would
persuade the world, that he is the best Minister that preaches least, that
has most preferments and cures of souls, but lives at ease himself* and
plays the good fellow; that the Lords day is best observed but with one Sermon
a^ most* and with one Play at least. These be the unclean spirits that revell
most in the time of this Viall^ wherein whose will not ru^^e with the stream
of all impurity and impiety, th^^ blast them with the name of heresy, as Pope
Paul* ^. did those th^^ studied Academicall learning, or as Traian put men to
death, only because they were Christians. So that these unclean spirits like
froggs pollute the waters where they live with the filthy froth of their frye,
so causing an universal surface of all iniquity, in the time of this Vial,
more then ever. The Royal Paraphrast says of them* They are likened to
Froggs, for that they are bred of an old, filthy, and corrupt false doctrine,
which for a long space has blinded the world before their coming* as froggs
breed of rotten and slimy coruption; or for that they preferr^ themselves
before all other Ecclesiastical orders preceding them* as imperfect and
unprofitable, hopping and leaping above them. Again, the frogg has no other
song, but one, Koax, Koax; and therein is very importunate; so these unclean
spirits, what is all their Croaking* but one song* The Church, The Church, the
Catholic Church* the holy Mother Church of Rome, the Apostolic Sea, one
supreme Pastor, and Judge of controversies, who cannot err, and the like. This
is their three man's song, wherein they go as in a circle. Thus, by
counterfeiting the froggs, they do, as the Egyptian Magitian^ seek thereby,
(even by their very clamarousnesse and obstreperousnes, to disgrace Moses and
Aaron Gods Ministers in their office, who preach the truth. Fourthly, froggs
bring forth their young, as the Bear unformed, having only a black head, and
tail: such is the spiritual offspring of these Froggs, whose faith is
informis, or unformed, implicit, and even black with ignorance. Hence the
Proverb, Nihilo rana gyri^a prudentior: no wiser then the young frye of a
frogg. Which may be applied to all seduced and blind Papists, who are not able
to render a reason of their faith. Fifthly, Froggs live in abundance of waters,
and of idleness. Whence the Proverb, (...), Thou pourest out wine unto the
froggs; as we say, To pour water into the Sea. And in what abundance of
voluptuousness and ease these frogg^ live, all the world knows. Again, the
Frogg is a nimble creature, and when yo^ think to take her up in your hand,
Page 324.
she skips away, and hides her in the mudd: such are these active spirits. In a
word, K. James of happy memory in his Premonition, to all Christian Monarchs,
free Princes and States, about these froglike spirits, has these words:
calling them a new sect of Spirits, raised up for the defense of that As Pope
In^ocent 3. at the Council of Lateran (at what time Dominicke solicited the
erection of his Dominican Order) dreaming that the Lateran shook, and was like
to fall, but that in came Dominicke, and supported it with his shoulders, did
thereupon call Dominicke, and erected his Order: so in the time of the Council
of Tre^t the Pope, yet dreming but with his eyes broad awake, seeing his
Lateran throne to threaten a fall by the Gospel, so powerfully preached by
Luther, and Calvin and others, did theru ponerect and confirm the Jesuitical,
or Ignatian Order, these three spirits, as his Roman Triary, to stand out, and
support his tottering Babell Tower.
tottering throne, called three in number, by reason of their thre^ fold
direction; being raised and inspired by the Dragon Satan, authorized and
maintained by the Beast the Antichrist* and instructed by the false Prophet,
the Apostaticke Church, that has the h^rnes like the Lamb, but speaks like
the Dragon: These spirits indeed thus sent forth by this threefold authority
for the defense of their triple-crowned Monarch, are well likened to Froggs;
for they are amphibious, and can live in either element, Earth or water; for
though they be Church men by profession, yet can they use the trade of Politic
Statesmen; going to the Kings of the earth, together them to the battle of
that great day of God Almighty. What Massacres have by their persuasion been
wrought through many parts of Christendom, and how evilly Kings have sped that
have been councelled by them; all the impartial histories of our time do bear
record. And whatsoever King or State will not receive them, and follow their
advice, (...) out must that King or State be, even with Gunpowder, ere it
fail. And these froggs had reason indeed to labor to become learned, thereby
to dissipate that gross mist of ignorance, wherewith the reign of Antichrist
was plagued before their coming forth. So far the judicious King. Thus we
need go no farther for a clear interpretation of these words.

Hence also we may note the vnaminous spirit of these three, the Dragon, the
Beast, and the false Prophet, out of whose mouth these three Froglike spirits
proceeding, may put us, in mind, as of their tripple authority, so of their
triple malignity, as the crafty cruelty of the Dragon, the usurped power of the
Beast, and the sophistry of the false Prophet. They are called also the spirits
of (...).
Devils: to note their Politic (...), going in the habit of illuminate (...)
and Rabbis, in the long robes of profound Craftsmasters, and expert Statesmen,
who in the time of this Vial bring into the world new Maxims of state, infused
into them from those, whence they come. But they work^ (...). This may seem to
excuse Priests and Jesuits from being of the number of those spirit^^ for what
miracles do they? Yes surely great miracles, if ye may bel^eue them. Although
what true miracles can false Prophe^^ the spirits of Devils do? But it
suffices, that these Prophets be the only Miracle mongers. And a^ King James
excellently, They do miracles of deceit, for they do wonderfully deceive men.
And do they not undertake to do miracles every day, while they would make the
worshippers of the Beasts Image believe, that they do a Miracle in^u^ning a
thin Wafer cake into the very body of Christ, flesh, blood, and bone? Only
the Apostle tells us, that Antichrists miracles are lying wounders, serving
only to deceive them that perish through strong delusion sent them from God,
that they should believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.
and so might be (...). And is it not miraculous; that they can by their
inchan^ing spells make of wise men stark idiots, offensible men senseless, of
reasonable men brutish, as to believe, that to be a miracle, which they, see
with their eyes to be nothing less? It is the property of a miracle to put it
self upon the trial of a man's infallible sense, specially of the eye. But
here is no such thing to be serve. When Christ turned the water into wine, it
had now both the color and savor, and substance, and true spirit of natural
wine. Thus it was with a true Miracle, the first that Christ wrought in Cana of
Galilee. It was not such still, as the guests could not discern from water,
either by their eye, or taste, or smell, but were by the strength of their
faith, or conceit, to imagine it to be wine. But the miracle (forsooth) of
Popish Transubstan^^ (...) cannot endure the couch of ^ens^^ trial; the eye
see^ nothing* but a (...) Wafer; the mouth tastes nothing but a thin shiver of
b^ead* Where then is the Miracle* That must be begged of the blind credulous
vulgar to be believed only. Thus it becomes a Miracle of implicit faith. And
what can he believed more miraculous, then that an impotent Priest should be
able to do that, which ^^lls not within the compass of Gods omnipotency? For
to cause one and the some natural circumscript body to be in a thousand
distin^^ places at one and the same moment of time (...) to be in the highest
heavens, and here upon (...) at the same instant, is a mere contradiction, a
mere lie, and (...) impossible for God to do it: but a silly Priest can
easily do this with saying over but five words. To cause the same circumscript
body, consisting of so many dimensions, such a length, such a breadth, such a
thickness* to remain the same in all the quantities of it, and yet to be
confined and circumscribed within the narrow limits of a thin and narrow Wafer
Cake, the body suffering the while no diminution, is a mere contradiction, a
mere lie, and so is impossible for God to do it: but a so^^y Priest can
miraculously do it, sw^llow down the entire body of Christ, with all the
dimensions and large quantity of it, at one morsel, down his wide Weson. To
cause the same body, consisting of flesh, blood, and bone, all of a solid
substance, to remain in their solid constitution without alteration, and yet
at the same time under the forms of a Wafer, Cake to melt in the mouth, where
neither flesh, blood nor bone are to be felt (as Christ showing to his doubting
Disciples his natural body, says, Handle me, and see; a spirit has not
flesh and bones, Luke 24.39.
as ye see me have.) is a mere contradiction, a mere lie, and so impossible
for the Omnipotent to do it: but an unclean spirit of the Devil breathed from
the mouth of the unreasonable Beast can do it. In a word; to cause the same
blessed body, which was borne of the blessed Virgin, and now glorified in
heaven, to b^ (...) cr^ated of the very substance of bread (...) into it, is
against the truth of God, (...) of our Creed* B^r^e of the Virgin Mary, a more
wicked heresy, then that of the For the Ma^^chee^ said, that Christ's body
came down from heaven, and so passed through the womb of the Virgin, as
through a trunk, or pipe, participating nothing of the substance of it: But
the Papists most basely make Christ's body of a piece of bread.
(...) of Christ^ humanity to be of the (...) and so overthrowing man's
salvation^, which could (...) be wrought, but by the Son of God in (...)
nature, that had sinned, and so it stands no^ with the (...) and glory of God
to make such a counterfeit body* yet (...) Priest can do it. And such are the
Miracles, which these froglike unclean spirit^ of Devils due work daily.

Again, these spirits or Agents are here called the spirits of Devils. We
read not in all the Scripture of any men so called* Judas only is called a
Devil. These, (...) spirits of Devils, to note them to be Devils incarnate*
and that the spirit of the Devil is more predominant, more reigns and rages
in the world in the time of this Vial* then ever, from the beginning of the
world; and that especially in these sprightfull Agents with their confederates
and consorts. This being that (...), wherein the Devil has but a short space
to ^aigne, and therefore he now plays the Devil* Chapter 12.1^.

And these got to negotiate with the Kings of the earth. Will not less serve*
These be (...) Froggs indeed, that like to those Egyptian frogge, da^e leap
and crawle up into Kings chambers. So prudent are they in their generation.
They are no peddling merchants, but profess to be great Iewellers, fit to
(...) with Princes. For so they may sweep wh^le Kingdom along. If they can
(...) the great Landlord, they will be sure of the Tenants. But whereabout do
they negotiate with Kings^ Surely in no small State-businesses, but even to
stir them up to take part with the Beast, and to make war^e with the Lamb, to
fight against the Gospel, (...), or suppress the true Religion, and the
Professors of it; a matter (I wi^) of no small consequence, for any state (...)

Although perhaps, (...) great many will not believe this, at least such as
(...), and will not (...)* but willingly wink, for fear they (should be eye
witnesses of their own woeful wr^ck and other^, which on (...) cowardice has
provided (...) when was there ever a greater, and more general confidence of
these Froggs, then now? Ye all are (...)* A man would think some Bull had of
late roared from Rome* causing all the Froggs to couch close in their holes.
This (...) may be a shroud sign of some such thing in good earnest. Whereas
otherwise it is one stonifician point of policy, when any Bulls come from
Rome, to cast a hood over the horns, to dissemble and choke it altogether.
Just so it was in King (...) of happy memory, when a Bull came from the (...)
P^pe Paul^ 5 so unreasonable, as the Papists gave ours, (...) maliciously
counterfetted by some, who bore (...) will to them; until the same was
confirmed by a second Bree^e from the same Pope* both (...), and answered by
his Majesty. But we need not (...) could to confirm the late former, since we
see (...) so good effect in the obedient silence, and calmnesse of hi^
Catholic sons, who* according (...) that special charge given by the Pope
in that late Breeue, are now all hushed, expecting the signal of the (...)
day, th^^^ have so long longed for. For we must no^ dream, that these froggs
are asleep all this while. They lie but closse, (...) froggs in the deep of
winter, waiting till the spring c^ll them forth, to croake, and hum (...)
together (...) Confederates to the battle. Yet they ar^ as busy and closs^
negotiating now as ever. Even now (...) they a gathering, as fast as they can,
the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world (a great part for the whole) to
the battle of the great day of God Almighty. They are no^ content, in every
state, where they may (...) egg on Kings to suppress the truth, and the
Professors of it, in their several dominions, as in (...) and the rest: but
they labor to muster all the Kings of Christendom together, to make war
against the Gospel, and utterly (to their vtterm^s^) extinguish it at onc^.
Do but go to D^v^r ^lift^, and lo^ke beyond the seas* and then tell me
whether eve^ thi^ Vial at least in this one point) was so apparently poured
ou^. And such is the condition of the time of this Vial, that these froggs
shall never l^^ue croking their Kings together, until they have brought them
to the ^aine batt^ll* The^ still solicit the Kings of the earth. But our hope
and comfort is, that which they make account to be their day, is and shall
prove the great day of God Almighty. He it is that means to strike the stroke,
and to make it his own day, even the great day of God Almighty* which shall be
a day of darkness and gloominesse to all Gods enemies. The zeal of the Lord
of hosts will perform this. He is the God Almighty.

Next follows the third branch or symptom of this Vial, to wit, Christ^
watch word to his soldiers; and this has a twofold references (...) the
present condition of the (...) of this Vial, and so it is for a Prese^vatiue:
secondly, (...) the subsequent great battle, begun to be pitched in this
Vial, and which is to be struck (...) the next, and so it is for a
Prep^ratiue* Nor let any imagine, much less ^ffirme, that his Watchword is not
proper for this place* as if it were surre^titiously or by some error crept,
or c^^vayd into this place. For if all Divines we (...) to study, where this
Watchword might best stand, they could not find a ^^tter place.

The Watchword is, Behold I (...) as a Thi^fe* Behold is a note of atte^t^on,
as elsewhere upon the like occasion, so here used to awaken all true Christians
to a watchful expectation of Christ's coming to judgment. And being inserted
in this Vial, it argues the supine drowsinesse of the present age, wherein it
is poured out. Which sleepiness and carnal securi^y is a symptom, well
sympathizing with the time of this sixth Vial, as being (...) forerunning sign
of the gr^^t day of God Almighty, approaching in the next Vial. A^ the Apostle
of the day of the Lord, says, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
When they shall say Peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon
them. The time of this sixth Vial being that, likened to the daye^ of No^h,
Matthew 24. From this general Lethargy, and carnal security the Lord rowseth
up all his servants here, with a Behold, Matthew. ^4.43. Luke. 12.39. 1 Thessalonians.
5.2.4. 2 Pet. 3.10. chapter 3.3.
noting his sudden and unexpected coming, therein compared to the coming of a
Thief in the night, which comparison the Holy Ghost often v^eth. For what more
sudden then the thee^es coming. He comes in the dead time of the night, when
all are a sleep in security; as Math. 25. Christ comes when all the ten
virgins as well the wise as the foollish, slumbred and slept. And this shows
that the time of this sixth Vial i^ very moment any, drawing on, and hastening
the seventh and last, even by the strong hand of headstrong iniquity mounted
to the highest pitch. In so much, as in the seventh Vial Christ will take the
carnal secure world napping, when they least dreamed of his coming, Behold I
come as a thief.

But least the wise also might be taken tardy (the spirit though willing, yet
the (...) weak, as Christ said to his sleepy Disciples in the garden) he
shows the happy estate of those, which like the five wife Virgins have their
Lamps ready trimmed with oil to meet their Bridegroom: Blessed is he that
watches, and keeps his g^^ments, least he walk naked, and they see his
shame. And though this spiritual watch be at all times necessary for Gods
children: yet most of all in the time of this sixth Vial. This watching here
is employed to be properly against those dangers, which attend the time of this
present Vial; and those are of two sorts: 1. The danger of false doctrines: 2.
The danger of corrupt conversation, and debosht course of incorrigible life.
Both these are comprised in the next words, and keeps his garments, least he
walk naked, and they see his shame. For garment^ are to be understood here two
waye^: 1. the garment of faith, which is Christ our Elder brother, in all hi^
righteousness imputed unto v^, and put upon v^, covering vo^ing all our
nakedness, and hiding our shame from the pure eyes of God, which cannot behold
any thing unclean. Thus is Christ made unto us of God ((...) garment of four
quarters) wisdom and Righteousness, and sanctification and redemption. 1 Cor.
1.30.
In this garment of our elder brother we obtain the blessing, Genesis 27.
while it causes, our persons to be accepted, yielding a fragrant smell in
Gods nostrills, being (...) field, which the Lord has blessed. This is that
garment of salvation, and robe of righteousness. Esai. 61.10. This is the Lord
our righteousness* made ours by faith. Ier. 23.6. and 33.16. Compare
diligently, and with judgment these two places together. Psalm. 32.1, 2.
Thus our nakedness and shame points to Genesis 3.10. and the covering of it to
Genesis ^.21. Where the Lord God himself makes Coat^ of skins to cloth Adam and
Eve, being (in all likelihood) the skinns of sacrificed Beasts, a type of
Christ our Sacrifice, by whose righteousness, as a skin, our sin is covered,
and our persons clothed. Although the time of this present Vial would strip us
of this Such, as of skins, durable and lasting.
durable and substantial covering, and inste^d thereof b^ing v^ back aga^ne
to Adams invention, to invest our selves in his (...) figleaues, of self
saving righteousness.

The Second garment which we must look unto, is our inward garment, woven of
sundry graces infused in to us by Gods Spirit. These by the continual (...) of
Gods Spirit and grace, must be woven out of our own bowels, as the laborious
thread of the silk worm thereof to m^ke a garment to cover our nakedness,
and shame from the eyes of men. And thi^ i^ the garment of sanctification. And
forasmuch, as even the best of God^ Saints may so far forget themselves, as
foolishly to fa^^ foul upon the worlds reproach: here they are stirred up by
Christ (as it were) to take the needle of sharp compunction, and the well
twisted thread of faith, hope and Charity, therewith to sow up the r^nt
again, and by how much they have, of carelesne^ and coldness of affection
toward God, and of he^dlesse attention and watchfulnes over their own ways,
any way offended God or man: now upon renewing their covenant with God in Christ
by faith and repentance, they may double and treble their care and zeal of
glorifiyng God, edifiyng men by their example, for the time to come, so as
their nakedness and shame may be for ever covered.

But how comes the danger of loosing our spiritual garments to be coincident
and proper to the time of this Vial? Surely not without cause. We have seen
already the three unclean spirits out of the mouth of the Dragon, and of the
Beast, and of the false Prophet, as abundantly and most eminently predominant
in the time of this sixth Vial: and can we expect any other, but that the world
in this age should be mightily poss^ssed with the lying spirits of false
Prophets, which going in sheep clothing (being inwardly ravening wolves.
Matthew. 24.) would not only flea off the fleeces and fells, but also slay and
devour the sheep themselves? And when did ever false doctrines, and false
Prophets out of that aforesaid triple-mouth, ever dare grow to so great a head
and height (since the pouring out of the fourth, and fifth Vial) as we may
begin to behold in this succeeding age? Would not the false Prophets of the
Beast stripp us of our glorious robe of faith, while they would gueld faith of
its native and prime quality, namely, certainty and assurance of salvation by
Christ? Did not thus the apostatized Church of Rome in her Council of Trent
found her Apostasy from Christ, and from having any more communion with him,
upon the groundless ground of doubtful uncertainty, cancelling and accursing
the only saving faith of Christ, by depriving it of those essential
properties, certainty, assurance, affiance, without which saving faith can be
no more saving faith, then fire can be fire without the essential quality of
heat* No marvel then, if hereupon, having cut off their right hand, to wit,
the only saving and justifying faith, by which only Christ our Righteousness,
as a most pure and perfect garment or vesture is put upon us: they, with the
left hand of human^ invention and presumption, learned from apostatized Adam,
are driven to weaue to themselves the Cobweb of selfe-iustification out of
their own poisonous bowels, as the Prophet makes the comparison: Esa. 59. No
marvel, if having denied that only affiance-full saving faith, which rests
assured of Gods promises, building his salvation upon the eternal and
unchangeable free love of God in Christ, electing and predestinating him to
eternal life, the evidence and earnest whereof is witnessed unto him by the
spirit of God, by whom also he is sealed to the day of final redemption: no
marvel (I say, if men, forsaking this only firm foundation of God, whereon
the faithful are vnmoveably built, they do invent new-old sandy foundations,
building their salvation upon their own fickle arbitrary will to receive or
reject grace offered, to retain or relapse from grace (as they call it) once
received, so hanging their salvation by a small hair upon a rotten pin. No
marvel then, if they deny faith's native certainty, and consequently abolish
the very essence of it. For what certainty can a man have of salvation, when he
builds it not upon God, but man? In this regard therefore (so peremptory and
importune are the false Prophets in the time of this sixth Vial) Christ
admonishes all his to look most diligently to the garment of their faith.

And because the spirit of Prophecy is noted here by the spirit of Christ, to
be a pregnant symptom of thi^ Vial, it will not be impertinent, but rather
very important and necessary, to take a brief view (at least) of such
principal doctrines, as in our days have dared with open face, not only to
confront, but altogether to suppress and put to silence the fundamental
truths of God. Upon consideration whereof, we may take the better estimate and
aim, how far forth the pouring out of this sixth Vial may seem to fall
upon this present age^ Nor mean I here simply and solely the false docttines
of Rome, and het Emissaries, which have their issue immediately and directly
from that bloody Sea of the Trent Council, mentioned before, and such as come
out of the mouth of the Dragon, and of the Beast, and of the false Prophet; but
a certain collateral offspring of false teachers, who under the name even of
the true Church, do confederate and side with the Jesuits, like Sampsons
Foxes tied tail to tail. These are the only Rabbis of repute, that venditate
and vent their false doctrines every where, both with their pen and tongue (at
least when their pleasure is, and leisure serves from their pragmaticall
speculations, to make some rare Sermon, or Masterpeece, wherein it is their
glory to seem most learned, and the auditors happiness, least to understand
them) that claim to themselves the sole title (in a manner) of the whole Church
of England, as being the only Oracles, from whom all others must receive the
infallible Dictates of faith. Whatsoever, before this time, has been the
ancient, constant, unanimous, uniform doctrine of the Church of England,
grounded upon the Scriptures, sealed with the blood of so many Martyrs,
witnessed by the writings of so many learned Bishops and Doctors, who lived and
died in that doctrine, yea ratified by solemn Act of Parliament (which I am
sure was never yet repealed, nor shall be, I trust, while England stands)
must now fall under the check and censure of a few (at least, in their own
conceit) great Rabbis (as reserved cases for the Pope and his Cardinals in
the Court of Rome) by them to be new minted, and not to pass current, but with
the mixed base allay of the alchimy, extracted from the brainsicke limbecks of
some projecting Chimists. So that not unjustly may these also challenge a
copartnership, as coagents with these former frog-like spirits, to the Kings of
the earth, and to animate and inci^e them to take up arms against Christ, and
his Gospel. For by them the doctrine of Arminius is both openly avowed, and
stiffely maintained, which differ nothing at all from those graceless
Conclusions, which the Jesuits have sucked from that bloody Sea of Trent,
running through all the veins of the Pontifician body. To give the Reader a
taste hereof, I will set down one maine Jesuitical Proposition (among other)
of Molina the Jesuit. In Praedestinatione nulla est alia Certitudo, Proposit.
P.M. linae. Societatis Jesus. Protos. 15.
quam Praescientia, et certitude tota, quod Praedestinatus sit in vitam ^ternam
pervinturus, a Praescientia sola pendet: that is, In Predestination there is
none other certitude, then of Prescience or foreknowledge, and all the
certainty, that one predestined shall come unto life eternal, depends upon
Prescience alone. In which one Proposition is packed up the whole mystery of
Arminius, which foundeth man's salvation not upon Gods free grace in
predestinating, but in man's free will foreseen, which foresight or prescience
in God has no other stability or certainty, but the mutability or inconstancy
of man's free will in receiving or rejecting grace offered, and of man's power in
retaining or relapsing from that grace once received. Which Jesuitical
Proposition, with the rest, is thus censured by the Dominicans. Propositio est
contra sacras literas et Patres, Censura ^arundem Proposit. a PP. Dominicanis
Censura 15.
repugnat and potissime authoritati Apostoli ad Romans 4. Vt secundum gratiam
firma sit pr^missio; qu^ni locum expendit optime S. Aug. de Praedestin*
Sanctorum, cap. 11. Vbi ex hoc loco probat etc. This Proposition is against
holy writ, and the Fathers; and chiefly it is repugnant to the authority of the
Apostle Romans the 4* that according to grace the promise might be firm. Which
place Saint Augustine does excellently discuss in his book of the
Predestination of the Saints, Cap. 10.11.
where from this place he proves, that Predestination i^ certain and
infallible in regard of grace it self: for that Prescience, being but a
natural seeing ((...) were) through a Perspecti^e, is not grace. So they.

But to come to our Iesuited Arminians. These are they who domineering now in
the Church of God, razing the very foundation of man's salvation, to wit, Gods
eternal free grace and favor toward his elect: may give us strongly to
suspect, if not rather constantly to believe, that this Vial is already begune
to be poured out. Well, of what sort or rank so ever they be, the Lord here
warns his servants to beware of such, as would strip us of the robe of grace
and glory. Although it was well hoped, that upon a public Edict prohibiting
and silencing all quarrels about the Arminian doctrine, no Popish Arminian
would have been so bold, as to vent any more books in print, tending to Popery
and Arminianisme, and much less that any public examiners of Books durst
have approved and privileged such books for the Press: yet see the mischief
of it, by this means all books, that are written in defense of the truth,
either against Arminians, or the Papists, can find no favor to pass the
Press: but such books, as can cunningly and slyly, under the veil of the
Church of England, reconcile Popery and Arminianisme together, may only pass
for current cum privilegio. Then which, what can be more dishonorable to his
gracious Maiestyes proclamation, what more derogatory to the Gospel, what more
pernicious to trouble the peace of the Church and state, let all indifferent
men judge. A few shall suffice for instance; only I omit, for the present, to
mention the names of the books or authors, if happily they may check
themselves, and retract their errors, or call in their books, by the same
authority whereby they were published, least persisting in them, they prove
heresies, and that not of the lowest kind, and so come to fill up the measure
of this Vial.

In a book printed of late, Page 68.
there are some things much favoring Popery, and tending to the nuzzling at
least of silly ignorant Papists in their blind, Idolatrous, and faithless
religion; if not also to animate simple minded Protestants to become simple
silly Papists, and so to loose that garment of salvation, which the only
religion and ^aith of Christ, truly professed and maintained only by the true
Protestants, can invest us with. For the purpose, there are these words. We and
our adversaries consent, that there is salvation to some in the Roman Church.
And who are those, some? It is expressed; we acknowledge an honest ignorant
Papist may be saved. And again, we have not so learned Christ, as to deny
salvation to some ignorant silly souls, whose humble, peaceable obedience maks
them safe among any part of men, that profess the foundation, Christ. Suffice
it to name this here, as confuted in the second Vial

Not many years after that book, and fewer before this present, comes out
another book (whose chief autors or fautors let time try out) which coming
in hood-winkt under a kind of some monastic veil of canonical Devotion,
framed also after an old worm eaten form, published in the dawning of the
Gospel in England, would prettily underhand draw in Popery again among us, and
tanquam postliminio restore it to some place and grace again in this state; at
leastwise reconcile the two jarring sisters (as the former author calls them)
the Church of England the Younger, and that of Rome the Elder together, yea to
reduce the Church of England to an union with that of Rome, as being the holy
Catholic Mother Church. But this book we have elsewhere answered.

Take one instance more. But the other day comes forth a third book, the
Author of it (I dare say) of no small correspondence, with the former. He on
the other side pleads for Arminius, and that not now obvoluto capite, as the
former; but aperta front, and ex profess^. In his Epistle Dedicatory (wherein
he seeks to indere his service to a great Macanas of one of our famous
Academies (God grant he aim not at some of the learned Chaires, wherein to
vent his not popular, nor Pulp^t speculations) he gives a dangerous by-blow to
the opposites of Arminius, and his doctrines, in these words, If the man which
most mislikes the Arminian or Lutheran doctrine in the points most controverted
through reformed Churches, will but agree with me in these two, That the
Almighty Creator has a true freedom in doing good, and Adams offspring a a
true freedom of doing evil, I shall not dissent from him in any other points
controuerted, unless it be in this one, that there needs be no other
controversy at all between the Arminians and their opposites in point of Gods
Providence and Predestination. In so saying, he would seem to imply, that the
opposites of Arminius in the point specially of Predestination, do hold a kind
of stoicall fatality, and servitude in Adams offspring, necessitated by divine
Decree unto all their evil actions. Which insinuation, how true it is, let all
men, that have read the works of the Oppugners of Arminius indifferently
judge; whether this be not a most notorious calumny. As if the Divine Decree
did impose necessity upon men's wills to prosecute evil actions, because it
leaves them to their wicked wills, which of their own nature corrupted are
now free only unto evil. Indeed God in justice leaving man, fallen, to
himself, leaves him to the swindge of his corruptions, which of themselves
necessarily, and yet freely run to all excess of riot, being altogether
averse and adverse to that, which is simply good. As the Scripture says, God
saw every imagin^tion of the thoughts of man's heart to be only evil
continually. Genesis

But touch we a little upon some passages of the boo^. The Author in the former
part having soared aloft, (as he would seem, as they say Simon Magus did at
Rome) and that having his wings imped with the feathers of Philosophy, to
search into the nature of the Divine Essence, whereabout he has spent much in
transcendentall (to use his own term) speculations, and quintessentiall
extractions, far beyond all Divines, that went before him, eiher modern, or
ancient, yea beyond Saint Augustine, and Saint Gregory, whom he mentions to
have come short of that knowledge of God, which himself has reached unto: he
comes in the latter part to make use and application of the former, whence he
would draw sundry conclusion for the maintenance of the Arminian doctrine;
which that he may do, you must give him leave to show his singular opinions
different from all ancient Divines, and allow him a latitude to speak ad
placitum, what him lists, tanquam e Cathedra, from Pythagoras his Chair.

But the sum is, though he promises much, and professes to know, and teach
more of the Divine nature, then ever yet the world knew: yet, in the up shot
of all his discourse, he mightily confineth and limitteth Gods infinite
Attributes, yea and his most liberal will it self to a very narrow room,
causing all of them, to hang and turn upon the only hinge of his prescience,
As he says, There is a goodness obiectiue (in the creature) precedent in order
of nature to the Act or ex^pcise of Gods will. And, unless a thing had bin
good, God had not willed it. And, When it is said, [things are good, because
God wills them] this illatiue inferres only the cause of our knowledge, not of
the goodness which we know. Thus by these and suchlik transcendentall
speculations, whatsoever good is in the creature, must primarily proceed from
some selfe-cause, or without God, and not from any cause primary absolute and
independent in God. For if the act of Gods willing of good be prevented at
least in order of nature by the obiectiue goodness in or of the creature: then
the cause of the creatures goodness is not from Gods will in order of nature and
causes, but from the creature, or I wot not what external cause out of God.
And if Gods eternal will be not the prime and absolute cause of all goodness
in the Creature: certainly his e^ernall Prescience much less. And so God, who
is Caus^ C^^sarum, is stripped of this honor and prerogative, and so robbed of the
glory of all that goodness which is in the Creature. Thus our Author, and
those of his mind, to avoid a supposed, and misiudged inconvenience, fall into
a mischief (yea into most impious blasphemy, placing and preferring the
Creature before and above the Creator, and so making the Creature God, as
having a selfe-being;) least by granting Gods infinitely free, wise, just,
good, and absolute independent will (according to the counsel whereof he
works all things, says the Apostle) to be the prime and original cause of
all things in the world (as his revealed will is the rule of all things) they
should seem to admit, Ephesians. 1.11.
that Gods will were also the cause of Sin: therefore they choose rather to
make the Act of Gods will the effect, then the cause of the creatures
goodness: since this they allow to be the object preceding Gods will in order
of nature, and not the consequent effect of it. But it is a fundamental
Principle undeniable, Deus, ordine naturae, nihil praevidit creatum, antequam
voluit creandum: God, in order of nature, foresaw nothing created, before he
first willed it to be created. In the Creation God first gave unto the
Creature its Being, and then he saw, that it was good. He did not first see
them to be good, and after gave them their Being. But, as Revel. 4.11. For his
wills sake they are, and were created. So that Gods will, in order of Nature and
of causes, is before the Creatures being or goodness; his will first makes
them the subject of goodness, before they become the object of his Prescience.
For nothing can be foreseen, before it first be conceived to have a being:
and a being of it self it cannot have, but from the Will of the Creator, the
prime efficient cause thereof.

It is pity, that such as should be good Divines, and would be esteemed
great Scholasticks, do not bend their studies rather to find out upon what
strong foundation of divine reason the ancient, catholic, and generally
received Doctrines of God are built, then to seek after I wot not what
sublimated speculations* and so boldly without the guidance of Scripture, as
the cleerest Perspectiue, aspire to pry into the divine essence, so far, as
to make a man more blind. It faring with such, as with a man, who with open
eyes daring and outstaring the bright shining Sun, is so blinded, that he
has lost the faculty of discerning the difference of objects and colors of
things below. Why do they not rather consider of the sundry distinct Acts of
Gods one and the same will? As, either the general Act of his will,
dispositiue, by which he disposes and orders all creatures, in their motions
or actions good or bad, to hi^ own glory. This dispositiue Act some call the
divine Providence, which extends it self to the least creature, as the
Sparrow, to the least hair of our head; for in him (says the Apostle) we
live, and move, and have our Being: or else other Acts of his will being either
a lesser or larger latitude, as the Act of his will operative and productiue,
as the principal efficient cause of the goodness or good actions in the
Creature; this will of God giving an habitual being of goodness to Adam in
his Creation, only leaving him to the exercise thereof, according to man's own
power and will, whereof he had sufficient: but Adam being fallen, the gracious
will of God not only rayseth him up, and puts him in a better state, then
before, by working grace and faith in his heart: but still goes on with him,
working in him, Phil. 1.6. and 2.13*
preworking to him, and coworking with him, to bring his work of grace to
perfection. In the third place there is an Act of Gods will permissiue, Romans
9.22.
and this is properly restrained to all evil morrall actions. Aquinas has an
excellent saying, Pars 1. q. 19. Art. 9* c. ad 3.
Deus neque vult mala fieri, neque vult mala non fieri: sed vult permittere
mala fier^, and hoc est bonu^? God neither wills evil to be done, (...)
wills evil not to be done: but wills to permit evil to be done. And this
is good. Jbid.
For, says he, though evil to be done, and evil not to be done, be
contradictoriously opposite: yet to will evil to be done, and to will evil
not to be done, are not contradictoriously opposed, since both is affirmative.
But the Author has quite forgot to be a practicke president of that to
others, whereof, like a great Master, he would prescribe the only rule and way
of the attaining to the true knowledge of God. For he would have them to fetch
the knowledge of God from the fountains, and not from the trenches. I would
himself had done thus, and not rather raked his doctrines out of some puddle
either of Philosophy, or Schoole-diuinitie, to which he would reduce, and
refine Saint Augustine, and Saint Gregory.

But pardon my digression. I proceed. The author upon his former premises in
placing the goodness of the Creature in order of nature before Gods absolute
will, and consequently making the creatures goodness only the preceding
object, and not the consequent effect of Gods will, as the supreme and prime
cause of all goodness in the creature, flowing from thence as the stream from
the fountain, infers many insolent conclusions. I will name but some of
them, and but name them only, with a touch, and away. For example: That God
has an infinite love to all mankind without difference, without exception. And
surely wonderful is that (...) or love of mankind in God. But by your leave,
there is great difference between mankind before the fall, and after. Before
the fall, God loved man as a good creature, such as he had made him: but after
the fall, man having defaced Gods image, and received the stamp of Satan's
image, is now become of himself, and of his own making, or marring rather a
corrupt creature, hateful to God. Again, is there not great difference
between Gods love to man considered in the first Adam in the state of
innocence: and between Gods love to man after the fall, as considered in
Christ the second Adam? yet our Author puts none at all.

Again, he brings the doctrine of the Church of England as he interprets
and that in three Collect^, to prove the infinite love of God to mankind, in
that God will have all men indifferently and without exception, to be saved.
Surely the Author seems to be very hard driven, and brought to a low ebb,
that is feign to fetch his water out of a poor Collect or two. What child of
this famous Church, does not reverence and submit to the authority of this his
Mother? But who shall be the Church of Englands interpreter? Any private
spirit? Or who dare say, that the doctrine of the Church of England is any
other then the doctrine of the Scriptures? For once divide the doctrine of our
Church from the Scripture, and then we shall quickly come to that pass, to
believe as the Church belieueth; or, as the Church of Rome belieueth. And how
is that? As the Scriptures teach? No; but as the Pope teaches, and
interprets; or, as the Pope belieueth. How belieuest thou? as the Church of
England. How is that? As such, or such a learned great man, or great learned
man (perhaps as great in conceit in the Church of England, as the Pope in Rome)
belieueth or interprets. But it was the custom of the ancients, in case of
controversy in faith, to call, Ad fon^es; they went not to the cesterne, but
to the fountains, the Scriptures. If any therefore should presume to interpret
the words of the Church of Englands doctrines to any other sense, then the
Scriptures teach, is worthy at least of his Mothers rod, if not of his fathers
high displeasure. But do not the Scriptures put an infinite difference between
Gods love to his own elected ones, and others, who are none of Christ's sheep.
Read John 13.1. The father loved his own. And 2. Tim. 2.19. And John
17.2.9.11.12* 24. Yea, and does not our Mother Church of England reduce Gods
love to mankind in redeeming of us, to his elect people in sanctifying of them
by his spirit? I would such great Rabbis were a little better versed in their
Catechism, before they vented such novel Aphorisms. We have to answer
touching our Creed. Thirdly, I believe in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies
me and all the elect people of God. This is our Mothers doctrine, according to
the voice of her Husband, John. 17. Prou. the sixth verse unto the end of the
chapter. Enough to put to silence all Arminian vniuersalists. Read also the 17.
Article of Predestination, which fully cleared the Church of Englands mind in
this point.

But thirdly, he will prove that God loves all men alike, because all men are
alike redeemed by his Son. And this he will also prove from the doctrine of
the Church of England. Which is answered, as before. The Scripture says [in
matter of censure] hear the Church: but in matter of faith and doctrine, hear
him, that is, Christ. The Church must ever submit her doctrines to the
touchstone of the Scripture. And so the Church of England does I am sure. And
what says the Scripture of the redemption by Christ, and for whom. Read Ioh.
10.5. I lay down my life: for whom? for the sheep. And Act. 20.28. The Lord
has with his own blood purchased: whom? The Church of God. But other
Scriptures say, that Christ died for all men. Those all must be reduced to all
Christ's sheep, being scattered over all the world; for these only he laid
down his life: these only he purchased with his blood: these only he prays
for* whom he lays down his life for, Joh. 17.9. read the place, and mark it
well; and consider.

But in this point we need no other opposition but the Authors Tenet, Page 170.
then his own contradictory confession. He says, Nothing can make the
Creature hateful or odious to the Creator, besides its hatred or enmity of
that love, by which it was created, and by which he sought the restoration of
it, when it was lost. Nor is it (says he) every degree of man's hatred or
enmity unto God, but a full measure of it, which utterly exempts man from his
love. Upon whomsoever he would father this doctrine, sure we are, the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 2.3.
that by nature we are borne the children of wrath, as well as other. Do we
not then bring enough with us into the world to pull Gods hatred upon us,
besides the height of malice against God contracted in the world? Does not the
least sin deserve Gods hatred and wrath upon us?

But this he contradicts again, saying, That Christ only received our
infirmities, Page 181.
and original disease, and not the contempt of him, and his law. Now if Christ
did receive our infir^^ties only, and original disease: yet even those then
cost Christ his precious blood, yea, and made him a curse for us, and to cry,
My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me. And was there ever any sorrow like
to his sorrow? But you say, Christ received not the contempt of him, and his
law. You mean then, that Christ died not for contemptuous sinners? And if
Christ died not for the rebellious contemner, what shall be become of a great
many in these days, that not only contemn, but oppose, and seek to oppress
the known truth? Surely the state of such is very exceeding dangerous, yet I
dare not say desperate, which yet should be desperate, if Christ died not for
the greatest sins, even sins of rebellion and presumption, as well as of
infirmity. Was there not in the law a Sacrifice, Leuit. 6.
as well for sins of presumption, as of infirmity. And was not that Sacrifice
a type of Christ. And does not God in the 50. Psalm, preach repentance even to
the contemner of his known word? But if he repented, how should he be
pardoned, unless Christ took upon him the centempt of him, and his law? But I
hope some of the Authors con^orts, (at least) will discipline him well
fauourdly for such a doctrine as no less uncomfortable, then unsound. In vain
else do Preachers beat the air in preaching repentance to habituated
contemners, if Christ bore not all kind of sin upon him. We read of no sin,
but it is pardonable, saving that against the holy Ghost; and that also, say
the Fathers, if a man could repent of it, were pardonable; and if pardonable
upon faith and repentance, no doubt but Christ took even that upon him also.
Indeed if a man run on in sin, with a high hand, hating to be reformed,
contemning the Ministry of the word, and so persist and dye in his impenitency,
it is evident that Christ the Lamb of God has not taken away the sin of that
man.

But in the fourth place, he says, Page 180.
That God loves all men unfeignedly as they are men, or as men, which have not
made up the full measure of iniquity. But having made up that, or having their
souls betrothed unto wickedness, he hates them. His hate of them as
reprobates, is no less necessary, or usual, then his love of them as men. But
though he necessarily hates them, being once become reprobates, or having made
up the full measure of iniquity; yet was there no necessity laid upon them by
his eternal Decree, to make up such a measure of iniquity. So he yet a little
before, where he says, God unfeignedly loves all men: God does not love* but
hate the Reprobate, although they be men* yea the greatest part of men: I well
hoped, that confessing there are Reprobates, he would come to some more
reasonable terms about his universal Redemption. But reading on to the words
above related, I was put by that hope, when I saw he allowed none for
Reprobates, but such, as by filling up the measure of their iniquity become
thereby Reprobates. But when comes a man to make up the measure of his
iniquity? Before he dye? Who can tell that? Or else, who dare say, such a man
is a Reprobate, because he goes on in his sin with a ^igh hand and repents
not? Indeed such impenitency is for the time a sign of a Reprobate: yet not
sure; for he may by Gods grace come to repent. And if by Gods great grace he
come to repent before he dye: how was he then a Reprobate? Unless ye will
say, that a Reprobate may be saved. But then ye should contradict your self,
saying, that Christ took not upon him the sins of such Reprobates.

But by saying, There was no necessity laid upon them, by his eternal Decree,
to make up such a measure of iniquity. Does he acknowledge an eternal Decree
then of reprobation? No surely, for he cannot conceive (at least he pretends
so) how there can be an eternal Decree of reprobation, without a necessary
inference of a necessity laid upon Reprobates, to fill up the measure of their
iniquity, will they, nill they. Surely, God does not impose a necessity upon
Reprobates to continue and make up the measure of their sin, because of his
eternal Decree: but they being thereby justly left to the swing of their own
will, and to the tyranny of Satan, are by Satan and their own servile lust
necessitated, yea by him as their rider whipped and spurd a gallop, till they
become to the end of sins race, the wages whereof is death. And as we say, They
must needs go, who^ the Devil drives. And says the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.26.
such the Devil takes captive at his will. Yet in the same place, of such the
Apostle leaves us not without hope, If God peradventure will give them
repentance, to the acknowledgement of the truth, and that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil. We are to use means of repentance
to such, as are most deboyst, and desperate sinners, because we know not who
are Reprobates, unless God reveal them unto us* as he did to Samuel,
forbidding him to pray for Saul, seeing the Lord had rejected him.

The Author has warily (to my observation) avoided to touch upon the example
of Jacob and Esau in the womb, of whom the Apostle says, that before they had
done either good or evil actually, Page 171.
God loved Jacob, and ha^ed Esau. Only in one place he says, that God hates
no man (not Esau) as he is a man (which is true) but as a sinner, but as an
enemy or contemner of his goodness. But Esau in the womb, before he had done
any actual evil, was hated of God. But that the Author attributes to Gods
prescience only, and not to his justice, in hating Esau, as he now found him
in the womb, the child of wrath, and impe of damnation, condemned in original
sin, and in the fall of Adam, on whom the sentence of death passed. And as for
Pharaoh, Page 179.
he makes him only an extraordinary and singular example, out of the sphere of
common Reprobates, as no way conce^ning them; although the Apostle propounds
him as a type of Reprobates, as Esau was; Pharaoh and his Egyptians being
typically the malignant enemies and Oppressors of Gods Church, such as
Reprobates are. For upon the example of Gods hardening Pharaohs heart, the
Apostle infers this general conclusion, Therefore has he mercy, on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens: Romans 9.17, 18.

In a word, to omit many other particulars (the whole requiring a full and
entire confutation) to prove that Gods will is to have all men saved without
difference, he quotes a place out of Ezechiell thus: As I live, says the Lord,
I will not the death of him that dies, Page 172.
but rather that he should repent, and live. This place is, by the Arminians
perverting, and misunderstanding, their common refuge, whereby to elude all
other places of Scripture, which do clearly and unanimously inform us in the
mystery of God touching our salvation. Yet the Author has so set it down, as
it is no where to be found, no not in Ezechiell, totidem verbis. But not to
quarrel about words, Ezechiell indeed has a saying somewhat like unto it, as
Chapter 18.32. and Chapter 33.11. The maine thing the Author stands upon, is
Gods Oath; whence he would conclude, that it is Gods unfeigned will to have all
men saved, not only genera singulorum, all sorts of men, but singula generum,
every one of all sorts. Now who will charge God of dealing deceitfully, yea
although he did not swear at all, but gave us his bare word only? Let God be
true, and every man a liar. Yet the Author putts a great difference between
Gods Oath, and his bare word; as if God were not as well to be believed upon
his bare word, as upon his Oath. But why then does he swear? For no other
cause, but when he is to deal with an incredulous and unbelieving people; as
many times a man cannot be believed on his word, unless he swear. And with
whom had God now to deal* Was it not with an incredulous and rebellious
people? See Ezech: 33.10: the people say, If our transgressions and our sins
be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live? The people were
so far gone in sin, that now they despaired of Gods great goodness and
mercy, yea that they thought now the sentence of judgment was so passed upon
them, as it could not be reversed, although they should repent, and turn from
their sins. Now out of this stubborn infidelity the Lord by his Prophet
labors to pull them, as it were by the threefold cable of his Oath. Thus God
is feign to condescend to the weak condition of his people, by attempering his
word in the ministry thereof in such wise unto them, as it may become the more
fit and potent instrument to work in them repentance, and conversion unto God.

And whereas our Author would pin upon his opposites an imputation of
mainteining a necessary contradiction or opposition between Gods reveiled and
secret will, as if in his revealed will he wills all men to be saved without
exception, but in his secreet will restrains them to a few: it is a mere
cavil, and unjust quarrel* For howsoever God in his word has manifested the
mystery of his freegrace and love in his immutable counsel of electing a
certain n^mber of men unto salvation; a Fundamental, which all Arminian
sophistry stands amaz^d at, and against which the gates of hell shall never
prevail: yet seeing God has not revealed unto men in particular who they be
that are elect, but in this point has given us his revealed will, not only for
the regulating of all our thoughts, words, and actions, but also as the only
ordinary means to bring all his people elect to an effectvall participation
and fruition of grace and glory by Jesus Christ: and seeing no man in
particular, though never so wicked, and so far gone in sin, and sunk down
in rebellion, is (for ought he knows) excluded from salvation, if upon the
word of grace preached he believe and repent (which was the case of this people
in Ezechiel) and seeing faith and repentance is required in every one that
hears the word, that he may be saved, and not the elect themselves are
exempted from this condition of believing: therefore after what manner soever
God does accommodate and apply himself unto us in the dispensation of his
word, whither by ptomises or threatenings, whither by word or oath, he does but
as a fisherman, that to diverse kinds of fish uses diverse hooks, baits, and
lines, some stronger, some weaker, as the Apostle says, I am become all things
to all men, that I might by all means save some. And who be those some?
Certainly in the end they prove to be no other, but Gods elect. Gods word
being like to a dragne^^, which takes all manner of fish at least by the
external calling, ( many are called) which drawn to shore in the
Resurrection, the good are gathered into vessels ( few are chosen) and the bad
are cast away.

Now forasmuch as Gods secret ones, his elect, before their effectual calling
to the state of grace, are in all kind^ and degrees naturally as wicked and
corrupt, as any of the serpents seed, blind, incredulous, rebelious as those
people of the Jews were; and seeing wheresoever the word comes to be preached,
there are ever some whom God will effectual^y save by the ministry of it (as
might be proved, if we had not exceeded the bounds of a digression) or at least
wise, Gods word wherever preached, returns not in vain, but accomplisheth
that which God will have it, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto he sends
it, Esa 55 11: cannot God then use his own means and ways to call men to
repentance, and so fit his i^str^ments, as whereby effectually to work the
grace of faith and repentance in their hearts; but m^n must quarrel the
wisdom of God herein, and so pervert the external dispensation of his will,
as either his written word must interfere upon his secret (...)* or else down
must fall the whole eternal and immutable Counsel of God? Which what is it
else, but to pull God out of heaven, and as the heathen Orator said, More
Gyganta^ bellare cum Dijs? Again, since no man knows who are of the elect, who
otherwise, but that every one being alike by nature a sinner, and so (for ought
we know) may come to be saved by the word of faith preached: cannot this word
then be preached to all indifferently, unless all without exception be saved
by it effectually? Let us hearken to this word, and obey it. The Elect who they
be, is one of Gods Secrets: The Lord know^th who are his: and, Let every one
that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. And, as Moses says, The
secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things which are
revealed, belong unto us, and to our Children for ever, that we may do all the
words of this Law. Deuteronomy. 29.29. To conclude then, it is not good to remove the
ancient baunds of Gods eternal truth, least men pull the Curse upon them:
Deuteronomy. 27.17. Pro. 22.28.
it is a sound and safe rule, first to let all positive truths in Scripture to
stand immovable in their full strength: and if there be any other places,
either of ^xhortation, or admonition, or redargution, or the like, whereby God
usually works upon men's affections, these must not overthrow Gods
fundamental truths, laid down positiuely and expressly in his word, whereupon
our judgments and faith must rest firm and fixed. Neither let men too
curiously pry into the Arc of Gods secrets, as to know how many, or who they
are, that shall be saved: but as Christ answered to his inquisitiue Disciples,
moving a fruitless question, [ Are there few that shall be saved?] Strive ye
(says he) ^o enter in at the strait gate. Luke 13.23, 24. Meddle not we with
others matters, but labor we to be found in Christ, and so to believe and
follow Gods word, as we may come to find our selves in the number of Gods
elect, rejoicing that our names are written in heaven; as Christ, checking
Peter about John, said, Follow thou me. Ioh. 21.22.

I have been the longer in noting the corrupt and rotten doctrines of these
times, now grown to such a height, as they threaten to pull Christ out of his
Chair, and to divest his true Disciples of the garment of faith, and
salvation; to the end, that the discovery of them (though but brief for the
present) may cause us the more carefully to attend, and put in practice Christ's
watch word, and no less serious, then seasonable admonition in this place. And
so much the more, by how much the abounding of false doctrines in these our
times, even razing the foundation of Gods Grace, may point us, as it were with
the finger, and induce us to believe, that now already this sixth Vial is
begun in a great measure to be poured out, hastening on the next; and so to
stir up our dull sides to keep the stricter watch. And here also we are
given to note by the way, how the great battle is first begun to be fought
after a spiritual manner, by the armies and forces of false Prophets in this
Vial, never more plentiful, powerful, and perilous then now; and so much
the more perilous, by how much they cover their heresies with the guilefull
pretenses of the Reformed Religion, as of the Church of England. This
spiritual war of theirs is nothing else* but a beating up of the Drum, and
sounding the Alarm in the ears of the Kings of the earth, to induce, seduce
them to a confederacy and part-taking with the Beast against the Lamb, with
Antichrist against Christ. But the Lamb shall certainly overcome them. Magna
est veritas, et praevalet.

And again, because ever, where false doctrines begin to venditate themselves
(specially such as strike at the very root of the Gospel, Gods free grace, and
saving faith) they draw after them a train of all vices, and daring sins at
their heele^ (as Simon Magu^ did that huge troop of his Samaritan Disciples)
intoxicating the heart and affections with the Circean Cup of their
selfe-seducings, forgoing and forgetting all conscience and honesty to become
great and high, as if their ambition aimed at the very throne of the Beast
himself: therefore also Christ admonishes his servants, to keep a diligent
watch over their ways, and guird the garment of sobriety closse about them,
least it be torn from their back, either with the malignant teeth and tongues
of false Prophets, and croking Froggs, which with their Sardonian smiles would
scoff Lady virtue and Grace ou^ of her ^ober habit, to put on the new fangle
fashions of the time: or by the impetuous torrent of all lawless examples of
profuse and prodigious manners, of proud and ambitious ^onnes of Belial, the
only heirs apparent to all earthly greatness. And by watching here is
implied, that carnal security, and beastly ^urquedry, all excess in eating
and drinking (which are enemies to watching) are proper symptoms of this
Vial. And above all, drunkenness. For that strips a man of his garment, makes
him naked, and men see his shame. Noah was once drunk, and he lay uncovered in
his Tent, that his shame was seen. But now he is accounted no man, that will
not drink drunk, till he lie under the Table, like a dog at his vomit, or
wallow in the kennell, like a hogg in the mire. Thus it is in this Vial, as in
the days of Noah, they eat, they drank: noting the excess of all
deboshtnesse. In this regard therefore, Christ admonishes his servants to
w^^ch, and that the more diligently, because of the dangerous state of the time
of this Vial, overgrowne with carnal security, and overflowne with that
borrowed German sin of drunkenness. And to encourage his servants, (least
they should be too much dejected with the worlds ^^omps and affronts, as
standing too strictly upon points) Christ pronounces them to be blessed, that
watch and look well to their garments of faith and holiness, howsoever the
misdeeming world deem them fools ^or their labor.

In the second rela^ion, Christ here insert^ this gracious admonition and
watchword, not only as a preservatiue from the present corruptions, but as a
preparatiue to fore-arme them against the imminent peril and trial of the
great day of God Almighty. This is that Panoply^, or complete armor
recommended unto us, Ephesians. 6: which taking upon us, we may be able to stand fast
in the evil day. It is saving faith, and a good conscience, which as an armor
of proof, will bear a man out, and bid defiance to all worldly fears. And
unless we renew our Covenant with God of faith and obedience, and so set our
selves in a way of reformation, thus having God reconciled unto us, and made on
our side: It may be said to us, as to those in Amos, Woe unto you, that desire
the day of the Lord; To what end is it for you* The day of the Lord is
darkness, and not light: Amos. 5.18. Certainly to all those, who appertain to
the confederacy of the Beast and false Prophet, to all profane and impenitent
persons, the great day of God Almighty shall be a dark and dismal day. Men
may see this (if they will) in the previous light skirmishes, what is like to
be their success in the maine battle. No prosperity, no success even to
those that profess to stand on Truths side, so long as their face is turned
the other way, or which is worse, while Iulus-like they look both ways,
halting between two with prevaricating feet, having on the Linsey-Wolsey
garment, neither hot, nor cold, and the like. What have these to do with the
great day of God Almighty? Certainly such, if they repent not of their damnable
heresies, do bring upon themselves swift destruction; 2 Pet, 2.1, 2, 3.
Forasmuch as by their pernicious ways, which many do follow, the way of
truth is evil spoken off; whose judgment therefore now long ago lingreth not,
and their damnation slumbereth not. But on the contrary, he that has on the
former armor, his garments of justification by faith, and of sanctification
joined with repentance, desires nothing more, then to see this great day of
God Almighty, even hastening unto it, as Saint Peter speaks: 2 Pet. 3.

And he gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrew tongue,
Armageddon. In which fourth and last clause of this Vial, are three things, or
circumstances, very remarkable. First, of the Person that assembleth or rangeth
the Warriors; and that is, the great Muster-Master, even the Lord of Hosts, He
gathered. Secondly, of the Persons assembled, Them; and those are the very
enemies of his Church, that war against the Lamb, and those on his side, who
are the Called, and chosen, and faithful. Thirdly, of the Place, where the
battle is pight* and to be fought, called here Armageddon. We will speak of
the last first, as most difficult.

This word Armageddon, is diversely taken by Interpreters: Mr. Fox.
Some refer it as alluding to that place called Mageddo in the fifth of
Judges, where Deborah and Barack discomfited the host of Sisera, at the waters
of Mageddo. Whereupon Deborah in her gratulatory song, sings, by a
Prophetical spirit, So let thine enemies perish, Judge. 5.2.28, 29
O Lord. And surely if we compare the presumptuous confidence of the enemies of
Gods Church in this Vial, to that of Sisera, and of the Ladies of his Court,
against Israel, triumphing before the victory, it may be a good allusion. To
which discomfiture also the Prophet David alludes ( Psalm. 82.) where he prays
against all the enemies of the Church, which prowdly say, Let us take to our
selves the houses of God in possession; Let us make havocke of these Puritan
Gospellers, and of the name of Protestants: Do thou unto them, as to the
Madianites, Psalm. 83.9.12. Judge. 5.21.19.
as to Sisera, as to Iabin, at the brook of Kison, to wit, at the waters of
Mageddo.

Mr. Forbes.
Others apply this place not only to the overthrow of Gods enemies, but withal
to the valley of Mageddo, where King Josias was slain, which was cause of
great lamentation to Judah. 2 King. 23. 2 Chronicles. 35.
But whereas this might make against the destruction of Antichrist, and his
Confederates here, which shall be cause and matter of much joy and comfort to
Gods people: the some Author solues it thus, that upon the fall of Antichrist,
the whole Nation of the Jews shall be ^onverted, and shall hereupon take up a
bitter lamentation for their long and obdurate obstinacy, now in a godly sorrow
for their sin, weeping to see him whom they had pierced, according to that,
Zach. 12.

Some relate others opinions of Armageddon, Mr. Bullinger.
as either to signify excidium rivi, the cutting off of the River, as alluding
to Babylons Euphrates: or exercitus vastationis, the Army of desolation. Others
derive it of Har, which is Hill, and Magedon, delightsome or precious, alluding
to the Church of God, the Mountain of Gods delight, as Psalm. 82.1, 2.

The Royal Paraphrast in his Epistle before his Paraphrase, sets down first
his own opinion, King James.
deriving the word of Harma, or Guarma, and Geddon, as much as, destruction by
deceit; because (says he) it is the name of the place, where the wicked being
assembled together by the alluring and deceit of Satan, and his three spirits
of Devils, ^o make war with the faithful, were all destroyed by God, and so
their destruction came, and was procured by deceit. To which also he is pleased
to add two opinions of others: as, first, to signify destruction by waters, to
wit, peoples: or, secondly, to allude to Ioshuah's discomfiting of the Kings,
Gods enemies upon the Hill of Mageddon; as here, Har, and Mageddon, the Hill of
Mageddon.

But now in such a variety of opinions, where shall we pitch? Surely we may
safely take direction herein from the Royal Paraphrast, who says, I condemn
not others, but rather allow them to interpret this book diversely, King James
in his Preface the Epistle to the Church Militant, before his Paraphrase.
so being it agree with the analogy of faith, with the method of the text, et
cum serie temporum; for these three being observed, it may fall out, that
diverse diversely expound one place, and yet all be according to the truth, and
meaning of the spirit of God. An excellent rule (well beseeming that Pacifique
Prince) to reconcile diversity of opinions, so they bound themselves to the
analogy and confines of faith. So that in all these differences of derivations
of this word Harmageddon, finding none of them to swerue from the Analogy of
the text, we may safely embrace all. Only two are most pregnant, and may seem
to challenge the most certain credit before all the rest. First, that this
great battle shall be upon the Hill of Gods delight, to wit, his Church, and
especially there, where the Gospel is most conspicuous, and shines most
clearly, against which, the envy of the Antichristian army, shall advance the
Standard. Parallel hereunto is that battle of Gog and Magog (chapter 20) the
secret and open enemies of Gods Church, wherein they shall compass the tents
of the Saints about, and the holy City, even the Church of Christ. And we have
a notable type hereof in the Prophecy of Daniell; where the great Antiochus (a
lively type of Antichrist) is said, in that his fatal battle to his own
confusion, to pitch the Tents of his Palace between the Seas, in the glorious
holy Mountain. Dan. 11.45.
This may prefigure Antichrists assaulting the people of God in Armageddon, to
wit, the glorious holy Mountain, the Church. And does not the glorious Church
in England stand between the Seas? The second is, that of ye royal
Paraphrast, though no way second, but rather may challenge precedence before
all the rest, for the singular allusion of it, Destruction by deceit. Which
does highly make for the honor of that Lord of Hosts, who by his wisdom and
power shall wind and turn all the wiles and stratagems of the old Dragon, and
false Prophet, all the power and puissance of the Beast to their own
destruction. And for this cause it is said here, He, to wit, God shall gather
them together into a place, called Harmageddon.

But this may seem strange, that God should lead this potent and proud army
even to his own Mountain of Delights, his Church. No, not strange. Did not
the Holy spirit lead Christ into the wilderness, to be temped of the Devil?
And has not God power over all these plagues? And was it not he, that brought
that daring Assyrian Host against the holy City in Ezechia's reign, as even
that blasphemous Rabsache seemed to vaunt, and all to da^nt poor Judah. And was
it not He, that said to Barak, I will draw out unto thee to the River Kish^n,
Sisera etc. Judge. 4.7. Read also Joel 3: where the Lord being about to deliver
his people from the Babylonian bondage, he says, ver. 2. I will gather all
Nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Iehoshaphat, and will
plead with them there for my people etc. And ver. 11. Thither cause thy mighty
ones to come down, O Lord; that is, Gods enemies, as ver. 12. Read the whole
chapter. It is a notable type of this in the seventh Vial. But what was the
event of all? How sped the Devil? How sped Rabshache with his mighty Host? How
Sisera? How, I pray you, should they speed, when a more potent, a more
politic Adversary, even the Lord of Hosts, taken their conduct into his own
hand, and puts his bridle into their nostrills? Can an enemy, though never so
powerful, look to prosper in any great attempt, when his adversary has a
secret disposing hand to direct and sway all his designs which way himself
pleases? The King of Syria's Counsels, and his words spoken in his bed
chamber against Israel, could they take place, when both there was a faithful
Elisha, to warn the King of Israel of them, and a prudent King, willing to be
directed by his good counsel? What shall become of Pharaoh and his huge host,
when as God hardens his heart, making him foolhardy to pursue Israel, and
that even through the red Sea, on whose dry channel when he first set his
proud foot, he might easily have read his own fatal wrack from those watery
mountains on each side, (like swelling walls ready to burst) so soon as once
Gods people were safely arrived? Just so is it here. He, the Lord assembleth
Antichrists forces into the place called Harmageddon. And can they then look
for any better success, then such as Pharaoh, and his Egyptians found? Surely
no. Be confounded then with fear, o ye Antichristian adversaries of Christ,
and his Church. Against whom do you confederate, and band your forces together
^ Of upon what presumption? Has not the Virgin, the Daughter of Sion despised
thee, O enemy? Has not the daughter of Jerusalem shaken her head at thee? Whom
have thou reproched, and blasphemed? And against whom have thou exalted thy
voice? Is it not against the holy one of Israel? Esa. 57.22. Is it not He;
that puts his hook in thy nose, leading thee to the place of thy perdition,
where thou notwithstanding in the beastly-wide throat of thy false confidence
have already swallowed down the destruction of Gods people, as at a morsel?
Oh that this might sink into the hard skull of thy senseless Beastly-head to
be better advised, and without fear o^ wit to enter the lists, where the
Almighty takes up the quarrel against thee! But now it is hid from thine eyes.
Thou will needs try thy Triarian forces in one maine battle, wherein thy
Pontifician Omnipotency dare cope with divine Omnipotency, if happily the
triple-crowned Godhead on earth, may dethrone the God of heaven, as often he
has done the petty Gods on earth.

Nor can the time of this Vialls full accomplishment, for the bringing of this
maine battle to a head, be far off from the first pouring out. The iniquity
reigning in this Vial, and the mad malice of the enemy, and Gods fatherly care
for his Church, least it should be swallowed up, do all conspire and concur
to hasten this great Day of God Almighty. The time of this Vial comprehending
those dangerous last days, whereof Christ says, For the Elects sake those
days shall be shortened: Mat: 24.22. And this seems to be spoken not so much
in regard of outward pressures, and persecutions of the Church, as of intestine
false doctrines, very potent and prevalent in this Vial. By which the Church
of God being so mightily oppugned and assaulted, not without good reason may
the battle of the great day be said, in the spiritual part, to be already
begun. Begun, say I* Nay, I trust, it is as good as done, the victory remaining
on the Lambs side, and those with him, the Called, and chosen, and faithful.
And how doughtily has the Dragon, and his party, those unclean spirits
bestirred themselves, in this spiritual or Ecclesiastical conflict against
the truth and Gospel of Christ? Who sees not with what confidence they have
been puffed up, as if already they had won the field? What a high hand had
they gotten over the Church of Christ, in suppressing the truth (in as much as
in them lay) that it might not be maintained either in Print, or in Pulpitts?
How began all kind of wicked heresy, opposing and impugning Gods Grace, and
Man's Salvation, to strout and vaunt it self, both by Printing, and Preaching,
bidding open defiance to the truth, and the Professors of it? Insomuch as it
was (in man's eye) whether for a penny should get the conquest, courageous
Truth, or outrageous Error. The conflict was so eagre, as I said to my friends
for their comfort, it was the Devils last heave. But blessed be God, we have
seen his head already broken; and his whole body will follow after. And as
Christ has begun to conquer in behalf of his truth; so this is an inducement
to that other conquest at the battle of the great day of God Almighty over all
the Antichristian enemies, in the behalf of all his children, the Professors
and followers of his truth.

In the mean time, O Virgin daughter Sion, here is exceeding joy, and abundant
consolation for thee. Thou have many, mighty, malicious, mischievous enemies.
But thy God has given thee sufficient proof of his protecting hand. As he
has begun, so he will make an end. The Church shall yet be assaulted on every
side by all the forces the enemy can make. But it is the Lord God Almighty that
leads them to destruction, as follows in the next Vial.

But me thinks I hear again some object (as not yet satisfied) that those
Froggs have in other ages been as busy, as now, and therefore this time
cannot so rightly challenge and appropriate to it self the pouring out of this
Vial. Why? What have I said? That this Vial is already poured out? Pardon me
for that. Let the truth it self be the trial of the time, and the time the
trial of the truth. It is true indeed, that those Froggs ever since their
first hatching, have not been idle, but as active as spirits; yet one thing is
further to be noted, as a peculiar mark or symptom of this Vial, namely,
that th^se Froglike spirits, coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of
the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, give us thus
much to note (and it is very notable) that the age of this Vial (when ever it
is) is haunted and possessed with a triple spirit domineering and revelling in
the world; yea, and especially in the Church of God; As Christ says, Mat.
24.15. Mar. 13.14. When ye see the abomination of desolation stand in the holy
place, where it ought not (let him that reads, consider it) then let them
that are in Judea, in the Church, look to it. For out of the Church no
discerning of the times of these Vialls. It is out of the Temple, that the
Angels pour out their Vialls: useful only to the Church of Christ. The first
is, the spirit of craft, and serpentine cunning, coming out of the mouth of
the Dragon (Chapter 13.2 and 12.3. and 20.2. and 12.9.) the Devil, the old
subtle serpent, more crafty then any Beast of the field o^ Gods making. For so
much does the mention of the Dragon here import, whence these spirits come. The
second, is the spirit of usurped power and domination, signified by these
spirits, coming out of the mouth of the Beast. For the Beast, signifies
especially that power Imperial of Rome, which the Pope usurps, as ye may see
in the 13. Chapter. The third, is the spirit of false doctrines, and lying
Prophets, and Ministers; which is signified by the spirits coming out of the
mouth of the false Prophet. Now, when ever we find a time, wherein the spirit
of craft, of lawless usurped power, and of false doctrines are most
predominant, and arrived to as great a height, as is possible, without the full
abrogation of all laws humane, and divine: we need then go no further to
seek out the most special time, wherein this Vial is poured ou^. So that
when ever you see the world fully possessed with the spirit of new policies
and projects, of the quintessences of all quaint and witty devices (but all
distilled from the Limbeck or Limbo of the Dragons crafty head) all of them
tending to that very end and scope, which the Dragon mainly aims at, namely
the ruin of well settled states, and of the true Church of God: when ever you
see, from the Dragons mouth, inspiring his machiavellian Athe^sticall
instruments and Ministers, the subtle spirits under this Vial, to go about
to govern the state of the world, both Ecclesiastical and civil, by the
clean strength of their unclean brains: which must needs concur with the
high contempt of Gods wisdom and word, with the senseless scorn of all
ancient, true policy, prudence, and providence, which the wisest Statesmen of
the world have used, for the well managing and making of their estates not only
secure, but glorious: when ever you see plenty of pragmaticall Punies or
skipiack-froggs, which by the inspiration of the Dragon, dare undertake with
the very Engines of their wit (as Archimedes did Sirac^sa, which yet was
surprised, while he was over busily a drawing of his circles) to maintain
their goodly Provinces against all incounters: when ever you see the world so
pestered with these working spirits, as nothing can be expected, but the utter
wrack of whatsoever is the object of the Dragons malice and envy: then (be
sure) is the time of the pouring out of this Vial, of those spirits reigning,
which come out of the mouth of the Dragon.

Again, when ever you see high and mighty spirits (especially Ecclesiastickes,
signified by the usurping Beast) to mount upon the wings of their ambition to
such a height of unruly rule, as to usurp a lawless and boundless power over
all, whose lusts must stand for laws, who Sampson-like knap insunder, as tow,
the strongest chains of all law and conscience, who (Beast-like will be
confined within no lists of common reason, and humanity, who go about to
overturne all well settled Monarchies, being firmly built upon fundamental
laws of the State, and would turn them into lawless Tyranny, or Anarchy;
then (be sure) is the pouring out of this Vial, wherein these spirits come out
of the mouth of the unreasonable Beast, the true Hieroglyphick of all lawless
usurpation and Tyranny, of all senseless sensuality.

In a word, when everye see false Prophets abound, but especially such, as
bring in old but new refined Heresies, yet clothed with the name of the true
Church, qualified with the wit of the Dragon, and armed with the power of the
Beast (for these three spirits go linked together) and laboring to make one
entire Church for the Dragon and for the Beast, then be sure is the time of
this Vial, wherein these spirits come out of the mouth of the false Prophet.

And not without cause is the false Prophet added to the Dragon, and the Beast;
since he is the feweller and bellows, not only to nuzzle and nourish the world
in all wickedness, in the crafty fetches of the Dragon, and the proud
usurpations of the Beast, but also to blow the coals, to incite and provoke
the Potentates of the earth to transcend all bounds of laws, Divine and
humane. Satan wants not, (much less will he want in the time of this Vial)
his wicked and lying Prophets, to sow pillowes under all elbowes, laboring to
make Princes glad with their lies (as the Prophet speaks) and sick with
bottles of wine, (...). 3, 5.
even with the sugared lees of their flatteries and falsehoods. And ever in a
corrupt age, especially the false Prophet is one maine stickler. As Esaias says,
From the Prophets of Jerusalem is profanesse gone sorth into all the land.
(...) 23.15. (...) 9.15.
And, The ancient and honorable he is the head, and the Prophet, that
teaches lies he is the tail. And false Prophets are those spirits, that go
to the Kings of the earth, to gather them to battail^ against Christ, and his
servants* and go about to possess them with the spirit of the Dragon, and of
the Beast, to puff them up above themselves, to make them forget the Decree,
the Law, to the perverting of the judgment of the afflicted. They so But the
second Psalm adds, Ye shall die, like men.
tell them they are Gods, as if they should not die like men: that the sublime
power in earthly Potentates, is a participation of Gods own Gods Omnipotency
is one of the divine Attributes, incommunicable as his Omniscience, and
Omnipre^ence.
Omnipotency: that, their distance from common men is as the Contrary to Deuteronomy
17.20.
heavens in respect of the earth: that, Justice can be no Rule, or Medium,
whereby to give God, or the King his right: that Gods word and Ordinance, is
the Rule of justice, which squares out all our service to God and man.
the observation of his man's laws (though just and good, and which tend as
well to the safety of the King, as of the Subject, and which all are sworn to
observe, the due observation whereof is according to Gods sacred Ordinance, and
the wilful violation a contempt of the same) does (notwitwithstanding)
prejudice and prepond^rate divine Determinations: that, to This, with the rest,
is a doctrine well be seeming a lying Prophet, and a seditious Spirit, sent out
to animate Kings against, and their own people.
observe humane laws, is a kind of preposterous zeal, The keeping of a
subordinate Law, to wit, of man, does not prejudice Gods supreme law: but Gods
law binds us tokes* man's law for conscience sake
elevating the authority of divine Determinations. Such strange Paradoxes and
Aphorisms, how far they may sor^ with Satan's madness in the time of this
Vial, I refer to the most judicious to judge Melius est (says the Preache^)
a sapiente corripi, quam st^lt^rum adulatione decipi. And, says the Wiseman,
Eccles. 7.5. Pro. 22.11.
He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall be
his friend. Our gracious Sovereign God ever preserve from all false Prophets,
that their lies may never prevail to corrupt or abuse the unparalleled
goodness and sweetness of his Princely naturally noble disposition.

The seventh Vial poured out. And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into
the air, and there came a great voice out of the Temple of heaven, from the
throne, saying, it is done, etc.
Of this Vial we may say, as Mr. Brightman of the fourth, but more truly and
evidently; Hu^^sque tempora nostra pr^cesserunt: hitherto have our times come.
The words of this Vial consist of two branches: first, the act of pouring with
the object, the air: Secondly, the effects: and they are two: first, the
definitive sentence pronounced upon the whole Kingdom of the Beast, v. 17: the
second, the execution of the sentence, to the end of the Chapter.

First, This Vial is poured into the air. In this Vial, as in the rest, we
must first find out the mystical sense. The Air in Scripture is taken for the
Kingdom of Satan. As Ephesians. 2 2. It gives us to note here, that this Vial is
poured out upon the whole Kingdom of the Dragon. Secondly, the air is taken
for the whole circumference and Kingdom of the lowest and middle Region of the
air especially, which compassing the earth on every side, betokens the
destruction of all Antichristian enemies over the face of the earth, no element
being so universal, as the air: nor any so apt to receive impressions to work
all kind of plagues, as the air. In it are bredd all sorts of Meteors, wind^,
storms, thunders, lightnings, plagues and pestilences, hail, and the like,
such as follow in this Vial, the consequent effects of this pouring out into
the air.

Now for the effects. First he^^upon proceeds the definitive sentence, (...);
It is done: o^, as Beza; Fuit; It was: (...) sege^ill, v^i Tr^^a fuit.
Babylon now coming so to be destroyed, as once Troy was. But our own
Translation is most proper: It is done. God has now passed his sentence upon
Babylon. And to the end we might the better mark such a famous sentence, it is
delivered in a most majesticall manner: first, in a great voice, the immediate
effect of the air, moved by this pouring out. Secondly, from heaven, to note
the Majesty of it. Thirdly, from the Temple of heaven, to note the truth of it.
Fourthly, from the Thr^ne, to note the equity of this sentence, running thus in
full equipage. It is done. The same sentence we read chapter 10.7: in the
beginning of the seventh Trumpet, which is a parallel or synchronisme with
this seventh Vial, wherein the Mystery of God is finished. Also this word we
find chapter 21.6. It is done, says Christ. Now some refer this to the
final consummation of the world: others to the consumption of Antichrist, and
his followers. The difference may easily be reconciled, since the consumption of
Antichrists Kingdom is one of the immediate forerunners of the last day; whom
(says the Apostle) the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and
shall destroy or utterly abolish with the brightness of his coming: 2 Thessalonians.
2. So that when we see these things begin to come to pass, then (as Christ
says) look up, lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh^ Luke.
21.28.

Immediately upon the pronouncing of the sentence, follows the Execution, set
forth by the means and manner of Antichrists destruction. First, there are
heard (...), sounds or voices. This is one Impression of the air. And these
sounds may be understood to come either from the Creature, or from the Creator,
both instruments of the Beasts ruin. First, of the Creature. And first, of the
living Creature; as the voices and cries of the Saints and servants of God,
lifted up in prayer against the Enemy: Such as we read of* Exo. 14, 15. and 2
Chro. 13* 14* 15: and Josh: 6.20. Or of Gods Creatures without life. As Luke
21.25, 26: The Sea and waves roting, and the powers of heaven shaking.
Secondly, the cry and voice of the Creator; whereof we read Ier. 25, 30, 31.
Job. 15.21. and 2 King. 7.6. When God sends a fear and terror upon the hearts
of his enemies, confounding them with amazement, and causing them to fly, when
none pursues.

The second instrument of Babylons ruin is (...) thunders. This is another
effect of the troubled air, whereon this Vial is poured. This is called Gods
terrible voice, Psalm. 29. Wicked men, even the proudest and wickedest, are
appalled at the thunder. The Emperor Domitian, that would be called a God,
when it thundered, would run under the b^dd. By thunder God has made mighty
havocks of his enemies* as upon Egypt, Exodus 9.^3. upon the Philistines at
Samuels prayer, 1 Samuel 7.10. Read Josephus on this story. Of the mighty
enemies, by whom M. Aurelius Antoninus was straightly besieged; but he having
some Christians in his Army, whom he entreated to pray to God for his
deliverance, at their prayer, God sent such refreshing of rain for his thirsty
army, and such terrible thunder upon his enemies to their discomfiture, that
thereupon he called the Legion, wherein those Christians were, Fulminatrix
Legio; and withal sent out Decrees of relaxation for the persecuted
Christians. We read how Anastacius the Emperor, a Persecutor, was smitten with
a thunderbolt, when affrighted he ran seeking a place to hide himself. In the
tenth Century we read of many examples of terrible thunders. ^ntur. 6. Cap. 3.
And ever with thunders come lightnings, whereof especially hotter Clymates can
tell us terrible wonders, if they were not there so frequent.

The next instrument of Babylons ruin is an earthquake, yea a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
ear^hquake, and so great. And an earthquake is another symptom and effect of
the air. We read of terrible earthquak^s. In Neroes time three Cities in Asia
were overturned with one earthquake; in Vespasians time three Cities in
Cyprus; In Iulians time earthquakes were so rife, and so ruefell, as there was
no safety within doors, or without: In Valentinians and Valeus his time, there
was an universal earthquake over the world, whereby the Sea was turned into
dry land, and dry land into Sea, plains made mountains, ^^cholcer. Chron.
and mountains plains. In Tiberius his reign 13. Ci^ties in Asia ruined by
an earthquake. Once in a great earthquake the Pope himself was driven to fly,
and hide himself in the openfield, under a shade of thin plankes of fur,
erected of purpose, least falling on his head, it might oppress him. But here
is such a terrible earthquake, such as never men saw, which shall shake down
all the foundations of Babylon, to the very ground, yea into hell it self.

For hereupon. in the next place; the great City is divided into three parts,
and the Cities of the Nations fell, etc. Here two things observable: first, the
disposition of the state of Babylon, here shadowed under the great City
divided. For great City here notes the whole state of Antichrists Kingdom. As
the City of God, whereof Saint Augustine writ, signifies Gods Church so the
great City here applied to mystical Babylon, imports the whose state thereof.
And the division of this great City alludes to the state of Jerusalem, which
was divided into three factions, when it was besieged by Vespasian. See
Josephus of the Wars of the Jews, lib. 1. cap. 1.
This division was an evident forerunner of that apostatized Cities utter
ruin. And Division in a state eve^ draws on destruction. Insomuch as
Vespasian, being pressed by his Soldiers, to assault the City, because of the
Jews intestine divisions, and mutinies, he answered, we shall not need; God is
fighting for us, and preparing an unbloody victory. It was a fearful curse
upon Simeon and Levi, Divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Genesis
49. Abim^lech, that cruel usurping Tyrant* needed no other revenger of his
bloody massacres of his brethren, but that curse pronounced by Iot^am, namely
dissension between Abemeloch, and the Sich^mites, Judge. 9.23. Read for this
purpose, Judge. 7.22. Also 2 Chronicles. 20.23. And 1 Samuel 14* 15. And says Christ,
A Kingdom, or house, or City divided against it self, cannot stand. Thus is
this great City divided into three parts: and can it stand? No* for it
thereupon follows, And the Cities of the Nations fell. That Is the first
effect of this division. The Cities of the Nations are Babylons confederate
Cities, and Kingdoms, which though they have the name of Christians, yet they
are no better then the Heathen, or Gentiles, or Nations. For so are the people
called, whom she has bewitched with her sorceries, chapter 14.8. Babylon made
the Nations drunk^ and Chapter* 18.3. All Nations have drunk of the wine of
the wrath of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication with her, etc. and verse 23. By thy sorceries were all Nations
deceived. So that the Cities of the Nations here are a^ it were the suburbs of
Babylon, they by division fall. God shall cast a bone, that shall make Romes
confederates to fall together by the cares, and so destroy one another. They
shall fall by division. And this division is triple, according to the three
great Monarchies, that support the Beast, The Empire, Spain, and France*

Secondly, there follows Babylons ruin* which i^ meant, not only of Rome, but
of the whole Papal Hierarchy, or Kingdom of the Beast. It is said here, that
Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of
the f^^^^nesse of his wrath. Gods remembrance in Scripture is some times taken
in the good, as, Lord remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom: here,
in the evil part. Babylon, that said in her heart, I sit a Queen etc,
thought, that God had forgotten her. No. God will now remember her for all
together, to give her the cup of (...) fury to drink* a just recompense of the
Whoores drunkenness with the blood of the Saints. All that are versed in the
Scripture know, that it is usual with God, to set forth his judgments by the
type of a Cup of fury. Read Psalm. 75.8. Esa. 51.17. Ier. 25.15. This Cup of
fury then signifies a full mixture of all fearful ^udgements, which in the
time of this seventh and last Vial are to fall upon Babylon, to avenge the Cup
of her filthiness of abominations, chap. 17.4.

And to show the inevitableness of her judgments, it follows, And every
Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found.

Islands and Mountains are places of refuge, Ezech. 39.6. I will s^nd, says
the Lord, a fire on Magog, (...) among them that dwell carelessly in the Isles.
M^n dwell more carelessly in Isles, then elsewhere, as being places of refuge.
And Esa. chapter 2. verse ^^. To go into the (...) of the Rocks. But here all
Islands and Mountains fly away in Babylons destruction, there is no refuge for
(...). Strange. The case is altered. (...)* that is so full of Sanctuaries for:
all kind of Malefactors, has now never a Sanctuary* not one poor Island, or
Mountain to fly unto; they fly from her, and are not (...).

It follows, v. 21. In this verse is contained the conclusion of the Chapter,
and the last Catastrophe of Babylons destruction. The last particular judgment
upon the remnant of Babylon, is a great (...) of heaven, every stone above the
weight of a Tale^^. This seems to allude to Josh. 10.1^ where God cast great
stones out of heaven upon the enemies, the Canaanites. Or to that in Exodus
9.23* where a fearful plague of huge hailestones makes havoc of the remnant
of the trees and herbs, men and beasts of Egypt, that were left of the former
plagues; those hailestones brake down trees, slew men and beasts, that were
abroad. But lo here hailestones as heavy as a Talent, every stone. Talents are
of sundry waights, from 100. pound weight, upwards to 1000. Halestones more
like to Milstones. So fearful is Babylons destruction; God has prepared such
instruments and weapons for her, as never the like.

But what use do the rest of Babylons children make of all this? Are they not
at least wise as wise at last, as Pharaoh and his Egyptians, to repent them,
that they have dealt so evil with Israel? Nay. Nothing less. Instead of
relenting, of repenting, and returning to him that smites, they blaspheme God
because of the Plague of the Hail, it was so great, as here it follows. O
fearful condition of Antichrist and his followers!

(...) the faster hasteneth on, by how much her (...). Amen.

FINIS.

