MASCHIL OR, A TREATISE TO GIVE INSTRVCTION, TOUCHING The state of the CHURCH
of ROME since the Council of TRENT, Whether she be yet a TRVE Christian
CHVRCH. And if she have denied the FOUNDATION of our FAITH.

For the Vindication of the right Reverend Father in God, the L. Bishop of
EXETER, from the cavills of H. B. in his Book entitled The seven Vialls.

By ROBERT BVTTERFIELD Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word.

IO^ 32. 7. etc. I ^^d days should speak, and (...) of (...) should (...).

But there is a (...), and the inspiration of the (...).

(...) wise, neither (...).

Therefore I said, Heathen to me, I also will show (...).

Printed by H. L. and R. T. for N. ^^^ter. 16^9.

(...)



To the Reverend and Right Worshipful Mr. Richard CHAMBER, Dr. of Divinity,
the E^courager of my Studie^, and Abe^^or of my honest End^^uours.
Worthy Sir,
Never any man attained unto Honor, but Envy folloued him close at the heels:
and those Actions, which before were not only plausible, but commendable, are
now subject to misconstruction. I know not else ho^ it should come to pass,
that that Reverend Divine, whose worth all Learned men know, and your self in
particular have often extolled, should come now to be taxed through the
preposterous zeal of some men, for publishing to the World that Truth, which
be has been always known to mainetaine; and should be thought to favor
that error, which no man ever more masculinely opposed. The heinous Crime
which is laid to the charge of that worthy Bishop, is this, That he is of
opinion that the Church of Rome, notwithstanding her manifold and deplorable
Corruptions, cannot yet be truly said to be all Error, no Church. An
afsertion (as you know) not infrequent in the writings of other learned men:
but if it chance to fall from the Pen of a Prelate, he is straightway
making a Wicket to let-in Popery. But is the truth so? Surely no: but as the
Doctor of the Gentiles was accused to teach that which ill-disposed men did
gather by his Writings; even such is their case, whose words showing the right
virtuous contentedness of his mind, Through Honor and Dishonor, are a most
fit Episcopal Emprese. It was an acute Hook. Eccles. Polit. lib. 3. 1
demand of one, who for his profound Wisdom and Judgment was second to none
that lived in the Age with him, Whether if an Heretic were persecuted to the
death by an Infidel for his Christian Profession sake, we could deny such a
one the Name of a Martyr. Now who knows not, that Martyrdom* is an honor
peculiar to ^he Church of God* From whence, if all Papists (as some would have
it) be^ quite and clean excluded, to what end do we spend so much time in
disputes with them about Christian Religion? Why do we trouble our selves more
with them, than with Jews and Infidels who are altogether Aliens from the
Church? Or why do we rather take the Works of Bellarmine than the Alcoran to
confute? But wherefore do I anticipate, seeing this is the subject of the
ensuing discourse, but that the virtue of the Cause yields Arguments more
than ^now? For mi^e own part, I entreat your self and the World to excuse me,
that I could be ^o longer patient, when I s^e him whose meekness ^^ such;
that although he desire^ Peace with ^ll men, yet disclaimes Peace with Rome,
who has written such serious diss^^as^ues from Popery, who has sent comfort
to some ^n that Inquisition, sand heartned them (...) Martyrdom, who before
the Reuer^nd Assembly of the Clergy in the Convocation, gathered together all
hi^ powers of Eloquence to persuade them to set themselves against that
Tyberine Monster (so ^ee calls Popery) Concio ad Cle^um.
I say, when I see him traduced as (...) that would help Popery 7. Vialls
page 28.
over the style, and censured as one whose Charity without zeal, without
sound Judgment. page 33.
Charity is told, whose Judgment ^nfound, I must crea^e pardon, if my (...)
within me work a little, though from Virulency of speech. I promise to
abstain: which, as my disposition ab harreth; so it cannot better my Nunquam
melu^em caus^m f^cit dice^tis petula^tia, sed ^epe peiorem. l. our Val. Antidot
in Pogium.
Couse: and he for whom I am entered into the Lists, will not so be defended,
who had rather put up injury; than either offer or requite any. Now (Reverend
Sir) if this imputation, laid upon the learned Bishop, were the exception of
one alone, my labor might seem superfluous: for why should not one man
dissent from another, so that still the unity of the Spirit be kept in the
Bond of peace? But the case is now otherwise: for you are not ignorant; that
from him it is derived to the People, to whom the worthy Prelate is made
odious, and who think his Works unworthy to be read any longer. Neither is it
needful to use force of reason to the Common s^^t: for what is wanting in the
weight of ^^ens speeches, is supplied in the apenesse of their minds, to
receive whatsoever is but probably tendered them against their Saperious; and
they account such men to carry singular freedom of mind, whiles th^se that
shall but undertake their defense, must encounter with many heavy preiudices
rooted in men's minds, that they are, Men-pleasers, and Time-seruers. Yet (...)
all thi^ deterr^ not from p^rsuing that which I have taken in hand: neither (as
I hope) shall I (...) any thing to the offense of any godly minded, if (besides
the Reasons; I allege to fortify the Cause it self) they be pleased to
consider what Reasons ^^d^ced me to stir in this Ma^^er: which are these; The
Truth suff^rs while (...) obtruded, and (...) are urged ^^ embrace it in stead
thereof: The Church suffers (...) her children ^re presented with (...)
opinion^ in stead of her (...) Te^e^ts: Who though she^ (...) condemned all the
^rrours of ^^^ Church of Rome, yet (...) cont^m^lious against the Church it
self. The Reverend Bishop suff^^^, who (...) his great deferning (...) Church
our Mother, (...) not ^o^^by to be (...) the same day ^is Adversary is spoken
of. And lastly, d^^ L^^^ned (...) suffer* whose (...) fall (...) con^^^^led
(...) Judgment. The Vindication of all these (^ great (...)) ^, the (...) of
many* have under ^^en, and ^^ ^umbly offer it to your Worships Patronage, to
whom I am so well ^nown^, that what I am I made ^ot t^ll you, not my other
infor^^ ^ou: what are my abilities, and what my weaken^s^^, is not hid from
you. Besides, such is your love toward me^, that with a Fatherly affection you
baue always prosecuted me (as all know that know us both) Vt nihil a me tam
Laurentius. Valla. Epist. ad Iohannem Tortellium.
exiguum profic^^ea^ur, quod non tuo, n^scio iudicio dicam an amori magnum esse
videatur. To your self therefore of right does this Work belong: to whom
though low more, yea whatsoever I am able to do; yet desire I to present this
as the first token of my Thankfulness, for that Countenance and Favor which
you have been pleased to show toward me. For the Labor i^ self, all that I
can promise is this I he Cause is good, I hau^ not made it worse. If the Style
b^e horrid and harsh, therein let my Youth plead for me, for the rest, let
Cato come in, and see, and censure.

Your Worships in all humble service Robert Butterfield.

Robertus Butterfield Magistro He^ric^ Burton salutem dicit.
QVod a Viris prudentibus obseruatum est (Frater in Christo multum dilecte)
illud nobis indies vsu venire magis magisque intelligo; idque non mi^us in
Theologia qu^^^ in caeter is Disciplinis. N^per ^^^er^^sse homines non
Buchana^. Hist. Rer. Scot. l. 1.
tam veritatis cupides quam contentio^^^, q^^ ex hominu^ clarissimorum
sugg^lla^ione claresce^^ se posse sperarent. Neque enim fieri posse
existimarunt, vt non i^ magna eruditioni^* opinione vulgo essent, qui cum Viris
vndequaque spectatissimis certamen sib^ propos^issent. Errores certe virorum
maximorum deprehendere, vt non cuiusuis est, sed exercitatissimi ingenii, ita
and opus est plenum periculi, quod si qui in ^^piant fac^^e ^^que perf^^^^nt
gnauiter, id ipst^e^^^ing it, et^^ alioqui (...) ^sperna^^^^ ^int cruditionis,
vt and veram gloriam, and came quam infequuntur, amittant. Quod tibi vertat
been, Libellum septem Phialarum nuper emisisti, (librum certe quanti^is pre^ij
v^iquorundam Literatorum errata ^o^a^e cum in animo habeas, contra Epistopum,
omni land ornatissi^^^^, animose, and vt Virum forte^^^^ces, copias tuas
q^amprimum educis. Duram sane copisti (...), In quo opere, ne singula
persequ^^, duo sunt quae tibi crimini dant Sapientes and Docti, inter quo^
fortasse etiam nonnulli tui studiosissimi. Primum, quod praeter ordinem and
decorum, nullo habito respectu loci, aut dignitatis, Vi^o tan^o, qui and
Columna est Ec^lesiae, non vereari^ diem dicere, cum and antiquis Canonibus
cautum si^ (quod recte pro Antistite Eli^^si obs^^^a^i^ er^ditissi^^^ noster
Professor ^egius) ne quiuis D. Collins. desen r^sp. ad Apolog. Card. Bella^m.
editus Angli^e.
pro arbitrio Episcopum lacesseret. Scio, quid respondeas, Deus (inquis) ^pse
non est (...), and Cucullus non 7 Phial. page 49.
facit Monachum. Mitto scripturam a te optime interpretatam, quae autem est, si
non haec contumelia est? siccine tibi licere putas in Ecclesiae Patres, and
Antistites debacchari? quanquam quid tibi licere non credis, qui homosis tanta
confidentia, vt te in hoc genere nec pudeat quicquam, neque metuas quenquam,
and cui solenne est non solum (...), quod aiunt (...), in Episcopos inuolare
quod modo facis, vetum etiam occultis cuniculis id agere vt ipsis odium atque
inuidiam confles. Testor ingenii tui faetum clegantissimum,

Principibus placuisse viris -- Nosti caetera. Virum sane Apostolicum, qui
tamen Apostolicum illum Canonem nondum didicit. (...). Canon Apost. 55.


Alterum crimen est, quod neminem scriptis tuis notas, quin eundem Papismi, vel
Arminianismi saltem, tacit, ne dicam aperte velis insimulare. Et quam ab
vtroque crimine alienus sit Diuinissimus noster Episcopus, notius est quam vt
pluribus ostendere necesse habeam. A Papismo quantum abhorreat, testantur
praeclara ipsius Monumenta, in quibus post fata victurus est, cuius Religionis
sordes quae pagina non proculcat? Et quam Arminio sit amicus, indicio nobis
erit eius ad Synodum Dordracenam non sine summo vitae discrimine profectio; vbi
quam praeclare se gesserit, quamdiu per valetudinem ibi manner licuit, nemo qui
non inuidus est ignorant. Quo magis demiror (imo, siqua fides est, pudet me
vicem tuam) te animo gladiatorio Virum tantum, tam inculpatum in arenam
prouocare, qui vt ipse de se dicit, a controuersijs est alienus, and quem omnes
norunt a litibus and iurgijs alienissimum; nisi ex illorum es ingenio quibus
quieta mouere (vt inquit Historicus) magna merces videbatur. Non in praesenti
Salust.
disputationem instituo, vberior ei rei dabitur in sequentibus locus; Verum vt
maxim verum fuerit errasse Episcopum dum Caetum Romanum Veram agnoscit
Ecclesiam, quis hoc illi Vitio vertet, qui cogitat scripsisse illum librum suum
ad Diaecesin suam, vbi si qui ^ssent, qui in auita superstitione adhuc
haererent aegre se illinc paterentur diuelli, ab illis praesertim qui in Patres
suos tam duram ferrent sententiam, tanquam de salute ipsorum nulla spes
superesset. Dandum erat aliquid imbecillitati infirmorum, fecerunt alii saepe,
item boni, vt ab Apostolis vsque repetas. Quanquam quid multis opus est? Nihil
peccauit Episcopus, nec veritati tantillum detraxit; Romanam, e^si non Puram,
tamen Veram esse Ecclesiam demonstrabimus, vt posthac siquis contra sentiat,
nihil sentiat. Vnde cuiuis luce clarius innotesce^ cuius futura est illa
Prouincia, ad quam Episcopum pro singulari tua humanitate amice hortaris, Nempe
7. Phial. page 48 and 52.
Palinodiam canere. Tuae (inquam) parts illae sunt, vt qui primas non habuist^
Aug. (...). su^ initio^
sapientia, habeas secundas modestiae sicut ille Sanctus Pater dicit, habet
enim Episcopus causam Vincibilem opt^mam: Nos certe illi rei operam dabimus, ne
audeas in posterum Ecclesiae Optimatibus inclementer dicere. Merentur inquam,
merentur viri huius nunquam satis laudandi praeclara in Ecclesiam merita,
nancisci aliquem Patronum qui ipsum a probro liberet, qui ipse nimis patiens
est. Quam impar ego ^m tanto facinori norunt caeteri and ipse agnosco; dabo
tamen operam sedulo vt omnes quotquot inspecturi sunt opus hoc nostrum
intelgant, mihi si facultatem at non volu^tatem defuisse. Inuitus diuellor a
laudibus Episcopi nostri, quem supplex Deum Veneror, vt Ecclesiae suae quam
diutissime seruet incolumem. Audi sis, si qua suntquae Christianum, Theologum,
Episcopum commendatum reddant, nihil horum mihi creed in illo desiderabis. Quid
in Christi^no nisi candorem, and morum probi^atem requiris? quid in Theologo
nisi acumen Ingenij and Iudicium acre? quid denique in Episcopo praeter
gubernandi peritiam cum summa Vigilantia coniunctam? me vide, mentiar si post
homines natos, multos pares viderit Orbis Christianus, nedum visurum meliorem
speres. Taceo facundiam ipsius, and ad omnia paratam Eloquentiam qua vnus omnes
Populares suos long antecellit (and qua te velut grandine obrueret) adeo vt
exte^ae Vide varia ipsius Opuscula ex Anglico in Galli^um se^monem versa.
gentes in sua ipsarum Vernacula gestiant ipsum audire loquentem; and qui
tantus est in dicendo, vt quod de Cicerone Oratorum maximo Quintilianus, de
illo vere ausim affirmare, quae vix singula quisquam intentissima cura consequi
posset ab ipso multa fluunt illaborata. Deus mihi testis est qua^ hic nihil
amplificem. Quae quide^ a me non temere dicta, velim vt t^ serio tecum cogites,
quot enim illi^ virtutes, totidem tua vitia vna oper depinxi, cui cum tali viro
simultate gerere iucundum est. Neque velin vt tu, aut quisquam alius existimet
me illum emerendi fauoris gratia impensius laudasse, vtpote quem ad hunc vsque
diem nunquam aspexi, and qua facie sit, nescio iuxta cum ignarissumis: quem
tamen in sinu meo semper gesto, quem tamen habeo semper ob oculos, prae
manibus, in delicijs maximis.

Quod reliquum est, te hortatum velim in super, ne popularem opinionem pluris
quam par est facias; quae quidem vt non est repudianda, cum and vltro defertur,
and surgit ex meritis, ita ambiendam nullo modo existimarunt sapientes. Et illa
certe est quae multa multis sape s^asit perperam. Qui nudiustertius Hosanna
clamabant, hodie Cr^cifige vociferantur. Non indignum erat homine Christiano
dictum Philosophi, (...). Non te moror diutius, precor tibi mentem meliorem,
and dico. Vale.

^he Contents of the following TREATISE.
PART. I.
Chap. 1. What we think of the Church of Rome. Chap. 2. that we think of
those that live in the Communion of the Church of Rome. Chap. 3. that we
understand by the name of the Church. Chap. 4. that we call a true Church.
Chap. 5. that the foundation of Faith is. Chap. 6. that it is directly to deny
the foundation, and how it is overthrown by consequence. Chap. 7. How to
distinguish betwixt the Church ^ Rome and Babylon in the Church, and ^ state of
the question. Chap. 8. Our first argument from Scripture. Chap. 9. Our second
argument, proving that Popery ^keth not away from fundamental tr^ but adds
to it. Chap. 10. Our third argument, proving from the B^tisme in the Church of
Rome, that she ^ true Church. Chap. 11. Our fourth argument, proving from the
l^ full Ordination in the Church of Ro^ that we cannot deny her the name of ^
Church. Chap. 12. Our fifth argument, proving from our man^ of disputing with
them, that we acknowled^ them to bold the foundation. Chap. 13. Our sixth and
last argument, taken from t^ judgment of the learned in this particul^
PART. II.
The Reverend Bishops arguments are defended, and Master Burtons objections
fully answered.

Chap. 1. Containing an Introduction to the following discourse. Chap. 2.
Master Burtons method and manner of proceeding. Chap. 3. Master Burtons
argument answered touching the marks of a true Church. Chap. 4. Master Burtons
cauilling at the Reverend Bishops similitudes, examined. Chap. 5. Whether the
divorce be sued out on Gods part, or on the Church of Romes part. Chap 6. Of
the charitable profession of zealous Luther. Chap. 7. Of the Deane of
Glocesters authority. Chap. 8. Master Burtons exceptions against some passages
in the Reverend Bishops Apology. Chap. 9. Whether Papists be Christians. Chap.
10. How from the Council of Trent Mast^ Burton would prove that the Church ^
Rome does directly deny Christ Jesus.
CHAP. I.
that we think of the CHVRCH of ROME.

LEt no man imagine, that Part 1.
I intend to plead for Baal, to be an Advocate for the impure Church of Rome,
or to lend a shoulder to hold up the tottering fabric of the Antich^istian
Monarchy, a rotten structure; and now, if ever, near to ruin and
destruction. Neither let it be thought by any, that I go about in this ensuing
discourse, afresh to paint over the face of Iezable; I desire rather (were it
not already sufficiently known) to discover her nakedness, and to lay open
her filth to the indignation and scorn of all that pass by. If any one shall
so interpret me, or in that manner gloss upon my writing, let him know, that
then this Book Quem recita^ (...) est, O ^^dentin^, (...). Sed ^ale cu^
re^ita^ in^ipi^ esse (...). (...).
cease to be mine, and becomes his own. If Baal be a God, let him plead
for himself. If Christ's pretended Vicar have any right to his office, let him
produce his proof, but let it be better than by making a Solaecisme in the
words of the Evangelist: Tues Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. Mat. 16.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church: better than by
John 11.
interpreting Sheep and Lambs, Clergy and Laity. He must show fairer
Cards for his deposing of Kings, and disposing of their Kingdoms, than the
two swords in Luke, Ecce tibi duo gladij: the one signifying the Chap. 22.
temporal, the other the spiritual jurisdiction; and that other will prove
but a dream, Arise Peter, kill and eat. We groan for that time, Acts 10.
when the Lord shall destroy this man of sin, with the breath of his mouth.

Our opinion touching the Church of Rome, is, That it is a Church, fraught with
heresies, full of impieties, that she has justified Sodom by her sins, and
the most Heathenish by her Idolatries: That her doctrines (for the most part)
are injurious to Almighty God, and contumelious to the Redeemer of all the
world. Out of their own mouths will we condemn them. A Jesuit of their own
plainly confesses, That if the body of the blessed Son of God be not in
such manner present in the holy Eucharist, as they teach, and to their power
maintain, that then they Costerus Enchtrid. cap. 8.
are the most impious Idolaters that live under the cope of Heaven: worse than
the Tartars, which worship a piece of red cloth for a God. The antecedent we
hold utterly impossible, and that it is wickedness to think that a sinful
man can make his maker: for, without all contradiction, the less is blessed of
the better; and Heb. ^. ^.
therefore what sentence we pass upon them is not hard to judge: Their
Doctrines are deuillish, but their practice much worse. Their public worship
of God in his house so ridiculous, superstitious, heathenish, demonicall, that
it is not possible for any man with an unwounded conscience, either to partake
with them, or to be witness of their actions. In regard whereof, that is most
true which some learned have affirmed, (...) con^^n^ of S^^i^tu^e. (...).
Doctor (...).
That they have a Religion more after Homer, than after the Scripture. And yet
all this is not sufficient to prove them either no Church at all, holding (as
they do) fundamental truth, or a Church not so far forth sanctified as they
hold the same. Which we hope shall appear plainly and clearly to all.

CHAP. II.
What we think of those that line in the Communion of the Church of Rome.

ALthough I think it more needful for every man in particular to work out
his own salvation, than to be curious to know the estates of others: and
apprehending the mercy of God to his own soul; to cry out, Domine, quis ego
sum? Lord, John 21. 21.
who am I that thou should regard me with such favor? rather than like
P^ter of John to ask, Domine, hic autem quid? Master, what shall he do? as
being too sollicitous of others. Nevertheless, we who enjoy the liberty of
the Gospel, cannot have a better occasion to magnify the goodness of God,
than by remembering Egypt from whence we are delivered; nor they who are yet
detained in the house of Bondage, than by seeing their danger to hasten thence.

Error in Religion may be no less pernicious to the souls of men, than
sinfulness of life: and therefore does so far forth (without Repentance)
exclude from all possibility of salvation. The state of the Church of Rome, not
only now, but for many hundred years past, has been such, that the Religion
thereof in many parts of it, has been heretical and erroneous, both for
opinion and practice. And therefore (though the condemnation of some were more
tolerable than of others; some being Authors, others receivers, some Masters,
others Scholars, yet) to all without exception, from the idiot and
handy-crafts man, to the Pope and the College of Cardinals, plagues were due
to our forefathers, though they did but erroneously practice what the guides
heretically taught. If the blind lead the blind both fall into the pit of
destruction. We see the danger they all were in from the greatest to the least.

But was there no way of escape? That which I named before, Repentance only.
Repentance may be either actual, or general. Actual Repentance is necessary
for all known faults: for those which we through ignorance admit, a general
Repentance will find place with God. By M. Hooker his discourse of
justification.
virtue whereof, as many as hold the foundation, which is precious, though they
hold it but weakly, and as it were with a slender thread, although they frame
many base and unsuitable things upon it, things that cannot abide the trial of
the fire, yet shall they pass the fiery trial, and be saved, which indeed
have builded themselves upon the rock which is the foundation of the Church.

Our Fathers then holding the foundation of Faith (which for the present I
assume) I doubt not but God was merciful to save thousands of them living in
Popish superstitions, in as much as they sinned ignorantly. Yet do we not
hereupon make Ignorance the Mother of Devotion (as it is objected by some)
because we make ^urten^ 7. Vials.
them nearer to salvation, who are held in error not knowing it, than those
which pertinaciously defend it being known; whose very want of learning may by
acc^dent conduce (...) cum lite^^^ in ^arathr^m. (...).
to their eternal good, and make a way for them to the mercy of God, whiles
the others are left without excuse. Nor yet because we hope that God might be
merciful to some that lived in times of error and blindness (which it were
no impiety to think, though we had no reason for it) are we of opinion, That a
man may be saved in any Religion: which to B^rto^ i^id.
have named only, is sufficient refutation.

But to conclude, let none embolden themselves upon the mercy of God exhibited
to our Fathers: there is not the same reason of them and of us; they sinned
ignorantly, but the truth is now laid before our eyes: they might be saved by
a general Repentance, for us actual Repentance is needful. Now the voice
from Heaven sounds more shrill in our ears than ever it did, Come out of Apoc.
18. 4.
her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not
of her plagues. This then being premised, I will come nearer to the matter in
hand, viz. Whether they say well who affirm the Church of Rome to be no true
Church, and if the Church of Rome deny the foundation of Faith.

CHAP. III.
What we understand by Church, here.

THis term of Church is (...), ambiguous, and of doubtful sense, none more.
The ambiguity of the word has served some as a fit cloak, under which they
might both shroud their sleights and impostures, and likewise ^v^nt their
deceitful wares. Thus our Adversaries of the Church of Rome, use the name o^
the Church, like Gorgons head, to affright the simple, and bring them into
subjection: no otherwise than the Jews of old cried the Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, who themselves of all others had most sacrilegiously
polluted it. And the Turks at this day brag of themselves, that they are
Muselmanni, that is, The only true believers, who hate (even to the very death)
Christ and Christian Religion.

Unto others, who delighted to find out the truth, it has given occasion more
accurately to distinguish, that they might neither enthrall themselves to every
company which boast themselves to be the Church, nor yet withdraw their due
reverence and obedience from the true Church, when they have found her out.

The word Ecclesia, which signifies (...).
the Church, in the latitude of the sense thereof, may be applied to signify
any company or congregation, any combination or faction whatsoever: but
strictly taken (and as it is ordinarily used in Scripture) by the Church we
understand Gods Company, the Congregation of the faithful, men called forth,
and set apart from the ^est of the world (which the word (...) imports) and
become the Lords peculiar. Now the Church which is (...), the Lords portion or
household, has a double acceptance; there is the Church invisible and the
visible Church. The Saints in heaven which are the Church triumphant, and the
true believers upon earth which are the Church militant, these together make up
the invisible Church: which we call invisible, because for one part of it those
which are dead in the Lord, and received into Abraham's bosom, they are far
remote from our sense, we see them not. The true believers upon earth, which
make the other part of the invisible Church, howsoever we are conversant
amongst them, and behold their persons, yet whether they be indeed such as to
us they seem, is more than we can know; and that their names are written in
the Book of life is a thing past our discerning. The visible Church
comprehends all Christians, as many as far and near throughout the whole
world are baptized into the name of Christ, and profess the same. Parts of the
true visible Catholic Church, are Churches National, as England, the
Netherlands, etc. The parts of the Visible Church, are either sound, as the
Orthodoxe and reformed Churches; or unsound and diseased, as the Greek Church,
the Churches of Italy, Spain, France, etc. Members of the true visible
Church, are all persons baptized, who have not renounced their Baptism, but do
still profess him, to whom at the first they gave up their names. To conclude;
what the nature of the Visible Church is, we may conceive by this exact
definition of it, that it is a Community or Society of men, sanctified Hooker
his discourse of justification.
through the profession of the truth, which God has taught the world by his
Son. Where, by the way, let it be noted, that by sanctification is to be
understood a separation or distinction from others, not professing as they do
(as the word is frequently taken in Scripture, especially the Old Testament):
for true holiness consists not in professing, but in obeying the truth of
Christ.

CHAP. IV.
What we call a true Church.

TWo things there are which breed diversities of opinions among men: the one
the many circumstances wherewithal matters disputable are beset, which being
Hooker. lib. 1. P^r. 11.
several, cause men of sundry wits to be of sundry judgments: the other, the
not conferring the opinions of those that dissent. From whence it has come to
pass, that many emulations and heart burnings have bin noun shed between men,
otherwise learned and pious, which afterward by wise men, interposing
themselves, and comparing the several opinions, have been happily laid
asleep, and the opposites reconciled; who, after their opinions and assertions
were compared together, were found in words to differ, but in sense and meaning
to say the same thing, and seemed rather to disagree, than to do so indeed. The
like falls out in this present controversy. Some have affirmed and do
maintain, That the Church of Rome so far forth as she has the Sacraments
and teaches fundamental truth, is the true Church of Christ, the Family of
Jesus, because they know it merely impossible, that these things should be
found any where without the Church. Others, beholding the mystery of iniquity
which works in that Church, and the many heresies and impieties where withal
her doctrine is fraught, have denied the Church of Rome to be a true Church,
and in regard of her many corruptions have thought her hardly to deserve the
name of a Church at Whita^er. ^e ^c^le^^a. Cap. 1.
all. These assertions are seemingly repugnant, and yet are easily reconciled:
the former opinion by a true Church understanding a Church that has those
essential qualities which concur to make up the being of a Church, and are
as it were the form of it (which according to Philosophy gives essence and
distinction to every thing) though otherwise much deformed and unsound; the
latter, meaning thereby a Church sound and healthy, including within the
appellation of a true Church, not only the being simply, but the wellbeing
also, and all that complement of excellency and perfection, which in this
world the Church is capable of. So that both sides confess the Church of Rome
to be a true Church; but neither of them, that it is an Orthodoxe Church.

Me thinks I might here put a period unto this discourse, and proceed no
faither, but that the importunity of some, which has caused me to begin this
treatise, calls upon me to go forward, and enforces to sift the matter
nearer yet, who will not thus be satisfied, but as if the church of Rome were
wholly, and in every part Diabolical, and every Papist an Antichrist, cry
in the language of Edome, Down with it down with it, even to the ground.
There is no saluattion for awy there, every 7. Vials. passim.
living soul therein perishes, they fight against God, and plead for Babylon,
whosoever they be that allow them the name of a Church, for she has altogether
denied the faith, nay cursed it, and is become worse than an infidel. I say
unto them as Christ to his Disciples, when their zeal or rather fury
transported them, Ye know not of what Luk 9. 55.
manner of spirit ye are.

Therefore to give full satisfaction: As we esteem him to be a true man to
whom the definition of a man Id q^^d absolute de re quaque dicitur ad ^ei
essentiam naturanque pert^^^^^, quod vero (...) id non est r^i essentiale
prop^i^, sed potius essentia accessio and circumst^ntia. ^umus lib: Singulari
de Ecclesia.
agrees, which is, that he is a living Creature endued with reason, though
otherwise he be sick of a foul disease, suppose the Leprosy, yea, the
Plague, which is not only contagious, but mortal likewise: So we take the
Church of Rome to be a true Church, and a part of the true Visible Catholic
Church, so far forth as the definition of the Church, above given, is
compatible with her, though otherwise she be miserably deformed, and
infected, which we have more than once affirmed. This attribute of truth then,
is to be understood not Morally, but Logically: So a Thief, though he be not
an honest man, is yet a true man notwithstanding. Yet more fully: The Church of
Christ may be Mus^ulus in Epist: ad Galat.
considered three ways: first, Respectu electionis diuinae: secondly, Respectu
obedientiae quam praestat Deo: thirdly, Respectu iuris Christi in Ecclesiam:
The Church in regard of divine praedestination is invisible (as we have showed)
and therefore comes not within the present cause: If we consider the Church in
regard of her obedience and fealty which she performs toward God, the Church
of Rome is not the true Church of God, she has rebelled against him, and
transgressed his Laws, she has added to his Word, and must expect (without
Repentance) that he will add to her plagues: But in the third place, though
she be turned aside by her Idolatries, and has wandered from God through her
Fornications, yet he has not lost his right over her, as over those Churches
of Constantinople, and other parts, who long ago embraced Mahumetisme in stead
of Christian Religion: Christ has still Title to the Church of Rome, as a
Prince unto his Subjects that are become Rebels, whom upon their Repentance and
Amendment he receives, not as aliens and strangers, but as his own natural
Subjects.

CHAP. V.
What the Foundation of Faith is.

THe Foundation of our Faith implies two things: First, the general ground
whereupon we rest when we do b^leeue. And thus the fundamental writings* of
the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, are the foundation of our Faith.
Therefore St. Paul tells us, that the Church of God is built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, ^phe. ^. 20.
More peculiarly, the Christian Church is said by St. John to be built upon
twelve foundations, and in them Apoc. 21. 14.
the names of the twelve Apostles. O that the Church of Rome did as M. Hoo^er
his discourse of justification.
soundly interpret these fundamental writings whereupon we build our Faith,
as she does willingly hold and embrace the same!

But secondly, if the name of foundation do note the principal thing which is
believed, then that is the foundation of our faith which Saint Paul has to
Timothy, (...), This 1. Tim. ^. 15.
is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners. That of the Samaritans, This is Christ, the
Savior Io^n: 4 4^.
of the world. That of the Apostle, God manifested in the flesh, justified in
1. Tim 3. 16.
the spirit, scene of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, received up into Glory. This is (...), The pillar v. 15.
an^^ground of truth, unto which these (...).
words are better referred, than to the Church, mentioned in the former part of
the verse, where she has her appellation glorious enough, That she is the
House of God, The Church of the living God. For although the Church may be
Columna forensis, a Pillar whereon do hang the Edicts of the Great King, which
exhibites unto us all saving truth (for which cause it is necessary that they
be added unto the Church which will be Acts. 2. 47.
made capable of salvation) yet can she not be Columna architectonica, that
unto the truth, which a Pillar is unto the house, bearing up the building: for,
thus the Church is built upon the Truth, not the Truth upon the Church.

CHAP. VI.
What it is to overthrow the Foundation of Faith directly; what by consequent.

WHat the Foundation of Faith is, we have already seen: now because that
directly to hold the foundation is so essential to the Church of God, that
without it there can be no Christian Church, and that by our Adversaries in
this cause the denial of the same is brought as a medium, to prove the Church
of Rome to be no true Church; it is therefore requisite, that we now enquire
what it is directly to deny the foundation, and what by consequence to
overthrow it. They overthrow it directly, which directly deny that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners, to whom Christ is an execration, as to
Pagans and Turks; or they to whom he is a stumbling block, and a rock of
offense, as the Jews. Other Foundation can no man lay than that which is laid,
1. Cor. 3. 11.
Jesus Christ. St. Paul, writing to the Hebrews, and desirous to win them to
the acceptance of this Corner stone, which their wise builders had rejected as
unfit for building; tells us what it is directly to deny this foundation, and
withal the heinousness of it, namely, To tread under foot the Heb. 10. 29.
Son of God, to count the blood of the Covenant, where withal we are
sanctified, an unholy thing, and to do despite unto the Spirit of Grace. This
is directly to deny the foundation. Of which crime, whosoever is able, let him
indict the Church of Rome, producing sufficient evidence thereof, and whosoever
shall open his mouth to plead for them, let him be guilty of all the dishonor
that ever has been done to the Son of God. If any man love not the Lord
Jesus 1. Cor. 16 22.
Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha. But until such demonstratiue proof
be brought forth, I resolve to sit down, and rest my self content to take up
his speech, of whom it was truly said that he was great in all wise men's eyes
but his own, The more M. H^oker his discour^e of justification.
dreadful a thing it is to deny salvation by Christ alone, the more slow and
fearful I am, except it be too manifest, to lay a thing so grievous to any
man's charge.

Thus we see what it is to deny the foundation of Faith directly. They
overthrow it by consequent, or indirectly, which, holding it directly,
maintain any one assertion whatsoever, whereupon the direct deny all thereof
may be necessarily concluded.

Thus the Galathians, holding circumsion, did by consequence overthrow
salvation by Christ, in as much as it was impossible that they should stand
together. Hence the Apostle urges them with such dangerous sequ^lles, If ye
be circumcised, Christ Gal. 5.
shall profit you nothing. Christ is become of none effect unto you that are
iustifi^d by the Law, etc. It was truly said of the Philosopher, (...). If one
absurdity be granted, a thousand will follow; and as by long circuit of
deduction, it may be that all Ho^ker. ^^cle: (...). 2. sub in^tio.
truth out of any truth may be concluded: So by a circle of consequence, there
is no error in Divinity, but razeth the foundation. Howbei^, we make a
difference of Heresies and Errors in this kind: some being in the next
degree to infidelity, as those which deny any one Article of the Creed: some
such as from wh^nc^ the denial of the Faith may be with facility concluded, as
those ancient Heresies which struck near the head. Of Hebion denying the
Divinity of Christ, and Marcion which denied his humanity. Some again (in
which rank are those which the Church of Rome maintains) which be removed by
a greater distance from the Foundation, although indeed they overthrow it. Now
this I dare confidently affirm, That no one Heresy which the Church of Rome
avouches at this day, nor all of them together, how damnable soever they be
in themselves, do so nearely raze the foundation of Faith, as any one of those
broched in elder times by Nestorius, Macedonius, and the like, who yet were
never said to deny the foundation of Faith directly.

Thus we see what it is directly to deny the foundation; what also by
consequent. All infidels deny the foundation of Faith directly, by consequent
many a Christian man, yea, whole Christian Churches have denied it, and do
deny it at this present day, as the Greek Church, the Churches of the
Lutherans, the doctrines of Arminius; not the Church of Rome only. What?
Hooker ^is d^scourse of justification.
Christian Churches, the foundation of Christianity? not directly, for then
they cease to be Christian Churches; but by a consequent: in respect whereof
we condemn them as erroneous, although for holding the foundation, we do and
must hold them Christian.

CHAP. VII.
How to distinguish betwixt the Church of Rome, and Babylon in the Church, and
the state of the question in hand.

WHen Popish Writers demand of us where our Church was before Luther, our
Divines usually return them this answer, That it was both within the Church of
Rome, and without it. Without it in distinct societies, as the Albigenses and
Waldenses, which arose in France, Sauoy, and the places near adjoining, from
whom descended the Wicklefisles in England, and the Hussites in Germany, who as
soon as the Church of Rome had interpreted her self, touching some maine
points of controversy betwixt us, and that a man could no longer communicate
with her in the public worship of God, by reason of some Idolatrous rites and
customs which she had established; separated themselves from her, having
Pastors and Congregations apart to themselves, and maugre the fury of fire and
sword, maintained their doctrines which they had taken upon them to defend. The
state of the Church mixed and conjoined with the Church of Rome it self,
consisted of those who making no visible separation from the Roman Profession,
did yet mislike the grosser errors, which at this day she maintains, and
desired a reformation. Thus, I say, we answer them, we plead not for our
selves that we made a new Church, but reformed the old. For we must note, that
there Doctor Chalon. Credo E^cles: Sa^ctam Catholicam.
may be a Visible church.
Church, which in respect of her chief Prelates, and a predominant faction
therein, may be false and Antichristian, yet may contain some members of the
Invisible church
true Church within her Pale, who refuse not to communicate with her; nay more,
are infected with some smaller errors of the time, but keep still the
foundation of Faith entire, and unshaken. Touching the state of the Church
under the tyranny of Antichrist, some of our Divines affirm, That the Church
was in the Papacy; others more warily, and indeed more truly, That the Papacy
was in the Church, because an accident is in the subject, not the subject in
the accident. For, as the body is one thing, the leprosy another, and the
leprous a third: so we must distinguish betwixt the Church, and the Papacy (by
which we ^eane the Dominion of the Pope, and Popish Doctrine) and the Popish
Church, a diseased body made up of them both. We must learn to distin^uish
betwixt the Court of Rome, and the Church of Rome, the sedu^ers, and the
seduced, the body of ^he Church, and the corporation of ^he Man of sin. And
of some have Jude. v. 22.
^ompassion, making a difference, says ^he Apostle.

First then, it is agreed upon, That The state of the question.
directly to hold the foundation of Faith, and to be a true Church, are one
and the same. Secondly, That by ^ome corrupt opinions which by ^onsequence
overthrow the founda^ion, the being of a Church is not taken away. Thirdly,
That the Anti-^hristian faction is not at all the Church of Christ. Papatus non
est Ecclesia, sed Pesti^, ^ydrops, (...). Iun^us ^e Eccle.
Ecclesiae carcinoma, says ^earned Iunius: the Papacy is not the Church, but
the canker, the gangrene, the disease of the Church. This is Babylon, this is
the wh^re, etc. Fourthly, That neither the Church o^ Rome, that is, those which
live in the Romish Religion, and make up on^ society or body, are the true
Church if thereby we understand the Orth^doxe Church of God. But here no^ is
the hinge of the Cause, Whethe^ the Church of Rome do directl^ deny the
foundation of Faith, which some affirm, (and I know not if eue^ any unto this
day except only M^ Barton) but we deny: and, Whethe^ the Church of Rome, as
she is at thi^ present corrupted and deformed has yet the true essence of a
Church which by him is denied, but we affirm, and hope that we shall mak^
good, through him in whom we can d^ all things; and yet think not t^ reap
thanks at the hands of an^ Papist, much less deserve to be the Popes white
Son for our pains. 7. Viall^ pa. 32.


CHAP. VIII.
Our first Argument drawn from Scripture.

THe state of the Church in this present world is subject to many changes, and
is not always one and the same, whether we respect her inward purity of
Religion, or her outward felicity and prosperity. Purity of doctrine is many
times oppressed by error and heresy, and the external happiness of the
Church is often disturbed by persecution and affliction: the one is bred at
home within her own bowels, with the other she is exercised by a foreign
Enemy: to the one God gives her over for her sins, into the other he suffers
her to fall for her correction and amendment. A more lively instance of this
we cannot have, than the ancient Church of Israel, as the Prophets delineate,
and set her forth unto us: with which our Divines do often parallel the Church
of Rome. Yet of he^ it cannot be denied, that in her worst estate, she had
many privileges and prerogatives of a Church, the children that were borne
Ez^k. 1^. 20.
unto them, God calls his own children. Quis ^nim aufit Ecclesiae titulum ijs
praeripe^e, (...).
apud quos verbi su^ praedication^m, and mysteriorum obseruationem deposuit
Deus? For who da^es take away from them the title of a Church, to whom God sent
his Proph^ts to preach his Word, and where he h^^ s^ttled the observation of
those (...) and types, which pointed at him* in whom ^ll the Nations of the
earth sho^^d be ^lessed? says he, professedly handling this present question,
and comparing the Church of Rome with the Church of Israel in her defection
from God.

Now whereas he says afterward Ibid. Sect. 11.
that this came to pass rather from the constancy of God, who, having once
made a covenant with them, would not repent, than was kept on their parts, who
rebelled against him; we willingly grant, and take it to agree well with what
we have already delivered, touching Gods right over his Church. Yet such
(says he) I^idem.
was the immu^ability and goodness of God, that their rebellion and
backesliding could not make the Word of God of none effect, neither could
circumcision be so profaned by their impure hands, but that it still continued
a true sign and Sacrament of his Covenant. The state of that Church afterward,
although it be observed, that after their return from the Captivity, they
never fell to Idolatry again; yet was such, that they were divided into many
Sects, and many Heresies sprang up amongst them. At the coming of our Savior,
they which sat in Moses chair, were the Scribes and the Pharisees, who
perverted the doctrine of the Law, and were the professed Enemies of our Savior;
yet then no doubt was the Church of the Jews the Church of God, or else God
had no Visible Church upon the face of the earth. The Christian Church was
never brought to a lower ebb, than was the Jewish Synagogue in the days of
our Savior Christ. Vide ^. Usher. V^^^e sal^^y of the Ch^^ch of Christ. page
^9. 1. Co^. 12. 3.


Fundamental truth as it is the soul of the Church, and can not choose but be
operative more or less, wheresoever it does enliuen, so is it of that divine
nature, that it acknowledges no other parent but God alone, and they belong
unto him by that name, whosoever hold and profess the same. No man can say
that Jesus is Christ but by the holy Ghost, says S. Paul, and every spirit
that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, says S.
John. 1. John 42.
Where let the words of St. Paul interpret the meaning of St. John, that not
only every spirit which confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is
of God, if so be that in works they deny him not, (with which condition some
would have those words to be understood) for many think aright of the
incarnation of the son of God, who in other things are not answerable to their
profession; but that this their confession is of God, and from him, and that as
the Devil is the Author of all cuill, so there is ^o good whatsoever but
proceeds from God and his most blessed spirit. When the Scribes and Pharisees
^orded it in the seat of Moses and the Prophets, many there were no doubt, who
though they communicated with them in the outward Sacraments, and discipline of
the Church, yet were the flock of another fold, and like a few Olives at the
end of a twig, after the shaking of the tree, claue to the right stock, and
waited for the redemption of Israel by Christ: And thus doubtless it was with
many heretofore, and with some at this day, which being outwardly of the
Church of Rome, we may justly notwithstanding challenge to our selves. Some of
Gods people Doctor Chaloner ^redo. Eccles. R^uel. 18. 4.
are certainly in Babylon, seeing such are warned by the spirit to come out of
her; and it were in vain to command a man to depart a place if he were not
there.

But to conclude our first argument; who can deny (which is the principal)
that God has his Church where Antichrist has his Throne seeing *as the
Apostle tells us) he mus^ 1. These. ^. (...). 4 (...).
sit in the Temple of God, its God. Quo^ seeds ci^^ in Templo Dei collocatur,
it^ innu^tur, tale fore eius Regnum, quo^ nec Christi nec Ecclesiae nomen
aboleat: That the seat of Antichrist is place^ in the Temple of God, thereby
is intimated unto us, that his Kingdom should be such, as should abolish
neither the name of Christ nor of the Church, says that great Geneua Light. I
permit it (...).
to your wise considerations (says one of no mean credit in our Church)
whether it be more likely, that as frenzic, though it self take away the use
of Reason, does notwithstanding prove them reasonable Creatures which have it,
because none can be frantic but they: so Antichristianitie, being the bane
and plain overthrow of Christianity, may nevertheless argue, the Church,
wherein Antichrist sits, to be Christian.

CHAP. IX.
Our second Argument, proving that Popery takes not away from fundamental
truth, but adds to it.

AS an Infant, at the first both little and unable to help it self, gathers
strength and stature by degrees, and likewise insensibly, till he become a
perfect man: such has been the growth of the Man of sin, at the first a
Pigmy, but now become a Son of Anak. By what means, from so small
beginnings, he attained to so great an height, the wisdom of the wise has
discovered unto us. Impossible it were for the Rulers of that Synagogue, either
to have gotten that power into their hands, which now they hold, or to
mainetaine it now they have it, by making an open invasion upon the truth, and
oppugning the bulwarks of Faith with hostile fury. No: Popery is a clandestine
conspiracy, and opposes Doctor Chaloner. Vnde Z. z^nia?
the Faith, not directly, but obliquely, not formally, but vertually, not in
express terms, but by consequences; and therefore until the Trumpets sounded
the alarm, and the Thunders in the Revelation gave warning, few suspected it.
Wherefore is it said to be a mystery of iniquity, but that it subtilely and
secretly undermines the Faith, not bidding open defiance unto it? Arius of
old, boldly and plainly denied the Divinity of Christ: Macedonius openly
opposed the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and the like. If Popery should go thus
to work, what mystery were there in it? What? which were not obuious to every
man's conceiving? Yea, Vid. Dr. Chal. Vn^e Z z^^ia?
what error in doctrine or discipline is there brought into the Church by
those builders of Babel, which had not its first Original from truth? as it is
iudiciously observed, that scarce any error has crept into the (...). lib. 1.
Ca^ ^.
Church, which took not its Original and sourse from the ancient approved
Discipline of the Church. Thus we see their general policy. If we enquire
into their particular practice, we shall find, that the Popes Arithmeticke,
Dr. Chaloner credo E^clesiam sanct^m Cathol.
which he uses in calculating the Articles of Faith, is not substraction, but
addition. What we purely affirm, the Popish Writers for the most part do
affirm the same; the difference is, that they affirm somewhat more than we
do. They deny not so much that our affirmations are truth, as that they say, we
affirm not all the truth: whereupon they usually style us in their writings
Harding against B. Jewel.
Negatinists. For example sake: We agree on both sides, That the Scriptures
are the rule of Faith, That the Books of the Old Testament written in Hebrew
are Canonical, That we are justified by Faith, That God has made two
receptacles for men's souls after death, Heaven and Hell, That God may be
worshipped in Spirit without an image, That we are to pray unto God by Christ,
That there be two Sacraments, That Christ is really received in the Lords
Supper, That Christ has made one oblation of himself upon the Cross, for the
redemption, propitiation and satisfaction, for the sins of the whole world.
But see, our affirmations content them not: To the Scriptures they add, and
equalize unwritten traditions; to the Hebrew Canon, the Apocrypha; to faith in
the act of Justification, works; to Heaven and Hell, Purgatory, Limbus Patram,
and Limbus Puerorum; to the worship of God in Spirit, Images; to prayer to God
by Christ, Invocation and Intercession of Saints; to Baptism and the Lords
Supper, five other Sacraments; to the reality of Christ in the Sacrament, his
corporal presence; to the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, the sacrifice in
the Mass, with other like: and these we deny.

These things being well weighed, we see how justly we may say since the
Council of Trent, as Luther did before it, That under the Papacy is much good,
nay all; yea, the very kernel of Christianity: for as much as such
affirmatiues of ours, at least, such as concern the foundation of Faith, have
been in all ages professed by the Church of Rome it self.

The nature then of an addition being such, that it does not directly M. Hocker
his discourse of justification.
deny, but by consequence at the most; that if that which is added be such a
privation, as takes away the very essence of that whereunto it is added, then
by sequel it overthrows: we suppose this to be another sound Argument,
proving that the Church of Rome does not directly deny the foundation of our
Faith, and consequently that we cannot deny her the name of a Church.

CHAP. X.
Our third Argument, proving from the Baptism in the Church of Rome, that they
are a true Church.

TWo things there are which difference and distinguish the Church of God from
the Assemblies of Infidels and Pagans: something which she exhibiteth, and
offers unto Almighty God: something again which she receives from the hands
of his most excellent Majesty, as a pledge and token of his favor and grace.
And we shall find that the Church has used both of these as a strong
argument, even to enforce Almighty God to be merciful unto her in her
extreamities. That which the Church offers unto God, is her service of him,
in that she calls upon his name, and professes to worship him in Christ,
acknowledging him to be the Author of all her good, and he to whom all praise
belongs. Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen Psalm. 79. 6.
that have not known thee, and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon
thy Name.

The Church receives from God the blessed Sacraments as testimonies of his
gracious dignation, and favor; as pledges of that invisible grace which by
those visible signs he has promised to bestow upon her; as seals of the
covenant, and agreement betwixt God and his Church, whereby he has engaged
himself that he will be their God, and they shall be his people; and lastly as
badges distinguishing them from all others which carry not the like unto them,
and whereby they love to be known. Wherefore (says David in the name 1. Sam.
17. 26.
of the Church) should this uncircumcised Philstime defy the armies of the
living God? What circumcision was of old, the same is Baptism now (^aue that
more glorious effects are attributed to this Sacrament of the christian Church)
the Sacrament of initiation into the Church, our incorporaion into Christ, the
door of our actual entrance into Gods house, that which both declares and
makes us christias, the benefit whereof is not terminated in our selves, but
extends to our children, by virtue whereof our Seed is holy from 1. Cor. ^.
12.
the very birth; not that grace from baptized parents is derived by
propagation, but thus we are to understand it, that to all professors of the
name of Christ this pre-eminence above infidels is freely given, that the fruit
of their bodies brings into the world with it a present interest and right to
those means where with the Ordinance of Christ is that his Church shall be
sanctified. It is the Doctrine of the Church of England touching the Sacraments
in general, that they are badges and tokens of Article. ^5.
Christian men's profession: And touching Baptism in particular, that it is a
si^^e of profes^ion, and a mark of See (...) on the Art^^les
differen^e, whereby Christian men are discerned from others that be not
christened, in the 27 Article of Religion. If then the administration of the
Sacraments distinguish a Church from that which is no Church: If Baptism be a
specificall difference of a christian from him that is no christian, how can we
deny them of the Romish religion to be now a Church? or with what color of
truth can we deny Papists to be Christians, seeing that we take them all to be
baptized persons, even as we our selves are? for it is an ancient Apostolic
aphorism, One Lord, one faith, one Baptism: Ephesians. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 13.
and by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, Protestants or Papists.

I will not now trouble my self to prove that Popish Baptism is true
Baptism, till I know who denies it; for howbeit some go about to prove it not
to be good from their Popish opinion, which makes the intention of the
Minister to be of the essence of the Sacrament (wherein how soundly they argue,
I shall hereafter enquire) and so the argument may be of force against them;
yet nothing hinders but that according to our tenants it may be good all this
while. Seeing then that out of all question their Baptism in the Church of
Rome is holy and good, let them who nickname the Ordinance of God, one while
calling i^ the 7. V^^lls. page 47.
Shell of Baptism, another while, the page 35.
Relic of Baptism; see how they can free themselves from egregious disgrace
cast upon the blessed Sacrament, and by rebound upon Christ, the Instituter and
Ordainer of it. The Penmen of the Holy Ghost seldom or never mention Baptism,
but withal they attribute unto it some effect of special grace: they teach us
that with water God does purify, and cleanse his Church: they term Baptism a
Bath of regeneration, ^phes. ^. 26. Tit. ^. 5.
they give men advice to receive ou^ward baptism, and persuade them that it
does avail to remission of sins; Act ^. ^8.
which makes me suspect, that the Spirit of God guided not that pen which
could drop forth such unsavory words. What? is Baptism now a shell, fit for
no use but to be cast away, and trodden under foot? is it become a relic, a
ragge of Popery? Surely, by as good reason as (in another Treatise) the sign
of the B^iting of the Popes Bull.
Cross is said to be the mark of the Beast. But what Classical Author have
we for these speeches? He that can (causlesly) object unto others quaintness
of speech, let him produce but one learned and religious, 7. Vi^ll^. page. 28.
that ever spoke or wrote in this manner. But I bridle my self, and return to
my purpose in hand.

Sacraments are pledges and tokens of Gods love to his Church: their very
being, and nature consists altogether in relation to some such gift and grace
supernatural, as God only can bestow. How then should any but the Church,
administer those Hooker. Eccle. Po^it. lib. 5. Parag. ^0.
Ceremonies as Sacraments, which are not thought to be Sacraments by any but by
the Church? For those then which are our Adversaries in this cause, and will
not grant Papists to be so much as Christians, they must give us leave (till
we hear farther from them) to think this our third Argument, drawn from the
lawful Baptism in the Church of Rome, to be unanswerable.

CHAP. XI.
Our fourth Argument, taken from the Lawful Ordination in the Church of Rome.

Our Lord and Savior, when he had finished the work of our Redemption, even
that great work which he came into the world to accomplish; then he ascended
up into Heaven to be the Advocate of his Church, the Mediator betwixt God and
Man, where he is at the right hand of God, making intercession for us. Romans 8.
34.
When he would deprive his Church of his bodily presence, he took care that
she should not sit like a Widow, disconsolate, and afflicted; and therefore when
he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men: to some to Ephesians. 4. ^.
be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, for the work of the Ministry,
and for the edifying of the Body of Christ. To these he gave his Promise, That
he would be with them always Mat. 28. 20.
to the end of the world. Solomon had a Vineyard in Baal ham^n, he let it
Cant. 8. 11.
sorth unto Keepers: This Vineyard is the Church; the Keepers, to whose
^^elage and care our blessed Lord (typified in Solomon) committed his Church,
were at the first Apostles, and Apostolic persons their Successors to the
worlds end, in their function, and Ministerial office: (...), men consecrate,
and set a part for that purpose; whose is the power of the keys, and the
office of laying on of hands, conueying that grace unto others which themselves
have received, that so the Church of Christ never be destitute. Where soever
there be persons retaining th^^ power, howsoever otherwise exceeding
blameworthy (which I often inculcate, because I would not be^ misunderstood)
there we cann^^ deny, that there is the true Church of Christ. And our
Adversaries ^^ this cause, see that they cannot gain their purpose, unless
they strip the Church of Rome of this privilege. There is no Ordination, no
Ministry, 7. Vialls pa. 36.
and so down ward, no Baptism, ^^ Christianity. The ears of our Divines are
well accustomed to tho^^ importune clamours of our Adversaries of the Church of
Rome, bot^ for our Church in former ages; ^f you h^d a Church before Luther,
where were your Pastors? and since the reformation, finding their cause
desperate in the particulars of it, they inueigh against our Clergy; You have
no calling, you have no more right ^^ meddle in things sacred, than yo^^ Wives
or Daughters, you are no Ministers, you run before you are sent, you are
Intruders, and Thieves, that enter not in by the door of the fold, but climb
up another way, Wolves, and Laymen, no Priests: and therefore you have no
S^^r^ments, nor Service of God. This is the voice of Bristow, Howlet, Sa^ders,
C^^pian, and the rest of that rabble. Now if it be observed what we answer to
the first, and bow we refute the latter calumny, it will soon appear what
we are to determine in this matter.

First then we affirm, That no man has ^^ do in this office, but he that is
lawfully called thereunto. Who ever intruded himself with impunitie, and
without dangerous arrogancy, into this funct^on? The hand of Jeroboam is
withered; and Ozia^, though a King, is smi^ten with Leprosy, for touching
those things which were holy without a calling thereunto. This is that whereby
we may discern the Priests of the Sanctuary from Ieroboams Priests; of whom
we read, that whosoeue^ would, might consecrate himself. Christ suffers
not the Devil to tell 1. King. 13.
that he knew him, beca^se (as one n^teth) Mark. 1. 25.
hoc presumed without a calling ^^ publish the truth. The Devil could easily
espy the want of Commission in the Sons of Sce^a, when they adjured him by
the name of Ies^^ whom Paul preached: Jesus I acknowledge, Acts. 19.
and Paul I know; b^t who a^^ ye? Your warrant is not good, yo^^ counterfeit
charms are not strong enough to remove me. The reason is manifest, No man
takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.
Secondly, Heb* 5. 4.
We auerre no less confidently, that it belongs unto the Church only to
send those who shall hau^ authority in the Ministration of holy things. She
received the Keys at the hands of Christ, and to her it appertains, to
deliver them to those that shall use them. She has he^ Commission, As my
Father sent me, so I send you. For this cause I l^ft thee in John. 20. 21.
Cre^t (says St. Paul to Titus) that thou Tit. 1. 5.
might ordain Elders i^ eu^^y Ci^ie, ^^ I appointed thee. Without this
there can be no Oeconomie, nor order in the Church: we should have as many
several opinions as several ^^n. Ordination therefore, and laying on of
hands, the Church has ^ommanded to be retained, and performed with all
solemnity: That a Bishop should be ordained, ^^ther by the whole Province, or
by a Council, or according to the Canon, Canon. Apost. 1.
by three or two Bishops at the le^st, ^he Metropolitan (if it be possible)
being present, and promoting the business: What Pries^^ and Deacons should
be ordained with due^ites and ceremonies, and prayers in the face of the
Church, that (...) people might acknowledge their lawf^ll Pastors. Thirdly, For
those tha^ before L^ther had the Popish t^^s^ in detestation, they might
^cknowledge even them of the Church Dr. ^rid^^^x L^ct. de V^si^. E^cle^^a.
of Rome for their Pastors, so far forth as they had a lawful, calling; and
preached Christ howsoever a for as much as they oftentimes feed others, who
themselves eat nothing; or give good corn mingled with a great deal of
chas^e. Fourthly and lastly, for our Ministry at this day, we answer them,
That either it i^ Lawful and Cano^icall, or else they have none; seeing that
we have received it from them, though they we^^ unworthy to confer it, as
they ^^om their Predecessors and ours in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. It is
worth the while, to observe the impudency of our Adversaries i^ this matter,
how when they cannot answer v^, they betake themselves to their wonted trade of
lying: Thus goes the ^^le; S^ory, Sands, and Gri^d^ll (say they) ^ee by
appo^^^men^ at the sig^e of the N^gges^ he^^ in Ch^^pe side to Lo^den, and
(...) that the old Bishop of L^^d^ffe, wh^^ they expected for their Canonical
Cons^^rato^^, had withdrawn himself for the threats of ^onner, they laid
hands one upon another. Our Divines pass not this over in silence, but give a
precise and punctual answer to it. Not only our Reverend Bishop (whose cause
we have now in hand) answering his Egregious Cauiller, in that golden Work of
The honor of the married Clergy: but diverse others of our choysest Divines,
who Dr. Prideaux orat. de vocatione Ministror. M. Mason in the defense of the
Ministry of the Church of England.
seriously refute this Fable, evidently showing out of the undeniable Records
of our Church, not only at what time, by whom; in what place, every one of the
^orenamed Bishops was Canonically consecrated, but also touching B. Jewel,
Parker, and others: who preached at the consecration of every one of these* and
likewise what were their several Texts. And left these turn coats should
persist herein, and still tickle their Proselytes in the head with this tale,
our right Reverend Archbishop that now is, caused four of the learneder sort
of their Priests ^^ be brought, who beheld and viewed these Records before
sufficient witnesses, and promised to certify the truth to the rest of their
party.

Thus we perceive that it is a thing hitherto unheard of amongst us, that any
Member of our Church should deny that there is lawful ordination in the Church
of Rome. What then ^^ is there no God in Israel? nor balm^ in Gilead? must we
go to gathe^ grapes from the Romish hedges, and derive Bishops of Christ from
the Sea of Antichrist? (i^ is to be understood all this while, that we ple^^
our own cause, the Reformed Churches in other parts want n^^ learned Patrons
of their own) the weake^ so^t may perhaps be offendes hereat, sed Cordatiores
norunt, t^^ Dr Prideaux O^at. de V^^at. Minist.
wiser understand, that the Scribes Pharisee^ sometimes sat in the chair of
Moses, and that Judas ba^e the office of an Apostle; and sometimes the Evil
have chief autheritie Article. ^6.
in the Ministration of the word and Sacraments, says the confession of our
Church: for it is one thing the power of teaching, another the purity of
Doctrine; nor does he that by superstition, or heresy lets go purity of
Doctrine, presently lose his authority and faculty of ordaining, as Aarons
Idolatry hindered him not from transferring the Priesthood to his posterity.
Who is ignorant that they which are baptized by heretics are truly baptized?
and likewise that those which are admitted into the Minist^ie by such, are
truly ordained? we regard not the quality but the authority of him that
conferreth holy Orders. As we rebaptize M. Hieren his answer to the Popis^
^^me. How can she make a lawful Priest, if she be not the church of Christ?
none that have received Baptism in the Church of Rome; so we do not ordain
them anew which have taken Orders from that See, when they become conuerts. If
they have sworn to any Error or Heresy of that Church; that we cause them
to abjure, but we suppose them truly invested in the Order o^ Priesthood.

By this we hope it is evident, th^^ there is yet a little strength in t^^
Sinful Church of Rome, forasmuc^ as there is true Baptism, wherei^ they are
baptized into Christ's tru^^ and not the Popes errors, and t^^ she has not
wholly lost the face ^^ a Church; for there is true and lawful ordination,
wherein they recei^ Commission, and do promise to tea^^ the people, not the
Popes legend^ but out of the holy Scriptures; s^ that both Pastor and flock
are o^^ by admission, promise and engagement, theirs by abuse and practice*
Neither shall the precipitate speeches, and rash censures of any man ever
prevail so far with us, b^ that we will still believe, and hope and pray
that he which called Job amongst the Heathen, and the Quee^ of the South by
the bare report o^ Solomon, and gives that instinct o^ nature unto creatures
walking in a pasture where venomous herbs are mixed with wholesome, to make
choice of that which is proper for them, and abstain from the contrary; will
give the guidance and assistance of his Spirit to his number under the tyranny
of Antichrist to do the same, that so his calling be not still in vain, the
ordination wholly unprofitable, or that admission in Baptism always
frustrate, that is, to be the savor of death unto death, and in none the
savor of life unto life: and herein we doubt not but we are heard, even before
we ask.

CHAP. XII.
Our fifth Argument, proving from our manner of disputing with Papists, that
they do not directly deny the foundation of our faith.

IN those many parts of knowledge, about which the mind of man is conucrsant,
some such grounds there are, which being proposed, (...) mind does presently
embrace them, as free from all possibility of errou^* clear and evident
without proof. Such are those Principles in Philosophy, that the whole is
greater th^^ the parts, etc. Those axioms o^ reason, that the greater good is
to ^^ chosen before the less, that we m^^ do unto others as we would be
d^^ unto our selves. A sentence whi^^ St. Augustine says, all Nations vnd^^
heaven are agreed upon: and of su^^ (...). Th^oph^as^us.
things as these to demand a reason were to take away reason. Oth^^ things
there are, which although the^ be not so manifest in themselves, ye^ such is
their plainness, that eue^ easiness it self makes them hard^ be disputed
of: and to this numbe^ it seems to me, that the matter about which we now
contend, may well be reckoned; wherein for ought I can perceive, they whi^^
oppose us, have not brought so mu^^ as probability of reason to b^c^^ their
opinion, much less that substantial reason, and demonstratiue 7. Vialls. p.
^8.
proof, wherewithal they bear us in hand. For if the present question to
this day had never, been moved, nor any word or syllable sounding that way
were to be found amongst the Writings of the Divines of the Reformed Churches:
yet such a general tacit concent there is amongst them herein, and so
universally do they conspire in this, that the Church of Rome does not
directly deny the foundation of Faith, that their assent may necessarily be
euinced, if we do but consider their manner of disputing against them of that
faction.

The Fathers in the Primitive Church, when they wrote; Tertullian, the Book
which he calls Apologeticu^; Arnobius, and Lactantius his Scholar, against
the Gentiles, Chrysostom his Orations against the Jews, Eusebius his ten
Books of Evangelical demonstration; they stand in defense of Christianity
against them, by whom the foundation thereof was directly denied. But the
Writings of the Fathers against M. H^oker his discourse of justification.
Nouatians, Pelagians, and other Heretics of the like note, refell Positions,
whereby the foundation of Christian Faith was overthrown by consequent only.
In the former sort of writings, the foundation is proved, in the latter it is
alleged as a proof; which, to men that had been known directly to deny,
must needs have seemed a very beggarly kind of disputing. In like manner our
proceedings against Papists, in disputing against them, do show not only that
they hold, but that we acknowlehge them to hold the foundation. Do we go
about to prove to them this truth, th^^ Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners? Do we not allege i^ as a proof? What say we against
transubstantiation, but this, That if our Lords Maiesticall body have now any
such new property, by force whereof it may every where really even in substance
present it self, or may at once be in many places; then has the Majesty of
his estate extinguished the verity of his nature? Against the merit of works
what do we allege, but that Christ alone has satisfied and appeased his
Fathers wrath? Christ has merited salvation alone. We should beg the
question, we should do fondly Vide Thomam part. 1. quaest. 1. a^tic. 8.
to use such disputes, neither could we think to prevail by them, if that
whereon we ground, were a thing which we know they do not hold, which we
are assured they will not grant. To be copious herein were to light a candle at
noone day; and I have been too prolixe already, for which my ensuing breuity
shall make amends.

CHAP. XIII.
Our last Argument, from the judgment of the Learned.

ALthough we judge what we have already delivered in this cause, to be
abundantly sufficient, and our arguments such as will not readily be answered;
yet because we would not be thought to hold that which no one learned or
godly has done before us, and that it may appear that if to say the Church of
Rome is a true Church, be to favor Popery, the greatest Adversaries that ever
that Church had, have been favorers thereof, with whom they must be content
to absolve or condemn us; it shall not be grievous to us to allege the
Testimonies of a few, whereby it shall appear that the best learned in our
profession are of this judgment. We heard something by the way before of
Caluius opinion, we shall find that he is still the same. I suppose (says
he) that in the Papacy some Church remains, Calu. Epist. 104.
a Church crazed, or, if you will, broken quite in pieces, forlerne, misshapen,
yet a Church. Again, Semisepultus illie Instit. lib. 4. cap. 2. Sect. 12.
iacet Christus, obrutum Euangelium: There is Christ half buried, the Gospel
overwhelmed with humane traditions. I deny her not the name of a Morn. de
Eccles.
Church (says another) no more than to a man the name of a man, as long as he
lives, what sickness soever he has. Hear another of as deep judgment as
any in our Church: I acknowledge Zanch. Praefat. de Relig.
the Church of Rome, even at this present day, for a Church of Christ; such a
Church as Israel under Jeroboam, yet a Church. Mark his reason, Every man
sees, except he willingly hoodwincke himself, that as always, so now the
Church of Rome holds firmly and steadfastly the Doctrine of truth concerning
Christ, and baptizeth in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
confesses and avouches Christ for the only Redeemer of the world, and the
Judge that shall sit upon quick and dead, receiving true believers into
endless joy, faithless and godless men being cast with Satan and his Angels
into flames unquenchable. Hear another: In hunc modum iudicium facimus de
Ecclesia in qua est Papatus. ^unius (...) de (...).
Deus vocat came, etc. This is our judgment concerning that Church in which the
Papecie is. God calls her, etc.

Exparte Dei vocatur adhuc Hammi, Populus meus; and Ruchama, misericordiam
consequuta, quae verissime enparte sua Lo-Hammi non Populus meus, and
Lo-Ruchama, non assequuta misericordiam potest appellari, vt apud Hoseam
Prophetam legimus: On Gods part sbe is yet called Hammi, my People; and
Ruchama, one that has obtained mercy, who for her own part (by reason of her
disobedience) may truly be said to be Lo-hammi, not my People, and
Lo-Ruchama, one that has not obtained mercy, as we read in the Prophet Hosea.

At ista Ecclesia nihil non habet corruptum. Fateor: sed quod Diui^^ habet
omnia in Scripturis, a Deo est, quod corrupta habet omnia, ab ip^a est, quod
diuina habet omnia, Ecclesia est, quod eadem habet corrupta omni^, Ecclesia
corrupta est: But that Church has nothing which is not corrupted, I grant it:
but that she has all Divine truth contained in the Scriptures, it is from
God, that that truth is corrupted, is from her self, in that she has all
divine truth she is a Church, in that she has corrupted it, she is a corrupt
Church.

Ecclesia non tollit^r corruptione nisi totali (vt loquuntur) quam vocant
interitum. Ecclesiam non tollit partialis cor^^^tio, sed inf^^mat. Ecclesia
Romana omnia hab^t corrupta, sed non omnino: haec non interitus est, sed
p^^tialis corruption eius dicanda est: The being of a Church is not taken away
by corruption unless it be total (as they speak) which is the destruction of
it. Corruption in part does not destroy the Church, but weakens it. The Romish
Church has all things corrupted, but not altogether, etc.

Let us come nearer home. Though M. Hooker his discourse of Iustificat^on.
the Church of Rome have played the Harlot worse than ever did Israel; yet are
they not as now the Synagogue of the Jews, which plainly deny Christ Jesus,
quite and clean excluded from the New Covenant. Vtrobique Catholica Tortu^a
Torti. page 367.
fidei professio, qua ipsa in professione non mutamus in quibus nobiscum estis;
in multis enim nobiscum estis: With you and with us is the profession of the
Catholic faith, in which profession we alter not that wherein you agree with
us; for in many things we agree, Vo^ ^ere cum ^ulta apud v^s re^iqua sint ad^uc
de Cathotholicae f^dei d^^m^^ibus, quanquam non nihil sermentata, membra quid^^
Catholi^ae etsi non s^na membr^dice ^^u^^inemus. page 40:
says the late Reverend Bishop of Winchester. And again, Seeing that with you
there yet remain some opinions of the Catholic faith, howbeit somewhat
sowred with Popish leaven, we are content to account you members, though
unsound members, of the Catholic Church.

Hear another, who never yet was so much as suspected to favor Popery. We
must distinguish the Papacy from ^. Usher in a Sermon of the Universality of
the Church of Christ, before the King at Wansted. page 13.
the Church wherein it is, as the Apostle does Antichrist from the Temple of
God, wherein he fitteth. The Foundation upon which the Church stands, is that
common Faith, in the unity whereof all Christians do generally accord. Upon
this Old Foundation Antichrist raises up his new buildings, and lays upon
it, not hay and stubble only, but far more vile and pernicious matter, etc.

And after. Popery it self is nothing page ^6.
^lse but the botch and plague of the Church, etc.

And again. If you demand where page 30.
was Gods Temple all this while? the answer is at hand; There where Antichrist
sat. Where was Christ's People? Even under Antichrists Priests. And yet this is
no justification at all, either of Antichrist, or of his Priests; but a
manifestation of Gods great power, who is able to uphold his Church, even there
where Satan's Throne is. Revel. 2. 13.
And sundry other witnesses might be produced, which I had not leisure or
opportunity to enquire into. In the mean while I would gladly se^ the
Testimony of but one in estimation for his learning amongst us, that ever
affirmed the Church of Rome to deny the foundation of Faith directly. The
Verdict which the Church of England passes upon them, is this: The Church of
Rome has erred not only in their living, and Article 19.
manner of Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith: but that she has denied
the Faith, and is become wors^ than an Infidel, I cannot find to have been
at any time delivered under her authority.

To draw therefore to a conclusion; since the Scriptures affirm that many of
Gods people are in Babylon, and that Antichrist must sit in the Church of God;
since that Popery takes not away from the foundation, but adds to it,
^^ndamento a^ (...), ^a^it^ no^^tium Caput. (...) v^i s^pra. Vide Dr. Pride.
^^ct. de ^isib. ^^clesia.
whence nothing is more frequent with ou^ Divines, than to term Popery,
^octri^am addititiam, and their Reli^ion, Popish additaments: and Aqui^^^, who
gave the Pope power to ^ake a new Creed, never thought that he might abrogate
the old; for ^s much as they have that Baptism which makes them members of
the ^ue Church, and Orders so good that we never iterate them; seeing that
when we dispute against them ^ee acknowledge them to hold fun^amentall truth,
and that all our ^octors with an unanimous consent ^ffirme so much, and the
sentence of any one Classical Author cannot be ^rought who affirms the
contrary; and lastly, seeing the Church our Mother imputes unto them error
^nely in ^atters of Faith, not abne^ation of the Faith it self, we affirm
that the Church of Rome, though otherwise wicked enough, has not ^et directly
denied the Founda^ion of Faith, and therefore that we cannot deny her the name
of a Christian Church: (...), which is that we intended to prove.

The Second Part.
Wherein the Reverend Bishops Arguments are defended, and Mr. Burtons
Objections answered.

CHAP. I.
Containing an Introduction to the following discourse.

THere is in rectitude (as the Philosopher wisely (...).
notes) that perfection and beauty, whereby we discern both it self, and
whatsoever is contrary unto it: For he that knows what is straight, does even
perceive thereby what is crooked, because the absence o^ straitness in bodies
capable thereon (...) Ari^^^^e anima. lib 1.
is crookedness, yet because t^ Judge both of rectitude and obliq^tie is the
Rule, which all have not t^ skill, few the will to apply: it is necessary
sometimes to leave the amiable discourse of truth, and apply o^ selves to set
forth the knottinesse an^ deformity of error, that error man yet be more
abandoned, and trut^ more heartily embraced. We suppose that we have already
not only fortified the cause it self which we took in hand, with good a^
solid reason, but laid down tho^ rules also, whereby whatsoever c^ be probably
objected against the truth, may be fully answered; ^^ namely, if we mark in
what sen^ we affirm the Church of Rome t^ be a true Church, in what respect s^
is Babylon, and in what consideration a true Church; what it is to d^nie the
foundation, what likewis^ to overthrow it, and how far ^ Christian Church may
overthrow it. Yet to make the work complete, it will not be amiss to examine
the weight of those reasons which are opposed hereunto, and to free the
arguments already brought in defense, not of the Romish Church, or any point
of their Religion, but of a true ^ssertion amongst Protestant Di^ines, from the
exceptions alleged against them. And this we will do* Heb. 6. 3.
^f God permit.

Where by the way let me aduer^ise, that had the second Edition of ^he
Reverend Bishops book Of the old Religion. I saw it not, till I had quite
finished the first part of this Treatise.
come sooner to my hands, I think I had saved my pains, and not proceeded
^hus far; not that I had not a good mind to the Bishops defense, and yet
have, but that it might seem super^uous to add to it, unreasonable to ^eply
against it. M. Burton (as it is ^uident) before the Edition of his book, saw
and read the Reverend Bishops Apology, wherein he shows that preferment has
not made him differ from what he was before nor self*conceit to take up a new
opinion, but love of the truth, to auer^ that wherein he finds all Divines t^
conspire with him, none gain sayin^ him. At M. Burtons hands he has g^^ned
nothing hereby but the opinion of pertinacie added to his error; ^^ takes him
boldly by the sleeue, an^ calls him to account, not only f^^ his former
assertions, but for his Apology also: how justly, we com^ now to enquire.

CHAP. II
M. Burtons method and manner of pr^ceeding.

(...) Nazianzenus.
(...)* All disputation consisting of tw^ parts, the confirmation of truth,
an^ the confutation of error; the first o^ these we have absolved, the la^^
now takes place, M. Burton took upon him the interpretation of a portion of
holy Scripture in the book of the Apocalypse, one of those two books, which
St. Austen said were reserved to be understood in heaven. The subject of his
discourse is the pouring out of the 7. Vialls; wherein, The Cantic. in the Old
Testament, and this in the New.
as if St. John in the Spirit of prophecy had foreseen the error of our most
worthy Prelate, and designed M. Burton for one of the 7 Angels, he powers out
the second Vial wholly upon him: with how good success, let the event decide.
In the mean while I shall return him some of his own dregs to drink.

His proceeding is troublesome, and tempestuous like the Sea, one while
affirming, another while denying the same thing. Scopae dissolutae. Now he
answers, now he argues, by and by he declaimes, altogether without order, vt
nec pes nec caput vni reddatur formae: yet to reduce him to the best form we
can, we will observe in his discourse these two parts. 1. a general
proposition, 2. the disputation it self. In the first he teaches us how to
procced herein, telling us that it is a matter not to be 7. Vialls Page 28.
maintained by finenes of wit, nor quaint Rhetorical discourse, but upon sound
ground, and substantial demonstration. I need not tell you whom he would
decipher by this speech, but I must needs wonder that he is so witty at first;
and it calls to my remembrance the Infamous Paralle^ written by Eudaemon
Johannes against the late Reverend Bishop of Winchester, wherein one maine head
of hi^ accusation against that worthy Prelate, is, that he was too conversant
i^ the Comic writers, his style w^^ Vid (...). Tort^r. ^orti.
too curious, his Latin too neat for the Jesuits palate. Thus M. Butr^^* least
the Bishop by his divine Esoquence, and accurate speech should prevail too
far with his Readers strikes first at that, by disgrace tearming it finenesse
of wit, and quain^ Rhetoric; little hurting his adversary therreby, but
singularly dishonouring Almighty God. For whose are the Arts? whose is
Eloquence, and utterance? who gave man the wit and the brain? Demand of all
the faculties of the Soul and body, whose Image and inscription they bear,
they will tell you Gods. In as much therefore as you offer ^niurie unto the
least of these, you do ^t unto God.

But who sees not whereunto this ^endeth? Those irreproueable la^ours which the
present age admireth, and posterity shall rather ^nuie than equal, That
admirable faculty wherewithal the Author of ^uerie good gift has blessed our
most heavenly Prelate above all the ^onnes of men, all is blown away with a
puff, as if it were nothing but froth: and to what end, but to eleuate his
authorite, and by bringing his ^erson into dis-esteeme, to eneruate ^is
writings. This is the artifice wherwithall some men at once do thrust out
others, and work themselves into the estimation of the common people.

But if Wit and Rhetoric be banished, what shall succeed in the stead thereof?
why sound reason and substantial demonstration. Bu^ are these incompatible? or
is it no^ Rhetorique argumentatiue as well ^ Logic? did not Zeno compare Logi^
to the fist, and Rhetorique to the open hand; the one a more strict, the other
indeed a more apert way ^ reasoning? and by so much does Rhetorique, the Queen
of humane an^ excel Logic, by how much the open hand is a more elegant form
than the shut. He was some bod^ ^a^rentius (...).
that thought he could conuin^ of error most of the Philosopher^ for that they
wanted Elegancie ^ speech, Ac mea quidem sententia (sai^ Pra^at. ad lib. 4.
(...).
he) si quis ad scribendum in Thedogia accedat, parui refort an aliqua^ aliam
facultatem affer at an non, ni^^ enim fere catera conferunt, at qui ignarus
cloquentiae est hunc indignum ^rorsus qui de Theologia loquatur existimo: et
certe sols eloquentes columnae Ecclesiae sunt, etiam vt ab Apostolis vsque
repetas, inter quos mihi Paulus nulla alia re eminere quam eloquentia videtur.
In my opinion if a man come to write in Divinity, it greatly mattereth not
whether he bring any other faculty or no; but if he be not Eloquent ^aur.
Valla. ib. (...) after loqu^ (...), and cogitationes suas lite^i^ mandat, in
Theologia praesertim ^mpudentissimus est, and siid con^^^^^ sacere se art
insamsamus, quanquam (...) est, qui nol^te leganter and facunde dicere, quod
cum (...) non contin^i^, videri volun^ (vt sunt p^rue^^^) n^l^^, aut (...)
debere sic (...).
he is unworthy to speak thereof, for they are Eloquent men which are the
pillars of the Church; if we look back to the very Apostles, amongst whom
St. Paul excels in Eloquence. And again, To presume to write Divinity
without eloquence, is impudency, and if it be purposely done, madness;
although there is no man but would express his conceits in clegancie of
speech: which because some cannot attain unto, they pretend (such is their
perverseness) that they will not, or indeed that they ought not so to speak.
Let us then see what discourse that is, which has in it neither finenesse, nor
wit, nor Rhetorique: But you will say, we shall have sound reason, and
demonstratiue proof in steed thereof. So we hear^ tell: But I assure thee,
Reader, if thou weigh it iudiciously, thou will find but a little wool for
this great cry; and as the Proverb says, Pro thesauro, carbones; in stead ^^
treasure, coals, and some of them so hot, that they burn our fingers i^ we
touch them.

CHAP. III.
Mr. Burtons Argument answered, touching the Marks of a true CHVRCH.

TO come to the disputation i^ self: I find but only one passage which is
like an Argument; for the rest, that we may see how good ^n Orator he is, in
causa Iudicia^^, he amplifies before he proves; and, to show us his skill in
Logic, he proves that which is granted him, inueighing against the impieties
of the Church of Rome: wherein, so long as he speaks the words of sober^esse
and truth, no man will be his Adversary; and, showing how injurious their
Doctrines are to the Foundation of our Faith, by consequent overthrowing it,
which is nothing to the purpose. His only Argument which he produces, is
del^uered in this form: A true visible 7. Vialls. p. 34.
Church has the true Marks of a true Visible Church; namely, pure and sound
Doctrine, and the Sacraments administered according to Christ his holy
institution: but these Marks are not to be found upon the Church of Rome;
therefore she is no true Church. This Argument he professes to take Ibid.
from the Doctrine of the Church of England, if the Homilies contain any part
thereof. If Mr. Burton do doubt of that, we can succor him with the
nineteenth Article of Religion, the unquestionable doctrine of our Church,
where the same words are. For answer whereunto, we profess that we esteem
these tokens such genuine Marks of the true Church of God, that the more
apparent they are in her, the more glorious she is in his sight, and the more
perfect in respect of her self. And herewithall we justly defend ou^selues
against the whole Antichristian Band, that so long as we have that Doctrine
which Christ and hi^ Apostles delivered unto his Church, purely taught amongst
us, and the holy Sacraments rightly administered, it is not the want of their
unwritten rotten traditions, unwritten truths, untrue writings, which can take
away from us the Appellation of a true Church. Yet we know, that these marks
are not so essential to the true Church, that so soon as unsound Doctrine is
mingled with the truth of Gods Word, and the Sacraments unduly administered,
that which was a Church should cease to be one. The Children of Israel did
abide many days without a Sacrifice and Ephod, etc. yet then Hos. 3. 4.
did not God cease to be their God, nor they to be his Church. The Perkins
Cases of Conscience. Book 2. Chap. c. quest. 1.
Sacrament of Baptism (says one of note) in the lawful use thereof, is a
note whereby the true Church of God is d^scerned, and distinguished from the
false Church; not that the Church of God cannot be a Church without the
Sacrament: for it may want Baptism for a time, and yet remain a true Church;
as well as the Church of the Jews in ancient times, wanted Circumcision, for
the space of forty years, Josh. 5. 6. and yet ceased not to be a true Church,
and loved of God. Thus he. Besides, we are given to understand See Rogers on
the nineteenth Article. prop. 8
by the authorized Commentary upon the Confession of our Church, that although
the Church of England make these the Marks of the Visible Church, yet does she
not so strictly tie the Church to the signs articulate, as if all were
excluded the Church which do not rightly participate of the Word and
Sacraments: for it may fall out, that they may be corrupted, as in the times
of blindness and superstition, or intermitted, as in persecution.

Thus this Argument alleged, concludes affirmatively, Wheresoever Gods Word is
purely preached, and the Sacraments duly administered, there is a true Church:
but not negatiuely, Wheresoever these are not found in such sort as were to be
desired, there is no true Church. Thus the mayor proposition is answered. For
the minor, which affirms, That the Cburch of Rome has not these Marks of a
true Church, we confess, that Gods Word is not purely taught amongst them, but
mingled with much dross and error; yet have they not abolished all truth:
neither can we think but that they are much sounder in their Sermons, than in
their Disputations. For the Sacraments, it is true, they have defiled the
Ordinances of God with their indecent Rites; yet can they not hereby make them
nullities, much less by their erroneous opinions ^uacuate the force of them.
Their Baptism for the substance of it is holy, and good, and effectual (no
doubt) to them that receive it, as ours. The Eucharist is to them that partake
of it (if they be worthy Receivers) a true Sacrament, notwithstanding their
Teachers opinion of Transubstantiation. That they are debarred of the Cup in
the holy Communion, is the sacrilege of the Masters of that Synagogue, and the
want thereof shall not be prejudicial to those that unfeignedly desire it. It
is a rule of equity, Factum alterius ^lij nocere non debet, The faultiness of
others shall not hurt those which do not so much as consent with them: and
surely God will never lay that to their charge, which through the
perfidiousnesse of others, it lay not in them to avoid.

This part of the Reason then proves the Church of Rome to be an unsound
Church, not no Church. And Mr. Burton himself, who thinks that these marks
could not agree to the Church of Rome for these nine hundred years past, yet
denies not that there was both a Church and Salvation there, till the Council
of Trent.

Thus, I hope, we have given full satisfaction to Mr. Burtons greatest, and
his only Argument, and showed it to be neither substantial nor
demonstratiue. The Word of God purely preached, and the Sacraments according to
Christ his holy institution administered, are Marks of the true Church. If here
by we examine the Church of England, she will appear glorious and beautiful,
like Eden the Garden of the Lord: if we urge them against the Church of Rome,
they show her to be not no Church at all, but not an Orthodoxe Church.

CHAP. IV.
Mr. Burtons cauilling at the Reverend Bishops Similitudes, examined.

FRom hence he descends to examine those speeches which fell from the
Reverend Bishops Pen, whiles he would set down the extents of the differences
betwixt us Old Religion. Chap. 1.
and the Church of Rome. Who justly blames those which dislike whatsoever is
in the Church of Rome, counting all Doctrine Popish that by them is maintained,
and all Discipline Antichristian which by them is used; as if it were all
error, no Church: adding these words, Neither for the chafe do we leave the
floor of God, neither for the bad fishes do we break his nets. Mr. Burton.
But if page 36.
the floor be not now Gods floor, but Antichrists floor, where nothing is
to be found but chafe: and if the n^t^ be no other but such as catch only
the bad fishes, which is not the property of Gods nets, etc. Stay a little: Is
there nothing in the Church of Rome but chafe, no good corn? Pol ego illum
perisse d^co, quoi perijt pudor. Is it all chafe which they teach concerning
the Trinity? Is it all chafe which they teach touching many other
fundamental Points of Christian Religion? Those studious endeauours of the
Dominicans against the Jesuits, maintaining Gods free grace against man's free
will, are they all chafe? The Twelve Books of Aluarez De auxilijs gratiae,
which do so trouble all the Fathers of the Society, is there naught but
chafe in them neither? So long as M. Burton has been in the Ministry, could
he never find any good grain amongst the writings of the Jesuits themselves?
how many sound and orthodox interpretations of Scripture do they lend us;
Maldonat, Lorinus and the rest? if there be nothing but chafe in them,
wherefore do we lay out so much money to buy their Commentaries? It is not
long that I have been a Preacher, yet in that short time (I thank God) I have
found much good corn amongst them, and have delivered many things professedly
out of them, yet never hitherto could any man accuse me of teaching either
Heresy or Schism. And doubtless he himself is not ignorant hereof, though
he think good to dissemble it. Again. It is true, it is not the property of
Gods Nets to catch only bad fishes; nor yet of any nets at all: and for no
other cause is the Kingdom of heaven, that is, the Visible Church of God
compared to a Net, but because that promiscuously it gathers both good and
badde Mat. 13. 47.
fishes.

All truth (says the Bishop) wheresoever it is found is Gods; as the Kings
coin is current though it be found in any impure channel. M. Burton. True,
but when the truth of God is turned into Page 36.
a lie; and this lie put for Gods truth, then the case is altered. Here is a
nimble conversion; But if all Men and Devils should turn Alchymistes, were it
possible for them to Metamorphose Gods truth into a lie? St. Paul speaking of
the Gentiles, how they abused that light of reason wherewithal God
enlighteneth every one that comes into the world, and became vain in their
Imaginations, says of them, that they changed Romans 1. 25.
the truth of God into a lie, which was but a change neither, (...), not a
simple conversion. Thus M. Burton, unless you may have leave to wrest
Scripture, your answer is nothing. If any man obtrude adulterate money of his
own stamping If a man take the Kings coin and bea^e it into a thin lease,
and cat. page 30
in the Kings name, let him suffer as a Malefactor; but when the Kings current
coin is proffered, let no man reject it as base and vicious, least h^ himself
be impeached for a Traitor. Where by the way note that yo^ have already
contradicted your self. Even now all was chafe in the Church of Rome, now
Gods truth is there; how else can it be pretended, how else can they color
over lies with it?

The Reverend Bishop proceeds: Fundamental truth is like the Maro^ean Wine;
which if it be mixed with twenty times so much water, holds his strength. He
is pleased to be merry with the Bishop, and tells him, that his Comparison is
pretty, if it did hold water. Your Vibanity, Mr. Burton, page 37.
is pretty, if your manners were as good. But (says he) what if twenty times
so much poison be put to it, etc? What will that hold poison now which before
would not hold water? We grant it: yet let me tell you, that all the poison in
the world cannot be operative upon the truth of God, to alter the nature of it.
Popery is poison, but fundamental Truth is an Antidote: a little quantity of
Antidote that is sovereign, will destroy much poison. Many drink of the Cup,
in the hand of the Mother of Fornications (though some take deeper draughts
than others:) to some of them which take downe^ withal some reasonable portion
o^ Fundamental truth, by the mercy of God it may be an Antidote to expel the
poison from their hearts, and strive so long with it, till it qu^^^ overcome
it: that so that may be fulfilled which our Lord promise^ as a sign to follow
those that believed on his Name, That thoug^ Mark. ^6. 18.
they should drink any deadly thi^^ it should not hurt them. Now yo^
Comparison of extracting the spirit^ i^id pa. 37.
of Fundamental truth through (...) Popes Limbecke, till nothing be (...) but
a dead Vappa, is very unapt. For they that distill, reserve that pure substance
which they extract, for the^ use, casting away that which remains, as
unprofitable. So that by thi^ Popery should refine, not pollute t^^ truth of
God. Thus unhappy a^^ you in your similitudes all along.

But, good God, what spirit possesses this man, that he thus chaset^ our
Divine, and harmless Bishop, who does not so much argue for truth, as
beautify and adorn it. We all know, that similitudes are brought to
illustrate that which is already proved, or taken for granted in the judgment
of the wisest: no man uses them as Arguments. Our Reverend Prelate intended
not a disputation; or if any, not against any but the Romish Church. How
comes it to pass, that while he forcibly bends himself against them, he is
by mis-construction made to plead for them? and all his lovely similitudes set
upon the rack, as if they nourished some unheard off monster? When he
perceived that upon the first Edition of his Book, some (as he well hoped)
through ignorance rather ^han obstinacy were offended, he straight way
addresseth himself to relieve those whom he had no way harmed; rectifying
their judgments that will yield to instruction: and, by a judicious Apology,
fully satisfying the truth, and all that are impartial lovers thereof, here
he speaks home to the matter, and leaves no scruple unresolved. In this Mr.
Burton can be content to gleane, taking up now and then a sentence; yet
propounding more than he answers: but for the former discourse he lets not a
tittle thereof fall to the ground vnsifted, answering twenty lines with twenty
pages. But could neither his gravity, his place, nor his well-deseruings of the
Church prevail for him, but he must needs come under the ferule? or has he
only faulted in this kind? Surely no: but furious persons strike them that
come first in their way.

But what superstition does your Limbecke extract out of the Similitude p^^. 38.
taken from Papinians ruled case, That a sacred place loses not the holiness
with the demolished walls? Does the Reverend Bishop intend any thing but this,
That whatsoever is once dedicated to God, ought not for ever to be alienated?
it still in despite of malice and profaneness remains his to whom it was
entitled: What have we then now to do with beliuesse infused or affixed by
any solemn act of consecration? and for edifying the Faith of Christians, he
has oftentimes, like a true Scribe, instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven,
brought out of his treasures both old and new Provision for that purpose, and
is not yet drawn dry: Comparisons, as all other parts of learning, he knows
how to use in their due place, rather to help the understanding than to beget
Faith.

CHAP. V.
Whether the divorce be sued out on Gods part, or on the Church of Romes part.

THe Bishop goes on: If the Church of Rome were once the Spouse of christ, and
her Adulteries are known, yet the divorce is not sued out; that is, Though she
have rebelled against God, and on her part broken his Covenant, yet he has
not quite rejected her as yet. Against this Mr. Bu^ton takes in hand to prove
pa. 3^.
that on both parts this divorce is formally sued out. On her part, because pa.
40. 41. etc.
(faith he) she has in the face of Men and Angels openly, plainly, expressly
denied Christ for her Husband. For proof whereof, we have a Bull of Pope
Pius, 4. produced at large; and from thence he is not ashamed to affirm, that
Christ is therein as solemnly pa. 42.
renounced, as we in our Baptism renounce the Devil and all his works; when
there is not so much as one word or syllable of renouncing Christ there
mentioned. But this will come more fitly to be examined anon, when we enquire
how Christ is denied in the Council of Trent.

In the mean time let us enquire how on Christ's part the ^iuorce is sued out.
And that is in the Book of the Revelation, where she is called the Whore, and,
Come out of her my People, pa. 43.
etc. Whence it is inferred, If she be Babylon, If she be the Whore, she is
no longer Christ's Spowse. Answ. Not only of Israel, but of Judah was it said,
that the faithful Esaias 1.
City was become a Harlot: And, God by his Prophets expostulates with them,
calling them a generation of Miscreants, Witches children, the seed of the
Adulterer and the Whore: yet it cannot be denied, Esaias 57. 3.
but the Sheep of his Visible flock they continued, even in the depth of
their disobedience and rebellion. Now if it seem strange to any that the
Church of God, while she plays the Whore, should still be his Wife, let them
know, that the Visible Church is but equiuocally called the Spowse of Christ:
For, properly the Church Invisible, the Mystical body of Christ, is only his
true Spowse, and she is a pure Virgin, without spot or wrinkle, being washed
in the blood of the Lamb. Those that outwardly professing Christ make up the
Visible Church, we charitably presume to be members of his mystical body, for
which cause we call them his Spouse also.

But when we speak of Babylon and the Whore in the Revelation, and apply it
to Rome; we deny absolutely that the Church of Rome is Babylon (that is, all
those which living in that Religion make up one If thereby we understand a
company of m^n* but if Baby^on be a ^lace, then we must understand thereby
the ^^^ of Antichrist.
Body or Society) but * Bablyon is a faction in that Church. Are not the
Whore and Antichrist the same? Now what can be more absurd than to think the
whole Church of Rome The Antichrist? Antichrist was to seduce those that dwell
upon the face of the earth, the Whore was to bewitch the nations; now the
Seducer and the Seduced, the witch and the bewitched are not one. As I take it,
we are to rejoice at the downfall of the Whore; but God forbid that we should
rejoice at the Destruction of every member of the Church of Rome, but rather
with tears beseech God for their conversion. And therefore good M. Burton, now
the learned Bishops distinction takes not place a day after the fair: as it is
a Visible Church, we have not detrested page 44.
to have Communion with it, as Babylon we have nothing to do with it; He that
before was too fine, too witty for you, now speaks confusedly, strangely. You
see we have learned to distinguish betwixt the Church, and the great whore in
the Church: with the Church we yet hold communion in many things, though that
from Babylon we separated long ago. He, whom I suppose you will not in have
teach to speak, spoke in this manner. As the Apostle does say of Mr. Hooker
Eccles. Pol. lib. 3. 1.
Israel, that they are in one respect enemies, but in another beloved of God;
in l^ke sort with Rome, we dare not communicate concerning sundry her gross
and grievous abominations; yet touching those maine parts of christian truth,
wherein they constantly still persist, we gladly acknowledge them to be the
family of Jesus Christ, and our hearty prayer unto Almighty God is etc. Your
distinction therefore of the Devil in his Essence, and as a Devil, with the
rest of that stamp, you were best lay up till a dear year.

CHAP. VI.
Of the charitable profession of zealous Luther.

AT length we are come to consider the weight of zealous Luthers speech. We
confess that under the Papacy is much good, nay all, yea the very kernel of
Christianity. To this M. Burton answers, that be spoke this page 45.
before the Council of Trent was hatched, and died when they began to be
assembled. It is well he did so; for had he lived but a while longer, he had
sure been a favorer of Popery, as well as Calvin, who lived after that
Council, and yet confessed the Church of Rome to be a true Church, as we
have showed. Yet by his leave, if this were true when Luther lived, it is as
true now. If they have added more error, yet have they taken away no more
truth, otherwise than virtually, and by consequence. Luther thought it not
likely, or possible, that the Church of Rome should be much more corrupt, than
it was when he published at Wittenberg so many ^ropositions contrary to the
Romish Religion, Sleidan. Com. lib. 1. And Hist. of the Council of Trent. lib.
1.
95. in number; which pre^ently brought about his ears, Tece^ius, Eckius,
Siluester Prierias, Hogostrat and I know not how many more. Luther thought the
Church of Rome wicked enough, when he affimred, that ^tiam si n^hil praet^r^a
pe^catum fuisset in doctrina Pontificia, quam quod docuerunt nos deb^re vaga^i,
and fluctuare, am^^^ente, and du^ios de remissione peccatorum, gratid and
salute no^tra: iustas tamen haberemus causas cur ab Ecclesia infideli n^s
se^ung^remus. Luth ad cap. 41. Genesis
If they could not have bin blamed ^or any thing else, but only for teaching
that we must waver, and doubt, and ^lwaies remain uncertain of the re^ission
of our sins, of grace and saluati^n, yet should we have just cause to separate
from that infidelious Church. The ground therefore of Luthers speec^ was, Not
that he saw not erro^ enough, but that he knew there w^ likewise all truth.
Under it indeed^ (as our divine Bishop observes) oppressed, overwhelmed, yet
there i^ was. The Council of Trent ha^ joined Traditions to the Scripture^
making them together the rule ^ Faith: but before that time Luth^ complained
that he could not ha^ audience out of the Scriptures, b^ the frigid decrees of
Popes, and the fooleries of Schoolmen were obtruded in stead thereof. In a
word nothing was decreed in the Council of Trent, which Luther had n^
gaine-said before that time. So the the errors are the same they were* but
established under a more peremptory form.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Deane of Glocesters Authority.

But here the Authority of the Reverend Deane of Gloucester is Dr. Field.
alleged, in his Treatise of the Church, Lib. 3. Cap. 47. and it is desired
that he may take up the matter. 7 Vialls pa. 45.
Peace is amiable, and the mediation of wise men is to us very acceptable. The
Person is Reverend, neither will we dissent from him in any thing without due
respect had to his place and learning. But wherefore, when you are urged with a
cloud of witnesses in this very cause, do you 7. Vialls. pa. 51.
reject them as private persons, whose opinions must not prescribe against
truth? Calvin, Bucer, Beza, Melanchton, See the reverend Bishops Apology.
Mornay, Deering, Iunius, Raynolds, Param, Hooker, Perkins, etc. all these you
slight, and would have us be tried by one only, who indeed is Reverend, but
All these much more. Yet, as if he distrusted this alleged Author somewhere
else, he will have him to Vmpire the Cause in the one place. Fear not, a wise
man will not contradict himself; and it is ^ received Rule in reading both the
Scriptures, and the Fathers, and (...) Writers, That the clearer places are to
interpret those that be more obscure.

But because you shall acknowledge your self in our debt, we yield y^^ this
request, though unreasonable: but upon this condition, that if Dr* Field be
found to speak against y^^ rather than for you, you never appear more in this
cause. Courteo^^ Reader, the passages are but short therefore read and judge.
The w^^thy Deane brings in Bellarm^^^ obiecting against us, that by the
confession of our own Writers, Luther and Calvin, etc. the Church of Rom^ is a
true Church. What now dot^ he answer to this? He says not, T^^ before the
Council of Trent they were a Church, but none since: bu^ grants him, That they
might in some sense truly say that they were a true Church. But, says he,
neither Luther, nor Calvin, nor any of us do acknowledge that the Popish
Religion is the true Religion, or the Romish faction the Orthodoxe Church of
God. See then, we may affirm Rome to be a true Church, and yet the Romish
cause gain nothing by it: for the Popish Religion is never a whit sooner the
true Religion. and though we give this attribute to the Church of Rome, yet the
Romish faction is nothing the better for it; for all this while, they are not
the Orthodoxe Church of God. Where me thinks the Deane gives more than we
delire, for we have already distinguished betwixt the Church of Rome, and the
Faction of Rome, and this we do not hold to be a Church at all, much less
the Orthodoxe Church of God. He proceeds to speak of the Council of Trent,
touching which he lays down his opinion in these words. The general and
maine Doctrine agreed upon in the Council of Trent, in such sort as it is most
generally conceived, is damnable; But there are, noe doubt, some of a better
Spirit, The French receive not the Council of Trent to this day.
and have in them particularly a better conceit of things than generally is
holden. So that the faith of the Council of Trent, is not the faith of every
particular man, much less is every Idiot chargeable with the dam^^blenesse of
those doctrines. Lastly, says he, formerly the Church of Rome was the true
Church, but had in it a^ Heretical faction; now the Church i^ self is
Heretical, and some certai^e only are found in it, in such degreey
Orthodoxie, as that we may hope w^^ of their salvation. Lo, Mr. Burt^^* the
Church of Rome is now Heretical, not no Church at all: for Heresy (as we
have showed) takes not away the being of a Church; and there is hope of some
men's salvation living in that Communion, which you deny in every page. Thus the
worthy Deane of Gloucester has not a word against us, but for us; and you are
no less unfortunate in your Authorities, than before you were in your
Similitudes. Now vicem read, let us be as much beholding to you, as you are to
us, and tell us what you answer to those formal passages alleged out of the
said Reverend Author in his Appendix See our reverend Bishops Apology.
to the Treatise of the Church, where he is clearly for us, That the Romish
Church is a part of the Catholic Church of God; showing it likewise to be the
Tenent of the greatest Divines of our side: In this you are silent, and pass
it over siccopede, with a dry foot, as the Proverb is. And therefore whereas
you afterward tell us of a many Shells in the page 46.
Church of Rome; the Shell of the Scriptures, the Shell of the Creed, the
Shell of the Sacraments, and the like, you had done much better to fit down
and crack nuts, than to trouble the world with such empty discourse. Nucleum
amisit, reliq^i^ pignori put omina.

CHAP. VIII.
Mr. Burtons exceptions against so^e passages in the Reverend Bishops Apology.

THus Mr. Burton having done with the Reverend Bishops Rhetorical discourse,
he comes to take notice of what he has more seriously laid down in an
Apologeticall advertisement, joined to the second edition of his Book. And
here whiles page ^^
he expects from the Bishop an ingenuous recantation of his error, lo^ a
constant asseueration of the truth and the Reverend Bishop is heartily pitied
that he is not mutable. But consider, Mr. Burton, that if he had retracted
that which you think his error, all your former paints had been lost: and
for the rest; how would you have done for a genuine interpretation of St. John's
meaning in the pouring out of the second Vial? As for your pity, bestow it
somewhere else, he has no need of it: rather pity your self, that it was
your lot to fall upon so weak a cause, and to meet with so strong an
Adversary.

But let us see what are his exceptions against the Reverend Bishops second
thoughts. First, it is not enough for Mr. Burton that he thus distinguishes,
referring Visible to outward Profession; True, to some essential Principles of
Christianity, neither of them to soundness of belief; that so though the
Church of Rome be a true Visible Church, yet is she not a true believing
Church. Acutely and admirably. What reasonable man would not this satisfy? Why
does not this please him? Because he denies any being at all to her; and page
48.
that which is not, is not Visible. Thus nothing but the blood, the life of the
Church of Rome, will satisfy his zealous thirst. But hear what he objects:
Under correction, is outward Profession a sufficient Mark of Visibility for a
Church? Ridicule: What is Visible in a Church, but that which she professes?
Or, if you will not refer Visible to outward Profession, whereunto will you
refer it? But this is none of those Marks (...) page 48.
which the Church of England takes notice of a Church by. The Word preached,
and the Sacraments administered, make her a Church: but her Profession makes her
Visible. But they are the Synagogue of Satan which call themselves Jews, and
are not: and the Samaritans feared God, but they served Idols withal: and so
does the Church of Rome; therefore it follows, that she neither fears God,
nor does after his Laws. True, it follows very well. Add to this that which
elsewhere you teach, What is it generally to profess Christ, and particularly
7. V^alls. pa. 25.
to have no interest in him; to profess the foundation, but not to be built
upon it? But all this while you are besides the cause; here is an Homonymie,
you argue from the Church Visible to the Church Mystical and Invisible: and
fallacies, Mr. Burton, are no demonstrations. Many things exclude a man from
Heaven (as well errors in manners, as Faith) which do not exclude him from
the Visible Church: he that would have salvation, by true Faith must be made a
member of the Mystical body of Christ. Does not the Reverend Bishop tell us,
that Visibilitie avails not to salvation; and the Church of Rome, that Their
danger is more Visible th^n their Church? Wherein then has he offended?

But to what purpose is it, that you entertain us with a tedious discourse of
the Visible Church, all the while neither telling us what the Church is, nor
what is Visibilitie; Thus his d^spu^ing i^ nothing but equivocation all along.
by these ambiguous proceedings deceiving the simple; whereas a fair
distinction, if it might take place, would make all friends? Sometimes indeed
you show us the Church clad in her glorious apparel, that thereby we may take
notice of her: but what if Briers rend her clothes, and dirt defile her goodly
garments, does she then cease to be a Church? Surely no. Now it being
objected, that the Church of Rome holds some Essential Principles of
Christianity, first you confess it, then (contradicting page 4^.
your self) you deny it, saying, That she has professedly abiured Christ;
thereby also gaine-saying what even now you granted, namely, that she^
professes to fear God: for how can she profess to fear him, and yet
professedly abjure him?

CHAP. IX.
Whether Papists be Christians.

IN the next place Mr. Burton is so oppressed with the weight of the Bishops
reasoning, that he sees not which way to turn himself. Grant the Romanists
to be but Christians, how corrupt soever, and we cannot deny them the name of
a Church. This is Gordians knot, which because he cannot untie, Alexander-like
he cuts it. But why should we grant them page 49:
to be Christians? Not Christians? Of what Sect then are they? Jews, or
Turks, or Pagans? We know no other Sects in the world. Nay, they are worse
than these, yea, worse than the Devils themselves, as he affirms in the next
page. I never yet heard by a sober man, that any greater fault than Heresy was
laid to their charge. Now he that is an Heretic, is necessarily a Christian:
for he that is not a Christian, cannot be an Heretic. Olim qui Haeretici non
inter Tureas, Epi^^o^ Winton. Tortura Torti. page 304.
aut Iudaeos, aut Ethnicos, censebantur, neque nisi qui de Christianis essent
Haeretici audiebant, nuper exortus (nobis) Tortus qui Christianos negat: In
former times Heretics were not reckoned amongst Turks, or Jews, or
Infidels, (much less amongst Devils) neither were any called Heretics, but
such ^^ were Christians, of late some peruers^ men are risen up, which deny
them to be at all Christians. But why must we not grant them to be Christians?
Because they are not able to demonstrate themselves to be such. But what if
they have not all your faculty of reasoning demonstratiuely, shall they be no
Christians therefore? Can no man be a Christian except he be a Logician? But
it is further objected* that No Papist can undoubtedly persuade himself that
he is a Christian; Ibi^. page 42.
and this reason is given, He is not certain of the Priests intention in his
Baptism, nor yet of the Bishops intention, by whom that Priest was ordained.
Therefore no Papist can be sure whether he be a Christian or no. Well then, for
answer to this, first it is granted, That admission into the Church by Baptism
makes men Christians, Christianity makes them a true Church. So that all we
have to do now, is to prove their Baptism good; which if we euince, we have
gotten the day.

First then, All that is alleged to make their Baptism a nullitie, is a
possibility, that the Priests intention might be absent, when they were
baptized: but* a posse ad esse non valet consequentia; from a possibility of
the Priests not intending, to his not intending actually, the Argument follows
not. So that if this reasoning were found, the most that can be concluded from
thence, is, That (perhaps) Papists are no Christians. It is uncertain, whether
they be so or no: now in things which are doubtful, we are not to learn which
way charity should incline. But secondly, It is unreasonable that another man's
spite or ill-meaning should do me hurt. Delictum cum capite semper ambulat:
That men's own faults are their own harms, is an undeniable Rule of Equity.
Thirdly, It matters not whether the Baptism according to their Tenants be
good, or no; you must prove it not to be available according to us, and
according to the Word of God. We are no Papists, whatsoever you think of us,
neither will we betyed to their opinions. There be two things essential to
Baptism: the Matter and the Form; Water and the words of Christ's Institution.
If with Water they were baptized, In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, their baptism was good, we care not what become of the Priests
intention. But fourthly, to come home to you; Either the baptism in the Church
of Rome is true, or not: if it be true baptism, then have we gained, and you
are overcome: if not, then it must be iterated when they turn to us, and so
you rush unawares into the exploded Heresy of rebaptization; your ground being
the same upon which the Masters of that error built their opinion: which See
Hooker. Eccles. Pol. lib. 3 1.
was, That knowing how the Administration of Baptism belongs only to the
Church of Christ, they thought that Heretics are not at all any part of the
Church: and therefore rebaptized them.

Dum vitant Docti vitia, in contraria Currunt. But wherefore do you now depart
from your fore-alledged Classical Author, the learned Dr. Field, See our
reverend Bishops Apology.
who says, that the Church of Rome ministers the true Sacrament of Baptism,
to the salvation of the souls of many thousand Infants? This is too gross an
ouer-sight for him that promised nothing but substantial reason and
demonstratiue proof. Therefore be advised against another time, and though the
Priests wits be a wool-gathering, let not yours be so.

But why trifle we? Why should we grant Papists to be Christians? Wherefore
should not we grant them that which we cannot deny them? For howsoever the
Priest at the baptizing, or the Bishop at the ordaining, had another meaning;
yet the words Dr Chaloner, cre^^ ^^^les. Sanct Cat^ol.
wherewith they baptized, and ordained, being the words of Christ, are to be
taken in Christ's meaning, in as much as he which receives a thing from
another, is to receive it according to the intention of the principal Giver,
and not the isntrumental Giver. He which conferres Baptism, and Orders as the
Principal Doner, is Christ: the Bishop or Pastor conferres them only as his
Instruments. See if this be not the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of
England in the 26. Article. But is it credible, that Mr. Burton should be all
this while in jest? For he adds, For the bare Name of Christians, and a page
4^.
Church, we will not stand with them. What more do we require? Why contend
we? But he kickes it down again with his heel; So they do not hereupon, nor
any for them, incroach and challenge the being and reality; yea, or the very
Visibility of a true Church. When you make this sense, we will give you an
Answer. The next page I wholly omit, as judging it unfit for a Christian to
utter against any that bear the Image of God, where he does nothing but
compare Papists with the Devils, making them worse, contending that the Devils
are as good a Church as the Papists. But the ill luck is, that he cannot
prove them Visible.

CHAP. X.
How from the Council of Trent, Mr. Burton would pro^e, that the Church of
Rome does directly deny Christ Jesus.

TO draw to an end: I come now to the head of the Cause, wherein he would
prove, That the Church of Rome, not by a circle of Consequence, but ditectly,
denies Christ Jesus. Directly, not by Consequence only: directly (I say) she
denies, page 51.
and destroys the Foundation of Faith. I have borne with him all along
hitherto, but now I must crave pardon to challenge him for an egregious
contradiction. Directly, not by Consequence only. Can the Foundation be
overthrown both by consequence and directly too? None can overthrow by
Consequence, unless they hold directly: and can any man both hold directly,
and deny directly? Wherefore then do you take the pains to prove both?
unless you mean to declaime rather than to dispute, and (howsoever, you would
be thought to neglect Rhetorique) affect the praise of Garneades the great
Orator, who having one day prevailed in Court by his Eloquence, would come the
next day, and as strongly mainetaine the contrary Cause. Otherwise, that which
you first allege, to prove that the Church of Rome by Consequence overthrown
the Foundation, destroys that, which you bring in the last place to make it
appear that she denies it directly; and that which would show her to deny
directly, makes void all that proves her to deny by Consequence: And so both
former and latter reasoning fall to the ground, being nothing worth.

But that you may confess, and the Readers may see, tha^ you have a fair
Adversary, we will pardon you all this, and bind our selves to grant you the
Victory, if you can perform this latter promise; prove but the Church of Rome
directly to deny salvation by Christ alone, and yours be the day. How, or
where? page 51.
In the Council of Trent you say. Sess. 6. Can. 10. If any shall say, that men
are formally i^st by the righteousness of Christ, let him b^^ accursed. Is not
this a direct and (...) express denial of the Foundation?

Answ. I will not pronounce Anathema to those that shall be otherwise minded:
but this I say, That this alleged passage is so far from implying a direct
denial of the Foundation of Faith, that it opposes no truth, it favors no
error. Formal justice is the same that inherent Righteousness, inherent
Righteousness is the Righteousness of Sanctification. Now who can say that we
are formally just, that is, that we are sanctified by the righteousness of
Christ? That which we have of Christ, is the righteousness, not of his
Person, but of his Merit, not inherent, but imputed. Qui^ vnquam e n^stris nos
per iustitiam Christi imputatam, formaliter iustificari asseruit? An non f^^mam
quamlibet inharentem, qua formaliter iusti denominemur, semper explosimus?
Annon fidem, vtcunque inbaeret, non vt formam, sed vt organon, non formaliter,
sed relative tantum iustificare astrnimus? who of us ever affirmed, that we
are formally justified by the imputed righteousness of Christ? Have not we
always ex^loded any inherent form, which should denominate us formally just?
And although Faith be inherent, ^et we teach, that it justifies, not as ^^
form, but as an instrument, not ^^^mally, but relatiuely, says that Dr.
Prideaux. Lect. de iustific.
^orthy Oxford Light. Me thinks ^ee that can tell others that they will
^ewray their shameless ignorance, ^f they deny that the Church of ^ome in the
Council of Trent ^dmitteth of any other Faith than such as the Devils and
damned in 7. Vialls. page 2^.
Hell have, which must be deduced by I know not what blind consequences:
should not himself be thus foulely mistaken.

We have past one danger: th^^ which is alleged in the next place will make
more against the Council of Trent: but will advantage hi^ that alleged it as
little as the form^^* Can. 11. If any shall say, that men are justified by the
sole imputation ^^ Christ's righteousness, or by sole ^^mission of sins,
otherwise than ^^ inherent righteousness in us obtai^^^ thereby; or also that
the grace wher^by we are justified, is the only fa^^^ of God, let him be
accursed. Offer them the fundamental word^, and ^ee (...) them will refu^e to
(...) to them.
that inherent righteousness which we have, is obtained, and the
mer^^riousnesse thereof whereby we ^^ justified, do directly deny, th^^ Jesus
Christ came into the world ^^ save sinners. Now this is the Pop^^ doctrine of
Justification, Christ has ^^^rited to make us just: but as a Medicine, which
is made for health, does not he^l^ by being made, but by being applied: so by
the Merits of Christ there can be no justification, without the application of
his Merits. Thus far we join hands with them: but in the Application ^ee
disagree. We teach, that by ^aith the Merits of Christ are apprehended, and
applied to our ^ules; and so we are imputatiuely justified; they, that the
Merits of Christ have obtained for our works ^^at pitch of advancement, that
by them we are made just; and so our inherent righteousness is our
Justification. Let no man think, that I s^^ke to varnish their opinions, or to
^^^ the better foot of a lame Cause ^o^ most, Thus they teach: yet is their
doctrine contumelious to God, (...) ini^rious to the blood of Christ. The
Pelagians being over great M Hoo^er in his discourse of justification.
^^iends to Nature, made themselves enemies unto grace, for all their
confessing, that men have their souls, and all the faculties thereof, their
wills, and all the ability of their will, from God. And so the Church of Rome
is still an Adversary unto Christ's Merits, notwithstanding her acknowledging
that we have received the power of meriting by the blood of Christ. And if it
were not a strong deluding spirit which has possession of their hearts, it
were not possible but they should see, ho^ plainly they do herein gainsay
the very ground of our Faith Gainsay it they do, not directly deny it: all
the pains which shall be taken to prove it, will be^ utterly lost. Nay, what
great^^ Argument against them to pr^^^ their Cause weak, than the pain^^ they
take in it? seeing the direct d^niall To Jews and Turks Christ is an
execration, we doubt it not, but Popery is a mystery.
of the Foundation, is not ^ thing that can be done in a com^^* If it be, it
is as manifest as the No^^^ day: it is not, if it need pr^^^* Now for the
other clause, touching the Grace whereby we are justified, we must be content
to take them according to their meaning. Whenever they speak of Justifying,
they understand that which we call sanctifying; and when they mention
Justification, they mean iusti-faction. Thus it is evident, that Papists do
not directly deny the foundation of Faith: (which if they did, they were no
Christian Church) by just consequence we grant that they do, yet even in this
impiety some are deeper than the rest. The Philosopher notes in men's
capacities that weakness, that the common sort cannot see things which follow
in reason, when they follow (as it were) a far off by many deductions. For
which cause, the vnlearneder sort of Papists seem more excusable. The Masters
of the Synagogue of Rome know better; and therefore heavy will their account
be. Many partake in the error, which are not guilty of the Heresy of the
Church of Rome; yet even their error also is damnable. By this time we may
percelue with how good reas^^ Mr. Burton could say before concerning the Popes
Bull, or now of the Council of Trent (which yo^^ as we have showed, is not
the belief of every Papist) that therein Christ Jesus is renounced as
solemnly as (...) in Baptism renounce the Devil and all his workee. And I
cannot bu^ exceedingly wonder, that (...) Divine should dare to publish to the
world such unjustifiable untruths, ^^ if he should never give an accou^^
thereof neither to God nor Man: Me thinks I could feel his pulse though I
never saw his face, and (...) you his temper: but because so^e Reverend Friends
of mine (...) good opinion of him for his honesty, though not for his
discretion, for their sakes I spare him. Only this I add, that his fault to
the greate^^ that being before admonished, that See the conclusion of the
Reverend Bish. Apology.
there is a bar before which we shall once give account of all our
euerlashings, he would yet go on, and despise such Fatherly counsel. He
shuts up his discourse, turning himself to the learned Bishop, and blaming
him for trusting the judgment of Amongst whom is our royal King James, to
whose Paraphrase on the R^u^lation, M Burton acknowledges himself much
beholden.
particular persons in a Point, the contrary whereof the Church has publicly
resolved, and diverse famous and learned have avouched: and again solli^its him
for a Retraction. The judgment of those particular Persons, is the universal
Concent of Protestant Writers: the Church our Mother has taught us no such
Doctrine; nay, I dare say, she abhorres it. You speak of many famous and
learned, but we find not one sentence of theirs alleged; and those whose
judgment you would have us to stand to, are found to speak against you. And
now let the judicious Reader judge to whom it appertains to make the Palinody.

For mine own part, I have now brought that to pass which I earnestly
desired; and if I have favored any unsound opinion, yea, or spoken
suspiciously, let me suffer as an Heretic. Nay, God knows, that I have
weighed every word in a Balance, being fearful to give offense either to
Protestant, or Papist, or to the Church of God. The Position, which, according
to my weak ability, I have maintained, is this, That all the corruptions in
the Church of Rome do prove her more or less sound, not more or less a
Church. If in this o^ any other thing I have erred, I shall thank those that
will bring me into the way again. Let wise men finite me, and it shall be a
precious Oil that shall not hurt me: but let no man condemn me, till he
have first showed me better, and found me obstinate. I hate lukewarmenesse, I
abhor neutralizing, I heartily embrace that speech of the Reverend Bishop of
London, of blessed Dr. King. 7. ^^ Lect. on Jonas. (...)
Memory, It has been a favorable Compromission of men more partial than
wise, that the Questions betwixt Rome and the Reformed Churches, might easily
be accorded. I find it not, etc. We have Altar against Altar, Liturgy
against Liturgy, Prayers against Prayers, Doctrine against Doctrine, Potentate
against Potentate, Pope against Prince, Religion against Religion, Subjection
against Subjection, Faith against Faith, so Diametrally opposed, as th:
Northern and Southern Poles shall sooner meet together, than our opinions.
(standing as they do) can be reconciled. Yet I unfeignedly desire that things
may be otherwise; and my prayer unto Almighty God is, that they may at length
(if it be his will) so yield to frame, and reform themselves, that no
distraction remain in any thing, but that Which is our prayer in the Church
Liturgy, that all which confess his holy name, may agree in the truth of his
holy word.
we all may with one heart and one mouth, glorify God the Father of our Lord
and Savior, whose Church we are, I conclude my Apology for the Reverend
Bishop, with his Application of the sweet Apologue before the Body of the
Clergy met in the Convocation; The Spider in the Cup, Conc^o ad Clerum.
the Worm^ in the Apple, what else be they but superstition in their worship,
rotten and unwholesome traditions in their Faith? without these the Religion
pleases us well.

Nu^^ ^^ quit (...) qui dictum in se inclementiu^
Existima^^ss^, sic existi^e^, (...)
Resp^^sum, no^ dictum esse quia (...) prius.
FINIS.

