decorative illustrated border enclosing title page A PRONOstycacyon practysed
by master Mathias Brothyel of Rauensburgh.

Anno. 1545.

EXCVDEBAT LONDINI Richardus Graftonus clarissimi Principis Edouardi
tipographus.



The prologue.
The practyse of master Mathias brotheyl of Rauensburgh, upon the year of the
incarnacyon of our Lord Jesus Christ. M. CCCCC. xlv. Written for the pleasure
of the most noble prince and lord, lord Frederyke cou^tye Palatine upon
Rhene, duke in Bauary. etc.
I Doubt not most noble and benign lord, but that your highness knows the
text of Moses in his first book entytled Genesis, wherein he shows and
declares that God almighty created all things of naught, and of none other
thing but only by his deuyne word and breath of his mouth, made all this whole
unspeakable work of heaven, earth, the sea and all that in the^ is contained,
as well visyble as inuisyble: and that he does yet still with out ceassing or
intermission work what soever is done among al his cretures by the same his
deuyne power. For in such wise has god (as ye would say) inwardly powered him
self into al his creatures that al men (onelesse they be clean destytute of
sight, or void of al reason) may se that God is contynually with us, and that
he governs and susteyneth all his creatures by certain means, and shows
his divine goodness emonge al his creatures by the heavenly influences. And this
poincte also the most wyttye and learned men, I mean natural Philosophers,
have after a sort well perceived, and through their own reason and clear wit
have so far atteigned, that they have agreed in this, that there is one only
God, and that al creatures are by one certain excellent divine sapience ruled,
vpholden and sustained. And these Philosophers also have come so nyghe to the
verite, and to the knowledge of God in their high contemplacions, that they
have determined and avouched al this whole, wonderful, fair and ineffable
workemanshyp of God, as namely the heavens, the son, the moon with all other
sterres and creatures, to have been created and made by the highest artifycer
and chief fourmer of al things. which God most entyrely loves mankind and
favors the same, because he has engraued and enpla^ted in the hearts of men
his divine will and pleasure by the light of nature and the enducyng of the law
of nature, and has made mankind an image like unto him self, and his sprite
immortal incomprehensyble, and quycke or swyft of knowledge, much apt to
co^templacion, and evermore having mind to his oryginal that is to God and to
things ghostly, prone, diligent, feign, and much desirous. He has furthermoe
so sensybly and vysybly clothed and covered the soul, with flesh, blood and
other material substance taken of the earth, and made it se^s^^le and
perceyuable to the sense of touching, that it loves earthly, tra^sytory,
temporal or mundayne things. Plato avouches man to be the soul only, which
soul has the body but as a certain tabernacle and instrument. And wha^ it is
infused into the body, it is as ye would say obscured or darkened and (as it
were) enbraked or enprisoned in a derke dungion, so that it forgets all
heavenly things, and makes search to inquire of things unnecessary, as
what God does in heaven, and what things men do among them selves: and not
what things God works among us in the world by his creatures, as namely of
the sky, the sun, the moon, and the other planettes and of the whole
fyrmament, where the heavens selfs nevertheless show fourth his ryghteousnes,
as witnesses the Psalmest, in such wise that al things cha^ces to come
emonge us in earth, do follow and ensue by the course and influence of the sky,
and by the reuolucion of planettes and of the stars fyxed. All which things
although they be unto your excellency manifest and by your own experience
sufficiently known, yet ye may somewhat more clearly understand and perceive
as well by this pronosticacio^ of mine, as also by the practices of other me^
that have written in this kind: that the Eclypses of the two great lights, and
of the other signs in heaven, without doubt do induce and sygnifye great
perels, of the world, and dissensyons emonge those persons that have the power
of the world, and be rulers and gouerners in the same: which thing is of me in
the chapters here ensuinge in this little work of my practyse in many places
showed and declared. And forasmuch also as I know most noble prince your
highness by reason of your noble virtues mete to be in a prince: and furthermore
by reason of a singular prudence given to you of God, that ye have a specyal
inclynacion, and a singular affeccion toward experyence, and toward all
arts. I have thought it best in prese^tynge mine obeisau^ce and service, to
dedicate this my Pronosticacion unto your hyghnes, humbly besechyng that the
same will accept and take in good part this my little labor. If at any time I
can do pleasure un to your hyghnes in greater things, I acknowledge my whole
study, dylige^ce and travail bound thereunto, yea and promise my self also to
be both prompt and ready from time to time. In the mean while, besechyng that
God almyghtye will long, keep and govern your highness prosperously in reast
and peace, and lucky state of al things.

Given at Monace in the year. M. CCCCC. xliiiii. on the day of the Natiuite of
saint John Baptyst.
A Pronosticacion.
The first chapter shows of the influence and effycacy of those planettes
which shall chefely bear rule this year.

IT can not be denied but that the word of God and the work created by his
deuyne word (that is to say, heaven, earth and all that is contained in the^)
are so annexed and united together, that it is impossyble to know the
operacion of the one without the other. For wylt thou know the power and
strength of the word of God, then must thou search in his works* by the
which we naturally understand what God works with his creatures* and what he
will work herafter. For here in earth n^xt god almighty (as Ptholom^^ in the
first quadripartite techeth) al ^a^ses as well of things to come as of things
that does chance unto us, comes through the heavenly, course and influence
of the planettes predominatinge or bearing chief rule, who of all the most
expert auctors in this art of Astrology, is best allowed and followed. Therefore
when I saw wrothful and co^tencious Mars in the figure of the reuolucion newly
entered into the house where Venus was, I may not give the power of the higher
rule to the womannyshe or femynyne planette Venus, but she agrees with the
angry Mars to be an aydour unto her* whereby Venus may govern this year after
her will and dysposycion. wherefore every wise man will consider the nature and
propertye of these two planettes, and so look unto their matters (through the
deuyne help) that they fall not into the ungodly inclynacions of them. For it
is written, Vir sapiens dominatur Astris, (that is) the wise man shall bear
rule with the stars.

The second Chapter is of the Eclypses of the Sun, and what time of the
year it shall appear, and of his operation i^ general.

literal depiction of the Gemini twins (Castor and Pollux) astride the dragon's
tail (the descending node of the moon's orbit with the ecliptic) encompassed by
the hollow circle of a moon

THe syxt day of July, the moon shall take away from us the light of the
sun in three points.xliiii. ininutes in the.xxvii. degree of the sign
Gemini, in Cauda draconis, or dragones tail, and will make a shadow unto us,
it shall begin at.viii. of the clock and one mynute before noone, the mydest
shall be.xlix. minutes after.viii. and it shall end.xxxix. minutes after.ix. of
the clock, and so it shall endure from the beginnynge to the end one
hour.xxxvii. minutes before noone And the operacion of it shall extend and
teach one year.xxxi. weeks and three days. Also in the year passed, on
the.xxiii. day of January in the sign Aquarius fell the Eclyps of the Su^ne,
whose operacion lasts two years.xxxvi. wekes. And they that dwell in the East
and toward the South for the most part shall feel the terrible operacion of
this Eclyps. And the operacion of it shall be such that scarsly I dare be so
bold to exprese the terrible significacion of it with words. For of truth
most mighty prince, even those unto whom power to govern and rule
perteyneth, are not fre from the peril and operacion of this Eclips. For before
that the terryble influence of the Eclyps passed, and the Eclyps that shall be in
this year shall leave their operacyons. Mars shall move war, and blow his
horn, chefely unto the dystruction and death of those carnal or fleshely
persons that are filled with vice and uncleanness.

The third chapter treats of discordes sedicions and wars of this year.

ALbehazen Haly the son of Abenragel writes in the eight part of the.iiii.
chapter, saiynge many perels shall chance unto the warryers, that shall be
compelled to war in the Southe: namely, when the reuolucyon of the year shall
happen or fall in the day, and Mars being retro grade, or goinge backward in an
earth sign. which thing also Albumasar in the.viii. difference of the.ii.
tractes of the reuolucion of years, testifyeth: that when Mars shall occupy
the.ii. house before the Sun in the sign Taurus, it sygnifyeth much
slaughter and unjust shed dynge of blood. Oh how gredy, how desirous, and
thrustynge for blood that Mars is, which will spare no labor nor pain to
bring his unnatural desire to effect. Oh how louinge a master shall he be to
discord and enui, yea and above measure busy and dylygent to seek occasions of
strife and discord. He shall styre up the courages or minds of great me^ and
princes to war and battle. For by the operacion of these.ii. Eclypses of the
su^ne and through these evil and most unfortunate aspectes of Mars and Saturn
they shall be wholly bent and set upon most fyrse and cruel battle and war.
And as Ludouicus writes in the second co^clusyo^ of his book of Aphorisms or
proverbs of Astrologye: when Mars being in the sign Cancer is burned with
the heat of the sun, then shall his cruelty, woodenes, and fersenes be
shewede more horrible in styrynge up of sedycio^ through all the whole world,
and to sow dyscorde. And as then, when he shall be in the east, there shall be
diverse tumultes and battles. All people shall be at varyance and war at once
together, which things almoost shall be like unto these that are spoken by
Astrage king of the Medes, that by the treason wrought by his nece or cosyn
named Cyro, he had the victory of Harpurge. wherefore without ceassynge,
earnestly and busylye let us offer sacryfyce unto the heavenly father, by Jesus
Christ our Lord, that he may wit save to have compassyon on us, and to
grant his holy ghost unto our magestrates, by who^ all the dysse^cyons;
debates, dyscordes and stryfes that now are spronge up among us, may
beforgotte^. And so together with God our father without end we may both
reygne and live. Amen.

The fourth chapter treats of the fruits of this year, and of the price of
those things that belong unto the use of man.

IN discribyng, or setting forth this Chapter, we must use a more exact
dilygence and a more precise judgment, that we give none occasion to these
engrossers to exercise and occupy their engrossynge, which do scrape up and
gather together out of all places and coasts both wheat and other kinds of
grain, not only for their use and profit, but also that they may there by get
great gaynes and aduau^tage. Furthermore Albuma. writes in the book entytled
Floru^, de minus felici prouentu fructuum (that is) of the unkindly yield of
fruits: and says that when Venus is let in the beginning of the year,
and Mars is found in the reuolucyon in Taurus, and Jupiter in Caprycorne, that
then there shall be a great wast of corn feldes, and a great dearth and scarcyte
of all manner grain and fruit, as well of that which grows on trees, as of
wheat and barley. And Ptholome also does witness the same in his book entytled
Centiloquium, in the.lxxxxvii. co^clucion where he says when the fourth part
of the year, and the lords of the corners of the preuencyon shall be weak and
feable, that then al thing that do appertain to the use and profit of men, to
be both costly and dear. But Haly Abe^ragel in the.xxxi. cha. of the fruteful
and unfruitful years shows. when the lord does stand fortunatly in the
preue^cional figure, and does turn him self with a chereful countenance to
Jupiter, then the nature and influe^ce of the planettes are to give unto us a
very fruyteful and ple^ tyful year* and a good and prosperous yield of al
things, so that I dare boldly affirm and truly say that the ground this
year shall yield suffycyently al manner of fruytes and grain to the use and
profit of men. Furthermore, we read in many places of scripture, as in
the.xxi. of Genesis. Also in the.ii. book of Samuel the.ii. Cha. Amos in
the.viii. cha. That there has been often times a great and long penury of all
things and intolerable famyn and dearth, namely we know this thing to have
chanced for the synful living of the people. So likewise, even now at this
season, except we amend and correct our life, great and horrible plages shall
ensue thereof. For God is greatly offended with our sins.

The.v. chapter is of the infyrmyties, diseases and plages, as well of men, as
of beasts that shall reygne this year.

WHen in the science of Astronomy I do consider and ponder the causes of
dyseases and infyrmites which chance yearly. I find that this year ensuinge
shall be pestyle^ce and corrupt airs, and there shall reygne a certain general
pain in men's heads of the which many shall dye, and many by the reason of a
whurlyng and gydynes in the head, and of to much melancoly shall be depryued of
their wit and reason, and fall mad, and some other shall have the falling evil,
and many men shall dye suddenly, and the pestyle^ce shall reygne in some places.
Furthermore Mars and Saturn do threaten very whote and burning diseasses: as
fevers or agues, many aches in the head, neck, and in the eyes, and also
impostu mes, pluryses or stytches, and other sondrye kinds of dyseases, with
which God shall punyshe the styfnecked or inobedient persons, for God does
always punyshe the stubburne and unruly people, as we read in holy scripture.
As in Numeri.xvi. Deuteronomi.xi. Psalm. C. v. That the earth opened her mouth
and did swalowe Dathan, and overwhelmed the company of Abyrom, and the flame of
fire burned many. Also there is a notable example written in the Acts of the
Apostles the.v. chap. of Ananyas and his wife which for lyenge and dyssemblynge
with the holy ghost, fell down sodeinly. whereof the Psalmody speaks. They
sodaynely went from God and peryshed for their sins.

The.vi. Chapter expresses, in what days the new moons, the quarters, and
fulmoones shall appear under the fyrmament, with the change of the wether for
three days before, or after, either of them.

January.
THe last quarter the.vi. day at vij. of the clock before noone, cold and dry
with snow, and like wether shall be on the.ix. day. The new moon the.xii. day
at.xii. of the cloak.xxi. mi. at midnight following, snow, and after with cold
wyndes and tempest, myxed with snow: The first quart the.ix. day at.x. of the
clock aforenoon* cold and dry with change of wether. The full moon
the.xxviii. day at one of the clock xxxv. mi. before noone cold.

February
THe last quarter the.iiii. day at eight of the clock after none, snow. The
new moon the.xi. day at x. of the clock xxxv. mi. before noone, dark, cloudy
and cold. The first quarter the.xviii. day at iii. of the clock after noone,
cold myxed with snow. The fulmoone the.xxvi. day at.vii. of the clock after
noone, te^perate

March.
THe last quarter the.vi. day at.v of the clock before noone, inconstant, and
after fair. The new moon, the.xii. day at.ix. of the clock.x. mi. after
noone, yet repair not your gardens, because then should all the herbs
peryshe with snow. The first quarter the.xx. day, at x of the clock before
noone. It may be fair until the.xx. day. But March and Apryl will show them
selves angry and peradventure they may let that. The fulmoone, the.xxviii. day
at.ix. of the clock xxxviii. mi. after noone, Mars and Venus will water the
earth and the feldes, the^ let the husbandemen provide to have good seed of
otes and barley.

Apryl.
THe last quarter, the.iiii. day at.xi. of the clock before noone, good and
temperate. The new moon, the.xi. day at.viii of the clock xxviii. minu.
before noone, moist, and after metely fair. The first quarter, the.xix. day
at.iiii. of the clock in the morning, inconstant, The full moon, the xxvi.
day at.ix. of the clock.xix. mi. before noone, moist, and varyable.

May.
THe last quarter, the.iii day at.iiii. of the clock after noone, rain. The
new moon, the.x. day at.viii. of the clock xxiii. mi. after noone, moist and
cold, therefore be not to busy to water the herbs. The first quarter,
the.xviii. day at x. of the clock after noone, rain and wyndy, with thu^der
and lyghtnynge. The full moon, the.xxvi. day at vii. of the clock xxviii. mi.
aforenoon, fair, but the.xxviii and.xxix. day varyable with rain*

June.
THe last quarter, the first day at.ix. of the clock after noone, good wether
to carry in hay, and for reapers, but about the, v, day it chau^geth. The new
moon Eclypsal, the.ix. day at.ix. of the clock.xlii mi. aforenoone, rain,
thunder, and lyghtnynge. The first quarter, the.xvi. day at noone, at which
time I counsel al husband men to mow their meadows of hay, and to carry in a
pace, if they will not be let with rain. The fulmoone, the.xxiiii. day at ii.
of the clock, and one mi. after noone with rain about the.xxvi. day.

July.
THe last quarter, the first day at, iiii. of the clock before noone, fair.

The new moon, the.ix. day at.xi. of the clock.lv. mi. before noone, rain,
thu^der, and lyghtnynge. The first quarter, the xvii. day at none, te^perate.
The fulmone the.xxiii, day at viii. of the clock.lix. mi. after noone, rain
and thu^der. The last quarter, the.xxx. day at.ii. of the clock after noone,
fair til the.iii. day of August, then rain.

August.
THe new moon, the.vii. day at.iii. of the clock.xx. mi. after noone, te^perat
and myxed with rain. The first quart, the.xv. day at.ii. of the clock after
noone variable* The full moon, the.xxii. day at iiii. of the clock.xxxi. mi.
after noon, moist not good to bathe, nor to let blood. The last quart, the.xxix
day at.ix. of the clock before noone, as before.

Septe^bre.
THe new moon, the.vi. day at.vii. of the clock.xxvii. mi. before noone, in
some places much rain. The first quarter, the xii. day at.xi. of the clock
after noone, fair and convenient to gather grapes. The fulmoone, the.xx. day
at.i. of the clock.xxxi. mi. after noone, a good harvest season and a
convenient time to sow wheat and Rye The last quart, the.xxvii. day at.x. of
the clock after noone, wyndy, and rain

Octobre.
THe new moon, the.v. day at.xi. of the clock.xxxi. mi. after noone, wyndye,
yet fair, about the.x. day cold, and in hylly places snow. The first
quarter, the.xiii. day at.vi. of the clock before noone, snow The full moon,
the.xix. day at mydnight aft. xlvi. mi. fair with drought. The last quarter,
the.xxvii. day at five of the clock after noone, varyable.

Noue^bre.
THe newmoone, the.iiii. day at.ii. of the clock.xliiii. mi. after noone, cold
and dry, and a little after, wind and rain. The.i. quarter, the.xi. day at one
of the clock after noone, te^perate. The full moon, the viii. day at.ii. of
the clock.xxxvii. mi. after noone, moist. The last quarter, the.xxvi. day
at.ii. of the clock after noone, cold and moist, and in hylly places snow.

Decembre
THe new moon, the.iiii. day at.iiii. of the clock xxvi. mi. after noone,
with cold and varyablenes The first quarter, the.x. day at.ix. of the clock
after noone, te^perate, but about the.xiiii. day moist with snow. The
fulmoone, the.xviii. day at.vii. of ye clock ii. mi. before noone, snow. The
last quarter, the.xxvi. day at.x. of the clock before noone, fair, but about
the.xxviii. day snow.

FINIS.
Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


