The Orator: Handling a hundred several Discourses, in form of Declamations:
Some of the Arguments being drawn from Titus Liuius and other ancient Writers,
the rest of the Authors own invention: Part of which are of matters happened
in our Age.

Written in French by Alexander Siluayn, and Englished by L. P.

LONDON Printed by Adam Islip. 1596.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable my most especial good Lord John, Lord St. John, Baron
of Bletsho.
RIght Noble Lord, it is the custom of ignorant and unlearned statuaries (who
are both defective in art and faulty in judgment) when they have either a
Venus to carue, or a Cupid to pollish, to find means to rear them on some high
marble pillars, to the end that the distance of the eye might shadow the defect
of their cunning. In imitation of whom (knowing mine own disabilitie to
deserve, and weakness to achieue) having hewn out of my rough wit this first
fruit of mine oratory, I have thought good to ground and rear them upon the
authority and greatness of your Lordship, whose favors and merits may advance
them to that degree and esteem of reputation, which of themselves they
despair of, except under your favor and countenance. The reason why I make
you my patron is for that I know you to be a ^auourer of the learned, and a
maintainer of the souldior; discreet in your judgment, and bountiful to all
toward and deserving scholars. Vouchsafe honorable lord, that your general
affability and courtesy toward all men, admit no instance in my behalf, but
as both by bounty and other infinite graces toward me you have made me
fortunate, so now in countenancing this labor of mine, make me happy by your
acceptance, who humbly beseech almighty God to join entire felicity to your
many virtues.

Your lordships in all dutiful affection, Lazarius Piot*

To the Reader.
SInce he is to be counted a discreet man (gentle Reader) that provoked with
the desire of glory, and kindeled with good affection, indeuoreth to profit
his neighbor by virtue, and procure himself a life and residence in the
memory of posterities: I have thought good (in hope to advantage my self with
the same title) to present thee with certain Rhethoricall Declamations, the
use whereof in every member in our Commonweal, is as necessary, as the abuse of
wilful ignorance is odious. In these thou may learn Rhethoricke to enforce
a good cause, and art to impugn an ill. In these thou may behold the fruits
and flowers of Eloquence, which as Tully says in his Orat^r, Been constitutae
ciuitatis est quasi alumna: use them to thy profit good Reader, and accept them
with as good a mind as I present them with a virtuous intent. If thou study
law, they may help thy pleadings, or if divinity (the reformer of law) they
may perfect they persuasions. In reasoning of private debates, here may thou
find apt metaphors, in encouraging thy soldiers fit motives. Fathers here
have good arguments to move affections in their children, and children virtuous
reconcilements to satisfy their displeased fathers: briefly every private man
may in this be partaker of a general profit, and the grossest understanding
find occasion of reformation. The benefits then so general, and my intent so
honest, I heartely entreat you to keep Talions law in this, and pay me like
for like, give me good thoughts for great studies, and at leastwise show me
this courtly courtesy, to afford me good words (which cost you nothing) for
serious thoughts hatched up with much consideration. Thus commending my deserts
to the learned, and committing my labor to the instruction of the ignorant, I
bid you all heartely farewell.

L. P.

THE MIRROVR OF Eloquence: Containing an hundred Historical, or rather
Tragical Declamations.
Declamation. 1.
Of Fuluius, who caused the Senators of Capua to be beheaded, without the
consent of the Senate and people of Rome.

BY how much they of Capua were prone, and ill advised, to revolt from the
Romans unto Hanniball, after the battle of Cannas, by so much were they more
obstinatly besieged, so that being forced for want of timely succors, to yield
unto the mercy of the two Roman Consuls, Appius Claudius, and Quintus Fuluius,
they were in the end more cruelly punished than any other rebels. The which
Vibius Virius (the ringleader, and chief author of the said rebellion)
together with seven and twenty other Senators foreseeing, they all poisoned
themselves at a banquet: The rest of them that yielded, were sent to prison,
five and twenty to Cally, and eight and twenty to Theana. Where without any
commandment from the Senate or people of Rome, and especially without the
consent of Claudius: Fuluius caused them all to be first scourged with rods,
and afterward to be beheaded. Wherefore a doubt was made whether he was more
righteous or rigorous in his deed. And therefore let us imagine, that shortly
after the rest of the Capuans accused him, saying thus:

WAs it not sufficient grave Senators, and you blessed people, that Vibius and
his associats the chief authors and cause of the said rebellion, did sacrifice
themselves unto Fuluius his cruelty, but that you must further ad thereunto
these seven and fifty miserable Senators? Is it possible that they were all
culpable? No surely: for seeing that they trusted to the Roman clemency,
their conscience was a sure testimony of their innocence. But that could not
save them from the fury of Fuluius, who to exercise his cruelty, has taken
from the Senate and people of Rome, the means as well to show their pity as
their power, not considering that the worthiest part of a victory is to subdue
the just desire of revenge. Wherefore despising all authority, and chiefly
that of his Colleague and companion of his victory, he rather desired to be
accounted cruel then merciful, and neglecting the proverb which says, That
sometimes man shows himself a God unto man, would rather verify the contrary,
That man is even a woolfe unto man. Surely our misery cannot but be great, yet
should it have been more tolerable, if it had proceeded from the Senate, or
people, for then should there have been some show of Justice considered upon by
many, where now is seen but a revenging cruelty, thought upon by one alone,
and executed on the sudden. And so much more is this deed execrable, in as
much as ordinarily we see many consultations to be held, and that of many men,
to pronounce judgment against one: but alas, almost al our Senators have been
condemned even in a moment by one man alone (if he ought so to be called) who
has showed himself more cruel then any furious Lion or fierce Tigre. For he
not being satisfied with the stripes and death of those which were sent
prisoners to Theana, took yet further pains to make his journey to Cally, to
torture and behead those which were there also imprisoned: and he not being
thoroughly appeased therewith, did ad thereunto the miserable death of Taurea
Lubullus a man even besides himself, who although that of his own accord he
offered himself to abide any punishment, yet were his torments aggrauated the
more. All these acts (O Romans) are most lamentable, and worthy of great
compassion amongst men. But yet the hateful contempt which this monstrous man
has made of your authority is most detestable: For as he was in acting the
second execution at Callie, when the miserable souls were not yet all bound to
the stakes, there came (as it were by divine grace, and your goodness) letters
from the Praetor and people of Rome to stay their execution, nevertheless this
man his rage alone, prevailed more than did the clemency of all the rest of
you. But what is this man, who presumes to be more wise, and takes greater
authority upon him, then all the other Romans besides? Surely if cruelty be
wisdom, and presumption carry authority, he has reason? But if humanity be
decent for men, and to think no better of himself then others, be modesty,
he has done amiss? for he is worse then a beast that thinks himself
better then any other man. If it were lawful, I would feign know what moved
him, that he could not so much as stay this last cruel execution? Or what hurt
might have happened unto the Romans thereby? of whom we are the true (though
disobedient) children, since heretofore we freely gave our selves, and all we
possessed into their hands. But if some amongst us, more ambitious then the
rest, upon hope to command the weaker sort, have yielded themselves unto
Hannibal, was it convenient that even those who were displeased therewithal
should die so cruelly, without being admitted not so much as to speak for
themselves. Alas this cruelty is too extreme, and so much the more in that it
was done against the intention of the Senate and people of Rome. But God grant
that under the color of this horrible deed, there be not some secret hidden,
more pernicious and hurtful unto the Romans then ever our rebellion was. I
know (besides the difficulty thereof) how much all true Roman hearts do
detest such as do aspire to tyrannize over their own country, yet I may say
that the deeds of Fuluius do show that he aims at that mark, and it may be
himself suspecteth that so much is already known by him; which was the only
cause why he was unwilling that the Capuans should be suffered to speak, least
some thing might have been disclosed unto his prejudice, the which I will not
affirm, because that if it were so, it ought to be more then made manifest,
since that many have not only been suspected, but also grievously punished for
matters less apparent then this: And amongst others Coriolanus, Manlius,
Spurius, Cassius, and Melius, only for showing themselves over liberal. To
conclude, I feel my self so ouercharged with grief, as I am not able to
speak in such sort as I ought, pleading before this honorable Senate, who may
be pleased to bear with my weakness, considering that they never keep decorum
which are ouercharged with extreme sorrow. May it then please you most worthy
Senators, protectors of equity, by that little which I have badly expressed,
to consider what might further be spoken upon this matter, by one who is free
from all anguish and fear.

The Answer of M. Attilius in the absence of Fuluius.
I Think most grave Senators, that these men here have no other reason to
complain of Fuluius, but only because he has saved the lives of too many of
the Capuans. For it is very certain that after the taking, or surrender of
Capua, Fuluius caused information to be made of all those that had borne any
good will unto the Romans, and there were found no more then three silie women,
that is to say, Vestia, Oppia, and Faucula Cluuia, who by the hire of her body
did secretly relieve the Romans that were in prison; and the other, did every
day offer sacrifice for the prospertie and victory of the Romans: The third
being but a young girl, was the same that came unto our camp, and gave
intelligence that those Numidians which fained to be run away from Capua,
were sent for spies, and some of them were found with letters about them, to
carry unto Hannibal. Touching the rest, it may be said, that although they
were all guilty, yet did Fuluius cause those only to die, who surpassed the
others in authority: Wherefore Fuluius was no less merciful unto those whom
he saved, then just unto them that he executed. But it is the manner of the
wicked, yea of the most part of men, seldom (...) to say more rightly) none of
their Citizens were worthy to live: so did Fuluius but well, having seen with
his eyes your obstinacy in fighting, your favor to Hanniball, and your hate
to the Romans, thereupon to execute justice: as also because the dignity of
the consulship carries with it the authority both of the Senate and people,
in such affairs where expedition is required: and it is not for the offenders
to demand an account of the judges for the justice which they have executed,
but those who by their favor are yet living ought rather to admire their most
wonderful mercy. Say then that your cruelties have been the cause that
Fuluius may yet be called more merciful then just. Finally he is the man, who
leaving his Colleague hurt at the siege of Capua, came with part of the army to
succor Rome, and fight with Hanniball, who was before our gates at your
instance: He it is who has compelled you to submit your selves again unto the
Romans: And he it is who in the behalf of the people, has yet the power to
punish you further. Wherefore it is but folly to answer particularly to every
slanderous supposition which you would assert against him, since those that
are conquered, do never love their conquerors.

Declamation 2.
Of the first Earl of Flaunders, who was accused to the French King for
hanging his eldest son.

THe Flemmings write very obscurely in their Chronicles, that their first Earl
was named Leideric, being the son of one Saluart, a Foster of Flaunders, and
they say that the said Leideric, while he was yet a Foster and coming to
survey his woods, did find the French king his daughter bebloubered with tears,
because that in the said forest, some had murdered a Prince of England, who
had secretly stolen and carried her forth of France. Which Princess, Leideric
married, and of her had seven sons; whom he caused to be all apparelled with
garments, the left side whereof was cloth of gold in honor of their mother,
and the right side was woollen cloth, because himself was neither prince nor
knight. Now it happened that the said French king (whose name they likewise
tell not) followed in chase of Heart even unto the city of List in Flaunders,
where the said Leideric dwelt, with whom the king was lodged: who thoroughly
viewing Leiderics children, thought that they greatly resembled his daughters
countenance, and demanding for their mother, he presently knew her for his lost
child: Whereupon he made the said Leideric knight, and created him Earl of
Flanders. Now says the history, that the eldest son of the said Earl being
old enough to court ladies, did meet before the court gates with a woman that
had a small basket of fruit to sell, which he took from her and carried up
unto the gentlewomen. The poor woman stayed for money for her said fruit, so
long until it grew toward night, and then departing homeward, she lost her
self in the forest, so as she could not find her house until the next
morning, when coming home, she found her child dead for want of the teat.
Whereupon she complained unto the Earl, he fained to carry his said son
abroad to tourney, but passing through the forest, he caused him to be hanged.
Wherefore let us suppose that the people accused the Earl unto the king in
this sort.

EVery cruelty (if it may please your Majesty) is assuredly very odious, but
that which the father commits against his own child is most execrable: for
the father his kindness ought to exceed all other love, imitating therein, the
love which God did bear unto man, for the salvation of whom, he has not
spared his only begotten son, our Lord and Redeemer: whose example they are
more bound to follow that are chosen to rule others, then those which are more
base in condition, because the people for the most part do conform themselves
to immitate their actions which command, and especially the bad before the
good. Whereupon it follows, that he which commands over a Commonwealth or
province, cannot offend in any mean sort, especially if his offense be
public, more if the cause be not over great, but most of all if it be such a
vice as degenerateth from the nature of man: all which said faults are found in
this detestable deed of our Earl, having wrongfullie put to death his own
son: and what son? Even his eldest son, and the same which should have
succeeded him and been our Earl. But what offense can be more public then to
cause his son to die by the most shameful death in the world? For by the
halter, are thieves executed: and yet he had no such cause to put him to death,
seeing that notwithstanding his fault was remediless: moreover there is no
^ice thought more unbeseeming a man then cruelty, and there is no greater
cruelty the^ that which is committed against a man's own blood, the which
cruelty is not only done against himself, against his son, and against us
in putting our Prince to death, but also against the mother and brethren of the
Prince, and that which worst is, against your Majesty; having executed the
son of your daughter, your nephew, and your subject, who in process of time
might have done good service unto your crown and state. Wherefore this tyrant
has not only showed cruelty unto all these above named, but he has further
manifested his ingratitude unto his king and sovereign; unto your Majesty I
say, who has made him noble by knighting him, creating him Earl of this
country, and accepting him for your son in law. What punishment deserves
not a crime so manifest committed against the person of such a monarch? But who
is so ignorant that will not affirm that in this action, froward fortune has
rather been the cause of the mischeife happened unto this woman, than the
prince himself, or else it was her negligence or ill hap, or the desteny of the
infant. What meant she to stay so long? Did not she know where to have found
the Prince the next day? Had she lost her money by staying for it? But to be
short, this woman did show her self to be both cruel and obstinate, as their
sex are for the most part, and it may be she stayed so long tatling with some
of her gossips, and boasting that the Prince had bought her fruit, as night
ouertooke her before she was aware: for the prattle of a woman is oftentimes
without measure. But were it that the Prince his fault were far more manifest
and heinous then it is, yet is the cause to be judged by none but by the king
only, or by such as should by his Majesty be deputed and appointed for judges,
and it is more unfit that the father should be judge of his child then any
other, because either too exceeding love, or too extreme rage, may ouerrule
him: for when he is angry with those whom he loves, his anger proves more
vehement and dangerous toward them then against others. Likewise no judgment
ought to be pronounced without counsel and due informations: But what proofs
was brought against our prince? Where are those which were called to consult
upon judgment, or to give advice that he ought to die? Alas, the father and
the hangman were both Jury, Judge, and Executioner. Well, God grant this
mischief proceed not from some other ground: that is to say, least some old
malice long since conceived has not made the father to find this occasion to
destroy his son, it may be, chiefly to advance his second son, whom he loved
better. I pass over in silence how he has secretly endeavored to have the
world suppose that the same was none of his son, thereby meaning to slander your
daughter, for those which know themselves inferior to their wives, do never
love them heartily, but seek all the means they can to make them less
esteemed, and especially such as are ungrateful, of whom this Tyrant shows
himself to be the chiefest. It may be said that it is not lawful to accuse
any man by conjecture, but what vileness may not a man imagine by such a one,
seeing that like as virtues are knit together, so do vices follow one another?
To conclude (dread sovereign) we do better feel this wrong done to your
Majesty, to your daughter, to her children, and to our selves, then we are
able to express the same in words; but our just tears together with our
silence, demand justice of your highness.

The answer of the Earl.
AS nothing surely can be more odious, or degenerating from the nature of man
then cruelty, so also is nothing more necessary for humane conversation, then
justice joined with wisdom; for indeed without it, justice seems to be no
better then cruelty, as wisdom also without justice is esteemed no other
then mere malice, yet holding these two virtues linked together, a man may put
his own child to death, and not be taxed of cruelty, but rather praised for
his piety and love toward them and Commonwealth. And such were the
Numantines accounted for slaying their children, rather then they would leave
them for slaves: So was Virginius who killed his daughter to save her
chastity. I pass over Manlius Torquatus, Posthumous, and diverse others who
put their own children to death only for the zeal they had unto the
observation of military discipline: yet for all that not any of all these have
been judged to be cruel or worthy of blame, but on the contrary have thereby
gained immortal praise and glory. Likewise there is no doubt at all, but that
the fathers kindness ought to exceed all other love: following the example of
our maker, who leaves not to exercise his mercy together with his justice: and
that it is so, he many times punishes sins both in this world, and in the
world to come: moreover we must not think any father so cruel to hurt his
son in the little finger without feeling the grief thereof himself in the
midst of his heart, and therefore it is a mere folly to teach fathers how
they ought to love their children, since nature who is the mistress of all
humane creatures instructs them therein sufficiently: and as it is most
certain that princes or such as rule, are above all others bounden to be
virtuous, and that they are constituted as guides and examples for all their
subjects to follow, so can it not also be denied, but that severity of justice
is more requisite in them then any of the other virtues, (if virtues may be
feperated) and he which will well consider my deed without passion, shall find
all the four principal virtues therein to be observed. For first of all I
have done justice in putting him to death, who was not only the death of an
innocent, or at the least the same that caused the mother to suffer her child
to die, but also such a one who defrauded a poor woman of part of her living,
in that he paid her not for the same, which she brought to sell for her
relief. My prudence was showed in putting him to death without any commotion
of the people, and in terrifieng all others from offending, as also to take
from every malefactor all hope to escape just punishment for their misdeeds. My
temperance I declared in causing the offender to die by the shortest and
secretest manner of death that I could devise, thereby ridding him from the
shame to be a spectacle unto many. And my fortitude was manifest, in that I was
able to overcome the desire which I had to pardon him both the same and all
other offenses. But in the end considering that the first princes are bound by
their examples to stir up and provoke their successors to execute justice
without partiality, I have for that end sacrificed my will, together with the
life of my best beloved son, because the evil customs of the former princes
are turned into laws by those which succeed them, and those which are good are
quite forgotten if they be not confirmed by very memorable examples. Therefore
Saul did not amiss when he would have put his son Ionathas to death,
seeing law is to be administered unto all alike: for where exception of persons
is respected, there must needs corruption of justice follow, which marreth all,
for nothing can be permament which is corrupted. True it is that he was my
eldest son, but being such a one as he was, he neither ought to succeed me,
nor yet to live any longer: and accuse me no more of cruelty, since to punish
an evil doer is a deed of mercy, for pity without justice is folly or
rather iniquity; and the greater he is that offends, the more severe
punishment he deserves: For the poor wretch, or he which is of base
condition, may excuse himself by his poverty, by want of instruction, by
ignorance, by his lewd education, and such other like reasons both vain and
frivolous; but the offenses of great personages is to be attributed to nothing
but to pride and malice. Neither is one death more shameful then another, but
only that death where the party is made a spectacle to the standers by: for it
is not the death, but the offense that is shameful. And therefore in executing
justice I cannot be termed cruel unto mine own blood or my son, nor unto
your Prince, unto the Kings daughter, neither unto our children: for he not
being such a one as he ought to be, was now no more to be regarded by any of
us, but was no better then a thief, and a murderer. Who is then so mad as to
be called a grandfather, father, mother, brother, or a subject to so vild a
man? Neither must these be the means to begin those good services that ought
to be done unto the crown of France, which was institituted and preserved
hitherto by virtue. It is a vain thing to go about to persuade fathers of the
valor or worthiness of their children, seeing that for the most part they
believe it more then is requisite, and always do excuse their faults more
then they ought; of which sort I confess my self have been one, so long as
there was any hope of amendment. I assure you, that a long time was my heart
most grievously perplexed, before I could consent unto the punishment, and
death of my son. But omitting all other circumstances I will show you the
reasons which moved me to put my son to death, for the sons discredit,
must needs be the fathers disgrace, because they do always cocker their
children but too much: and therefore it was not without cause that the Romans
(from whence all good laws have their beginning) did give unto fathers all
power over the life and death of their children, knowing that without most just
occasion they would never put them to death. No son could be more dear unto
me then mine eldest, but equity commands me to love the Common wealth
better; which in no sort can be regarded, when he which rules the same is not
virtuous, because none therein should be in safety if the prince were vicious.
My life and death is in the mercy of the kings Majesty; but to die, I would
not have failed to do that which I have done, being (as we are) mortal, and
death may only be delaied, but not escaped. Our life also is not to be measured
by our years but by our deeds: for he has lived long enough who is by good men
deemed most worthy of long life, and he cannot die too soon, who spends his
life in wickedness. Wherefore it was no reason that my son should have lived
any longer, and I would to God that so his reproach might die with him, as I
wish my renown may live after me. Touching judgment, he which governs the
Commonwealth, must needs be judge in the same. Such were the Dictators or
Consuls amongst the Romans, and such at this day are kings and princes. And
Plato says: Happy is that country where Philosophers are kings, and kings be
Philosophers: whereby it appears, that rulers ought to be judges, as you
your selves do confess, in saying that the king ought to have judged my son:
which indeed had been reasonable, if his Majesty by his prerogative had not
given me free authority in matter of justice; in such sort then as I am subject
to the judgment of the king, is my son subject unto mine, and I am not to
yield an account of my actions unto any other then unto his Majesty: and
especially because the witness of a father against his son is more
sufficient then all other testimonies, according to the reasons above said: and
saving my duty unto his royal majesty, and this noble assistance, this is
most false which you object against me, touching my lady the Countess; who
has thought me worthy to be her husband, and the king accepting me for his
son inlaw, I have evermore loved and honored: and so far am I from causing her
to be ill accounted of, as with the price of my life I would seek to defend
and increase her honor, which being so, it may please his highness not to
suffer him to be unpunished, who has spoken so slanderously as thou have done,
as if any person living might doubt of her chastity. In saying that I think
my self to be inferior unto her, thou do therein also show thy ignorance
together with thy malice: for besides the difference of the sex, which makes
every man better then a woman, it is most manifest, that love and marriage does
always make the man and the wife equal. It is likewise to be considered,
that they are no less noble which attain thereunto by desert, then those
which come unto it by descent, for which the heirs are the more beholding unto
their ancestors: and to say that I deserve not the dignity which I enjoy, it
should be a reproach unto the king, who of his grace respecting my deserts, has
himself thought me worthy of what he has bestowed upon me. Lastly, I appeal
unto your majesty for the wrong which my subjects do offer me in accusing and
slanderidg me unjustly, and consequently I demand justice upon the same.

Declamation, 3.
Of Pacuuius, who having by his subtilty saved the Senators of Capua, is
accused of Treason.

AFter the overthrow of Cannas, many cities yielded unto Hanniball, and in some
of them the people rebelled against the Senators, as those of Capua did, where
the Senate were in great danger to be cut in pieces by the communaltie, the
which Pacuuius foreseeing, being a subtle man, and of the number of the
Senators, but better beloved and esteemed amongst the people then with the
Senate, he determined to appease the people by a wile: Whereof consulting with
the rest of the Senators, and they finding no better means for their safeties,
they consented thereunto. Whereupon Pacuuius fained to detain all the Senators
as prisoners in the palace, appointing certain Ploebeians there to guard
them: then he said unto the people which were already assembled before the
palace, I have the Senators our enemies in prison, and am of the opinion that
all of them should be put to death: but to the end that the city may not be
destitute of Magistrates, it behooves that you your selves do choose amongst
you new Senators in the steed of the others which we shall kill, to the end that
we may not be surprised unawares, either by the Romans or any other of our
enemies, and have not such as may command and govern us. Then having a
Catalogue in writing of the names of all the Senators, he said: First such a
one must be killed (who was a man of great authority) name one amongst you who
may be thought worthy to succeed in his place. Then the people began to look
one upon another, and there was not found any that was deemed sufficient to
take that charge upon him. Wherefore they began to accuse Pacuuius of cruelty,
and in the end they confessed that there was not men enough to be found amongst
them worthy to be Senators, and therefore they concluded to leave the Senate
even as it was. Whereupon the Senators were both delivered, and confirmed in
their former authority. Yet let us suppose, that it happened, that one amongst
the Senate (no less envious of Pacuuius his authority, then ioifull that he
was saved by his subtlety) did long time after accuse him at Rome, affirming
that he only induced the people unto this sedition, and that his intention
was not to save, but rather to slay the Senators, and began his accusation in
this manner:

Undoubtedly such as suffer a wicked or vicious man to live in a city, do
either first or last repent it, yet is it rather commonly too late: How much
more then ought they to be sorry that suffer such men to obtain the
government of the Commonwealth, and the honors only due to righteous and
virtuous men, who for the most part do shun such authorities, because it is a
hard matter to execute so weighty a charge well. For since the weakness of
man is such, as even the wisest do mistake bad things for good, and good
things for bad, until the effect of that which afterward happens does make
the^ know their error: How can vicious or wicked men be able to do any thing
that is good? Surely honors are the true touchstone whereby the virtue or
goodness of a man is known: for in authority virtuous men do manifest their
goodness, as wicked men do lay open their badnesse, as Aristides, Epaminundus,
Licurgus, and others in all their authority did show that virtue was
incorruptible: And Periander, Pisistratus, Lisander and others declared, how
much ambition prevails over such as are not perfectly virtuous, whose example
Pacuuius was desirous to imitate, for being born in Capua a wicked man, and
seeing that he was there in such sort suffered to remain, he durst well make
claim unto dignities, and obtaining the same did afterward aspire to be
tyrant. For by how much they which are unworthy of authority, and yet do
attain there unto, by so much the more does their insolency thereby increase;
and that in such sort, as they not only do presume the same to be due unto
them, but also that there is no government great enough for them, and
therefore such oppress even those who have most favored them, which truly is
a just punishment which the Gods sends upon those who favor the wicked, that
even by the same themselves are oftentimes destroyed. And so is it justly
fallen upon our Senators, who knowing the vices of this man, have not only
permitted him to attain the most principal honors, but also by their
negligence have suffered him to tirannise over the Senate and people, even to
the danger of the lives of the said Senators; being so audacious as to affirm
unto them, that he only was able to defend them from being hewed in pieces by
the people: and afterward by his rashness put all their lives in danger of
the peoples insolency. But what had it been if the people had resolved to do
that which he counseled them unto? what assurance had he that such his folly
should have come unto a good end? Truly that was even the least of his caro,
seeing that it could not happen amiss unto him, for if the people slew the
Senate, he should remain the prince of the people, and the matter falling out
as it did, he should remain lord of the people and Senate together, persuading
both the one and the other, that they were highly bound unto him: Whereunto the
Senate was forced to yield, considering the authority which by their fault, he
had gained amongst the people: yet this had been a small hurt if he had been
contented that but only himself should have been king, but his actions
declared that he would confirm the kingdom unto his posterity by the means
of Hanniball, unto whom he not only brought his son Perolla, but himself did
stay him from the killing of Hanniball, and from the procuring of the freedom
of his country by this his most noble act. Finally this noble young man did
very well show himself to be the son of a Roman matron, holding that noble
mind of his mother: How could he choose but be grieved at the heart seeing that
by his fathers words (who rather ought to have exhorted him thereunto) his most
courageous purpose was broken from the which this hairebraine man in all vild
actions did not only dissuade him, but also constrained him to give it over,
affirming that if he would not be ruled by him, he would advertise Hannibal
thereof, yea and would cover him with his own body in such sort as he should
not be hurt unless Pacuuius were slain. Thus he alone did corrupt the
faithful zeal which the child ought to the Romans and his country. I pass
over with silence, how that he was the cause that Decius Magius was so euilly
entreated by Hanniball in the presence of all the Citizens, and then afterward
clogged with chains to be carried to Carthage, if the gods had not succored
him better then this honorable person, who had such credit with Hanniball,
that at his banquet was the second man at the table, and his son the third,
and yet did not once excuse, but rather most grievously accused poor Magius to
have always favored the Roman faction. Thus has this unhappy man betrayed his
country four times. First when he put the life of the Senators to the
discretion of the people: secondly, when he caused Capua to revolt from the
Romans: thirdly when he made an agreement with Hanniball, and suffered him to
enter into Capua: and fourthly, when he kept his son from killing Hanniball.
He will answer that he alone neither caused Capua to revolt, nor to receive
Hanniball, I say he did, for under the color of his protecting the Senate, no
man durst gainsay him in any thing, except Magius who was punished therefore.
If those who (without calling any stranger) do by no such execrable means
aspire unto tyranny, are grievously punished, What torment then may be
sufficient to be inflicted upon this wicked man? Who not content to have
usurped the government, and called in a stranger for his defense, did also by
threats corrupt the good nature of his son. Remember O you noble Romans that
you have for less fault punished and driven away your kings, and consider also
the causes why we cannot, much less will not be under any other then you, do
us justice then upon him, who has withdrawn us from you.

The Answer.
AMongst reasonable and virtuous men, al vices are odious, but above all,
ingratitude is a vice most detestable, for it is the cause that many good
turns are left undone: for even as the iuie causes that tree to die about the
which it windeth, and which sustaineth it, so an ungrateful man seeks the
death and destruction of him, to whom he is beholding for many good turns,
which makes a number fearful to employ themselves either for the particular
good of any, or for the the public benefit of many. But the noble minds
leave not for all that to do their endeavors, for even as the sum is nothing
infected by the mud upon which it shines, and as the slanders of the
ungrateful can no way hurt the true virtue, which even in the midst of
vices, shines as the light does in darkest places, even so this damned man,
the more he thinks to impair my reputation, the more does he increase my
renown. For first he says, that I have obtained the chiefest dignities in
Capua, it is then a sign that either I am virtuous, or else the rest of the
Citizens that have advanced me to such authority, are al vicious: for every
one favors his like, and repugneth his contrary. You say that I think my
self a tyrant: Where do you find that tirants do succor or save the life of
such as pretend to be equal with them in power: can you deny that by mine
industry the Senate was saved? Has not the effect made the same apparent? You
say that I brought them in danger, hazarding their lives to the discretion of
the inconstant people, how is he brought in danger who already by his own
fault is fallen thereinto? Do you call it a hazarding, to save men's lives? If
you had known any other means more expedient, you ought therein to have given
your advise? But that in extreme evils extraordinary means ought to be used:
So I knoing that the evil proceeded as well from the ouergreat presumption of
the Senate, as from the insolency of the people, thought to find out the
fittest remedy: for each party, perceiving his error framed himself
accordingly. Think you before I seemed to make it a question whether the
Senators should live or die, that I had not first gained the chiefest of their
enemies, and that I did not know the weakness of the rest? And as touching
this point of the yielding to Hanniball, the authors of his receiving they did
poison themselves, which takes away the suspicion that any other was the
cause thereof: How could I then be able to resist Hanniball more then you and
others? True it is that I was second person in his bancket at the table, but
the same was rather a sign that he did it to win me, then that I was such a
one as you term me to be. For the subtle Barbarian, did not embrace those
who did already favor him, but such as he would draw unto him: and the better
to prove that true, my son whom he knew to be a Roman in heart, was the
third man at his banquet, whom truly I confess I did dissuade from killing
Hanniball, because it was a thing impossible, being always armed, environed
with his guard, and chiefly because he evermore suspected my son greatly: So
that the best that could happen by his rashness, would be but the death of him
and many others, and it might be the utter subversion and ruin of Capua. What
hurt then have I done preserving such a one as is most affectioned unto the
Romans, and also in saving the city which could not fail but fall into their
hands again: for all violent things as was the fortune of Hannibal are of so
long continuance, but being at their Periode, turn vpside down in a moment.
Therefore in such a time more wisdom consists in dissimulation, then in
obstinate boasting, as appeared in that of Magius, which was nothing profitable
unto any man, and besides it was not only hurtful to himself, but also
Hanniball did thereby know the cowardlinesse of the whole Senate, and Citizens
of Capua, since that before their faces they suffered one of the noblest
amongst them, to be bound and carried away unto his camp. It was then that
they should have resolved or taken occasion to have run altogether upon
Hanniball, and to have massacred him, as my self and son were desirous to
do, if we had seen any likelihood to have been seconded by any: but there was
then no show of such courage in you, and the more you accuse me to have brought
you in bondage, the more unworthy are you to be believed. Yet if it were so,
why did you endure it? you will say for fear of the people: why could not you
win or keep the people in obedience, as well as I? Surely because your
ambition, and pride was more great to grieve them, then was your wisdom or
policy to govern them. You will impute me for favoring more the Plebeians
then Patrician faction: so was the like heretofore objected to the Fabians, who
afterward enterprised particularly to defend Rome from the Veians at Cremera,
where they all died saving one, who has raised up again their race, which is
at this day so profitable to the Common wealth. To conclude, misery is alone
without envy, wherefore it is not to be wondered at if thou do vomit a
thousand leasings against my virtue, long time guided by good fortune, yet for
all that can thou not say that I have aspired Tirantlike to rule, nor called
the stranger, but the greatest hurt that I have done, is that I have saved you
and others like unto you, amongst the good and faithful friends (such as my
self) of the Roman Commonwealth.

Declamation. 4.
Of him which would usurp the inheritance of a Prince, that went to the wars
against his fathers will.

THere was a Prince who forbad his son to go on a certain journey to the
wars, threatening if he went, to desherite him. The son for all that went
thither: wherefore the Prince made a nephew which he had, his heir, leaving
notwithstanding a great revenue for his son, which is augmented by the new
Prince. Nevertheless, shortly after he redemanded the principality, saying:

I Having done nothing unworthy for a Prince or a gentleman, my father could
not disherite me. Wherefore it is as fit for the father, in commanding, to be
wise, as it is for the son in obeieng, to be willing. What if my father
(fearing to lose me) had forbidden me to defend the Church, or my country,
Ought I to obey him in this commandment, being no less dishonorable and
prejudicial unto himself then to me and our posterity? Verily I confess
that fathers ought to be obeyed in all reasonable things, but when their
commandments are to no end nor reason, they must be neglected; and after, as
they may, obtain pardon; if of themselves they confess not their fault:
besides, it must be distinguished what the matter is, and what it imports.
Indeed I will confess that I should greatly have misdone (my father or
country being in war, or in any danger) if then I should have forsaken them
for any thing that might happen, but when there was not so much as any show of
danger, what hurt have I done, if in the wars else where I have served, to
learn the better how to defend our own country? or rather if I made known
abroad to strangers, and our borderers, that they should not so much as think
to offend me, and not look for requital thereof; since that I did voluntarily
upon mine own pleasure go to defend others? Tell me then wherein I have
either offended my father or country by this gentlemanlike act, or whether you
ought not your selves to have accompanied me, if you had been as valiant as
you should have been? but it is always the custom of dastards to cover their
own cowardice either with the shadow of a certain obedience toward their
parents, or by a show of wisdom, as sometimes also by a sign of their
innocence, more superstitious then religious: saying they ought not to kill
any man, or if they should as often have their hearts and courage conformable
to their wicked wills, there could not be more cruel people in the world then
they: Is there any in the world more desirous of revenge then women, and yet is
there no creatures living more base and fearful then they: for as impossible
is it for a noble heart to be cruel, as it is for a cruel man to be
courageous: if you had not bewitched my fathers understanding, he could not
choose but have been very desirous to have left his principality to such a
son of his own, as had made proof of his skill in keeping, as also in
augmenting the same if need were: and especially being bound unto his people to
leave them such a ruler: for princes are not or should not be other then
fathers or tutors at the alest unto their people, whom they should after their
edath leave to be guided by such a one as should maintain their laws and
rights, and which should defend them from such as would offend them: wherefore
not without reason did Pirrhus king of the Epirotes answer his children (who
asked him to which of them he would leave his kingdom) that he would leave it
unto him that should have the sharpest and best edged sword amongst them al.
This valiant king did very well know, that such realms where the king is not
held for a soldier, are always molested by their neighbors or by strangers:
Have not we seen as much by proof? that whilst the Macedonians were under
Philip, Alexander, and other valiant kings, yea even unto the last Philip, they
were always in prosperity: but after Perseus was their king, they were
subdued by the Romans, and Perseus being vanquished, was carried in triumph to
Rome by Paulius Emilius. But why stand I upon such needless examples, seeing
they are infinite and without number? Whether had the Romans ever finished their
new city amongst so many envious and evil disposed neighbors, without the
valor of Romulus their king? Finally if my deceased father had well considered
of these reasons, and that he had not been badly counseled by you and such
as you are, he had not disherited me, but should greatly have reioiced to see,
that during his life I endeavored to make my self worthy to succeed him in
his seat. I need not to make a doubt whether he might for any cause give the
principality to you or to any other, since himself having received it by
inheritance from my grandfather, and I being borne unto it, and not unworthy
of it, ought to enjoy it as my due, and lawful succession; for he was no
other then guardian and protector thereof: how could he then take it from me
and give it unto you, who deserve the same in no sort, neither by reason nor by
valor: Had you been so wise as you think your self to be, to gain a dignity
or an assured principality, you should have immitated some such, as it may be
being less cowardly, but more wise then you, and knowing themselves not
valiant enough by arms to win any authority, do become first begging
friars, and so well behave themselves therein, as afterward they become
cardinals, yea and oftentimes obtain the Papal seat, in such sort should you
have become a Prince; You I say who have neither virtue nor valor, but in your
tongue, by the which you could so well persuade my deceassed father to
dishonor himself, and to wrong his only son, preferring you before him.
But I have such an assured hope in the Emperor his sacred Majesty who is our
judge, as that shall be restored which of right belongs unto me, and I assure
that but for the respect I bear to the same Majesty, I would do that, as you
should know you ought not to usurp my government, but think your self very
happy in surrendering the same over to me, and not receive the punishment due
for your rashness.

The Answer.
RAsh and unadvised may he be termed, who in the end of his reasons adds
threatenings in the presence of his imperial Majesty, whom he faineth to
respect, and upon whom such an injury redoundeth rather then upon me who am
here under the protection of his said Majesty. But to answer unto this your
deed, I say that it is not the act of a gentleman to disobey his father either
whilst he lives, or after his death, in desiring to take that from me which
he charged me to keep by his last Will. Touching the first disobedience; Durst
you be so presumptious to understand the cause why your father did forbid you
to go unto the wars? You were ouerbold therein, since he knowing your
indiscretion and wavering mind would not trust you with such a secret matter:
How many things seem aduantagious, honorable, and profitable unto young men,
which old men do foresee to be a manifest ruin? What do you know what they
do keep in store for you whom you have offended in this war? Or if he who
even by your aid is become more mighty shall use the same his power to your
prejudice? For so did the Romans, who being succored by their confederats, did
first vanquish other nations, and then afterward subdued those their
confederats likewise: what do you know if your father foresaw the same, or a
greater danger? If we are bound to believe old men, how much more then ought
every one to believe his father, of whom (next to God) he holds his life and
his being? And therefore they are double in fault which do not only give no
credit to their words, but also do disobey their commandments as you have
done: for if one way you shall lay the fault unto your frailty, which hindered
you from believing the truth, and shall say it is man's nature so to do; Yet
your disobedience added thereunto, does another way make the same unpardonable.
How many are there that have put their children to death for less fault then
yours? It may easelie be seen by the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin histories: As
for example; Saul the first King of the Hebrews, would not he have put his
son Ionathas to death for tasting a little honey against the commandment of
his said father, although he did it ignorantly? Epaminondas the Theban, did
not he cause his son to die, for fighting contrary to his commandment: did
not Aulus Posthumous, and Manlius Torquatus Romans, do the like? what would
they then (think you) have done, if their children contrary their will and
commandment, had gone to the wars as you have done? Teaching them who were with
you to disobey their prince, as you did your lord and father: and not content
to have offended him during his life, will confirm and ratify your
disobedience after his death, in resisting his last Will and testament: and to
his great dishonor accuse him with want of wit. For less fault was Cham the
son of Noe, not only disherited, but also cursed of his father for ever, yea
and his posterity after him, who could not do with the faults of their father
and grandfather. The Romans had not the power over the life and death of their
children: So that but for such men as you, that law at this law had not been
invented; for from the injustice and wickedness of men, do good, holy, and
righteous laws proceed: Wherefore it is a true Proverb, that offenses beget
laws, and afterward those laws do discover and punish offenses: for where no
fault is, there law is not requisite; and where no law is, there can be no
breach thereof: Whereupon S. Paul says, That the law only made me know that
to desire is sin. Your father did not prohibit you from the defense of your
country, or the church, therefore you need not make a question of that which
he did not, but of that which he did, which was his dissuading you from this
war, and for the same cause he added threatenings unto his commandment. And
notwithstanding for all this, you would not obey him, but it may be the great
grief which your father took for this your obstinacy has procured his
death: and yet you say (although he has not wholly disherited you) that he did
you wrong to give the principality unto him, whom he knew to be best able to
keep it: see how far the love of the father exceeds all the malice that
the son can imagine: for notwithstanding after this your fault, he thought
upon your profit more then you deserved, and therefore he had a desire to leave
you wherewithal to live like a Prince, but not the power to loose your self
and your people: Do you think the good Prince did not know, that in the
wars vices are sooner learned then virtues? And that you were more inclined
to wickedness then wisdom? For how can he be a lover of virtue, which
despises both his father and his commandments? Moreover he knew very well
that the country whose Prince is accustomed to the wars, is never in peace;
and not being in peace it cannot prosper. Also he said, that as count^ies had
long ben kept, so they should be maintained, because every alteration or
change is dangerous, and if there come any profit thereby, it is not in their
days to be expected who are then living. Wherefore knowing that his
predecessors and himself had more increased and conserved their government by
wisdom, equity, and justice, then by arms, it seemed nothing reasonable
unto him, to leave for successor such a one, who only seeking to be counted
valiant, would forsake all virtue, which takes her beginning from the fear of
God; and he which fears him, is another manner of man to his father, then you
have been to yours. Now since your father had all these reasons on his part,
can you say he was not a good protector both of his people, and also of you:
Likewise he knew that Numa Pompilius did more conserve and increase Rome by his
religion and good laws, then Romulus did in the building thereof by his wars:
the which to speak truth, are very necessary in every new government; but
where the people do honor their Prince, and he is in love and peace with his
neighbors, there warlike men are more dangerous then defensive, the which we
may see by the Romans, who never were overcome but by their own proper forces,
also the soldiers which were in the city were the destruction of the same.
Therefore those princes do well, who have the means to send such people to
exercise their fury in strange countries, for arms are always hurtful in a
country, unless it be for the defense thereof. You say that because you have
been in the wars, your neighbors and strangers will stand in fear of you:
better were it for you to be beloved of them: for every one desires their
death, of whom they stand in dread. I would have followed you to the wars my
self, if you had gone thither by commandment or consent of your father, unto
whom it was grief enough to be disobeied by his son, without increasing the
same by the like offenses of his nephew; for if I had followed your course, I
should have thought that I might have given him just cause to think me none of
his subject, much less his kinsman. God grant that this your ingratitude,
caused him not to doubt whether you were his son or not. Touching Pirrhus,
his answer was as wicked as the end of his life was wretched. And Perseus was
overthrown only because he trusted in his forces, provoking by his
presumption the Romans against him. You say that I deserve not the
government; (...) your father being far more wise, has judged me worthy,
and you unfit. I will no further answer to your assertions, which do as much
discover your impudency together with your contempt of God and good things, as
also the malice which abounds in you; but will leave you to your own
discretion: and will only conclude thus, that all those reasons above said,
and it may be the least only more then all the rest joined together, have
incited your father to give me that which I deserve, and I pray you compel me
not to take that from you, which of my own liberality I have bestowed upon
you. Touching that which I possess I do so much trust in the sacred Majesty
of the Emperor, as I am assured that he will maintain me in my right, who am
his most humble and most faithful servant.

Declamation. 5.
Of Spurius Seruilius, who defended himself against the people, being by them
accused for his cowardly fighting at the hill of Janicola.

NOt long time after that the Kings were banished Rome, and that the death of
Tarquin the last king thereof was made manifest, the Consuls and Senate began to
grow more proud and covetous then they were accustomed, and the people being on
the one side ouerburdened with taxes, and on the other side ouerlaid with
usury, and imprisoned for debts, they began to rise against the Senate, in such
sort that they being in arms upon the holy mountain, they would in no wise be
persuaded to depart, before there was granted unto them that they might have
two Tribuns for the people; by means whereof, their insolency grew to that
height, that when they had not war abroad, they troubled the Senate at home,
intending t^ set new laws abroch, and amongst others, the law called Agraria:
and on the other side, the Senate resisting their demands in that behalf, they
were cited before the Tribuns, and condemned sometimes into exile, and
otherwhiles great fines set upon them: by reason whereof, some of them did
voluntarily banish themselves before that judgment was pronounced against
them, and others made themselves away by some kind of death before the
pronunciation of the sentence: amongst whom was Coriolanus, who died in exile,
and Menemus the son of Agrippa, who died with anger, being condemned in 200
asses, because in the time of his consulship, he aided not the Fabians who were
slain at Cremera. Afterward Spurius Seruilius was accused, that he was the
cause that the Romans lost the batiaile at the foot of the mountain Ianicola,
against the Tuscanes, who defended himself courageously against the Tribuns
saying after this manner:

NOt in vain did Plato say, that the common people are like unto the beast
Polipus, which has many feet and wants a head, by reason whereof not seeing
the way which he holds, he overthrows himself: in like manner the ignorant
people do go on forward without any consideration, seeking their own
overthrow whilst they imagine to give the Senate a fall: and that which is
worst of all, they who ought to guide those blind men in a better course, are
such as by force would bring them into the bottomless pit of confusion, or
headlongdowne fall of rashness. It is unto you that I speak, O you Tribuns,
yet no Tribuns, but rather seducers of the poor people, and scourges of the
Commonwealth: Surely the Senate, and people, do now receive worthy
punishment of their faults, the one having desired, the other having suffered
you to be promoted to such authority. Truly worthy Agrippa did never do
other harm to the Commonwealth, thinking to do good, then in appeasing the
people with this condition, that they should have Tribuns appointed them; as if
at the length the people knowing the confusion of their weakness, would not
by the same means have acknowledged their fault: for without you they would
have understood, that the Senate executing right and justice, (as it does) is
invincible, as depending only upon the laws, and the gods. O Romans, know you
not that the kings have honored, and in a manner submitted themselves unto
them? And so long as they held that course, they were like unto the gods in
honor, and prosperity: but after that Tarquin the proud, would have put down
the Senate, he himself was exiled with perpetual shame, to the confusion of all
his posterity: O blessed people, who then knowing what was needful for them,
did endeavor themselves to hold up the Senate, not suffering so much as that any
kinsman or fauorer of the name of a king should remain in Rome, whereunto
Collatin (the rooter out of kings, and one of the first Consuls, who was
banished only because he was by name a Tarquin) was a witness, they having no
desire to suffer neither king nor Consul of his race: Shall we then endure the
tirannie of the Tribuns? Do you not say, O you people, that they would (if it
were possible) abolish the Senate, that they might afterward tirannise over
you: for such is the manner of those, who of nothing do rise unto some
dignity, as through pride and ingratitude, they do make themselves
intolerable, which is to be seen by these Tribuns, who when they could not
show their pride and ingratitude to Agrippa, for the short time he lived after
their creation, have manifested the same to Menenius his son, being the cause
of his death, with the grief that he took in seeing himself condemned by
those, who not long before durst not presume to consort with any his fathers
servants: I say this noble Agrippa died so poor that he left not only so much
as to bury himself withal, as it likewise chanced unto many others. Behold
then in whom the ambition and covetousness remains, which you would impute
to the Senators: who as a candle do consume themselves for the public good,
whilst you (which were it not for the office that the Senate has bestowed upon
you, should oftentimes have no bread to put in your mouths) endeavor to
persecute the Senate, and destroy the people. You accuse me to be the cause that
the battle was foughten so vnluckilie, under the mountain of Ianicola, I
submit my self to the report of the Senate and people whether my endeavor were
wanting. Menenius was condemned for not aiding the Fabians in the time of his
consulship, and I for fighting vnluckilie: as if the one and others fault
proceeded not from the insolency of the Tribuns, who did so animate the people
against the Senate, as hardly would they march under the Consuls: but who
knows not that the soldiers never do any good service, if they love not
their leader, who also can do no worthy act, if he be not thorowlie assured
of the good will and obedience of his soldiers: but concerning the Fabians,
they were cut in pieces in the field, before the consul was advertised that
they were in any danger, yet was he condemned unjustly by you. Is it not
also manifest that you by your crossing and hindering the enrolling the
souldiosr, have been the cause for the most part that succor has come too
late: this is all the good that you do in the Commonwealth, O you Tribuns,
plagues of the same: it is not before you (who are unworthy to take account of
my actions) as I will justify, much less excuse my self: condemn me if, you
can, I speak not to the end to dissuade you: I will not be ashamed to be the
companion of so many virtuous men whom you have wrongfullie condemned; but I
do verily assure you reverend fathers, that as much hangs over the heads of
every one of you, until that the condemnation of such a one (not more loving
to the Commonwealth, yet more happy then I) do provoke you not to endure any
more the insolency of these heddie fellows: who do only maintain their
authority they have with the people, in quarrelling with the worthiest
Senators: and you O people, no less ungrateful, then ignorant, of the evil
which threatens you, be you full assured, that these men will bring you to
that pass, that you will desire (but never obtain) that the Senate may be
restored to their first authority.

The Answer.
IF the people should not have some better head then yours, it were better they
had none at all, for although every one lived after their own fantasy, yet
should it be less hurtful for them then to be led or governed by such a one
as seeks their destruction, and it cannot be said that the commendation or
condemnation that the Senate deserves by means of the election of the Tribuns,
is rightly due unto them, because the same election never was allowed by their
good wills, but being compelled, they consented thereunto, although in effect
they were the cause that the people would both have them, and also obtained
them: For they using the people more rudely then slaves it caused them to look
unto their own safeties, and to take up arms and force the Senate to consent
unto the choosing of Tribuns, to defend them from those who sought to tirannise
over them: nevertheless you would on the contrary have us to serve the Senate,
and to consent that not only they should have all the honor and profit of that
which was gotten with the price of the peoples blood, but also that they should
devour the authors of their dignity, by imposition, and vsuries, bringing them
into captivity for debts, keeping them in prison and irons, and tormenting
them at their own pleasure. Although you do not acknowledge, O you Senators,
how much you are beholding unto the people, yet remember only when you had
need of their valor to confirm your authority, or to defend you from the
enemy, how friendly you could speak. When Porsenna king of Tuscan came to
besiege Rome to establish the Tarquins therein, you then said that the people
were oppressed, that it were reason to discharge them from taxes, that the
custom of salt ought to be taken away, and to give them corn in common,
since that they were at charge enough in begetting and bringing up of their
children for the wars; but as soon as the siege was raised, this
consideration and liberality did vanish away both together: King Tarquin being
once dead, then began you by little and little to use those free people like
slaves, so as nothing remained unto to them but the name of freedom, but as in
greatest harms extreme remedies are sought, so had the people or else the
Senate perished without the mitigation of the Tribuns, and it cannot be denied
but that otherwise the misery of the people had always increased, since that
amongst seven kings there was but one which was hurtful unto them, and now
hardly can there be found amongst a number of Senators, one that is good or
favorable unto them; or if any such be; yet dare they not make any show
thereof, for fear to displease others thereby, and be called favorers of the
people, as it happened to the Fabians, who rather desired to die in fighting
alone with the enemies, then to be odious to the Senate, and not to be able
without danger to favor the people: tell us only whether you are rulers or
lords over the people; and consider, that if you be their rulers, you ow them
equity and justice, or if you will be their lords, you ought to favor and
protect the^, notwithstanding they can obtain nothing at your hands but by
force: you affirm, that if we had not been, the confusion and weakness of
the people would have made them acknowledge their fault: but you confess not
that the people might sooner be able to make a new Senate, then the Senate a
people, all these proofs are dangerous, because they are extreme, and virtue
consists in a mean. The kings have honored the Senate, so also have they not
despised the people, for without them, the king could not be, and the first
Senate was chosen from amongst them: if Collatin were banished for his name
only, Why ought they not to be condemned, whose deeds deserve no less?
Truly neither Consuls, Senators, nor Tribuns ought to be suffered, if they do
not their duty: neither was it ingratitude to condemn the son of Agrippa, but
equity, and as there are but a few Senators who die poor as he did, so are
they nothing like the candle, but only in that they are too fat with the cost
of the poor people, and with the danger of their lives; for the Consuls
command, but the soldiers fight. Concerning this, that you warred vnluckilie,
the blood of the dead, and the cries of the living, bear witness thereof: and
truly he is not worthy to be a Senator, much less a Consul* who cannot
gain the good will of the soldiers. Lastly, we had not opposed our selves
against the enrolling of the soldiers, if in due time the demands had been
thought reasonable: and therefore either you must justify yourselfe, or else are
you worthy of double condemnation, because your talk tends to sedition, in
desiring to move the Senate and people against us, who are no common officers,
but most holy Magistrates, appointed to keep in peace both the one and the
other: also the time will come when we shall greeuouslie punish such unlucky
Southsaiers and Prophets, who do seditiouslie foretell and prophecy evil to
the Senate and people, like as you now do.

Declamation. 6.
Of a maimed man, who for smiting an officer, is condemned to lose his hand,
but it cannot be proved with which hand he did strike him.

A Man that was maimed of one of his hands, did strike an officer of the
Magistrates, for the which he was to lose his hand: it could not be proved
with which hand he did strike him, he said that it was with his left hand,
which was the same that was maimed: notwithstanding the judge would the sound
hand to be cut off, alleging these reasons following.

IT were better that laws were never made, then not to be executed, for the law
that is not kept, makes the Magistrates despised, and so consequently makes
men to do evil, but the meaning or gloss of the law is to be considered, as
also the quality of him which breaks the same together with his intention:
for if a man kill another in his own defense, or he which steals, being by
extreme want urged thereunto, such a one is in less fault, then he which
kills a man of set purpose, or he which steals, having no great need: It
behooves us then to consider that the meaning of the law is, that he which
smites an officer must lose a member, and not that which is maimed already by
some other means: but concerning you, who are the breaker of the law, you had
little cause so to do, being lame, because such men should rather keep
themselves from strokes, then desire to strike any man, because they are the
weakest: also you were not constrained thereunto, and therefore you were rather
to expect for more hurt, then any good to happen unto you by the same blow;
whethereby it may be seen that anger is an enemy of good counsel, and
forbearance is the best means to bridle rage: for if you were not wronged by
the officer, you deserve double punishment for striking him: and if you were
iniuried, yet the badge of his office might have served for a warrant that
there was a Magistrate, of whom you might have had right, if you had accused
him boldly, alleging that he which was to redress wrongs, had wronged you:
but in not doing so, we must come to this that you have done, which is, that
you have beaten the Magistrate his officer: you say it was with your left hand,
the which is very unlikely, because few men are left handed, and you
especially cannot so be, seeing that if you were such by nature, yet were you
constrained of long time to use your right hand, and very hardly could you
ever remember your left hand, unless it were when you stood in any need
thereof: if you say that it served you only to strike withal, it is a sign
that you had a will, or that you were accustomed to strike, which is a kind of
offense. Finally there is sufficient proof that you have stricken, and you
confess the same, but you cannot prove that it was with the left hand,
neither is there any likelihood at all of your saying, wherefore if you have no
other proof, you may account your self for a condemned man, for the law
intends that you shall lose a hand: how can one now take away that which you
have wanted long since? bethink you then to prove your saying, or suffer the
law (which you have mistake^) to be executed upon you, to give example to
others, that hereafter they be not so rash. For to cut off your unprofitable
hand, should be rather a pleasure then a punishment to you.

The Answer.
THe zeal which I bear unto the Commonwealth, makes me to confess my great
prejudice, that laws are both to be kept and executed: and I (...) abundance,
but do you verily believe, O you Censors, that your imposition can in any sort
be the overthrow of Mamercus? Do you not know that the more virtue is
oppressed, the more she does flourish, much like unto saffron, which the more
it is beaten, the better it grows? Has not Mamercus been greater then you
already, and may he not so be again? What might then befall if he were so
full of revenge as you are? Do you think that it would be any benefit unto the
Commonwealth? Does he want any means, friends, or favor, as well of the
Senators, as of the people? No truly: but thanks be to the Gods, he neither
has, nor ever had any wicked intention: this one thing which abounds in
you, is wanting in him. But what has moved you to persecute him so cruelly?
Wherein has he offended you? Forsooth he has abridged the term of your
authority, is not this all? Has he not more abridged his own? Desiring
thereby to make you know, that offices are not to be sought for: but when any
one is called thereunto, he ought to think upon nothing, but the good of the
Commonwealth, and for the advancement thereof, he must neglect his own profit,
the which virtue is sildome in any man, but if any such be to be found, then
were it good for them and their family that they should not continue long in
office, and if they be otherwise, it were far better for the Commonwealth
that they never had office at all: I dare not judge or say what you are, seeing
you desire the office for five years, not considering whether you may live so
long or not, but this is the mischief, that your ambition, I will not say
avarice, does deceive you in such sort, that without any other respect, you
hate even those who take care, both for the Commonwealth and for your benefit,
and you must not think although Mamercus be esteemed a noble gentleman, that he
will always pocket up these your slight faults, and leave the matter at this
stay, whereby you may be emboldened to abuse either his, or any other man's
patience hereafter; for henceforth we do appoint that those which have been the
former Censors, shall be the correctors and judges of such as shall newly come
forth of their office.

The Answer.
WE do confess that the Dictator should be such a man as you say, but you did
not or at the least would not tell what else was requisite for him to do, which
is, that he ought also to consider to what end he was created, whether to
repress the Tuscans, or to abolish, or abridge the authority of the officers,
appointed by the Senate and people, as if he alone were wiser then all the rest.
There was never any Dictator made, unless it were to withstand those
casualties which could not otherwise be redressed: We do not stand upon the
necessity of this abridgement, but do only demand if it could not be done
unless a Dictator should by this deed embolden the people every day to attempt
new matters? And give an example unto the succeeding Dictators, to do other
things, the^ those for which they are ordained: for of all things as well good
as bad, the beginning is the chief point, so that it is most dangerous to be
the ringleader unto others to do amiss, because suddenly they allege the
example of him that went before them? For the greater his authority is, that
was the first inuenter of any such matter, so much the more pernicious is the
same unto the Commonwealth: therefore we have not done amiss, if that should
happen which you say, because those which would follow his example, should also
remember that such presumptuous acts do not so greatly profit, as they are
supposed. But we have not burdened him for this cause, but only because it was
our duty so to do, and we are no more bounden to give an account of our
actions, then he is of his, the which seem no less contrary to the Senate,
then favorable to the people, who are over insolent of themselves already: and
although we will not say that Mamercus entendeth by this popular favor, to
perform some bad act: yet who shall hinder some to think that by such like
means a man may imagine to aspire unto some such unjust matter: I will not say
to be tyrant, for there is more then one way to attain unto the same: as there
are many sorts of tyrannies: Wherefore it is the duty of a good Citizen to
show that he does quite detest every act that may breed any suspicion.
Therefore it were no wisdom to come unto this extremity of the deserts,
either of his or our actions; for the disputation thereof would be no less
difficult, then dangerous: so that it were better to defer that until you
have obtained (as you say) that we must be adjudged and corrected by our
predecessors, in the mean season let us now pretend that our authority is
more then your understanding does allow it. We are not ignotant of Mamercus his
virtue, neither can we but know what favor, kindred, and means he has, nor
has he offended us, but rather the Magistrate, and the Commonwealth; for
having abridged the office, he takes away the men even then, when they might
do most good therein: for there is no man so perfect, that at the first
commits not some faults, or at the least wise does not execute a charge
better, after he has been exercised in the same some years, then when he
first began to use the same, the which neither he himself, nor you can with
reason deny: nevertheless, there is no malice in us, but rather in you, that
do not only accuse us, but threaten us, as well with the future authority of
Mamercus, as also that we must answer our actions unto those that supplied
this office before us: but considering that threatened men do live long, and
such as do most fear, do sorest threaten: and because threatenings are for the
most part sure weapons to defend the threatened, we will make no account
thereof: and the rather because they come not from him, whom you pretend to
have the greatest wrong, who is over wise to use such speeches, and though he
should, yet could we answer him well enough, no man knows better then
himself whether his wealth be increased, and whether his imposition be over
burdenous or no: if he do either affirm it, or you do prove it, we will
answer you, and if we have heretofore spared him, it was because the time did
so require it, and for some other respects, wherewith we are not to acquaint
you: Finally Mamercus during his office, did that which he thought good, and we
during ours, neither have, nor will do any thing but that which is good,
honest, and reasonable, and we are not to answer you for our actions. God
grant that the people do not believe that Mamercus has abridged the office
of Censors, for the same end and purpose as Spurius Melius extended his
liberality of corn unto them.

Declamation. 9.
Of the husband that slew his wife, for having lost two of his children, the
one by fire, the other by water.

A Certain woman as she was washing and wiping her little son, did see her
young daughter fall into the fire, whereupon being over hasty to help it, she
let her son fall into the boule of water, wherein he was drowned, hereupon
her husband happened to come in, who presently slew her: The woman's kindred
apprehended him and accused him unto the justice, saying:

THis wicked fellow not being content with two mischances, would needs ad
thereunto a third mischief: O what grief ought ours to be, that having not
only lost our young nephew, and his mother, but being justly provoked thereunto
by this damned deed, we must likewise procure the death of this wretch, which
in an unlucky hour was our kinsman: seeing that he alone must be the dishonor
of all our lineage, dying as a public spectacle by the hands of a hangman,
according to his deserts, because he has been worse then a hangman to his poor
wife, whose only company he deserved not, being so chaste, honest, and virtuous,
as she was, bearing a sincere and devout love unto him who was her butcher, so
as I dare say and believe that this soul of hers, no less loving, then
innocent, does yet lament in another world, not only in that she was martired
by him, who ought to have loved, cherished, and defended her from all others
that would have burther, but also takes pity upon the most just misery of
this murder, and as whiles she lived, she always preferred his contentment
before her own, so now she would think her self happy, if it were possible,
that she might once more die to save his life: as did the charitable Alcest to
save her most dear Admetus: but I would demand of this wicked man, wherein his
wife had deserved to die by the hands of him, who had sworn to keep and defend
her from all injury? Alas, an over vehement charity made her commit a
fault, which as it fell out was great, but to be blamed for it, she is not: For
a motherly love and a natural charity (seeing her daughter fallen into the
fire) made her forget that she held her son in her arms. Alack her sorrow
might very well have sufficed, not only for a penance, but also as a most sharp
punishment for her offense, the which this cruel monster would never consider,
but heaping mischief upon mischief, shame upon shame, hurt upon hurt, murder
upon murder, had a desire with the price of his life to slaughter her, who
loved him more then the bals of her eyes, even the same who desired not to
live, but only to please him: but there are some men (of which number this is
one) who the more the poor women are obedient unto them, the more froward and
cruel do they become toward them, never cherishing them but with reproaches,
blows, and threats, so that they being always possessed, or ouercharged with
an excessive fear, do commit a thousand faults, because their minds are never
free, to think upon that which they are to do: and who need to doubt but that
the fear of this cruel man made the poor innocent forget that she should not
have hazarded the loss of one of her children, to have saved the other:
Wherefore if therein there was any fault, he is to be blamed for it, and
notwithstanding, he has made her endure a most cruel punishment therefore, is
there any love more great then that of the mothers toward the child? Had not
her pitiful lamentation for her fault committed, ben a sufficient penance
for the same? Alas noble judges, the more strange this case is, the more
great is our grief, which makes us to doubt, whether our complaints may be
heard; and if they be heard, whether they are understood; if being understood,
whether they be felt; for as much as hardly may they be felt by those whom they
concern not so nearly, because another man's hurt does never seem so heavy
unto any, as it is to himself. Wherefore we do thoroughly assure you, that we
can better feel our harm then express it: for when the mind is occupied with
passion, the spirits must needs fai^^ whereby our senses are stopped, and our
speech hindered. Consider with your selves, O you judges, if it be possible,
how great our misery is, and let our silence suffice to manifest that which we
cannot utter, be you then as justly severe, as this accursed man is wicked and
cruel.

The kindred of the accused do Answer.
ALthough you do employ all your skill together with your malice, and
ignorance, which you would hide, yet is the same more manifest then any other
thing. You think that you have showed a great cunning in persuading that it is
fit to put a man to death, who would willingly be dead already: to what end
serves so much vain prattle? Seeing that he denies not his fault, and that
the judges do know better then you, what punishment he deserves: to what end
is it to accuse such a one as accuses himself? Where do you find that it is
reasonable to vex the afflicted, with injuries? Or that which is worst, to
increase his affliction? It is you that would heap mischief upon mischief,
shame upon shame, hurt upon hurt, and finally you would increase the number of
the dead, without considering that the same passions which made this dead woman
careless of one of her children, to save the other, did also stir up this
poor disgraced man, to do that which he ought not to have done: I pass over
with silence, the occasions, that she might more the^ once, have given him to
have used her ill, the which he having hitherto patiently resisted, has
always endured, considering that he could not offend her, being the half of
his flesh, without hurting himself: but at the last being provoked in such
sort as he was, blinded with a rage, no less extreme then just, he has done
that which was no sooner executed, but he would have revoked it with the price
of his own life, the which he yet does offer, to make satisfaction for his
fault, for the which he is so penitent, that he will think himself happy to
finish his grief by death: but even as justice suffers not those offenders
to die, who would afterward live honestly and well, so is it not reasonable to
put those to death that desire the same: and like as they do not excuse, or
dissemble with those, although no great accusation is brought against the^,
that be malefactors, so also ought not their sentence, to be the more severe
for the multitude, or sharp and cruel words of the accusers, but moderating
the rigor of the laws, according to the equity of their conscience, they
ought to judge rightly, not laying all the fault upon him that is accused, nor
also wholly acquiting her that is dead, seeing that she is not altogether
faultlesse. I will not here allege any more reasons upon conjecture as you do,
of the love that she did bear unto her husband, for he might say, that he
loved her as well, for against such as we do best love, are we most extremely
angry, when the cause is great: but let us put the case that he was testie,
froward, and cruel, as you say, ought not she then to have hidden her fault
for a time, and after have caused some other to have told him, or rather have
hidden her self, to avoid his first anger? You will say, that her passion did
blind her judgment: this excuse serves as much for him as for her: but this
is the mischief, that the most part of women are never ready nor advised in
doing any thing but mischief, Whereunto they apply their wits so much, that
they are to seek in doing good: for if it were otherwise, a man should not see
a woman naturally more ready to frame an excuse, invent a deceit, or a
leasing, and other such like remedies then a very wise man could do, Whereof
also they make their boast: Finally none can know their subtilties, malice,
forwardness to mischief, and slacknesse to goodness, so well as he that is
married, and yet they that have been often married know best, for if those which
are once married, deserve to be placed in the rancks of such as are diseased,
the others may be accounted in the number of those that are mad. Touching your
other reasons there is no need to answer them, saving only that the woman's
friends and kindred have their ears continually full of the imperfections of
their husbands, the which when any mischief happens, they can tell how to
augment them, without considering that their own wives do say as as much of
them: Lastly, it may please the judges to have more regard unto this poor
accused soul, then to the insolent babble of his spightfull accusers: for who
can be more worthy of pity, then he unto whom life is more bitter then death.

Declamation. 10.
Of Caius Seruilius, who is accused to have slain Spurius Melius, that had
releiued the people during the famine.

AT Rome during the time of the sixty eight Consulship, the famine was so
exceeding great, that many of the common people did throw themselves into the
Tiber: then Spurius Melius, one of the order of the knights, a very rich man,
having great acquaintaince in Tuscane, caused a great quantity of corn to be
brought from thence, the which he did freely distribut among the people for a
gift, so that by this means having gained the peoples love, he aspired to the
kingdom, whereupon being warned before the Dictator, he not only refusing to
come, but also moving the people to sedition, was slain by Caius Seruilius
Hala, master of the knights; who shortly after was for this fact accused as an
offender, by one of the Tribuns of the people, who said:

HOw can a city be termed free, or well governed, where it is lawful to
kill a Citizen under the color of a crime, before he be not only condemned,
but also before his cause be tried, or his accuser known: and what man was he?
Surely a man who in such a time being dead, ought to be raised to life again,
if it were possible: a man noble by his virtue, abounding in riches, the which
he knew how to distribute, not only according to the true order of
liberality, but with a wonderful and more then humane charity: but what
charity can be more great then immitating the gods, to preserve the poor from
death? and especially from hunger, which in truth is the horriblest death of
all others: how wicked then is the nature of those, who desiring not to follow
his virtue, have borne him such hate, that being provoked to rage at the report
of one only accuser, (and it may be suborned) have deprived him of life: some
will say that he would not appear before the Dictator: was there no other
means to cause Spurius appear, but first by placing guards through all the
streets, and afterward to send unto him the master of the knights, to tell him
that the Dictator demanded for him, and consequently that he was accused for
aspiring to be tyrant? What man in the world is so resolute, that he will come
on the sudden hearing that he is accused of treason? That knows a Dictator to
be expressly chosen to condemn him, the which officer is never made, but upon
special cause, and to repress the enemies to the Commonwealth? That beholds
a master of the knights, chosen of purpose to carry him away: Who would not
be meruailously astonished at this, because the more innocent a man is, the
more amassed is he in the like extremity? for it is very manifest, that those
that are culpable, foreseeing the dangers wherein they adventure themselves,
do also foresee to provide for remedies, or at the least, when dangers do
happen, they are least astonished: but this man being as much afraid, as
innocent, endeavored to fly, to the end he might have some leisure to consider
from whence this so sudden mischief proceeded, or to avoid the first rage of
the Dictator: who having his ears cloied with accusations, and his mind
occupied with passion, and anger against the accused (as he did very well
manifest, sending to seek him with such fury,) he dispaired to find any
place reserved to hear, much less to weigh his just excuses: was there no
means to send for him after a more modest order? It seems no; because they
would find an occasion to do that which was done. If the commission of
Seruilius was to slay him? There was no need to expect any further course of
law. If his authority were but to fetch him, he could not kill him, without
being in very great fault, although Spurius had been an offender? For having
pursued him so near, he might as well have taken him, and brought him away
with him, as murder him. Is it possible that a master of the knights was such
a coward, that he durst not, being armed on horseback, lay his hands upon a man
running away? But I pray God that this be not true, which the people do murmr
abroad: to wit, that Seruilius doubted of the truth of the accusation,
wherefore finding in his own judgment, an occasion to deprive the party
accused, of audience, and a means to justify himself, he served his own
turn fitly: to satisfy the malice of the Senators, and the greedy avarice
of the usurers, who by the liberality of Spurius, lost the means to finish
the devouring of all the poor people: for such is the nature of the malicious,
envious, and covetous people, the one kind of which, do think themselves
undone to see another man prosper; the other imagine that they are disgraced,
if any one attain unto honor; and the third sort more worse then all the rest,
do think that to be lost out of their own goods, which they cannot wrest
forth of the substance of another: wherefore such people are hurtful to all
men, and worst of all to themselves, for they take as little pleasure in that
which they have of their own, as in that which they have not at all: so that
they possessing nothing but riches, do never any good but when they die: for
then is their unprofitable treasure set at liberty, and the Commonwealth is
freed from their greedy deuourings. I pass over with silence that some do
presume, seeing Seruilius triumph through the city, with his sword all bloody
in his hand, that he had some particular malice against him, and the more
constantly is it affirmed, because he might as well have taken him as slain
him: others do say that this block was thrown in his way, to confiscate his
goods, and they say that if it had been otherwise, all the Senate together had
more cause to appease the people, then Spurius alone; for they knowing how he
was by duty bounden, had no occasion to stand in any doubt at all of Spurius:
but it is pity when men will not only do no good themselves, but also
persecute those which do it. God grant that this which the people speak so
rashly concerning the Senate, be not very true: but as touching Seruilius he
cannot deny, seeing that (besides the boasting that is made thereof) there are
store of witnesses, that he has killed Spurius, and not one will say that the
other made any resistance, wherefore we demand that justice may be executed
upon him who has been the cause that the same was not done upon Spurius, if
he were culpable, and if he were not, then we require it, because he has
slain an innocent.

The Answer.
AS he whom I have slain was not guildesse* so also I have not only seen
justice executed upon the offender, but have further done it my self, because
I could not other wise choose; for it is manifest, that he is a malefactor that
denies to come to his answer, and he does sufficiently resist and make his
defense, that flies from him that is sent to bring him: touching the proof,
how can those be witnesses against him, whom he had already suborned?
Especially such as assembled themselves to rescue him from me, if I had taken
him alive; I will not say those which even now called him their God, and
preserver of their lives, a matter illbeseeming the Citizens of Rome, who ought
rather to reward me for having rooted from amongst them such a one, who like
unto the fisher, and fouler, (that with a little bait, deceaueth both the fish
and birds, depriuining the one of their liberty, the other of their lives)
would also do the like by them: but it is commonly seen that as the belly has
no ears, so also has the stomach no discretion, the which is apparently
proved by the confederats of Spurius: wherefore it belongs to you noble
citizens, that are not bounden unto him, and which have not sold your liberty
for a morcell of bread: to you I say it belongs to consider what I have
deserved, having slain him, who with the help of a few faint hearted fools
would captiuate your sweet liberty: as for that which the Tribun says of the
peoples mourning against the Senate, if he himself be not the inuenter thereof,
yet it is a sign at the least, that the people which use such conference with
him, do very well know, that he takes pleasure therein, for if there were no
ears that delighted in hearing slanderous speeches, there would be few
slanderous tongues: but how could I bring him alive, seeing the people do yet
so greatly affect him, because time which changes all things, has not as yet
changed their minds, but rather increased the same. If that be true which the
Tribun does rashly say against the Senate? A man may easily term Spurius
another manner of man then you say he is, although the crime had been less
dangerous then it is: but when the matter concerns the preservation of our
liberty (seeing there was no respect had unto the sons of Brutus being
faulty, nor unto Collatin being innocent, and partly the author of the said
freedom) why should Spurius be respected? And as you say that the Dictator is
not chosen, but in great extremity, his election does sufficiently witness
the extremity wherein the Commonwealth remained: true it is, that I told him,
wherein he was accused, to the end that if he were guiltless, he might be
less afraid to appear before the Dictator, and being guilty, have the better
means to think upon his excuse; but he had no desire to take the benefit of
my advertisement, but as one already condemned by his own conscience, he
endeavored to fly away, for a true sign, that he is a malefactor which
distrusteth as much in himself, as in the judges: if he had not been faulty,
why was he so fearful? Seeing that innocence does always assure those that
embrace her: but we may see by him, that Tyranny is like unto a fair and
pleasant palace, that is high enough, but yet without stairs or steps to come
down without breaking ones neck: even so those which by pride and ambition
think to attain unto honor and profit, do for the most part meet with shame
and confusion: he needed not to fear that he should not have had time and
place to excuse himself, seeing that there was never any Citizen condemned in
Rome, if his cause were but only doubtful: if his meaning were good in
distributing the corn, why did he not come to declare the same unto the
Dictator? Finally if he had been as innocent as he was culpable, I am not in
any sort to be blamed, seeing the Dictator has not only allowed, but also
publickely lauded my deed. I list not therefore further to dispute of his
innocence, or his offense, but rather the accuser that did accuse him: And it
appertains unto the Dictator to defend me, having performed my charge
according to his commandments, seeing that even when I had done it, he allowed
my fact to be good: and worthy for a master of the knights as I was. But who
will any more obey the Dictators, if when after their authority is expired, it
may be lawful for any man to sue those which do accomplish their
commandments?

Declamation. 11.
Of the wife of a Tyrant, who having slain her husband, required his son for
a recompense.

THe law appointed, that whosoever killed a Tyrant, should obtain of the
Commonwealth whatsoever he demands, except only the government thereof:
Moreover, the same law says, that after the death of the Tyrant, all such as
were nearest of kin unto him, must likewise die, although they be nothing
culpaple: Whereupon it happened, that the wife of the Tyrant (not knowing any
cause why) did slay her husband, and required for recompense of her fact, that
her sons life might be saved, and exempted from the foresaid law: but the
Citizens declared that the same could not be done, saying:

THe same law that promises you a reward, does deny you him whom you demand,
seeing that it commands expressly, that all the kindred of the Tyrant should
die: wherefore if any other then your self had slain him, you should have
been one of the same number, yea and the first of all, as she that was nearer
unto him then any other of his kin, and so consequently the chiefest partaker
of his Tyranny: but yet to favor you, we will not now dispute upon the cause
of your killing of him, whether the same was done through hate, anger, or for
some other particular reason, without any regard at all of the common good:
for although no act, be it never so good, is to be performed by any wicked
means, yet do we allow your fact for good and laudable, and you may induce us,
to believe that you have done it in a good zeal, and for our benefit, so that
you will not desire to save the Tyrants sons life: for in preserving it, you
shall not have slain, but revived the Tyrant, neither yet ended, but prolonged
the Tyranny, because it is more likely that a young man will live longer then
an old: for surely, although the Tyrants son be never so well disposed, yet
shall we always suspect him, can there be any greater tyranny then to stand
in doubt of it continually, seeing that of all evils, fear is the cruellest
part, for without it death it self should be a sovereign good: Truly a known
Tirannie, were far less grievous then a daily fear to fall into it would
be, for the Proverb says, That much better is a known mischief, then a
doubtful pleasure: how much then ought we to prefer a certain good, before
a manifest evil? of the which good we can never be assured, so long as the
tyrants son does live: for the desire of revenge is so whot, and the
covetousness to command and rule so vehement, that hardly may he forget who
was his father: also it is to be feared that you would never have slain the
fire, if you had not thereby hoped one day to see the son in his seat: which
would be worse for us, then if the father were yet living. You will say, that
the banishment of him whom we fear, might very well put us out of doubt, the
which can in no sort be so, because our enemies which might help him with
their favor and counsel are abroad. Coriolanus being banished, would have
destroyed Rome; had not his mother by her wise persuasions prevented him, so
also would this our enemy not be the first, that of an exile would aspire to
be king, for such as are far from their country, experience and want, makes
them much more industrious, and resolute; so that so long as he lives, we
shall be like him that holds the wolf by the ears, who no sooner is let
lose, but he does mischief, and to hold him still, is both ircksome and
dangerous: for as the wolf hurts those whom he sees, before he be spied,
even so this race of aspiring Tirants infect the righteous minds of those which
are not well acquainted with their nature. But would you willingly incur this
blame to have slain your husband for some other cause, rather then for the
good of the Commonwealth? we have no such bad opinion of you yet, let your good
deed then be sound, and without spot, rather then to demand such a thing,
whereof unto you there would come exceeding mischief, and unto us most great
danger; like as you know, that the law says, that the Tyrant killer should be
rewarded, so you may remember as well (as the reward) that it also says, that
all the Tirants kindred ought to be put to death. If you have slain your
husband, neither for love of the law, nor for the good of the land, you are
greatly to be blamed, and to be punished for murdering your husband: but if
your zeal be good, suffer then that good may come thereof. You will say, my
son is young: true it is, and therefore he may the more easily grow worse
then better, as those do who are by nature borne vicious, and they are such
for the most part as are borne of tyrannous parents, as his father has been
proved, and so shall you likewise be, if you obey not the law. Finally the
father and the mother have been both very resolute, the one to usurp, the other
either to suppress or desirous to renew the tirannie: until now we do not
know whether of the twain was meant: but we know very well how dangerous the
preserving of a son borne of such parents is, whose qualities he may very well
follow: resolve you then to put us out of doubt (in asking such a reward as may
be granted) that to a good and virtuous end you murdered the tirant, or else
prepare you to receive such punishment as a woman deserves, that for her own
particular passions has slain her husband.

The Answer.
HOw now my good lords and friends? Are you desirous that in you this
detestable Proverb should be verefied, which says, That there is nothing
more unconstant, unthankful, and more exceeding insolent then the common
people, so soon as they perceive themselves free from fear? It should seem
then by this, that tyranny, keeping you in awe and so consequently in
obedience, would be more profitable for you then liberty: but God forbid that
so it should be said of my countriemen: I had rather die a thousand times if it
were possible: and seeing I have not spared mine own husband for the good of
the Commonwealth, never think that I would spare my sons life, yea or mine
own unto your prejudice. But I fear that we thinking to do well, both you
and I shall be blamed: I of cruelty, and you of cruelty and ingratitude
together: for greater cruelty is it to slay an innocent, then to pardon an
hundred offenders; consider then that her son who has set you at liberty,
has never offended the Commonwealth, but as young as he is, he has always
seemed to abhor the cruelties of his father, who being put to death by my
hands, the child has very constantly shown himself to be more glad for the
benefit of the Commonwealth, then sorry for the death of his father, and with
a great contentment has he left off his gorgeous apparel, and his accustomed
delicacie, to conform himself after my will, like unto the rest of the
Citizens: Why then my very good lords do you desire the death of an innocent,
which shows himself so affectioned toward you? And such a one as may one
day do you good service? wherefore do you not as well consider the good which
he may do unto you, as the mischief which you imagine to be done already by
him? But the hate which you did bear unto the father, you turn upon the son;
when you say that he is the son of a Tirant, why do you not as well say that
he is her son that slew the tirant: If you will not love him for my sake, at
the least let your hate be as little as your love, and condemn him not, before
he have offended: let him live a while, and if he commit the least offense in
the world punish him with death: lo then the gift which I do crave for the
reward of my desert, not the life of my son, but the delay of his death: you
say that it is not you, but the law which requires his death: it is to be
considered, that all the interpretations or gloses of the laws, ought rather to
tend unto clemency then unto rigor; and principally when the effect thereof
tends unto cruelty: for this law which says, that all the kin and
adherents of the tirant must die, ought to be understood of those which have
aided and assisted him to exercise his tirannie, or that have been his
partakers therein: but wherein might this poor innocent have offended, who
knows not as yet what tirannie means? you must then remember my lords, that
he is her son who has made the zeal of her country strive and triumph over
the name of a Princess, over the delights of the world, over sovereignty so
greatly desired of women, the which they themselves are unapt to obtain, over
wealth, the which they so much esteem, and finally over a husbands love, and a
vowed faith: and that which is not the least, esteeming all impartial pleasures
as base, in respect of your general profit. Remember that I have deprived my
self of my husband, that I have slain my child his father: what zeal would you
have more great toward our fellow countrymen? But if there were the least show
in the world that he would ever be prejudicial unto you, I would not let for
any thing to sacrifice him by and by for your safety: but seeing I am certain
that he will become a very good Citizen and a faithful lover of his country:
following the same example which I have given, believe me sirs that I had
rather die then he should, as also I will not live any longer after his death.
Will you justly deserve this infamy O you Citizens, not only to have been
unwilling to give the promised reward unto her that redeemed you? But also to
have been the cause that she suffered a death more sorrowful then the miserable
Hecuba? Alas, alas, why do you not as well believe that he may prove good as
his mother, which is the surer side? and that he may not be so bad as the
father of whom you have been revenged by the hands of her, who more then any
other was bounden unto you. You must believe that the gods are just and
pitiful, and in this only point of pity, men may follow them, and make
themselves almost like unto them, as the Proverb says, That one man is a god
unto another, and sometimes a wolf unto a man; take you the^ that part which
is most commendable. O courteous lords beware that you incur not the anger of
the gods and the reproach of men, and that which is worst of al, take heed least
your ingratitude, or your over great desire of revenge, be not the cause to
make you lose the good wills of such, who in some other urgent affairs may aid,
or do you some worthy service: For ingratitude and cruelty are abominable
both before God and men.

Declamation. 12.
Of him who under coulor of obeying his father, displeased the priest that
administered the sacraments unto him.

A Certain honorable lady being at the point of death, made her last will
and testament after the desire of her curate: who had more respect unto his
own particular profit and the commodity of the church, then to any the
benefit of her kindred: whereupon so long as the lady was able to say I, he
always added something or other unto the will: when neither any of the sons,
nor the father himself either would or durst gainsay him in any thing he did,
for fear of troubling the mind of the sick woman: but after her death and
that the funerals were inded, there was some motion made to have the said will
reformed: whereunto the curate would in no sort consent, but compelled the
heirs and executors to perform the same, unto their great grief. Some small
time after, the husband of the deceassed chanced to fall into the like
sickness, and the curat handeled him after the same sort, as he used his wife,
even unto his last gasp, so that the poor man because he would leave the
world in peace, did still answer I: the which the eldest son perceiving,
(who but a little before was returned from the wars) he began to be
exceeding angry: and imagined which way he might be revenged of the Priest:
Wherefore coming near unto the bed, he also began to increase the number of
the masses, and dirges, whereunto the pacient still answered, then in the end he
said alowd, Is it your will that the curate be presently thrown down the
stairs? the sick man said I, again, not understanding what his son said:
the same was no sooner spoken, but the son took the Priest by the neck, and
throwing him down the stairs, brake one of his arms. The curate accused him,
and protested that he had wronged him, saying:

WHat treason may be more execrable then this, being committed under the coulor
of pity? I was called to comfort the sick, to administer unto him the holy
sacraments, and to admonish him of his souls health: when this ungodly fellow
approached near unto the bed, and faining to assist my devout intention, did
wickedly betray me, as is manifestly of be seen by the maiming of my limbs.
The deriding of the sacred relics, and abusing of the patients will, might
well have sufficed, without further adding thereunto this outrage. Who shall
henceforth be the pastor, that dare instruct the diseased to have a care of
their salvation? Seeing the thanks which they have, and the recompense which
they receive therefore, is the assaying to break their neck? Very true is
that, which is commonly spoken of such as follow wars, which is, that they
never take pleasure in any thing, but in doing mischief; and that they as
much despise those things which are sacred and holy, as they do esteem such
as are profane. This lewd fellow has not only sticked to slander his own
father, at the hour of his death, but also cares not although he be damned
for ever. O child of perdition, do thou not know that at the last gasp
consists either the salvation or damnation of men? How many are there, who
having always lived godly, do damn themselves at the last hour; and others
having been wicked, that by their end have been saved? The good Dismas who was
crucified at the right hand of our Lord, shows us an example of the one, and
Judas an Apostle of the same Christ, is a figure of the other: how durst thou
the^ trouble the last thoughts of thy father by thy insolency? Especially
outraging him whom with all thy might thou ought to defend, seeing that we
do here represent the Divinity: for the Pope represents God, the Archbishop
the Pope, the Bishop the Archbishop, and the Curate the bishop. I require then
that the wrongs done unto God, the Pope, the Archbishop, the Bishop, and to my
person, may be repaired, and that he which has committed it, may be punished
according to his deserts: to the end that all such insolent persons, that will
not bridle their affects, for the reverence which they owe unto God and his
Church, may by his example beware that they incur not the like punishment.

The Answer.
DO you call that Treason, to perform the same thing, the which you heretofore
by law compelled us to do? That is, to fulfill the testators last Will: Now it
is to be considered, that in all things we do, we must begin at one end; as for
me, I began first with the last, and the rather because the same not being set
down in writing, I feared that it might have been forgotten, or least by
deferring of time (which is very often the loss of occasion) I might be
hindered from effecting the last commandment of my father: as also because he
long before made a sign unto me, that I should rid him from your company, who
had no other talk with him, but of temporal matters, that he might wholly
apply his mind unto God, and therefore he granted unto every thing which you
demanded; thinking that the best way to dispatch him from your importunities;
but had you had your own will, I believe you had been there yet to trouble him:
wherefore I am not to be blamed, if I had a desire to do this last service for
my father, unto whom I am more bounden then to you: for I remember very well,
that you your self (at such times as in my youth I came unto you to shrieue)
did always inioine me to do whatsoever my father and mother commanded me,
without exception of any thing: and if otherwise I did, I should be damned:
think not then master Parson, that for respecting you overmuch, I will be
damned: Moreover you have so many times preached unto us, that a man must
honor his lather and mother, and that it is the first commandment that has
any reward promised upon the earth: how could I then better honor my father,
then having compassion to see him so importuned, to deliver him from such a
pain, according to his good commandment? If you had taken as great care to
the patient, as you did to the Notarie, you should very well have perceived
how he made a sign with his head that the same should be done which I did,
though not so soon as I ought, because I would first be informed what his will
was, which so soon as I understood, I suddenly put it in effect, without
suffering it to be set down in writing, for fear least others seeing this
testament, should also put in practice this last point, when you gave them the
like occasion: could I then offend you when I thought upon you chiefest
benefit? Also I cannot believe that I have slaundered my father, in yielding
such obedience as was due unto him, and giving him the means to apply his last
thoughts unto his true salvation: if there be any fault done, it proceeds of
this, that I did not exactly understand the progression of your dignity, for I
did think that men so worthy, ought to approach more near the perfection of
him, whom you say they do represent: This is all wherein I may have failed,
for the rest I refer me to the judgment of those, which are of more
knowledge then either you or I am.

Declamation. 13.
Of him that would disherit his brother, because he had smitten his father.

IT was an ancient law, that whosoever did smite his father should be
disherited: whereupon it chanced that a certain young man being drunken, did
strike his father, who imputing the fault unto the wine, both dissembled the
matter, and pardoned the offense: but the father being dead, without making
any will, the yoonger brother would have his elder brother to lose his
inheritance, because he had offended the law, saying:

YOu know O you just judges, that which the law has appointed for those that
strike their father, I require the execution thereof, and it must not serve his
turn to say that the wine made him to do it, for such an answer in steed of
an excuse, would make him double in fault, and he is as well worthy to be
excluded from any part of his mothers good, as he is to lose every whit of
his fathers inheritance: the one because he did beat his father, and the other
because he uses to be drunken, for the drunkard is more worse then a brute
beast, which never drinks but to maintain life, but it seems that the
drunkards lives to no other end but only to drink. What mischief happens
not through this vice of drunkenness? The Partriarke Noe was the first that
planted the vine, so also he was the first that was drunk therewith: what
happened unto him thereby? Nothing but only shame, anger, and displeasure;
Lot also being drunken, committed incest with his daughters: Cambisses being
reproved by one of his faithful counselors, because he was commonly drunk,
did with an arrow strike through the heart of the said counselors son,
saying, can he be drunk that shoots so fair a shot? That great conqueror
Alexander slew his Foster brother Clitus, coming from his banquet, and
afterward being sober, he would have slain himself for sorrow: but who
knows not that such fruits come of drunkenness? Wherefore they being double
in fault which commit wickedness through that vice, deserve double punishment.
And now to return unto our first matter, who will not say that my brother
ought to lose his inheritance, seeing that he has strooken our father, because
the same makes a doubt whether he be his son or no; and if he be his son,
as I believe he is, the greater is his ingratitude, wherefore there is no need
to stand upon my fathers dissembling or pardoning of the wrong, for as much as
I should likewise have consented thereunto: but I will still say that it is fit
to hang up the vessels which do contain such pestiferous licquor, and that
there is too much favor shown unto those, who for drinking overmuch, and
afterward beating their father, are but only disherited.

The Answer.
YOu blame me for an offense, the which I know not whether I did it or not, or
if I did it, at the least it was against my will, but were the matter as you say
it is; Yet were it not to be attributed to my fault, because I did not know him
whom I offended. Truly I confess that I have misdone in drinking too much,
but you do most wickedlie sin through malice, in going about to alter the
meaning of your deceassed father, and to disherite your brother, that never did
you any wrong. Wherefore do you desire that a fathers kindness should be
abused? Why do you make the world to doubt whether you be his son, and my
brother? That he is my father his pity has declared, but your ambition and
extreme avarice makes me doubt whether you be my brother, for brethren ought
to love together, and help one another, yea if need were to die one for
another, as did Castor and Pollux, Agamemnon and Menalaus, with diverse others,
whose fame shall be immortal; for this affection wanting, undoubtedly they are
no more brethren, but far greater enemies then strangers can be. I confess
also that wine is the cause of great mischiefs, and therefore I will keep me
from it, but you your self, do bring in a sufficient excuse for me, in saying
that so many great parsonages, being overcome with wine, have committed very
great faults, as well as I: as touching the double punishment which you would
have, your passion makes you to give that counsel, which never heretofore
has been allowed for current, but tell me who has made you more wise then our
father, and those that sit in judgment, that you will make new laws? Seeing
that you have received no offense thereby, and that our father has made no
complaint thereof at all. It is manifestly to be seen that covetousness, and
not a sons love, inciteth you against me; for if such a zeal did stir you
up, why made you not your request during our fathers life? But you knowing
very well, that he was not, or at the least thought himself not offended, have
stayed for his death to overthrow your brother.

Declamation. 14.
Of one that to escape his enemies, took away a Priests horse byforce.

A Crtaine man flying from his enemies that would have slain him, met with a
Priest on horseback, whom he prayed to sell or lend him his horse in that
extremity, the Priest flatly denied him: the other took the horse by force:
and afterward having escaped, he sent home the horse again together wtth a
good reward, nevertheless the Priest accused him of theft, and said:

THe chiefest point of justice, by the which the Commonwealth ought to be
maintained in peace, is that every one may quietly possess without any let
or disturbance, that which he has justly gotten: As for me I will prove
very well that I have bought, and truly paid for my horse, nevertheless it
has been violently taken from under me, eue^ when I had most urgent cause to
use him, for I was going to confess and comfort a sick person, who through
the fault of him that took away my horse, is dead without confession: behold
now by this means a soul in danger of eternal damnation, for it is the
burden of sins, that causes souls to be lost: in like sort I was in double
danger of my life; one way, if his enemies had known that he had prevailed by
my horse to escape from them; another, for the fear that he did put me in
together with the force that he did use in taking away my horse, as also
because I was compelled to go well three long hours a foot before I could
find any house, whereby I caught such a quartine fever as will easily bring me
to my grave, for as the quartine fever purges and makes young men to grow, so
does it kill such old men as I am: but although all this were not likely, yet
ought justice to be done, as an example for thieves, otherwise shall no man be
able to travel the country: if such a one be pardoned as robs a Priest,
why shall not he hope for the like that robs a Merchant? You will say I have
restored your horse, and rewarded you with a gift as much as the horse might
be worth; the matter consists not therein, but in that you did take him
from me against my will, with violence, and threats; But in restoring of my
horse, have you raised the dead to life again to receive confession? And am I
cured of my disease? Especially if your enemies had overtaken you, who should
have restored me my horse: Seeing I knew not who you were, but only he which
robbed me. I require and hope that such justice shall be extended toward me
as will make others by your example to respect those, who are recommended unto
them from God and the church.

The Answer.
IF I had taken your horse through malice, covetousness or other vild meaning,
your reasons were to be esteemed, but I did pray you either to lend him, or
sell him unto me to save my life, yet you being more hard to be entreated then
the boisterous wind or raging waves, had no pity of my distress, whereupon
your cruelty constrained me against my will, to commit that which in no sort I
had determined to do, but what is he that will not endeavor by all the means
he can to escape death? Assure you that in such a danger I had no leisure to
consider the inconveniences that might happen, nor to think upon either of our
deaths that might have chanced by this deed; for I might have died without
confession as well as the other, and in a worser sort then by a quartine ague,
whereof you fear to die. I confess that I have offended you, and am ready to
make you such amends as shall be thought meet, but I could do no less,
without losing my life at the same time. If one will do much to defer his
death a little while, why should it not be lawful for me to save my life
altogether? The which for a need, I would bestow for you. Finally necessity
has no law, and that cannot be termed a robberrie which I have done: for
there is nothing so well done, if one will have respect unto the chances that
may come thereof, but may be thought ill done: for humane actions are such,
that in all things, there is more danger then assurance: therefore our actions
are not to be judged by the event thereof, but by the intent of them that do
them: what would be said then, if being willing to draw you forth of a pit
(wherein you might happen to fall) I should chance to break your neck, Should
I be guilty thereof? How many men are killed by the Physicians, thinking to
cure them? Are they punished therefore? No truly, because their meaning was not
hurtful, no more also was mine, as I have declared by my liberal restitution:
but consider that necessity makes many things lawful, and that it is so, it
is written that David (being compelled through hunger) entered into the temple,
and he and his man did eat up the show bread; The which was lawful fo none but
the Priests to eat: also many times sacred and holy things are gaged, and
sold through necessity, how much more lawful then is it for a man to take a
horse to save his life, with a good intent to make satisfaction? although you
are a sacred parson (sir) yet I hope you are too wise to believe that your
horse is one, so also I would not have the Proverb to be verified in you, which
says, that never Priest nor woman could either pardon an offense, or
acknowledge any service done unto them: this were a vice far unfitting your
profession: but finally seeing you will in no sort be satisfied with reason,
you are as much bound to believe the judges, as I am to endure that which it
shall please them to adiudge me, and so shall I neither be bound to you in any
thing, nor for any thing, seeing you have brought me to the extremity of the
law.

Declamation. 15.
Of him that after he had bargained with a souldior to kill his enemy, did
forthwith repent him of the fact.

A Certain man bargained with a soldier to kill his enemy, but afterward
repented him, and forbad him in any sort to touch him, to the end to hurt him:
and this he did in the presence of two witnesses: the soldier
notwithstanding went on forward and killed him, and afterward was taken and
condemned to die, but the Attorney General accused the man that had hired him
of this capital crime, saying:

SHall it then be tolerated in a Commonwealth that any man may hire one to
murder another, at his own pleasure? As if there were no justice to determine
their controversies and quarrels? If such faults may be excused, or wincked at,
who shall be any where in safety? If it be an offense but only to imagine
such a wickedness, how much more then is it to commit it? And so much the
greater is this fact, as that he was not contented to offend himself alone,
but that he has likewise provoked another to be partaker of his villainy,
especially with the price of his money, moreover it is a capital crime when
one enemy kills another, how much more heinous is it then, when one goes
about to cause him to be murdered by such a one, as not only wishes him no
hurt at all, but also by such a one as skantlie knows him? What infection?
What plague? What abomination can be more great in a Commonwealth then this?
If whooredome be punishable, the which were it not for the reproach thereof, is
rather an increasing, then a loss unto the Commonwealth; What punishment may
be severe enough for those as will infect the same with such murders? If this
crime be not sharply punished, every one will boldly enterprise upon any
small occasion to cause his adversary to be slain if he can, and if he
cannot, he will say then that he is sorry that ever he thought to do so bad
a deed; as this man says: One would not believe that such a wicknesse would
be invented amongst men, or if a man did know it, hardly should it be
believed: but those which do believe it, ought also to know, see, and believe
the punishment due unto the same, and the mischief that for such heinous
crimes does happen unto those that commit the^. This man says, I did forbid
him in the presence of two witnesses, commanding him not to kill mine enemy;
as for me, I think but suspitiouslie of those witnesses, for if they had been
honest, and just men, they would have found the means to warned the other,
wisely to beware of him that had already conspired his death, as also of him
that was to take away his life: or else they should have advertised the justice,
that there was a murderer in the city, that for money would undertake to
slay men, and by that means, there had not happened so great a wickedness:
and that which is worst, it is very likely that after he had forbidden him,
he did again command him without any other witness, but the money given to do
the deed: but were it not so, yet is it very evident that you are the author
of this mischief: and the cause of the death of two men, therefore it is but
right that you should make the third, for he which makes such a bargain once,
has either done it before, or will do the like another time, so that it is
best to prevent the worst by cutting you off betimes. You say that he ought not
to have killed him, seeing that you forbad him; but you should not have induced
him to kill him, least afterward you might not be able to revoke his will at
your commandment, for all the while that he sought for the means and
opportunity to do the murder, an hatred against the same man did enter by
little and little into his heart, which you did afterward think by your
forbidding, might be wholly rooted out at one instant: but the same is not
easily to be done, for men are naturally more inclined to mischief, then
goodness, so that they do always more hardly forgo it, and especially
such as of long time having followed the wars, are used to kill men, so that
they do as it were thirst after humane blood: wherefore you ought to have
believed that after you had persuaded him to act the murder, it was not easy
for you to dissuade him from it, and so consequently you should not have
persuaded him, much less have given, or promised him money for the same
intent: but you should have remembered that the pleasure of revenge lasts but
a little while, and the joy that comes of mercy endures for ever: Moreover
that for the most part in seeking to revenge us upon another, we do find our
own destruction, wherefore it is better, and the surest way to leave the
revenge unto God, who is just, and knows the hearts of all men. But if desire
of revenge, or to have right of your enemy, had so greatly urged you, you
ought to have had your recourse unto the justice, and so to have had him
chastised, without any danger or dishonor unto you at all: or else if you
would have needs chosen a worse course, you might have determined to have
taken revenge your self, without making another man a murderer for you: and
it may be, that even then, when you had repented you of the fact, you had been
as little able to have withholden your self from doing that which you had
determined. All these reasons above said, do make your trespass the greater,
and I see not any of them that may make it seem lesser, so that it seems
very reasonable, that the offender should be punished, to give an example unto
all those which have the like wicked desire.

The Answer.
Truly I confess that I have greatly sinned against God: but as for the
world, our thoughts and minds are free, provided that they stretch not to the
affecting of mischief, so that I am not by justice reproouable, much less
punishable: for to sin is incident unto man, but to persist in sin is
devilish, the which I have not done: But knowing that repentance comes by
divine grace, I would not seem to neglect it, but showing that it had taken
effect in me, I forbad the murderer not to hurt mine enemy; if he for any
particular quarrel has slain him against my will, what could I do therewith?
You say that I ought not to have persuaded nor bargained with him to do it, it
is true, but the Evangelist says, are there not four and twenty hours in the
day, Wherein a man may fall by the temptation of the devil, and rise again by
the grace of God? even so did I fall and rise again, as the like may chance
unto every man, seeing we are all conceived in sin; and by that means (as
your self affirms) more naturally inclined to do hurt then good: so that
it is not a small virtue, to repent before a man commit a mischief. David of
whom God said, that he was a man after his own heart, and that he should wholly
obey his will, what wickedness I pray you did he commit? And nevertheless by
repentance be obtained pardon and grace: we must not say that all those who
have been somewhat badlie minded, are wicked men; or that which is worse,
notorious offenders, as you say; for if it were so, the most part of men should
be such, and it may be, you your self that accuse me so sharply, should not
be free from crime. As touching your assertion, that I am guilty of the death
of twain, and that I ought to be the third, I utterly deny that, fot as much
as the first man's death is rather happened through his own misbehauiour then my
malice, for if he had not done me wrong and outrage, I should never have
imagined to procure his death, and having not thought it, I had not spoken unto
the other, who knowing him not, would not (after my forbidding him) have taken
a new occasion to kill him: but who knows whether he has slain him at the
instance of some other, and will not confess it? Knowing that if he did, yet
he should not escape unpunished. Finally he truly confesses, that I forbad
him to proceed any further therein, and that afterward I never spoke to him
thereof: how can I then be guilty? Seeing that I cannot be so, although I were
the cause of the mischief as you say: for as much as mine intention was not so,
wherefore we must judge, not according to the chance or success of actions,
but according to the meaning of him that does them: otherwise for the most
part, when the sick do die, the Physicians should be blamed: or he who having
an intent to kill a man, and should lanch his impostume ought to be praised, the
which cannot be, for when the intent is wicked, the fault is no less so long
as it lasts; but the wicked intent ceasing, the crime does end together with
it. Wherefore, if I did amiss, in persuading this man to kill mine enemy, I
did well in forbidding him to proceed no further in the same. Touching this
point, that whereas neither the witnesses, nor I have advertised the other;
There are many men so bad to be dealt withal, that one cannot advertise them
of any thing, without danger of great reproach; so also was it not reasonable
to accuse one unto the justice which had not as yet offended, also they were no
more then witnesses, that I did forbid him to hurt mine enemy, but yet they
knew not what had passed before between us. Moreover the remembrance of the
short pleasure of revenge, and the everlasting continuance of the joy of
mercy, had made me repent that ever I had a desire of revenge, wherefore I did
remit all unto God, without seeking redress either by justice, or any other
way. If then this misfortune be fallen upon him for his sins, or otherwise, I
am not to be blamed, and there is no reason which may make me an offender,
seeing that all the foresaid reasons, mine innocence, and good meaning is
proved, according unto the which I require to be judged by the equal doom of
our just judges, who do very well know, that Socrates himself confessed that
he was inclined to wickedness, as well as to Philosophy, but that by virtue
and the good spirit, he resisted the wicked desire, as I have done through the
grace of God.

Declamation. 16.
Of a woman that would forsake her husband, because he stood excommunicate.

A Certain man was excommunicated and accursed for disobedience to the church:
whereupon his wife would needs be divorced from him, but he would not restore
her marriage good, but alleged these reasons:

Have you not promised me before the Priest and the assembly of our kindred
and friends, to be my spouse, and lawful wife? And never to forsake me for
any chance whatsoever? Have you not always been partaker of my prosperity?
Wherefore will you then abandon me in my first adversity? As for me I will not
let for any thing that may happen, to esteem you for a very honest wife, but
I know not what others will think of your deed: for as much as the custom of
honest women is, never to forsake their husband in any matter, nor for any
thing, but they do still abide constant with them in love and unity, and they
do observe the faith which they have promised, when they were not only made
companions, but even the one half of their husbands: seeing that men cannot,
and much less ought not to seperat those whom God has coupled together by
marriage, which is the most ancientest, most holiest, and most approved by God
of all other whatsoever: for God himself did institute the same, not in the
world, but in terrestrial Paradise, even when man was yet in his innocence,
and afterward he honored this holy estate with the first of his miracles that
he wrought, at the marriage in Cana of Galiley, where he turned the water into
wine: Moreover you must consider, that God took from man the substance whereof
woman mas made, to the end that she might thereby be bound not to forsake him;
wherefore Saint Paul says, that woman was created for man, and not that man
was made for woman: in like sort the words of our God himself does witness
the same, when he says, It is not good that man should be alone, let us make
him therefore an help; what liberty then has the woman to forsake her
husband? Although it was by the woman her provocation that man sinned, and was
justly cursed by the mouth and power of God, yet would he not for all that
separate them, but gave them hope of salvation, if they remained together: For
he says, that like as by a woman sin came into the world, so also of a woman,
should he be borne which should overcome sin and death. Saint Paul also
bids the believing wife to abide with the unbelieving husband; saying: Woman
what do thou know whether thou shall save thy husband or not? Wherefore then
will you forsake me? Whether it be by right or wrong that I am sequestered from
the church, yet am I not utterly excluded from the same: time may make it known
whether I deserve to be excommunicated or not, and although I may have deserved
it, yet contrition, and Gods favor cannot be denied unto me: now is the time
that you ought not to forsake me, (not so much as with your eye only if it
were possible) were you but such a wife as you should be: Truly a wife can
give no greater token of her chastity, then by showing a perfect friendship,
and an inseparable love unto her husband: for they are shameless and immodest
women, that do change their love, according to the fortune of him whom they
feign to love: how many have there been found even amongst modest women, that
have with a maruailous constancy continually loved and followed their
friends, as Thisbe, who followed her Pyramus, and would live no longer after
his death, Briseis followed Achilles; Ariadne, Theseus; Medea, Jason; and the
concubine of Alcibiades, he being slain between her arms when she could not
better provide for him, she wrapped him in one of her best garments to bury
him: will you then be much less constant, then unchaste? will you imitate and
be accounted like unto Clitemnestra, Thebe, Helena, and other bad women? Do
you not know that such as are good, are always honorable even after their
death? As Alcest, who willingly desired to die to save her husband Admetus his
life; the famous Iphias seeing her husbands body burned, would in no sort
forsake him, but leaped into the same fire, and was burned with him.
Hipsicratea because she would not forsake old Mithridates her husband, did cut
off her fair hair, and being armed, did always serve him as his companion in
the wars. Cornelia also never abandoned her Pompey, but followed him into
Egypt where he was slain. Octauia the sister of Augustus would have followed
her Marc Anthony in all places, if he would have suffered her: and although he
loved Cleopatra, yet so long as she lived, she maintained him in peace with her
brother. Triaria the wife of Lucius Vitelius, did also accompany her husband
in the wars, she being armed as he was. What shall we say of Hersilia,
Hiperminestra, Laodemia, Oenone, Clita, Arganthona, Democrita, Gumilda, Caia,
Valeria, Terentiana, Iulia, Arthemesia, Panthea, Sosia, Tarsa, Paulina the wife
of Seneca, Portia, Turia, Sulpitia, Aegeria, Alcione, Procris, Camma, Sara,
Michol, and an infinite number of others, which are all famous for the great
love which they did bear unto their husbands: wherefore do you not covet to
be of the number of these? Seeing that my disgrace offers you the means to
make proof of your love and faith toward me, lose not this occasion, bad for
me, but good for you, your glory may be a comfort to mine affliction. I do not
withhold your marriage good through covetousness, but to keep you from doing
that thing which may redound unto your dishonor, and I would not in any sort
that it should be said that I was consenting unto it, and I protest before God
and men, that I do it for no other cause at all: for I am not ignorant how
much all women are importuned, especially such as are known not to abide with
their husbands for any great love; but as I have said, I will never consent
that it shall be reported that I have been the cause of your folly. Wherefore I
remit all unto the judges, without any further speaking of the matter, being
to stand to their censure whether I am to restore your marriage good or not:
the which shall be a small loss unto me, if I may be so good cheap rid from
her who loves me not at all.

The Answer.
I Should think my self happy in hazarding but only my goods, and life to
remain with you: but when the question concerns the soul, we ought to
consider, that we have nothing more precious, seeing that the same is none of
ours: but God has made it immortal to govern this body, the which ought to
be wholly obedient unto the soul, that we might afterward by the only help
and grace of God, restore the same unto him unspotted, if it were possible, the
which I cannot do if I remain with you: for all those that do but only
speak unto such as you, are guilty, except they do only speak to convert
you, the which hitherto I could in no sort do: but how should I do it? When
neither the exhortations of the church, nor yet your excommunication both
together, were able to turn you? That which Saint Paul says, that the
believing woman ought to remain with the unbelieving man, is nothing pertinent
to this matter, for more faulty is the Christian which sins maliciously of
set purpose, then is he which sins of ignorance, being yet uncalled of God.
I do well remember what I have promised you at our marriage, and I will
perform it, so that it be not to the condemning of my soul and that it is so,
I have always shown; that duty which an honest wife owes unto her husband,
and am yet ready to continue the same if you do return again unto the
bosom of the church, and then you shall truly know that I will not forsake you
for any occasion: I am not also ignorant what the worthiness of marriage is,
and I would not have you think that men do separate me from you, but God
himself, for as much as he is head of the church: I do confess that the
woman was made for man, but for all that it follows not that she ought to
damn her self for him. As touching the hope which you do show you have to
return unto the church, it were better that it were too soon then too late,
for then should I have no occasion to depart from you, and I do promise to
turn unto you when you shall be absolved. There is no love wanting in me, but
there lacks goodness in you, because you remain obstinat. I cannot be
termed in the number of those that have left their husbands without cause, but
my greatest grief is because I have too just a cause, and I believe that
Alcest, Iphias, and the other ladies which were truly virtuous, would have done
as I do in the like case as mine, had they lived in these our days: for even
as it was an honor and virtue in them, to do that which they did for their
husbands, so likewise should it be but a shame and a sin in me not to forsake
you. The same which you say provoke you, not to restore me my marriage good,
induces me not to leave you, so that I may abide with you without offense and
discredit, as I would not also that any one should think that I were
consenting or partaker of your obstinacy, no more then you would be thought to
be consenting unto my seperating, and under this false color, you would keep
back my marriage good. I do advertise you that I will rather forgo it if it
be not ad- (...) always procure them enemies, and do make quarrels in public
places, to the greater danger of honest people then their own. But I would to
God that I had been dead before now, at the least with my husband, seeing that
life is more bitter unto me then death: and my greatest grief is, because I
am not only harmed by this Homicide, but as many of the noble kindred which
he and I have, are greatly interressed in it, many of the friends whom he
favored are damnified: the poor has lost much thereby, for he was a good
alms giver; Lastly, the Commonwealth is weakened, losing such a Citizen who
lived so well, that he had many friends, and not one only enemy; that did
pleasure many, and never displeased any. Consider then you righteous judges,
what punishment is to be done upon him, who depriving us of so many benefits,
has been the cause of so great mischief.

The Answer.
IF men's actions ought to be judged, not according to the event of the same,
but according to the intent of him that does it, I cannot in any sort be
blamed, for I did never know this man whether he were honest, or dishonest,
wherefore seeing I neither loved him, much less hated him, I had no desire to
do him either good or hurt. But since by misfortune it is so fallen out, that
being constrained to defend my self from those who sought to kill me, he has
had a blow both against my will, and unwitting, mine enemies are more to be
blamed then I, for they are the cause thereof: Wherefore ought I then to bear
the punishment thereof? The sorrow that I have had because this fault is
happened by my hand, is sufficient enough, although it was done against my
meaning, without that I should be further troubled for the same: and were it
not that my wife, and my children, (whose livings I do get) could not live
without me, I had rather die then live, having ben so disgraced by you, to have
deprived you of your future hopes and your present happiness; but if it be a
cruelty to cause the innocent wife and children of a guilty man to suffer,
what is it then to take away the life from the wife and innocent children of
such a man that is no ways faulty? For it is sufficiently manifest, that
this woman which accuses me of crime, not knowing me no more then I do her,
is carried away with her passion: seeing that also she does altogether condemn
my fact without having any respect unto the innocence of mine intent: I will
not say for my defense, that her husband has rather ben the cause of his death
then I, seeing that he would needs pass by such a place where many men were
fighting; for not only they which are wise and well advised do shun the like
meetings, but also fools, children, and the very brute beasts do fly from
them: as touching the criminal conjectures, that it was a thing done of set
purpose; the sharp pursuit of mine enemies, do sufficiently excuse me, and
if there be any other proof, more sufficient then hers of such a fact, truly
I will condemn my self as worthy of death, but being otherwise, I cannot be
so: where she says, that I ought not to throw stones at any man, I answer
that he which would judge of that, it were fit that he did prove the like
danger as mine was: to affirm also that to have many enemies is a sign of a
wicked man, is a very absurd judgment, for it is often seen that the good
are hated as well as the bad, and that which is worst, It is of the wicked,
that the good are hated; so that they are in far greater danger, and very
often constrained to defend themselves: even so it fell out with me. But who
was, or ever shall be milder then Socrates? And who had more wicked enemies
then he? who never ceased to slander him, even to the procuring of his death
as an offender. What shall we say of Phocion, and of Aristides, likewise of
Solon and Licurgus, and of the great Scipio Africanus? I pass over with
silence, our Savior Christ and other Saints, least I should profane their
holy names, in placing them amongst other men. I am not be alone then that
has enemies, neither ought this mishap impair my reputation, or make my cause
the worse in any sort. Finally, there is no fault so little that cannot be
greatly aggrauated, if any man will seek for circumstances as this woman
does, who would prove the Commonwealth and so many persons interessed, that
it seems by her speech that her husband was immortal: but I demand if he
should have died of an appoplexie, or some other sudden death, whether should
not the loss have been all one? But it is the manner of women to make the
wrongs which they receive, seem great, esteeming those which they commit, very
little: wherefore it were superfluous to answer her tedious accusations, which
is the cause, that referring my self as well unto the mercy as to the equity
of the judges, I will attend their just sentence.

Declamation. 18.
Of Sergius, who fought against his enemies, without aduertising his fellow
Virginius thereof, and therefore is not aided by him.

SErgius and Virginius, both equal in authority, were captains in the Roman
army, before the city of the Veies. Sergius was encamped on that side where
the Tuscanes might come to releive the besieged city, and Virginius on the
other. Now it happened that Sergius was assailed of the Tuscanes, and fought
with them, without requiring aid of Virginius, so that part of the camp was
thereby discomfited: he being returned to Rome, accused Virginius for not
aiding him, and said thus:

WHat profits wisdom, courage, and dexterity in a commander, when envy
alone is far more able to hinder him, then all these virtues together are
able to further the advancement of his service, that desires to profit the
Commonwealth? Even so is it happened unto me, for although Virginius and I did
both together employ all our best means to besiege and take the city of Veies
for the honor and profit of the Senate and people of Rome, yet were we never
able to do any service of worth, but on the contrary we received dishonor
and hurt by the only envy and ambition of Virginius. Nevertheless what have
not I done to allure him unto kindness? and to persuade him to be careful of
the safety and honor of the Commonwealth? I have always given him the
chiefest honor, and held him not as my companion; but as the only General
commander of the enterprise; yea and leaving unto him the place of most
advantage, I did encampe my self both where the greatest danger, and most
concourse of the enemies was; thinking by that means not only to induce him,
but also to bind him more straightly, (not unto my aid) but unto the common
good of the whole army, and his own honor, yet what have I gained with all
this duty, and true humility? nothing at al, but only thereby increased his
malice, pride, and ambition. I therefore considering with my self how hardly
two Generals in one army do perform any enterprise fortunatlie, and how on
the contrary, by the diversity of their opinions and wits they do oftentimes
not only procure one another mischeife, but also sometimes, put the
Commonwealth in great danger (as Terentia Varo did at Cannas, when he gave
battle against the opinion of his Colleague) did rather desire yet further to
abase my authority in respect of his, honoring him as my superior, in all
lawful things; but all was vain, for as much as those actions which do serve
to gain the love of such as are modest, do increase the pride and insolency
of those that are proud, for they do attribute that unto cowardlines, which is
done by modesty and wisdom: which men Virginius desired to follow, for he
(seeing that I to gain his favor, did oppose my self unto the greatest
danger for his security and defense) did presume that I did not this noble
act to induce him unto the like aiding of me, but that I did owe him this
honor; whereupon he did not only forget that I was his companion, but also he
would not perform the duty of a good General: for how can he be a good
General that sees any of the inferior captains in danger to be
overthrown, and will not send him aid? Paulus Emilius ceased not to fight,
but did willingly die in the battle, although that Varo began the same
against his advice, the which I have not done: for it is well known that I
would not fight against your will, seeing that I encamped in that place to no
other end, but only to make head against the Tuscanes, if they came to molest
the camp, to raise the siege, or to hinder our enterprise: yet nevertheless
you had rather suffer the Commonwealth to be hindered, then to afford me your
aid in so great an extremity, especially seeing that by that means we might
happily have ended our enterprise: for in succouring me, the Tuscanes had been
discomfited, and no doubt the besieged could not have chosen, but of necessity
must have yielded: but you rather desired my loss and dishonor, then to have
your own profit and honor joined together with mine, which had been but a
small matter, if all the Romans had not ben therewithal greatly hindered. The
gods forbid that I should say, that you had intelligence with the enemies, but
I am very sorry that you give occasion unto many to suspect the same, others
to presume as much, and some constantly to believe it: for you being very well
known to be both valiant and noble, it may be supposed, that without some
particular respect you would not have suffered, not only the Commonwealth and
your Colleague to be endangered, but also you could hardly have endured the
sight of the enemy, without an extreme desire to fight with him. Truly
Marcellus made many Sallies and Skirmishes against the mind of that great
Fabius, but for all that, he never left to aid him when need was; so that by
the wisdom of Fabius, together with his zeal unto the Commonwealth, they
were named, he the buckler, and Marcellus the sword of the Romans; whereby it
is apparently seen how happy and fruitful the unity and agreement with
Colleagues is, whereunto I have with all my power always exhorted you, yet was
I neuerable to obtain this good at your hands, either for my self, or (...)
his pride, which he would attribute unto me: but it is the common custom of
the wicked to slander others with those vices which they know to be in
themselves, and they imagine that of necessity others are more addicted unto
them: Whereupon they do falsely affirm, that they have borne that respect unto
others, which they themselves do maliciously look for. As touching that which
Paulus Emilius did, he performed his duty in fighting with Varo, being
thereunto required, as I would have done the like with you, if you had willed
me, or at the least if I had known that the enemies were come: the which you
might have advertised me of by one only man or twain, without weakening your
camp; but I not knowing thereof, how could I help you? But only suspicious
of your meaning; I will not say that I was in doubt that you had some
intelligence with the enemies, seeing that I cannot think so vild a part or so
great a Treason could ever enter in the heart of a Roman: but I may well say
that I had great reason to suspect, least those of the city perceiving me go
unto your aid, might have sallied forth, and charging us behind, have
discomfited our whole army, seeing that I knew your overthrow even as soon as
I knew that the enemies were come; and there was never any man of sound
judgment that would lose the whole, when he might save the half, the which
was so well considered of our Senate, that after the overthrow of Cannas, Varo
was more praised for returning home, though flying, then was Paulus Emilius for
dying in the place: moreover it is a doubt whether he did well to fight against
his mind with Varo, seeing that it had been better for him and for the
Commonwealth to have been less forward, or at the least more slow, for by that
means al had not ben lost, and it seems indeed that he condemned himself to
have erred greatly, when he would rather die, then accept the horse which
Lentulus did offer unto him to save himself: for it is a great rashness, to
bring men unto the battle without some great likelihood of victory, the which
I could not hope for, not knowing that you should fight so long until you were
quite overthrown, and then was it too late to send you my forces, already
amazed with a novelty being as sudden as it was unfortunate and unlooked for:
for who would ever think that you would have been so proud, or rash as to begin
the battle without aduertising us? Us I say that should at the least have been
companions of your danger, I will not say of your glory, seeing the greatness
of your courage could not endure it. Furthermore as I am not ignorant why two
Generals in an army are chosen, so do I in like sort know very well (to our
great disadvantage) that you had a desire to usurp unto your self alone the
whole authority: finally there is too much said in a matter so evident,
wherefore I submit my self unto the judgment of the Senate, whether I was
bound, or whether I should have done well to hazard the rest of the army, to
remedy a mischief, whereof I had no intelligence until it was quite
remediless.

Declamation. 19.
Of one that being condemned, appealed to a higher place, and refuses his
first judge, being president thereof.

A Certain inferior judge of a Province, condemned a man to death, who
appealed from him to the court of Parl^ment: nevertheless, he deferred his
coming thither so long as he could, sometimes by faining to be sick, and by
such other means; which succeeded so badly for him, that the said judge came
to be President at the Parliament whereunto the said offender had appealed:
Whereupon being brought thither, he refused to be judged by that new President,
saying:

YOu would then that I should appeal from Pilate to Pilate, I will keep me
from that, if justice have any place; for it cannot be termed an appeal, to
have the same judge from whom one appealeth: Who knows not that he is the
same man, who to increase his dignity, will nothing at all surceasse his
injustice, but rather with his dignity and authority will also increase an
ill opinion toward me, because I have appealed from his injustice? for if he
did me wrong when I might appeal from him, what will he now do, if he may
absolutely judge me without contradiction? As for me, I do firmly believe,
that with mine enemies coin he has bought this authority, to the end that I
might have no other means to escape his unjust sentence: I will not say that
such places of authority ought not to be sold, but I dare truly avouch that
there ought great heed to be taken upon whom they are bestowed, and so much the
rather, because being to continue in the same during their life, they are the
less subject to correction, and paying money therefore, more subject to
corruption. O happy is the country where the King makes his abode, as at
Paris and the places thereabout, for there those which deserve authority
obtain them: for by the proof of their capacity, fidelity, and good
services done unto the Kings Majesty, and to the Commonwealth, they are
provided of such estates as they deserve, or rather those places of authority
are provided for such men as know how to exercise them as they ought: but here
where we are far from that princely light, all is subject to corruption, and
they do not bear office which do best deserve it, but they which have the
most friends, and the greatest purse: so this my partial judge has in one day
obtained without any desert at all the dignity of a President by his money. To
avoid this corruption, in Italy, Spain, Almaine, Flanders and other Provinces,
the judges are only but for a year: but after that the term is ended, they
are subject to the like officers, or unto the Censure of other judges: such
also was the custom of the Romans, that so long time did flourish, and yet
should have flourished, if Marius and Silla, and afterward Caesar and Pompey,
had not (with other good customs) caused this likewise to be neglected: for
the Roman Empire, which so many years before was famous, did wholly decline,
when offices were more easily obtained by the wealthy then the virtuous; but
so long as the rich men did suffer themselves to be governed and judged by the
poor Fabricias, and such others, no kingdom was more happy and prosperous
then the Romans Commonwealth. The Venetians have flourished almost a thousand
and two hundred years, by the like means, in making more estimation of such
Senators as were virtuous, then of those that were rich, who if they have not
virtue joined with their riches, do there never obtain any dignity: which is
the cause that amongst them justice is rightly administered, and that the
condemned do never hope for any redemption, or favor by appeals: but
because we are far from the presence of the King, from his Counsel, and from
the most worthy chief Court, we in this our Province do see the judges so
corrupt, or sometimes so ignorant, that of an hundred appealants two do not
return rightly judged. It were reason therefore that this our judge were
allowed some certain time, to learn of the Lords which have of long time ben
of this Parliament, before he have this authority to adiudge those appealants
which have appealed from himself: truly I should the^ be content to say that I
have appealed from him being unjust, unto himself being become just; but what
assurance have I now thereof? Seeing that in authority (which is indeed the
touchstone to try men withal) the most part of them do wax worse, and even as
the weight of gold diminishes, being oftentimes rubbed upon the touchstone, so
does the consciences of such as are but slenderly endued with virtue decay, by
often changing of their dignities: for if men did know, or at the least would
not dissemble, how hard a thing it is, to use the office of a judge; there
would be so few that would covet to buy that place, as hardly should there be
any found that would be desirous to take such authority upon them:
Nevertheless, this being not my judge, but mine adversary, not content to
have adjudged me once, would condemn me again. King Lewis the twelfth, when
one counseled him to be revenged on those, which in times past had offended
him, answered that it was not the part of the king of France, to revenge the
wrongs which were done unto the Duke of Orleans; which surely were both the
words of a noble and mild prince: but I find not any of these two parts in this
new president: but rather on the contrary, it seems that he has made
himself president, to cause those to die whom he has wronged, being but an
inferior judge, of whom I am one, and he which is unto him most odious. The
old proverb says, That the ignorance of the judge is oftentimes the cause of
the calamititie of them that are accused: O happy world wherein this Proverb
was invented! if then the judges did only offend through ignorance, although
the same be a fault great enough, what shall we alas say then in these days?
Wherein malice exceeds ignorance, and that for the most part they harbor both
together? Or that which is worst of al (if it may be lawful to speak the
truth) that as the number of the skillful increases, so the number of the good
decreaseth, and when that happens, there can no good be hoped for in the
Commonwealth: for there is nothing more dangerous in the world, then to have
such a man in authority, that is wise and wicked both together: because that
for every purpose, they have examples very ready to prove, and persuade their
wicked intentions to be lawful, like unto this man, who by his money is made
president: Wherefore I do rather submit my self unto any other judge, then
unto him whom I do utterly refuse.

The Answer.
IT is a common thing that such as are offenders do hate and slander their
judges, and the more just they are, the sooner do they falsely accuse them of
injustice: wherein they themselves do make their crime more apparent: for they
would have the judges such as they are, that they might pity those that are
like unto themselves: or at the least that they might be such as would be
corrupted, the which they cannot hope for in those that are just, wherefore
they are driven into despair, knowing that no punishment can hurt the
desperate man, as also that there shall not so much be inflicted upon them, as
they do deserve, and so they vomit out their poison against the righteous
judge: the which they do the more boldly, because they know well that for all
their speech he will be never a whit the more cruel unto them, but without any
stearnnesse or malice will judge them according to the laws, executing them
rather with mercy, then rigor; neither shall the wicked be able to move his
patience, for he which perceives himself to be blamed truly is angry, and
thinks to be revenged: but on the contrary, he that knows his conscience
clear, makes no account of slanderous speeches: or if he chance at the first
brunt to be angry, he does presently bridle the same his anger by reason,
rather desiring to remain such as he is, then by rage or passion to become
such a one as in ttuth he ought not to be. I am the same man which he affirms
me to be; so also is he nothing amended since I condemned him. I did never
bear him any ill will, neither did he ever give me occasion so to do: but
truly I have condemned him, but with less rigor then his deserts required, or
the laws commanded: but why should not I be odious unto him whom I have
condemned to die? Seeing that the Physicians and Chirurgions, who do employ
themselves to save men's lives, are oftentimes heartily lothed of them, when
either they touch their sores, or will not suffer them to follow their noisome
appetites, but do rather appoint them to take good and and wholesome things: the
child and the servant, yea and the wife, do for the most part hate the father,
the master, and the husband which chastise and rebuke them; how much more then
does the offender hate the judge which condemns him? Seeing he wrongfully
deemeth him to be the cause of the shame and punishment which he receives,
although himself be the occasion both of the one and the other evil. Whereas
he says, that I have bought my office to hurt him: there be some other proofs
then his tongue to verify the contrary; It is likewise apparently seen, how
he slandereth the most part of judges. It is a goodly matter indeed for an
offender to censure the deeds of judges, and to discourse of equity and
justice, as also to dispute whether offices may be sold, and whether officers
ought to be yearly chosen or not; you are brought hither to be judged, and you
will judge the judges: all this serves you to no end, bethink you if you can,
how you may clear your self, and afterward you may accuse us before those
that have power to redress it, and then there will be greater credit given to
your speech: but now you being condemned as an offender, no man that knows
what justice is, will believe but that you speak of others, as you your self
would do, if you had their authority: for the manner of those that have their
consciences seared, is such, that they are persuaded that the most part of men
are like unto themselves, wherefore let us come unto the point concerning you
and me: say only, have I proceeded against you otherwise then by an ordinary
and usual custom; Have I not given ear as well unto your excuses, or
iustifications, as unto your accusers? Have I posted over or rashly hudled up
your process? Are not you your self the occasion of your bringing hither so
late? If amongst so many I have been thought worthy of this estate, should I
have forsaken it for you? Or was it I alone, that did judge your process? The
counselors were not they there, as they are here in like sort? Was it I that
either did condemn you, or that must again condemn you? Are they not your
own deeds? Bethink you then to allege other reasons to more purpose for your
justification, or to submit you unto the discretion of the judges: praieng unto
God to give you the grace, patiently to abide the sentence which they shall
pronounce upon you, referring all unto the will of God, who by that means will
bestow that upon you which shall be more profitable for you: for he exalts
those that do heartily pray unto him. And lastly determine (if the worst do
happen) since you could not tell how to live well, to learn to die well, giving
thanks unto God for taking you out of this miserable world, before you have
further offended his divine Majesty: by that means your punishment together
with his mercy, shall be a full satisfaction for all your sins.

Declamation. 20.
Of the soldiers that would needs give over the wars after the death of their
General.

THe ancient military law is such, that every souldior makes his oath
particularly to follow his Ensign, the Ensign takes his oath to obey his
captain, the captains their Colonels, then all of them generally do swear the
same oath to the General of the army, (representing the person of the Prince)
to serve him truly and faithfully. Whereupon the General, or Lieutenant
General chances to die in a difficult and dangerous enterprise, and by his
death the soldiers hold an opinion that they are acquitted of their oath, and
that they may give over the enterprise. And thus one amongst them pleads for
all the rest:

THe oath of the souldior lasts so long as he that receives it, or he to
whom it is made lives, as we have done unto our General, who being dead, we
are no longer bound. We have sworn to serve the Prince under his conduct:
following him in all, and by all things, into all places, and against all men,
without any exception at all: the which we have done even until his death,
without any refusal, or contradiction, wherefore having performed our duty,
we are no longer bound: for we cannot follow him any further, except we should
die as he has done, which would be a thing as hurtful unto the Prince, to the
Commonwealth, and to us, as it would be profitable unto our enemies, and ill
willers, unto whom we ought to do no pleasure nor profit at all. And never
think that we are to be retained in service still, saying that the Prince will
send another General, or that his Lieutenant that is dead, represents his
person by order of prescription, until the Prince have confirmed him for
General: or that he has sent another: for such a reason is nothing worth,
because there are many that suffered themselves to be enroulled under the
deceassed General, which would neither march nor be enrolled under him whom
the Prince may send us, for such was the trust that we did repose in his valor
and wisdom, that nothing seemed impossible unto us, so long as we followed his
command, wherefore (considering that the Prince may well bestow the dignity and
estate, but that the discretion, wisdom, and valor of the man, comes from
above) we are discouraged to serve any longer, without knowing under whom: True
it is that there is none so good but there may be found another as good: but it
is very certain also, that an opinion is half an effect, and that for the
most part, it orders matters as it lists, without any other respect, and
especially when it is joined with some proof, or admirable experience, as was
that of our late noble General; which has so many times ben redoubled, who
by his example did not only increase the courages of those that were valiant,
but also made the very cowards bold and stout: so that it may very well be
said, that he has carried our hearts with him, or rather that he has bestowed
part of his greatness upon us al. Finally, the souldior that marches under
such a General whom he likes not, differs nothing from a slave, who is
bound to serve his master whether he be good or bad, which is the cause that
sildome they do any thing that is good. Wherefore is an oath made? But only
that the performance thereof may follow. Why are not we as free from our oath
by his decease, as we were bound by the same while he lived? How many did
march under Scipio, that would not follow Lelius? Although they were both of
one, and the same country, one as noble as another, and so great friends, as
the one might well be said to be the other: Nevertheless, for the most part
both of the Roman soldiers, and strangers, had rather have died with the
one, then lived with the other. By what means did Epaminundas and Pelopides
reform the military discipline of the Thebans? But only by the good opinion
which the men of war had of them. We do not say, that we would wholly refuse
to serve, and bear arms for our Prince; but we would feign know under whom we
should march: moreover, we would that it might be lawful for those that will
serve no longer to depart: and that those which would follow the future
commander, might be bound by a new oath.

The Answer.
WHat novelty is this? How dare you only think a treason so great? Not only
against your Prince and country: but against your selves, and the profession
of arms? Saying that you are acquitted of your oath, by the death of your
General: Who is then your General? Is not the prince? Is he dead? Or does he
ever die, but strait another succeeds him? It is not you that were sworn
unto the General that dead is, but I, that was his Lieutenant, who always in
his absence represented his person: If I had then this authority whilst he
lived, what a jest were it that I should lose it after his death? For when he
was absent, your oath bound you to me. Wherefore has the General a
Lieutenant? But only because (himself being subject to wounds, sickness, and
lastly to death) that he should maintain and keep the soldiers in obedience?
You cannot deny, but that so long as he lived, it was I to whom you were to
yield an account of your actions, but not for you to doubt of my authority:
for proof whereof, durst you refuse to follow me in any place where I would
lead you? Or to deny to do whatsoever I would command you? Durst you once
have demanded whether that which I would have you do, was the pleasure of the
General? Would I not have punished him with death, that should have disobeied
me? Or had I not the power by martial law of my self to put any disobedient
soldier to death? The Colonel, has not he the like authority over the
captains? And the captains over the others that command under them, even unto
the corporal, who has the same power over the private soldier? What do you
mean then to doubt of the authority of your General? Consider soldiers how
you have sworn to serve your prince, and follow your Ensign; which is meant
so far as you may be allowed by the prince: what will you then say? Seeing
your Ensigns are yet displaied, and your captains willing to serve? Do you
not know that you are entered in their muster-role, and that you must march
under them: They under the Campmaisters, the Campmaisters under the Colonels,
the Colonels under the General or his Lieutenant, and the General under the
prince if he be there, if he be not, then he represents his person? where is
then your understanding? Who has bewitched or seduced you, that you will thus
pervert order and military discipline? Is not this fellow a trim Orator, being
no less ignorant then ill advised: who thinking that he is the ablest and
wisest man amongst the rest, heapeth upon himself alone, all the dishonor and
punishment of this fault? he I say that was worthy to die before he was
borne, rather then he should have attempted to corrupt so many worthy and
valiant men. The noble Romans did sundry times commit the like faults,
especially under that great Scipio in Spain, who also caused only Albius
Calenus, Atrius Vmbrius, and others the inuenters of the mutenie to be punished
as capital offenders: and I do assure you that in their deed, they offended
not so much as you, for they had been unpaid of a long time, and it was
certainly thought, that Scipio their General was dead, which was the cause
that made the soldiers not only to mutenie, but also many cities and
Provinces to revolt, before they did mutenie. Whereupon Titus Liuius says,
That when the authors of the deed were punished in the midst of their
fellows, there was not heard so much as one only groan, seeing them beaten
stark naked with hollie wands, even until they were ready to give up the
ghost, and afterward their heads to be stricken off being half dead. Those men
did mutenie because they did see that the Provinces did rebel, but you, having
passed the worst of a dangerous enterprise, being upon the point of a victory,
the which your General (whom you so greatly bemone) has prepared for you
with the price of his life, would now give it over. Is it possible that the
reverence which you owe unto his memory, and the shame of your selves should
not be able to withhold you? the greatest love that can be showed unto any man
that is deceassed, is to immitate his deeds, and to observe his precepts: and
you will wholly estrange your selves from them, which does plainly declare,
that being unworthy of such a General, God has taken him away from you: or
rather he very well knowing your unworthiness was not desirous to live any
longer. I know not what else to say or think: what should be become of your
ancient valor, and martial reputation, which was wont to have more need of a
bridle to hold you back, then spurs to prick you forward. I am ashamed of your
shame, if it be true that you have charged this lost man to make this
discourse? But I cannot believe it: for the insolency is too great, so that it
cannot proceed from any other but from himself, and so consequently none
ought to bear the shame, and punishment thereof but he: Nevertheless, for the
good opinion which I have of you, I do put his life and death into your hands:
having so great confidence in your nobility, that you will not endure a man so
pernicious, to remain any longer amongst you, but if you shall suffer him, it
will be your own hurt more then ours, besides the shame and reproach which will
continue for ever, yea, and that after death: for there is no doubt but that
the Historiographers do as well record the faults of soldiers, as their
valiant acts, which afterward is oftentimes the cause, that their posterity
do fare the worse for it. Lastly, I have told some part of the reasons why
you cannot, much less ought not, to demand that which this wicked man has
proponed, without the consent of any of you, except it be of some such as are
like unto himself, which may well be termed the scum of the army, for in
such assemblies there are some bad, like as there is no corn without darnell,
no wine without lees, nor any fire without smoke: or else if your
ungraciousness be such (as I can hardly believe it is) that many are of that
mind, but rather that it is the lesser number, and consequently the worser
sort of all the army: I am of opinion, that such kind of people are not fit to
be kept; for such a riddance of them, will be profitable unto the whole army,
because a few well disciplined, are more worth then a great number of those
that are confused, disobedient, and without order. Let them come forth then
which would be discharged, whilst the captains are here with their muster
roles, to the end that at the same time also they may be commended and
rewarded, which shall remain constant in performing their duties: and by the
same means also to determine upon that which we are to write unto the Prince
and country of those, who so cowardly do forsake their leaders and companions.

You must note, that when the Generals do make these orations, there is none
so hardy that dare be the first, which will say he would be discharged: for
they fear least some of them may be already corrupted or won by the
captains. And by this means do they punish the authors of the mutenie, and
use some liberality toward the soldiers.

Declamation. 21.
Of Gamaliel, who having slain two of his brethren, because one of them had
ravished his wife, is accused by the others.

SAdoc and Gamaliel (amongst diverse others) were two brethren, the one
excelling in learning, the other in arms: Sadoc by Astrology, foretold unto
his brother, that if he married withont the consent of al his brethren, that
there should thereby happen a great mischief and dishonor unto al their
lineage. Gamaliel neglecting this advice, did marie in a strange country, which
done, shortly after he brought his wife (who was exceeding fair) home into his
own country, and obtaining of his brethren his part of the patrimony left by
his father, he lived thereupon peaceably. He being one day fallen sick, Sadoc
visited him so long, that he fell in love with his fair sister in law, and
found such means as he inioyed her company in a manner by force; she declared
the deed unto her husband, he both slew his brother Sadoc, and also another of
his brethren, who came to defend him: Whereupon the other brethren and kinsmen
being moved therewithal, did accuse him to the justice by these words:

THey truly are in a miserable case, who have no freindes that may give them
instruction and good counsel in there youth, because that youth without the advice of such as are grave and wise, are like a fierce horse without a bridle,
who overthrows both himself and his rider: but far more unhappy, and worthy
of all mishap is he, that dispiseth good counsel; and above all other they are
most unfortunate, who through such contempt (withour being themselves in any
fault) are partakers of such mischeife as thereby does happen, as we O
righteous Judges are, who not only for such an error have lost two of the best
of our brethren, but also are constrained through just disdain to demand the
death of the third, as unworthy both to be accounted any of our number, and
also such a one as deserves to live no longer in the world, having committed
so execrable a sin as to murder his own brethren: not that the fault inciteth
us to hate him, but because the sorrow for those whom he has slain, provoke
us to require justice: as well to bridle by this example other such like
insolent persons, as also that the rest of our parentage may be rid from the
fear of this murtherous man, spotted with the blood of his brethren. For it
commonly falls out, that such blood thirsty men as he is, cannot refrain
from shedding humane blood: as it appears by Abimilech the Hebrew, who slew
seventy of his brethren; and by Absalon, who having caused his brother Amon to
be slain, would have done the like unto his father: what shall I say of Ioab,
and others of the Jews? These are the virtues which a man learneth in following
the wars, who being used to murder, finding no enemies kills his friends,
and afterward his kindred and brethren as this has done: so did Romulus cause
his brother to be slain, and Alexander killed his foster brother Clitus, and
others his good friends and servants. Aso Epaminundas the Thebane, Manlius
Torquatus, and Aulus Posthumous Tubero, being Romans, slew their sons (more
worthy to live then they) under the coulor of observing military discipline.
The like did Brutus being in exile, and Cassius the Ensign of Crassus, saying
that their sons conspired against them: the like did Artaxerxes Mnenon King
of Persia. Likewise the great Constantine caused his son and his brother in
law to die, without showing a reason wherefore: The King of Iotara slew all his
sons except one, because he should be his only heir: Authi Coelio
Mithridates, a noble warrior, slew his mother, brother, and many of his
children: Herod put three of his children to death: Finally, this desire of
murdering proceeds from the use thereof, by the which Etheocles, Polinices,
Tideus, Polites, Antiochus, Aristobulus, and an infinite number of others, who
after they had been famous warriors, became worse then hangmen: but who will
spare him, that for so small a hire, or for a vaineglory to be accounted
warlike, hazardeth, or rather sells his own life? Yea, and for the most part
his soul, which life he ought not to bestow but only for the safeguard and
defense of his country and family: how can they deserve to enjoy life, or to
be accounted off amongst men, who live to no other end but to murder them: and
which do not only delight in making of widows, and orphants, but also would
willingly make their own wives and children in the like case, (though with the
price of their lives) for the great pleasure they have, to be accounted cruel:
such a one this our brother (but unworthy that name) is and ever has been:
whereby we do plainly perceive, that like as virtues are linked together, so
do vices follow one another: for from his youth he has despised the good
counsel both of all his kindred, and also of his brother whom he has
afterward slain, through the report of a woman: and what woman? Forsooth a
stranger: who being enamoured of a stranger, and marrying with him, cared not
to forsake her country and kindred to follow him hither, where (it may be)
perceiving that she was not sufficiently made of to her own liking, and
especially of him who foresaw the mischief that should happen by her, did
accuse him unto her husband, knowing him to be as foolish, and light of
belief, as prone unto anger and murder. How many are there that do
themselves provoke men unto adultrie; But when they see that they are refused
by them, they do afterward complain that they would have forced them? The
wife of Putiphar, of Theseus, and of others, do very well witness the same:
what assurance have we of the chastity or goodness of this woman, that she
has not done the like? Hardly may a woman be forced which makes any
resistance; and if at the least she want strength to defend her self, she
cannot lack a tongue nor a shrill voice to cry out, being a thing so incident
unto their sex: but although she had been forced indeed, was not the law
sufficient to have punished the same? Should not we then have been as ready as
we are now, to accuse the offender? But forasmuch as truth ingendreth hatred,
he having found an occasion (as he thought) to offer violence unto his brother,
was in sooth very loath to lose the same: consider then, O you judges, if such
faults be not rigorously punished, that women being naturally given to revenge,
and men over easy to believe them, will commit a thousand mischiefs. Lastly,
it cannot be denied, but that it is as great an injustice to pardon an
offender, as to condemn an innocent, and that even as justice without mercy
is cruelty, so also is clemency without Justice iniquity: wherefore we are
certain that you will judge rightly, as the law commands, and conscience and
honor does bind you.

The Answer of Gamaliel.
IN effect these my brethren (if such they may be termed, purchasing my death)
do very well show that another man's misfortune is light unto them which feel
it not, and every one preaches patience and temperance in other men's matters,
as these do, who would persuade me that this exercrable offense should not
once have provoked me to revenge; the which it has not done, but rather unto a
just punishment of the malefactor: for that is called revenge, which is done
wittingly, but that is punishment which is enforced through a most just cause
of disdain or anger. Some may say that every punishment ought to be done with
a settled mind, without choler, for fear of being over rigorous, I do confess
it ought: but who can also deny that the first motions of anger are not in our
own power? Wherefore I would, and it were also reasonable, that these my over
sharp accusers had a true feeling of the wrong done unto me, and then they
would judge more modestly of their brother, who has done that which they ought
to desire, that is; rooted out from amongst them a supersticious Divine, not
only hurtful to his friends, but unto all the Commonwealth: Is it not too
apparent that such people are puffed up with ambition, that they had rather see
the death of a million of men, then to suffer that by any it should be known,
that they have failed one jot in their fond diuinations? As he of Milan did,
who having foretold that at a certain time he should perish by iron, (not
finding any man that would kill him, although he gave them diverse occasions)
slew himself to verify his prophecy: so this my dead brother, having
foretold that by this my marriage a great mischance should happen unto all our
race, had rather be the cause thereof himself, (not seeing any likelihood
therein) then to be esteemed unskillful in his art, which is especially
forbidden both by divine and humane laws. And then you say that you have lost
the best of your brethren, me thinks that if he were the best, then the rest
should be nothing worth at all; and you ought not to say that a just cause of
disdain constrains you to require the death of the third, but rather an
iniust hatred; for were it not so, from whence could such an inuectiue proceed,
to animate the judges against me? Had it not ben sufficient for you only to
have said, this man here has slain our two brethren for this and this cause,
whereupon we demand justice? You say that you are partakers of the misfortunes
of my marriage, why do you not rather say of the insolency, wickedness, and
adultery of Sadoc? As also that I am unworthy to be reckoned amongst your
brethren; truly he never deserved to be accounted. If offenders ought to be
punished for an example, I have not done so bad as you say, in punishing him
suddenly: For who was a more notorious offender then he? You say that those
which follow arms do all become wicked men: Abraham, Moises, Joshua, and a
number of others because they were valiant in arms, were they the less
righteous? Moreover the multitude of those which you allege that have slain
their kindred, makes more for my commendation, then my condemnation: for you
shall find that the most part of them had less cause to do the same then I.
Furthermore I cannot believe, that either money, or desire of vainglory draws
men unto the wars, but rather a desire to maintain lawful and just quarrels,
although every General affirms it to be his own. Finally, the wars has been
in all ages: Saint John baptized the soldiers without forbidding them to use
the same art: yea God has many times commanded his people to use it: so that
it may be justly proved that wars is rather an occasion of virtue then vice.
Concerning the report of my wife, this is not the first time that women have been believed in the like case: wherefore seeing neither you nor I have or can
find any reproach in mine that may blemish her honor, she is as well to be
believed as othets; and if as you say a woman cannot be forced, then have
diverse heretofore ben wrongfully condemned for the like offense. Truly the law
had been sufficient to have punished Sadoc, but if I had had such patience as
was requisite, what assurance should I have had that he would either have come
before the justices, or else if he had chanced into their hands, that you would
not all have taken his part, as you are now against me? And as you say, it is
injustice to pardon an offender, so is it justice to punish a wicked man, as I
have done: wherefore I have not offended, but only in that being justly stirred
up to anger, I have defrauded the judges of their authority, of whom humbly
beseeching pardon for this fault, I do wholly submit my self unto their
mercy, beseeching them also to defend me from your malice.

Declamation. 22.
Of him who after he had had his pleasure of a maid, would have forsaken her,
to have married her sister.

A Young Gentleman having had a quarrel a long time with a neighbor of his,
made an agreement with him, upon a condition that the said neighbor should
give him leave to choose one of his three daughters in marriage, and allow him
the term of one year to make his choice: so that under this coulor, being
familiar with them all, he got the eldest of them with child, afterward he
would have chosen the second, whereunto the neighbor opposed himself, saying:

THou ungracious man, how dare thou imagine such a wickedness? Or once behold
me in the face, having ben so treacherous and mischievous to abuse that
familiarity, which was granted unto thee in sign of reconciliation, under the
which thou have more harmed me in protesting thy self to be my friend, then
all thy weak forces had been able to hurt me if thou had continued my mortal
enemy. O God is it possible that men may be so wicked, That what they cannot
do by force, they accomplish under the cloak of an honest friendship? but why
say I freindship, When that is the greatest benefit that God has given for the
use of man, without the which, this life should be full of bitterness and
sorrow? But let us come unto the matter: did not you make your choice, when you
had carnal copulation with my daughter? Is not that the consummation of
marriage? Truly yes, they were all three promised unto you, but in lying with
this you have had your choice, and it is not very likely that she would
otherwise have consented thereunto; but you breaking promise with her, would by
that means be revenged of me for all former enemities: but if it be so, that an
ancient hatred prevails more with you then a new friendship? I do beseech
you most worthy judges, that he may be punished, which has suborned, seduced,
and abused her that is his wives sister, for by our agreement, he is bound to
take one of the three: moreover let him be punished, which has so grievously
offended his father in law, his mother in law, and his sisters in law, and
finally (contemning laws and all honesty) has slandered the Commonwealth.

The Answer.
I Have not yet chosen at all, but in trying which of your daughters should
deserve to be my wife, it fell out, that this proved with child, I knew not by
whom; which was sufficient to have made me stand in doubt of all the rest:
Nevertheless, because I would not seem to break our league, I suddenly made
choice of the second, for feareleast as much might happen unto her, seeing you
have so badly kept the first: but why do I speak of keeping, seeing the
female sex are so hardly to be kept. If you will not give me your daughter, let
us remain friends, without being kinsmen? For a true friendship is more
worth, then a kindred, which is made by force or compulsion: wherefore I would
not in any sort violate the use thereof as you accuse me, but would rather be
partaker of your daughters shame in marrying with her sister, then to be once
suspected to be the breaker of our friendship. I cannot hinder your daughter to
say what she thinks good, both to excuse her shame, and to be made a wife, but
for all that I am not bound to believe her against my conscience, nor to make
amends for another man's fault to my loss and dishonor. You do seem in your
whole accusation against me, not to be well advised, and I do verily believe,
that choler (which is an enemy to good counsel) is that which chiefly
troubles you; whereby you speak very unfitly to the purpose, for although it
were so, that I had gotten your daughter with child (the which I deny, and she
can never prove) do you think that I would buy of her by marriage, that which
she has already given me, because she would have her share of the pleasure?
Or do you think me so mad, that I would wed her, whom I should evermore
suspect to play the wanton? For sildome or never does a woman abandon her
honor unto one man alone, and she that cannot keep it before she has tasted
the sweetness of the sport, will never keep it after she has been pampered
therein. But where do you find, that the dalliance of lovers, is the
contracting of marriage? If it were so, then must some men needs marry more
then fifty women, so ready are they to yield, yea and sometimes to require
the same. Lastly, I deny, that mine intention was ever to offend you; and
sufficient proof thereof, is the desire that I have to satisfy you, not
refusing her for my sister, which has so much forgotten her self, as not only
to lose her honest reputation, but also wrongfullie to accuse me: and because I
will not be over tedious, I put it unto your discretion, either to let me choose
or to choose your self, whether you will have me to be your son in law or no,
bethink you well then of the matter, for I will not make the first motion
therein.

Declamation. 23.
Of the part of a house which was to be pulled down, for the offense of one
that dwelled therein, whereupon another dwelling in the same house, was opposite.

TWo men were owners together of one house, one of them dwelled in the lower
part, and the other in the higher part thereof: he which dwelt beneath
committed an offense, for the which the law commanded that his dwelling should
be pulled down: but he which dwelled above, withstood it, saying:

TRue it is that this house is ours in common, and for his part he dwelt in the
lower part thereof, but what have I to do with his fault, that for the same my
dwelling ought to be harmed, seeing that I have not offended the law in any
sort? What is he that does not very well understand, that in pulling down the
nether part of an house, the upper part thereof falls of it self, as being
without foundation, or an unprofitable mansion? I will not disobey the law, the
which although it be to be observed, yet is it not for all that to be used with
the extremest rigor, for the text of the most part of the law is brief, but
it may be well enlarged by the gloses, and those which tend more unto pity
then rigor, ought to be allowed, and especially in favor of them which are
not faulty, in hurting of whom it is mere injustice; which is a thing more
injurious, then not to punish the offender at all: for if it be lawful to
prefer mercy before justice, how much more then ought we to use clemency
rather then cruelty; As this would be, to take away the dwelling place from a
poor innocent family such as mine is? It must be considered that this law was
made for strong houses, wherein the malefactors might make resistance, but
throwing down such an house as is only fit for dwelling, you not only wrong
me and mine, but also the neighbors of the whole street, yea and the whole
city besides, in leaving a void place in a chief street, amongst so many
houses, the which will serve but for a lurking place for thieves, and other
wicked people that walk by night: wherefore if the extremest rigor must be
shown, that a part of the house must be pulled down, let it be the uppermost
part, and leave the lower room for a recompense unto me; although it be
somewhat to my prejudice, to change the wholsomest part for that which is cold
and moist: moreover to speak the truth, it cannot be well said, which part was
justly his, seeing the house fell in partition, or in common unto us both alike.
It is true also that the same part which you will pull down, fell unto him by
lot, and so did mine likewise unto me, seeing then that the offender cannot be
harmed, except he that is innocent be hurt, it were better either to spare the
one for the others sake, rather then to hurt him that never offended; or at the
least to do as I have said, and make a change, that the faultlesse be not
altogether undone.

The Attorney General contradicts him, thus.
IT seems in a manner that your speech has some likelihood of reason, but
being thoroughly well considered, it has none at all: for it is necessary, that
justice (which is a benefit for the Commonwealth) should take place, all
particular profit or dommage set apart, for even as you say, that this house
fell unto you both by lot, so the same lot willed that his part should be the
lower room, and not the upper: the law commands not his part alone, but that
his dwelling place should be raced down, the which ought to take place, yea
although his dwelling had been hired, to warn those that be landlords not to
let their houses but unto those that they know to be honest men: and it was not
in vain, when a Citizen of Rome causing the sale of his house to be cried
through the city, he made it to be published, that amongst other good
properties which was belonging unto it, there was good neighbors round about
it; which does manifestly prove, that a man may often receive hurt by his
neighbors, how much more then by him that dwells in the same house with him.
In thinking to save part of your ability, you would blemish your whole honor,
for in pulling down your habitation, and letting the offenders stand whole, it
will be thought that you have committed the crime, and that he is innocent,
because the same is done as much for a perpetual memory and reproach of the
offense, as for an example to others: and the law was ordained for the strong
houses no more then it was for those that were weak, whose loss will be a
less hurt unto the Commonwealth. Moreover, where the greater number is, there
do such faults happen the oftener, as also because the common people are less
afraid then the Noble, to be convinced of crime; for as much as the fall of the
great, cannot choose but be great, and therefore the more to be feared, and
especially when it concerns the loss of honor, which is so hardly to be
gotten, but being once lost, sildome or never may it be recovered. The
augmenting of the gloses of the law cannot redound unto the prejudice of
justice, which is to correct or punish the wicked without any respect at all:
if you have nothing to do with the fault of the offender, no more also has
justice to do with the loss which you sustain for dwelling so near unto
him, and you must not say that this void place shall serve for a lurking hole
for thieves and such wicked people as walk by night, for so long as justice
shall be truly administered, the number of such kind of people will be but
small. But why do you not as well say that this place will serve for a terror
unto those which would commit the like offenses, seeing the token that justice
has here left for the same: and this must be especially remembered, that there
is no other bridle to restrain the wicked, then the inviolable execution of
the laws, yea, it is the chiefest work of mercy to punish the wicked with
rigor, because that by the punishment of one, an hundred are terrified:
wherefore we must not for some little particular loss, neglect the common
good, and the rather, because that for your loss you may seek your remedy
upon the rest of his goods: but should it be otherwise, yet ought you to
prefer justice, which is immortal (as being the daughter of God) before a
little temporal goods.

Declamation. 24.
Of him who having lien with his bondwoman, would neither manumise her, nor
consent that her son should be sold.

THe law in times past was such, that if any man did lie with his bondwoman, he
was inioined to manumise or make her free. Whereupon it happened that a
certain man begot his bondwoman with child, he being called before the
Justice, did swear that he did not lie with her; she being in travel with
her child, swore he did: the judge the better to sift out the truth and to be
assured whether the child were his, commanded that he should be sold for a
slave, (the man lying in prison for debt) unto the which he would in no sort
agree. Whereupon the judge presumed that he was the father of the child, and
condemned him to manumise the mother. The man appealeth saying:

IT is manifestly to be seen, that the judge is more carried away with passion,
then guided by justice, for first he would have me to make my bondwoman free,
and yet she never requested me to do it, and next he has constrained me to
swear, thereby to exempt me from doing it, but not content therewith, having
bethought himself upon the speech of her being in travail of childbirth (and
it may be, incited by himself) would that there should be more credit given
unto the oath of a bondwoman, then unto his, that is a Citizen free born, and
owner of the bondwoman: who doubts that she (seeing her self favored of the
judge) will not take an occasion to swear an untroth, to gain her freedom?
But must he believe her for all that? When a slave is taken for an offense, if
he says his master is partaker with him therein, is he to be believed? Do we
not know that every slave hates his master? But the passion of the judge is
very manifest in this, that amongst all the moveable goods which I have, he
would needs cause this poor child to be sold, who as yet cannot speak: I
gainsaying so great a cruelty, he would infer that I declare by the same
that he is my son; the which is not true: but I am not so hard hearted,
neither do I hate the silly creature (born within my house) so extremely, as
I can without compassion see him separated from his mother so young, which is
almost enough to kill him; but what a judge are you, That in steed of
exercising mercy, will hinder others from using it? Whereby a man may easily
know how unworthy you are to execute the office of a judge, seeing that
justice and pity ought to be joined together as the body and soul, which
being separated one from another, the body dies: even so without mercy,
justice dies: and as the dead body by corruption is turned unto earth, so is
justice without mercy changed into cruelty. How long did the city of Rome
flourish, being grounded upon pity? When in her beginning she received al
nations, which had elsewhere no place of abode? And yet you would condemn me,
because I embrace pity in my heart, which will never enter into yours;
otherwise you would comfort me being so miserable a prisoner as I am: but to
increase the afliction of the afflicted, you would not only cause that to be
sold which he loves, but also would have him manumise his only bondwoman,
from whom he might reap some profit by her service. Yet if at the least you
had willed the mother and the child to be sold both together, your cruelty
then should not seem so manifest; but like unto Herod, you have a desire only
to hurt the innocent and the prisoner: notwithstanding, I have so great
confidence in the equity of those who are more righteous the^ you, that (they
having just pity of the afflicted, and innocent) will condemn your cruelty.

The Answer.
Were you so honest a man as you should be, you might both be free from this
punishment, and I eased of that travel which you have put me unto: but how
would you be esteemed just and pitiful, seeing that you your self do give
men occasion not to think you so? showing your self to be either more
slanderous then any other, or else truly very miserable? Do you not know
that it is the greatest virtue that can be in the world, for a man to bridle
his tongue, and that it oftentimes hurts his own master more then does his
enemies sword? Wherefore I stand in doubt whether your malice or ignorance is
greater, but the one being never without the other, I will only say that you
show them both at once, attributing that in me to passion, which can be no
less the^ prudence: truly he were unworthy to be a judge, that knew not how
to discover the malice of offenders, for as much is that judge to be esteemed
which is without wisdom, as a Commonwealth without laws, a Prince without
faith, a physician without experience, a souldior without valor, and a Merchant
without credit; who being such, they do not fall themselves alone, but they
are the cause of the overthrow of a great number. But tell us what was the
cause that Solomon judged so rightly, but only wisdom? Even so I without
the same should never have known your iniquity, and so consequently I should
never have found out a just cause to condemn you: for it is very manifest,
that covetousness never judges any thing to be unlawful, because it has no
place but amongst such as are wicked, which is it that caused you to think it
lawful to commit whoredom with your bondwoman, then to deny the fact, and to
forswear your self, because you would not make her free, desiring rather to
prejudice the law, then to hinder your profit; and afterward being cast in
prison for yout faults, you would yet further defraud your creditors, in not
consenting to the sale of him, who (if he be not your son) stands you in no
stead, but to burden you with a further charge: and especially hindering his
mother, he is the cause that she cannot apply her business to get your living
and her own, so that they do both help to consume and wast that little which
remains to pay the creditors, or that which you have hidden to deceive them.
If he be not your son, why would you keep him? To serve for a witness of
your servants shame? Do you not know that he which cleaves unto vices, makes
them his own? It is no charity to keep a child to be your slave, and less
charity is it, not to consent to have him sold to pay your debts. Touching
your demand, why I do not sell your other goods? I answer, there is time
enough, but I would first begin with that which was least profitable unto you,
and yet of great charge; and if you allow not this reason, I did it to make the
truth known unto others as well as to me it is, that he is your child; wherein
I do sufficiently declare, that I do not only join mercy with justice, but
also that I do further thereunto ad wisdom, to make up the number more
perfect; for without it justice seems to be rigor, and mercy no better then
folly: for what greater foolishness can there be, then to pity such a one
as hurts others? as this infant hurts you and your creditors; therefore if
he be not your son let him be sold, and if you have begotten him, make his
mother free. Whereupon do you appeal? Because I have not likewise condemned
you for perjury? The same may yet be done all in good time, the deed being
proved. You do also say, that it were better to sell the mother and the child
together, it would be more indeed the child's profit: but it must be considered
that many would willingly have a child in their house to make them some
sport, and afterward to do them some service, which would not be troubled
with a whore, that can be nothing but a slander, and an ill example for all
their household. For all these foresaid reasons, it may be gathered that I have
no desire either to harm the innocent, or to hurt the afflicted, but mine
intention is to have the father acknowledge his child, and that the mother
should be recompensed as reason requires.

Declamation. 25.
Of a General who after he had lost the battle, sent to the Prince to know
if he should give the battle.

A King sent his Lieutenant General to the wars, with an express charge not
to give any General battle without he did first advertise his Majesty
thereof. It happened that occasion offered such an advantage, that the said
Lieutenant (notwithstanding the Kings commandment) did fight a battle: but
as the wars are casual, and that oftentimes fortune crosses the virtuous, so
he lost the said battle, and presently afterward he sent a post unto the
king to tell him that such an occasion was offered unto him to give the
battle, as was greatly unto his advantage, and declared such apparent
reasons, as the Prince appointed that the battle should be given, then the
messenger said: If it like your Majesty the battle has been given with all
such order and policy as was requisite, notwithstanding we have lost the
field: The King being exceeding angry, caused the messenger to be hanged, and
the Lieutenant General to be taken and condemned him to death, who appealed,
defending his cause thus:

IN vain do Princes send those unto the wars, whose hands they keep tied,
and truly it may be said that I was sent in such sort: Nevertheless, seeing
the likelihood of a profitable victory, to finish the wars to the great honor
and commodity of my Prince and country, the band of his commandment unloosed
of it self, and leaving me at my liberty, I did my best, although fortune
enemy to virtue so wrought against us, as the effect proved not according to
the likelihood of the deed, and the desire of the doer, but what shall I say?
That I can do what men may do only, fight a battle, but God alone must give
the victory: The which oftentimes either he delaieth or suffers it wholly
to be lost for the sins of the people, when God sees that their pride and
other vices are not yet left: moreover, it happens many times that God will
punish the insolency of the soldiers, using the enemies as instruments of his
justice; Was not the battle lost by the children of Israel before Hai, only
for the theft of Achan? Was not also the whole host troubled, and Ionathas in
danger of death because he had tasted a little honey? With a number of other
examples which I ouerpasse because I will not be tedious. Alas how hard are
men's actions to be effected, without his great danger that imploieth himself
therein? And principally when the judgment of the performance thereof
depends upon one man's voice only? Wherefore O Prince I say, that you alone
cannot judge me, much less condemn me, except you do it of your own
absolute authority, which undoubtedly were manifest tirannie, the which I
think you do very much abhor: considering that you alone cannot be a head
without members, and that in this deed of mine the members are also
interressed, that is to say, if I have offended, they are to punish me, and not
having offended, they ought to preserve me, to perform some good service: for
it is a matter of no small importance for them to save or lose such a man, whom
you have thought worthy to be the only General of your wars: and I doubt
whether you alone may make a decree that I shall not fight, except also you
your self may command me to do it: for seeing the loss is more hurtful unto
the people, then to the Prince, wherefore ought he to be the only judge of a
deed, wherein the General profit, or loss of the comminaltie consists? For
be it loss or gain, the people must maintain the Princes estate, and
especially when they lose most, then are they most of all burdened with
imposts and lendings, to resist the enemy, and to satisfy the Princes
pleasure: whereupon it may be inferred that if I have offended, it is more to
the prejudice of the people then the Prince: notwithstanding I am content to
submit my self unto their judgment, trusting that they will have no less
respect to the services which heretofore I have done, and to those which
hereafter I may yet do, then unto the good meaning that I had to perform this
last service well, although God (it may be for a greater good) would not suffer
me to have the victory, being as likely as it was desired.

The Princes Answer.
YOur excuse aggrauateth your crime, saying that you did your duty, and yet
despised his commandment, whose mind therein you knew not. Did you know the
reason why he forbad you to fight? Think you that he was altogether ignorant
what the enemies were able to do; and that they might be overcome rather by
temporising then by any stroke striking? Do you think your self wiser then
that great Fabius, who rather desired to be counted a coward, then to lose the
Roman Citizens, who in that sort temporising with great patience, was in the
end the conqueror of that furious Hanniball. Do you not know, that before a
man can command, he must know how to obey? the which you had no desire to do;
You would willingly have the soldiers obey you in doing badlie, and you would
not obey the Pirince in doing well, what would they say of you, if they were
living? M. Manlius Torquatus, Aulus Posthumus Tubero, and Epaminundas, they
caused their own sons to die for transgressing, nay, rather for fighting
against their commandment, yet had they the victory; O how happy was that
world then, when nothing was impossible unto those warriors so well
disciplined! It is always the custom of the rash and brainesicke men, to
attribute their faults to the will of God, to fortune, to the sin of the
people, Prince, or soldiers, as you do; forgetting your own, together with
your disobedience, which being displeasing both to God and men, can bring forth
nothing that good is: then you mocking the Prince after the battle is lost,
do demand whether you shall fight it, alleging so many reasons (it may be
forged) that it were impossible to lose it: and that which is worst, heaping
sin upon sin, you bring the princes authority in question, and stir up the
people against him, but your own reasons do confound you, for do not all the
members obey the head? The head being grieved, are not all the members pained?
Yea, when many members are lost, the head still remains, and takes care to
preserve the rest, as hitherto I both have, and will still preserve my people
(God willing) who are not so impudent as to desire to take an account of your
faults, knowing well, that as that which concerns the soul is referred unto
the divine, the diseases of the body to the physician, and controversies for
goods to the justice, so are matters of wars and the government thereof
referred to the prince: but how can you do them any good service, seeing that
you have done your best to overthrow the^, for your own pleasure? Truly I
should have thought you alone worthy to be my Lieutenant General, if you had
known how to obey me: but not esteeming me for your Prince you cannot be my
Lieutenant. Do you not know that in all affairs faults are not tolerable? But
especially in the wars, where there needs but one to overthrow all, they
are most hurtful: where have you ever seen that it is lawful for an offender
to change, or alter the laws, much more then is it for him to diminish or
bring in question the authority of your Prince? But what would not you have been bold to attempt if you had been victor? Surely nothing, but even to have
attempted to make your self King. Finally, the people may remember both the
good and bad services that you have done, and those which you may yet perform:
but as for me I do award him to be punished, who in stead of demanding mercy
and pardon for his offense, will procure a second destruction, in changing of
ancient customs, whereby the people have been all hither happily governed,
and preserved: for there was never any alteration of laws or customs without
bringing a calamity upon that land wherein they were begun.

Declamation 26.
Of those who were executed, because they confessed that they had murdered a
man, afterward it was found that they were guiltles.

A Judge (upon some likelihood) caused two men suspected of murder to be
racked: they confess the fact, and are put to death. Some certain time after
their execution, he which was supposed to be murdered returned home: whereupon
the kinsmen of those that were executed accused the judge, saying:

Alas how miserable is that Commonwealth, where those that ought to
administer justice, and defend the innocents, do (in steed of protecting them
from danger) put them to a most shameful death: which truly proceeds by the
admitting of cruel and bloody men to the seat of justice: who besides their
wicked nature, being accustomed to this vice, would make us to believe that
justice (which ought to be the twinne sister unto mercy) consists in nothing
but in barbarous cruelty: such a man is this our worthy judge, who under the
coulor of I know not what likelihood, because he would not seem to be idle,
has tortured and tormented two poor innocents in such sort, that to escape
from his hands, they have thought it a less hurt, to die by the hands of the
hangman, then to remain any more at the discretion of such a judge. Surely
it were better to pardon two malefactors, then to put to death one innocent;
but this man has rather cause two innocents to die, then he himself would not
be an offender. The ioints of every righteous judge ought to tremble, the hairs
of his head to stand upright for fear, yea, and the heart to faint when he
thinks, that by the authority of his voice (although never so just) one like
unto himself, (nay more) resembling the image of God, should be put to death?
Seeing the fault for which he dies cannot be recompensed; wherefore Nero (who
was accounted a monster for cruelty) had yet a kind of horror, when he signed
any sentence of death. You will say that they are put to death to terrify
others that are wickedlie minded. I confess it, but the same ought to be done
unto offenders. Alas, if this judge had been as careful to have sifted out
the truth (which at the last by time is now brought to light) as he has been
cruel to torment, and ready to execute these poor innocents, neither had they
died so shamefullie, nor he lived to have been charged for the crime of their
death: but who may henceforth believe that the very wicked ones can be
rightly judged, when the good have been so wilfully cast away? Do so much
then O you rightful judges, that this unjust judge may be no more neither of
your number, nor of the number of men, unless you will all be partakers both
of his crime and of his dishonor.

The Answer.
OF a truth that Commonwealth is miserable, where the judges are such as you
say: and most happy where they do in no sort swerve from the laws and
customs long since allowed of, which I have wholly observed and kept: For the
law commands, and the custom is, that every man suspected of crime, whereof
there is a very apparent and sufficient likelihood, should be put unto the
rack, although the judge were neuar so well persuaded of his innocence: and
confessing the same both upon the rack, and when he is taken off, that then he
should be punished: surely if I have otherwise proceeded, I am faulty; but
having not done amiss, I accuse you for wronging me, and require that you make
me amends for dishonouring me: consider that it is in a manner an offense for
any man to live so loselie as that he may be suspected to be a malefactor;
such have your kinsmen ben, for they were not only suspected of me, but
generally of all men, and it may be of your selves, for you never offered to
approve their innocence, until after their death: They should have taken heed
that they might not have been suspected. In Athens and Rome, although Aristides
and Cato had been accused of murder, yet neither the judges nor the people
would ever have believed it, so much is the opinion of a man his sincerity
able to do; which good opinion was never had of your kinsmen: moreover, they
should not have confessed the fact with their own mouths, know you not that the
judge must not be partial on neither side? But he must judge according to the
witness of others, and the prisoners own confession* complain then upon
those who have brought in such sufficient proof as caused them to be racked,
complain also upon their impatience and cowardlinesse, in that they would not
endure the torture of the rack, rather then die upon the gallows. I know well
enough what regard is to be had before we pronounce the sentence of death
against any man: As concerning Nero it is well known that it was but
hypocrisy in him, although he seemed to have a certain horror when he signed
the sentence of any condemned man, for afterward it was apparently seen,
that he caused many innocents and men of worth to die, and I verily believe
that he would have made no difficulty at al, unless the party condemned had
been a notable wicked fellow, for every one do love such as are like unto
themselves. I did not prolong the execution, because I would not increase the
affliction of the miserable by long imprisonment, as all judges do who are not
subject to corruption, for the prolonging of a malefactors life is both irksome
and hurtful unto him. To conclude, let their process be thoroughly examined,
and if I have done any injustice I do submit my self to be punished, if not,
then I appoint these my accusers to be so served.

Declamation. 27.
Of him that falling down from the top of his house slew another man, against
whom the son of the slain man demands justice.

IT happened that in the country of the Switzers a certain countrieman being
got upon the top of his house to see what reparation was wanting, fell down by
mischance upon another man who happened to walk under the same house, and with
his fall he slew him, but himself escaped. The son of the dead man caused the
other to be imprisoned, and required that he might be put to death according to
the law, which says, that every mankiller ought to die, and he would not take
any other amends or satisfaction: the judge of that place seeing his most
cruel obstinacy gave sentence, that the said plaintiff should ascend up to
the top of the same house, and throwing himself down upon the defendant,
should kill him if he could. The plaintiff appealing before the Seignorie of
Berne says.

MY lords I beseech you to consider what men our judges are, who in steed of
doing justice for the death of one of your subjects, will further ad thereunto
the death of another, or at the least compel him with the danger of his life
to be the executioner of himself, or of another, or it may be of both twain
together, which is a thing most abominable, and against all reason. Who has
ever heard that the punishment of a murderer has been executed in this sort?
And that there was ever any honest man that on a sudden was commanded to
play the hangman and to perform an execution so strange? They say that he fell
down by mischance: as for me I think that he did willingly throw himself
down upon malice, for else he would at the least have given warning unto all
men (as his duty was) that he meant to go up to the top of his house, that
they might have taken heed of any inconvenience that might chance as well by
the falling of the tiles, as of the like of this that now is happened: but if
it were true that he fell by mischance, why should not he have been slain as
well as my father? Consider my lords that the malice of men was never so great
as at this day it is, and that they deui^e many means how they may hurt one
another: and especially those in whom malice is rooted, which is never shown
but when it may do most hurt.

The Answer.
COnsider my Lords the malice together with the ignorance of this man, who
heaping mischief upon mischief, would make of one mischance twain. Is it not
enough that one honest man be dead, But that another must against reason die
also? Must the Commonwealth be in such sort maintained? Were it not better that
this man should be preserved to help to defend the country if need were? Do
we not know that sometimes one man is more worth then an hundred? Is not he of
the same lump as they were, who in times past, by their valiant deeds in
arms, were able to win that liberty which we do now enjoy? (Thanks be to
God, and to the inviolable justice of this most noble Senate) Suffer not then my
lords the will of this foolish malicious man to be fulfilled, unto whom the
defendant has offered such a satisfaction as is more then reasonable: but he
being void of all reason, has by his most grievous obstinacy constrained us
to give this sentence, which was no less absurd then his request unreasonable,
being very sure that he would never effect it: and for answer unto his
frivolous assertions, we will only say that the defendant had occasion to be
upon his house top, and the father of the plantife had nothing to do beneath,
or before the same: not that the other nevertheless had any desire to hurt
him, but is extremely sorry for it, neither is it likely (although he had
borne him never so ill will) that he durst have hazarded his own life in that
sort, but he would rather have thrown a tile at al adventures and afterward
have come down on the other side saying that he did it not. Lastly, the
malice and envy wherewith he would slander another, is too apparent in
himself; Wherefore it may please you (most merciful lords) to give such
judgment as this your subject being innocent, may be preserved to do his
country some service.

Declamation. 28.
Of him that caused his wives chastity to be tempted, that thereby he might
have some cause to put her away.

A Certain man caused his wives chastity to be tempted by his servant, that
was hoth fair and young, who was many times so importunate with her, that at
the length her husband (being hidden in the garden) did hear how she promised
unto her fained lover, that she would yield unto his desire, the first time
that her said husband should ride into the country. Whereupon he accused her
to be an adulteress, and would have put her away, saying:

NOt in vain does Solomon say, that a virtuous woman is a crown unto her
husband, but she that behaueth her self dishonestly is a corruption in his
bones: Alas I did suppose that I had had a virtuous wife, but she proves
quite contrary, wherefore I am constrained to forsake her, although the wife
ought to be no other, then the better part of the husband so long as she is
known to be honest, but if she be otherwise, reason wills him to make no
longer account of her, for marriage being a figure of God and his church, it
ought to be altogether pure and immaculat: moreover the man and the woman by
this means ought to be as the soul and body, which cannot be separated but by
death: but finally I know to my great discredit, that he which takes a wife
is assured of a great danger, seeing that mine without any occasion (having
whatsoever a woman of her degree might desire) has given her self over unto
such a one as was even but my servant: what should not then some noble or
worthy man have obtained at her hands if he had likewise tried her: but she
not being courted by any other, yielded unto the first, as also because all
lascivious women do very well know that such men as live without care are best
able to satisfy their lust, which is the only cause that they do rather
frequent the company of Lackies and Monks who are fed without any care or
cost of their own: but what a fool am I to complain, and say that this is the
first offense, seeing that this perchance is not the hundredth man that has
obtained whatsoever he required of her, for commonly many faults are
committed before that one be espied: but when one is disclosed, it constrains
a man to be suspicious of many more: and that woman may well be termed
shameless, which suffers her tongue to promise the performance of such a
villainy: especially seeing those that are most impudent, desire that men
should think that they are not lightly to be wone, but that with much
courting, large offers, and round rewards, they are rather enforced to yield,
then upon no consideration at all to promise a victory. I marvel much why
any woman can for shame live to show her face, when she her self by her own
tongue condemns her reputation: O an hundredfold miserable are they, that for
so frail a solace do buy a perpetual sorrow: but what goodness can there be
in that woman which has lost her chastetie? The which was well known of
Susanna, Lucrece, and the Grecian Hippo who did leap into the sea, choosing
there to die rather then she would lose her chastity, besides many others,
who ought to serve for an example unto our matrons, but they had rather imitate
Flora, Thais, and Lamia, wherefore as they do deserve to be heirs of their
vice, so likewise ought they to inherit the same renoune: as for me I am sure
if I do remain any longer with this woman, that not only my goods and
credit, but also my body and soul shall be in danger of losing, for such as
are harlots do steal from their husbands to give their companions, and
sometimes they make them their husbands murderers, at such a time when as
soul and body do both perish together: to prevent so great a mischief (I
speak to you my masters that are her kinsmen) I know not what your kinswoman
was when you gave her to me, but I am very sure that I redeliuer her unto you
a most dishonest woman, wherefore I do but my duty in putting her away, seeing
that Caesar did put away his wife, because he found Claudius in his house
apparelled like a woman at such time as the women were about their sacrifice,
and not knowing whether he meant to have defiled his wife, he only alleged
this for all his reason: It behooves (says he) the wife of Caesar to be as
free from suspicion, as she ought to be from fault: receive then your kinswoman
charged with an evident crime.

The Answer of the kinsmen, beginning at the end of the accusation.
O What a proud fellow is this, that would compare himself unto Caesar, O what
a great credit he does himself in thinking to discredit us, when he says,
That he knows not what our kinswoman was when she came unto him: but that he
knows well how he restores her unto us worse then dishonest, truly he has
made a fair piece of work, in causing her to be tempted, to make her seem
such a one: in sooth that man which will be a baud unto his wife, does deserve
(as you do) to lose his goods, life, reputation, and soul also. We know well
enough, that the best part in a woman is her chastity, and how much they are
to prefer it before all other graces: so also you cannot deny but that the
dishonesty consists in the deed, and not in a word spoken without knowing to
what intent: what can you tell whether she promised him for fear least he
would have forced her, seeing her alone? Or because she would cause you to know
the unfaithfulness of your servant, and by that means conserve both your
credit and her own? Neither do we likewise deny that she has made a
promise unto the first that courted her, for being virtuous, and so known,
there was never any man that durst be so bold to ask her any such matter, as
also your servant durst not have presumed, if you your self had not encouraged
him: he then which seeks for that which he would not find, ought not to
complain, if he find that which he would not have sought: but it is very
likely that your self was very certain that she would never have performed
her promise, seeing you had no will to see the trial thereof, for what could
you have lost thereby, if she be such a one as you say she is? But you know
very well that she is better then you deserve: therefore because you hated her
virtue, you would be rid of her: surely you allege Solomon very well for your
advantage, as you think; and you say not amiss when you affirm, that the
wife ought to be the better half of her husband, for certainly the same is
seen in our kinswoman, seeing that you are of no account at all, wherefore you
do not deserve that she should be your crown. Lastly were she less honest,
she might deny that which you cannot prove, but seeing that she has made no
promise, but to quite her self and to save your reputation and her own: we
require that you may first make amends for slandering her, and afterward we
will not refuse to take her away from such a wicked man as you are.

Declamation. 29.
Of a bastard who demanded the performance of his fathers will, although the
house and the goods were burned.

A Man making his last Will and testament, left all his goods unto two of his
sons lawfully begotten, upon condition that they should give a thousand
crowns unto his bastard. Now it chanced that during the funerals, the house,
and the most of the best stuff therein was burned, so that the remainder of
all the goods and mooueables that were left, amounted not to three thousand
crowns: Nevertheless the bastard demands a thousand thereof, the eldest
son consented, the yoonger resisted it, saying:

What reason is there to give a greater portion unto a bastard, then is left
for the lawful children? Seeing the mischance that is happened, moreover it is
to be doubted whether our father might or ought to make a will in such sort,
seeing that reason binds the fathers so soon as they have children, to
believe that they (being no other then true administrators of their goods)
ought to leave them unto their children, at the least in such quantity as they
have received them from their fathers: but let us inquire of this claiming
bastard, (that with so great instance demands the accomplishment of our
fathers last Will) that if he had bequeathed him an hundred blows with a
staff, whether he would willingly receive them? I believe he would not: or if
he had imposed him to do some great penance for him, or to accomplish some
great vow or pilgrimage, a man should then have seen how ready he would be to
perform it: but for the most part it is a custom that those which have stood
the dead in no stead, except it be to discredit them, will nevertheless desire
the best part of their goods, before those that have better deserved them: but
what is he? Unless he be such a one as he says; That is, a manifest witness
of our fathers shame: and if he be not such a one, what is that which he
requires, and wherefore does he claim it? Especially seeing that such a
mischance is happened, as the best part of our goods is lost before that any
part of the Testament could be performed. As for my brother, if he will give
away his goods, I will not hinder him, but I will keep mine if I can: and the
rather, because that if the worst do happen, yet cannot he claim any further
part in our goods but only such a reasonable portion, according to the value
of it now (considering our loss) as may proportionablie answer the value of
that which it was worth at the same time when the Will was made; and yet if I
do bestow this liberality upon him, it is for the love of our late deceassed
father, and not for his own sake.

The Answer.
THe judges are too just to allow your saying, and yet more righteous should
they be if they caused him to be chastised, that makes a doubt whether his
father may dispose his goods at his own pleasure, having as he had a good
understanding, and a perfect memory, so that he remembering me, how obedient
and serviceable I was always unto him, was desirous to show that he knew
thereby that I was undoubtedly his son, and for such a one was he willing to
acknowledge me, giving me a certain portion of those goods which were his, and
none of yours: wherefore it must no more be demanded who I am, what I require,
or why? For I tell you that I am son to the testator, which you say was your
father, I do demand a thousand crowns, because that his Will declares that
you should give them unto me: but as for the blows with a staff whereof you
speak, I think they are rather due unto you, in that you desire to abuse your
fathers soul: what do you know if by this means, he was desirous to
unburden his soul of the sin that he has committed in begetting me, less
in reputation then you? concerning the vows and pilgrimages, if they had been
enioined me, I would have acquitted my self therein more willingly then you do
in that whereunto you were inioined: but you would judge my heart by the malice
of your own, wherefore not I, but your self serve for a discredit unto our
father; for some may think that for want of good education and chastisement you
are become so mischeeuous* moreover, I neither can in any thing, nor for any
thing be partaker of your loss, seeing that since the deceasse of our father,
you have had the goods in your possession: if you had given them me to keep, I
should have been bound to answer it, but not being so, I will not forgive you
any thing: and like as you say that you will keep your own, even so will I get
mine own if I can, and if I ought to forgive any part thereof, it shall be
rather unto your brother then to you, because he will not deceive me; but as
the worst wheel in the cart makes the greatest noise, and vildest beast in
the Heard is most stubborn and untoward to rule, even so the example of your
brother manifests your iniquity, and shows that you are contrary to his
just meaning, the which nevertheless by the help of God, and the righteous
favor of the judge, shall but redound to your shame and hinderance.

Declamation. 30.
Of a knight of Rhodes, that would enter into Religion again, after that he had
given over his Order, to take a wife.

Whilst the Knights were yet remaining in Rhodes, a certain knight amongst
them gave over his charge unto the great master of that order, and by virtue
of a dispensation did betroth himself unto a young gentlewoman: but upon the
marriage day he understood that she was his cous^^^ German, whereupon he
leaving her, requires to be received again into the order of the knights, and
that his charge might be restored unto him, but the great master having
already bestowed the same, denied him both the one and the other, saying:

IT is very unseemly for a wiseman to say, I thought not upon any such, or
the like matter: for a discreet man should diligently foresee all things before
he determine any thing, and truly he that is not wise and very discreet,
deserves not to be a knight, much les a knight of this order, and a commander,
seeing no knights are more worthy then they; because they keep even the very
key of Christendom. Wherefore you must not think (gentleman) that the
forsaking, and receiving again into this holy order of our knighthood, is so
easy to be done as it is in the courts of some Prince, where for the most
part, it is sufficient if they be but only knights in name, or as it is
commonly said, dubbed but with a Virgin sword: for in our order above all
things, constancy joined with prudence and discretion is requisite, so that
finding none of these three to remain in you, I cannot deem you worthy to
enter into this order, and much less to repossesse a place of command: but it
may be that this presumption of yours proceeds because you were over easily
admitted at the first; know then that it was upon the hope, that being young,
and frequenting the company of ancient knights, you might easily imitate their
valor, wherein you showing some likelihood there was a commanders place
bestowed upon you to encourage you therein altogether, but you have greatly
deceived our hope, when without any consideration at all you have given over
so great a credit and honor, to wed such a one with whom you had no
acquaintaince at all: is there any folly more great then to leave a
certainty for an incertaintie? If you committed this fault because you were in
love with the gentlewoman, you condemn your self to be voluptuous, and so
consequently unworthy of our Order, where you have made a vow of chastity,
which is maintained by the exercise of the body, and by ^asting: wherefore S.
Barnard said well unto his Monks; Eat you so sparingly, that the remembrance of
bread may be rather in your mind, then the desire of lust: by this means the
good knights do harden themselves and learn to suffer constantly the
extremity of a siege or of a long sea voyage. If you have done it through
ambition, you are as little excusable, Because that ambition is like unto a
fire which burns all before it, and never dies so long as any thing
remains to maintain it: and also because it judges all things to be lawful;
our order can never put any trust in you; or if you have forsaken the order
because you make no great account of it, You will never do any good for it:
You may answer that the good is sildome known before it be lost, I reply
unto you that they which neither do know, nor have known what is good, and
therefore have suffered it to be lost, deserve in no sort to have it again:
therefore it is your best way to purchase it by some other means. Do you say
that your felicity depended only upon this marriage? Then afterward seeing
you could not accomplish it, you would require again that which you have
forsaken, without any other reason: you know that our profession is to war
against the Turk, wherefore the only means to reobtaine that which you
demand of us, is to employ your self in such sort against our enemy, as we
may know the same valor, discretion, prudence, and constancy to be remaining
in you, which hitherto you have not shown: then forgetting all former faults,
we shall imagine how we may honor and reward you again, as already we have
done, upon hope that you should have been such a one as you ought, and yet may
if you endeavor your self so to be.

The Answer.
Truly that man is most wise who premeditateth and foreseeth whatsoever may
afterward happen, but I would feign know where such men are to be found, that
I might dwell amongst them as their slave if otherwise I could not? For so yet
should I esteem my self happy; but I believe that such men are more rare
then the Phoenix: for that point which you require to be in me, passes all
humane power, because that either secretly or openly the most part of men do
know well that many matters do fall out far otherwise then they would ever
have thought they should, and diverse chances may happen unto them whereof they
never imagined. Moreover, I am not ignorant that all these perfections which
you allege, are required in him which will be a knight: I do likewise consider
the worthiness of our order, and do know that the obtaining, giving over, and
reobtaining of the same is difficult: and so will it be as hardly proved
that I am less worthy then the most part of those that are of the same order,
the which I will prove body to body against those which will or dare
maintain the contrary; and it is a special point to be doubted whether I
have left the same or no, seeing that the effect for which I desired leave to
depart is not accomplished. I departed to be married, but am I so for all that?
No surely; for it is impossible that so I should be, because it was not
lawful: do you not know that marriages are made in heaven, and effected here
on earth? What can you tell whether it was Gods pleasur that by this means only
I should come to the knowledge of my kinswoman? Whom especially, before I knew
her, I loved with a sincere and chaste love, provoked thereunto by an honest
instinct of nature, and now by the will of God made manifest, to make you know
that neither voluptuousness nor ambition induced me to love her, but only the
neerenesse of blood, which yet being unknown, might notwithstanding move the
hearts of men: being then not departed for any such cause wherewith you
wrongfullie accuse me; I say and do maintain that not only I may, but I also
ought to re-enter again into mine order: yea and you might and ought to
constrain me thereunto, seeing that the effect for the which I gave it over
has not accordingly succeeded: but since I see, chiefly by your slanderous
reproaches, that you are wholly bent against me, I appeal from your will to the
censure of all the members of this order, without whom you cannot be General,
were you a thousand times greater then you are.

Declamation. 31.
Of a Judge who paid three thousand crowns to cause a murderer to be hanged.

A Certain nation received one to be their prince, who makes an oath, that he
will maintain them in all their privileges, rights, and customs: It happened
that the judge appointed by the same Prince would have caused a murderer to be
hanged: the kinsmen of the malefactor do prove by their privileges, that he
might redeem his life for three thousand crowns: the judge caused him to be
hanged, and paid himself three thousand crowns for having put him to death;
his kindred appeal unto the Prince, and say:

MOst mighty and just Prince, the renown of your equity has incited us to
become your most loiall, most loving, most humble, and most faithful subjects,
and to choose you for our sovereign Prince, and most redoubted lord: whereby
this good is happened unto us, that we have always found in you such justice
and bounty as is requisite; as also your Majesty shall ever find in us all
dutiful obedience: but what shall we say? Seeing that this happiness of your
good meaning, is abused by the malice of your ministers, and especially by the
chiefest, which is he that ought to administer unto us justice in your
behalf, and to have a respect that we may be maintained in our rights,
privileges, and customs, according as it has pleased your Majesty to take
your oath: but he which is our judge has had justice in derision, and under
the shadow thereof has committed cruelty, for having condemned one of our
Citizens to die for a manslaughter, we showed him that which he ought not to
be ignorant of, that is to say, how our privileges do permit that such a
trespass may be satisfied with the payment of three thousand crowns,
appliable according to the ordinances in such cases provided, whereupon he has
thereby taken an occasion to put one of our Citizens to an ignominious death, to
the great dishonor of all his lineage, saying that he shall be acquitted in
paieng the said forfeit; as if there were no difference between the killing of
a man in cold blood, through a certain malice or contempt (especially in
derision of justice of the Commonwealth, and of the laws and privileges
thereof, to cause one die shamefullie* and cruelly by the hands of an hangman)
and the flaying of ones enemy, by whom a man is provoked thereunto through
some wrong, or other just cause of malice. But wherein you unjust judge had
this our Citizen offended you? Seeing that you have no part in the
Commonwealth, but like an hired servant in a house, you are to abide therein
only the appointed time of your office, which is given unto you not to
abolish our privileges, but to maintain them: all the other Citizens were
more interessed in this fact then you, and neuethelesse you alone have been
desirous of revenge; truly cruelty becomes no man, but it is most odious in
Princes and Judges, more then in any others: seeing that our Prince is
altogether free from this vice, ought not you to follow his example? Or at the
least you ought not to have erred from the same so reprochfullie. If too sharp
and rigorous laws are made more to terrify men then to destroy them,
wherefore have you rather desired to aggrauate our laws then to perform them?
Who has made you more wise then our Ancestors, who have invented this
privilege for the conservation of the Citizens? Do you not know that justice
without mercy is injustice? How great cruelty is it then, to turn mercy
into rigor? Most unjust is the sentence which preuenteth judgment, and such
has yours ben, for cruelty deprived you of all judgment when you pronounced
the same. Do you not know that whilst you judge other men, God judges you?
How would you do then if he should judge you according to your your deserts?
But who has moved you to commit this new cruelty? Do you not know that all
innovation of laws and customs is no less dangerous then scandalous? To
conclude, you have offended the Prince in resisting of his oath, and wronged
his subjects in breaking their pruiledges: both the one and the other offense
deserves death: whereupon we beseech you (most righteous Prince) that he which
has contemned your authority, justice, and our privileges, may be punished,
that all the Judges hereafter may thereby take an example; Seeing that if our
enemies had not given him the money, he would never have purchased at so great
a charge, an unlawful means to exercise his cruelty against your subject, and
our privileges.

The Answer.
IF any law be unjust or pernicious, it is that which is not equal to all
men; but how can that be equal which causes the greatest malefactors to
escape for money? As this privilege does allow, which imboldeneth the rich
that ought to succor the poor, not only to wrong them, but also to murder
them, because he knows very well that he shall be acquitted for money, the
which being paid, he afterward commits a thousand mischiefs to get that
which he has spent, into his purse again: for what wickedness will not such
a one be bold to commit, that makes no conscience to kill his equal? Or it
may be such a one as is better then himself? But if the law or your privilege
be unjust, then have not I offended: Or if I have misdone, in paieng the
forfeiture I am acquitted. Why should he be punished which procures the death
of a malefactor; Seeing that he which murthereth an innocent is quit for
money? Concerning the difference of cold blood, and to cause one to die by the
hands of the hangman, that does in no sort aggrauate the offense: for being an
offender, he has thereby had the better means to acknowledge his fault, and to
crave pardon of God, especially to dispose of his worldly cares and family,
the which he gave no leisure unto the other to do: and for the reproach, it
consists not in the manner of the death, but in the cause of the death; For if
any man should be hanged for having done some good unto his country, his
death should nevertheless be accounted honorable, but he which is hurtful
unto the Commonwealth (although he die in his bed amongst his kindred) yet
should his death be accounted odious. It is not I then that am cause of his
shame, but the murder which he has committed. I confess indeed that he never
offended me, but rather justice; so likewise I caused him not to die, but to
maintain equity: and not being able to do it without disbursing of money, I
did rather choose to pay it, then to leave justice undone. I have not infringed
or broken your privilege, but only showed that it is unlawful, and that it
ought to be amended. I cannot tell whether your ancestors were more wise then
I, but I dare well say that they were rich men, who without the consent of the
poor men, invented this privilege: for there was never any tyranny more
manifest, which your selves ought to abolish, you being subject to a most just
Prince: therefore I desired to admonish you thereof at mine own proper costs
and charges. Likewise I know that I am not the first which has been slandered
for mine honest meaning, in desiring to change wicked customs into good; for
Solon and Licurgus were not free from the like, and before them Moises, then
Socrates who was put to death for no other cause. But considering that Justice
alone is the sovereign of al other virtues, and rules all mortal wights,
because that without her none can live in safety, especially seeing that
without it the Commo^wealth is like unto a body which being corrupted with
evil humors does with lanquishing pine away, I have neglected all other
things, especially to maintain the same; and you have no cause to complain
on me for setting as little by my life as by my goods. Wherefore without
answering any further to your slanderous reproaches, trusting unto the equity
of the Prince, I do freely submit my goods, honor, and life unto his most
just judgment.

Declamation. 32.
Of those that would depose the King because he had lost the battle.

IT is the custom of a certain people that the men of war do choose the
King. It happens that the said King does lead his men unto the wars, where
all his soldiers are overthrown, only he with a very small number escaped,
so that the Citizens and people are constrained to take arms to defend them
from the conquerors, and the better to perform the same, they would choose
another king: but the foresaid king resists them, saying:

AS there is but one only God in heaven, and one sun to lighten the world,
so likewise cannot you have two kings over you, neither yet can you depose or
change your king at your pleasure: for the power of kings comes of God, which
holds their hearts in his hand: how dare you then but only think such a
wickedness as to be desirous to change or depose him who is anointed and
chosen of God to reign over you? Did not David put him to death which made his
boast that he had slain Saul? And although that David were already anointed
king of Israel, yet was king Saul not deposed until his death. You say that
I have governed the wars ill, I deny it: for I went thither my self, and
neither wanting valor nor skill, I did valiantly fight to the great endangering
of mine own person. I have not neglected my duty in fighting, but God has
given the victory to the enemies: wherefore would God have preserved me from
so great a danger, unless it were to manifest the especial care that he has
over kings, and that it were his pleasure that I should yet reign over you?
And not another? How dare you then imagine to change him whom he has first
given unto you, and then afterward so miraculouslie preserved? If you stand in
doubt whether I deserve the dignity or not, the elective voices of so many
valiant men, which have only judged me above all the rest of this realm for
the worthiest to be your king, ought to assure you thereof: but as hope does
torment men's hearts no less then fear and other passions, so some of you
hoping to attain unto the kingly dignity, have not the patience to stay
until it be void by my death whereby it plainly appears, that covetousness
never judges any thing to be unlawful: the people have nothing to do to
depose their king, but God by depriving him of life, who by his grace, and for
your good, has been pleased to save me: will you then contradict his will? But
although I had for want of skill been the cause of our loss, will you say
that you must needs choose another, that may do as much or worse? He which
has once done amiss, may when he begins again make amends, but thanks be
to God as I want not experience, so have I not failed to do that which was
requisite, but it may be it was our sins that have provoked Gods wrath against
us, who by our contrition and amendment of life is first to be appeased, then
he being merciful unto us, we shall not only be revenged of our enemies, but
he will also give us power to subdue those that would oppress us: yet that
this shall be done under any other the^ I, whilst I live, I hope that good God
will never suffer it, seeing that to determine but such a matter were to heap
sin upon sin.

The Answer.
WE do neither require two kings, neither do we desire to change our king,
for we have none: who made you king over us? are not they dead that chose you
for their king? You are then king over the dead: Wherefore reason would that you
should be sent unto them. When you were chosen we were Citizens, now through
your fault we are constrained to be soldiers. It is the ancient custom that
the men of war do choose the king, we will then choose one; Seeing that your
self are the cause that we have changed our quality, what reason is there
that you should remain in yours? Concerning the example of David and Saul, it
nothing concerns our matter: for the greatest part of every action
consists in the time and place; therefore it must be considered, that as our
time now* is not the like unto the time then, so also that we are here, and not
in Palestine. Moreover, we have no more Prophets to anoint the kings, because
God for our sins does no more elect kings by miracle: wherefore it commonly
happens, that the most wicked man attaineth to that dignity, and chiefly
when the election remains in the power of the soldiers: for sildome is
there found any equity amongst those that follow the wars, so that our
misery is lamentable, seeing that your ambitious rashness compels us of
Citizens to become soldiers. We know well (to our great prejudice) that you
your self did go unto the wars; but of your industry, valor, and duty, no
man bears witness except your self: but the widows and orphants of those
whom you have led unto the slaughter, with a far greater number, can witness
the contrary: and they do affirm, that you had great wrong to escape,
because so many valiant men are lost through your default, the which is more
punishable then excusable. To say likewise that God has preserved you by some
his especial providence, it may very well be: because he would send you back
hither to receive punishment for your rashness, by that spectacle somewhat to
comfort the multitude of those whom you have made miserable: neither did the
elective voice of the soldiers choose you as the best man of the land, but as
he that was most conformable to their desire, and that would give them the most
liberty to do ill; for so were Otho, Galba, Vitelius, and other harebrain men
chosen by the soldiers for Emperors. As for ambition and covetousness,
wherewith you accuse us by presumption, you do evidently show, that it
remains in you. In saying also that he which has once done amiss becomes
afterward more expert: the same is doubtful, for even in his first fault he
shows that he wants judgment, and no man ought to presume to make himself
cunning by the prejudice of so many others, and with no less then the hazard
of a whole realm. In every action it is odious to err, but in the wars it
is most hurtful, so that to do amiss therein but one time only, is far too
much. We do not depose you at all, for henceforth you are king no more,
neither yet ought you to be any thing if we should justly proceed against
you, but we refer that unto the discretion of the king which shall be chosen.
As concerning contrition and good works to make satisfaction for our sins, it
cannot choose but be a good deed to root out him from amongst us which is the
cause of our mischief. To affirm that God will never suffer us to obtain the
victory under any other but you: You only say it, and the opinion of all
the wisest is quite contrary, wherefore it is best to follow the opinion of
many which have not as yet erred, then the judgment of one only man, which
has brought us into this misery wherein we now remain through his fault.

Declamation. 33.
Of the Athenians who denied to pay unto the Thebans that which they ought.

THe Athenians did owe six hundred thousand talents of pure silver unto the
Thebans. It chanced that Alexander did by force of Arms take the city of
Thebes, and amongst other riches he found the Athenians obligation, (wherewith
to gratify the said debtors, he restored it unto them: but after the death of
Alexander, the Thebans demanded the said sum of the Athenians, who answered,
That seeing they had recovered their obligation, they were not in any sort
indebted unto them; with these reasons hereafter ensuing.

YOu say worthy Thebans that we do owe you six hundred thousand talents,
the proof thereof is very hard, seeing that it is well known of old, that
you never lent any such sums without good assurance, and taking sufficient
bands of the debtors: show us then if you have any bond of ours, and then we
shall think upon the means to satisfy it. You say we had one, but Alexander
took it from us, and restored it to you: if it be so, consider what he was
that took it from you, and redeliuered it unto us, was it not Alexander sent
from the gods, not only to subdue you and us, but almost all the world? At that
time, were not your goods only in his power, but also your lives? Do you
grieve that a part is lacking, seeing that the whole might as well have been
lost? Do you not know that he came to leave you what he thought good, and to
take from you that which he knew to be superfluous? Seeing that superfluity
is not only troublesome and painful, but also hurtful: for inciting the
hearts of such as possess it unto pride and insolency, it is oftentimes the
cause of their misery: in like sort such is the judgment of the gods, that
they which have flocked together to afflict many, should afterward be
afflicted themselves by one alone, and all that which they have in many years
purloined from others, should afterward in one day be taken away from them by
the same man: in like manner has it befallen you noble Thebans even as you
say: Alexander has taken away our obligation from you, to restore it to us,
it is the will of the gods, who in process of time have wrought such
alterations, wherefore it may so fall out in time to come, that you (owing unto
us so much silver) or more, you may likewise pay us after the same sort. That
we are quit from you it cannot be denied, seeing that you have no bond of
ours: for to what end are bonds made but to compel such as will not pay?
Constrain us then by our obligation to pay you, or cease from demanding any
thing of us: but although it were so as you say, that Alexander had yielded up
our obligation, what do you know whether we have paid it unto him; Who then
was Lord not only of your gooods, but also of your lives? If we have paid it
him, why should we pay it again? And if he have liberally bestowed it upon
us, We have both thanked him, and are also yet beholding unto his posterity,
yea, unto his ashes for the same, why would you, or how can you the^ bind us
twice for one only debt? That cannot be don Thebans, wherefore it shall be
but well that you surceasse to importune us any further: considering that
those which weary others, take small rest themselves, and especially, that
labor is lost which profits nothing at all; as yours has been and always
will be concerning this matter, and although you take herein what course you
shall think most expedient, yet you must believe that we are able to yield
you a reason for any thing that you shall demand at our hand: but see that you
remember this; that he which de sireth to molest another, does oftentimes work
his own overthrow.

The Answer.
THere is nothing more true (you ungrateful Athenians) then our speech, when
we say that you do owe us six hundred thousand talents; and that it is so,
the prosperity wherein we have placed you, and the misery wherein you were,
are two witnesses very sufficient to prove our reason and your ingratitude:
which truly is a pernicious vice, but in the end more hurtful unto those
that use it then unto any other, wherefore it is a folly in you to look for
any advancement thereby: but although it were not so, what proof would you
have more plain then your own conscience, if you would believe that which is
able to testify unto you? And think not but that the same obligation which
Alexander has restored unto you will be a witness against you; Yea and to
bring a greater mischief upon you being in your hands then when it was in
ours: for seeing that it was possible for us to lose that which we had gained
justly, what think you will become of that which you do detain and possess
wrongfullie? Assure you that this iniquity will bring you unto an extreme
necessity, more great then that from which we have freed you by our
courtesy: lending you that which you now do wickedlie deny us. As for
Alexander, he had no power over us when we lent you the silver, therefore he
could in no sort acquit you thereof. If then the fire by mischance had burned
your bond, or if a thief having stolen it, should have restored it unto you,
should you for all that be freed of the debt? It seems no; Make account that
there is no other difference betwixt a thief and Alexander, but only that
the one steals by subtlety, and the other by force: as that Pirate whom he
had taken said unto the same Alexander, Because (says he) that I have but one
ship, I am called a thief, but because thou art able to steal more then I,
thou art called a king. But why are you not ashamed to be beholding for a
shrewd turn unto one, whose father and he have been always mortal enemies to
the liberty of Greece? take example by the gain which he has made, after so
many extortions. Is not he miserably dead, by the means of his most familiar
friends? And those were his heirs which were not so much as any thing a kin
unto him; who did spend his treasure and goods in destroieng one another: the
which should make you wise, O you Athenians, and cause you to surceasse this
folly, to say that you are quit, having received your bond from one, who has
taken it from us by force; and who for this deed and other such like, did
shamefullie die as he deserved: moreover, it is not likely that he was sent
from the gods to subdue us, but true it is that by their permission we were by
him unjustly tirannised over, and for our sins he was as a scourge of the
Gods, but their anger ceasing, he perished also. But who did ever, see that a
debtor ought to be the judge of his creditors actions, as you would be of
ours? Seeing that you are utterly blinded with passion: for whilst you accuse
us of pride, and covetousness, you do not consider that your selves are guilty
of treason and theft: because you have cleaued unto the capital enemy of
Greece, and for the same cause you will detain from us that which we did lend
unto you in your greatest need: concerning that which you speak of Time, as
being the minister of the gods, it may be the same gods of whom you speak in
mockery, will so bring it to pass, as time shall compel you shortly, not
only to satisfy us, but also to become more miserable then ever you were,
when you shall entreat for our aid, the which now you do ingratefullie forget.
In like sort you must not allege that you have paid your obligation unto
Alexander, for we know very well that you never had less means to do it
then at that time, and although you should truly have paid it, yet were it of
no import, nor any satisfaction unto us: for you neither ought it unto him,
nor had he any letter of attorney from us to receive it; he might then very
well deliver you your obligation, but yet he could not forgive you the debt
whereunto he had no right at all: determine then you Athenians to satisfy us
by fair means, if you will not have us to imploie both our own and our
friends forces, together with the help of the gods the just judges of your
iniquities.

Declamation. 34.
Of him that is in trouble for accusing a man of crime, for which he is
committed to prison, and there dies.

A Man accuses another for an offense, the party accused dies in prison
whilst the informations are in making, the accuser cannot sufficiently prove
his accusation. Whereupon the kindred of the accused do require to have the
accuser punished with such punishment as the crime deserved, wherewith he
accused the other. And they say:

Truly the weakness of man is such, as every one esteems his own misery
more great, and lamentable then he does another man's: but what is he which can
say that we pass the bounds of reason, when we say that this our kinsman
deceassed, is worthy to be greatly lamented; And that he which is the cause
of his death deserves most severe punishment? seeing that he has not only
abridged his days, but that which is worse, has endeavored to cause him to
die most shamefullie; especially to the great prejudice of his poor family,
and all his lineage: and his purpose has not failed in any sort, seeing that
the poor man is dead in prison, although he never once deserved to come into
the same. And it is not to be thought a small matter to imprison a man, seeing
that in Athens those which died in prison could never be buried in the
sepulcher of their ancestors: as if they would thereby infer, that they which
died in such a place, might stain the tombs of those that died with honor and
reputation of virtue: and the same custom is yet used in sundry most famous
cities, as amongst others at Paris, the chief city of France, where they
do observe this law, that he which but for debt only passes the wicket of a
prison, shall never after be capable of any office or other public
promotion: how much more then for suspicion of crime? There is nothing more
apparent, then that this poor man seeing himself in such disgrace, died even
for very grief; and the wicked wretch that has accused him is yet living in
health: but let us see what likelihood there is in his accusation, seeing that
yet after the death of the accused he cannot prove his saying? I may therefore
now say, that he could not be suffered to allege any reasons for his own
defense neither might take any acceptions against the witnesses, nor yet be
allowed openly to prove his innocence, but with the least suspicion that
might be he should have been constrained to abide the sentence of condemnation.
Be you assured, O you righteous Judges, That this accusation proceeds by the
instigation of diverse malicious persons, who if need had been would likewise
have served for witnesses against him: but their malice or ill will ending by
the death of this miserable man, they do also forsake this ungracious fellow
in his greatest need. Such is the just judgment of God that the wicked do
oftentimes perish even by their own wickedness: but for all that, their
offense is not any whit diminished, neither is this poor dead man alone, but
his distressed widow, children, and all his kindred (unto whom he was a true
friend) any lot the less harmed: wherefore it may well be said that this lewd
forger of vntroths, has murdered both this man here, and overthrown the
others: yea and some are yet likely to die for want of his life that now is
dead: I mean the poor children, and the miserable widow. Then what gibet,
what sword, what halter, what wheel, or what torments are sufficient to punish
thorowlie this execrable wretch, which is the cause of so many mischiefs? For
first he has gone about to prosecute his death, and next he has endeavored to
defame him: alas he is dead, and reputed for infamous by those which have heard
his accusation, and not afterward known his innocence: but many seeing him
no more, will yet think that there was favor showed him in causing him to die
in prison as a malefactor, unless this abominable fellow as a public
spectacle, do not possess the same place whereunto he pretended by his false
accusation to bring the innocent: consider then you just Judges as well the
misery of the dead and his allies, as the execrable iniquity of the false
accuser, and do you gain as much favor at the hands of God, and praise in the
world by your just judgment, as he has gotten sin and infamy by his
wickedness.

The Answer of the accuser.
THere is nothing more true then that I have justly accused him, whom I know
not by what death he is deprived of that due punishment which he deserved,
wherefore the Proverb may be truly verified by him, which says, That the
gallows is not so much made for the thieves as for the unfortunate; for if he
had not ben dead, the witnesses of his iniquity would have proceeded as they
ought, who as mine adversaries say, do forsake me in my need: yet not for
those reasons which they allege, but because they are corrupted as well by the
bribes of the widow and kindred of the malefactor, as also by the importunate
requests and threats of others more mighty then they: for such is the misery
of our age, that men are now more easy to be corrupted then ever they were:
moreover, I cannot but suspect that his kindred fearing least the truth should
come to light, have poisoned him in prison, yea and it may be by his own
consent; doubting that although all the witnesses might be very well
corrupted, yet if I my self would have been bound unto the rack against him,
to have proved to his face that my accusation was most true. I was not then
the cause either of his imprisonment, his discredit, nor yet of his death; but
his offense was the occasion of all: yea and by his death he has deprived me
of the means to prove the same, thereby to bring my reputation in question:
and that it is so, if any of these stout fellows my adversaries (who now
think to face me out at their pleasure) will maintain the innocence of their
dead kinsman against me upon the rack, I will not only there adventure my
credit, but also my life: the like will I also do against the prowdest of
those witnesses, who being corrupted with bribes are become dumb. But let a
nie one show me some reason why I should accuse him wrongfullie; seeing that
twixt him and me there was never any malice, quarrel, or other occasion:
whereby it may clearelie appear, that the true and only zeal of justice
enforced me to accuse him, for otherwise I had no reason to procure so many,
and so mighty enemies against me. To conclude, by the foresaid reasons it may
appear, whether he himself has not ben the cause of his own mischief:
therefore none but himself deserves to be blamed or harmed for it.

Declamation. 35.
Of the son of abondwoman which would disinherit his brother.

THe law of bondmen or slaves is yet in Spain, that those which have bought
them (be they Christians or no, they may kill them) or make them do what they
will. Whereupon it chanced that a man bought a maiden slave, and having lien
with her, she bare him a son: some few days after she died; wherefore the
foresaid man bought another bondwoman to nurse up his son, and he did so much
also with her, that she likewise brought him forth another son; she lived
with him and ruled his house, till that the children were great, and that the
father happened to die, who by his Will appointed that the eldest brother
should part the goods, and the yoongest should choose. He made no mention at all
of the woman, so that she still remained a slave: and the eldest son took
occasion thereby to defraud his brother of his inheritance or pretended
patrimony: for to make his partition, he placed the mother of his brother on
the one side, and the goods on the other, saying, choose take thy mother and
leave me the rest of the goods, or take the goods and leave me thy mother: the
other seeing this extremity would not choose, but accused his brother of deceit
or punishable cousenage, saying:

THe law commands, and the Will appoints, that thou ought to part, and I
ought to choose; but thou neither have parted, nor yet can I choose, for the
duty and love which I bear unto my mother, compels me not to leave her,
and especially at the discretion of so wicked a man as thou art, seeing that
thou inforcest me to three extremes, the one is to forsake my mother, or to
disherit my brother, or lastly to compel me and my mother to live
continually in poverty. Great is thy malice to enforce me to become as
wicked as thou art; call thou this a partition, to place all the care on the
one side, and all the goods on the other? My mother is grown old in the
keeping and increasing those goods which thou would usurp, and now being
weak and unprofitable, thou would have her to die for hunger with me, or
else that she should abide in extreme misery at thy discretion: do not thou
know that thou art the son of a bondwoman as well as I? Yea, and that thy
mother never got thee any good toward household? but my mother gave thee suck,
and nursed thee, what ingratitude can then be more great then thine? Make such
a partition at the least as I may remain without blame in the choosing, and
yet not quite without living. If deceit or punishable cousenage is
distinguished by taking from any man that which is his, then thou do worse,
for thou not only leauest me nothing* but thou increasest my misery: this is
not the first time wherein the deceivers do seek to cloak or coulor their
deceits with some law or statute, unhappily wrested, but I hope that the
Judges will have a respect unto my integrity, and reprove thy detestable
iniquity.

The Answer.
I Have parted better then thou can choose, wherefore there is no abuse in the
partition, but in the election; For on the one side, I do set thee riches, and
on the other side immortal honor, for loving thy mother best, which shall serve
for an eternal memory and glory. How many are there that would buy such a
felicity with the price of their lives? As Curtius; who for the good of the
Commonwealth leaped headlong into a burning gulf: Sceuola burned his hand
because he missed the killing of Porcen^a. Horatius fought alone against the
whole army of the Tuscanes, and defended the bridge which he caused to be
broken down behind his back, Hercules and Alexander fought for glory, not
only against men, but also with lions and other beasts, why wilt not thou then
gain this glory, when thou may obtain it without any danger of thy person.
Lastly, seeing that profit and honor cannot go together, and that thou
shunnest honor, leave it to me, and take thou the profit. I had rather have the
renoune to love my stepmother better then thou do thine own mother; then to
have all the goods in the world: moreover, he carries away no small portion of
the patrimony, which shall have her who has long time governed the whole as
thou confessest: I am of the mind that our father left her still a bondwoman,
to the end that thou should have no other thing but her, or at the least that
by the same it might be known which of us is most worthy. I do not say that
I will not give any other thing unto thee, but I would first see if thou
deseruest it, and that thou might also acknowledge my liberality: but as
for the Judges they are too righteous to force the laws, and to alter the last
Will of our father.

Declamation. 36.
Of Simon who put himself into prison to redeem his father thence being dead,
afterward how he slew his wife being daughter unto him that had made him his
heir, and paid his debt.

THe law says, that if any man take his wife in adultery, he may kill them
both and not offend the law. Whereupon it chanced that a noble Senator named
Milciades a man of honest reputation, was through malice accused for some
offense, and condemned to a great fine of money, so as not having wherewith to
pay the same, he was imprisoned and there dies: and because the law commanded
that those which died in prison should not be buried else where but in the same
prison, unless any man paid his debts: Simon the son of the deceassed
Milciades, yielded himself a prisoner in his fathers place, to the end that
he might be buried with his ancestors. He remaining in that sort a prisoner
without any means or hope ever to come forth, one named Callies a man very
rich, but of bad reputation, offered to pay his debt, and to make him his heir
if he would take his only daughter in marriage; Simon consented thereunto, he
was delivered, and married with the daughter of Callias: within a while after
he took her in adultery, he therefore causes Callias to be called, who
entreats for his daughter that could not deny her fault. Simon slew her in
the presence of Callias, who afterward acused him of ingratitude, which
amongst the Athenians was a punishable vice.

The accusation of Callias.
I Had made thee double bounden unto me, therefore is thy ingratitude the more
manifest; I did redeem thee from prison, where thou should have rotted; and
being poor, I made thee both my son in law, and mine heir: I do affirm,
that thou have induced thy thy wife to commit adultery, that thereby thou
might have an occasion to kill her, wherefore thou have not kept her as thou
ought, and thou have not only suffered her to fall from her former manners
unto vice, but thou have likewise furthered her therein, and when occasion
served, thou have not failed to rid thy self from her to our great prejudice
and dishonor: and thou have further shown thy cruelty in calling to the
father to behold the slaughter of his daughter, to the end that he might
always carry this grief, that he had been both an eye witness of her
misery, and that he was rejected or refused of his request by him whom he had
succored and redeemed from extreme misery, before he was thereunto entreated:
and nevertheless being ashamed to be son in law unto the man that had so
greatly bounden thee unto him, have caused the body, and soul, and renoune
of his daughter to be lost; if then one alone ingratitude is punishable, what
punishment shall be worthy for thy infinite unthankfulness joined with an
extreme cruelty.

Simons Answer.
THe shame of thy daughters adultery was more ircksome unto me then any
prison, wherefore I have likewise used that instrument which has by the law
been given unto me, not for any desire that I had to displease thee, to rid
me from thy kindred, or to kill thy daughter, but to revenge her shameless
immodestie, and to diminish my discredit. If thou have released me from prison
to the end that I should be base minded, thou have lost thy money, because thou
did not advise me thereof before hand, for I should surely have told thee
that as a noble heart could never be changed, so also could it never endure a
reproach: alas the difference betwixt my fathers disgrace and mine is, that
his ended in coming dead out of prison, and mine but began in coming alive
forth of the same. Milciades has had the only honor in the Commonwealth to
have been redeemed being dead by his son living, who afterward being
redeemed alive by another, to his great misfortune, was constrained to
displease his redeemer, because he required an unlawful matter. I will never
be unthankful when thou shall request a good turn as honest as that which I
have received of thee, but thou intreatest me to let the adulterers escape;
what could I do more if I had had my hands yet bound fast in prison, where at
the least the dishonor should never have been imputed unto me. Would thou
then think to keep me so bound, as I should be thereby hindered from doing but
my duty? Both of us in doing a good turn, have received a far greater; I in
taking my father forth of prison dead, and thou in fetching me forth alive,
for the same has been unto us a great honor, and it would not be lawful
for us to suffer adulters, without the loss of that honor which we have
gotten: moreover, it behooves him that has been a true and a faithful son
unto his father, to have the like children; my father was truly worthy to
have such a son as I was, so also was I not unworthy to have the like, which
I could never have had by thy daughter for whom thou have bought me. Thou say
I have brought thee forth of prison, I answer that I willingly put my self
therein, and I will never believe that ever I got so great credit by being
redeemed from thence by thee, as I have gained honor by entering therein for my
father, of mine own accord: I dare say that thou did never redeem me
thence for mine own sake, but only to honor thee and thy daughter, double
unworthy of so great honor, which was the cause also that she could not long
continue in the same, wherein I desired not to imitate her: likewise I can
neither be reproved, condemned, nor punished, having done nothing against the
law. That is a good turn or a favor which tends only to the profit of him
that receives it; but when he that does it, looks also for some commodity
thereby, the favor loses both his force and name: even so is thine, so that I
am in no sort beholding unto thee, and so consequently thou can not twit me
with ingratitude. If Virginius slew his daughter because he would not see her
forced to be unchaste, what ought thou to do unto thine, who had never any
desire to be chaste at all.

Declamation. 37.
Of him who is forsaken of his father for relieuing his ouncle, who also does
afterward forsake him for succouring his father.

TWo brethren are enemies; the one has a son, the other has no children,
neuerthe less by misfortune he becomes poor, his nephew takes his fathers
goods secretly, and releiueth his ouncle therewith, the father perceives it,
and forbids him to do so any more, yet he ceassing not from releeuing him,
his father disheriteth him, and drives him out of his house, he goes unto his
poor ouncle, who adopteth him for his son, and at the last chansing by
succession to be wealthy, he makes him his heir. In the mean season the
other brother falls likewise into poverty, whereupon his son does secretly
sustain him with his ouncles or his adopted fathers goods, who likewise
forbids him, and lastly drives him away and disheriteth him for the same
cause, whereunto the nephew opposes him, saying:

YOu cannot disherit me for the same reason which has induced you to adopt me,
for if it were well done to sustain you, it is yet a better deed to succor my
father. Charity is commendable toward all men, wherefore then would you alone
usurp it? the more miserable that a man is, the more requisite it is to be
charitable unto him, how much more then unto him that is enforced to hope, and
expect for relief at his enemies house, by the means of such a one whom he
has driven from him. You say that heretofore he forsook me. I answer that
the example of another man his vice, is no excuse but a great error: do you not
know that every prosperity is uncertain? What is he that having seen Marius
lying by the sea side upon the reeds, would ever have believed that he had been
Consul of Rome, or that ever he should so be again? What? do you think that
he which is most happy, need not to stand in doubt, and that he never may hope
to be unfortunate? Your self serves for an example of the contrary: consider
then that he which beggeth relief of you is your brother, which has craved of
his brother, receives it by the hands of his son, which is he that takes
naught of yours, but of the inheritance which you have already given unto him;
it is your nephew or adopted son which gives, because he will not suffer his
own father to perish with hunger, and by that means be adjudged unworthy of
your adoption. I do not overthrow you, but I feed one only old man, and I am
unto you in steed of many servants. All the world should perish if wrath were
not by mercy appeased. I am the only son which is always tossed between
two fathers, and still forsaken of the richest, but I take God to witness,
that leaving you rich, I will depart unto the doors of another, showing unto
every one him, for whom you disherit me; although I cannot be disherited, for
having done that whereunto the law both bound me and also constrained me, what
a matter were it if you should forbid me to weep when I see a man in misery?
Our affections are not in our own power. Many laws and customs unwritten,
are far more certain then those which are, of which the law of nature is
most infallible.

The Answer.
ALl that which thou have alleged is rather a boasting, then any acquitall or
excuse. Touching my fear it is just, for I ought not to take such a one for
mine heir which is unthankful, or rather mine enemy, wherefore I do forsake
thee, for although thou bear no malice unto him that has done me wrong,
yet do I hate him that has done thee injury; so great was my affection
toward thee: thou were no more his son being not only forsaken of him, but
also adopted by me, it was of me that he should have craved, not of thee. What
art thou that wilt appoint a law unto thine ouncle, thy supposed father, and
thy benefactor? we have not remitted our controversy unto thy judgment, for
we have God, the laws, and the Magistrates for judges.

Declamation. 38.
Of the Elians who did cut off the hands of Phidias, after he had made the
Image of Jupiter Olimpus.

THe law amongst the Grecians was, that whosoever committed any sacrilege,
should have his hands cut off: Whereupon it happened that the Elians required
and entreated the Athenians to lend unto them Phidias their grauer or caruer of
Images, a man most excellent in that art: whom they did lend unto the said
Elians to make an image of Jupiter Olimpus, upon a condition that they should
restore Phidias again unto them, or one hundred talents (which are threescore
thousand crowns) for him: the image being made, the Elians do pay Phidias his
wages, and afterward affirming that he has stolen gold forth of the temple,
they cut off both his hands, it may be through malice, because he should never
make any image so fair again, and so they send him so maimed home again
unto Athens, saying that they are quit of their promise; but the Athenians
demand the hundred talents, and say:

WE can no more be served by Phidias in any sort, for he was only able to
manifest his worthiness, so long as one might see his works: when he went
unto you he had hands, whereby he made the Image of Jupiter, it is you that
have committed sacrilege in cutting off his holy hands, your god was the
first that did behold the innocent blood of this workman, wherefore he shall be
a witness against you all: alas poor Phidias some men are relieved by their
cunning and skill in their miseries, but they have been the causers of thy
misery. Do you think that we do account him to be received being without
hands, whom you did require of us because of his hands? We having lent you such
a one as could make gods, you do restore us such a one as is not able only to
worship the^; Are you not ashamed to offend Jupiter with such sacrilege? It is
the man indeed: but the workman is lost, you do not restore Phidias at all,
but a continual grief, and a desire to have him, a grief to have him as he
is, and a desire to have him as he was; his hands which were wont to make the
gods, cannot now be held up to entreat men. Alack Jupiter was so rare a piece
of work, as the Elians were desirous it should be the last, to the end that
they might gain that glory to have the last and chiefest work that ever
Phidias made: we lent you the hands, we require the hands again. You make
your selves accusers, witnesses, and judges, whereby your falsehood is known,
for it is not like to be true that he (who neither was covetous nor took
pleasure in any thing but in his art, wherewith he gained more then he would)
should be a thief: moreover, he which made the gods would have disdained to
steal that which was hallowed unto them, wherefore we do call those gods which
Phidias has made, and those whom he might yet have made, against you; unless
you satisfy the contract: for we will confess that we have received Phidias,
if any do swear that we may be served by him, and you cannot deny but that
you have deceived us, but assure you, that we will be revenged of you therefore.

The Answer.
WE had gold, iuorie, and other holy things wherewith we determined that
Phidias should have made us diverse other Images, for the which cause we did
well reward him for the first: we did request him of you, to the end that the
gods might be served by him, and not to be robbed by him; but seeing the
contrary, we have judged that it is no less fit to revenge the wrongs done
unto the gods, then it is to pay their services. We are not the cause that
Phidias has lost his hands, but it is his offense, and the law: require of
them then your amends, or else complain of them and not of us, who have in all
things done what we ought, or if you will vex us wrongfullie for Phidias, we
will call upon those gods whom he has offended to help us, hoping by their
aid to destroy those which would hurt us.

Declamation. 39.
Of the son that defended his mothers cause, who being distraught, did
wrongfully accuse her self to be guilty of sacrilodge.

THe law says, that whosoever does voluntarily confess to have offended the
law, without any other witness is worthy of punishment. Whereupon it chanced
that a certain woman (having in one day lost her husband and two of her sons
by some violent death) did fall into such despair therefore, that she hanged
her self, but her third son happened to come before she was thoroughly
strangled, who cut the rope asunder, and after he had gotten her to life
again, he carried her unto the Temple, to the end that the respect of a place
so holy, might keep her from doing her self any hurt, then he went forth to
buy some sustenance to comfort her. In the mean season it happened that the
officer came in there to search for church robbers, this woman being desperate,
confessed that she had robbed the Temple, whereupon the Magistrate according to
the law would have her punished, but the son in the mean time happened to
come, who gaiinsaied it thus.

THat which is fallen out in our house, ought to protect my mother being
condemned here; wherefore I knowing the matter, it is lawful for me to examine
her my self of the offense in your presence, which she wrongfullie takes upon
her: moreover, it ought to be considered, that the law says, that those which
confess a crime, shall be condemned. Now to confess, is to aduouch the
accusation for fear of the rack or other tortures, but to accuse her self,
is not only a doubtful confession, but a sure, evident, and most manifest
desperation: and that it is so, it must be known of her how, and when she
committed this sacrilege? Or where she has bestowed that which she stole?
Truly she cannot prove her saying, but she thinks that she commits
sacrilege in suruiuing after the violent death of her husband and children,
and no other crime can be found in her; wherefore in her own opinion her saying
is true, but by the law she is not punishable, seeing that if I had not ben,
she had been dead already by her own hands. It behooves me to beseech the
judges to be merciful to the offenders, but I had need not only to entreat,
but also to compel my mother to take pity upon her self; what need you to
doubt if a woman overcome with sorrow desires death, when a number with over
exceeding joy have died suddenly? Whereby it plainly appears, what
weakness remains in the female sex, who therefore are not to be believed,
nor received for witnesses. But tell me good mother? Why do you not bear your
loss patiently, seeing that you see the gods themselves do lose that which is
consecrated unto them in their Temple: Alas worthy judges, you do well know
that the afflicted do more fear, honor, and reverence the gods, then those
that are in prosperity. How then should this woman, more woeful then any
other, presume to offend them with sacrilege? What need has she of riches,
that desires to live no longer? Neither has any children to leave them unto,
but me, who would redeem my father and brethren from death with those which I
have yet of mine own, me I say, who have and do love my mothers life better
then her wealth. Alas no want of riches, but want of heirs to possess them
is cause of her misery. You may say that she being angry against the gods for
her loss, and desirous to be revenged, has committed this sacrilege, there
is nothing more unlikely, for her courage is abated with grief, and she
attributes her mishap unto her self, and not unto the gods, neither is it the
least mischief that fortune does unto us, when being our greatest enemy, she
does not only make us miserable, but also supersticious, in such sort then we
bear the greatest reverence not unto the gods alone, but chiefly unto
inconstant fortune; all this is proved by her, because she had rather hurt her
self, then offend the gods, but if otherwise it were, far more easy had it
ben for her to have burned the Temple, the^ to have stolen the treasure locked
up under so many keys, wherefore you ought to weigh all the circumstances
together, and to be very careful that the law and the penalty thereof, which
serves for a terror unto the wicked and malefactors, be not inflicted upon
the innocent. For he commits a greater offense which punishes the innocent,
then he does that pardons the malefactor.

The Judge answers.
THere was never any sacrilege that could be hidden, for every tongue, and
especially the malefactors own tongue is ready to reveal it, as by this
woman it appears that accuses her self, provoked thereunto by the wrath of
the gods, who for her offense do pursue her: wherefore it is reason that I
appoint her to be punished, upon whom the gods disdain to show their miracle
in consuming her with lightening, as if she were unworthy to die by the hands
of any god, but they all together do pursue, and drive her to work her own
confusion by a most shameful death, the which by her being perceived, she
rather desired to die by her own hands, but they have not suffered her, to the
end that the wrong done unto their Deity, might be publicly revenged, and
that she might serve for an example unto all the world, so that thou were sent
by them to cut the cord asunder: but do thou think that a church robber may
die any other way then by justice? She has done as much as in her lay, to
conceal and not to confess her offense, yea, and that by the making of her
self away, yet she could not, but in spite of her, she was constrained to be
her own accuser, and to require her deserved punishment, which is no small
miracle. Therefore if thou desire to know her offense? It may only be
answered that she has committed sacrilege, the which she confesses and
aduoucheth. If thou demandest why she did it, I say that if she committed it
before the death of her children, it was to enrich them, if it were after their
death, it was because she would be revenged of the gods. Where thou say that
it had been more easy for her to have burned the Temple; in that thou show
thy self to be her son, but far more wicked then she, if it were not rage,
and ouergreat desire of revenge, that stayed her from making her choice,
according to her wicked intention? Thou would know where she has bestowed
that which she stole? I believe that she has given it thee, and that thou
would save her life, to have some more by the like means. Nevertheless, we
will punish her alone that confesses the fact, until that thy sins do
induce thee unto the like confession, or that thou be convinced by more
apparent testimony, and in so doing we shall appease the gods, fulfill the
laws, perform our duties, and clear our consciences, which commands us to
root out the wicked forth of the Commonwealth by public punishment, because
there is nothing that does better maintain the world in equity, then
rewarding the good, and punishing the bad.

Declamation. 40.
Of the wife that would not forsake her husband, although he went about to
procure her death.

IT happened that a man and his wife made an oath unto each other, that if one
of them chanced to die, the other should not survive above three days after.
Upon a certain time the man went upon a long journey, and being on his way, he
sent a false message unto his wife which certified her that her husband was
dead, she to keep her promise, threw her self down from the top of her
house, nevertheless she died not with the fall, wherefore her father caused
her hurts to be healed, and kept her until certain news came how her husband
was not dead, but had sent her word of his death, only because he was desirous
of his wives death. Whereupon her father would have compelled her to forsake
her husband, she would not, he renounceth her for his child, and disheriteth
her, for which she complains, saying:

O Immortal God, which by thy providence gouernest all mankind, thou have not
permitted that this fact should be for our hurt or destruction, but only for
a trial and proof of the love which I bear unto my husband, and yet my
father would separate those whom death could not put asunder: neither is that
which I have done to be thought strange, seeing that I had both cause to do
it, and the example of diverse women which have done the like, to allow it; for
some have burned themselves with the dead bodies of their husbands, others have
by their death redeemed their husbands life. I am therefore happy to be
accounted one of the same number being yet living, and my husband safe and
sound, who it may be would try whether I were worthy to be beloved of him, and
now knowing it, he will love me better then ever he did. The love which is
ouergreat is cause of suspicions and iealousies, and therefore my husband was
desirous not only to try whether I did not love some other, but also whether
he was beloved of me, and I am very glad that with the danger of my life he
has found me such a one as he desired. What wrong shall I then both do unto
my self, and unto him, if when I should reap the fruit of my loialtie and
most constant love, I should depart from him, God forbid I should so do.
Moreover, I should never be well able to live without him, for it was partly
the cause that I threw my self headlong down, because I would not languish
without the hope and comfort of his presence, which I shall now possess with
more pleasure then ever I did. To conclude, I cannot leave him, and if I could
I would not, wherefore it is lost labor to speak any more thereof.

The fathers Answer.
IT cannot be denied but that he which went about to procure my daughters death
is mine enemy, wherefore there is no reason that she which loves mine enemy
better then her own father, should be my heir: thou say I cannot, nor I
ought not to forsake him. Why cannot, or may not she so do, that cannot only
determine to die, but to be her own butcher? Having no sooner heard a fained
report of the death of thine enemy, thou soughtest thine own death in good
earnest, if thou could endure his abscence being gone on a long voyage, when
thou had occasion to love him, why can thou not now do the like having
just cause to hate him? Thou art quite freed from all former oath or promise
which thou have made him, in showing the desire which thou had to accomplish
that which he caused thee to swear, thereby not only to abuse thee, but to
make thee die. Thou say that all is fallen out for the best, I know not how
that should be, for as no bad act can be termed the author of any good, so
ought we not to judge things by the event, but by the intent; hardly can he
ever love thee, who as often as he sees thee, shall be either ashamed of his
fact, or aggreeued that it took not such success as he wished: likewise the
trial of love is not made by a danger so evident.

Declamation. 41.
Of the prodigal son who being forsaken of his father, redeemeth his brother
whom his father had neglected.

THe law was such, that when the children were thirty years of age, they
might require their father to give them their portion. Whereupon it chanced
that a man had two sons, the one of them was prodigal, and the other a good
husband. He gave the prodigal son his portion (who demanded the same by
virtue of the law) and did wholly disherit him from any of the rest of his
lands or goods: the other, who was the good husband, made a voyage by sea, and
fell into the hands of Pirates, he writ unto his father for his ransom, his
father was deaf and could not hear on that side: Whereupon his prodigal
brother redeemed him, who when he was returned home made his said brother his
heir, in recompense of his release by him, wherewith the father being
displeased, disinheriteth the thirsty son of his patrimony, who withstandeth
him thus:

ALl those which do know what I have done, do praise me for it, except you.
How true an example of pity and brotherly love has my brother showed, when
sailing to seek me, he has adventured great dangers, travailing over many
lands, and seas, never giving over his enterprise, until he had brought me
home again unto my fathers house: wherefore if you did love me as both my
obedience, and services deserve, and as nature does bind you, you could not
deny but to have received at his hands service most acceptable; And in
recompense thereof to have acknowledged him for your heir, as I have done: for
if for his prodigality you did disherit him, he has showed himself both
toward you and me not to be prodigal, but indeed very liberal. If you did
disher it him because he was unprofitable, he cannot now be termed so,
Seeing he could make so long a voyage, and when all fatherly love was in you
forgotten, he yet could perform the duty both of a good son, and a better
brother. You say that age hindered you from coming to redeem me at the
beginning of my captivity, what man is so old that could not sail so small a
way as I was from you? wherefore seeing you did it not, you ought to think
well both of him and me, for he has restored me unto you, and I would also
make him yours. If you disherited him because he was wicked, he is no such
man, seeing that he has been so charitable toward his father, brother, and
unto all those that love us. Lastly, as I cannot compel you to give me more
then the law appoints, so cannot you take that from me which you give me not,
but it appertains unto me presently after your death, even as you received it
from our grandfathers, seeing that I never offended you in any sort, unless
you will account, the duty which I use toward your son and my brother for
an offense.

The fathers Answer.
I Am constrained against my will to disherit you both twain, seeing that you
both take pleasure in displeasing me, wherefore I must imitate the physicians,
who in extremest diseases use most dangerous remedies: and as the Chirurgions
do oftentimes cut off the members to preserve the rest of the body, so must I
separate my sons from me, who are agreed together to anger me: thou would
have me take him for my heir, who has tried the law against his father, for
his patrimony; what will not he attempt then to abridge my life, for the rest
of my goods? But thou must consider that the law does allow thee only for a
minister or administrator of the patrimony, but not for lord thereof, and
therefore thou can not adopt thy brother. For the same law which condemned me
to give him his part, restrains thee to adopt him, seeing that he is above
the age of thirty years: for children also and such as are in their minority
ought to be adopted; moreover he is thy brother no more, seeing he has let to
be my son. But how can thou adopt any one for thine heir, seeing thou
art yet belonging to me? Or if thou art not mine, how can thou inherit my
goods? How would thou have power over thy brother, seeing thou will not
suffer me to have the like over thee? If he have deserved any good at thy
hands, thou oughtst to entreat me for him, and not to use your own authority.
Want of means and opportunity has hindered me from redeeming thee, and thou
would against my will give that unto mine enemy, which in spite of his
teeth he was enforced to leave me. O worthy Judges, I beseech you see unto
what extremity I am brought, seeing that one has taken away part of my
patrimony, and the other would that he should have the whole.

Declamation. 42.
Of the husband who gave two children unto his wife without telling her which
of them was her own.

A Certain woman died in childbirth of a son, whom the father sent to nurse
into the country, and within a few days after he married a young wench which
he had already got with child, she about a month after did also bear him a
son: whom he in like sort did send abroad to be nursed, handling the matter so
well, that not any besides himself did know which was the first or the last
child. About three years after he made the children to be brought home to his
house, and would not tell his wife which of them was hers. Moreover, they were
both of them so like the father, and so little like the mothers, that she
could not that way discern them, whereupon she accused her husband of bad
usage, who denied it thus, saying:

WHerefore do thou weep for thy child, seeing thou art sure to kiss him
and see him every day, if thou will, I would long since have told thee which
of them is thine, if I had not known that thou art as desirous to show thy
self a stepdame to the one, as a mother to the other. Consider only that the
one is thy son, and the other is his brother, and thy husbands son; love them
then for their own sakes, or else neither love nor hate them: but I perceive
that whilst thou desire to be a mother to the one, thou art a stepdame to
them both. If thou do constrain me to tell thee, never imagine that I will
tell thee the troth, wherefore I will not deceive thee as a mother, but as a
stepdame. Nature her self determined that they should be like each other, to
the end that they should be both thy children. Thou might very well know
which of them is thine, if the desire which thou have to hate the one did not
hinder thee, wherefore behold the one or the other with the eye of a mother in
law, and it may be the same will be thine own. Long since should I have told
thee the troth, if thou had ben less importunate to enquire it. I will that
thou alone should enjoy this benefit, either to have one son in law without
being a mother in law, or else to have two children without having suffered for
the birth of more then one of them. When they are of more age, mark which of
them will be more obedient unto thee, and the same shall be thy son, or at
the least shall deserve that thou should so account him: and give over
henceforth to bewail thy son, seeng thou art not only certain that thou
have him, but also that thou can not lose him, unless they do both die.

The wives answer.
YOu do me great wrong, for how can my son love, honor, and obey me aright, if
he be not sure that I am his mother, so that desiring to make me a mother of
two, you make both the one and the other to be my sons in law. You do well
know both your children, and have the joy thereof, but you deprive me of mine,
or rather, make me partaker of nothing but grief and sorrow: and being willing
to give a mother to your own, you deprive me of mine. You say well that I am a
stepdame to them both, but you are the cause thereof, and are worse then a
stepfather unto mine, seeing that you take his mother from him, or at the least
will not suffer him to know her.

Declamation. 43.
Of him who drunk poison with his wife, wherewith she died, and he made claim
unto her heritage by her Testament.

WHen Octauius, Marc Anthony, and Lepidas did part the Roman Empire between
them, many of the Nobles were slain, and others fled and were banished, or else
fined in a great sum of money paiable unto those which were appointed to kill
them. Amongst whom there was a Roman exile who was followed by his wife that
was very rich, whose chance was that upon a certain time she found her
husband in a secret place, holding a cup in his hand, she asked him what he had
in the cup, he answered that it was poison, and that he would poison himself
because he desired to live no longer in this misery; the wife answered that
she would not live without him, and therefore prayed him that she might drink
some part with him: whereunto he agreed, and having drunken part, he gave her
the rest, the which she did drink up, and died suddenly after. The husband
died not: but within a short while after by the means of his friends he was
called to Rome again, where being arrived, he showed a very plain Will of his
wives, wherein she left him heir of all her lands and goods; her kinsfolk who
did very well know how she came by her death, accused him for poisoning his
wife, complaining and saying in this sort.

HE hid himself with poison, because he would be sought and found by his wife,
he fained that he would drink it to make her drink thereof, he said he would
die, because she should desire to live no longer, He did drink in such sort of
the poison that he is yet living, and his wife dead: I would feign know then
what man did ever murder his wife more manifestly? Or what poison is that
which could not once kill so great an heir, who affirming that he would die,
after he had caused his wife to die, did himself escape: it is a great matter
that all the rest of the fugitives are become poor by the late edict, and this
man is made rich thereby, the others have lost their own goods, and he would
usurp the goods of another, as a reward for procuring the death of her, that
loved him more then her self, and so much did he know that she had witnessed
in his favor: she followed him when he was pursued by his enemies sword, and
under a fained coulor of love he has murdered her with poison. A goodly
exchange, she took his poison, and he her Testament, so soon as she had
drunken she died: but is there any doubt to be made of the force of the
venom? Seeing it was compounded and made by the heir, who might very well
drink part of the uppermost, as being less violent, either having an Antidot
very ready, or else having taken it before hand, thereby inciting his poor
wife by deceit to drink the bottom, where all the poison did lie, so as it
might very well be said, that he had the drink, and she the venom, which
long before he had prepared to hurt her alone. He did very well know that
she would not live without him, seeing that she was desirous to thrust her
self into most great dangers for his sake. If they are punished which kill
their enemies in open fight, what punishment is he worthy to have, which has
treacherously murdered his wife that loved him above all things; as he ought
to have loved her.

The Answer.
MY wife did love me in time of peace, she followed me to the wars, and in
exile in my greatest extremity she never left me, saying that it was a
righteous deed not to forsake him that was innocent: I had a just occasion and
was desirous to die, because I would not be put to death by the hands of a
hangman, or live continually in fear of mine enemies; They which are
deceitful do hide the truth, but I told her plainly, that it was poison
which I would drink, and as I never refused her any ^^ing, so also had I not
the heart to refuse her this last request, and the rather, because I was sorry
to leave her in misery, as well for the grief which I knew she would take for
me, as also, for the anguish and trouble she should suffer to live at the
discretion of such kindred as you are, who would never have cauilled for her
death, if the Will had been made in your favor; and if she had died intestate,
you would have quarrelled amongst your selves for her inheritance. And where
you say that I drank the first draught, it is true; because I did not only
always use to drink before her, but also because I hoped by this means dying
first, to shun the grief I should sustain to see her die before me. Moreover,
the poison was not of such quality as you say, no worse in the bottom then it
was above, for that which could not infect all the drink would be less able
to infect or kill any body: likewise I am sure that I did drink a sound
draught, more then the half. But I do now know to my great grief that my
wife was more tender then I, wherefore she is dead with that poison, which was
not of force enough to kill a man more strong. Also you need not demand (that
seeing I was desirous to die) why I would not make an end of my self when I
saw my wife dead, for touching this point, they cannot judge thereof, which
have not ben so near their death as I was, for they know not how horrible it
is in such an extremity, and especially every violent death, but more
chiefly that which is slow, and draws on by leisure: wherefore before you
can judge rightly thereof, you ought either to have tried this extreme point,
or at the least, to be as near your death as I, who shall never be sound
again, nor of any long life. Wherefore it is not for covetousness that I
require my wives inheritance, but thereby to have means as well to eternise
her good renown, as also because I would not suffer her last Will to be abused.

Declamation. 44.
Of him who having given over and forsaken two of his children, would not leave
the one of them with him that had fostered them up.

IT must here be considered, that in times past amongst the Grecians it was
lawful for such as would, either to slay their children, or to forsake them
and leave them at all adventures; and the law was such, that if any did find
them and bring them up, it was at the fathers discretion to redemand and take
again his child, paying for his nursing. Whereupon it happened that a father
through poverty was enforced to leave two of his children, being twins, to
the mercy of the world, which children another man chanced to find, and caused
them to be nursed, thinking to keep them as his own, for he had none. It
likewise chanced that within a certain time after, the father who had forsaken
them became rich; so that he desired to have his children again, and causing
them to be sought out, he which had fostered them, came unto him, saying that
if he would let him have one of them, he would give him the other, and he should
choose which of them both he would have, the father agreed thereunto, but seeing
the children he took them both again. The foster father summoned the father
to the law for one of them, the father defended himself saying:

HOw would thou have me make partition of my children with thee, seeing that
I made a refusal thereof, especially to the mother which has conceived and
born them? I have begotten them both, I have desired them both I took pain
for them both, they were both borne together, they were both left, or lost
together, because I knew that being twins the one could not live without the
other, thou foundest them together, thou have fostered them up together, and I
have found them together again, wherefore then in the restoring should they be
sundred; especially seeing fortune which once separated them from their
Parents, would never sunder them one from another, how could I choose the one,
and leave the other, seeing that because I could not choose, I did leave them
both? if the martial law, which is the cruellest, does not suffer that two
brethren being taken in the war should be sundred, how does the Civil law
allow it in these here, who are not only brethren, but may well be termed
the half of one another, each of them loses his grace and worth if he be
absent from the other. I should do a wrong in desiring thy children, but not
in retaining mine: why would thou have acquaintance to sunder that, which
abandoning to the world could not separate? I would give al for my child except
my child only, I made the bargain weeping and trembling as much as when I
departed from them, for I was constrained by force and necessity, because I
could not find the one without promising the other. It is enough of the first
wrong that I did unto my children, in expulsing and leaving them through
necessity, without adding thereunto a second injury, which would be in
seperating them willingly, seeing the law, my duty, and the equity of the
judges may be my warrantise; for every agreement made by fear or force is
nothing worth, but only those which are willingly made, or according to the
laws.

The Answer.
IF thou will not separate them, reason commands thee to leave me both twain,
seeing thou had not only the heart to leave them at all adventures, but
further also thou have been accustomed to live without them, but I leaving the
one shall never be but in perpetual grief and anguish for the other, seeing I
have been accustomed to have them both, do thou think that he uses force or
constraint that makes thee a father when thou never hopedst to be one, I have
freed them from the danger to be devoured of brute beasts, or to die with
hunger, I have nursed and fostered them, I do restore one unto thee, yea and
give thee thy choice, wherefore no man is a loser but I, although the judges
should be never so righteous and favorable to my most just demand.

Declamation. 45.
Of him which stroke his father by the compulsion of a Tyrant, whom he
afterward did slay, and requires a reward therefore.

THe law appointed, that whosoever did strike his father, should have his hands
cut off. Whereupon it chanced that the King being a Tyrant, caused a man and
his two sons to be sent for unto his palace, and having brought them up unto
the top of a high tower, he commanded the sons upon pain to be thrown
headlong down, to strike their father, and he would defend them from the
punishment which by the law was appointed; one of them because he would not
strike his father, threw himself down, the other did give his father a blow
with his fist, whereupon the Tyrant who did greatly fancy, and daily sought
such men as were wicked, entertained him into his serui^e, and loved him so
dearly as he wholly put his trust in him: but as Treason does oftentimes spring
of too much trust, so this man took an occasion to slay the Tyrant, as well to
revenge his brothers death, and the injury done unto his father and him, as
also to win honor, and gain the reward promised secretly by the Citizens to
him that should kill the Tyrant: who having slain him, demanded the said
reward; but the ungrateful people accused him for striking his father, for the
which they would have his hands chopped of. Whereunto the poor father would in no
sort consent, but gainsaied him thus:

I Should be more happy if I did rather defend many malefactors, then one
only innocent: will you cut off those hands which has slain the Tyrant, and
restored you your liberty? what do you mean, why did you not cut off the
Tyrants hands, that constrained my son to transgress our laws, so that it was
as necessary for him to strike his father, as it was lawful for others to rob
Temples, and to ravish the Virgins and wives. O how much do we owe unto those
hands, by the which such cruelty is brought unto an end, the tyrant did trust
that by the same hands he might shame some, and slay others; but they have
deprived him of the means to perform either the one or the other: but how much
more am I indebted unto this my son, then unto the other that brake his own
neck? For he did not that to spare his father, but himself, because he cared
not though I had died with sorrow, which no doubt I should have done, if this
here had done as much, and in smiting me has he not only saved my life so
much, as he has afterward likewise preserved the Commonwealth. Alas my
poor children what great extremity have you both endured, by the cruelty of
a Tyrant? The one has broken his neck, and the other to his most great grief
too was enforced to beat his father: but far greater praises does he deserve
that has slain the Tyrant, then the other does which did murder himself.
What offense has this my son and your protector committed? Save only that in
lifting up his fist, and gently letting it fall again, he fained to strike his
father, who in like sort seemed as though he were aggreeued therewith, but both
the one and the other did it to escape a worser mischief, and to perform a
greater good: necessity in all does greatly excuse humane weakness, and
therefore the Saguntines were not only excused, but exalted for slaying their
fathers; which is more then a light stroke. His brother in leaving me at the
Tyrants mercy did worse then he, who without hurting me, has saved me. You
say that he had no respect unto the law, I know well that the law is strict,
but the interpretation is large: if one being mad chance to strike another, he
is not punished: Neither yet is the little child which strikes his father
condemned: For the mad man has more need of pity then punishment, and is
rather to be helped then hurt; and the child has neither strength nor
understanding to offend: these two points in such an extremity are found in my
son, for in striking me, he endured a greater pain then I; if those women
who were defloured by the Tyrant, are not esteemed unchaste, Nor those Priests,
which through force or fear have brought the treasures of the Temple unto the
tyrant, are not deemed culpable, Wherefore then should my son be blamed who
fained to strike his father? Thereby not only to save his life, but to kill the
Tyrant, revenge the ravished women, and to restore both the treasure unto the
Temples, and also to purchase freedom unto all; I did command him to strike
me, wherefore he should have sinned more in disobeying me, then in obeying the
Tyrant therein; so that he has not offended me, but spared me. Moreover, the
revenge or punishment of a sons offense against the father, lies in the will
and discretion of the father: if any other had stricken me, and I had no desire
to complain, no man could compel me thereunto, or pursue him for me, what do
you mean then by this? Seeing that he which has given the blow, has endured
the greatest grief and hurt thereby, and that he which received the same,
commanded the other to give it him.

The Answer.
THe more you defend your sons cause, the more you make him culpable, for you
showing your self loving and pitiful unto him, do likewise show, that he
ought rather to have died a thousand times, then to have strooken so good and
loving a father: what does he then deserve that has smitten such a one to
please a Tyrant, Whose servant he afterward became? You say he did it to
profit the Commonwealth, and we doubt it, for we cannot begin to do good, by
performing a mischief; and he has offended the Commonwealth more by his
wicked example, the^ can well be expressed: for never was it found before,
that any was so bold to strike his father. If he would not prevent his
brother, yet should he at the least have followed him? Who chused to die rather
then to see his father stricken, so should they both have been an example of
pity, where now one of them loses part of his glory by being brother unto a
man so wicked, for the one cannot be mentioned without the other. You say that
you pardon the wrong which he has done you? But the law pardons him not for
transgressing it. You say I would needs be stricken? but we say that his
brother would not that you should. It seems by your speech, that even as the
Tyrant judged him a fit man to commit a vilanous act, so you likewise had the
same opinion, and seeing that you could not escape, you fained that you were
willing to be stricken, for fear of being slain altogether: Lastly, he has
smitten his father, knowing that it was against his brothers will, and against
the decree of the law, so that he being guilty, is likewise worthy of
punishment.

Declamation 46.
Of the bondsman who having saved his Master, his son, and goods, together
with his daughters honor, pretends to marry her.

A Tyrant standing in doubt that his Citizens would attempt some conspiracy
against him, took the bondmen of all the city into his favor, giving them
freedom, and inciting them to murder their masters, they fearing the effect
thereof, did suddenly fly forth of the city, leaving their houses, wives,
and children in danger at the mercy of the Tyrant, who to take away al means
and hope from the Citizens; and from the slaves all possibility ever to be
reconciled unto their masters, suffered and commanded the said slaves to ravish
their wives and daughters: Shortly after the Tyrant died suddenly by
mischance, whereupon the Citizens returned by force into the city, and caused
all the slaves to be executed or hanged, except one, who having fained that he
had ravished his masters daughter, did faithfully preserve and keep her with
all his goods, and restored her a virgin unto his Master, moreover, he did
forewarne the Citizens of the dangers which would follow, wherewith his Master
received such contentment, that he gave him his daughter in marriage. But the
said Citizen had a son, who opposed himself thereunto, accusing his father
to be void of understanding, and said thus:

Our grief would be the less, if the Tyrant and not the father had made such
marriages. Can any man say that he has not lost his wits, which seeks
rather to immitate the Tyrant his enemy, then his bondsman? Who has at the
least shown more love unto him, then he does either to son or daughter,
seeing that he makes himself like unto the Tyrant. If the bondsman had lien
with my sister, I had caused him to be hanged as well as the rest, and now you
your self would have him to lie with her: you say that it is by marriage, I
deny that, for marriage is meant betwixt those which are worthy one of
another, either in deed, or opinion: Then seeing none besides you, who are mad,
of that opinion that a slave may be worthy to be your son in law, and my
brother in law, it can be no marriage: and were it otherwise, I say that this
marriage brings more shame, then if she were ravished or abused by a Noble
man, for then at the least the child which should so be borne, should be more
worthy and be better respected then the child of a bondsman. Who would ever
have thought that the Lord or Master would have suffered his slave further
then the Tyrant would his friend? It may therefore very well be said that
whosoever makes such marriages, is either a fool or a Tyrant, of whom the one
deserves death, and the other to lose al authority. O what a fair son in
law has he chosen, who has nothing of any worth in him, but that he has
kept himself from being hanged with the rest of his fellows? Alas my sister
shall then being under the power of her father, lose her virginity, which was
so carefully preserved when she was under the power of the Tyrant, and he
shall be thought worthy of such a marriage, which was not deemed worthy of
the gibbet. Far more happy are those which were defloured, for they
nevertheless do now take such other husbands as are worthy of them. It is a
goodly matter when the father makes such a match for his own daughter as the
Tyrant did for those of his enemies. Ah unfortunate sister, who being under the
tyrants power did desire thy father, and under thy fathers power, thou
desire the Tyrant, who would yet defend thee from this injury. Is this a
small reward for a bondsman to see all his fellows on the gallows, yet himself
to be free from the like? you say that he has not ravished his mistress, say
likewise that he has not slain his master, nor used poison nor sorcerie: do
you say that he does a good act that keeps himself from crime for fear of
punishment? Our misery is as great now as the shame which the other maids and
wives have suffered during the Tyranny, for this is done during our freedom:
the others shame was in the absence of their Parents, but this is in the
presence of hers; the others shame was called deflouring, but this here cannot
be called constraint but a voluntary consent. It was not virtue that kept him
from doing as much as the others, but the fear to be hanged with the others,
he knew very well that God would not suffer so cruel a tyranny to endure, and
when the Citizens returned, the slaves should be punished: But why will you
marry your daughter to one so vild and base, who having her in his power, both
esteemed, and knew himself to be unworthy of her? Wherein only he deserves
some recompense, which may be done in giving him freedom and means to live,
but you must not give him her, for whose sake chiefly you would reward him.

The Answer.
I Do now know very well that thou art ignorant how true nobility proceeds
from virtue, or else you would not judge this man to be ignoble, who is truly
virtuous; seeing neither the greedy desire of wealth was able to win him, nor
the provoking of lust could entice him, nor yet the fear of punishment and
cruel death might once terrify him to swerve from his duty. Who does not
know, if the tyrant should have had but the least inckling of his fidelity
toward me, that he alone should have suffered the same death which has been
inflicted upon all the rest. Wherefore I cannot bestow too much upon him, who
has not spared his own life for my honor alone, but for the honor of all
our lineage, from the which he ought not to be excluded. But where do you find
that marriage consists in the equality of persons, do you not know that M.
Cato married a pore Plebeians daughter; as also a number of other like examples
might be rehearsed. And if you stand upon worthiness, you shall find that
your sister deserves to have but an honest man, and such a one you cannot
deny him to be, unless you speak untruly: Nature has not made any bond or
free, but it is fortune that imposes such names both on the one and the other,
wherefore Plato has not said in vain, that Kings are born of bondmen, and
bondmen of Kings. Finally, if my daughter will not take him for her husband,
she will as well cause me to suspect that she is aggreeued or displeased with
him in that he took not his pleasure with her so soon as he might, as I do
already believe, that you would have her to die without children, because you
might be the sole heir of all my living.

Declamation. 47.
Of him that would not deliver his brother, that had accused him falsely to have
slain his father.

IT was an ancient law, that whosoever did bear false witness being convinced
thereof, he should remain his bondsman against whom he was a witness.
Whereupon it chanced that a certain man which had two sons, carried one of
them abroad into the country with him, within a small time after the son
came home again alone, the other son accused his brother that he had slain
his father, and added such apparent likelihood unto his sayings, that the other
being upon the rack, confessed the offense which he had not committed; so that
he is condemned to a cruel death: but a certain solemn feast drawing near
at hand, some of his friends found the means to reprieue him until the said
feast should be ended: in the mean time the father returned home to his house
safe and sound, whereupon he which was condemned, accused his brother of false
witness, and having convinced him thereof, put him in prison: but the father
entreated his son to deliver his brother, the which the other refused to doc,
so that his father threatened to disherit him saying:

What can thou say save only thy brother has produced or born false
witness against thee? I say that he thought he had said the truth, for the
love which he did bear unto me, and the fear that he had of my death did make
him beside himself: but if thou desire to prove him more faulty, then I
say be thou merciful, and every one will say, that he did much amiss to
offend so kind a brother. Art thou abashed that thou foundest thy brother so
cruel against thee, seeing that he believed or thought that thou had
slain thy father and his? Why wilt not thou suffer me to have two children?
will thou torment thy brother to procure my death thereby? If it be so, he
has not altogether accused thee wrongfullie. Alas one of my sons was in
prison because I did not return, and the other is in prison because I am
returned. If thou do not set him at liberty, I will live no longer: whereby
it shall be known that thou wantedst not the will, but the means or occasion
to murder me, and it will be said that thy brothers meaning was not so bad
against thee, as it was good toward me, seeing that he inwardly perceived
thine iniquity, and in forsaking me or returning without me, thou thy self
were the cause that he accused thee. Do thou not perceive that I am fastened
even amidst the self same chains wherewith my son is fettered, and that the
same bond which binds his hands, does burden my heart? Churlish and
ungracious as thou art, wherefore do thou keep thy brother in prison and
thy father in thraldom, who by his return has saved thy life? The which (if
otherwise he should have done) thou could (next unto God) never hold of any
other then of him.

The Answer.
WHerefore should I pardon him, who not only sought my death, but endeavored
to procure my perpetual defamation; It was to my great danger that I was
imprisoned, condemned, and delivered, wherefore no man but my self can
rightly judge of my passion; He falsely alleged that I had slain my father,
thereby to cause me to die forwith, me I say who was ever a most kind brother
unto him; who knows not that the greater the love is, the more vehement is
the hate when it is once justly conceived. The hangman being more pitiful
then he, was the first that brought me news of my fathers return. If I had
ever ben wickedly minded, I should not have had so just a cause to be angry? Is
it to be wondered at, if I detain him prisoner that sought to bring me to a
shameful end, it may be to murder you afterward secretly? It is not only a
hate, but a fear which I have, least he should complot some other Treason
against me, that hinders me from delivering him. What is he that did not
very plainly perceive, that the only prolonging of my punishment procured his
pain, although the daily expecting thereof did more displease me, then the
present suffering the same could have daunted me, seeing the hangman always
before me, who was himself affrighted at those torments which were prepared
for me. If my father do love me as well as he does my brother, I would know why
he died not at his return for sorrow, seeing me at the gibbet? It is he then
for whose sake he would disherit me, that by one only treason did think to
murder both his father and his brother, that he might as well be sole heir,
as also possess the whole inheritance the sooner.

Declamation. 48.
Of a father that would renounce his son for marrying a maid that had freed him
from her fathers prison.

A Certain man being taken by Pirates or rouers on the sea, writ unto his
father for his ransom, the father excused himself, so as the other remaining
without hope of releasement, is relieved by his daughter who was captain of the
Pirates: and she was not only favorable unto him during his imprisonment, but
also promised to set him at liberty, and to fly away with him, if he would
swear to marry her, either when he came home, or by the way: He did swear,
and married her solemnly before he came where his father remained; who was
discontented therewithal, and would have had him to forsake her for to marry
with a rich inheritrix, but he would not: whereupon his father would disherit
him, saying:

O What a great joy may thou hope to have of thy wife, or what comfort can I
expect of my daughter in law? Who for the love of a stranger, cared not to hate
her own father: Yea, and was not ashamed to disclose her disordinate lust unto
one whom she never knew before. Thou will say that first of all she had
compassion of thy misery, and from that compassion did love spring; but I
answer that it was neither compassion nor love toward thee, but rather a
desire to satisfy her own lust and pleasures, that provoked her to deliver
thee: wherefore thou art not in any sort bound unto her having partly satisfied
her desire, for it should be impossible for thee wholly to satisfy the same;
seeing the dry earth, the grave, and a woman's womb, are three insatiable
things.

The Answer.
I Should greatly err to put away, or leave her, who has not forsaken me in
such a place, where not only my father himself feared to come, but also where
he either durst not, or would not once succor or relieve me. If you had seen
my body ouerloden with chains and bonds, my hollow cheeks, my deep sunken
eyes, as also my black and unprofitable hands clogged with gives, you would
truly have said that compassion only moved her to deliver me, the which she
could not do without running away with me; and because I would not be
unthankful for so high a favor, what better reward could I bestow upon her then
my self, since I was the chiefest cause that she has nothing wherewithal to
marry her: being then my wife, she could do no less then love me, but if it
had been so that she had loved a captive, a slave, or at the least one far
more miserable, Yet ought she not to be therefore condemned. The Romans in
times past did worthily take a bondsman to be their King. Misery or poverty
neither hinders nor corrupts virtue, but makes it more excellent, and is
oftentimes the cause whereby a man may show himself more worthy: but what
think you of a number of Romans, who being violently taken from the plough,
have nevertheless greatly enriched and increased the Commonwealth by their
poverty? why then should I make her miserable, that has freed me from
misery? If I should be so ill disposed, yet ought you both to reprove me and
chastise me for it: suffer me then to perform my duty, seeing you are not
willing either toward her or me to perform yours. And in that she loved me
better then her father, I am so much the more bounden unto her.

Declamation. 49.
Of one that was likely to be defrauded of the honor due to him for his
victory: because he had taken the arms belonging to a dead man.

A Certain valiant conqueror chanced to die, who having made his Testament, he
ordained that all his arms should be hanged up for a Trophey about his
sepulcher, and that it should not be lawful for any man to take ought thereof
away. It chanced that another man (who tofore time had been no less famous for
his victories in the Commonwealth then the other) lost his arms in the wars,
and being charged by the enemies, he fled in the city even unto the sepulcher
aforesaid, from whence he took the dead man's arms, wherewith he returned unto
the fight, and there behaved himself so valiantly, that he came home again a
conqueror. But like as virtue is evermore persecuted by envy, so he (having
placed the arms again from whence he had taken them, and received the
triumph of his victory) is accused of sacrilege, and for robbing the
sepulcher of another man by taking away his arms; but he excused himself of
the crime saying:

THese arms stood more in need of my aid, then I of their assistance, for the
victory which I have obtained has kept the enemies from taking the city,
and all that therein is, and although it were otherwise, yet could not that be
termed violence which one takes without resistance to a good intent, and with
a will to restore it again. Many speak of arms which know not what they
mean, for these here being in my hands at the combat were arms, but so long
as they shall remain in the temple, or about the sepulcher, they can be termed
no other then spoils, or an unprofitable Trophey, so that it may well be
said, that the arms stood in need of my strength. I lent my self unto them,
whereby also the Commonwealth has received great benefit, and the dead man and
his arms have gained more thereby then they lost, for the dead shall be the
more eternised, and his arms the more famous. Necessity is not only without
law, but she her self is the law of time. Wherefore oftentimes she causes the
richest merchandise to be thrown into the sea to unburden the ship: or to
break down, and overthrow some houses to save others from fire: so likewise is
one or more members cut off to save the rest of the body: how much more
lawful is it then in a necessity to do a good act, as I have done three, for I
have overcome the enemy, assured the Commonwealth, and increased the glory of
these arms, in making them double victorious. Is it not apparentlie known
that many do morgage, and sell all the jewels and relicques of the church, to
conserve the Commonwealth? Wherein then have I offended, employing for the same
a thing of so small a value, which served but for an unprofitable show?

The Answer.
THy fault is very manifest having showed thy self badlie furnished for the
combat, but ready enough for the flight, and in the one and the other very
cowardly; as also no less impudent in defending thy cause, then impious in
committing so vild a crime: to prove this my saying true, thou have either
lost, or forsaken thine arms, the which any man of worth does far prefer
before his life. Thou could not then (by thine own saying) recover that
dishonor of thy loss, without taking away a dead man's arms, which were
hallowed and consecrated to the church; and thou have no other excuse for thy
theft or rapine, but that thou did lose thine: seeing then that both the
one and the other act is most execrable, whether of the twain will best serve
thee for an excuse? Thou say, I have set the arms in their place again;
thou do thereby confess that it was not lawful to take them thence. It
seems thou would infer, that thou deseruest very much in that thou
did not leave them, as thou did thine own, and it appears by thy
speech, that having restored them again, the law has in no sort been
offended; I answer, that in performing this offense, thou have done like unto
him that should first wound a man, and afterward heal him again; or like
unto him that restores any stolen goods, not only when he has no more need
thereof, but after that he has enriched himself by the means thereof. It
might have been sufficient for thee, that thou had saved thine own life and
revenged the death of thy followers by these arms, without usurping the triumph
and glory of the good luck which they did yet contain by the virtue of the
dead man: wherefore thou art only beholding unto them, else might thou as
well have been conqueror with thine own arms, without usurping or taking away
these which thou knew to be victorious. There is no reason then to pardon
the fault which thou thy self have committed, for any the good success we
have received by another man's weapons; and although the same should so be
according to thine own desire, yet must we do justice, and even as thou have
obtained the honor and triumph of a conqueror, so must thou endure the
punishment due for crime.

Declamation. 50.
Of an adulterer, who having slain a Tyrant, claims the reward and honor
that was promised, the which was refused to be given unto him.

A Certain Tyrant having by force obtained the sole government of a
Commonwealth, the Citizens thereof did secretly ordain amongst them, that
whosoever could slay the said Tyrant, he should have ten thousand crowns in
recompense, and his statue or image should be set up in the Temple, and be
called the only patron and protector of his country. Whereupon it happened
that a young man did so well court the Tyrants wife, that he inioied her at his
pleasure, and oftentimes he went unto her by night disguised, and sometimes in
the habit of a woman. In the end he was suddenly surprised by the Tyrant, who
would have slain him, but the young man being the stronger, or rather being
aided by the wife, took the tyrants sword from him, and slew him. Wherefore
he demanded of the Commonwealth the recompense promised unto him which should
slay the Tyrant; but the Citizens gainsaied his demand in this sort:

IF the Tyrant himself had not armed thee, thou had never slain him, but
what shall I say, Seeing that one Tyrant murdered another at all adventures?
For adultery is no less offense then tyranny: but of whom requirest thou a
reward for thy not suffering him to slay thee, Seeing that even those which are
most wicked, do eschew death as much as they may? the tyrant should have
deserved as much if he had slain thee, as thou do in killing him, so that
can be said to be nothing else but an equal combat, the issue whereof has
been happy for thee: neither did the honester, nor the innocenter man get the
victory, but rather the stronger, or the vilder person. Seeing it was manifest
that the Tyrant came to murder thee who were as wicked as himself, and that
he brought the means to kill himself, why come thou alone to demand the
reward? The which if any were done, ought to be divided in three parts, that
is to say, one part to the Tyrant for bringing thee a sword, another part to
his wife for helping thee to take it from him, and the last and least part for
thy self: Moreover, thou did not enter armed as those do which would kill,
but thou camst delicatlie apparelled, and perfumed into the chamber, not
without good espiall before hand of the Tyrants absence. A valiant man no
doubt, who desired not to find the Tyrant, but his wife, who was not pricked
with hate, but passioned with love. They which go purposely to kill any one
do arm themselves with courage and courtelax, and do go thither where they
think to find those they mean to kill. Every noble act is begun with an
intent, and performed by occasion: for as oftentimes the virtuous enterprises
are rewarded, although the success do fall out sinisterly, so are wicked
enterprises not left unpunished, although they succeed not according to the
meaning of the malefactor; and as virtue without effect loses not her glory,
even so likewise is that never allowed for virtue, or worthy of reputation,
which happens by fortune, or chance. The wisdom of our Senate, would never
have appointed so great a reward for him that should slay the Tyrant, if they
had thought the same should have been performed by so wicked a person, not
willingly, but by constraint, not by virtue, but by vice. Never was there heard
of such a combat, for he which was counted the vildest caitife, did fight for
the best and honestest cause; the Tyrant fought to revenge his own wrong, and
his wives reputation, and thou to maintain thy lewd act and foul adultery: so
that it may truly be said, that thou did murder a woman's husband, and
fortune has slain the Tyrant, by whose death the Commonwealth has gained her
freedom, although he was not slain for the same intention. It is a goodly
matter to see thee come polluted with the kisses of an adulterous minion, to
demand the recompense belonging unto a virtuous man; this honor should be due
unto such a one as had freely killed the Tyrant, being thereunto provoked by
virtue; but not unto thee, who did it by chance or constraint, thereby to
defend thine own life: wherefore the same life which thou have saved by this
deed, is a recompense great enough for thy desert; or if thou will deny this,
consider that first we must punish the vice, and afterward reward the virtue:
thou can not deny but that thou did first commit adultery before thou
sluest the tyrant, first then suffer punishment for thy fault, and then we will
afterward consult whether thou deseruest that reward which thou demandest. But
above all things remember this, that no good act is to be attempted by
mischief, neither must virtue be attained unto by vice.

The Answer.
YOu say that I went not of purpose to kill the Tyrant, seeing that I did go
unarmed: But I affirm that I did, which is plainly approved by his death. In
that I was unarmed, it does not any whit deminish my virtue, but rather augment
my danger, the which not to esteem, nor fear, can be no other then virtue.
You must not examine what I carried into the Castle, But what I took away
thence; Likewise never ask wherefore I went thither, but mark what I have
done there: True it is that the sword was none of mine, but the hands were
mine, the courage, counsel, danger, pains, and lastly the act was mine. Do
you call me an adulterer, who am the only cause that your wives need not stand
in fear to be any more ravished? I did warily consider (seeing the strong
fortification of the castle) what means there might be to kill the Tyrant,
but having tried the soldiers, the servants, and the maids, I could find no
fitter occasion, then by the means of his wife, who long before had been
liberal enough of her honor unto others: furthermore, it can be no more
termed adultery to cuckold a Tyrant, then it is reputed murder to kill a
Tyrant; but it is rather worthy of reward. Moreover, it was very dangerous to
carry a sword secretly into the castle, but very easy to find one there, for
my purpose was that if I could meet with the Tyrant, every thing should serve
me for a sword; likewise I was sure that he never went without a sword, and
that when two strive for one sword, it remains unto him that is the strongest
or worthiest. Also I was not ignorant how God does always resist such wicked
persons as he was, and does favor such lawful enterprises as mine: and you
cannot say that I went not to seek the Tyrant, seeing I stayed of purpose for
him even in his bed chamber, whether I was sure that he used to come all alone.
Take not then that from me by your malice, which is due unto me by my virtue
and manhood.

Declamation. 51.
Of the father that adopted for his heir, the son of his forsaken son.

THere was a man which had two sons, the one whereof he did utterly denounce
and forsake, in that he had married with a woman of lose life, by her had a
son, and afterward fell sick: Whereupon he sent to entreat his father to come
at the least to visit him once before he died, who being come unto him, his
forsaken son commended his little child unto his care, and then died
suddenly. Wherefore the grandfather was so greatly moved with compassion that
he adopted the child for his own, and made him coheire with his other son,
who being therewithal displeased, accused his father to be void of his
senses, but he gainsaid him thus:

THis were a very new manner of losing a man's wits, seeing that by your saying
I should be very wise, if I did not know those which were mine own. Truly I
did expect that some body should have entreated or requested me to have
revoked this my poor forsaken son, but no man durst be so bold, seeing thou
which were his brother, did never do thine endeavor therein: wherefore it
is to be supposed, that all men knowing thy ambition to be fool heir, they
feared to displease thee. Alas this poor man's life was only prolonged but
until he might speak with me, and when he had once heard me, he opened his
eyes, (shut up in a manner already) to see me, retaining his fleeting soul
but only whilst he bad me farewell, so that I may rightly say he left both
life and child in my bosom. To conclude, I well perceived by his end (but
alas too late) that he was truly my son; but thy rigorous cruelty toward
him, and thy great ingratitude toward me, makes mec in doubt whether thou art
his brother or no.

The Answer.
THe father of this child is unknown, and although he were, yet do your own
deeds sufficiently testify that you are not well in your wits, if you forsook
my brother without a cause: but if he were worthy of your displeasure, he did
yet further deserve it in marrying with a lewd woman, and if he by this marriage
were the more unworthy to be revoked, much more unworthy then is this bastard
and unknown child, to be your heir: so that I know not whether of the two
injuries you do unto my brother is the greater; either in taking away part of
his brothers inheritance from him, or in adopting him a false heir. Being
persuaded and importuned by this dishonest woman, he recommended unto you his
son, which he did very well know he never begat: but what cannot such women
persuade? Or what will he refuse to do for a whore, that was not ashamed to
give himself unto her? How then can you be judged wise in adopting another
man's son, to disherit your own?

Declamation. 52.
Of the unchaste woman that was adjudged to be thrown headlong down more then
one time.

A Woman that was attainted of whoredom, and for the same condemned to be cast
headlong down from the top of an high tower, being ready to be thrown
down, did pray unto God that he would declare her innocence, in preserving her
from death; her prayers being ended, she fell from the top down to the ground
without receiving any hurt at all. Nevertheless, the Marshall would have
thrown her down again. Whereunto she replied in this sort:

Wherefore will you resist the will of God, which has preserved me? And were it
not so, yet is the judgment accomplished. I was (though wrongfullie) condemned
to be thrown headlong down, I have so ben, my judgment and execution being
accomplished, what would you else do? Am I not acquitted, Seeing that it was not
said that I should be executed any more then once? Neither is any man ever
executed two times, especially because every judgment ought rather to be
mittigated by clemency, then aggrauated by cruelty. If you would punish me
for the offense which you suppose I have committed against God; seeing he has
declared me to be innocent, why would you offend him in punishing me? It is the
usual place from whence others are thrown down, wherefore it is very
likely, that if I had been guilty, I should no doubt have died as well as they.

The Answer.
THou show thy self to be as shameless at thy punishment, as thou were
when thou did commit the offense which thou would now deny. Know thou
not that denial after sentence is once past, is nothing available? The
meaning of which sentence must be interpreted, which is, that thou must die,
likewise it is either a chance that thou art not dead, or else thou use some
charms or witchcraft: for were it as thou say, that God would have thee
saved for thine innocence; he would rather have defended thee before thou
had been condemned falsely, then sheilded thee from death after thy fall:
but it is more likely that he would prolong thy pain, because so short a death
is too easy for so heinous a crime as thine is: or else because thou have
committed other offenses, he would have thee cast down more times then once;
for God is not so slack to help the innocents: He saved Susanna before she
was stoned, not suffering the stones to touch her body. Finally, if it be his
divine will that thou should be unpunished, thou shall have as little hurt
at the second or third throwing down as thou had at the first.

Declamation. 53.
Of her who having killed a man being in the stews, claimed for her chastity
and innocence to be an Abbess.

THe order of the religious women is such, as they must be pure, chaste, and
free from all crime, but the Abbess must be the chastest of all the rest.
Whereupon it chanced that a certain young Nun of Naples was to sail into
Sicilie to be an Abbess there, but her misfortune was such, that she was taken
upon the sea by Pirates, they sold her unto a bawd in Barbary, who put the
said Nun into a Brothelhouse to get money by her, but she declaring her
misfortune unto such men as came to take their pleasure of her, did so win them
by her persuasions, that they giving her the accustomed reward, left her a
virgin: until that on a time there came unto her an insolent souldior, who
would in no sort regard her speech but having paid his money, would by force
have had his will of her, and as he was striving with her, she drew his dagger
forth of his sheath, and slew him, for the which she was put in prison, but
being before the Judges, she was not only acquitted of the murder, but also
they sent her back unto Sicilie unto the place whether she was determined to
go. She being there arrived, they would not receive her for Abbess, but said.

THis woman here which would be an Abbess, should yet have been in the
Brothelhouse, if she had not murdered a man; but can she be chaste, coming
from such a place? Nay let us see whether it be lawful to receive such into
monasteries, whom the stews and the prison forsakes, Seeing the order of
religion may very lawfully be denied, even unto those as do but only pass by
such places? she says fortune constrained me unto these inconveniences,
therefore ought every one to have compassion upon me: but we say that those
which are worthy of pity, are unworthy of a prelateship, neither is it a
custom amongst us, that such places as are of greatest honors should be
bestowed in recompense of sustained harms, seeing that the only freeing them
from their said harms may serve for a sufficient recompense of their passed
miseries. Likewise, we may consider how smally she deserved by the little care
her parents took of her distress, not only in suffering her to be lost or
taken away, but being taken never sought either to recover her, or once to
seek her out: and what did the Pirates see in her that they rather sold her
unto a pandor, then to a Princess, or to some other honorable lady? If she
knew how to persuade so many men to leave her a Virgin, (as she says)
wherefore could she not persuade her mistress to suffer her to gain her
living by some other means, rather then to put her forth to so vild a use; or
else why did she not as Hippo the fair Grecian did, who leaped into the sea so
soon as she perceived that she was taken by Pirates. Alas if this woman
obtain the Abbesseship, greatly are the Nuns of this order to be pitied,
if amongst them there cannot be found one more chaste then an harlot, or more
innocent then a murderer. She cannot be chaste enough to rule over us,
especially seeing she says; I knew how to persuade all those that came unto
me: the which shows a certain token of her immodestie, for otherwise how
could she have pratled so well in that place where such as were modest would
have burst into tears, and without being able to speak one only word, would
have died for shame. Let us then take the case thus: that in her there are
three do claim to be Abbess, the first, is one taken by Pirates, the second
such a one as has lived in the stews, and the third she that murdered a man,
of whom the best is far unworthy of any honor.

The Answer.
GOd herein was minded to show his power, by making this woman free in bondage,
chaste in a dishonest place, and most innocent in committing murder to defend
her chastity. I know not whether any did ever deserve the place of Abbess so
well as she: but I am sure there would be somewhat to do to depose all the
Abbesses that are less worthy then she. How chaste she is, the blood of the
slain souldior does testify; how innocent she is, the Judges do declare; how
happy she is, her return does show. Wherefore it is very manifest that God
would never have preserved her from so many perrils, if it had not ben to
serve him in some worthy place. Therefore the same God which has protected
her, is himself alone a further testimony of her chastity, and he only is
able to comprehend her admirable valor.

Declamation. 54.
Of him who against his fathers mind persuaded his sister to cause him to die
that had forced her.

THe law is, that whosoever kills a man by chance, he should be banished or
put to exile for five years: likewise every maid that is forced or ravished,
may choose whether she will have the ranisher die, or whether she will have him
to be her husband. Whereupon it chanced that a certain man which had a son and
a daughter, was exiled for the cause aforesaid: his daughter that remained with
her brother in the house was ravished by another young man, who after his fault
committed, fled unto the maidens father, with whom he so much prevailed, that
he obtained letters from him, wherein he commanded his daughter to choose her
said rauisher for her husband, and not to require his death; the father
likewise writ unto his son, entreating him to persuade his sister to consent
thereunto: who on the contrary constrained his sister to demand his death, so
that the father at his return did cast off and disherit his son, saying:

A Less my misfortune is intolerable, seeing that I being (as always I have
been) a lover of the Commonwealth, have notwithstanding bereaved her of two
men, and both against my will, yet not without being culpable therefore; in the
one manslaughter I was abused by fortune, in the other by him who is in name
(yet not indeed) my son, that has enforced his sister to disobey her father,
as well as he, in a just commandment, and caused her to obey him in a cruel
revenge, some may say that it is incident unto man to offend, it had been a
sufficient excuse, if I had not both advertised and entreated him the
contrary, and also if he had not known the grief which I already sustained
for being the cause of a man's death, and that I did therefore owe a citizen
unto the commonwealth, whom I might have satisfied in saving the life of this
same man, by whom many others might have been begotten; so that having slain
the other unadvisedly, I might have saved this circumspectly: but thou because
thou would have no nephews by thy sister, and that thou might cause me
die with sorrow, have broken my purpose, wherefore I judge thee unworthy of
the heritage, which so plainly thou seek to obtain by so many unreasonable
means.

The Answer.
THe death of a good Citizen, cannot be repaired by saving the life of a wicked
caitife, for that is no satisfaction, but rather a double offense unto the
Commonwealth: Moreover, those children which should be borne by the marriage
of a rauisher would serve but for witnesses of their fathers shame, and the
wrong done unto our stock, the which ought not to be increased by him that
had doubly wronged them, having not only injuriously assailed the house of
an exile (although the affliction of the afflicted ought not to be increased)
but also after he had wronged him, without any shame at all coming before
him, he first made him privy to the injury, and in a manner both constrained
him to consent unto it, and to allow thereof: wherein then have I offended? By
complaining of the injury done to my absent father? I cannot be either
forsaken or disherited, because I have done but according unto law. Likewise my
father who was so far off from the place where the wrong was committed, could
not well judge thereof, seeing that his grief being absent, could not be like
ours that were present, and also thee state wherein he was, together with his
age, made him to endure wrong better then I could. Furthermore, the adulterer
knowing the horriblenesse of his crime, went to make his agreement with him who
was ignorant of the truth, and returning hither, he renewed the injury,
prowdly commanding us to like of his marriages, by virtue of certain letters,
that (it may be) he either obtained by force, or at the least gained by frawd.
No man is undone too late at any time, but a manifest undoing is it, to give
ones daughter unto such a one, as with the help of such wicked impes as
himself, has both defloured her and dishonored her, breaking into our house
by force of arms. I believe he would never tell you all this (father) or if he
did tell you, and you were content therewith, or that you bewail his death
any more, you are no less faulty then he.

Declamation. 55.
Of him who gave over his betrothed wife unto his sick son.

A Certain man had two sons, nevertheless he was betrothed or made sure
unto a young maiden, with whom one of his sons became so far in love, that he
fell sick, and no doubt he had died, if the Physician had not told his father
that his sons disease proceeded of love, whereupon the father came unto his
son, prayed him, coniured him, and lastly threatened, not only to curse him, but
also to kill him, (holding his sword in his hand) if he would not manifest unto
him the cause of his sickness, and what she was whom he loved, wherefore the
son seeing himself in such an extremity, trembling and weeping, confessed
that he was in love with his mother in law; the father to save his sons life
yielded her whom he had betrothed unto him, and caused them to be married
together. The other son who was envious against his brother, accused his
father to have lost his wits, the which the father denied, saying:

IT is thou that have lost thy wits, or at the least art utterly blinded with
passion and ill will, so that thou will be the cause, that every man will be
amassed at such an act as was never seen: that a mother in law should be more
pitiful unto her son in law then thou art unto thine own brother. Call
thou that want of understanding, when by my wisdom I save my son, in granting
him her, who in no sort was aggreeable for me: I say that in keeping her from
him, I should have lost my wits, seeing that she might have done ill, I might
not have done well, and my son should have died: I am sure that he loved her
better and more fervently then I did, therefore is she due unto him, what wrong
do I thee? Art thou angry to have thy brother, and not a mother in law? I did
draw the sword before his face, the which no man could take forth of my hands,
but only himself in confessing the truth. Lastly, all that a father does to
save his sons life is not only very excusable, but to be accounted for
exceeding great wisdom and just pity.

The Answer.
IT had been better for my brother to have died, then to have caused his
concupiscence so apparently to be disclosed, Seeing the best that can be said
of him is, that he was healed by adultery: that you have saved him by
execration, and she has helped him by abomination. Why may not that be
termed worse then adultery which is done chiefly by the commandment of the
husband? I know not whether you have showed your self more mad in betrothing
this woman, or in forsaking her, or else in marrieng her again with your son?
But how far besides himself is he, that thinks it a good deed or a good
turn to commit whoredom? A wise man (no doubt) that drew his sword, not to
punish adultery, or to eschew the slander thereof, but rather to enforce his
wife and son to commit adultery together. My brother ought rather to have
perished, then to be cured so perniciouslie; but suppose that if he had lusted
after his sister, or his mother, ought he to have had either of them? These
remedies are more dangerous, and more grievous, then danger, mischief, or
death it self. But all this has been compacted betwixt the son, the betrothed
woman, and the Physician, who likewise claimed an interest therein; And thus
the disease, the cure, and the adulteries proceeded of your folly.

Declamation. 56.
Of a man that is found dead in his bed, his wife wounded, and the accusations
together with the witness of a child.

IT chanced that a certain man being a widdower that had a son, married his
second wife, by whom he had another son: and because his first son did but
badly agree with his mother in law, the father gave him part of his house,
which was nevertheless divided with a wall, so that they were several:
likewise this old man had a receauer or factor which was a young man and a
fair, so that this man was somewhat suspicious that he loved his wife, which
jealousy was not a little increased by the sons persuasions, so that thereby
oftentimes there chanced such braules between them, that his ^actor and he
were upon terms of parting. Whereupon it happened, that shortly after the
nieghbors through the wives exclamatio^s, ran into the house, where they found
the goodman slain in his bed, his wife wounded, and so much of the common wall
broken down, that a man migh teasily pass through it: wherefore not only the
son, but also the factor was suspected to be guilty of this murder; and
having apprehended them both, they brought them before the child being of three
years old, who did lie in the same bed, and asked him which of them it was
that had beat his father, the child pointed with his singer unto the factor,
wherefore the son accused him for murdering his master: but the factor through
the breaking of the wall, accused the son for murdering his father, saying:

O How wicked this world of ours is, seeing that it has brought forth so
cursed a man, that has at one instant both murdered his father, and would
have don the like to his mother in law so that I believe the fear of missing
did in some sort hinder or stay his murtherous hand, from giving so great a
stroke as he intended, and she fained her self dead least his purpose should
have been effected; or to save her husbands life, whom this traitor has
murdered least he should have been a witness against him for the fact, as
also because he did most unnaturally hate him, for the kind and honest love
the man did bear unto his wife, and therefore he sought the means to expel me
from hence, that he might better accomplish his wicked enterprise, for two are
more easily slain then three, and it may be that he did put on such like
apparel as mine to abuse this poor infant, and to corrupt his innocence by
false testimony: but what witness can be more manifest, then the breaking of
the wall, the which is likewise pulled down, for the desire he had to murder
his mother in law.

The Answer.
IT is very apparent that thou come neither unprovided of sophistical
arguments long before premeditated, nor that thou art any whit abashed of this
murder, seeing that the horror there of does nothing hinder thy tongue from
babbling. O miserable man that I am: hearing the noise I ran thither thinking
to have seen the adulterers taken, but alas I found my father killed, which
does astonish me in such sort as I will only answer that I do not only rest
upon the child's demonstration, but upon his further affirmation, although thou
have of long time kept him in awe, so that in pointing to thee with his finger,
he has both declared thee to be the murderer, and also that thou have
oftentimes forbidden him to accuse thee for the lascivious kisses proffered in
his presence: there is not any witness more sufficient then the pointing of
this innocent child who is of sufficient age to be able to know and discern,
although not subtle enough to deceive feign or lie. If thou say that one
witness is not sufficient, then will I stand unto the peoples censure, and will
not refuse that thou she and I may be all three examined by torments, for God
the right and fortitude shall be for the innocent.

Declamation. 57.
Of him that would compel his son to marry with his sister in law, that was
by him accused of adultery.

A Man had two sons, to the one whereof he gave a wife, who being married,
made a certain very long voyage into a far country, during his absence, his
brother took such an hatred against his sister in law that he accused her of
adultery, but yet not before the Judges, whereupon her husband being returned,
took a bondwoman that was his wives servant, and caused her to be tortured so
extremely to know the truth, that she died with the torment not confessing
any thing, wherefore his father, that loved his daughter in law, did sharply
reprove him, that he would so lightly conceive an ill opinion of her. He as
well for grief that he had wrongfully suspected his wives honesty, and
unjustly killed her bondwoman, as also to perceive his brothers malice, and to
have procured his fathers displeasure, did despair, and either hanged or
killed himself, wherefore the father willed that according to the Jewish law,
the other son should marry his brothers widow, or if otherwise he refused,
he would utterly forsake him and renounce him for his heir, against the which
his son pleaded in this sort:

YOu would have me to marry with my brothers widow, whom I have accused for
an adultresse, (as in sooth she is) who caused both my brother to kill himself
for grief, and compels you to disherit me. I believe that you tempt me to
take her to try whether I did accuse her wrongfully or no, for you your self
would never give me an adultresse to wife: but you might think, if I did take
her that she is chaste, and I am false: truly if you could make me to marry
her that both hates me mortallie, and I know to be a dishonest woman, one
might then assuredly believe that nothing would be ever impossible for you to
effect. But why would you compel me to make her my bedfellow that has made
me brotherlesse? Her I say that is the cause of her husbands death, of the
discord twixt you and me, of the scandale to our lineage, and of the peoples
murmuring? I have already chosen a wife that loves me, that will follow me if
I will, that will never forsake me either in adversity or prosperity, and
finally that will be such a one unto me as a wife ought to be unto her
husband, which will be more worth unto me then a most great inheritance;
whereas if on the contrary I should marry this woman, every one might suppose
that I loved my brother but little, to wed her that was the cause of his loss.

The Answer.
THere is nothing more reasonable (seeing thy brother was desirous by his death
to acquit the wrong which he had don unto his wise, by giving credit to thy
false accusation) then that thou by marrying her, might also declare her
innocence; for the shortest follies are best: wherefore it were better for
thee to confess, and blot out thy fault by doing well, then in perseuering
always in thine obstinacy, to show thy self in a double fault, for thou art
the only cause of all these chances and slanders which thou obiectest;
therefore in not making amends for thy fault, I may lawfully disinherit thee
for thy folly.

Declamation. 58.
Of the sorceresse, which poisoned her son in law, and accused her own
daughter to have been consenting thereunto.

THe law appoints that every woman which uses poysoh, being convinced of the
crime, should be tortured, until she accused such as were partakers or
consenting unto her wicked act. Whereupon it happened that a man having but one
son, married a second wife, of whom he had one daughter, who being of
reasonable years, the son died of poison, and the mother in law is not only
suspected for his death, but accused and convinced thereof; wherefore she being
laid upon the rack to make her confess such as were consenting to her fact,
she accused her own daughter, so that she was adjudged to be burned with her
mother: but the poor father gainsaid it thus.

AH miserable child, seeing thy mother hates thee as much as thy father loves
thee; O mischeeuous woman that even unto thine own daughter thou art worse
then a stepdame, art thou not sufficiently glutted with thy passed murders,
but thou must further gorge thee with thy daughters massacre? But who knows
not that such kind of people desire not to die without slaughter? Wherefore
amongst the fencers, or soldiers, that combat is most cruel which is fought
against a desperate man that is sure to die: no doubt but they that may not
live, will procure any murder if they can, for the death of others makes them
the less to bewail the life which they are ready to lose; and where despair
is, there does rage abound, because the horror of death, fills their courage
with fury, and they resemble certain beasts that bite those weapons wherewith
they are wounded, and being thrust through, they make their wound the greater,
that they might approach near him that has gored them. But how should she
fear to belie one, that takes a pleasure to poison any? Why will not she
effect my daughters death, that without any cause wrought my sons decay? But
what son? Truly even he that might have been beloved of every stepdame that
had been less wicked then she, that cannot so much as love her own husband.
But to do him a dispight, she hates her own daughter to death, and remembering
that she was a mother in law, forgets that ever she was a mother indeed: let
then the truth of the innocent father be of more estimation the^ the leasings
of the guilty mother, seeing that in the extremity of death or torments, the
wicked do never speak truth. For proof whereof, a bondsman that Cato had,
being convinced of theft, and tortured therefore, affirmed that Cato was
accessarie to the theft, who was then better to be believed, the bondsman and
the torture, or Cato? In like sort you are more to credit the innocence of the
daughter, then the malice of the mother.

The Answer.
THere are some beasts so raging mad, that their young ones are no sooner
brought forth, but they become as fierce as their dames, wherefore it is best
to strangle them while they are young; likewise the venomous herb takes his
poison from the root, how much more then may this girl be wicked, being born
of a mother so execrable, and so much the rather, because the daughters do
always resemble the mother more then the father: how greatly then has her
wicked nature ben furthered by lewd counsel, with hope and ambition to be her
self the sole heir? Which was the principal occasions, that this stepmother
poisoned your son, and that the daughter consented thereunto: wherefore it
were no reason that she should escape punishment.

Declamation. 59.
Of the Praetor that caused the head of a malefactor to be cut off at the
request of a whore.

FLaminius the Roman Praetor governing in France, sitting at the table with a
comman woman whom he dearly loved, she said unto him, that she had of long
time desired to see some man executed by justice, but she was ashamed to go
unto the common place of execution. Whereupon he forthwith commanded a
condemned prisoner to be brought, and in the hall where he supped, he caused
him to be beheaded in his presence: the which deed was reported at Rome,
wherefore a long time after Cato accused him of Treason against the
Commonwealth, saying:

THe enterludes, comedies, flatteries, whoredoms, and other tricks far
unworthy a Roman Praetor, might very well have sufficed, without further
adding thereunto a spectacle so cruel, for the recompense of a banquet so
lascivious; It may be one only kiss of a minion, bought all the whole blood
and life of a man, so that he might be justly termed a worse hangman which sat
at the table to behold the same with pleasure, then was he which smit of the
head, perchance not without pity: I do not seek to rip up all the faults of
so many years past to accuse him, but that one only night his act. It is more
likely that he which bestows much upon a woman, would deny her the slaughter
of a man, the^ it is possible for him which grants her the slaughter of a
man, to deny her any thing; if thou would whip a slave, would thou not
carry him forth of the banqueting hall? But who would ever have believed that
a whore should have desired to behold the hangmans sword upon the cupbord, and
the table to be stained with humane blood: but yet who would have thought that
ever any Roman Praetor could have granted such a matter? Oh what an
abominable act is this? But what shall I say, seeing the Roman Empire has been in such sort blemished, and the law rather polluted, then the offender
thereof punished? Forsake your graves, O you Bruti, Horatij, Fabritij, and all
the rest of you who were the ornament of this Empire, alas behold how your
rods, axes, and other signs of office, have been abandoned unto dishonest
damsels only to please them, and to make them sport: every offense that is
committed by a Magistrate under coulor of his authority, is more punishable
then any other fault; for the Magistrate is a spectacle for all other men,
because all men do mark and cast their eyes upon his acts, and this man
whilst the beholders, the hangman, and the poor prisoner, stoood all looking
upon him, suffered both his own eyes, and understanding to be ravished by the
looks of an harlot. O earth cover this abomination, to the end that it may be
no more remembered.

The Answer.
IF hypocrisy or secret ambition did not more provoke thee then does the zeal
of the Commonwealth, I suppose thou would have been as slack in accusing me,
as thou know the same has in no sort ben wronged by me, because the
Commonwealth can no more be disgraced by one man's folly, then it may be
dignified by one alone man's forwardnes: but as nothing is well said which is
not rightly understood, so is nothing well done that is wrongfullie
interpreted, otherwise I should be untouched of crime, and you not vntaxed of
slander. For the Commonwealth is able enough to reprove that which is not done
according to reason and equity, but also to reprehend whatsoever is
unprofitable for it. Have not the Senate and people refused to hold those
agreements which were made by their Emperors or Generals, and sent them bound
unto the enemies? If they have not allowed the faults of two Emperors together,
wherefore should the fault of one only Praetor be laid unto their charge? (If
to execute a man by justice may be termed a fault.) But what need you to
inquire where or when such a one did die that was worthy to die? You say that
I have slain one; It is true: but whom have I slain, save only a condemned
man? You ask when and where? I answer that it was in the night, and in the
common hall. And I do ask you if any time or place is limited wherein or
where a malefactor ought to suffer? and although there were, yet who knows
not that in the presence or company of a lose woman, there is always little
good performed? and that the common hall or the prison is no other then a place
of horror and misery for offenders? But it has been an ancient custom at
Rome, that against such as they cannot charge with any great crime, they would
feign find out some small occasion of quarrel, like as they sought to condemn
Brutus, who did afterward recover their liberty, and so did they accuse
Manlius of inhumanity, Silla of cruelty, Marius of ambition, Lucullus of
superfluity, and many others of covetousness. But touching my deed, what art
thou more the^ the other Censors, that have been ever since the fault which thou
chargest me withal, who have never accused me therefore, not that they are any
whit thy inferiors in wisdom, or equity, or that they are less lovers of the
Commonwealth then thou, but because they could better then thou consider that
it was not lawful, and less reasonable to blemish so many worthy actions of
our lineage, for a small vanity of one alone, who cannot yet be said to have
done any act, either contrary to duty or against justice.

Declamation. 60.
Of a man without hands that renounced his son, because he would not kill his
mother being found in adultery.

THe law says, that if any man do take his wife committing adultery, it is
lawful for him to slay them both her and the adulterer, but yet it must be
without deceit; likewise it says, that the son may revenge the adultery for
his father. Whereupon it happened that a martial man lost his two hands in the
wars, and as one mischance does never happen alone, within a small time after
he surprised his wife in adultery, and finding himself unable, he commanded
his son to slay them, the son would not, whereupon he renounced him for
his heir, saying:

I Shall then by thy fault amongst all men be he alone that has neither
pardoned nor punished adultery; but who in this case will not imagine that
either I had no son, or that my son had no hands? Yet my greatest grief
consists in this, that I know the contrary. Alas, in finding the
adulterers, I felt in good earnest how great a miss I had of my hands, alack
I lost them in the wars, and my son could not find his in the house;
wherefore I may say that he stood me in as little stead as my sword which I
could not use. How shall he either vanquish the enemy, or defend his country,
which has denied the help of his hands unto his father? When will he sight
for us, that could not fight for himself? Get thee packing then with the
adulterers whom thou have suffered to escape, and leave me rather alone, then so
badly accompanied. Thou say thy heart would never serve thee to kill thy
mother; why do thou not also say that the adulterer is thy father, as I do
verily believe, and thou do show he is? Seeing thou soughtest rather to
please him in a matter unjust and execrable, then me in that wherein by the
gods, law, and reason, thou were commanded. Wherefore it cannot be said that I
do either renounce or disinherit thee without a cause.

A very notable answer of the son.
ALas, me thought it was in a manner all one to murder my father, as to kill my
mother in his presence; and as it was never allowable in a reasonable man to be
cruel, so were rigorous laws made more to terrify all, the^ to torment any;
for if the law be strict, the interpretation thereof is large, and they ought
to tend rather unto clemency, then cruelty: a great mischief can never be
appeased in committing two others. Moreover, the pleasure of revenge does
suddenly vanish, but the contentment of mercy does never vade; so likewise
does every pitiful heart melt, in thinking upon the horriblenesse of
murder, wherefore with the spectacle of a misfortune so sudden, all my body
became senseless. You good father did lack your hands, but before I could
recover my spirits, I lost al my members; yet was the mischief which you
commanded more great, then all the misery which had happened was grievous:
pardon me then if I did not accomplish your commandment, in a thing which
far exceeded my strength and courage. A father pardons his son, if he
refuse to fail, because he cannot brook the seas, and that his heart does
faint as mine did; the like happens if his heareserueth not to go unto the
wars, although he be the son of a warlike father; for every man is not
borne to manage arms. And it is to be considered for what intent the law says
that it is lawful for the father or the son to slay the adulterers: Truly it
was because the lawmakers were not ignorant that there were some men which
either could not or would not kill one another; what can I do with all if we
are both of the same number, you made by the war unapt, and I by nature
unable: wherein then can you blame me, saving that the adulterers are escaped,
because you were maimed and I amassed or almost in a swound? If the fault then
be common, why should I for the same be only condemned?

Declamation. 61.
Of two maidens ravished by one man, for the which the one required his death,
and the other desired him for her husband

THe law permits a maiden that is ravished, to choose either the death of the
rauisher, or to take him for her husband. Whereupon it chanced that one man
defloured two maidens in one night, so that the next morning the one required
that he might die, and the other requested to have him for her husband,
wherefore she that desired his death, said thus:

Who did ever see any man saved for one offense, by the means of another
fault far more heinous? For if sin proceed from humane frailty, to
persevere in the ^an^e is a devilish obstinacy; one defloured maid accuses
him, the other defends him: revenge you our cause then O you judges, let the
severity of your discipline be redoubled, seeing the crime is double: the
people do already secretly desire it, for he has not only forced or ravished
twain, but I alone have been defloured by twain, that is to say, by him that
did the deed, and by her that would preserve him from death: must he be suffered
to live, that has deserved to die twice? Had he but deserved one death only,
he should not live any longer, because no body would have defended him; but
this woman would unto our shame verify the Proverb, which men do impose upon
our sex, saying, That women are selfe-willed, and that they do always choose
the worst. If thou had ben the first that had been forced, I do hardly
believe that thou would have desired him for thy husband. To conclude, as
thou can not sue any further in his behalf, save only that thou may not
be deprived of thy choice; so also can thou not abridge me of my request: it
is in thy choice to save his life for the fault he has committed against thee,
but thou can not command his life for the injury done against me, seeing
that I was first wronged, let me be first revenged, and afterward thou shall
wed him if thou will.

The Answer.
THou say that thou were the first that was wronged, I do not know so much,
and therefore affirm that it was I; or if I were the last, the^ was mine the
greater wrong: for that which he did unto thee, may be excused, either by
love, or necessity; but what he offered unto me can be no better termed then
insolency, malice, or disdain, seeing that then his greatest heat was past:
nevertheless, considering that clemency is more natural unto our sex then
cruelty, I say that where the prerogatives or claims are of equal force,
there is more respect to be had unto humanity then rigor: and if you allege
unto me the examples of Lucrece and Virginia, I will in like sort allege unto
you the Sabines, and others, no less honest but more discreet, and the greater
number, from who^ has proceeded greater good, witness so many worthy Romans
issued from them. His death can serve to no other end, but to eternise the
memory of our infamy, either by the public or secret revenge of his kindred:
never did any man's death profit a woman. Lastly, if thou think that thy
honor deserves his death, I answer that mine is not unworthy of his life,
and I believe that the judges will affirm my wish to be more just then thy
will.

Declamation. 62.
Of him that his father did disherit, because he went unto the wars.

THe privilege of the war was that he which had been thrice a conqueror, should
be freed from going to the wars any more. Whereupon it happened that a
certain Roman, which had been thrice a conqueror, would return unto the
wars against his fathers will. Who seeing that he would needs go, did for
his obstinacy disherit him, whereunto the son pleaded in this sort.

FIrst I am bound unto God that he has made me three times victorious; and
next unto him, am I bound unto my country, for the love which I have born unto
it has been the cause that I did fight and got the victory; wherefore after I
have performed my duty unto these twain I will obey my father in all things,
who ought not to be against the public good, and my glory* it may be that he
himself has not ben thrice a conqueror, wherefore it is requisite that I
should supply his default, or my childrens defect, who peradventure shall
never be of such desert; but why would you dissuade me from sighting after the
obtaining of three victories, Seeing that they do yet fight whom I have
thrice vanquished? As the Senator which is past threescore years of age, may
choose whether he will come to Counsel ye or no, and yet such as are much
older do notwithstanding come thither so long as they live, so is it (...) for
me to go unto the wars, when honor commands me, as often as list. In that
which is past, I (...) no more then my duty, and therefore I (...) reward, but
that which hereafter I shall do of free will, shall merit a recompense. You
would have him to be idle, that never loved ease; you see the danger wherein we
stand, all the Citizens do fix their eyes upon me, and to speak the truth,
the Commonwealth does yet owe me nothing for my passed victories, seeing that
it could not excuse me from the battle, but now the same law shall allow it
to be desert, which before did appoint it a duty. Seeing then that what I do
is but for your profit and honor, why should you disauow me for your heir,
me I say which will fight to maintain your life, your house, and the
inheritance which you will take from me.

The Answer.
THou do acquit thy self toward God and thy country in obeying thy father
in a matter both lawful and reasonable, for the Commonwealth has as great
need of pitiful and obedient men unto the laws, and their Parents, as it
has of such as are valiant, wherefore thou art bound to be both the one and
the other; thou art already known to be valiant, be thou then likewise
known to be pitiful, obedient, and loving toward thy poor father, who
shall die if thou should miscarrie by thy over boldness. Do thou think
to be victorious in fighting against the law and the will of thy father? No,
for God is too just. A^neas was not so much praised for all his heroical
deeds, as he was commended for loving his aged father, and for preserving him
from the Trojan site. Do thou wonder if thy father be no less careful for
the (...) of thy person, then the law is which forbids (...) hazard thy
self any more in the like peril. I had rather to renounce thee suddenly,
then having lost thee in the wars, to be attached with a double sorrow: it is
therefore in thy choice to remain my son or no. It is a far greater virtue
to be able to contain thy self within thy bounds, then to perish in this
battle: thou shall go in greater danger to lose thy gotten reputation, then
to enlarge thy future renown; therefore thou being my son no longer, my
grief shall be the less.

Declamation. 63.
Of him that appeased the father of a maiden whom he had ravished, and yet
could not pacify his own father.

THe law commands, that if any man do ravish a virgin, that he should die
therefore, unless that within thirty days he do both pacify or appease
the next of kin unto the said damsel, and likewise the nearest of kin unto
himself. Whereupon it fell out so, that a certain young man ravished a young
virgin, and before the prefixed term he had thoroughly appeased the maidens
father, but yet his own father would by no means be satisfied, wherefore he
accused his father to have lost his wits, saying:

HOw can that man be said to have his understanding, that is more cruel unto
his own son, then is he that has been offended? There is no beast in the
world so fierce, that seeks not to preserve that which it has it has
engendered; whereby it appears that those which do otherwise, may be judged
to have less understanding then brute beasts. If you think that I have
wronged you in not coming rather unto you as to him whom I was most bounden
unto, then unto the virgins father; You must consider that it was because he
was more wronged then you, and that I judged you more pitiful then he, and
he harder to be entreated then you. But alas unfortunate that I am, I have
found mine enemy more favorable then mine own father, so that I know not
what else to say, but that amongst such men as have their wits, the love of the
father does always exceed the sons folly. If it please you to save my life,
or if your cruelty be such as you loath to see me live, speak, for the time
is at hand? But I grieve not so much to die, (if you have lost your wits) as I
sorrow for the perpetual moan that you will make, in that you have been the
abridger of my days, when as time more then reason shall have mittigated your
choler, and restored your understanding, whereof now I may well say you are
deprived, or at the least that the same is mightily deminished.

The Answer.
THou say that the maide^s father was more wronged then was I, I grant it,
yet can thou not likewise deny but that I have greater cause of offense the^
he: for thy force did take away the maidens shame, but I shall be ever
dishonored to have begotten a son so dissolute, that has displeased his
father, wronged a Citizen, defloured a virgin, defamed his stock, and given
cause of offense unto the Commonwealth. It is thou that wantedst thy wits,
seeing thou could not know that at one instant thou should not have
committed so many mischiefs together; and most mad thou were, if in knowing
the same thou could not shun the same, but heaping one offense upon another,
thou would slander me to have lost my wits, whereby it appears that as
virtues, so are vices linked together. Thou accusest me before I have condemned
thee, the term is not yet expired, I do very well know that thy life and
death are yet in my choice: Have I then lost mine understanding, wherefore do
thou tremble? why does thy tongue faulter? For what cause are thine eyes
troubled? The thirtieth day is not yet come: but wherefore would thou that
any man should pity thee, seeing thou were pitiless unto the damsel, who
when thou did ravish her, showed no less sorrow then thou do now?
Wherefore could not thou consider what vice is at the first, as well as at
the last, which is always a present pleasure, but a parting pain, leaving
always either some scourge, or at the least a most sound sorrow accompained
with a horrible fear? but although I should leave thee thy life, do thou
think to remain unpunished? will not thin own consience torment thee far worse
then any hangman would? Nay why should I grant that unto mine enemy, which I
have denied unto my son? For seeing thou accusest me, thou can not be
rightly termed my friend, much less my son. Is it to be wondered at if I
rest doubtful, seeing that the law it self has neither determined thy death,
nor concluded thy marriage? Thou have always behaved thy self as if thou
had ben allowed to do any sin, thou have not yet entreated me as thou
ought, but have rather requested the other his friendship then my favor;
and having first appeased his fury, thou afterward thoughtest assuredly to
constrain me to winck at thy fault. Would a fool consider thus much? Tell me
then wherein I am a fool: Have I lived badly, or committed such folly as thou
have? Have I forgotten the laws? Have I not counted thy days? Can I not
prove wherefore thou art unworthy of my favor, demanding it after such a
fashion? I have consulted with our kindred, I have devised with our friends,
alas what pains have I taken, to perform a fathers duty. Ah me most
miserable, seeing that my anger is so just, that I cannot yet forget it. I do
not wonder although thou have appeased the maidens father, for it is easier to
pardon an injury then a crime, yea when he came to entreat for thee, his
kindness did the more harden my heart against thee, for me thought that a man
so honest ought in no sort to be harmed: thou tellest me that the time is
short, how then could thou find so much leisure as to accuse me? Do men
appease their misdeeds after such a manner? Is that the way to obtain favor?
Do thou now think it fit to entreat? But tell me wherefore am I besides my
wits? Is it because I have not pardoned thee? The time is not yet past, I may
yet pardon thee, although thou art unworthy, seeing thou accusest me before I
have hurt thee.

Declamation 64.
Of the husband that did put away his wife, who being tortured, did yet save
his life in not confessing that he pretended to murder the Tyrant.

A Tyrant being suspicious that a Citizen pretended his death, caused him to
be apprehended, and committed him to prison, and there tortured him, to cause
him to confess his conspiracy, and who were his confederats; but the Citizen
would not confess any thing, whereupon the Tyrant did also cause the Citizens
wife to be tortured, who in like sort would confess nothing, wherefore they
were delivered and set at liberty. Within a short time after the said Citizen
killed the Tyrant, and being greatly rewarded and honored by the Commonwealth
for the deed, he put away his wife as one that was barren, because she had been
five years with him, and never conceived any child. For which cause she
accused him of ingratiude, saying:

THat which the Tyrant was unwilling to do, he that killed the Tyrant would
do, to show himself more unjust then was he; he would frustrate our
marriage, which at his own request and entreat was solemnized, and to manifest
his ingratitude the more, he would needs stay until he stood indebted unto
me for his life: if he meant to forsake me, he should have put me away before I
had been tortured for his love, the which torture is cause of my barrenness. O
miserable woman that I am, seeing that my kindness has procured me care, and
my good deeds turns unto my decay. Is it not very well known, that the
constancy of my courage, and the silence of my tongue, have been the only
overthrow of the Tyrant; I then being the cause that the Tyrant can no more
break the marriages of others, why should mine be suffered to be broken. But
who is ignorant, that during the Tyrants life, the barren were esteemed most
happy, because they could not see their children ravished at the Tyrants
pleasure? True it is that I have borne no children for the Commonwealth, but I
dare affirm, that I am the cause that many are and shall be borne, and that
henceforth there shall be no more taken from it. The Tyrant suspected my
husband his intention; because either he had disclosed something, or else his
countenance or behavior discovered his pretense, but yet in any sort he
cannot complain of his wives tatling, no not when she was in her extremest
torments, I had always more respect unto my husband that was absent, then unto
the Tyrant who was present, being more careful of his health then fearful of
mine own hurt. But who can express all the preparation that was made for
instruments of cruelty (able enough to daunt the courages of many men) to
terrify the constancy of a feminine heart, the whips tearing my flesh, the
fire, the iron shoes, the whot eggs under mine armholes, the buskins, the
trestles, the pullies, the cords, the napkin, water, oil, and the hangmen: yet
all these together could never draw one only word from me to the prejudice of
my husband, but proving by lively reasons, the contrary of all that was of me
demanded, I was the cause of his deliverance: wherefore does he vaunt that he
has slain the Tyrant, seeing the same was more easy for him to accomplish,
then for me to endure so many torments; for I have suffered whatsoever ancient
cruelty was able to invent, and that which this present age might possibly ad
thereunto: what shall I further say, but that the hangmen were weary and tired,
and the Tyrant himself was tormented at my tortures. Having then bought with
such exceeding pains, life, honor, glory, and riches for this ungrateful
man, why would he put me away, to take a richer wife? For one more noble he
cannot have, if that be true nobility which proceeds from virtue. O how
plainly does it appear by him, that abundance engendereth avarice, which is
the root of all vice, and enemy to all virtue, as he does very well declare:
for when he was more poor, and less wealthy, then had he more pity, and
less wickedness. But what is this fellow that would prescribe nature a law,
and appoint the times wherein a woman should conceive? Must he be like unto
God? Does he not yet know that he is worse then a beast that would be better
then a man? Must he be so presumptious? Consider only that if you are worthy
to be honored, I deserve not to be hated.

The Answer.
YOu might have just cause to reprove me for your torment, if I had not
revenged your torture; if you did know that I intended to slay the Tyrant, and
you neither did reveal nor confess the same, you must not think that I am
any whit then more bounden unto you for it, for it is no good deed to abstain
from doing ill, but to persevere in doing good: and I do verily believe that
you were ignorant of my intention, for I never made you acquainted with any
thing, not minding to trust a prattling woman (whose nature is to keep nothing
but that which she knows not) with a matter which was only worthy of the
advice of a manly courage, both grave, sound, and wise, the which parts I did
then know to be utterly wanting in you. Nay I may truly say that before your
torments, I never determined to kill the tyrant, but your sustained wrongs
enforced me to seek revenge. But although you had heard something and
disclosed it not, yet was the same no good turn, but fidelity; in like sort
if you had but confessed never so little, you should have been worse tormented
to have gotten more matter from you, and you had been deemed the more guilty
in not revealing the deed before you came to the torture. Wherefore in
confessing any thing, you could not but prolong your pains and shorten your
life, you have then done more for your self then for me. Having then done
nothing for me, I cannot be beholding to you; not being beholding to you, I
cannot be called unthankful; and the rather, because I do not wrong you in
putting you away, seeing it is not because I despise you: but you must know
that Cato in his old age was married again unto a poor young maiden, whereupon
his son demanding of him why he gave him a mother in law? He answered: My
son, it is not to offend thee, but to give unto thee more brethren as
victorious as thy self, to the end that you may altogether profit the
Commonwealth So mine intention is to beget children, which (as I have said) may
one day be profitable unto the Commonwealth. Suffer me then to have that of
another which I can never hope for of thee, and let the good and profit of the
Commonwealth be preferred before our own pleasure; for we ought not to be born
for our own commodity, but for the good of our native country, and those
which do otherwise think, may not only say that they are unborn, but that
they are unworthy to be borne: I would not then that you should be of the
same number.

Declamation. 65.
Of a rich man that died for the love of a chaste woman, unto whom he bequeathed
all his goods, whereupon her husband accused her of adultery.

IT chanced that a certain man having a passing fair wife, left her alone at
home, and he made a voyage to Jerusalem: In so much that there happened a very
rich merchant being a stranger to come and lodge hard by this fair woman's
house, so as the said merchant became in love with her, and sending her sundry
great presents, he solicited her to love him, but she refused his presents
three times, and being thereby frustrate of all hope to speed, the said
merchant became exceeding sick, bequeathing all his wealth unto this fair
wife, adding these words unto his testament: Because I have found her chaste and
modest. He being dead, the fair woman received the riches and goods, her
husband is advertised thereof before he come home to his house. Whereupon he
became so suddenly jealous, that at his return he accused his wife of
adultery, saying:

THou can not deny but that either in deed or thought thou art an
adultresse, for these riches do witness against thee; I will confess one
only point, which is, that my absence might have been the cause thereof, but
now it must be considered what a wife you are unto me, and what an husband I
have been unto thee: have thou ever wanted any thing? Or did thou fear that
thou should want? What had thou then to do with these riches? But who
knows not that the most women are sooner overcome with covetousness then
love? Did thou not know also that continency and concupiscence are the two
keys of women's honors? for by the one it is preserved, and by the other it is
polluted. Wherefore every woman of worth ought to behold nothing but the earth,
and sometime her husbands face, for fear least she should desire some other
thing, and unto every stranger she ought not only show her self bashful, but
discourteous, faining to be blind and deaf: for love enters in by the eyes,
and is conceived by the ears; also by a woman's countenance, either a denial
or a consent is a great deal sooner and better perceived then by her tongue,
they which make a sound denial at the first, are never importuned the second
time, much less the third time. Who will ever believe that any man would have
left all his goods unto a woman because he found her contrary to his wish? If
he were so glad to find her chaste, why did he solicit her to be immodest? It
is a great folly for any man to seek for that which he would not find: Who
may not say or think that this our age is void of all shame? Seeing that a
stranger witnesses the chastity of a woman toward her husband before he is
required: she that fears not to be thought an adultereste, will never be
ashamed to be one indeed; for opinion governs all things at her pleasure, and
if shame or fear of infamy did not restrain some more then another, there
would not be one good woman: for shame serves as a bridle to the immodest, and
as a guide unto the chaste. What will be said, if all the world will affirm
with me that thou art dishonest, Except one man only, and he but a stranger,
which says thou art chaste? wherefore the praise which he gives thee, and the
false testimony which he alleges for thee, does as much harm thee, as my
true accusation does hurt thee. A goodly matter no doubt, when no man assures
me of my wives honesty, but a common whorehunter: he says that thou art to
thy husband constant, and I affirm the contrary, who is more worthy to be
believed, a Citizen or a stranger? A husband, or a whoremonger? Imagine (O you
Judges) that if this woman's shame were not too apparent, I would rather have
dissembled it, then have brought it to this extremity: for he which
discovers his wives faults does but shame himself: but I remember that
notwithstanding that Caesar could not get Claudius to be convinced of the
adultery wherewith he was charged, for being found in Caesar's chamber in
woman's apparel, yet did not he let to put away his wife, saying, That it
behooued Caesar's wife not only to be free from shame, but from suspicion.
Wherefore there is no reason that I should keep her that is publicly defamed.

The Answer for the woman.
THat woman which is either beloved or courted, is not to be deemed therefore
the less chaste, for a woman's reputation and good name depends neither upon the
malice nor folly of men, who do always most desire those whom they have
least hope to obtain, modesty being the special reason that provoke a man
to fancy a woman; therefore they affirm that beauty does only engender
lust, but virtue is it that most wins love: and like as virtue is never
known but when it is tried, so also does it most appear in the resisting of
vices. But what can a woman do withal, if men do love her, or if they be
vicio^s or importunate? It is impossible to hinder any one from loving,
especially seeing the Philosophers affirm, that the first motions of our own
passions are not in our power, but afterward they may be brideled by reason:
what power then have we over another man's passions? Concerning the testimony
of the testator, there is more likelihood of truth therein, then otherwise, for
if the truth be ever spoken, it is when we must forsake this false world: and
it is to be supposed that he bequeathed his goods unto her, as well because
the woman's chastity had not only increased love in him, but also had
converted the same into holy love; for the constancy of the woman, changed
the man's vice into virtue, so that by this good deed he thought to requite the
bad opinion which he had wrongfullie conceived of her, before he did
thoroughly know her. Wherefore I will only say that if she be to be blamed for
her beauty, nature is the cause; if in that she was alone, her husband is to
be condemned; if for being courted, the lover was culpable: she did deny his
request, in that she was chaste; he made her his heir, therein was she happy;
she accepted the inheritance, therein she did wisely: whereupon she cannot be
said to be faulty in any thing, but it is your ouergreat prosperity that
hinders you from tasting the sweetness of her virtue.

Declamation. 66.
Of him that caused his eyes to be pulled forth, to gain ten ounces of gold,
the which was refused to be given unto him.

IT was the custom of a certain Commonwealth that every Citizen which was
fallen blind by mischance, should out of the common treasor be allowed ten
ounces of gold for his maintenance. Whereupon it happened that ten or twelve
disordered Citizens which wanted means to maintain their accustomed riotous
cheer, cast lots amongst them, which of them should have his eyes pulled
forth, to the end that he might receive the abouesaid sum of gold to spend
upon good cheer amongst them: it chanced (as oftentimes it falls out, that
wicked counsel is most hurtful unto him that gives it) that the lot fell
unto him that was the inuenter of this wickedness: Wherefore the rest took
him by force, and pulled out his eyes, and sent him unto the Magistrate to
demand the ten ounces of gold, but the Magistrate being advertised of the
manner of the fact, would give him nothing, saying:

HOw long have you been blind? By what chance lost you your sight so
suddenly? Was it by doing any good service for the Commonwealth? I am
assured it was not, for it should be contrary to thy custom, because thou
never did any, unless thy follies and disorders should be accounted for
service, so that first it may be aduouched that thou art no Citizen, for the
honor of that name belongs only unto the virtuous, therefore such as
resemble thee may be justly termed the scumme and reproach of the
Commonwealth. Moreover, I am not ignorant that thou did suffer thine eyes
to be plucked out, that thou might with thy companions continue as long as
you could that beastly life which you have begun, therefore both thou and they
deserve double punishment, they for pulling out thine eyes, and thou for
suffering them, for it is to the prejudice of the Commo^wealth, the which if
thou had thine eyes might if need were have employed thee as a pyoner in
the wars, or to do some such thing, but now the best that can be done with
thee, should be to hang thee up, to the end that thou might no trouble unto
others, but rather serve for an example unto all. Likewise it is to be
considered, that the law should be unjust if it should make men blind of
purpose; the law was made to comfort the afflicted, but not for to buy them;
misery needs not to be bought, being already too abundant: therefore it is
better to refuse our liberality unto one, then to be the cause that many
others should make themselves blind: we relieve those which for their blindness
have need of releife, but not those that pluck out their own eyes, because
they would be relieved.

The Answer.
AS it is not the Magistrates office to increase the affliction of the
afflicted, so likewise ought you not to wrong him that requires but the
performance or decree of the law, which simply says, that every Citizen
being blind, ought to have ten ounces of gold. Wherefore am not I a Citizen,
seeing I was never reproved by justice, or noted of infamy? Also I have
wronged none but my self: if I have wasted my patrimony, I only suffer
therefore, and diverse Citizens have been profited thereby: I have not then
done the Commonwealth any wrong in profiting many. As for the loss of mine
eyes, my meaning was not that any man's eyes should have been pulled out, but
that the lot should have been cast by way of pastime, only to laugh at him upon
whom it should light, but lighting upon me, they pulled out mine eyes by force:
wherefore there is great reason to punish them for the wrong which they have
done unto me, but yet ought not I to lose that which the law has allotted
me: if Democritus be praised of many for pulling out his eyes, that he might
the better wade in the contemplation of Natural Philosophy, why should I be
blamed although I had voluntarily suffered mine eyes to be plucked forth that I
might the better abstain from vices? Take it then which way you list; I ought
not to be denied the ten ounces of gold, seeing that I am a Citizen, and
have lost my sight either by force or willingly.

Declamation. 67.
Of the forsaken son who first would and could not, and afterward might and
would not return unto his father.

A Man forsakes or disheriteth his son, who went unto the wars, and returned
home a conqueror, wherefore he demands for his reward of the Commonwealth
that his father might be compelled to receive him into favor again. But the
father being unwilling to be compelled to receive his son, defended himself
so well, that he was no more urged thereunto. Yet because he was very desirous
to have his son again without being constrained, but rather that his son
might acknowledge it merely to be his benevolence: he went also unto the
wars, and returning with conquest, requesteth for his reward, that his son
might return unto him; and if he refused, that he should be enforced to come
home again, and obeying his father, receive his inheritance, the son would
not. Whereupon the father summoned him to the law, and in the presence of the
judges said thus:

MY victory is more famous then thine, for after that thou had vanquished,
we had yet cause of further war, but my conquest was the utter overthrow of
our enemies, the end of all our wars, and the assurance of our Commonwealth.
But although it had not ben so, yet what art thou? who begot thee but I? Say
that I have not made thee worthy to return home unto me, yet these eyes, these
hands, this body, these feet which thou have, had thou the^ from any
other then me? The courage, wisdom, yea and this stoutnesse which thou now
show, take not thou the same from my nature? For if a villain had
begotten thee, thou should be like unto him; as for example, the Eagle
engendereth not a dove, nor does a lion beget a hare; wherefore one of these
two must be granted, either that I am worthy of reward, or that I am unworthy
to have any at all: If I be worthy, then my reward is, that thou return
home again? If I deserve none, restore unto me all those above rehearsed
graces which thou hold of me. Thou will say, I could not obtain the same
reward which thou demandest; in saying so, thou will but renew the quarrel for
which I did renounce thee, which is, that thou would never acknowledge the
pre-eminence that in all things I ought to have over thee; but if thou should
be believed, thou would take upon thee the authority of thy father, and yet
thou know not how to love me so well as a son. O my child thou know not
what it is to be a father, I would give thee that which thou have especially
required for thy reward: Thou may say, I will not be at your discretion to
be cast off some other time when you list: in saying so, a man may judge that
thou desire to give me the like occasion. Do thou not know that a father
never forsakes his son, without feeling far greater grief then does he
which is forsaken? But coming again unto both our deserts: I have behaved my
self more valiantly in the wars, from whence although the aged are especially
exempted, yet have I ben therein employed, therefore it is a question whether
thou have ben a conqueror or no? thou have exercised thine age, but I have
overcome mine age; thou have made war, but I have finished the war; I did not
only fight valiantly my self, but by my aged manhood did greatly animate the
courages of young men, therefore it may be said that I deserved a double
reward; be thou then the recompense of my valor. I have foughten being old, I
have adventured that little blood which I had left me to gain thee. Alas how
far besides our selves are we both twain, seeing that when we are requested
then we do refuse, and being refused, we would with all our hearts enjoy that
which we are denied, I had not so soon renounced thee, but I did as speedily
desire to revoke thee, if I had not ben assured that thou would never
acknowledge any good turn to come from me; but do not thou compel me to
be suspicious, when thou will not return unto thy fathers house, unless it be
by thine own authority, or after a boasting manner? Consider only how much
more honorable it is for thee to return at mine instance then at thine own.

The Answer.
YOu are not to augment your victory to the prejudice of mine, in doing
whereof you wrong your self, and so much the rather, by how much you confess
that the valor of men redoundeth to the glory of those that ingendered them,
so as in like sort the vicious son can be no other then a reproach to his
father and mother, wherefore it was said that Agrippina was worthy of that
cruel death which she had, only because she brought forth so vild a son as
Nero. Also it cannot be died, that my victory was less famous then yours,
which by mine became the more easy, because he is easily vanquished, which
has been once overcome. But setting all this apart, because unto the judges I
would not be so troublesome as you have been tedious, I will only say thus
much, that of a free man, I desire not to become a bondsman, in as much as none
can constrain a valiant man unto any thing against his mind, and seeing that
you have renounced me, I am no more your son, but if you deem me so, either
there is no reason to reward you with that which you affirm to be your own,
or else it is more reason that my victory which was the first, should first
rewarded by my return unto you, and afterward demand what you think best for
the recompense of yours.

Declamation. 68.
Of a maiden who being ravished, did first require her rauisher for her
husband, and afterward requested his death.

THe law is so, that a maid being ravished may either demand to be married unto
the rauisher, without bringing him any marriage good at all, or else she may
cause him to die. Whereupon it happened that a young maiden being ravished,
accused him that ravished her, and required him for her husband, but he denied
the fact, and affirmed that he never knew the maiden, yet she found the means
to prove him guilty, and having convinced him thereof, she would not then
marie with him, but sued that he might die. Against the which he pleaded thus:

THou can make thy choice but once, and the rather, because I do not yet
know whether that which I alleged in my own defense was more to save my life
then to salve the law, which being once corrupted, would be far more
prejudicial unto others then unto me, who if the worst do chance, can have
but a bad choice, when I must be constrained either to marry such a one as
desires my death, or else die for one who^ I loved too dearly. Thou art not
only the procurer of my shame, but also of my slaughter; for the scaffold, the
hangman, the sword, the bands, and lastly my death, are all ready prepared for
me, and that only by thy means. Will not al men (think thou) say these are
too many evils to be borne at one time, unless thou might be likewise a
partaker thereof? Do thou not know that ouerferuent love depriueth a man of
his understanding? And that the law never punishes those that offend for want
of wit? They then are to be punished that offend through malice or hatred, and
not such as sin through want of discretion, or too much love? Thou seek my
death because I denied the deed, but I say my denial makes me more worthy to
be excused, for thou can not say but that it proceeded either for want of
remembrance of the deed, being void of sense when I did it, or else because I
was sorry or rather ashamed for mine offense; wherefore if the worst do
happen, the one cause freeth me from punishment, and the other makes me
worthy to be pardoned, seeing that to every noble heart, sorrow, shame, and
repentance for misdeeds, are three punishments more worse the^ death, which
does speedily free us from all misery, and impossible is it for any man to
escape it, how soon or late soever it comes; nay rather in prolonging of our
lives we lengthen out our misery. But I pray thee tell me, seeing thou have
chosen me for thy husband, am I not the same? Wherefore then will thou kill thy
husband, when thou meantest to save thy rauisher? Therefore I may say that
herein thou resemblest the she wolf. When thou did demand me for thy
husband, thou did not then know me to be honest and shamefast, or that I
would do my best to conceal thy shame and my discredit; and now thou have
tried mine honesty, thou seek mine overthrow: so that it seems thou art
more angry in that I am ashamed of my folly, then thou art aggreeued with my
fault: why art thou angry? Do thou not know that love, wine, and women, do
make the wisest witless? as Solomon, Sampson, Hercules, Lot, Noe, and an
infinite number besides do witness: likewise the night is void of shame, so
that it is lawful by day to deny the faults of the dark. Thou did choose
me for thy husband, therefore thou may not revoke thy choice, nor the judge
his sentence; nothing can be more politic or profitable in a Commonwealth,
then the performance of every sentence that is given, and the observation of
ancient laws. Whereby I conclude, that if thou be permitted to choose twice,
the law is false, for never did any maid do the like, then seeing thou art no
better then others, thou ought to obtain no more then they.

The maidens Answer.
I Knowing thy malice, and that he which is not ashamed to commit a fault, will
never be ashamed to deny the fact, did not choose thy death which thou
deseruedst, but thy wedding, whereof thou art unworthy; thereby to make thee
acknowledge thine offense, the which thou would never have done, had
thou not ben convinced by most apparent witness: so that it cannot be said
that thou meantest to hide my discredit, but rather to make it more evident by
the testimony of diverse, and thou did not care if I had been found a lier.
They which are ashamed, sorry, or repentant for their misdeeds, have not the
face to deny so audiciouslie their misdemeanors; but thereby it appears,
that before thou did commit the fact, thou thoughtest to escape by thy
falsehood. My choice was of no value, seeing the crime was not verified, neither
art thou my husband, seeing by thy denial thou have affirmed that I had no
action at all to demand thee, I do crave then the death of the malefactor, that
would not take the advantage of my mercy. Likewise the law makes no mention
how many times I am to make my choice, but only that I may choose the one or
the other, must not the choice for the offense be effectual? it has not yet
been because that he himself would not have it effected; I have not then
chosen, but endeavored to choose, if he had not by his denial hindered my
choice. Yet now seeing the deed is no more doubtful, I do choose his death, as
well because in going about to prove my allegation false, he sought to take
away my life, or to take me with double infamy: the judge cannot give away my
right, therefore in causing him to die, he shall satisfy those points which he
says are requisite in a Commonwealth.

Declamation. 69.
Of him that would be paid for his house, wherein a Tyrant was burned.

A Tyrant seeing that he was besieged in his castle or fortress, fled unto a
Citizens house to hide himself. Some one of the tounsmen being advertised
thereof, burned the house and the Tyrant within it, for which deed he obtained
both the honor, gained the reward belonging thereunto, and likewise received
many presents and gifts from the citizens. Which when he whose house was
burned did perceive, he required to be satisfied for his loss by him that set
it on fire, but the other refused to pay him any thing at all, saying:

Wherefore did thou receive the Tyrant? Why could thou not drive him
forth, or slay him? What was the reason that he fled to thy house rather then
to another man's? What cause had he to think himself more sure in thy weak
cottage, then in a strong castle? Why do thou esteem thy house better then
the Commonwealths benefit? Must you that neither killed the Tyrant, nor yet
revealed nor brought him forth that he might be slain, be partner of the
reward? I affirm, and do verily suppose that thou bewailest his death, and it
is very likely that either thou wast his friend or his servant: at the least
thou can not deny but that thou wast his host, yea, and I assuredly believe
that thou did watch of purpose to save him from peril: a man might easily
accuse thee to be one of his confederats, and that thou did offer him thy
house, seeing that therein he thought himself more sure then in any other
house besides. It were far better that one hundred houses much fairer the^
thine should be utterly lost then so vild a Tyrant as he should be yet living.
Nay it were better to see a city quite raced down to the earth, then the
Citizens should be continually spoiled by tyrannous cruelty, without all
hope of amendment. Seeing then that for the common good so great losses are so
slightly regarded, there is no reason that thy petty loss should be in any
sort reco^penced, especially because thou can not say that thy hurt came by
me, but by the Tirant, and no way better can thou excuse thy fault, then in
accusing thine own hard fortune, which was the only cause of thy harm, by
bringing the tyrant unto thy house.

The Answer.
HE which has all the profit and honor, ought likewise to be partaker of the
hurt: as I do not unjustly reprove thee, for the wrong which thou have done
me, so also dare I aduouch, that thou have not killed the Tyrant, seeing thou
did neither see him, nor once touch him, but my house was it that slew him,
therefore it is not against reason, if for the loss thereof, I do at the
least demand some part of the reward. The tyrant did not make any special
choice of my house, much less was it offered or prepared for him, but as he
could, he entered therein, because I was not at home to hinder him; likewise
thou mightedst as well have follow- him in and killed him, but thy heart served
thee not, and therefore thou did rather choose to fire my house, then
otherwise to slay him, and in danger thy self to be hurt: thou then have the
reward, but deseruedst it not, and yet thou would have me lose my house,
which was his overthrow. Who can tell but that he might well have escaped if
therein he had not entered; If then my house did keep him, and receive the
fire that burned him, why ought it not as I have said, be likewise partaker of
the reward?

Declamation. 70.
Of the grandfather that did secretly steal away his deceased daughters child,
for fear least it should be poisoned by the stepmother, as two other before
had been, whereupon the said child's father accused his father in law of violence.

IT happened that a man had three children, whereof two died, not without
suspicion that the stepmother had been the cause of their death. The father of
the said childrens mother did secretly steal away the third child, least it
might come to the like end as the rest did. Neither had the said grandfather
visited the other children during their sickness, because he could not be
suffered to come in, but was kept out of doors. The father caused his child to
be cried, the grandfather said that he had him, whereupon the father accused
the grandfather of violence, saying that he had stolen his child; the good old
man made his excuse, saying:

SEeing that this is all the sons that my daughter has alive, suffer me to
bring him up. What do thou fear? That I will not let thee enter in when
thou come to visit him, as I was served at thy house? thou art deceived, I
am not so ungrateful: fond foolish man as thou art, thou seek not those two
children which thou have lost, nor once hearkenest after them which have been
wilfully made away, but seek him that is not lost, that he might likewise
be lost as the rest were. Thou ask one of me whose life I will charilie
protect, and I do require two of thee whom thou have carelessly suffered to
perish. Why is not a grandfather better to be trusted then a stepmother? I came
to visit my little nephews being sick, yet might not see them; that was
violence, and not this which I have done? For therein has neither been used
weapons, combat, resistance, nor force, but such as was too friendly. Let all the assistance be judge of this controversy which is between a young man and
an old. Thou say that I have stolen thy son, I answer that I do keep my
daughters son, thou say that I have taken him away from thee, and I deny
it; but true it is that when he came unto me, I would not drive him away from
me, and I am the cause that he is yet living. So do the Physicians and
Chirurgions oftentimes bind us, and whether we will or no apply such
medicines as are most needful for the recuring of our maladies. That which I
have done is no strangers deed: Nature has her right, and this difference is
there betwixt the father and the grandfather, that it is lawful for the
grandfather to preserve his children in safety, but not for the father to
suffer his to be slain. Whence proceeds this thy ouerlate pity, to begin
to seek thy lost sons of this which is here in safety? See thou not that all
those that favor the child, do desire that thou might not find him?

The Answer.
HE has not taken away the child to keep him, or for any fear he had of his
safety, but only to slander my wife with sorcerie, and to make me suspected
to be thereunto consenting. What have I to do with this man, O you Judges, who
while his daughter lived, did never bear me any love, and now after her
deceasse does hate me deadly? and having scantly visited my children when
they were sound, he came crieng out and lamenting during their sickness,
prophesieng that which has since happened, and would but have increased their
grief to have heard it. He was kept forth, because his coming was well
known to be more hurtful to all, then helpful to any, and that he should
neither by his needless exclamations shorten the lives of the poor infants,
nor steal this other child, which now appears was his only intent.

Declamation. 71.
Of him that being accused for intending his fathers death, is thereupon
renounced of him, although that in open Judgment he was clearly acquitted by
equal sentence.

YOu must consider tbat in times past, when in judgment there were as many
voices on the one side as on the other, in any criminal cause, the party
accused was acquitted, because that justice ought to regard clemency more then
cruelty. Whereupon it happened that a father accused his son of paricide,
saying that he intended to murder him: wherefore he being imprisoned, and the
informations made on either side, the proof was found so uncertain, that the
party accused had as many voices in judgment on his side as the accuser,
whereby the accused is acquitted. Notwithstanding the father being displeased,
forsakes and disheriteth his son, though he were acquitted by justice,
saying:

My request is now less then it was, for I do not desire to be revenged of
thee, but only that I may be rid of him that would have slain me, I do no more
accuse him, but shun him. Do you think that he will spare me being his foe,
that would not spare me being his father? No surely, For because he would no
difference between my testament and my death. He is not acquitted of his
offense, but only freed of his punishment, because the sentences were alike.
To prove him innocent he ought to have had many voices, but to condemn him,
there needed no more then one. The Judges have not found him faultlesse, but
only spared the punishing of his fault: wonderful is the mercy of the law of
this country, seeing that the equality of voices may acquit malefactors.
Thou may then thank the law, not thine innocence, for thine escape. Thou
say, I am acquitted, and therefore you can neither account me nor call me a
paricide. I allow it so to be, neither will I disherit thee therefore, but for
thy other vices, which are the cause that there are as many that believe thou
would have murdered me as there be that do stand in doubt thereof. But
who knows not that it is a grief for a father to accuse his son, and to
bring him in danger of death, although it be his desert? What is he then that
would be so cruel to accuse him wrongfullie? I take God to witness that as I am
very glad because thou have escaped punishment, so likewise would I take away
all occasion, to accuse thee any more; and in putting thee away, I would take
all occasion from thee to murder thy father.

The sons Answer.
AS there needs but one voice to condemn me, which God has withheld to
defend mine innocence, so is my joy exceeding great in that I am freed from
crime and disgrace, as well as from punishment; and a very likely matter is
it, that some of the Counsel (believing it to be impossible that a father
would ever accuse his son wrongfullie) have been on your side, but the other,
s who considering all men be subject to passion, and that many fathers do
imagine that the lives and deaths of their sons ought to be doomed by them and
at their choice only; have equally taken my part, especially because there
was no proof or witness against me. And notwithstanding you disherit me,
because I should always be secretly suspected of infamy, whereby it appears
that your meaning was never good toward me, or at the least it is corrupted
by such as pretend to be your heirs, so that although I am now oppressed by
your authority, I hope that by my patience all men shall know, and your self
will confess, what a son I both have been, am, and ever shall be; and it may be
that time may cause you change your evil opinion (if God so please) who never
forsakes the innocent.

Declamation. 72.
Of the son who striving against his father, obtained the dignity of Emperor,
afterward being taken in the wars and crucified, his father is accused to have
betrayed him.

IT is to be considered, that amongst our ancestors the dignity of Emperor
was no other then that which we at this day do call General of an army, or
Commonwealth, the which dignity was once demanded by an ancient and valiant
man; But his son resisted him in such sort as he obtained the place for
himself, and as the Proverb says, Mowed the grass under his fathers feet:
Nevertheless they went to the wars together, where it chanced the Emperor to
be taken by the enemies. Whereupon the Commonwealth sent forty Ambassadors to
redeem him, upon any condition whatsoever. These Ambassadors met the Emperors
father, who told them, that he had brought gold to save his sons life, but it
was too late, because he was crucified before he came. The Ambassadors
notwithstanding passed on further, they found their Emperor according to his
report crucified, yet not so thoroughly dead, but that he said thus unto them,
Beware of Treason: Who at their return, upon these words of the son, accused
his father to have betrayed him, saying:

Our Emperor has suffered a shameful death, and the traitor has received
money for the reward of his Treason? We have seen this same man more sad to see
his son pronounced Emperor, then sorry to behold him taken of his enemies.
How was it possible that thou could return alone, being old and ouerladen
with money, seeing they did take the Emperor? Thou have received more money
then thou could well hide: but that is no great wonder, seeing that in one
person thou have sold both a son and an Emperor together; Who said unto us,
Beware of Treason, but alas he said it too late. Truly if the enemies had
not given thee this gold, they would have taken it from thee as well as from
others. This sentence of the Emperor (being ready to die) was short, and even
for shame very hardly uttered, seeing that thereby he accused his father. Why
did thou escape leaving thy son behind thee, who was borne to be an
Emperor? Surely for no other cause but that he hindered thee from being one.
His proceeding against his father by lot and elective voices was done to no
other end, but only thereby modestly to show that from henceforth he would
neither trust thee with the government of the Commonwealth, neither yet ought
the same trust thee to govern it. Our Ambassadors carried gold thither to
redeem our Emperor, and his father brought gold hither which he received for
selling him unto the enemies. How happens it that thou art not dead, or at
the least without motion, and as it were crucified with thy son? why did
thou return so speedily, seeing he was alive and did yet speak? Certainly
his speech bewraied the Treason, but his silence indeuoring to conceal the
same, did better decipher the Traitor, that would not once stay the coming of
the Ambassadors, nor yet return with them again. This good Emperor although
he were crucified, yet left not to be careful for the Commonwealth. And
therefore he said take you heed of Treason: Behold how he could not conceal
the Treason; but like a child he would not name the traitor. Thou will say
that compassion urged thee to depart so quickly. We would know, seeing thou
could not have him alive, why thou did not at the least redeem him when
he was dead? For never was any enemy so cruel but that he would be moved
with a fathers tears, and so great a sum of gold together. This word, Take
heed of Treason, signifies, beware least any without the priuitie of your
towneguards do come forth of your city, or without the knowledge of the
Commonwealth do go unto the enemy, or least any one do return from the
General of the enemies laden with gold: Nothing of this wants, in all men's
judgment thou have done all this, thou wentest forth of the city, thou have
ben in the enemies camp, thou art returned thence laden with gold, the Emperor
warned us of Treason, the Ambassadors have disclosed the traitor, all doubt is
taken away, consider only (O Judges) who did speak, who now speaks, and who
speaks not.

The fathers Answer.
I Did demand the Empire to save my son from the danger whereinto himself
has fallen, I know not whether there be any Treason, but you may think that
if I were culpable therein, my son would have as little respect to accuse me,
as he had to strive with me for the Empire. I did carry money thither, which I
have brought back again, for seeing my son taken, I took all the gold which
of long time I had hidden in my (...) Nay who will doubt that she has not
committed this fact wherewith she is suspected, seeing that she cannot deny
that fault which one would never have charged her withal. You see worthy
Judges that her sin, her conscience, and her own mouth bear witness
against her, pity then this poor dead body burst and ouerflowing with
poison, behold the bride, bed, and feast, turned into tears and funerals, take
compassion of him who above all others is a miserable father, and a most
unfortunate husband.

The wives Answer.
YOu charge me with two great crimes without any likelihood of truth, that is
to say, with adultery, and poisoning; of the one there is neither proof nor
witness, of the other there is a tormented slave witness, who not only to
escape from tortures, but also to be revenged of the stripes which heretofore
she has received, accuses her mistress: but who is so ignorant, that knows
not that such vild wretches as she do seek for nothing else but mischief, or
at the least for alteration or change, and especially when the husband and the
wife are at variance, because that for the most part all the anger lights
upon their shoulders therefore they seek to mittigate their own disgrace by
another discredit: likewise your sicklenesse, evermore ready to believe
false reports, and not my faults, does induce you to accuse me falsely. The
malice which this slave did bear unto my daughter, persuadeth me that she
has poisoned her, because she would not behold her marriage, for fear of
falling forth of my hands into hers, that was younger, and therefore more
rigorous, as being less subject to reason: O what a goodly man is this, who
does give more credit to a tortured slaves words, then unto the long
experience of the integrity of his wife: you do your self confess that you
would never have thought that in seeking for the murderer of your daughter you
should have found out your wives adultery; it is then a sign that I never
heretofore gave you any occasion to suspect me for a lascivious woman: what
moves you then to believe it now? A wicked and disloiall bond woman. Who
provoked you to suspect me for poisoning your daughter? One word spoken by me
in my anger: Do you not know that they which are justly angry or grieved do
speak that which they never think? Think you that the mother has not a just
cause to be angry, when she sees that her daughter shall be married without
her consent? Seeing the mother and not the father suffered all the pain in
bearing her, and that inforceth her also to love her more tenderly. Since I
could not abide to see her badly married, could I be so hard hearted as to
cause her to be murdered? Alas the fear that I had of her death, made me
to divine her destruction. In like sort it is evident that those which are
ouercharged either with anger or fear, do oftentimes unadvisedly foretell
such mischief as shortly after falls out but too true: even so has it
happened unto me, being ouerburdened both with the one and the other accident;
consider O you Judges, how mad this man is, who unto his daughters death would
ad his innocent wives decay, grounding his opinion therein, upon such a word,
as any one that desired to kill another would never utter. Lastly I protest
that he wrongfully seeks my discredit, and therefore I request that he may
make me amends for my disgrace.

Declamation. 74.
Of Romulus who caused his brother Remus to be beheaded.

ROmulus and Remus being both brethren and twins, were the founders of Rome,
and the first Kings thereof, nevertheless they were ruled by the advice of the
Senate, who had established a law, that he which went forth of the city
without leave of the kings or the license of the Senate, should be guilty of
Treason and be forthwith beheaded: Upon this decree they began to build the
walls of their city. Where the two Kings being one day both together, and
Romulus praising the diligence of the workmen, saying that they had in a short
time raised the walls so high, as they might be well termed defensible. Remus
to show the agilitie of his person, or it may be to contrary his brothers
speeches, leaped at one iumpe over the wall forth of the city: whereupon
Romulus being greatly displeased, and exceeding angry, or rather because love
and rule can never abide any companion, so it may be he having long before
sought for some occasion, caused his brother to be suddenly taken, and
affirming that he was gone forth of the city without leave, he did by the
law condemn him, and made him to be presently beheaded: Wherewithal the Senate
being displeased, accused Romulus for killing not only his brother, but also
their King, And thus they say:

WHat good luck or happiness may we hope to reap of our Commonwealth or
city, seeing that in the beginning thereof, not only one twinne brother has
presumed to kill the other, but also the King has murdered the King. If one
hand should cut off the other, one foot tread upon the other, one eye darken
the other, and finally if all the members would seek to hinder each other,
what benefit or help may be hoped for of the body? As the man which has but
one eye is always in danger to be stark blind, or as he which has but one
hand, the least hurt which the other hand receives makes the man altogether
impotent, even so we thought our selves happy to be free from the like
danger having two kings, to the end that if the one were sick, the other might
govern and aid the Commonwealth; those dangers which the one might incur for
want of foresight, the other might prevent by his forecast, the one being
abroad, the other was in the city, and being not only brethren but twins,
we hoped that they should be invincible, but alas the one has overthrown
the other. What punishment then does not he deserve, which has deprived the
Commonwealth of so great a hope? Who knows not that kings are the true guides
of the people, and how good or bad soever they be, the most part will follow
their example? Unhappy then are those Commonwealths where the kings are
wicked, and especially when their chiefest fault is cruelty, which in them is
most odious: therefore has nature framed the drone being king of the bees
without a sting, or at the least if he have one, he uses it not: if cruelty
then be so unseemly for kings, how much more is it for such as are the first
kings, seeing that they do instruct and embolden all their successors to
follow their steps; for man's frailty is more prone to follow the bad then the
good: do we not know that sharp laws are made not to destroy Citizens,
much less Kings, but only to bridle the vicious, and by keeping them in aw to
assure the virtuous; the text of the law is strict, but the gloss is ample, and
ought always to tend rather unto clemency then cruelty. What would you say
if a man (overcome with a jealous care of his country) should go forth of the
city without leave to do some exploit for the benefit thereof; Ought he to
die? Are not the laws made for the profit and safety of the Commonwealth? Let
us consider to what end the King leaped over, was it to go seek the enemies?
No, but rather thereby secretly to show, that as he could leap forth of the
city at one iumpe, so might the enemies as easily pass our such low walls;
wherefore as he would neither flatter the workmen, so without gaining their
ill will, he would provoke them to be more diligent in their labor, and for
the same purpose he endeavored to please both the^ and also the assistants in
showing the agilitie of his body: O how worthy of commendation is that man
which ioineth profit with pleasure, as he did! but we may say that he in steed
of receiving honor by the people for his reward, obtained cruel death at his
brothers hands for his recompense. Seeing the law was by the Senate invented,
why were not they acquainted with his execution; that so his integrity might
have been made manifest? For that which a king does cannot be said to be done
without leave, so that the people be not hurt thereby: for in every lawful act
he may take leave by his own authority, wherefore you have no other excuse, but
that the only ambition to reign alone, incited you to kill your brother,
murder our King, and hurt the Commonwealth, whereby it appears that the
greedy desire to rule is void of all pity or remorse: if we say that he
which parts from his friend parts from himself, what may be said of him
that has by death sundred his brother from him? Which at one instant was
conceived with him, who has remained in his mothers womb until his
procreation with him, who was cast forth unto the beasts, and fostered up
together with him, who has helped him to build this city, to appoint the
Senate, and was created King with him; what judge will be then so ignorant which
will not say that you ought to die with him? And that you do wrongfullie
usurp the time wherein you do live longer then he. Give rightful doom
then, O you Senators, to the end that he which has killed his brother without
your consent, may no longer tyrannise over the Commonwealth.

The Answer of Romulus.
AL happiness ought to be hoped for (grave fathers) when in the Commonwealth
the laws are not only good, but when they be observed and kept, and by the
punishment of a great one, all the rest are threatened if they miss in their
duty: mine integrity is sufficiently declared in submitting me unto the
laws, yea, even in the not sparing of mine own brother, as in like sort I
would not exempt mine own person for the observation thereof. If Minus,
Radamanthus, and Eocus had not ben just and somewhat severe in the performance
of their laws, they should not have obtained that immortal renown which they
now have, neither should be held as Judges of the infernal mansions: like as
it is many times not only lawful, but necessary for one hand to chop of
another to preserve the rest of (...) executing one of the enemies thereof, not
without your judgment, but by you both condemned and adjudged, ever since the
law was by you made and allowed; for you have added no exception thereunto.
Consider then most grave Senators, and you courageous people, that if I receive
any hurt, it is for doing good, beseeching you also to believe, that what
mischief or good soever shall happen unto me, cannot happen unto any that is
more affected unto you, or more careful of your welfare then I.

Romulus escaped at this time, and reigned a long time after very cruelly, but
finally at a sacrifice which was made out of the city, there fell great
store of rain, with horrible thunder and lightening, whereupon the Senators
took occasion to kill Romulus, and afterward having hewed him in an hundred
pieces, every man carried away a piece, and made the people believe that he was
taken up into heaven alive, whilst they were offering their sacrifice, and he
was placed in the temple amongst the gods, and named Quirinus.

Declamation. 75.
Of him who being found with a poisoned potion, is thereby accused to have gone
about to poison his father.

A Certain rich man had one only son, who was of such bad behavior, that
he renounced him, and received him again three times. Lastly, he found him at
unawares in a very secret place of his house, where he was brewing a poisoned
potion, the father asked him what drink that was, he not being able to deny
it, said that it was poison, the which he thought to drink because he was
weary of his life: afterward he threw the poison on the ground, the father
knowing his malice long before, accused him that he had prepared that poison
for him, saying:

IT is far unlike that he which in three times being forsaken did never make
any show to be desirous of death, would now poison himself being both in the
good favor, and in the house of his aged father, whose inheritance he did
daily expect; but it is rather most certain, that he being unwilling to stay
for it until my death, was desirous to attempt the abridging of my days. What
likelihood was there that he would willingly die, who being suddenly taken,
threw the poison down for fear least he should have been compelled to drink
it? Why should you think that such a one is weary of his life that does now
defend himself as much as he can, because he would not be condemned to death?
Those which desire to die, do go unto the wars or travel by sea, and so
die with honor: in denieng thy crime thou proouest thy self culpable; can
thou deny that thou did seek, find, buy, and bring the poison into thy
fathers house? Unto whom thou showing thy self an enemy more then a thousand
times, have compelled him against his will to reject and disherit thee three
times, and thinking always by my exceeding mildness to overcome thine
extreme maliciousness, I have thrice returned to receive thee with more then
a fatherly kindness, but I perceive that all the good which is done unto the
wicked, is not only lost, but also increases their wickedness: for thou
can (...)

THe law is, that whosoever kills any man, should not be buried at all.
Whereupon a certain rich man of a good stock happened by some occasion to kill
himself. So that thereby the Magistrate accounted him for a murderer, and
therefore would not suffer him to be buried: but the kinared of the dead man
stood against him therein, and said:

IF this poor man had slain any one, your reason were of some worth, for it
might have been supposed that malice, hatred, envy, or some other vice, had
procured him to commit manslaughter, but alas he has slain himself being
overcome with misery, or else because he had lost his wits: I know not whether
of these two accidents were the cause of his fall, yet am I sure that they are
not to be imputed unto his fault, but he is more worthy to be pitied then to
be punished. What greater cruelty can there be in the world, then not only
to punish a dead man, but such a one as died miserably? We cannot but suspect
that he perceiving the Magistrate did wrongfullie hate him, has therefore
shortened his own days: for if you did not bear him some ill will what should
move you to go about to deprive him of that which in the end time will grant
unto him? For even those which are hanged do at one time or other not remain
unburied; wherefore Diogenes said well unto his disciples, that demanded of him
where he would be buried: lay me (said he) upon the earth, for the same it
self will in time bury me: this your rigor then is more prejudicial unto us
that live, then unto the dead man: if the worst happen, what can you say of
him? Or wherewith are you able to accuse him, save only that his great
misfortune made him to imagine that he could no way end his misery but by
death? But alas he was deceived, for although he be dead, yet does mishap
follow him, so as he cannot by his sepulcher hide his shame; whereby it
appears, that misfortune does sooner beat down the wretched then it does
the wicked. Surely considering that which is denied unto him, I cannot blame
him for being weary of his life; in his death he has immitated Cato, why
the^ ought this man to be unburied more then he? In your judgment then do you
think that Curtius should have remained without a sepulcher, if in his very
death he had not found the same, casting himself while he was yet alive into
the burning gulf? Who is more miserable then he that whilst he lives is
weary of his life? And who is more unhappy then he that is dead, and wants
a sepulcher? Is it to be wondered at if this man were willing to die, seeing
that for all he shunneth it, mischief pursues him? Nature affoordeth a
sepulcher unto all men, yea the sea casts the dead upon the land to be
buried, those which are hanged in chains, do by little and little slide down
into their graves, for in the end they become earth; they which are burned, the
selfsame fire that co^sumeth their body, does bury their bones converting
them into ashes; others are intombed in the bellies of fishes, and of other
land beasts. As it is the office of Magistrates to persecute murderers, so
likewise ought they to pity the murdered. If you say that he which kills
himself is a murderer, you must yet consider that he has wronged none but
himself: it may be that he did procure his own death for fear least he
should be constrained to wrong some other, what thing then can (...) example
others might be warned to be more careful of their kindred. This law was
invented but only to terrify those who neither feared death nor damnation.
Assure you that he would never have died in that sort, unless he had committed
some heinous offense, for there is no sin so great but that he which dare kill
himself will be bold to commit.

Declamation. 77.
Of the servant of Lucullus who thinking to give his master a drink to make
him to love him, caused him to become a fool.

LVcullus was a Roman Senator, very rich and wealthy in goods, gotten by the
wars, who both lived most deliciously, and also spent more largely then any
other Roman: but most of all he greatly loved learned men, and rewarded them
very liberally. Whereupon it chanced that one of his household servants was
very desirous to work some means that he might likewise choose him to love
him, and the better to effect the same, he prepared a certain love drink, and
made his master to drink thereof (for that which fools cannot attain unto
by virtue, they think to accomplish by villainy) but as from folly there
never comes any thing but mischief, so happened it by this foolish servant,
for in stead of making himself to be beloved, he troubled his masters senses,
because he knew not how to mingle his drink aright. Wherefore the kindred of
Lucullus brought him into judgment, and accused him for poisoning his master,
whereunto the servant replied thus:

TRue it is that I gave him a love drink, but not producing such an accident
as has since unto him happened; and that servant is in no sort faulty, which
as much as in him lies, seeks to procure his masters favor, provided that
it be not to his hurt: the drink which I have given him, has been tried by
many, and may yet be proved by more, I meant neither to hurt my masters
body, nor to trouble his mind, seeing that I never hoped for any good in the
world but from him; but those which gape for his lands after his death, or that
desire to have the managing of his goods during his life, have taken occasion
by this my potion, to give him some other drink that unto his senses has been
more pernicious, that thereby they might both defraud me of my hoped good
intention, and also accomplish their wicked expectation: who has ever heard
that to love ones master well, and to desire to be beloved of him, should be
an offense? and so much the rather, was my meaning lawful, because I neither
have loved him, nor desired his love for any covetousness, but to gain this
only good, always to do unto him most faithful, most humble, and acceptable
service; but as there is no word well spoken which is badlie construed, so
there is nothing well done if it be taken in ill part, or sinisterly wrested,
which is so much the sooner done, because the most part of men do not judge
according to the meaning, but according to the issue of our actions, although
he which has done them be in no sort faulty. But I beseech you worthy
Judges to consider what reason there is to accuse him for a malefactor who has
given the love drink, and not once to seek out or to inquire after him that
has given the noisome and hurtful drink Think you if I (...) mous as
Lucullus was? What theft can be more manifest then in desiring to usurp a love
so worthy, being thy self in all points so worthless? We do in deed
confess that the servant is permitted to love his master, and by his good
service to win his masters love, but it is not lawful to enforce the love of
any man, how much less then is it for a servant to constrain his master? So
that as well the intention as the issue of thy deed, appears to be damnable;
and there is no need to inquire who gave the pestilent potion, seeing thou
did it thine own self, and that thou can not deny the same: moreover,
that which thou confessest to have done is no sign that thou did love thy
master very well, but rather that thou did love thy self too much, for
those which do love entirely do seek all the means they can to please those
who^ they love, but not to force or constrain them to any thing against their
liking, whereby it may be proved that thou only did mischief Lucullus, in
going about to take from him his liberty, having thereby deprived him of his
senses. And there is not any that pretended any profit by his hurt but only
thou, seeing that all the wealth which Lucullus had, was ours and his friends
more then his own, for he was never borne but for the profit of the
Commonwealth, and to pleasure his friends. Therefore we do also require no
other thing, but that the innocent may be acquitted, and the guilty not only
sought out (for he is found in thee) but also punished, as well to give an
example unto all other servants not to enterprise any thing against their
masters, as to revenge the Commonwealth, and Lucullus himself for this
injury.

Declamation. 78.
Of a woman who slew her daughter, that had through childishness killed her
little brother.

THe law appoints, that every woman which kills her child should be
burned. Whereupon it chanced in Orleans, that a poor woman which got her living
partly by washing of bucks, and sometime with carrying of fagots about the
city to sell, had one daughter about the age of four years, and a son
about one year old, with the which children she was left a widow by her
husband. So that she oftentimes being forced to shift the little child, she
said unto him as the most part of mothers and nources use to say, that if he
pissed his clothes any more, she would cut off his prick; the which the little
girl hearing many times, she forgot it not: but one day when her mother was
gone unto the wood, she began to vnswaddle her brother, and seeing that he had
pissed his clothes, she took a knife and cut off his yard, wherewith he lost
so much blood that he died, afterward she told her mother at her return home
what she had done, who seeing her child dead, she was so surprised with anger,
that she took up a little stool, and struck so great a blow therewithal
upon the girls head, that she presently died. For the which she was carried to
prison, and her husbands brother suing her to death, accused her saying:

THis woman has both slain her daughter, and in like sort was the cause of
her sons death, not only in that she left it to the keeping and discretion
of a little girl, but also because she had oftentimes spoken fondly, and
threatened the child foolishly: did she not know that whatsoever was ill to be
done, was not good to be spoken, upon what occasion or intent soever it be? And
that as every word that is spoken, is easily imprinted in the young and tender
hearts of little children, so will they like apes imitate all that they see,
and as children, do whatsoever they hear spoken: why then did she say before
this child any thing which should not be done? And chiefly a matter so
dangerous and so unfitting? Did she not know that children (as being humane
creatures, and subject naturally unto vices) do keep and remember the bad
sooner then the good? And especially the females, as being more vicious then
the males. Some may say that it was a mischief, which she nor any other would
ever have thought upon: but I answer that they ought to be cut of which are
the cause of such misfortunes, to the end that they may no more commit the like
mischiefs, or at the least by their occasion there do not happen some other
greater mischances. If she have lived so badly, that she had no neighbor or
friend so favorable unto her with whom she might have left her little son in
her absence, she is not worthy to live any longer; and if she had any unto
whom she might have recommended the same, she is likewise worthy of death for
not doing the same. Of what thing ought a mother to be more tender and charie,
then of her child? Why then could she suffer the one to die by her negligence,
and heaping mischief upon mischief, murder the other by her malice? What
Tigre, Wolf, or other wild beast, though never so cruel, which will not only
be careful of her young ones, but also will even unto the death defend them
from those that seek to hurt or harm them in any sort? How much less then
will they themselves be so cruel as to kill them? Wherefore must I be the only
speaker in this case, when as with just grief I can hardly speak any more?
If no punishment shall be used when women (who ought to be true examples or
perfect patterns of kindness and pity) are more cruel the^ savage beasts,
I know not what I should say? Saving only that they are happy which either
lived before us, or that shall be born after us, without beholding this our
most unhappy age, if such a woman may be suffered to live any longer therein,
who after she has been the cause of her sons death, has yet further ben the
author of her daughters destruction.

The Answer of a friend for the woman.
Wherefore do you procure the death of such a one who desires nothing so
much, as to die? Do you think that this poor woman is not sufficiently
afflicted, but that you must further seek to aggrauate her sorrow? Alas we
may by her example very well perceive, that a mischief never comes alone,
seeing that first we have ever known her to be poor, next she has lost her
husband, the only stay of her poor life, then her son, and afterward her
daughter, and that which is worst, she is not only a prisoner in danger to
lose her life, but also he which ought to releive her and procure her
delivery, seeks her destruction. Surely the least of so many miseries
wherein she is on all sides compassed, is sufficient enough to make her worthy
of compassion, and free her from punishment. Whereof do you accuse her? Do you
not know that it is not in our power to bridle the first motions of a just
anger? Know you not that the grief which she suffers because she has killed
her daughter, exceeds all the tortures that may be invented to torment her?
For more harm does a mischief that tormenteth the heart, then all the
tortures which may wound the body are able to hurt. Whereas you accuse her of
folly, the folly is your own when you would find in a silie woman, that which
may hardly be found in those that govern monarchies or Provinces Do you not
know that there is no virtue which is not by poverty neglected? And that
necessity has no law? Wherein then has a poor woman offended, who having no
other means, did leave her children at home, whilst she went abroad to get her
living? You speak of friends, and neighbors; it is too manifest that charity
is so exceeding cold, that if one do but twice desire a favor or pleasure at
any man's hands, he is straight said to be importunate: moreover, it is to be
considered, that to take those out of the world who have been the cause of some
great mischance is not the next way to redress the mischief, but rather to
increase it. Concerning the natural malice of little children, being conceived
in sin, and that they retain, or imitate the bad rather then the good, ask
nature wherefore they are so? But you shall find that he which accuses nature,
condemns himself, for we are all subject to her laws. If every thing
should be taken at the worst, and according to your saying, the most part of
men should deserve death, and you might be one of the same number? Where do you
find that he or she is unworthy to live which has not either a faithful
friend, or a loving neighbor? Seeing such happiness is so rare, as all those
which have written unto this present time, do not make mention of six pair of
faithful friends? Amongst whom are Theseus and Perithous, Achilles and
Patrocles, Laelius and Scipio, Orestes and Pilades, and he must be a good
friend with who^ one would trust his child, and more then a good one, if he
will ordinatily have the care and trouble to look unto it. How would you then
find amongst poor women that which so sildome is found amongst so many famous
men? It is very likely that this woman did not kill her daughter as being
cruelly addicted to murder, but rather as being overcome with a just cause of
anger. The comparison which you make in likening her unto a brute beast is very
odious, seeing that she would not only have defended her children against all
those that would hurt them, but also that the compassion ^^ich she had to see
one of them dead, induced her to strike the other. In all ages there have been
seen many shrewd turns and mischances, therefore the fault happened in this
our age may be repaired, if the Judges will be pleased to be as merciful as
you would have them merciless, for by that means the offense of a woman shall
be the cause that in after ages the mildness of our Judges shall be remembered.

Declamation. 79.
Of a Turk who bought a child with a red head to make poison of him.

A Poor woman having but one son which was of a red colored hair, which
the Frenchmen do in a mockery call the dissembling hair, put her said son to
serve a merchant, who within a while carried the child with him into Turkey,
who whilst he there remained, there came a Turkish Physician oftentimes unto
the said merchant, to enquire whether he would sell the red boy? But the
merchant always answered him that he would not, until that on a time the boy
said unto him secretly: Master sell me well, and give the money unto my mother
to relieve her poverty, and I will find the means to run away, and to escape
from him well enough, so that I will return unto you or to my mother; the
merchant agreed thereunto, and sold the boy for a certain sum of Ducats,
hoping to see the boy again, but within a while after he was very much
abashed when he could see him no more. Wherefore he demanded of the Turk where
the boy was, and entreated him so earnestly that he might see him again, that
the Turk having brought him into his house showed him only the boys head, and
all the rest of his quarters boiling in a cauldron, wherewith the merchant was
greatly amassed, but dissembling his sorrow as much as he could, asked the Turk
what he would do with that child boiled, the Turk answered him that it was to
make poison, and that he hoped to gain more then ten thousand ducats by him:
the poor merchant being very sorrowful, brought the money home with him, and
gave it unto the boys mother, telling her not without tears the whole truth
of the matter, the mother refused the money, and required justice of him that
had sold her son, accusing him to be the cause of his death, and these were
her reasons:

WHo is more miserable then I? Seeing by the fault of him, with whom I would
have trusted mine own life, my son (being his servant) was even in one month
sold as a slave, and then most cruelly slain: and why was he slain? Alas
to be not only the instrument and cause of the death of many others, but it
may be to serve for the ruin and destruction of all Christendom; since there
needs but a little poison to murder those that defend the same: I did lend
thee my son to do thee all good and honest service, upon thy promise that
thou would use him as thine own; I do ask thee whether thou would ever
have sold thine own son upon any condition whatsoever? Would thou not
have sent him to travel abroad, to see the world, and to learn virtuous
qualities, that he might be a stay unto thy age, and a profitable member in
the Co^monwelth? I hoped to have had the like of my son, and the loss ought
not to be esteemed any thing the less, because he was son unto a poor
woman, for they when they once give their minds unto learning or any other
good quality, do become more virtuous: as for example, Ag^thocles King of
Scicilia, was not he the son of a potter? Viriat king of Portugal, Otto, and
Tamberlane Emperors of the East, were all three shepherds: Arsaces king of the
Parthians would never bewray who were his Parents. Ptolomey the first of that
name being king of Egypt, the son of an Esquire, Eumenes one of the successors
of Alexander was the son of a wagonmaker, Dioclesian Emperor of Rome was the
son of a Notarie, Pertinax likewise an Emperor of Rome, his grandfather was a
bondsman; Valentinian, the son of a ropemaker; Proba the soune of a gardener;
Aemilius knew not from whence he came; Maximinus was the son of a Muletter,
with an infinite number of others of far baser parentage then was my son,
that have been the honor of all their country. Alas must the love which I did
bear unto my child be measured by thy covetousness? Do thou not know that a
Turk never buieth a Christian for any good that he wishes unto him? And if
he did, ought thou to allow him to deceive his master, and to run away from
him? Thou should have chastened him for inuenting such a villainy; for I did
not give him unto thee to the end that thou should consent unto his wicked
counsel, but that he should be well counseled and instructed by thee: but I
do very well perceive, that it is not said in vain, that covetousness is the
root of all mischief. Cursed be the gold, I will have none of it, for I know
well that they which will live according to the rule of nature, have no need
thereof, and they which will live after their own mind, have never enough, of
which number thou art one, and that has caused thee to cast away my son so
miserably, for the which I demand justice.

The Merchants Answer.
WHy do thou persecute me, O thou woman, for a mischance that displeases
me no less then it does thee? If it were otherwise, might not I have kept
this gold and have made thee believe that thy son had been run away from me?
Yea, and that he had robbed me, or else that he had died by some other
accident, then could thou well have endured thy sons loss, together with
thy poor life; but indeed thou verifiest the old Proverb, which says, That a
woman is extreme in all things, and that likewise she commonly chooses the
worst: whereby I might have been better advised, when I told thee of this
mishap, being therefore no less sorrowful then thy self, for to say the
truth, it was a great lamentable mischance, and now I do very well know how
unseemly it is for any man to say, I had not thought, because every wise man
thinks upon every thing before he do any thing: Notwithstanding, I dare
affirm that few men would ever have supposed that of a child there might be
poison made to kill men: and surely I doubt whether thou art to be blamed or
no for bearing such a one: for such children are begotten by unlawful
conjunction, when the woman is in her wicked disposition. Furthermore, if my
son should have persuaded me to leave him with that Turk, I know not whether
I should have done it yea or no. Lastly, I suffered him to do what he would,
thinking it should have been for his profit and thine, our deeds ought to be
measured by our good or bad meaning, and not according to the event thereof: and
say not that a Turk does never buy a Christian to do him any good, for
many slaves do there become great lords, and governors of Provinces: thy
son would not credit my counsel, and although I had not consented unto his
request, yet would he have left me to accomplish it: the covetousness was in
him, and not in me, hardly may he be either counseled or corrected that is
naturally inclined to wickedness as he was, and I believe that he had that
from thee, seeing that to the death of thy son thou would ad the
destruction of the dearest friend that thou have in the wortd, and who in stead
of thy son and husband would be the stay of thine age, and always helpefull
unto thee. But it is truly said: women naturally can never forgive a fault,
nor acknowledge any service or favor that is done unto the^.

Declamation 80.
Of him that agreed to behead his father, after his father refused to do the
like by him.

IT chanced that a father and his son were both convinced of treason, for the
which they were condemned to die, nevertheless as they were ready to be
executed, the Judges being inclined to mercy rather then rigor, were willing
to save one of them, saying that the grief which he should have that might
see his kinsman die, would serve for a sufficient punishment, and to increase
the same, they feigned that the one of them should be the others executioner,
and they put it unto their choice who should be the executioner, and who the
party to be executed: wherefore either of them striued a great while who
should be the party to be executed, but in the end the son agreed to the death
of his father, and according to the decree would have beheaded him, the which
the Judges perceiving, they caused the execution to be stayed, and pardoned
the father, and sent for the hangman to behead the son, but the father
defended him, saying:

YOu ought not, O you Judges, to pronounce your sentences in manner of a
mockery, or by the ambiguitie or reuocation of them to increase the affliction
of the afflicted, under a color of moderating justice with mercy: if mine
offense be not worthy of death, why will you make me suffer many? That is to
say, one in seeing the extremity of the choice whereunto you have put us,
another in contemning my life and offering up my neck at naught to be cut of
by my son, and the third in seeing him to be condemned for being willing to
accomplish your sentence? If it be a cruel deed to see a son execute his
father that thereby he might have his own life saved, a greater cruelty would
it be for the father to kill the son? Wherefore O you Judges you should not
have given so cruel a sentence: but can you blame a child if to save the prime
time of his youth, he do not spare the withered age of his father, whose
years are not many, and they miserable? For to say the truth, age is an
incurable malady; but although it were not, yet sure grief and despair would
be my destruction: if you have any children, consider then what our misery
is? And if you have none, learn of those which have them, what the affection of
fathers toward their children is? And then may you know that the extremity of
the choice which we have been put unto, without increasing our misery, is
sufficient to make us seem more worthy of present pity the^ of further
punishment. Not in vain did Lisander of Sparta say unto him that found him
childishlie playing with his children, I pray thee (quoth he) do not disclose
this my folly at any time, unless it be when thou have children as well as I:
for that discreet personage did very well know, that those which have no
children, do never know how great the father and childrens love is one unto
another, the which does wax more fervent as our years and age increases:
wherefore it is no great wonder if my son has consented to do that which I
could never agree unto, seeing that his years are all too young as yet to
understand so well as I what true affection means: therefore I cannot believe
that he whom Manlius Torquatus caused to be beheaded (to manifest his care in
observing military discipline) could assuredly be his own son, the which
perchance himself did well understand, and for that cause he found occasion
at one stroke to be both reue^ged of the mother, in grieuing her with the
slaughter of her son (the cause and witness of his sorrow) and also by the
same means to gain an immortal memory: I say memory, because such kind of
cruelty is not to be termed glory. But how many are there who for want of
years and discretion have conspired their fathers death, and yet have not
been compelled thereunto as this my son was, but only either for the desire
of rule or greediness of goods? notwithstanding there was never any father so
cruel as to punish his son for all that, except Herod that abominable
monster, more cruel then any brute beast; But David did not he weep for his
son Absolon, by whom he had received so many detestable persecutions, and
injuries? Must there then be a quarrel taken, because I have been more pitiful
then my son? who nevertheless would not do any thing without my
commandment, and by the duty whcih he ought unto me, which has chiefly
induced him heretofore to commit that offense for which we are both condemned.
Lastly, reason wills that your last sentence be not revoked, for no sentence
ought ever to be revoked to the hinderance or prejudice of such as are to
suffer: if one of us must die, it is I that ought so to do, seeing that I was
first born, and being the elder, I have offended through malice, but he through
ignorance, I willingly, and he in obeying me; I then being the only cause
that both he and I have offended, it is requisite that I only should die for
both our misdeeds: and never imagine that my son does for all that escape
unpunished, for as all my misery shall in my death have an end, so shall his
calamity in living together with his years daily more and more increase, as
well in grieuing that he has offended the Commonwealth, as that he has been
constrained to kill his father by their commandment, who ought to abhor the
only thought of so execrable a cruelty.

The answer of the Judges.
Our sentence was not pronounced by way of mockery, neither was it revoked to
increase your miseries, but only to know (seeing you are both twain worthy
to die) whether of you is most unworthy to live: for mercy which assuageth
Justice, ought always to be extended toward him that is least culpable.
Wherefore finding your son more faulty then you, we have appointed him to
die, yet not by your hands, for we know that the same were rather cruelty then
justice, but we have hereby made a certain trial whether there were any
virtue remaining in him, when in consenting unto your death, he has bewraied
his ungraciousness, so that except you be yet an enemy to your country, you
ought not to bewail the death of a man so wicked, or a son so worthless;
but we plainly perceive that every one favors such as himself is, and
that you will never surceasse to hate the Commonwealth: so that it will be no
great loss although you should (as you say) die with grief; for such a loss
shall be more profitable to all, then hurtful to any: likewise of two wicked
men we had rather save him that by course of nature will die the soonest, and
which has little time, and less strength to accomplish his wicked purpose. We
have children, but if we did know that they would ever be like unto you or
your son, we would presently do with them as we will with him, and as we
ought to do with you; they are to be pitied which are poor and miserable,
not such as are wicked and malefactors, for as to afflict the good it is an act
of cruelty, so to punish the bad, is a deed of charity: we do not cause your
son to die, for being willing to accomplish our sentence, as you say, but
because he being already worthy of death, the same does make him more
worthy, and we do save you by our special grace, because you would not kill
him, showing your self at the least a better father, then he is a son: and
the duty which he ought unto you can be no excuse for him, for it is very
apparent that he would hardly ever have obeyed you, had you commanded him to
do any good: true it is that never any sentence is to be revoked to the
hinderance of the good, but as we have moderated the first to save the life of
one of you, so is it lawful for us now to apply the other in such sort, that
he may die which is most wicked. Also the choice which we do put you unto
cannot be called cruelty, seeing that it was not to that end that it should
be so effected, neither was the same any sudden invention of our own
thoughts, but it is to be considered that the wickedness of malefactors causes
the judges to invent new and extraordinary punishments, thereby to repress
vice the sooner. To conclude, if you think that we do you any wrong, you may
appeal unto those who have as great authority over us as over you.

Declamation. 81.
Of a Surgeon who murdered a man to see the moving of a quick heart.

THere was in Padua a most cunning Surgeon, excelling all others of his
time, who having made wonderful experiences of his art (for no less is the
desire of cunning, then is covetous of coin) had also a wonderful great
desire to open a live man, that he might perfectly know the motion of the
heart, whereupon he made diverse and sundry requests unto the Senate of Venice,
that they would grant unto him some condemned malefactor, to make therewith
this his desired experience, but he could never obtain the same at their
hands, for the Venetians are by nature not only pitiful, but also somewhat
supersticious. But these refusals did but the more increase the longing of this
Surgeon: for to say the truth, every haulty spirit are in that like unto
women, who do for the most part covet after that which they are forbidden to
touch. So that he being still in this rauing or rather longing, there came
unto his door a poor soldier, very well proportioned and of a sound body,
coming newly from the wars, and demanded his alms of the Surgeon, who
caused him to come in, and cherished him secretly some three days after his
own fantasy, afterward having brought him down into a cave, he caused him
by certain fellows hired for that purpose, to be bound unto a post, and
opening him alive, he saw that in him which he so greatly desired, but as no
murder can ever remain vndisclosed long, so it happened that one of his
confederats was taken for some other crime, and being upon the rack, he
amongst other matters, revealed the murder which he, his companions, and the
Surgeon had committed whereupon they were all taken, and the Surgeon
confessed the fact, saying:

TRue it is most just Judge, and you worthy Senators, that I have been the
death of one man to save the lives of an infinite number of others, not only
by the cures which I hope to perform during my life, but by that which I will
leave behind me in writing after my death: wherefore it may be said that
having made an experience so notable and profitable, I have done worthily, but
having killed a guiltles man I have done wickedly. I confess it, and would
confess to have offended more hainouslie, if I had not more then once
entreated, that to prevent a further mischief, I might have been allowed to
make this trial upon some condemned malefactor, the which I was never
permitted to do: some one may answer, must you therefore kill an innocent? Or
do that by your own authority, which a whole Senate would never allow? Do
you think that your authority alone is greater, or your wisdom more then all
theirs together? God forbid worthy lords, that I should ever presume any such
matter; but I dare and that truly affirm that it is lawful for Chirurgions
to do many things which is not decent to be allowed by the Senators: nay, they
would abhor to hear it but mentioned; what a thing were it if at all times
when a man's leg or arm, or the breast of a woman must be cut off, to save the
rest of the body, that first the Counsel should be moved, or leave requested
of the Senate for the same, would it not be a horrible matter? And as at Rome
heretofore the first Surgeon was stoned by the people; so would they now
become very odious unto the Senators, being unskillful of the profit of that
art: therefore all things which are odious, but necessary, ought to be done in
the most secret manner that possibly they may be; let not this then be any
further revealed, which for a good intent and upon a most just occasion I have
done secretly: concerning the innocence of him upon whom this trial has been
made, there is no proof nor any certainty thereof, but rather many
presumptions to the contrary: for first he had a bad countenance, he came
from the wars which is a place whereunto one goes to no other end but to kill,
or to be killed, he left his captain in the midst of his wars, without either
leave or pasport from him, which is a manifest proof that he was attainted of
some notable crime, or else is worthy so to be for flying from the field, or
not performing such duties as souldior are sworn to observe; for none ought to
bind himself unto any thing without doing his endeavor to discharge the same;
He was poor and oppressed with hunger, wherefore I may say that his death has
saved their lives whom it may be he would have robbed by the high ways: for
commonly those which are idelly brought up in the wars, do never desire to
gain their living by an honest trade or exercise, so that in the end they
become fit to furnish the gallows. If then his offenses have induced me and
moved my mind unto his prejudice alone, to act that which is for the
commodity of many, every lover of arts, and welwiller of the Commonwealth,
will not find this deed so strange as it seems in show to be unto the
ignorant and vulgar sort, but they will rather judge it to be somewhat
commendable. To conclude, most worthy Judge, and you famous Senators, I trust
so much in your wisdoms, as it will please you to consider that every bad act,
which is not only grounded upon some just reason, but also which redoundeth to
a benefit and profit no less wholesome then necessary for the whole
Commonwealth, is turned into a good act, or at the least is sufficient to
excuse the author thereof: and especially when the same happens not casually
or by chance: but proceeds of a good, free, and sincere intention as mine may
be termed, and as all my actions have ever been known to be.

The Answer of the Attorney General.
THe accusation of your companions inforceth you to confess your fault, and
your iniquity causes you to allow the fact, which makes your offense not
only double, but also treble, in that you seem to prove by frivolous reasons,
before so worthy an assembly, that you have not misdone; which is both absurd
and false, for never can any bad act, be the beginning of any good deed: but
I would know, who has made you more able, or more bold, to desire to try that
which so many excellent men in times past, would never attempt, because they
would not do any thing contrary unto humane pity, could not you
comprehend that which you seek by consideration, as well as others have done
before you? Trust me, in going about to show that you are more sufficient then
all men, you therein do plainly set forth your ignorance, which can comprehend
nothing without experience. It seems by your saying, that all the skill of
your art consists in experience; if it be so, you ought to have in your
body every disease or accident one by one, whereof you would cure others, or
else you must beleeeue that which other men have written thereof: the which you
should also have done without making such a cruel experiment, the which (if you
had been as well advised as you were curious) might have been done upon some
beast whose entrals had not been much unlike unto a man's; but as those that
have used to shead humane blood, cannot refrain from the same when they would,
so you being accustomed to cut off members before there be any great need,
waxing every day more cruel then other, were desirous to come so near as the
heart: Therefore he which said that Physicians are Alquimists of men's bodies,
should likewise have said that Chirurgions desire nothing so much as wounds and
sores. If the decrees do forbid to make an anothomie of a dead body, and the
Senate would not grant unto you one that was condemned, was not that sufficient
to make you know that you should offend God and his law in causing a man to die
for your own pleasure? And it is not enough for you to have slaughtered him,
but you must yet further go about to slander him; surely, it is an ancient
custom of the wicked to blame the good, for you who are a notorious
malefactor, would reproach him whom you neither knew nor ever frequented his
company, except when you murdered him, under the coulor of charity and
devout hospitality. Were not you bound (he being in your house and protection)
to defend him against all those that would in any sort hurt him, which is
far from murdering him your self? I know not whether the Romans did amiss
in stoning Talister their first Surgeon: but I am sure that we had been
better not to have given so much authority unto ours. The surmises which you
allege against the dead, are neither credible nor of any worth, for few men
had a worse countenance then Socrates, nevertheless there was hardly found a
better man in all Greece or one more harmless then he: you say he came from
the wars; It was a sign that he abhorred the cruelty thereof, and there is
none but you that says he was run away from thence without a pasport; I would
know if it were so, how he could pass so far as your door? You reprove him
for his poverty, but where do you find that poverty is a vice? I say that
when a soldier comes poor from the wars, it is a sign that he hates
the thefts and robberies wherewith by supposition you would accuse the poor
dead man: but who has appointed you to punish another man's faults: and
especially those which are unknown unto you? If as you say your spirit was
moved to do the same, it behooves to separate that spirit from the body,
which is so ready to effect the evil desires thereof: Neither is that fit to
be allowed which the people do dislike altogether, for it is the common
opinion, that the peoples voice proceeds from Gods voice. Moreover, if such
faults should be borne withal, it is to be feared that the people should not
(only) be scandalized thereby, but also they might easily immitate the same,
for there is no offense so great that finds not some show of a lawful
excuse, when the Judges are disposed to wink thereat: But why do I say
(only) save only because vices are unpunished? Let us therefore do well,
least this Commonwealth which has flourished twelve hundred years through the
good justice observed therein, should decay if the same were now neglected, for
the same corruption which is in a body without a soul, is in a Commonwealth
without Justice. Consider then you worthy Judge and Senators, that never
murderer had his will or intention, good, free, or sincere, as this fellow
says his is, for the actions are always witnesses of the intent and meaning
of men.

Declamation. 82.
Of a rich man that compelled a poor man to give him his daughter in marriage.

THe law appoints, that every maiden that is taken by force, or she whom one
has had at his pleasure by any manner of compulsion or abuse, may either choose
the death of him who has forced, constrained, or abused her, or else he shall
be bound to take her to wife without any portion at all to her marriage.
Whereupon it happened that a rich man of Greece entreated a poor man of the
same contrie three sundry times, to give him his daughter for wife, but the
poor man would not, within a short time after as he went together with his
daughter to go to some place by sea, the ship happened to wrack, so that the
poor man and his daughter saved themselves in a little Island belonging to the
said rich man, who at the same instant chanced to be there, wherefore this
occasion fitting to his desire, he friendly entertained the old man, made him
good cheer, and again requested him to bestow his daughter upon him, the poor
man made him no answer at all but wept; the rich man finished the marriage
with her the same evening: every one being returned into the city, the
father would have carried his daughter before the Magistrate, but her husband
would not consent that she should go thither. Whereupon the poor man said
unto him:

LEt my daughter come before the Magistrate, if thou be an honest man, for if
she be thy wife, what need thou to fear? But if thou have constrained her,
why wilt not thou submit thy self unto her choice, thy fear accuses thee,
and is a witness that thou did take her against her will; thou art no honest
man if thou fear that she will choose thy death, for he which forces a maid
cannot die too soon; why do you doubt if I have given you my consent? If I
have denied you, why should you have her? Having demanded her of me when I was
at liberty three several times, I did every time deny thee: and the fourth
time being in thy power, not daring to refuse thee with my tongue, I refused
thee with mine eyes and my tears, seeing then that by two several means thou
were refused, and that no body agreed that thou should have her, how can
thou deny that thou tookest her by force? Alas, I do less grieve at my loss
by sea, then I am sorry for the other which I have suffered since my coming
to shore, for between the time of my shipwreck, and the forced marriage of
my daughter, there was not one night. What son in law would not tarry until
his father in law had dried up his tears? But how should I trust thee with my
daughter, seeing thou dare not trust me? Thy malice is an hinderance thereof,
for thou know very well that thou art the cause of our shipwreck, having
made a fire not in the usual port of thine Island, but in such a place where
thou were well assured the ship could not arrive without wracking, so as not in
the sea but in the country we were cast away? And I was twice cast away by
the loss of my daughter, even when I was wet, and being astonished with the
sea, and giddie with the wind and waves, thou came unto me to request my
daughter: as a ship wracked man, and a captive I did my endeavor, refusing that
by my tears, which being free I did with my tongue three times deny thee,
thou rich leacher, but yet thou seeing us in such calamity, thoughtest once
more to win us to thy lure. It must be known whether that may be called a
marriage which is done in the nooke of an island being almost desert, where none
were present but a few people that escaped from shipwreck, all our tears were
tokens that we desired no such thing. They are arguments of unwillingness and
witnesses of the hearts sorrow, no man weepeth for that which he desires, but
tears are in steed of entreaties for those which are shamfaste, and are
ashamed to entreat; Thou can not then deny that thou tookest my daughter by
force, and it is the more likely, because thou will not submit thy self to
law, and stand to her choice whether she will have thee for her husband or no.

The rich man's answer.
THou have nothing to say nor any thing to do with my wife, except it be to
see her. Nevertheless, I refer it to her own choice whether she will go to
the Magistrate yea or no: but I would not that it should be at thine instance
nor when thou would, for I do very well know that she was never content
with those refusals that thou made me, therefore can it not be said that I
have taken her against her will, nor against thy liking, for by the laws
silence is a consent; concerning thy tears, I took them for a good token,
believing that they proceeded for joy, not only that thou had escaped
drowning, but to see that in so great misery I did not yet disdain to be thy
son in law, as also that thou were ioiful to behold my constancy in loving
thy daughter. For tears are not as thou say always signs of sadness, but
sometimes tokens of joy, and especially when they are accompanied with silence,
for sorrow inforceth a man to speak, and joy provoke silence. As for the
fire which thou say I did make to cause the ship wherein thou wast to be
cast away, there is none but thou that co^plaineth thereof, for every one
knows that my sheepeheards made that fire for their commodity, without
thinking to hurt any man thereby. And for the marriage it was solemnized as
commodiouslie as the place could afford. And it is not to be wondered at, if
one who has long time loved most fervently, did take the fruition of his love
as soon as possibly he might, for the nature of lovers is, to think every
minute a month; and fearing to lose the good so much of them desired, they can
hardly believe that which they both see and touch. I will willingly submit my
self to the law, but I will not that thou should have the credit to compel
me in any sort. Thou have no cause to complain of thy shipwreck, seeing that
from the same two holy actions have proceeded, that is to say, hospitality,
and marriage, I offered thee the one, and entreated thee for the other. Thou art
deceived if thou think that I will love thee or thy daughter any whit the
more, my life having ben once in your power, the love which I do bear unto
her is great enough, without bringing me unto such an ouergreat extremity, far
better is a free and voluntary love, then is that which proceeds from any
bond; my affection cannot be increased, because it is already perfect. My
marriage declares that I neither ravished nor constrained thy daughter at all,
unless it be because I married her without any substance at all, if thou art
not content that I have so done, give me her portion and I will accept it. If
thou have no goods, use mine as the goods of thy daughter, and let us live in
peace.

Declamation. 83.
Of a blind woman that would have detained her son from redeeming his father
out of prison.

THe law appoints, that every child which was old enough to serve and relieve
his father or mother, and would not endeavor himself so to do, ought to be
imprisoned or kept in bonds as a bondslaue. Whereupon it chanced that a man
made a long voyage by sea, leaving his wife and son at home; being upon the
sea, he fortuned to be taken by Pirates, so that he was constrained to write
unto his wife and son, that they might find the means to ransom him out of
captivity. The wife wept so much as she became blind therewith, the son
would needs depart to redeem his father, but his mother would detain him,
demanding that service at his hands whereunto the law did bind him, and would
have caused him to be laid in bonds, because he would not tarry, the son
pleaded against her thus:

IT is sufficient that two remain in bondage without desiring that the third
should likewise be laid in bonds, the prison detaineth my father in thraldom,
and your bondage mother is your blindness. Wherefore will you heap misery
upon calamity in bringing me also in captivity? what wrong do I unto you in
leaving you a little while for so good an intent as to releive my father? Will
you have the world to doubt that you are not so loving a wife toward your
husband as always hitherto they have esteemed you? Will you that for your sake
a man may say that all women are in their extremities? Do you not know that
virtue consists in a mean? Will you have me to forsake my father? do you not
perceive that his captivity summoneth me to travel for his liberty? Do you
not consider that the chiefest part belongs to the father, and the second
unto the mother? He is abroad, you are at home, he is in bondage, you are free,
you are amongst pitiful Citizens, he in the hands of pitiless Pirates, his
feet are fettered, but thanks to God yours are at liberty: true it is that you
are blind but alas he is far more miserable then you, for your blindness
hinders you from beholding an infinite number of things which would vex you,
but he continually sees his enemies, vieweth his chains whippes and
bastinadoes which he often feels and hourly fears, and looks upon the
oar and other instruments wherewith he is evermore tired. You say the voyage
is too dangerous for me, how many are there, that to win the love of some gay
lady, will not stick to adventure any danger whatsoever? Why then should I
fear to deliver my father? Consider that such as hinder others from well
doing, do amiss themselves, and that he which gives not all the aid he can
unto those that are afflicted may be well said to be the only cause of their
affliction. Wherefore dear mother, I beseech you not to be one of that number,
or if you will needs be, yet suffer me not so to be.

The mothers Answer.
IT is thou that desire unto my husbands loss to ad my sons lack, and so
finally to procure my utter desolation, leaving me here alone blind and
poor; If thy father being old and subtle, could not escape from being taken by
Pirates? How will thou being young and simple, shun the like perils? Do thou
say that thou shall leave me for a small time, when I know thou can never
return? If thy father had believed me, he should not now have been in that
calamity wherein he remains, and into that which thou would cast thy
self, neither yet should I have been constrained to have brought that love in
question which thou say thou bear unto us both; in that which I require,
there is no extremity at all, for being bound unto twain, he or she that is
present, may command as being the nearest: thy death or thy loss will not any
whit deminish, but rather double thy fathers misery, when he shall know it, if
he be not dead already, as I fear he is: For young men may die too soon, but
old men cannot live any long time: if he were advertised of my blindness, I
am sure he would command thee not to forsake me; how would thou then have
thy voyage to prosper when thou undertake it contrary to thy fatherrs
meaning, and against thy mothers mind? Where is thy true obedience? Is this the
recompense for my bringing thee forth with so great pain? And for nursing and
bringing thee up with such exceeding care? In serving me thou do well, in
leaving me thou do ill: so that thou can not say that I hinder thee from
well doing. But I would rather persuade and compel thee thereunto if I could:
likewise, I have as much need of help as thy father has, who did himself
command thee not to forsake me, when he departed from hence; and then being not
blind, I had no such need of thee as now I have. Never imagine that God will
ever favor thee if thou now forsakest me.

Declamation. 84.
Of a rich man who thinking to burn the tree of a poor man, did also burn
his house.

THe law appoints, that whosoever harmeth another man unadvisedly, he must
but only recompense the hurt that is done, but if any do a mischief of set
purpose or maliciously, he must make satisfaction for the same fourefold.
Whereupon it happened, that a rich man dwelt next house unto a poor man, that
had in his small garden a great tree growing, which did take away a great part
of the prospect from the rich man's house, who did oftentimes entreat the poor
man to sell him the said tree, but he would in no sort consent thereunto,
affirming that it ought to remain there in remembrance of his deceassed
father, who had himself planted the same. At the last, the rich man seeing
that he could not prevail, did upon a night set the said tree a fire, which
flamed out so vehemently, that therewithal he burned the poor man's house. For
which the rich man offered to pay for the tree fourefold, but for the house he
would pay no more then once. On the contrary the poor man would have him make
a fourefold satisfaction both for the one and the other, saying:

IF you had not maliciously set my tree on fire, my house had not ben burned.
But what likelihood or proof is there, that you meant not to burn my house
with me and my family therein, as well as the tree, seeing that the one was so
near adioining to the other, and that you fired the same in the night season,
yea, and that about the time of our first sleep, which is the deadest time of
all, watching a fit season when as the wind blew directly toward my house that
you might be able to save your own from harm? Where is justice? What is become
of the laws, seeing that what could not be obtainted by entreaties, nor
effected by threats, is attained by force unto the danger of the lives of a
whole family? What do you call tyranny, but only when a man does what he
lists, and without reason uses revenge, when no offense has been offered?
And when that which cannot be won with silver is wrought by fire? If laws
take any place, there is no difference between the rich and the poor, and as
well may the one as the other enjoy that which is his own: you have large
possessions and houses in the country as well as in the city, between your
buildings and round about them, you have meddows, woods, and rivers to delight
you, and yet of all these nothing was more pleasant to you then my ruin, in
causing me to lose my house; me I say, who only could pass no further then
this tree: why shall I not say that thy voluptuousness and thy delicacie makes
thee like unto Nero, who delighted to see Rome a fire? Even so for thy pleasure
thou have in one hour burned all my patrimony, and mooueables, as thou
would in like sort have burned us, had we not escaped from the fire stark
naked. You say that my tree kept the air from your house, I pray you sir did
not your galleries and high walls do the like by mine and others men's? And your
great store of servants do not they daily molest us, under the coulor of your
greatness? And the dunge of so many horses as you keep does not it infect
our air think you? You deem that all these discommodities are nothing at all
unto us, but yet one poor tree of mine seemed unto you a whole forest, my
loss is inestimable, seeing that by the saying of my furious enemy, I have
lost more then he was willing I should. My request is but reasonable, that
either the fire may end with his house that kindled the same, or else that he
may make me satisfaction according to the law.

The rich man's Answer.
I Did not burn thy tree through malice, but was constrained thereunto by
necessity, for the same hindering the wholesome air that might breath into my
house, made it pestiferous: how many times have I entreated thee, saying; take
what thou will of me, and let me at the least lop the branches of this tree,
for they do not profit thee in any sort, but they annoy me greatly? Yet was
it never possible for me to obtain so much favor at thy hands: to what end
served those boughs, which did nothing at all shadow thine but my house?
Many such like requests have I made unto thee, but it was in vain, because
the desire that thou had to annoie my house, hindered thee from choosing that
which was profitable both for thee and thine; for those boughs did already
ouerpresse part of my house, and thrust down the wall, and finally would at
the length not only have shaken, but quite thrown down the same, for there
is no violence so great as that which increases by little and little; but why
was the law of fourefold restitution made, but only because the lawmakers did
assuredly think, that there would be men as obstinate as thou, of whom it
should be impossible to obtain any reasonable thing by courtesy? I caused
the tree to be burned in the night, to avoid the sedition of the people, I did
not think that the fire should have passed any further, but what can I do
withal if misfortune (the just revenger of thy obstinacy) do pursue thee? It
cannot be said that I use any tyranny, because I am ready to submit my self
unto law. And the comparison which thou make between the rich and the poor
man is no less odious then absurd: for the difference consists in that the
rich man is able to do more for the conservation of the Commonwealth then the
poor man can; for he unto the great store of his household servants may likewise
entertain other soldiers for the defense thereof, whereas the poor man at
that instant serves for no other end but to increase the famine, or to
discourage others: in like sort there is as great difference betwixt my deed
and the fact of Nero, as there was betwixt thy tree and thy house, and the
great city of Rome. Finally so small a trifle is not worth so much talking,
and chiefly because I refuse not to satisfy thee according to the law, and
thine own request, for the law appoints that whatsoever I have burned
willingly, I should restore unto thee fourefold, and for the rest which was
vnwillnglie done, I should but only pay thee for it as it was worth.

Declamation. 85.
Of Agamemnon who first promised, and after would not sacrifice his daughter
Iphiginia.

ALl the Grecians being assembled together at the port Aulida, to go unto Troy
for the revenge of the rape of the fair Helena: The sea became a long time so
tempestious, that they could not depart thence; whereupon Chalcas their chief
priest co^sulting with the gods, after many sacrifices, prophesied that the sea
should never be calm unless that Iphiginia the only daughter of Agamemnon,
General of the whole army and brother to Menelaus the husband of fair Helena,
were sacrificed unto Diana; so that Agamemnon because he would not lose the
honor to be the greatest of all the Grecians, consented unto the death of his
daughter, and writ unto his wife Clitemnestra that she should send her daughter
unto the said place, faining that it was to assure her in marriage with
Achilles: shortly after repe^ting him for the abusing of his wife in such sort,
and being sorry that his daughter should die, he secretly sent another letter,
commanding his wife to hide her daughter, that she might not be taken to be
sacrificed: this last messenger was surprised by the way by Menelaus, who
accused his brother of ambition and Treason, saying:

SEeing that all the warlike men of Greece have done you this honor, above so
many other noble and worthy men, to choose you only for their General, why
will you like a most injurious and perjured man so wickedlie betray them? Do
you not yet know that the gods will never permit a treason so great and manifest
to be hidden, and especially when they themselves are interessed therein? Know
you not that Diana requires your daughter for sacrifice, it may be to punish
your ambition, or to chastise the pride of your wife, or rather to extirpate
the presumption of the same your daughter? Truly I believe if none of all
these three reasons do provoke the chaste Goddess unto just punishment, yet
all these three together do stir her up unto a just revenge; just I say,
because that the gods do never any thing unjustly: but who knows if the
goddess (foreseeing the future lasciviousness of your daughter) be determined
to have her before she be stained, or else that she desires to have an
unspotted virgin to be offered up unto her, that she might be the more
favorable unto us, and make us conquerors over the rauisher of the chastity of
Helena; for whose defense you and all the nobility of Greece were bounden,
before she did choose me for her lord and husband: and yet whilst I was absent,
you suffered her to be ravished and carried away, which makes me to think that
the Goddess being displeased with you, is desirous to have the same fault
purged in the presence of all the Grecians, by the death of your daughter.
Finally, the judgments of the gods are secret, but when their wills are
manifest, they ought to be accomplished. The goddess requires Iphiginia, you
have promised her, we do look for her, therefore we ought to have her;
especially seeing all the skill that man has is notable to prolong her life
one only minute against the will of the gods: and although you might save her,
yet ought you not to prefer her life either before so many worthy Grecians,
or before the honor of all Greece. But why should all the rest of Priams
sons, or any other Barbarian fear to enterprise any thing against us, If
it shall be reported that for to save, or thinking to prolong a maidens life,
the whole army of the Grecians assembled together at such an infinite charge
and with so great travel should of it self be so suddenly dissolved. What
ambition can be then more great, then to usurp the title of a General, and
not to perform the duty thereof? And what Treason is more manifest, then to
go about to defraud all Greece of the honor obtained by the blood of our
ancestors? If it was thought a strange matter that Ulysses fained himself mad
because he would not go unto the wars, and if for the same cause the parents
of Achilles were despised having concealed him in the habit of a woman? What
shall we say of you, who would not only deceive our army of one or two men,
but would (if our selves we will not give it over) that all of us should be
swallowed up in the waves of the sea? Do you not consider that the greatness
of your charge binds you to be more courageous and righteous, then all the
rest? Who then will judge you to be such a one, if you repugne against the will
of the gods? If you contrary the desire of al men? and without any shame at
all, perform not your promise? If it be so, I dare say the Grecians are
unhappy in choosing such a General, and you an unhappy General seeing that
by your default the Grecians shall lose their ancient reputation. You may say
that a fathers love is great; I agree thereunto, so ought such as are highest
in authority (as you would be) condescend unto great things, especially when
as reason requires: consider then for whom you do give your daughter, it is
for the honor of your brother to recover your sister in law, for beauty the
only paragon of all the world. It is to be revenged of our enemies for the
safety of our country, to confirm the ancient valor of our nation, to win
unto your self an immortal glory, and that which is more then all the rest,
to fulfill the good pleasure of the gods: of who^ one alone is able to destroy
all mankind. Consent the^ (as you are bound) to obey their divine power, to
perform your duty, to pleasure your brother, to recover your sister in law,
to save the Grecians, to mainetaine their ancient reputation; and especially
to shun the name of a traitor. That your daughter my niece, may be offered up
a pleasing sacrifice unto the gods, who do never request any thing hurtful unto
their creatures, and it may be that they will save her; as well to manifest
their mercy, as to provoke us ioifullie to obey their commandments, from the
which we can in no sort excuse our selves.

Agamemnons Answer.
HE can never be termed ambitious, who neither by force, tyranny, nor
subtlety, attaineth unto any rule or dignity, but only by virtue, and the
election of many* which in direct means there is none can say that I have
used. As concerning the pleasure of the gods, that mine innocent daughter
should be sacrificed, what certainty have we thereof, but only the word of
the priest Chalcas: whose priestlie dignity I do not contemn, but rather his
humane person, being as ready to err as the worst man in our troops. But I
would feign know what pity could remain in the gods if they delighted or
took pleasure to behold the sheading of innocent blood? I cannot believe that
the same is to prevent the loss of her chastity, for as great power has the
goddess to maintain her virginity, as to shorten her days. Moreover, of
extremes not only the gods, but also every virtuous man does always
endeavor to choose the best, whereby it appears, that they by the death of an
innocent virgin, will neither recure lasciviousness, nor your own
negligence; whereunto neither the Grecians, I, nor my daughter are in no sort
bound. For you needed not to have received Paris, the son of a barbarous king
into your house, much less to entertain him there a long time, and least of
all to leave him at your departure all alone with your wife: Do you not know
that it is very dangerous to leave fire and flax together? Are you such a
fool that you know not how young men are lascivious, and women light? But who
knows not that ambition and lust respect no law? Have not you tried that
loves poison creeps in by the eyes and ears? Did you not think that the
same beauty, which not only inflamed you, but all Greece was as able to set a
young Barbarian on fire, who was by nature lascivious? I confess that the
judgments of the gods are secret, and therefore ought we first to be
thorowlie assured of their wills, before we either give any credit thereunto or
effect the same, least in thinking to obey them, we do disobey them. What
proof have you that Diana requires the death of my daughter, save only the
word of an old man, who either doteth, or it may be would have this honor,
that at his bare word the warlike and invincible Grecians, overcome with
superstition, have sacrificed the noblest and worthiest maid of all Greece? And
never allege that the gods desire the best things for sacrifice, for that is
meant only by brute beasts, but as for humane creatures they do preserve
them, witness the old age of Nestor and others. Neither did there ever any
great good proceed of too much superstition, which does much differ from true
religion, because the one always tends unto that which is good, and the
other unto that which is bad. If Diana require her death, she may find her
well enough where she is, without dishonoring me by the delivery of her? Which
in sooth were a treacherous part. What certainty or assurance will Chalcas give
that the seas shall be calm by the death of my daughter? Durst he gage his
head that so it shall be? and although he would so do, is those few years
which an old man may live to be compared unto the youth of a Princess, who by
her progeny will be able to illustrate all the world? To kill our own
children is not the way to combat Priam and the rest of the Barbarians: I will
not fail in any sort from the duty of a good General, no not in spending
mine own life; but my daughters, that will I not give no more then you your
self would do, if one should likewise demand your Hermione as well as my
Iphiginia. I will not in any sort accuse either Ulysses or Achilles, but I do
excuse my daughter, who is no way culpable of the forced or voluntary
adultery of her aunt. The same reason which commands me to be courageous,
does also forbid me to be cruel: but what cruelty can be more vild then to
kill an innocent virgin? And how much more execrable is it, for a man to kill
his own daughter? I did at the first promise her, as well to avoid public
sedition in our army, as also to have leisure thereby to laue my daughter, for
I hoped that you your self, and they altogether deliberatlie considering the
cruelty of the fact, would at the last confess with me the same to be
altogether tyrannical and unlawful: for the gods do never favor such unjust
acts. To conclude, so long as the breath remains in my body, I will never
consent unto the death of my daughter, for it is sufficient enough that we do
leave our houses, forsake our wives, abandon our children, and freely
undertake this journey no less painful then perrillous to our persons,
without suffering our daughters to be sacrificed or offered up to recover that
which you have negligentlie lost, and know no other reason why. And I cannot
believe that any amongst so many worthy me^ should be desirous, or would
willingly behold such a detestable deed but only you, who think to increase
your own house by the overthrow of mine.

Declamation 86.
Of him that having taken up and fostered two young unknown orphants, did maime
them because he might the better beg with them.

THe law forbids, that no man should either hurt or hinder the Commonwealth
in any sort. Whereupon it happened, that a man found two infants, who through
their parents poverty were laid abroad and left unto the mercy of the world.
Wherefore he took them, and fostering them up in his own house, he did wryth
and break the ioints of their arms and legs in such sort, as he quite maimed
and lamed them, to the end that by begging with them he might gain the money.
Which being known, he was taken and accused to be offensive and hurtful unto
the Commonwealth. And his accuser said in this sort:

Alas, how miserable are these infants, who have found one that has been
much more cruel then he or she that cast them forth. Seeing that with the
price of their members they are forced to pay for their bringing up (or to say
more truly) to satisfy the greedy covetousness of him that faineth to be
their fosterer: for if he had not done it for covetousness, the very name of
orphants might have suffised to have obtained a relief both for them and their
fosterfather. If those that through anger or malice do wound or kill a man are
punished, What punishment is not this mischeeuous wretch worthy of, who has
done far worse, in making these poor infants for ever miserable? Wherein he
has showed himself much more unnatural then the brute beasts, (if it be
true as Histories report) that in such a necessity, Cirus Whilom King of
Persia, was nourished by a Bitch, and Remus and Romulus first founders and
Kings of Rome, by a she wolf. O never hard of cruelty, when the lame and
impotent are constrained to get his living that is whole and sound, who has
not only made them unprofitable, but odious and burthenous unto the
Commonwealth! For they serve to no other end then to increase the famine
therein, and also in the day of battle to discourage the hearts of most
valiant by their lamentable cries and complaints: in like sort it may so happen
that some woman with child may dream of the^ in such sort as with the very
fright thereof she may bring forth the like cripples. All that which this lewd
fellow can allege is, that if he had not been, these infants had died with
hunger; It may be no: For how many others might have found them, that both
would have cherished and brought them up for the profit of the Commonwealth?
How many such as they have become famous warriors, yea and Kings? Whereof
Cirus and the two foresaid Romans are sufficient examples: but this ungracious
man has cut off the tongues of some, to the end that without speaking they
might be more importunate in craving: seeing then O Judges that you are
pitiful toward cuerie one particularly, extend your mercy toward these
twain here together: he is above all other most cruel, who under the coulor
of mercy, does most mischief: these poor children are carried about to
feasts and public assemblies, to beg their alms, where beholding the
soundness and nimblenesse of others, their sorrow is the more in seeing
themselves maimed: other orphants or castawaies that are sound, are not
altogether hopeless to find their Parents again, or to be known by them, but
these wretches can never be known because they were not such when they were
left of them. Finally, it may be alleged that it was the greatest mischief
that could happen unto these twain, to be found, and brought up by this bad
man who is the cause of their perpetual misery.

The beggars Answer.
HE cannot be termed cruel, who has been more pitiful unto these infants,
then their own father or mother that abandoned them: I confess that I have
maimed them, but who can tell whether I have done them more hurt or good
thereby, for I have made them such as all the world is and ever will be ready
to relieve them: Moreover, they take no pains in getting their living, and
they are free from the danger of killing in the wars, or by thieves, in like
sort they need not fear to be hanged by justice, or noted of infamy. As for
any hurt don unto the Commonwealth, who can tell whether they would have been
pilferers, murderers, thieves, traitors, seditious persons, seducers,
Heritickes, and other such like wicked fellows, as by nature they were likely
to prove, being begotten of such parents, as cared not to leave them to the
mercy of brute beasts? So that it may be said that by one small mischeife I
have prevented a number of manifest dangers: those that instruct youth to
skirmish and kill men, are far more hurtful unto the Commonwealth then I, and
yet are they not punished. I have not only made them as unable to do hurt, as
they are unfit to do good, but also I am the cause that they are yet living:
the Commonwealth can not be harmed by those which are not abiding therein as
these were, being laid forth to die, from the which I have saved them. Whereas
you allege that I am the cause that they live miserably, you do thereby
affirm that it is by my means that they live, which is no small matter: the
charity of many does relieve them, but by my only compassion they do live.
If I had fostered them up, and not maimed them, I should have deserved
commendation; the loss thereof then is sufficient punishment for my maiming
them. Who would ever have thought that such a Commonwealth should have had
officers so idle as to busy themselves with that which a beggar does amongst
beggars, who have their justice and Commonwealth by themselves? Why may you not
likewise say that Paris being cast forth of his Parents, and afterward
acknowledged by them, was the cause of his father and brethrens death, his
mother and sisters captivity, the destruction of the noblest of all Greece and
Phrigia, and lastly the utter subversion of his country Troy, as well as you
speak of Cirus, who in the end slew his grandfather, and Romulus his brother?
What should not he then have deserved that had maimed those? Or who can judge
whether I have done good or hurt in maiming these here? But the time is so
wicked, that whatsoever the poor do is accounted an offense. How many rich
women do cause the fruit of their womb to perish by the straight girding and
lacing in of their bodies? How many Noble men do burst their lacquise legs
with running, and lame their servants with hunting? How many men do they
undo, who do either die with hunger, or else are forced to rob by the high
way? How many quarrels or braules do they make to the hurt of the
Commonwealth? If you would endeavor to correct such kind of men, you should have
no leisure to persecute those who have not offended, but in show only: but it
is not said in vain, That the laws are like unto spiders webs, wherein the
small flies are taken, but the great ones do break through and escape.

Declamation. 87.
Of a gentleman who required to have those goods of his restored which his
son had sold, in proving by law that his father was dead.

A Gentleman of Piemont had a quarrel, or at the least fell into the hatred of
a great lord of the same country: who did one day cause the said gentleman to
be taken very secretly, and hiding his face, made him to be carried into the
dungeon of his castle, where he remained a prisoner, in such sort as during the
space of more then eight years, he could nener imagine in what place he
remained: the said gentleman before he was prisoner, had likewise a quarrel
with two of his neighbors, who were inferiors unto him in calling, with whom
also the said lord was greatly displeased: whereupon he immagined how he might
at one instant cause them both to die, and by the same means quite himself
from all suspicion that might be imagined of his wronging the gentleman. So
that he began to enquire what was become of the said gentleman, and upon
suspicion of the enmity of these two neighbors against him, he prevailed so
much by false informations, that the Justice apprehended their bodies, and
either by examiuation or tortures they were enforced to confess that they had
murdered the said gentleman, upon which their confession, the Justice caused
them to be publicly beheaded: so that every one did assuredly believe that the
said gentleman was dead. Wherefore a son which he had, being a very
prodigal youth, began not only to seize upon all his fathers lands and
goods, but also did riotously wast the same, and in the end sold and consumed
all; in such sort as shortly after he died in great poverty. It chanced about
fourteen years after that the Frenchmen surprised the said great lord in his
house, and for because the castle wherein he held this gentleman prisoner was a
fort of great importance to be kept for a frontier place, they compelled the
said lord to surrender the same up unto the King, or his Lieutenant General,
the which he did: and the Frenchmen finding the said gentleman there, suffered
him to depart, who like one risen from death to life, went home unto his own
house, the which he found was sold, and the Judge which had caused the others
to be executed dead: but he pretending to know nothing of all that had
happened, required restitution of his lands and goods, saying:

THere is no law that permits the son to sell his fathers goods during his
life. You see that I am not dead, and that I am his father that has sold you
his goods: if you stand in doubt thereof, I will for your further assurance show
you evident tokens, and will prove the same by sufficient witnesses: Your light
belief or want of wit to be better advised, ought not to be prejudicial to me
in any sort. You are not the first that have made a bad bargain, and a good
restitution: for most commonly men being blinded with covetousness, do
casilie believe every thing to be true which they desire. Caesar imputed this
lightness unto the Frenchmen, the which it may be they have brought hither
unto you, to make you partakers thereof, but yet for all that I will not lose
mine inheritance; restore it unto me then or else prove that I am not he whom
you know me to be. O you righteous Judges, I do esteem you too just to suffer
me to fall from one misery into another far more great, having not derued
it: for not only is age an incurable malady, but poverty joined with it,
may be termed an exceeding mischief. From the which worthy Judges I beseech
you to preserve me.

The answer of the possessors.
WE do allow the same law which you allege to be just and right, but we know
not whether we should account you amongst the living or the dead: seeing that
not only the people have accounted you dead, but the law it self has
adjudged you both for a dead man, and also has caused those to die who
confessed that they killed you. What witness is more like to be true, then
that which is aduouched by twain, not only to their own hurt against
themselves, but to the detriment of their goods, their honor, and their lives?
If the testimony which those miserable men have produced against themselves,
has been sufficient to cause them to lose their goods, honor, yea and their
lives; Why should not the same be of force to maintain those in their
possession which have publicly bought an inheritance of him, who by the
witness aforesaid had power to sell and surrender the same? If you have any
interest therein, take it you of them who are the cause of your hurt; that is
of the foresaid witnesses, of the Judge, of the lord that took you prisoner,
or of your self, who could take no order in your own affairs, or seeing you
would not agree, could not keep you from your enemies: it was no covetousness
that made us to buy your heritage, but the zeal of the Commo^wealth, who are
interessed when the lands are vnthriftilie wasted: likewise you judge amiss of
us, if you think that the desire which we had of your death, induced us to
believe the same: for it was more hurtful then profitable unto us; because it
was no small contentment unto us to have so good a neighbor as we have
always esteemed you to be: and for that we would be no more in danger to have
so bad a one as your son was, or a worse, we did buy his inheritance, the
which as our desire is that you should not lose the same, so also would not we
lose our silver, for the recompense of our care in preserving your goods, and
amending your heritage; of all matters in strife, the possessor being on the
surer side, has the advantage: We have nothing to prove against you, but it is
you that ought to prove our bargain to be fraudulent or of no worth: and we
believe that the Judges will remember that we are not the causers either of
your poverty or age. Furthermore, they are not ignorant that the chiefest
point which ought to be observed in the Commonwealth is, that cuerie one should
be maintained in the quiet possession of that which he has justly gotten and
paid for, as we have done the inheritance which you do wrongfullie require
at our hands.

This former process is true, and has been reported unto me by the lord John
Chastillier, Knight, one of the Kings Counsel, and surueior of his Majesty's
treasure, who assured me that he was in Piemount during the foresaid process.
And moreover, the said lord told me that after long arguing and much
controversies it was judged that the plaintiff should enjoy his inheritance
during his life, without impairing or alieating the same: but after his
deceasse it should wholly reuert unto those which did possess and had bought
the same of the said plaintifes son.

Declamation. 88.
Of Horatius, who after he had himself alone vanquished the three Curiatij,
slew his sister that bewailed the death of her husband.

ABout that time as Rome began to flourish, those of Alba, an ancient city,
and to say the truth, the very same from whence the Romans had their
beginning, had some grudge toward Rome, through which there arose a mortal war
between them, the which after many skirmishes, and sundry combats, they
agreed to end in this sort, vz. That the three brethren of the Albanois named
the Curiatij, should fight hand to hand against other three brethren of the
Romans called the Horatij, upon condition that those which were overcome,
their city and Commonwealth should for ever be subject unto the other,
without contradiction or refusal: whereupon the said combattants being entered
the lists, the elder and the second brethren of the Horatij were suddenly
slain, the which the yoongest perceiving, he fained to run about the field as
though he had been overcome: wherefore the others were ashamed to pursue him
altogether, so that one alone following him eagerly, Horatius suddenly turned
back and slew him, and in the same sort he slew the second that was somewhat
too slow in seconding his brother: then making head against the last, who had
married the sister of the said Horatij, he likewise slew him, not without
receiving also many wounds himself, whereof when he was healed, he came in
triumph to Rome, all the people and the noblest matrons of the city meeting him
by the way, amongst whom by the commandment of her father his sister also
went, who had lost her said husband in the combat; she seeing her brother
triumph over the death of her husband, and her brethren in law, lost all
patience, and setting apart al respect, instead of welcomming him home, she
said unto him: Thou cruel menster how had thou the heart to slay my
husband? and saying so, she burst forth into abundance of tears, wherewith he
being enraged, answered: art thou she alone amongst so many honorable ladies
that art sorry for the prosperity and liberty of Rome, or that repinest at
my victory, and saying so, he gave her a blow with his sword on the breast,
afterward suddenly repenting himself for the deed, he alighted from his
triumphant chair, indeuouring (if it had been possible) to have gotten life in
her again, but he could not, for she suddenly died, being great with child.
For which deed those that maligned the glory of Horatius, took occasion to
accuse him so sharply, as he was condemned either to bear the yoke of an exe
upon his neck through Rome, in sign of bondage, or to be whipped with rods,
and hanged upon a cross until he were dead, but he appealed from this
sentence, and his father pleaded for him in this sort:

WHether are your hearts and understandings carried, O you Romans, that you
will thus persecute your redeemer? Do you not know that above all other vices,
Ingratitude is most displeasing unto the gods? How can you then prosper?
Surely it is impossible: Will you oppress him, that could not be dismayed
with the death of his two brethren, much less discouraged with the presence of
his three enemies? Will you despise him whom the gods have caused to be borne
for the liberty and honor of Rome? Know you not that in all this, none has
been harmed but I? Is it not sufficient that I have lost two sons and a
daughter, but that I must also lose this son too, who only is left to be the
staff of my age, and comfort to my forepassed afflictions? why would you make
him a bondsman that has been the cause of your freedom? Do you not fear that
this is an unlucky token, which threateneth all your thraldomes? Alas,
Romans banish this unhappy presaging from us, and either honor him with a
perfect triumph, or at the least despise him not, whom the gods have been
willing to honor with such a famous victory. The zeal of the Commonwealth
induced him suddenly to kill his sister, who to say the truth, did speak
very indiscreetelie; let then the grief which he suffers for committing
such a fact be a sufficient punishment for his fault: do you not know, O
Romans, that we have no power over the sudden motions of our rage? If there
be any fault, I am the cause thereof? For as much as I constrained my
daughter to go forth to meet him, without considering that women are not
only sildome times mistresses over their tongues, but also that love and
sorrow can never be dissembled. If you will not then suffer this mischance to
be unpunished, let the punishment light upon me: To the end that the gods be
not provoked to revenge upon you the wrong which you would do unto him, by
whose means they have delivered you: For there is nothing more certain then
that the gods have a particular care over those who^ they make conquerors, and
do so miraculouslie preserve in the like dangers. Contemn not him whom the
gods have honored, neither yet let him die, that has killed your enemies, and
made your lords over them; which if he had not ben, would have been lords our
you all.

The Answer of the Romans.
WE do not persecute our redeemer, but we would execute justice upon one,
who being dronken with vaineglory, has unjustly murdered his sister, that
might have borne many children like unto him, whereof he has slain one with
the mother, the better to declare that as he had delivered us from some
bordering contagion, so likewise he meant to tyrannise over his country. But
what will not he be bold to attempt against the rest of the Citizens, if the
murder of his sister should be left unpunished? Did not he know that even
amongst enemies clemency is judged to be the worthiest part of the victory?
How much then ought the same to be esteemed amongst friends, but more between
kindred, and most of all toward women, who are by nature weak, and subject to
their passions more then men? Where did he find that it is a vice for a woman
either to love her husband, or not to be able to dissemble a sorrow so just?
Seeing that he himself could not, or at the least would not endure a few
unadvised words of his sister; ought not he to consider that the woman is the
moietie of the man? and that the one cannot be hurt, but that the other must
feel the harm? It is true as you say, that ingratitude is odious unto the
gods, and therefore that which he has used toward his country, you, and his
sister, condemns him. We can never prosper if we suffer such a cursed man in
our Commonwealth. Seeing that he was so cruel as to kill his sister, it makes
us also to think that he willingly suffered his brethren to be slain, either
to augment his fame, or because he would be the only heir of his father: for
he which had the wit in such sort to fly from his enemies to snare the^ one
after another (which is an incredible patience) should not have been so furious
against his sister, if ambition had not blinded him. Alas, we are in doubt
whether Rome has gained more by his victory, then it has lost by his
murder, as well in honor as in profit; for it is no small hurt to scandalize a
Commonwealth by an evil example: Your loss does not deminish the wrong done
in common to us al, neither is it against reason, that having lost those who^
you might rightly call your children, you should likewise lose him that has
not respected you as his father, and has not showed the heart of a brother
toward his sister: but what stay shall you have of the murderer of your
daughter? Those on whom the gods do bestow the most graces, ought to be more
modest, and the less prone to abuse their favor; the mischief which he has
done is a greater forwarning unto us, then the correction is which we shall use
therefore, for by the punishment of offenders, the innocents are assured, and we
do thereby divine that we shall hereafter have dominion over all the world; for
Justice is pleasing unto the gods, and reward and punishment are the true
pillars of the Commonwealth: wherefore it is not likely to be true, that the
zeal of the Commonwealth can induce any to do ill, or to enterprise any
thing to the detriment thereof. Surely, if we have no power over our first
motions, his sister was excusable for saying that which she did, and the rather
if that (as you say) she was constrained to go to meet him, that came from
killing the moietie of her self: If you are culpable in that you sent her, we
having regard unto your good meaning, do respect your age and remit your
punishment, neither will we suffer you to endure any for your sons offense,
because that as it is a cruelty to punish the innocent, so is it a folly to
pardon the offense. The same care as the gods have over the conquerors, the
same care ought the conquerors to have, not to show themselves unworthy of
their divine favors; for unto whom much is given, of him also shall much be
required. What shall we then say, if he whom the gods have honored, do
despise himself? For he which by the favor of the gods has slain our
enemies, ought not afterward to have slain his own sister. If the gods have
by the force of his arms given us the dominion over those who would have ruled
over us, the worthiest thanks that we can yield unto their Dietie is, to show
by our good justice that we are not unworthy to rule. Wherefore you cannot do
better then to counsel your son willingly to choose the yoke, or patiently
to take his death; for making a virtue of necessity, he shall diminish the
dishonor of his offense, and the duty of the Commonwealth shall be observed.

Declamation. 89.
Of Diogenes that would not restore a cloak which one had lent unto him.

THe law commands a man to restore whatsoever he has borrowed, but those
things which are given ought not to be required again. Whereupon it happened
that a man named Aristarchus did lend a cloak unto Diogenes the Cinique. Within
a while after the said Aristarchus prayed him to restore his cloak, but
Diogenes could not hear on that ear, wherefore Aristarchus threatened him by
law, whereunto Diogenes answered:

I Know no other law then the law of nature, which commands me not to part
from that which I stand in need of. If thou then have given me this cloak, why
would thou have it again? Or if thou did lend it unto me to cover me
withal, wherefore would thou take it from me when I have greatest need
thereof? If thou say thou did lend it me until I had another, I am
content to restore it unto thee at that time? Look then if thou can find any
man that will give or lend me a better, and I will restore thee this again.

The answer of Aristarchus.
AS I did willingly lend my cloak unto thee, so may I take it from thee when I
think good: and as the law of nature commands me to have compassion of my
neighbor, and to help him, as I have helped thee as much as possibly I could
in lending thee this cloak, even so now it commands me to take it again
because I stand in need thereof: for he that is bad or unprofitable for
himself, can never be good for others. The law of nature commands thee not
to be unthankful toward him that has done thee a pleasure, much less to
detain by force, that which one has lent unto thee friendly.

Declamation. 90.
Of the three Fabij, who being sent Ambassadors unto the Gauls, did fight
against them.

DVring the thirteenth military Tribuneship, the Gauls came and assailed the
city of Clusa, who sent for aid unto the Romancs. They sent the three sons
of Fabius Ambusta, to persuade the Gauls not to hurt the Clusians being friends
unto the Romans Commonwealth: the Gauls answered that they required nothing
but dwelling places, and if the Clusians denied them some portion of their
country, they would fight with them in the presence of the Ambassadors, to the
end that they might be judges of their valor. And hereupon after diverse other
words the battle joined: where the three Ambassadors took part with the
Clusians against the Gauls, of whom one Ambassador slew a captain, which was
the cause that suddenly the Gauls gave over the battle, turning all their
malice against Rome, whether they sent Ambassadors, requiring that the three
Fabij might be delivered unto them. The judgment was remitted unto the Roman
people, who instead of chastising them, made them military Tribunes, giving
them the full power of Consuls: whereupon the Gauls did protest the ruin of
Rome, saying:

IT might have sufficed you O Romans, to have sent your Ambassadors to
dissuade us from the wars enterprised against the Clusians, without employing
the said Ambassadors against us, for you shall confess one of these three,
that either you are our friends, or neauters, or else our enemies: if friends,
you ought to aid us, if neauters, not to hurt us, and if enemies, to defy us,
before you fight against us. If you esteem us to be Barbarians, in that we
are strangers, and because we are not like you in eloquence? Yet are we not to
be judged altogether void of reason, or such as have not the wit to discern
what is right and what is wrong. Moreover, we know very well that those which
are sent to persuade peace, ought not to kindle or increase war. You sent
Ambassadors to persuade us unto peace, who on the other side not only
encouraged our enemies against us, but they themselves fought with all
violence: What Treason can be more great, then to feign one deed and do
another? If you did send them to fight against us (as it is to be presumed,
having sent three brethren, young men and valiant in arms) you cannot deny but
that you deserve all the mischief that we are able to do unto you? If they did
fight against your meaning, assure us thereof by sending them unto us; That we
may know who moved the^ (forgetting the duty of Embasssadors) to use
hostility against us, for in doing otherwise, you shall not only provoke our
anger, but the just vengeance of the gods against you, of whom we shall be
the cruel ministers. And think not that for want of power, or courage we have
left Tuscane to come unto Rome, but only to let you know that it is not for
the Romans to command the Gauls, much less to offend them in any sort; but
rather to favor them in their deseignes, that they might have good neighborhood
and friendship with such a warlike people: or in doing the contrary, to try
what advantage they have in warlike Prowess over every other nation:
Wherefore O you Romans either resolve to deliver unto us the three Fabij, or
prepare you to the fight, and although your forces are as feeble as your
courages are faint (if such Treason be harbored amongst you) yet feign your
selves to be other then you are, to the end that our victory may not be
altogether without glory; for we protest, that if our demand be not
accomplished, we will ouerrun your city, race down your houses, lay your
temples and walls flat with the earth, in such sort that after ages shall ask
where Rome stood, when as they shall see no memorial thereof left: for it is
the just judgment of the gods, that utter ruin should fall upon those, who
do offend under the coulor of friendship.

The Answer.
TRue it is that we did send the three Fabij for Ambassadors unto you Gauls,
and that they ought not to have fought against you, if for such you had
received them: but what shall we say, seeing that in steed of answering their
demands, you would on the contrary have made them beholders of your injustice
and cruelty? For you said that the Clusians should have no peace with you
unless they would leave part of their country for your habitation: then the
Ambassadors demanding for what reason, and upon what occasion you did require
lands in Tuscane? You answered that your reason consisted in arms, and that to
strong and warlike men all things were due, yea, and that you would forthwith
have an answer of the Clusians in the presence of the Roman Ambassadors; to
the intent that they might make report at Rome how valiant in arms the Gauls
were above any other nation. We would know of you Gauls if one should have
answered your Ambassadors in such sort, what you would have done? Seeing that
even those which are most warlike, should have tried every other reasonable
means, before they had proceeded into arms: and yet you despising those that
were the freest and mightiest people of all Italy, would command their friends
and their Ambassadors, and contemning both the one and the other, give a
battle in steed of an answer. Surely they were not sent to fight against
you, but seeing that for answer, you offered the battle unto their friends
and neighbors, without yielding them any sufficient reason why, they
remembering that they were Romans, would rather prove then behold your valor;
and if you had slain them in the fight, we would never have cauelled any
further for them: for you having neither received them as Ambassadors, nor
given them no answer but by arms, it may be said that they were no more
Ambassadors; wherefore we would never have required them either for such nor
for any others at your hands, for we know that it is a common thing to kill,
and to be killed: but although they had done amiss, as you say they have, yet
should you have first known our meaning, and have required satisfaction
thereof, before you should have brought your armed troops upon our
territories: but you do very well declare (you Gauls) that you will neither
send any Ambassadors, nor will receive any at all: but trusting in your
forces, you will make your wills a law, how unjust soever they be. As touching
your demand, whether we be your friends, neuters, or enemies, we answer that
we will be such as you shall give us occasion to be, for it seems they can
hardly be your friends that are near unto you: wherefore although we should
not allow that which the Fabij have done, yet may it be a question whether
they have done amiss or no in resisting the common enemies of all Italy,
seeing that an hundred years since, your ancestors leaving their natural
country, came first and occupied the country of the Taurins, afterward that
of the Insubrians, then the limits of Tuscane, and now without any reason you
would usurp the territories of the Clusians, the which if they had granted
you, what assurance should they have had that afterward you would have been
good friends, or peaceable neighbors unto them; seeing that you are of opinion
being strong men, al things are due unto you; and that you can yield no other
reason for your deeds then arms? What is he that can be assured of such kind
of people, which makes us to doubt, that in time, you would if you could
occupy Rome and all Italy? If you will be our friends, ^ee that you do not
only withdraw your army from us, but also for our sakes surceasse your
molesting of the Clusians, and then knowing that our Ambassadors have offended
you, we shall make you a reasonable satisfaction: assuring you that we are
sufficient to punish or chastise them withot putting you unto the pains to do
it: and if you show your selves (as in effect you have begun) to be our
enemies, the Fabij cannot be culpable* and it were better to employ them
against you, then to do them any hurt at your instance. But what madness
does incite you to come in such sort against us? You know well that if we had been minded to send aid unto the Clusians, we would not have sent three men
only. Wherefore we thinking you had been our friends, did send to entreat you
not to hurt the Clusians, but doing contrary to our request, the Ambassadors
thought you had been our enemies, and so consequently that they were bound to
aid the Clusians. When you have withdrawn your army from us, we will dispute
whether they did well or ill: But so long as you talk thus armed, we may say
that you have no desire to have us your friends. Of a truth they fought against
our meaning, yet never imagine you that for all the same, we will deliver them
unto those which come unto us as enemies. As for the anger of the gods, it
stretches not to those that defend their temples as we will do, moreover, we
are bound to defend our country, our wives, our children, and the sepulchers
of our fathers, if you will offer to hurt them; therefore as you do protest our
overthrow, so do we swear your death, if you once assault us. For to be
offended, and to offend, is all one, and it is a most just reason, that those
which seek to usurp another man's lands, should lose their own lives.

Declamation. 91.
Of a young youth, that made himself a Nun to enjoy one that he loved.

AT such time as the law was not so strict against those which by all the
means they could sought to enjoy the love of Nuns, a young youth came in the
habit of a maiden into a Nunnerie, and made himself a Nun, to obtain his
pleasure of one whom he loved in the same cloister: after he had obtained his
desire, and remained there some time in great delight, he was at last
discovered; whereupon the bishop would have constrained him to become a
religious man of the same order, which he had made profession of in the habit
of a woman, the youth appealed from the same sentence, saying:

Every lawful vow ought to be voluntary, wherefore you cannot constrain me
to enter into religion against my will. You say that I have made a vow
already, I refer it to your judgment, whether being a man, I might become a
Nun? If such a vow be lawful, then let me be still a Nun: If it be not
lawful, then is it of no force, and so consequently I am thereof freed, or at
the most, to be punished in such sort as by the law it shall be appointed, if
there be any law that makes mention of the like fault: and if there be no law
that makes mention thereof, it is a token that whatsoever I have done is no
crime, for there is some law appointed for every fault: for as laws are made
for the good of the Commonwealth, eue^ so those that offend them not are not
punishable: as for me, I believe that I have in no sort offended them, having
charitablie relieved her that had need of my help, considering the frailenesse
of my flesh, which might have induced her to do worse then a thing incident to
nature; yea, and to the great reproach of religion, she might have found the
means to fly away from the Nunnerie contrary to her vow and promise:
likewise, it is to be considered, that those faults (if faults they may be
called which are through love committed) are more excusable then punishable,
because they are done but for love, and to increase humane generation* besides
that the most philosophers do say, that lovers are fools, and others affirmed
that they are blind: what reason were it then to punish a fool, or such a one
whose understanding is blind? Who knows not that they are more worthy of
pity then punishment? Nay who knows not that love has always his abiding
in the noblest hearts, and compels the most obstinat to follow him?
Furthermore, the distance of places is not able to separate that true love
which of long time has been imprinted in the hearts of lovers, for as he that
does love fervently does sildome or never forget it, so ought youth to be
excused for doing but their kind: for that which in matters of love is lawful
for young men to do, is unlawful for old men to desire; Wherefore it may be
said, that as unhappy is it for a young man to be without love, as it is for
an old man to be in love: and the more worthy the thing beloved is, the more
vehement is our desire thereof; therefore the desert of her who^ I love, has
brought me to this extremity: to counterfeit a sex inferior unto mine, the
which I would for no other thing have done, but hereby it appears, that the
lover lives in the thing beloved, and that he is dead in himself; so that I
was constrained to find out this invention, to approach unto her in whom I live:
for water far of, does never quench fire hard at hand: the planets do
chiefly compel us to love, therefore does Venus show her self to be more
strong then Mars: and that which is more, no other law then that of nature can
be given unto lovers: for it seems that love is a divine and humane essence
all in one subject, whereby it happens, that true lovers are most apt to
sustain great travails, for love is no other thing the^ a contemplation of
the thing beloved, but the lover is such as the thing beloved is, therefore was
I enforced to become such as my mistress was. Lastly, being constrained by all
these abouesaid reasons, I am more then excusable, for of all the parts in a
man's body, the heart is the noblest, and the noblest part of the heart is
love: therefore it may be very well affirmed, that he which knows not how to
love well, has a bad heart. To conclude, it must be considered for what intent
vows are made, as for me I made mine to the intent that I might be near
unto my best beloved; in seeking to deprive me of this intention my vow should
be broken, and if it be so, I will make no other: but you cannot say that it is
all one vow, seeing that there is great difference between the obeying of a
man, and the serving of a woman, and religious men ought to be learned, and to
have such other perfections whereof I am not capable; whereas amongst religious
women obedience only with humility is sufficient, for which cause I will not
make any other vow then that which I have made: but as I said at the first, I
submit my self to be judged according to the law, beseeching that the gloss
thereof may be as far from cruelty, as it is fittest for men to use
clemency.

The Bishops answer.
IF I had not assuredly thought that thou would have refused my proffer, to
make thy self a religious man, I would never have offered the same unto thee,
being as thou art unworthy of so great a favor: but I intended by this means
to manifest by your own tongue your wicked intention, to the end that you
might be worthily punished therefore, and never say that if no law mention of
the like fault as yours is, that therefore you should remain unpunished, for
it may be there was never such a cursed deed heard of before, or the lawmakers
thinking that such a fact could never be committed made no mention thereof: as
Licurgus made no law against such as murdered their Parents, imagining that
none could be so wicked as to commit such a crime, therefore would he not
mention such a detestable deed: but do you think that for all that the
Lacedemonions would have left to punish those grieuouslie which should have
committed the same, and that they would not have inflicted a punishment as
rigorous as the fact was rare? No doubt they would: for when offenses are
execrable, the punishments must be the more extreme, to stop altogether the
passage unto such vices; and especially in such a case where the accusation is
not public, it were most expedient that the punishment should be secret, but
the more severe, that the same being known of few men, the crime might be
less manifest, and the terror of the punishment more great. For so during the
Consulship of Terentius Varo, Lucius Cantilius Chancellor to the Bishops having
committed adultery with Florania a Vestall Nun, was (in the place called
Comicia, the gates being locked up) so beaten with rods by the bishop, that he
died with the blows; which ought to serve as well for an example as a law unto
this fellow, whose fault is more foul. What punishment then shall be
sufficient for your adultery? Whereof you seem chiefly to boast and to
approve the same by your reasons no less frivolous then detestable, by the
which it should seem (by your saying) that incests and adulteries ought not to
be blamed, provided that thereby the generation of mankind be increased:
alas, how more happy were it that neither you nor she had ever been borne,
then that you should be the occasion of such a scandale, seeing that it were
better that he which scandalizeth the least of the Christians were thrown into
the sea with a millstone about his neck; What do you call love? A vild carnal
concupiscence, As much, or more common unto brute beasts, then unto reasonable
men, who cannot use it lawfully, but only in marriage, to the end to bring
forth children: Wherefore Saint Paul does very well say, That Whoredom is
surely one of the greatest sins and most hurtful unto man, seeing that every
other sin is without him, and whoredom consumes both his body and his soul,
making him the one half of an harlot, when he is created for no other cause
but to be the Temple and dwelling place of God. Why do you not say then in
steed of your leasings, that an harlot is a hell, wherein God suffers those
which forget him to be drowned, and that filthiness is the reward for the
infidelity of men? O wicked wretch, how dare thou then look up into heaven,
or behold the earth, the one being the seat, the other the footstool of God?
Whom because thou do forget, thou art unworthy of his favor. If whoredom
committed with profane women be detestable, what shall we say of adultery
with such as are religious, who are consecrated to God? Seeing that the
Romans, when as yet they were ignorant of the truth, did bury their Vestall
Nuns quick, that suffered themselves to be defiled? You say well, That lovers
are blind of understanding; see then the cause why those are to be punished
which suffer themselves to fall into such blindness, that proceeds of
nothing but idleness and gluttony which provoke luxuritie: therefore ought
you to have shunned these two vices, but you might have escaped the third, the
which as you have sought it, so are you fallen into it. Surely, all men are
tempted, and the greatest temptation, is not to be tempted at all, because then
we forget to be men, but virtue appears in the resisting against temptation,
which you having neglected, you have not only tempted, but defiled the spouse
of Christ: What fire or torment may expiate so vild and abominable wickedness?
And surely you have refused (as one that is unworthy) to do penance in
religion, having first defiled the same, making the holy vow thereof to serve
for a cloak unto your filthiness. Let then the bull of Perillus be put in use
again, and as he made the first experience thereof, so be you the first that
must be punished more rigorously then ever any heretofore has been, seeing
that your adultery (the like whereof was never heard) is the cause that a new
law must be made to terrify such as would follow you. Lastly, (immitating
the example of God, which would not the death of a sinner) I have called you to
repentance, not without great suspicion of your refusal; in doing whereof, I
take you at your word, and require the temporal sword to punish you, for
counterfaiting your sex, for abusing the vow of religion, for your vild
whoredom, for refusing to do penance, and for your devilish obstinacy.
Consider worthy Judges how many torments such a number of heinous crimes
deserve.

Declamation. 62.
Of Don Ferrand, who punished the mutined Spaniards, and afterward is
therefore accused.

IN the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth, the Spanish soldiers that were
in Scicilia, rose in a mutenie, and committed a thousand mischiefs, whereof
the least deserved the halter: whereupon Don Ferrand of Gonsagne, brother to
the Duke of Mantua, (who had always ben employed by the Emperor, in chiefest
places of command) appeased them, paying them part of that which was due unto
them: afterward he caused them to be embarked to carry them (as he said) to
Genoa, they being all embarked, he carried them unto certain desert Isles,
where he made them to go ashoare, faining that he would there take the muster
of them, and make an end of paying them: but when they were all in order a good
why in the Island, he found the means to cause those to retire unto the
Galleys, whom he meant to save, and afterward he set sail, and departed,
leaving the rest of the soldiers there, who for the most part died all with
hunger: for which fact Don Ferrand was accused unto the counsel of Spain as
follows:

IF discretion might be given as well as dignities are granted, we should not
now need to demand his death, who has deprived the lives of a number that were
seruitors to Caesar as well as he, and no less serviceable: the which he would
never have done, if he had considered that neither he nor any other could have
that honor to be General of an army if the soldiers did not freely
determine to serve their Prince, and follow the wars, especially, if they
would altogether with one mind refuse so to do: but hence comes the
mischief, that those which have not first learned to be controlled, do never
know rightly lie how to command? Wherefore Hannon said well when Hasdruball
commanded in Carthage, and Hanniball was to be sent into Spain, being very
young; It were better (said he) that this yonker tarried here in the city to
learn how to obey laws, then to teach him so suddenly to command in a
foreign land. Likewise, we are to consider what was the end of Pompey, who
following the faction of Silla, was sooner made a captain then a souldior:
even so those of our time which are nobly borne do command, before they are
able to discern peace from wars, the friend from the foe, good from bad, and
reputation from reproach; whereupon it chances, that as Hanniball was the cause
of the overthrow of Carthage, and Pompey the decay of the Commonwealth of Rome,
so these captains made in have presuming overmuch of their own courage, might
impair the prosperity of Caesar, if his fortune together with his virtue were
not invincible. But yet there is another mischief, which is, that Iralie
(which may be termed the churchyard of Spanish soldiers) brings forth few
men which are well affected to the Spanish nation: who to say the truth, being
worthy men, are also somewhat haultie minded, the which the Italians do
attribute unto their pride, which is the chiefest cause why they do for the
most part hate them: we will not be inquisitiue whether heretofore Don Ferrand
has been the cause of the death of a number of other Spaniards, but we may
well say that he has made those (whom he left in the desert Island) to die
the cruellest death that might be imagined, without any judgment, Counsel,
or consent of Caesar, as if men were nursed and brought up for nothing. Surely,
it should seem that he did not see what pains was taken in Spain to assemble
such a number of soldiers together, what stir there was to embarke them, how
hardly they crossed the seas, and what time was spent in disciplining them for
the wars, all which things was not done without great charge and expense unto
the Emperor, and the danger of their own persons; and they were no sooner
delivered over to Don Ferrand, thorowlie furnished and ready for the wars
(as if they had sprung forth of the earth in one night, like unto Mushromes)
but that he did presently thrust them not only into all the greatest dangers
that might be, when as many times there was no great occasion: but also
because he would be revenged for the faults of some few of them, he has done
them all unto the cruellest death that he could invent. But we would demand
of him how it could be possible that they should be all culpable, and whether
they were all authors of sedition? For that is not only hard, but impossible:
had it not been better then for him to have punished the authors, that thereby
the consenters might have been terrified or chastised, and the good cherished
and maintained? Or if he would needs have had them to die, could he not have
sent them forth upon the foe? Where revenging their death, they might at the
least have weakened his forces. We read indeed how the Romans tithed their
mutined soldiers, and used other like punishments, but it was never seen or
heard that they put them all to death; and especially in Spain under the
conduct of Scipio, where there was not only a mutenie, but also Vmbrius
Atrius, and Calemus Albius took upon them the authority of Consuls by the
agreement and at the instance of the soldiers, yet were none punished but the
authors of the deed, and the rest were paid, employed, and allowed for good
soldiers, not because the Romans had not as good means to send other
soldiers from Rome into Spain (and better then we have now to send out of
Spain into Italy) but this was the reason: the General was a Roman, and he
not hating the nation, was only contented to punish a few of the offenders,
and by the severity of that exemplarie punishment, to terrify and fear the
rest: for it is very certain, that those which are threatened do live better
then those which are punished, for the punishment being done, the fear is
past, and oftentimes it engendereth such a malice, as makes them to commit
far greater faults then the first; as (it may be) the effect shall be seen
by those which by some means may chance to escape from those Islands: do but
imagine if there had but a few ben punished, what dutiful men those which had been pardoned would have proved, to show that they were worthy of pardon, and
to cause their passed offense to be forgotten? But yet if all this could not
have moved him to spare them, yet should he have done it because it is so
difficult a matter to draw very often many men forth of Spain, where there
is no great store, as also for the great treasure that is needful to levy and
conduct them, which is always a great charge both unto the country and the
people: but what care have the Italians thereof, being borne far from Spain,
and natural enemies to our nation because they are more valiant then any
other? for which cause as I have said already the Italians call them proud, as
if a great fire could be without some smoke. And consequently it may appear
that although some Italians do serve Caesar, yet are they nevertheless
mortal enemies to the Spaniards: for they being indeed as proud as they are
cruel, cannot abide this worthy and valiant nation: for proof whereof, what
cruelty (joined with pride) was there ever more great then this of Don
Ferrand, who has not at the least spared those, who would have bestowed their
lives for the safety and defense of his? But he has likewise caused the
innocent to perish together with the offender; he does plainly show that he
(according to the example of Nero) would desire that al Spain had but one head,
that he might cut it off at one blow: therefore must we for an example prevent
by punishment, such minds no less dangerous then devilish, to the end that
other strangers being captains in the wars, may hereafter consider, that
oftentimes such a number of men may either keep or win a Province, but the
dead can fight no more; and many times for want of men there may sundry good
occasions be lost, to the prejudice of Caesar's greatness, and to the
hinderance of all Christendom. I pass over the causes that captains do most
commonly give unto their soldiers to mutenie, one whiles because they are
not paid as well as they, and otherwhiles when they detain the best part of
their contributions and other booties that ought to be given unto them;
remembering not that the soldiers do with the price of their blood oftentimes
buy those victories, whereof the Generals reap the honor and profit; neither
will acknowledge how by their malice, ambition, and avarice, the victory is
oftentimes foreslowed, or utterly lost, most commonly to the detriment of the
profit, honor, and life of the poor soldiers: and therefore to conclude, I
say that they are right captains who do attain thereunto by degrees, and by
their valor, and those will beware how they commit any such cruelties like
unto this which Don Ferrand has committed, for the which we require that
justice may be executed.

The Answer.
THose places which are of dignity and authority, ought not to be bestowed
but upon such as are known to be of discretion sufficient to deserve them. As
for me, I dare aduouch that this is not the first time that I have commanded in
Caesar's service, and that only by his own commandment, who has many times
praised, and always allowed whatsoever I have done; so that to judge me
indiscreet were as much to tax his Majesty as me: and he that would tax the
actions of the Emperor, should prove himself a very Idiot; for his manifold
victories and other noble acts (being indeed worthy of his Majesty) will be
a witness against these no less severe then ignorant Censors. And as it is
very evident that the judgment of Caesar does never deceive his Majesty, so
is it also very certain, that his Majesty would never have employed me so
many times, if he had not esteemed me discreet. And thus much further I dare
affirm, that if those which are so desirous to be my Judges, were chosen or
placed in their authority by the doom of Caesar, I should think my self
happy to be judged by them, although I am not bounden to render unto them
any account of my military actions, and especially because the deed which I
have done was allowed by Caesar, who only might have punished me if the fact
had been unjust: but his Majesty does very well know that sometimes it is
lawful to do a little harm, to shun thereby a greater hurt: and I will
further say, that if long before this time such soldiers as did mutenie had
been punished very severely, I should not now have been enforced to execute this
punishment, more notable then any that heretofore has been performed. And
although I am not bound to justify my self for that deed, before the Counsel
of Spain, yet will I not let to show that I am not so faulty, as they do
think me to be, for if I were, Caesar is so just as I should not be free from
punishment: for first of all the lords of the Counsel ought to consider, what
they be that accuse me, whether they be not some of the parties, and their
parents, or friends, who do as well show their ignorance as their impudency,
when they affirm that they were as good seruitors to Caesar as I, and that the
General could not be without soldiers, as if they themselves being
amutined, were not compelled to make a General amongst them. I know very well
that a number would willingly command, yet there are but a few which know how
to do it, neither can any perrorme that place, but such as have first learned
how to obey. Whereof I may vaunt, if Caesar should have appointed the meanest
of those whom I have punished to be my General, I would have had such respect
and ben so dutiful unto him as I ought, believing that Caesar would never have
authorized him without desert: neither was I ever so presumptuous as to trust
more unto my birth the^ unto true virtue, knowing well that Caesar favors
none but the virtuous. Likewise, I learned both how to obey, and also what was
military discipline before that ever I commanded, and never doubt that the
noble are more-seuere in commanding, then are the comminaltie, for none is more
proud then he which of a base groom becomes a gentleman. God grant the
Counsel be not full of such men, and that they be not such as are more
vicious then curious of the reputation of their houses. I will not argue
whether Hanniball or Pompey did well, but I may truly say that Marius, as one
ignoble, made the way for Pompey and Caesar to overthrow (as you say) the
Roman Commonwealth: for he and Silla were examples unto the two above
rehearsed. It is well known that Marius and Silla did by little and little
attain unto places of dignity, being but meanly borne, yet ceased they not
to be exceeding proud, hurtful, and odious unto their country. And a little
before them Terentius Varo who being the son of a butcher, did by degrees
attain unto the place of Consul, had not he I pray you ben likely by his
rashness to have caused the overthrow of Rome, if Hanniball after the
discomfiture at Cannas had pursued the victory? Neither was it Hanniball that
caused the ruin of Carthage, but rather the Senators, being no less severe
then ambitious and cruel, who did crucify their Generals if the wars
prospered not according to their minds; which was the cause that after the
battle against Scipio was lost, Hannibal could not abide in safety in the
city, the which (it may be) he had conserved, if the Senators had been
like unto those of Rome, who were always mild, whose example all counselors
of estate ought to follow; and they would no doubt be like unto them if they
did all know so well as the Senate of Rome, those occasions which are offered in
the wars, to enforce a man to do such things as are unusual. Moreover, it
cannot be said, that I (having ben brought up amongst Spaniards, and receiving
from them all favor and sincere friendship) should be ill affected toward
them: but I may rather say that their courage ought to be showed against their
enemies, and not against the Emperor, who is even amongst the Barbarous
Almaines, called the father of soldiers: you are apt to rehearse what I have
done, but you tell not the cause wherefore. It is sufficient for the Surgeon
to prove unto his patient why he does sometimes cut off or canterise a member;
so have I certified Caesar, that the mutiners ought to be suppressed, for
fear least they should animate others to commit the like Treason. Neither have
I caused them to die, witness a number that are escaped thence, and amongst
others four, who did each of them bestow a bullet upon me in my lodging, but
they could not touch me therewith, whom I have not only pardoned for the
particular injury done unto me, but also I have further saved their lives:
whereby it is easily known that I am no enemy to the Nation. Furthermore, it
was not expedient to leave them unto the enemies mercy, because that would have
but fortified them, and weakened the glory and courage of the nation. Neither
yet is it fit to hurt those secretly whom one intends to punish or chastise
for the terrifieng of others. As for the Romans, the number of their amutined
soldiers in Spain was great, therefore they could not use extremity for
fear of losing the rest of the army, and so consequently all that which the
Romans held in Spain, for many of the nobility there were already revolted.
Moreover, the Roman soldiers were not accustomed to rebel so often as the
Spaniards, and at that time especially they had not done it if they had not
supposed their Consul Scipio to be dead; and peradventure that was the first
time, for such was their modesty before that time, and a long while after the
overthrow of Cannas, as they (knowing the necessity of their Commonwealth) the
most part of the soldiers refused to take pay, and they called those
mercenaries which took the same, affirming that the good soldier ought to
be as well partaker of the adversity, as prosperity of the Commonwealth: but
those who^ I left in the Isle was but a handful of men, the best of whom were
dead before in the wars: so as the remainder were more fit to lose those
fortresses where they should be left in Garrison, then to keep them, and both
to corrupt the good soldiers by their example, and also to cause a whole army
to mutenie. As for the wrong which therein I have done unto Spain, a man may
see (setting the gentlemen apart) what soldiers do come from thence, for the
best are ruffians, the others are vagabonds, and cutpurses, such as were the
relickes of the beadles whip, or else such as had left their ears behind them
as a pawn of their honesty; and generally such, as al thieves, or very
little better. So that to send soldiers forth of Spain is rather to purge
and amend it then any way to impair it; for there can never be so many of
the abouesaid men taken from thence, but that the prisons are always seen
full, and the cities are not empty of them. And you must not affirm that they
were not all faulty, seeing that in such an offense, the consenter is as
worthy to be punished as the inuenter: for they which would not be of that
faction, might secretly withdraw themselves from them, as they know well how to
do when they fly from an assault or from some other dangerous skirmish, and
especially when their company is appointed to some toilesome Garrison, the which
is then all closely dissembled under the color of being Spaniards; Whereas
such faults amongst the Almaines are most grievously punished: but it seems
that a man should not presume to touch the Spaniards, as if they were the only
(because the latest) Christians. Let them then endure their mutenies, who are
the cause thereof by detaining their pay as you affirm, as for me, I know
Caesar's liberality can enrich me, therefore I have nothing to do to trouble my
self with a gain no less vild then unlawful and dishonest: and it suffices
me, that the noble and honorable men of Spain do know how well I love their
nation: for I make as little account of the slander of wicked men, as I would
willingly have the praise of the good, for every one commends such as
himself is: and that which is more, I will not refuse the judgment of such of
the Counsel as have commanded in the war, but from such as know nothing but
by reading, I appeal unto the others aforesaid. During which appeal, I will
be ready to do all the good services for Caesar as possibly as I may.

Declamation. 93.
Of the Matrons who are accused for poisoning the Senators.

MArcus Claudius Marcellus, and Titus Valerius being Consuls in Rome, many of
the chiefest did die, and all of one disease. Whereupon it happened that a
servant or bondwoman advertised the Senate that many of the Noble women of Rome
were busied in making of poison; the which they gave unto men as occasion
served them, and amongst others, Cornelia and Sergia both nobly borne, were
accused and found distilling the said poisons, who denying the same very
firmly and stoutly, the slave requested that they might prove their
innocence in drinking the waters distilled by them, but they refused so to
do, one of them saying:

GOd grant that my deuination be not true, yet who will not believe, that some
great alteration does threaten the Commonwealth, Seeing that slaves (natural
enemies to the Roman commonwealth) are not only permitted to accused the Noble
Matrons, but also are suffered to judge them according to their own fancy;
saying (and that in the presence of the Senate) drink of the water which you
have distilled if you will not be accounted faulty? But what would ensue then
if it were so, (as all this wicked generation of slaves have their private
meetings and conference together) that they had persuaded our slaves to put
some poison secretly into our distillations, seeing that there must be some
time to perform the same? In drinking the same, should not we thereby lose both
life and honor together? And if it should otherwise happen, that the water did
us no hurt at al, what could this mischeeuous wretch lose, seeing that not so
much as her life is her own, but at the will and discretion of him or her that
has bought her? And yet nevertheless, we should not let to be the spectacle
and byword of the people. For the desire of a vild slave, our innocence shall
be always suspected, and that chiefly amongst the common people, who do
sooner conceive an evil then a good opinion; then being once imprinted in
their brains, sildome or never is the same banished, But who would ever have
believed that the Senate could have been so unadvised as to admit the like
accusations, or to cause two Noble Matrones to appear in judgment at the only
instance of a person unworthy to live? Surely any man of good judgment will
be amassed thereat, but the unwise will evermore have an ill opinion of us:
wherefore (our honor saved) we were better die then live, for what may be
commendable in a woman except her good reputation, which surely is more worth
unto her then any other riches or felicities? Behold unto what extremity we
are brought, as well by this wicked woman, as by the indiscretion of the Senate?
Who do not consider that although poison be distilled, yet can it not be any
crime; No more then it is a fault to forge a sword, to make a bow and arrows,
or to spin a halter? all which may more easily be the instruments of death then
poison. But show me what law forbids the making or distilling of poison?
What skilleth it then if we have made deadly waters, to use them our selves
upon a necessity, for the preserving of our chastetie, if the city should
chance to be surdrised by enemies, or by falling into any other accident? Shall
we be therefore accounted malefactors? How many waters and other compounds do
we make that are hurtful to drink, as well to preserve and increase our
beauty, as also for other matters no less secret then necessary? The which we
would not reveal for any thing* For every modest woman had rather die then
reveal the infirmity of their sex. And yet nevertheless it seems that we
should be constrained publicly to reveal that which nature her self has
concealed, to the end it should he kept secret: O miserable world wherein we
are borne, seeing that so little respect is had of us, and that the Senate is so
fond, not only to give ear unto the enemies of the Roman Commonwealth, but
also to give credit unto their slanderous reports: but what if any slave had
accused Brutus to have been consenting to the practice of the conspirators?
Should it have been believed, because his sons were of that faction? Should
not the accuser have been executed on the cross? And yet nevertheless it is
agreed that this wicked slave must command us: yea, and the Senate allows her
commandment. But what will not these carians presume, to invent against their
mistresses? And therefore O you Senators you shall at one time or another abide
the penalty for the ouergreat credit which you have given unto their leasings:
for it is most reasonable, that those which favor the wicked, should perish by
their hands. Are you yet ignorant that so many slaves as there be, so many
enemies we have in Rome: and yet the Senate permits the wickeddest wretch of
that generation to persecute the honor and life of the Roman Matrons, being
but of late most worthily favored and privileged, for their virtue and
prudence. Lastly, there is enough said of a thing so unjust as this vild wretch
is, who does of her own accord condeme her self.

The Answer of the Senate.
AS is the common custom of women, so is your prattle tedious, and to small
purpose of the matter in question: also it appears, and is verified in you,
that the first advise of a woman is always best, and that for a present excuse
they exceed men, but when they would proceed, they speak against themselves,
and they quite forget what to say: even so your first excuse was best, when you
made a doubt that the slaves had corrupted your distillations: but afterward
it seems in your going about to prove it lawful to make such waters, you do
affirm that you did make them; if it be so, we are not of the opinion that you
should drink them, especially if you do suspect them, but if it be otherwise,
you should not do amiss by that means to prove your innocence, and procure
her end that has been your accuser: whose life although (as you say) it be none
of her own, yet would she lose it as unwillingly as you would yours, the which
you are no more sure of, then she is of hers, seeing that we are all at the
discretion of fortune: wherefore it may be said that not only bondslaues, sick
persons, sailers, and condemned men, are in danger, but also no man is certain
to be free from death: neither is it well said, that we allow the commandment
of a slave, but because she is likewise a woman we cannot hinder the readiness
of her tongue, no more then of yours: and for the allowing of her saying to be
hurtful, we may say that she has prevented what we meant to speak: but you
complain before you have cause; for on the contrary we do now demand, (since
you have spoken so much) whether you think this water be venomous or no? If you
think it is not, drink it? If you think that your bondwomen have poisoned the
same, it must be known where they had the poison; And consequently whereof you
distilled this water? Whereby it may be proved whether your drugs were able
of themselves to turn into poison or no? Or what poison might corrupt them?
And afterward we will know of the rest which made of the same, whether their
intention was like unto yours? For we know that there is a great number of you
which do make the same, which is a great likelihood that you are all of one
league: wherefore you two shall serve for a trial, seeing that you will
confess no more of the matter, for the comparison of the sword with poison is
odious, because the one serves to strike our foe, and the other is to slay our
friend as well as our foe. Therefore all the rest of your frivolous excuses
shall not save you. But tell us freely whether these waters which you have made
are venomous or no? For this we assure you, that either you must determine to
drink it, or confess the truth, seeing that after the first excuse you would
prove that it is lawful to make it, the which is mere false: for all hurtful
and suspicious things are unlawful and criminal. And although there were no
law against the same, yet ougt there one to be made; and never think that here
you shall be saved for your nobleness and great calling, for the more great
they are which commit such heinous acts, the greater punishment do they
deserve, seeing they are the cause of greatest scandale, and especially because
they are not constrained thereunto through necessity, but rather provoked by
their own malicious nature: the truth then shall appear either by your own
confession, or by the trial which your selves shall make in drinking of your
water.

Here is to be noted that these two women did voluntarily drink of their
water, and died, rather then they would confess the truth, which the Senators
knew already: for within a few days after, more then two hundred and seventy
women were condemned, and there was never before that any accusation of
impoysoning.

Declamation. 94.
Of an Earl of Flanders, who by a wile did hang four gentlemen for a robbery.

AN Earl of Flanders named Baldwin, and surnamed Apquin, was a very just
Prince, and kept a great court. Whereupon it happened that certain Merchants
being Iewellers, came to visit him, and they sold him certain Jewels,
aterwards departing from thence, they were pursued and robbed by four
Gentlemen, in great favor with the Earl; who being accused by the said
Merchants, and they not being able to deny the deed, the Earl was in such an
exceeding rage, as he swore that he would not sleep before he saw them
hanged by the neck: but the goods being restored unto the merchants, many
lords and ladies came to entreat for the gentlemen being prisoners, unto whom
the Earl after long suit and much entreaty, gave some good hope. Afterward
before he would go to bed, he caused the prisoners to be brought into the
hall, and made four towels to be fastened to a beam, under the which he
commanded a table to be set, then he said unto the prisoners, You know the
oath which I have made, wherefore I will fasten these towels about your necks,
then each of you list or draw up your legs in such sort, as I may say that I
have seen you hanged: and afterward setting your feet down again upon the
table, you may untie the towels, and say that my oath is accomplished, but
another time be better advised. The prisoners did the Earls commandment, who
seeing them well fastened to the towels, threw the table to the ground, and
leaving them in that sort hanged, he shut the hall door, where, at the last
they were strangled of themselves: but their kinsfolk accused the Earl before
his Sovereign Lord the French King, saying:

IF your Justice and mercy most redoubted Sovereign, were not equal to your
greatness, in vain should we have recourse unto your majesty, to have right
of your vassal our Earl; who conuerteth Justice into cruelty, and
especially against his gentlemen, who for their virtue and valor are odious
unto him, the which hate springs of no other cause, but only of a fear
which he has, that they will not always endure his cruelties. For cruel men
are naturally cowards, and consequently subject to fear, which proceeds
from the sting of their own conscience that does secretly and continually
accuse them: now how sarre unbeseeming cowardice and fear, is for the nature
of a French man, the taking of Rome, and winning of so many Provinces, as well
in Italy, as in Greece, Spain, and other countries do witness; and the
rather, because this warlike Nation could never be subdued by the Romans, nor
by any others, had it not ben for Civil discention amongst themselves. So
that it seems that the men of this Nation chiefly the gentlemen, and
chiefest of all he which ruseth, being neither hardy nor courageous,
degene^^eth from the worthiness of that Nation, and so consequently makes
himself unworthy, as being vild and abject, the which may be seen by our
Earl (if he may be so called that is an enemy of Nobility:) for what act can
be more vild in a great lord then to usurp and take upon him to execute the
hangmans office, and with his own hands to hang the gentlemen of his train for
a light fault, which may rather be called a trick of youth? In Spain a man
shall very hardly find one amongst the thieves in prison, which would promise
to be a hangman five years, to save his life: Nay, in every country there are
none of that office but such as are murderers or thieves. How odious then
ought that office to be unto a free man; but more unto a Nobleman, and most of
all unto a Prince of a country? who ought to be a spectacle unto all men, and
a true pattern of Nobility? And so much the more odious is this fact, because
those that are common hangmen, do execute none but such as are condemned, but
these men were hanged before they were condemned; If our Earl will not
affirm, that he was both accuser, Judge, and hangman altogether: and that
which was worst of all, he put them to death without confession, not suffering
them to have only so much leisure as to unburden their consciences, but even
under the coulor of saving them, he has slain them. Flaminius was accused of
the Roman Censors, because he being Praetor in Gaul, caused a malefactor to
be beheaded before him whilst he was at supper, and our Earl thinks that
he has not done amiss to hang three Gentlemen betwixt his supper and his bed
time, a thing far differing from the clemency required in a lord so great; for
every lord that rules a country ought to take example by the Princes of the
bees, who either have no sting at all, or if they have any, yet do they not
use it. Finally (if it please your Majesty) we are not alone wronged by this
fact, for your Majesty has lost four servants, who if need had been, would
not only have employed their wealth and their lives for your service, but also
might have induced many others to do the like: for a valiant Gentleman draws
men's hearts after him. The Commonwealth does lose thereby, losing those who
either for your Majesty's service, or the countries safety, might have been
conducters or leaders to the rest. Moreover, by such liberal and noble persons
diverse men do gain their living, and others increase their wealth, but alas
all this notwithstanding they are dead, not by right, but by the Earls rigor,
who was afraid least Justice should have been done unto them: but who would not
tremble in hearing it only repeated, that an Earls hall has served for a
prison, his table for a ladder, the beam for a gibbet, and he for a hangman?
And yet the same is happened, and he himself does boast thereof, for such is
the custom of those which resemble him, that of vice they make virtue, which
is the greatest mischief that can happen in a Province, and chiefly when the
same comes from the Prince. Had it not ben most reasonable first to have
known whether the fault was committed, and what was the cause, with the rest of
the circumstances thereof? And then to have proceeded lawfully and rightly
against the offenders? But it seemed that the Earl was afraid that he should
not have found neither sergeant, prison, Judge, hangman, ladder, halters, nor
gallows to execute these gentlemen: for which cause he desired that all these
foresaid mischiefs should be found in his hall and in his person. A man may
say that I speak with small respect unto my lord, but we protest, that from
henceforth we will never so account him, and if we cannot obtain from the
King the hoped remedy of our due reparation, we make a vow that we, our
children, parents, kindred, alies, friends, and whosoever else depends upon
us, will rather go dwell amongst the Scithians or any other more cruel
nation, then we will remain any longer under the government of a man so
infamous.

The earls Answer.
THe same Justice, mercy, and Majesty of the King which you employ against
me, shall yield me reason against all you, and shall in my behalf punish you
for your no less vain, then outrageous and vnreuerent speeches, wherefore I
do not refuse the judgment of his Majesty, although the matter concerns
his highness nothing at all, in as much as those whom you speak of were no
Gentlemen, but robbers and thieves, and for such have I punished them; and if
any would know why I did it not after the usual manner, as there shall no
reasons be wanting, so am I not bound to tell them unto any but unto such as
it shall please my self: therefore I will only say that they being in that sort
put to death, their ungrateful kindred toward me have received less dishonor
thereby, then if they had been made a public spectacle to the people.
Likewise, the nobility of Flanders are become so insolent, as they stand in no
aw at all of Justice, wherefore this Justice no less sudden then just, will
make them to bethink themselves twice, before they will commit the like
offense again. Moreover, you were resolved to save them either by entreaties,
or otherwise; therefore I desired to take away all occasion to ad unto their
death, not only yours, but also other men's destructions, for he may be termed
wise and virtuous, which by one small mischief can eschew far greater
mischances: but he that does never so great good unto the ungrateful,
receives nothing but hate and reproach for his reward: even so has it happened
to me herein. If you who say that you are noble, did know what nobility is,
and wherein it consists, you would say that these robbers were no Gentlemen,
seeing that gentilitie cannot be grounded but only upon virtue, and as thereby
the base borne attain to nobility, even so he which continues not therein,
loses that nobility which his father has left him, to the intent that he
should be virtuous: for nothing is more pernicious in a Commonwealth then he
who does falselie usurp the title of Nobility. I do demand of you whether the
son of a good musition may inherit his fathers cunning and renoume, chiefly
to be a good musition, without learning and thoroughly exercising of music? It
seems not, if then in an art of so small consequence a man cannot attain
unto the fame or faculty of his father, without he be the same in effect,
although it should not prejudice the Commonwealth in any sort; how then can
they inherit nobility, who make no proof thereof by virtue, by the which our
ancestors have gained it? If nobility came but by descent, it would be no less
weak, then of small continuance, considering the multitude of those that die
in the wars; but virtue which does thereby nobilitate others, does still
maintain the same. I have then caused these villains to die secretly for the
respect I had unto their kindred, who desired to remain noble in following
virtue, for those which do swerve from it, a man may rightly say that nobility
does end in them, and they which follow it cannot choose but be noble indeed:
the which Cicero knew very well how to apply when Claudius said unto him that
he was no gentleman; Truly (said he) in me does the nobility of my race begin
to bud, as in you the gentry of your stock is already blasted. And since
that I being so exceedingly bound unto virtue, as God has made me by birth
more noble and greater then any other of my country, I have done but my duty
in executing good, speedy, and short Justice: for Justice surely is not the
least kind of virtue, and not to execute Justice were cruelty, wherefore I am
not cruel, much less a coward, neither do they speak the truth which do
say that I am an enemy to gentlemen, or that I fear them, but I am indeed an
enemy to the vicious, and I fear least they should hurt the good, or that they
should be corrupted by them: now have I been their executioner or hangman as
you affirm, but they themselves according to their deserts have been the
butchers of their own lives; and were it otherwise, yet is he rather a hangman
which robs or kills an honest man, the^ is he which executes malefactors.
This Spanish pity proceeds of no other cause, but only for that they would
not execute those which are of their profession, yet to betray or murder good
men they are nothing scrupulous. The Prince of a country cannot show any
better example then in performing Justice, the which I have done: And know you
that the Judges are not necessary, but where the Prince is not present: for
proof whereof, Solomon himself judged causes, yet no other but the King can
judge me. As for Flaminius, he put a condemned man to death upon pleasure,
only to content an harlot, but I have executed four to observe Justice. But
for any service that they might have done for the King, a man may as well say
the like of all other thieves: for such people can easily assemble a great
number of such worthless and lewd fellows as they are. Likewise, it is not a
small mischief that prodigality is wrongfully held for liberality, as if the
prodigal did not commit a thousand mischiefs, to get wherewith to perform
their follies, as these four did, who by their prodigality became thieves.
Wherefore it may be affirmed, that they and such as would maintain them, are
those that esteem vice to be virtue, and villains to be Gentlemen. As for the
small respect that you have used in slandering me, it is therein that I may
show my clemency, for it is true Magnanimity to pardon great faults,
especially when none is offended thereby, by only he which pardons the same,
as I do not only pardon you, but also do further beseech the King not to
punish you, because it may be at your own choice either to remain in your
country or to forsake the same; not for that I care for such subjects as you
are which disdain me to be their lord, but because I would not against my
custom show my self rigorous toward those, who being overcome by passion, do
but offend me in words, and the rather because they which speak more then they
should, do thereby but procure their own shame. And to conclude, there is no
reason that you should be believed concerning the dead; But it may please the
Kings Majesty to be better informed upon this matter, if it shall not like
his highness to credit those informations as are most true, which I do here
present unto his gracious hands, binding my self unto any satisfaction, if in
ought I have swarued from Justice.

Declamation. 95.
Of a Jew, who would for his debt have a pound of the flesh of a Christian.

A Jew unto whom a Christian Merchant ought nine hundred crowns, would have
summoned him for the same in Turckie: the Merchant because he would not be
discredited, promised to pay the said sum within the term of three months,
and if he paid it not, he was bound to give him a pound of the flesh of his
body. The term being past some fifteen days, the Jew refused to take his
money, and demanded the pound of flesh: the ordinary Judge of that place
appointed him to cut a just pound of the Christians flesh, and if he cut either
more or less, then his own head should be smitten off: the Jew appealed from
this sentence, unto the chief judge, saying:

IMpossible is it to break the credit of traffic amongst me^ without great
detriment unto the Commonwealth: wherefore no man ought to bind himself unto
such covenants which he cannot or will not accomplish, for by that means should
no man fear to be deceived, and credit being maintained, every man might be
assured of his own; but since deceit has taken place, never wonder if
obligations are made more rigorous and strict then they were wont, seeing that
although the bonds are made never so strong, yet can no man be very certain
that he shall not be a loser. It seems at the first sight, that it is a thing
no less strange then cruel, to bind a man to pay a pound of the flesh of his
body, for want of money: Surely, in that it is a thing not usual, it
appears to be somewhat the more admirable, but there are diverse others that
are more cruel, which because they are in use seem nothing terrible at all:
as to bind all the body unto a most loathsome prison, or unto an intolerable
slavery, where not only the whole body but also all the senses and spirits are
tormented, the which is commonly practiced, not only betwixt those which are
either in sect or Nation contrary, but also even amongst those that are all of
one sect and nation, yea amongst neighbors and kindred, and even amongst
Christians it has been seen, that the son has imprisoned the father for
money. Likewise, in the Roman Commonwealth, so famous for laws and arms, it
was lawful for debt, to imprison, beat, and afflict with torments the free
Citizens: How many of them (do you think) would have thought themselves
happy, if for a small debt they might have been excused with the payment of a
pound of their flesh? Who ought then to maruile if a Jew requires so small a
thing of a Christian, to discharge him of a good round sum? A man may ask
why I would not rather take silver of this man, then his flesh: I might allege
many reasons, for I might say that none but my self can tell what the breach
of his promise has cost me, and what I have thereby paid for want of money
unto my creditors, of that which I have lost in my credit: for the misery or
those men which esteem their reputation, is so great, that oftentimes they had
rather endure any thing secretly then to have their discredit blazed abroad,
because they would not be both shamed and harmed. Nevertheless, I do freely
confess, that I had rather lose a pound of my flesh, then my credit should be
in any sort cracked: I might also say that I have need of this flesh to cure a
friend of mine of a certain malady, which is otherwise incurable, or that I
would have it to terrify thereby the Christians for ever abusing the Jews
any more hereafter: but I will only say, that by his obligation he owes it
me. It is lawful to kill a souldior if he come unto the wars but an hour
too late, and also to hang a thief though he steal never so little: is it
then such a great matter to cause such a one to pay a pound of his flesh, that
has broken his promise many times, or that puts another in danger to lose
both credit and reputation, yea and it may be life and al for grief? were it
not better for him to lose that which I demand, then his soul, already bound
by his faith? Neither am I to take that which he owes me, but he is to deliver
it me: And especially because no man knows better then he where the same may
be spared to the least hurt of his person, for I might take it in such a place
as he might thereby happen to lose his life: what a matter were it then, if I
should cut of his privy members, supposing that the same would altogether
weigh a just pound? Or else his head, should I be suffered to cut it off,
although it were with the danger of mine own life? I believe I should not;
because there were as little reason therein, as there could be in the amends
whereunto I should be bound: or else if I would cut off his nose, his lips, his
ears, and pull out his eyes, to make of them altogether a pound, should I be
suffered? Surely I think not, because the obligation does not specify that I
ought either to choose, cut, or take the same, but that he ought to give me a
pound of his flesh. Of every thing that is sold, he which delivers the same
is to make weight, and he which receives, takes heed that it be just: seeing
then that neither the obligation, custom, nor law does bind me to cut, or
weigh, much less unto the above mentioned satisfaction, I refuse it all, and
require that the same which is due should be delivered unto me.

The Christians Answer.
IT is no strange matter to here those dispute of equity which are themselves
most unjust; and such as have no faith at all, desirous that others should
observe the same inviolable, the which were yet the more tolerable, if such
men would be contented with reasonable things, or at the least not altogether
unreasonable: but what reason is there that one man should unto his own
prejudice desire the hurt of another? as this Jew is content to lose nine
hundred crowns to have a pound of my flesh, whereby is manifestly seen the
ancient and cruel hate which he bears not only unto Christians, but unto all
others which are not of his sect: yea, even unto the Turks, who ouerkindly do
suffer such vermin to dwell amongst them, seeing that this presumptuous wretch
dare not only doubt, but appeal from the judgment of a good and just Judge,
and afterward he would by sophistical reasons prove that his abomination is
equity: truly I confess that I have suffered fifteen days of the term to
pass, yet who can tell whether he or I is the cause thereof, as for me I
think that by secret means he has caused the money to be delaied, which
from sundry places ought to have come unto me before the term which I promised
unto him; Otherwise, I would never have been so rash as to bind my self so
strictly: but although he were not the cause of the fault, is it therefore
said, that he ought to be so impudent as to go about to prove it no strange
matter that he should be willing to be paid with ma^s flesh, which is a thing
more natural for Tigres, then men, the which also was never heard of: but this
devil in shape of a man, seeing me oppressed with necessity propounded this
accursed obligation unto me. Whereas he alleges the Romans for an example,
why does he not as well tell on how for that cruelty in afflicting debtors
over grievously, the Commonwealth was almost overthrown, and that shortly
after it was forbidden to imprison men any more for debt. To break promise is,
when a man swears or promises a thing, the which he has no desire to
perform, which yet upon an extreme necessity is some what excusable; as for
me, I have promised, and accomplished my promise, yet not so soon as I would;
and although I knew the danger wherein I was to satisfy the cruelty of this
mischeeuous man with the price of my flesh and blood, yet did I not fly away,
but submitted my self unto the discretion of the Judge who has justly
repressed his beastliness. Wherein then have I falsefied my promise, is it in
that I would not, (like him) disobey the judgment of the Judge? Behold I will
present a part of my body unto him, that he may pay himself, according to the
contents of the judgment, where is then my promise broken? But it is no
marvel if this race be so obstinat and cruel against us, for they do it of
set purpose to offend our God whom they have crucified: and wherefore? Because
he was holy, as he is yet so reputed of this worthy Turkish nation: but what
shall I say? Their own bible is full of their rebellion against God, against
their Priests, Judges, and leaders. What did not the very Patriarks
themselves, from whom they have their beginning? They sold their brother, and
had it not been for one amongst them, they had slain him even for very envy.
How many adulteries and abominations were committed amongst the^? How many
murders? Absalon did not he cause his brother to be murdered? Did he not
persecute his father? Is it not for their iniquity that God has dispersed
them, without leaving them one only foot of ground? If then, when they had
newly received their law from God, when they saw his wondrous works with
their eyes, and had yet their Judges amongst them, they were so wicked, What
may one hope of them now, when they have neither faith nor law, but their
rapines and vsuries? And that they believe they do a charitable work, when they
do some great wrong unto any that is not a Jew? It may please you then most
righteous Judge to consider all these circumstances, having pity of him who
does wholly submit himself unto your just clemency: hoping thereby to be
delivered from this monsters cruelty.

Declamation. 96.
Of Palamedes, who was accused by Ulysses that he meant to betray the Grecians.

AT such time as the Grecians assembled themselves together to go unto the
wars of Troy, Ulysses King of Ithaca because he would not go thither, fained
himself mad: and the better to color his deceit, he himself held the plough
tilling of a barren piece of land, but Palamedes very well perceived his
subtlety, and to make it known unto the rest that were sent, he took young
Telemachus, the only son of Ulysses and Penelope, and laid him in the way
where the horses and plough which Ulysses did drive should pass, who turning
the horses aside because he would not hurt his son, his dissembling was
discovered, and he constrained to go unto the wars with the rest of the
Grecian Princes. Wherefore they being at the siege of Troy, Ulysses the better
to be revenged of him, found the means to bury a certain quantity of gold
under the tent or pauillion of Palamedes, at that corner which stood next unto
Troy. Within a while after he accused him, saying that he had received treasure
from the Trojans to betray the Grecians. After long disputations and much
arguing, the hidden gold was found. But yet Palamedes did stoutly defend
himself against the accusation of Ulysses, who said thus:

O Immortal gods, O heaven, O earth, and you other Elements, O you planets and
stars, true witnesses of my just sorrow, and you men partakers of this great
mischief, (if it had not ben discovered) give ear unto the words, which unto
my great grief I am constrained to utter. Who would ever have thought that
any of the Grecian princes had had so vild a heart as that he would for gold
seek to betray his companions, together with their allies and subjects? but
alas contrary to the expectation of all, the same is entered into the heart
of one only. O gods, our conseruors, I render unto you immortal thanks, for
bringing me (in a manner against my will) unto these wars, seeing that I must
be your instrument to save all this army, pretending to perform a most just
cause, and yet nevertheless betrayed by one of the princes thereof. It is not
said in vain, that those which serve the gods, do by their grace obtain
wisdom, and become familiar with them; even so I, who from my youth have been
so happy as to admire, contemplate, and honor their deities, have received
this recompense therefore, as that my heart does most commonly foretell me
what mischiefs shall ensue: therefore I was in doubt to come unto this war,
seeing that I did as it were perceive that all the army should be in danger to
be lost by Treason: but it has pleased the gods to make me the means to
disclose the traitor; but must I tell who it is? Yes surely, for our countries
weal is to be preferred before all friendship, profit, or any other benefit:
Wherefore I protest unto the gods, and before this honorable assembly, that
if mine own son were partaker of this Treason, and none but my self did
know thereof, I would not only accuse him, but I would also cast the first stone
at him to stone him to death, as well for my countries safety as for because
he had in such sort stained our stock: nevertheless noble princes and you
Grecian people, I beseech you for the reward of this my service, that he whom I
shall truly name may serve for an everlasting example of the Grecians
clemency by saving his life, the which amongst great princes is nothing so
much esteemed as honor: for the remembrance of his fault will be a punishment
severe enough, and the granting unto him his life, will enforce him to employ
the same to achieue some notable act, thereby to extinguish the memory of his
passed lault, so that your pity shall bring you a double fruit, that is to
say, profit, and glory. Grant then my request O you Grecians, whereof I am not
unworthy, considering the maniefold good services which I have done for you,
by the which I do conjure you, as also by those which I may hereafter
perform, if you do bind me by this gracious favor which I do entreat of
you. Alas, I perceive you are all silent, but I know not whether it is
because you are astonished at the strangeness of the matter, or else (which the
gods forbid) because none of you will condescend unto the intercession which I
make for him whom you do not yet know? If you will not wholly grant my
request herein, yet at the least assure me that the chastisement shall not be
equal to the crime, but that the rigor of law shall be mittigated by lenity.
You make no answer at all, Grecians, wherefore I fear me least this danger will
draw you unto over great rigor: surely the fault is great, but in pardoning the
same your mercy shall be the more esteemed, for it is a common thing to
pardon small offenses, and it behooves those that are noble and great men to
pardon those faults as are of great importance such as this is; Trust me, if
you continue your silence any longer, you will provoke me also to hold my
peace, for as I would be glad to save the whole army, so would I be sorry to
cause the death of any of the princes. But I plainly perceive that I must
take your silence as a token of your consent, and so consequently that the
zeal of the Commonwealth and the safety of all you, ought to be preferred
before the assurance which I require: mark then my words well without passion,
which I fear to be too true: It is so that some of our secret friends which
are in Troy (whom I would not credit, if I did not through lie know their
integrity) have assured me that Palamedes during these ordinary skirmishes,
has under the coulor of fighting with the enemies, contracted with them to
burn the Grecian Navy, to the end that the army being void of all succors
or hope, should he laid open for the enemy, and to bring the same to pass, he
has received great sums of gold from the^. It behooves you therefore (O you
Grecians) to make diligent search, and to be thoroughly informed whether the
accusation be true, or that the Trojans have fained the same only of set
purpose, to weaken our forces by the loss of a man so famous, or to set us at
discord together, or whether Palamedes have taken this gold for any other
intent, as for to deminish their store by so much or else to work some other
stratagem thereby. I thought it good to declare this openly in the presence of
al men, to the end that some assuaging the rage of the rest, you might
altogether with one mind endeavor to sift out the truth of the deed, of the
which labor Palamedes might ease you by confessing the matter, and for what
intent he has received this coin, if he will not have us to search his ship,
or else where, for the said gold, the which being once found without his
confession, would greatly increase his crime. Wherefore advise him in the way
of friendship not to imagine that the same can be hidden from Argos, which
signifies no other thing then the eyes of the multitude, who do see many
things, which are supposed to be very secret. O how miserable are those that
persevere in mischief, because they are persuaded the same shall never be
manifest! For even when they think they are most safest, then oftentimes
either they themselves, or else those in whom they put most confidence, do
bewray them* in such sort, as over late repentance and sudden punishment do
both fall upon them at once. But this is the mischief, that ambition
persuadeth those which follow the same, that all things how wicked soever they
be, are lawful, and that abundance does nothing but increase avarice, which of
it self is insatiable. Do you then Palamedes show your* self to be free from
these vices, and in showing by effectual reasons that your intent was sound,
you may free us from this suspicion, considering that if you do otherwise, the
Grecians are no less ready to punish obstinate traitors, then courageous to
fight against their Trojan enamies. And let not passion O you Grecians cause
you to forget my former words spoken of pure zeal, only for your preservation.

Palamedes his answer.
O Radhamant, Minos, and Eacus, just judges of the infernal places, O Plute,
and Proserpine, Monarks of the darkesome mansions, thou Nemesis goddess of
revenge, and you hellish hags, Alecte, Thesephone, and Megera, tormenters of
sinful souls, cease your torturing of Tantalus, Ixion, Sisiphus, the
Belides, Prometheus, and all the other damned souls in perpetual torments, to
employ your justice, your power, your revenge, and al your extremest fury
against this perverse wicked Traitor, who harboreth no less mischief in his
heart then malice in his tongue. O immortal gods, how can you suffer such
iniquity? O earth why do you not open under the feet of this abominable
wretch to swallow him up? O you worthy Grecians, how can you hope for happy
success in your most just war, so long as this devil in the shape of a man
remains amongst you? Who is he, that can beware of his Treasons? who can ever
defend himself from his malicious practices? Which do worthelie persecute me,
in that I am the cause that this poison in man's likeness is come with us to
infect the souls, courages, and the noble nature of the Grecians, animating
them unjustly against those, who are both just and righteous: Alas, it is a
true saying, that a good man is no longer in safety then he pleases a traitor:
the which saying may be verefied by me, who thinking that I had done well for
all the Grecian Nation, have provoked against my self the unjust vengeance of
this mischievous man, who indeuoureth to work my shameful overthrow. Forbear
a while, O you Grecians, the unjust rage which you have conceived against me,
by the most venomous tongue of Ulysses, until that I make you know what
falsehood he uses against me, wherein he has not failed to employ all his
devilish subtlety: First I would have you to consider how in the beginning of
his oration, he seeks to ravish the minds of the hearers unto a certain
admiration, with a desire speedily to understand that which he would say; then
seeing their souls so doubtful, he stirs them up unto anger and fear
persuading them that they are all in great danger; afterward by a fained
hypocrisy, he would make them believe that he is familiar with the gods,
foreseeing all future mischiefs; but in effect he foreseeth none at all, but
those which himself intends to do (as he has caused this gold to be hidden
where it was found) and lastly he brings an example saying: that in such a
case he would not spare his own son, by that means indeuouring to persuade
the^ to stone me; having once imprinted it in your hearts, he faineth himself
desirous to save me, knowing very well that all his counterfeit speeches tend
to no other end but only to animate you against me, nevertheless fearing
least he had moved you unto some pity, he first sets down the
chastisement before he names me, and then he somewhat doubtfullie affirms
his saying to be true, urging me to confess that which never was: Whereof I
take to witness both the celestial, and infernal gods, just reuengers of
committed treasons, imploring their most just vengeance against him that did
never before this present hour know that any gold sent from the Trojans was
in our camp. But you may believe (O you Grecians) that Ulysses to be reue^ged
of me for discovering his deceit, when he fained himself mad because he would
not come unto the wars, that he I say (as himself affirms) having been
oftentimes within the city of Troy, where he has his intelligences, did
bring this gold from thence, and whilst I was in the battle he did bury the
same under my pauillion; the which as it is not the first treason which he has
plotted, so will it not be the last that he intends to perform, if you do
but suffer him therein, for sure he is one of those, who in doing evil do
imagine their evil deeds will never be espied, because he has so great a
confidence in his foxlike sleights, that there is no wickedness which he dare
not attempt: and the gods grant O Grecians, that he do not one day commit the
same treason which he falselie obiecteth against me. To conclude, I pray you
worthy Grecians thorowlie to consider all my passed actions, and to believe
that I had rather endure the cruellest death that might be imagined, then I
should ever have had the thought to commit any Treason. Be you then assured,
that what good or hurt soever you shall do unto me, it shall be done unto such
a one as never thought upon any thing but what was for the common good of our
country, the which I have evermore preferred before mine own commodity.

Notwithstanding the denial of Palamedes, he was stoned.

Declamation. 97.
Of the Roman Dictator, who would have put the master of the horsemen to
death, because he fought against his commandment.

LVcius Papirius Cursor, being created the two and fortith Dictator in Rome, to
make war against the Samnites, Quintus Fabius Rutilianus was made Master of
the horse, being a young and valiant gentleman. It chanced after a certain
battle, and the taking of some cities, that the Dictator went to Rome to
mark the disposition of the air, thereby to know what luck they should have,
leaving the said Master of the horse in the camp, with express commandment
that he should not attempt any thing until his return; But he being departed,
there was so fair an occasion offered, as Fabius gave the battle, and won it
wholly, afterward having caused all the arms of the dead enemies to be burned,
he wrote unto the Senate of his victory, neglecting the Dictator; who being
returned unto the camp, he delivered him into the hands of the Lictor, to be
beaten with rods, and to strike off his head, but as his apparel was pulling
off he escaped, hiding him amongst the soldiers, and afterward by night
fled unto Rome, whether the Dictator followed him, and having caused him to be
brought before his judgment seat, he would have condemned him again, but the
father of Fabius accompanying him in mourning weeds, and having recommended him
unto the people, took upon him the defense of his son, saying.

HOw great the misery of man is, may appear by the lineage of the Fabij, who
have been evermore troubled for the zeal which they had unto the Commonwealth.
First, Quintus Fabius having done many worthy acts, as well at home with his
Counsel, as abroad in the wars, by his courage, died in fighting against the
Tuscanes, where all the Fabians were noted to be famous, and especially Marcus
Fabius, who caused the Roman soldiers to swear not to give over fighting
unless they were conquerors, and being seconded by Ceson, Fabius making head
against his enemy, brought the Romans back again, who contrary to their
oath were ready to turn their backs, which in the end was the cause of the
victory: and because all that lineage was careful to cherish, and heal the
wounded soldiers, they were esteemed and suspected to be Plebeians. I cease
to report what they did both before and after: but I will only tell how they
took upon them an enterprise that they alone would defend Rome from the
insolency of the Veians, and there issued forth together three hundred and six
kinsmen, who died all in the said defense, and there remained no more of all
the Fabians alive but my father, that was in Rome, who alas has since that
time replenished the world, and restored unto the Commonwealth, this no less
miserable then noble lineage. How much better had it ben for him to have died
with the rest, if we must always for our good service be subject to the
reproaches of some, or to the persecution of other, or rather since we are no
less troubled in resisting the malice of the Citizens then we are in
fighting against our enemies; behold my son here who having vanquished the
enemy, is adjudged to die by the Dictator: and wherefore? Because he has
done that which the Commonwealth not only desired, but also that which it most
stood in need of: He is the conqueror, and now alas it is thought expedient
that a shameful and violent death should be a reward of his conquest, at the
will and pleasure of one only man. The Patricians and people rejoice at his
victory, enjoying the benefit thereof, the souldior is partaker of the same,
and the Dictator alone would have him to die, as if the Commonwealths good were
his hurt, or as if a Patricians renoume were his reproach, or as if the glory of
the master of the horse did not increase the worthiness of the Dictator*
Surely, if the Romans take this course (which the gods forbid) they need no
other enemies but themselves. Marcus Furius Camillus, that great protector of
Rome, did not only succor Lucius Fuluius (who fought against his intention)
but also made him partaker of his victory, and shortly after did choose him
for his companion in the wars of Tuscula, such was the magnanimity of this
great Roman, redeemer of his country, to excuse the faults which are committed
by youth: for he did very well know, that there was no less courage in him to
pardon a great offense, then to combat and overcome a great army of enemies.
Do you then noble Dictator imitate that most worthy man, Despise not the
whole Senate that requesteth you, refuse not the Patricians, the Tribuns, and
the people also, that entreat you, nor yet me a miserable old man and father to
this poor young man, who yet may accomplish many worthy and good services
for his country, if together with his life, you cut not off the course of his
virtuous acts; consent the^ unto some of our requests, or else grant unto us
all his life that is worthy to live, and as you yourselfe have had him in
very great estimation, making him General of the horse, so now give him his
life, and bind us all unto you for the same* If not, you will constrain me to
appeal unto the Tribuns, and to have recourse unto the people of Rome, who may
do more then your Dictatorship. I will see if you will give place unto such an
appeal, as did the Roman King Tullius Hostilius? or since you cannot triumph
over the enemies, whether you will violently triumph over the death of the
conqueror? I have been Dictator as well as you, but yet did I never offend any
private soldier, or other inferior Plebeyan; for I know how that dignity or
office is given to preserve the Romans, and not to destroy or hurt any of
them; how much less then a captain of good desert in the Commonwealth? A man
may hereby see what difference there is betwixt the modesty of our ancestors,
and the pride of this presentage, for besides that deed of Furius Camillus, it
is known that Quintus Cincinatus used no cruelty against Lucius Minutius, for
freeing himself from that place where by his rashness he was besieged, but
left him Legate in the camp, even then when he went to Rome. Yea, the people
who have all authority do never condemn any captain unto death, as it
appears by Virginius and Sergius, and diverse others, who having lost
battles, camps, and soldiers, have been thereof acquitted, or at the most but
fined in a certain sum of money, where as now one that ought as a conqueror
to triumph, is threatened by the Dictator with rods and the axe: what would he
then do if he had lost the battle? Would he not trow you condemn all the
Fabians, and all the soldiers which were escaped from the battle? Now when
this conqueror ought to be a spectacle of happiness unto all the city, being
accompanied with his friends to render thanks unto the gods for his victory,
they stand here round about him to bewail his misery, and to beg mercy of
the Dictator to save his life. O gods will you thus forsake him, who by your
favor has vanquished the enemies of your temples? And you Patricians can you
leave him that is by birth such as you are? And you soldiers, will you abandon
him that has led you unto to all martial glory? And you people can you
condemn him that is yet in danger of his life, having already adventured the
same for the safety of your houses, and the sepulchers of your ancestors? For
the defense of you, your wines, children, and whatsoever else is most dear and
acceptable unto you? Will you suffer the enemies to have such a pleasure done
them, O you soldiers, as that your captain, and he under whom you have
conquered, should be punished even by his countrymen, as the most pernicious
Traitor that ever was in the world? O immortal gods, let me die, before so
many miseries do happen.

The answer of Papirius.
Believe me Fabius I do greatly pity thy sons youth, and more thy age: yet
all that can only move me to compassion, but not to pardon a fault so unworthy
to be forgiven; the which I would most willingly do, if the injury had been
offered unto me, but being don unto the gods, to the Commonwealth, to the
Magistrate, and to martial discipline, what can I do less (seeing O you
Romans you have thought me worthy of the highest authority) then execute
condign punishment therefore? Will you that for one man's sake alone, both the
wars and the Magistrate should lose, the one his authority, and the other his
discipline? Were it not better that one man alone should die, then all the rest
above said should decay* As the Fabians have in times past done many worthy
facts, so also are they not free from a number of faults; for I doubt whether
it was virtue or rashness in them, to undertake alone such an enterprise against
the Veians, thereby depriving the Commonwealth at one instant of so many men
of that worth as you esteem them: it cannot be denied but their ouerweening to
increase their own reputation, did greatly deminish the Commonwealth and much
advantage the enemy thereof. But why do you not as well speak of the three
Fabians that were sent Ambassadors unto the Gauls to Clusa? Was not their
rashness the cause of the ruin of Rome? As the like might have happened by
this man here, had he not ben more fortunate then well advised. And thus much
further I will say, that by how much they which offend are of great birth and
noble parentage, by so much are they more worthy of punishment, for their
greatness makes the fault a long time after more famous, and being left
unpunished, they incite a number of others to do the like: Do you not think
that Marcus Manlius would else have forgiven the youthful folly and valiant
towardness of his son? whom he would rather put to death then it should be
said that by him were lost the ancient military discipline. In like sort
Brutus the author of the Roman freedom, preferred the same before his
childrens lives, who were executed by justice. Do you imagine Fabius, that
they loned not their children so well as you? Surely they did: but it seems
that you do less affect the Commonwealth then they: for here you care not to
see the Empire of the Roman people wronged, which surely is invincible, so
long as it shall follow the ancient customs, observe military discipline, and
maintain the authority of the Dictator, a most high office, and the only and
last refuge, when all other remedies fail. As for me I cannot make this
authority perpetual, yet I will beware that by me it be not contaminated, as
also I desire that the sovereignty of the Tribuns (being of it self
inviolable) would not endeavor by their intercessions, to violate the Roman
Empire. I do likewise entreat the people that they would not in me suffer the
power of the Dictator to decay; to the end that hereafter they do not too late
repent when they shall know that by their fault the soldier will no more obey
the Centurion, nor the Centurion the martial Tribune, nor the Tribune the
Legate, nor the Legate the Consul nor the Master of the horse the Dictator, and
that no body will show any duty at all either to men, or to the gods. All
the rest as Lucius Fuluius, and Lucius Minutius, were the companions of their
Colleagues, wherefore it is not said in vain, that he which has a companion,
has a master, they then fought not against the commandment, but against the
will of their Colleagues, as being equal with them in authority. But who can
deny that I had not the power, and that I did not command him not to fight
during my absence. The young Torquatus was judged to die by his father only
for hazarding his own person, and you would excuse Fabius who by his rashness
did endanger all the camp, yea, the whole Commonwealth; for the more you prise
his victory, the more is the danger apparent whereunto he brought the
Commonwealth. If such faults may be borne withal, who will not henceforth
stick to run from his Ensign? Who will have care to come when he is
commanded? Wherefore shall not the soldier fight against his captains will,
when the master of the horse has not only foughte^ contrary to the
commandment of the Dictator, but also in contempt of his authority has
burned the enemies, and did not once advertise him of any thing thereof after
the deed? But has endeavored to animate the soldiers to defend him against
the Dictator, and afterward did by force escape from the Lictor, and would not
obey any summons, but fled unto Rome, stirring up the People, Tribunes, and
Patricians to favor him. I know not what else to say, saving that (manifest
tyranny excepted) there could not a more heinous crime have been committed. So
that to conclude, I will say, that you may by force save him from death, but as
for me, I declare and protest that I neither will nor may acquit him.

Know that at these words, all the people began to entreat the Dictator for his
life, wherefore without pardoning the fault, he frankly gave him unto the
people.

Declamation. 98.
Of the disherited son, who claimed to have his inheritance again of the
heirs of him, unto whom his father had given them.

A Certain man disherited his son upon a just cause, and gave his lands unto
another man, who lying dead sick, said that he would have the inheritance which
was given him to return to the disherited son. Whereupon some few days after he
died before the notarie (which he had sent for) was come, so as although there
was nothing left in writing, yet did not there want witnesses to testify for
the said son, who demanded his inheritance, saying:

WHo is he so ignorant which will believe that my father would ever have
dishe^rited me in good earnest, but that he rather made this deceassed man to
promise that he should restore my land unto me after a certain time; for the
kindness of fathers does always exceed the malice of the children, because that
natural love is more ready to descend then to ascend, as well for the
instabilitie of youth as for the constancy that remains in age, who knows
and does well remember that he has done amiss in his youth: and like as God
naturally loves man far more then man loves him (the which is known by
his divine bounty toward us, and our ingratitude toward him) so the father
may well be angry with his son, but what show soever he makes thereof, yet can
he not hate him, for it should be contrary to the law of nature: who will then
imagine that my father (being by nature mild and courteous toward all men)
could ever have been so cruel against his own son? All these reasons
abouesaid are most manifest, but were it so that my father had absolutely given
away his possessions, and mine inheritance unto this dead man, yet did he
before his death restore the same again unto me, being either in conscience or
kindness moved thereunto: but had he not more reason and liberty to give it
to me, the^ my father had to take it from me? You say that nothing appears in
writing, for what end should writings serve without witnesses? Do we not know
that the paper endures all things, and the parchment much more? wherefore the
word of the testator and the authority of the witnesses is sufficient. What if
the Notarie after he had made the Will were dead, must we not then have had our
recourse unto witnesses? Wherefore seeing the notary did not come time enough
(it may be because some of you stayed him) shall not the witness of such
persons as are worthy to be believed, serve the turn, who did hear the
deceassed man say that he would have the said land to return unto me, and for
that effect did he send for the Notarie. It is at the end of the life, that a
man does chiefly seek to discharge his conscience, and then or else never is
the truth spoken: wherefore it is most evident that this inheritance does
infalliblie appertain unto me: and therefore I do demand to have the same by
friendship, and if so it may not be, then must I request it by Justice.

The Answer.
YOur father is not the first that has disherited his son, it may be because
he was more honest then you, and there is no likelihood and less certainty
that he has caused this man to restore unto you the inheritance, but if it
be so as you say, then prove it, for there is no reason to credit your words
being such an one as you have compelled your father to do that which you
cannot believe; yet to prove that this is so, the effect makes mention. We
believe that your fathers clemency was great, which (it may be) was the
chiefest cause why he desired to deprive you of all means to become any more
vicious, for some such as you are do live better when they are poor, then
when they are rich, wherefore you father in this was desirous to imitate our
God, who does all things for the best, although our nature is so corrupt as we
cannot comprehend the same. Likewise we must consider, that the father is not
easily brought to hate his son, but when he is enforced thereunto, then is
he more hard to be entreated or reconciled then a stranger, and the more slow
men are to become angry, the more great and terrible is their wrath when it
happ^eth; even so has it been with your father, whom you affirm to be
naturally mild and courteous: think then what violence he did unto himself,
before he had taken this irreuocable resolution against you. So that your
reasons seem very frivolous, and chiefly when you say that this deceassed
man (being provoked by the foresaid reasons, or by his own conscience) has
restored unto you those lands and goods which your father gave unto him: his
conscience could not be burdened, seeing that nothing can be more truly
gotten then that which comes by gift: likewise, therein he should but alter
the meaning of your father and his benefactor, for it is very likely that he
did give those goods unto him and his heirs, why then should he seek to
defraud them to give it unto such a one who by his own father was judged
unworthy thereof? His ingratitude thereby would be too manifest: but had he
therein ben so advised, yet has not the effect thereof insued (whether it were
Gods doing or his own meaning that so it should not be.) For men in the
anguish of their sickness do oftentimes speak many things which they would
not in any sort perform. The witnesses may bear testimony of his words, but
not of his Will, the which also ought to be of no force, since the patient
lived but a few days after* for a true and lawful testament ought to be made
when a man is of good disposition and memory as well in body as in mind*
Lastly, since nothing is written, there needs no witnesses, but he that
could have been a witness of that which he would have declared if the
Notarie had been there present, should perchance have heard him tell the reasons
why your father gave him those goods, as also unto whom he meant to leave the^,
but having said neither one thing nor another, they are ours as rightful
heirs: and therefore we will defend them by all possible and lawful means.

Declamation. 99.
Of two Citizens that were tortured, the one for demanding a debt, the other
for denying the same.

THe law commands, that all perjured persons should be put to death.
Whereupon it happened that one Citizen summoned another, saying that he ought
him a certain sum of money, the which he said he had lent him upon his own
word, and thereupon he took a solemn oath before the justice that his saying
was true: the other denied that he ever received any money of him, and did
likewise swear that he ought him nothing, so that necessarly one of the twain
must be forsworn, and so consequently guilty and worthy of death. Whereupon
the defendant as being most suspected, is put unto the rack: but he still
affirmed that he ought nothing. The plaintiff was afterward likewise racked,
who did also still aduouch that he did owe it him. Nevertheless, after they
had both twain ben tortured three several times, they were put both together
in prison, where they agreed no more then they did before, but each of them
particularly made a request, The first said that he was content to acquit the
debt justly due, that he might be delivered; the other said that he wat content
to pay that which he never ought, to com forth of prison; but the lustice would
have sent them back unto the rack, until the truth were known. From the
which sentence they both appealed, saying:

THere ought to be some difference between Justice and cruelty, and yet (O
you Judges) you make no difference at all, for you use the innocent as badlie
as the offender; and which is far more worse, you take away the credit that
ought to be amongst Citizens, and the use of such intercourse as they are to
have one with another, for there had been some other means to have executed
Justice, without bringing us into such extreme danger, where it may be the
innocent shall perish: each of us do say that we are innocent, nevertheless,
though one must needs be guilty, yet can we not both be faulty: What then if
the innocent, as being the weakest should yield, and confess the fault which
he never committed, choosing for the least evil rather to die once wrongfullie,
then to be any more tortured, and afterward to live either a maimed cripple,
or to pine away with pain, and so it may chance that the guiltles shall suffer
for the guilty, losing both his life, goods, and reputation, and on the
contrary, the malefactor shall have both his life and credit saved, and live in
good account to the great detriment of the Commonwealth; for being accustomed
unto torments, who shall let him to swear that any man is indebted unto him, or
that he is not indebted at al, when no man dare once offer to prove it upon
him, so that there shall be no villainy which he dare not commit. If you say
that he shall never have any great credit, but that he shall be still suspected,
as well amongst the Citizens as with the Judges, you may say also that the
innocent though he remain the conqueror, yet shall he be likewise suspected,
and the loss of his reputation shall be the reward for his maintaining the
same with such exceeding torments. Wherefore (saving the reverence we owe unto
your lordships) we suppose that it had been better not to have proceeded unto
these extremities, but before you had caused either of us to swear
particularly, you should have demanded whether any of us would have been
content to stand unto the word or oath of his companion, showing in general
what danger the offender did bring both his body and soul into. Likewise, both
the one and the other might have been examined touching the circumstances of
the matter, to see which of the^ would come nearest unto the truth, and also
you might have been thoroughly informed what the life and reputation of either of
them had been, that thereby you might have been able to make some sound
conjecture of the truth. But first of all the defendants oath ought to have been
taken, who having sworn that he ought nothing, the plaintiff might have been
adjudged to prove his debt, or else to lose the same, but making us both to
swear without knowing either the one or the other, the offender has taken his
oath the more boldly, thinking by forswearing himself to be acquitted thereof,
yet he has thereby brought both himself and the innocent into trouble and
pain. But it seems that this matter has been expressly handeled for this
intent, which cannot be termed justice, but cruelty, for as much cruelty is
it to torment an innocent, as it is justice to punish an offe^der, and it were
better to leave a wicked man unpunished, then to torture such a one as has not
deserved it: notwithstanding, we see that you had rather have the good man
tormented* then the malefactor should escape untouched, which should be yet
somewhat tolerable, if (as I have before said) it were not likely that
(proceeding in such sort as you do) the innocent should suffer for the
offender, although it were far more reasonable to pardon one bad man, then to
put a good man in danger: for Justice if it must needs be constrained to yield,
it ought always to be rather unto clemency then cruelty. Let then (you
worthy judges) the one be pardoned, for the others sake, because the offender
has already endured sufficiently for the expiation of his offense, and the
innocent has suffered too much for being no better advised before he brought
himself into such danger: and let that money which is now in strife be given
to the poor, seeing that the one offers to pay it, and the other to forgive
it. In so doing, you shall do more justly, then in continuing that course
which was unhappily begun.

The Answer.
IT is said that Charlemaine shifting the Saxons into Flanders, and the
Flemmings into Saxony, made of one devil twain, so you would persuade us to
do the like, by redoubling a scandale that has happened in the Commonwealth
you do feel it, and in a manner your selves have confessed it, but because
you have both twain no desire to be tortured any more, you will not confess
the whole. Did not you your selves say, that if the offender do escape, he
will be worse then a plague in the Commonwealth, and yet you do openly purpose
to procure his deliverance, for one of you twain must needs be the man, but
why do you not in like sort say, that if you be both delivered, it be hooueth
all men to take heed both of the one and the other, seeing that it cannot be
certainly known who is the lewdest or the belt; our intention is to purge the
Commonwealth by cutting off a wicked wretch, and you endeavor that we should
leave twain therein, of whom a man cannot know which is the best: who then may
not say that the Commonwealth is corrupted? There is no examining here either
of folly or ignorance, but of capital crime, some do think the one to be the
offender, and some do judge the other, so that although there be but one
malefactor, yet it seems that there is twain, which is very unseemly: were
it not then better if the worst should happen, that two should suffer, then to
see the whole city a long time scandalized? Let him then which has the best
right determine to maintain the same until he has vanquished the other, or
else until he has yielded the last gasp; and if you remain both constant unto
the death, or at the least the good be constant, and the bad obstinate, you
shall be examples of fortitude, and your death shall witness unto strangers how
much our nation does rather desire to endure any other mischief the^ to be
dishonored; but if you should both remain alive you should have no honor at
all, and we less credit to suffer two such amongst us, of whom it is
impossible to know whether is the honest or dishonest man. It were as good for
you to confess that you are both bad, as not to perceuer in the trial who
shall be the best. The agreement which you would now make, you should have
thought upon before the Commonwealth had been scandalized by your oaths, and
then you should have given those good counsels, which now are as far out of
season as they are in vain, for you are not to prescribe what course we are to
use with you, no more then we are bound to tell you wherefore we have caused
you to swear severally, but we may tell you (and that truly) how he that had
yielded unto the oath of the other might very well have escaped the extremity
of the crime, but yet the reputation of both would have been always doubtful,
so that it were much better to know the truth if it be possible: if not, it may
be said at the least, that the fault is not in us. And this is the difference
that we make between justice and cruelty, That the offender being known, he
may be punished, and the innocent honored. You say that the one may chance to
suffer for the other, you know the remedy, we cannot judge you by your own
mouths: it is impossible to pardon the one for the respect of the other,
without great offense to the Commonwealth, seeing that you both still remain
always suspected, and your lineage thereby mightily wronged. Since then you
have showed your selves more the^ men in the beginning, do not show your
selves less then women in the end. We counsel you so to do for the good of
the country, and for your own credit. Nevertheless, it is in the choice of the
soueraign judges to pardon your offense, but not to restore your former
reputation: for so long as the truth shall be doubtful, you shall be both
twain suspected, yea and esteemed unworthy to live amongst honest men.

Declamation. 100.
Of the controversy betwixt Titus Quintus the Roman Consul, and Nabis tyrant
of Sparta.

TItus Quintus making wars against Philip King of Macedon to drive him forth
of Greece, and in the name of the Romans to set Greece at liberty; not being
able to make a league with Nabis Tyrant of Sparta, received nevertheless
succors from him, and made a truce between the said tyrant and those of
Achaia. Afterward, haning overcome the said Philip, Quintus made wars upon
Nabis to cause him to restore the usurped cities of Greece, over which he
tyrannised: whereupon Nabis being come to a parle with Quintus, he said thus:

IF I could imagine with my self (O Titus Quintus) and the rest of you here
present upon what reason you have protested or made wars upon me, I had
quietly staid to have seen what end my fortune should have had* but now I
cannot refrain my desire (if I should perish) to understand first the reason
why I should come to this mischief: and surely, if you were such as by same
the Carthaginians are, so as amongst you the faith of friendship were of no
certainty or stabilitie, I should not greatly wonder although you made no
great account of that which you do unto me. But now that I behold you, I see
that you are Romans, such I say, as were wont religiously to maintain the
observation of divine things, and the faith of humane confederacy: and when I
look upon my self, I do verily believe that I am the same man, that have
been in ancient friendship and league with you as well as the rest of the
Lacedaemonians; and it is but a small time since, that for the wars of Philip,
yea and in my name the same has been particularly renewed. But it may be I am
he that has broken the same league, because I hold the city of Argos; How
shall I then be able to defend my fact? Surely either by the same deed, or else
by the times. The deed offered me two means to defend my self, because I had
the said city, being called thereunto by the Citizens and by their own
surrender: wherefore I received it, and did (...) have had one whiles with the
Carthaginians, another while with the Gauls, and continually either with the
one or the other have greatly troubled us, as thou have likewise done in this
war of Macedon: For very unseemly were it for us (who have undertaken arms
for the liberty of Greece) to confederate our selves with a tyrant: and with
what tyrant? Surely with such a one as is the most cruel and most inhuman
monster toward his own subjects that ever was. It behooued us in seeking to
free all Greece, to set Lacedemon also into her ancient freedom (although thou
had never taken Argos by deceit) and to restore her unto her laws: whereof
at this present (like a good follower of Licurgus) thou have made mention. Now
will we take heed since Philip has withdrawn his Garrisons from Iassa and
Bargilles, least we should suffer to be trodden under thy feet, two famous
cities, Argos and Lacedemon, heretofore accounted the two lights and beauties
of Greece: which it we should leave in bondage, it would blemish our title of
freeing Greece. Thou will say that the Argians were partakers with Philip: we
will not burden thee that thou wast therefore angry with them, and tookest
upon thee such a quarrel for our sakes. We are sufficiently informed that of
that innovation there were but two or three persons at the most culpable, as
also how that they were the only men that received thee and thy soldiers
into their castle, wherein surely nothing at all was done by common Counsel.
We know how the Thessalians, Phocians, and Locrenses, did by common consent
take Philip his part, nevertheless we did leave them free, having set all the
rest of Greece at liberty. What then do thou think we should do with the
Argiues, who are most innocent, as concerning their common Counsel? Thou
say that thou art condemned for delivering of captives and dividing of the
lands unto the poor (which surely are no small faults) but what is that, or
what are they to be compared to so many mischiefs committed every day one
after another by thee and thine? Let a free Counsel be assembled in Argos, or
Lacedemon, if thou take pleasure to hear the truth of the offenses of thy
most proud government. But now setting apart thy ancientest faults: how many
murders I pray thee has that son in law of thine Pythagoras committed of late
in Argos, and that as it were before mine own eyes? and how many slaughters
have thou thy self acted, I being even hard upon the confines of Lacedemon?
Moreover, those whom thou tookest whilst they were parlying, thou did
openly protest before all the Citizens that thou would keep them in
safety: Bring them therefore bound as they were, to the end that their
miserable parents may know them to be living, whom they have bewailed for dead:
but thou will say, let us grant that all these things be so, What have you
Romans to do therewith? Will thou say thus unto the Grecians friends? That
seek to free Greece? Who to do the same, have passed the seas? And have made
war both by land and by sea? Thou will say, Yet have I not offended you, nor
broken our league, neither violated the confederacy of the Roman Nation. How
often will thou have me to prove unto thy face that thou have violated the
same? I will not use many words, but briefly will I set down every thing:
Tell me then I pray thee how many ways friendship may be broken? Surely by
these two, that is to say. If thou use my friends like enemies, and
conioinest thy self with my foes: Whether of these two things have thou not
done? Seeing that first thou tookest Messena by force and arms, which was
joined unto us with the same conditions of peace as Lacedemon was, and received
into our friendship; and yet thou being our friend and Colleague, tookest a
city that was friend and united in league with us: and with Philip our
enemy, thou not only keptest company, but also by the sufferance of the
gods thou made aliance with him by the means of Philocles his Lieutenant,
and he making wars upon us in that sort, thou did both trouble the seas about
Malea with thy ships of war, and also tookest and slewest far more Roman
Citizens then ever Philip did: and unto the ships which brought victuals unto
our army, the river of Macedon was more safe then was the promontarie of
Malea. Cease therefore henceforth to brag of the observing of thy faith, and
the performing of thy friendship inviolable, and leave off all civil manner of
speech, speak plainly like a tyrant, and as an enemy ought to speak.

FINIS.

