JESUS PRAeFIGVRED OR A POEM OF THE HOLY NAME OF JESUS IN FIVE BOOKS

THE FIRST, AND SECOND BOOK.



Permissu Superiorum, 1623.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES PRINCE OF WALES, DVKE OF CORNEVVALL,
EARL OF CHESTER, etc.
Great CHARLES
I Do not think the Verse I write,
Worthy the honor of your Princely fight;
(And should you read no lines, but worth your view,
Men knew not what to dedicate to you)
But having nothing else to show my zeal,
With Widow, what I have, I freely deal: Marc. 12*
To give rich Donatiues great Princes use,
It Is also greatness badge not to refuse
Small presents; else how should mean persons show
That duty, which to Potentates they owe?
To you my PRINCE I consecrate my book,
Reward my Muse: with what? your gracious look.
Vouchsafe to read our Poem, wherein all
Is written without malice, without gall:
We are not bitter at the Present time,
Only we say Rebellion is a Crime.
And ancient sectaries our verse does strike,
Who so shall do your Highness needs must like.
And though we speak in rhyme, as Poets use,
Yet sacred verity attends our Muse.
Truth on our Poem waits: (an upright cause,
To set it fourth needs no lying clause:)
In all our building there is not a stone,
But we dare justify to be our own.
Certes now we have perfited our frame,
Casting reflections eye upon the same
We doubt much whether we have any vain
In Poetry, because we do not feign.
Vouchsafe then Mighty CHARLES my Book to view
Which is all Innocent, all smooth, all true.
Your Highness humble servant JOHN ABBOT.

A LA SERENISSIMA SEN^ORA DON^A MARIA DE AUSTRIA INFANT DE ESPAN^A PRINCESA DE
GALES.
SEN^ORA
Hemos edificado vna Yglesia, y en sufrontispicio pusimos el augustissimo
nombre de JESUS, saluador nuestro, que todos han de adorar: en el nombre de V.
A. se hizo esta fabrica, pues por los beneficios y el respeto de V. A. hemos
alcancado de nuestro Artaxerxes la permission de boluer a ver la cara patria,
paraque reparemos a Jerusalem, y restauremos los templos a V. A.

Nuestro grande Assuero ofrece a V. A. susceptro de oro, como el ramo de oliuo,
que es Esth. 5.
symbolo de la paz, paraque V. A. qual otra Hester hermosissma conuierta esta
benignidad en la salud de su pueblo, y assi buelua a florecer en Inglaterra la
fe de nuestros mayores, la religion antigua, que es lo que V. A. desea y
procura, paraque, segun esperamos, se buelua a recobrar por su dichoso
casamiento lo que perdimos por las ilicitas bodas.

Aun nos acordamos y gemimos por las miserias y trabajos que procedieron de
aquel desastrado matrimonio enter Henrique el octauo y Ana Bolena; pero por V.
A. se restauraran nuestras perdidas y en lugar de la tristeza y llanto entrara
la alegria con el gozo, paraque quede V. A. aun auentajada a las antiguas
Reynas, Theodolinda, Crotilda e Hingunde, a cuya piedad reconocieron los
mayores bienes con la fe las valerosissimas naciones de los Francos,
Longobardos, y Godos.

Dexemos a exemplos y cosas tan remotas quando tenemos a tantos en la Imperial
casa de Austria, en la real de Espan^a, en la de Bauiera; llenos estan los
libros, a cada passo se veen las memorias de las Isabelas, Marias, Margaritas.

Mucho deuen, Sen^ora, los Ingleses desterrados a la Mag.d de la Sen^ora Reyna
Don^a Margarita de Austria vuestra madre, porque fue mucha la piedad con que
ma^do assistirles.

A V. A. deura aun mucho mas todo el Reyno, y la nacio^ entera. Que ofreceremos
de nuestra part? como se declarara nuestro reconocimiento? poreste voto.
Hermosos sean tus passos en tu calcado, o hija del Principe, y contu agrado y
hermosura procedas y reins felizmente; Cant. 7. Ps. 44. Ruth. 4.
en nombre del Sen^or te bendezimos y le rogamos que te haga como a Rachel y
como a Lia, que edificaron la casa de Israel, paraque sea V. A. exemplo de
virtud en Ephrata, y tenga un nombre celebre en Bet lehem.

Assimismo dedico a nuestro Serenissimo Carlos, Principe y esperanca de la
Britannia, esta nuestra Yglesia, que con Moysen leuante en elmonte por el
exemplo y la traca que se Exodus 25.
me ensen^o.

Recibid, Sen^ora, este don, aunque pequen^o que ofrezco a V. A. con mis
humildes deseos, paraque se sirua de recibirme tambien en suproteccion, y enter
sus minimos criados.

Nuestro sen^or guarde a V. A. como yo deseo y ha menester la Christiandad.
Deste uento de S. Iuan Baptista de Anuers a 12. de Nouembre 1623.

THE PRAeFACE.
SOme will perchance object it is not fit
That verses should by such as I be writ:
I answer when the subject holy is
Who e're make Verses shall not do amiss,
That Volume which JOBS patience does rehearse,
For no small quantity does speak in verse.
Of other Scriptures is not a great part
Composed according to Poeticke Art?
And if we to the after times descend,
The sacred Catologue shall never end.
How many ancient Fathers Hymns have writ,
In one combining piety and wit
They err who think a Poet has no strain,
Unless the subject of his Muse be vain.
For why has Pegasus his vvings to fly?
If he must still keep earth, never mount on hight.
Is it not pity such a noble Horse
In Boggs and durtie way should spend his force,
And managed by loose Venus vvanton Son
In paths of obsceane love, his whole course run?
Recall your selves brave wits: such ways to pass,
Better becomes an Apuleian Ass.
And though the Iades you ride on, do not tire
Yet do they want the true Poetike fire
Fetched from that Mount where Virgins on a Hill
Write lofty Odes with a Parthenian quill.
There, there take horse: Nor are you straightened when
You make fair virtue object of your Pen.
God, virtue, sins hate are a spacious field,
And vvell-tild can abundant matter yield.
Write with a modest Pen such holy lays,
That Phoebus may with ouerlasting baies
Your tempells Crown: else know that chaster times,
Shall sacrifice to Vulcan your loose rimes
And thou my Pegasus whom I shall use
As Palfrie in this progress of my Muse,
Whilst of great JESUS name thy Lady sings,
Mount up aloft use thy best pair of vvings,
When thou art forced to trampel here benea'th,
Be it a moment only to take breath,
And in the way play not the Jade and tire,
But as thy journey, so increase thy fire,
A POEM, OF THE HOLY NAME OF JESUS. The first Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
We speak what Ground, VValls, Painters work
Roof, Pillars, Lamp, has JESUS Kirk.
GIVE me a Quill pulled from that Eagles vving, Ezech. 1. 10. 13. Ion. 1.

Who soaring in the bosom of his King,
Saw those deep secrets, which his Books descrie,
And we admire, but cannot look so high.
Oh give me such a Quill! and with the same
I Will write what vvorth is in that glorious name,
Which with the new year given the vvounded Boy, Luc. 2.

Did bless the follovving times, with hopeful joye
Of a release from Sin, from Death, from Hell.
(So many blessings in one JESUS dvvell.)
Know Muse this Royal name is Oil shed,
And over the universal world outspred. Cant. 1.

Be Oil too, learn in a'sea to svvimme
Above thy self; yea others, streatch each limme
With courage out: this glorious titles praise,
Like Oil above all other titles raise,
Thy subject is a Sea: behold thy self
In the vast Maine, no shallovv fear, no shelfe.
He who made all, and means now all to save
To show his meaning, will this JESUS have Lu. 2.

For his own name, and thinks enough is done,
To make the world reflect some nevver Sun
VVarming our hemisphere, and giving light,
Shall drive away with graces beams black night.
Who ever had this name, and was not high?
What JESUS ever was, and did not fly
Above the common pitche of humane race?
As if the name did bring a special grace:
If we see JESUS forthwith we shall see
Captiued Man from servitude set free:
Victorious Tribes tryumphing over foes, Esd. 2. Ios. 3.

With equal lots, divide the lands of those
Whom they have Conque'rd: hitherto has stood
Adjoining to this name a common good.
In fairest offspring happy ancient Nun,
Bring forth thy valiant and thrice worthy Son, Ios. 1.

(Our JESUS figure, honored with his name,
For IOSVAH and JESUS are the same.)
Whose holy anger made Apollo stay,
And bait his fiery horses in the way; Ios. 10.

Who but a JESUS such an act has done?
Who but a JESUS could command the Sun?
Who but our JESUS, only has the grace?
To make the Sun of Justice, keep his place.
That we not overtaken by dark night,
Discern may, when, and where, our foes to smite?
Who can the promised land out-deale to his?
But JESUS to whom Earth and Heaven is
By Father given; who but JESUS shall
By stratagem surprise, and make to fall Mat. 28.

Proud Haie, of present world the figure right?
Which must be vanquished, not by force, but flight:
JESUS shall teach his Army Haie to sack, Ios. 8.

By a strange stratagem of running back.
When they lie hid within a Cloister wall,
Then Haie by holy fire and svvord shall fall.
Shall I relate how Jericho falls down,
VVhilest holy Israel about the town Ios. 6.

Goes in Procession: JESUS walks this round,
And bids the Priests their brazen trumpets sound.
I should dilate my self upon this feate,
And largely explicate that power great,
Which JESUS gives to Priests absoluing words Mat. 18.

A greater force, then have spears, lances, swords.
They can and do, with their sole voices sound, Io. 21.

Cast battelments of Jericho to ground.
What are these walls, these battlements down cast,
By sacred power of Priests forgiving blast?
The walls are sin, the bulvvarkes sin, sins guilt,
Houses, whereof proud Hiericho is built.
But houses, bulvvarkes, walls, yea the whole town,
As Priests do blovv their trumpets, are cast down.
I should describe, cake how the seuen-fold foe,
By JESUS conqu'red, does in myst'rie show,
Our deadly enemies: in number seau'n,
Which must be conquered, before we enter heaven:
Those kept the Israelites from promised land,
In our pretenses these against us stand.
What arts, what stratagems does JESUS use?
As he the warlike Chananites subdues?
To fight against vice rooted in the heart,
A special science is, a special art:
Which JESUS does, communicate to his,
By whom the promised land obtained is.
Then to describe the army of our foe,
In what disord'red order he does go.
How against him great JESUS soldiers fight.
Is subject for a holy Muse to write,
But we must leave it to some happy wit,
(Ours is not such) or to some time more fit:
And speak of JESUS who the People lead, Agg. 1. Zach. (...). Esdr. 3.

When they from Babylon did homevvards tread.
And freeing them from proud Assyrias thrall,
Repaired the Temple, and built Sions Wall:
For Records count, that the infernal King,
His Troops against Jerusalem did bring.
And with the Cannon shot of deadly sin 2. Paral. 36. 4. Reg 25

Making a Breach, the City entered in.
How many of the Tovvnesmen left he dead?
The rest with him to Babylon he lead:
Where vvretched souls, forgetting native house,
Forgetting Sions God, they do carouse
In the Whores Cup, and drunk with Babell wine, Apoc. 1.

To Babels Idols, honors give divine.
The lusts of flesh, some do adore; some Gold (...). I^ 2.

With the Kings Picture fac'de, for their God hold.
Others do build their Churches in the air, The three enemies of the soul.
1. Io. 2.

Where they place honors Idol, all their care
Is to ascend, and with a bended knee
Pray the false God propitious to be;
Each Man, as once in Salmanazars days, 4. Reg. 17.

A proper Idol has, and to it prays.
Our JESUS seeing this with holy zeal
Of Fathers glory, will procure the weal
Of these blind vvretches: he will endure no more
With Gods dishonor they such Gods adore.
And first with cunning hand of heavenly might
He does restore the blind unto their sight,
And makes them see their Gods wear made of stone,
VVood, and like trump'rie, in them life had none
Enraged with themselves their wrath they vvreake
Upon the Idols, and their Puppets break
In pieces: this being done, they do conspire
To burn the Relics with an Holy fire
Of divine Love. Then does our JESUS show
The way to Sion, and before them go:
Where being come, and pitying to see
How the fair City vvalls destroyed be.
The houses ruined, and the Church cast down,
Nothing but desolation in the Town:
He himself vesteth with apparel base,
And clothed so, beginns to work apase,
Exhorting his to do in every thing,
As they see him to do, their Prince, their King;
I cannot tell what an effectual force
To move men's hearts is in the virtuous course
Of Magistrates: each one thinks it a grace
To work with JESUS, with him to be base
Clothed as their leader is, they fall to work,
And help their JESUS to build up his Kirk.
My Pegasus is vvearie of his flight,
Wherefore my Muse, for some short space alite, A description of the Catholic
Church, beginning with the foundation thereof. Which is Faith. Mat. 16.

And whilst the Jade does rest his lazy bones,
Let us contemplate of what VVood, what Stones,
What form, what matter the new Church is built,
What Moses work it has, how it is guilt:
And first if we behold with curious Eye
What the foundation is, we shall descrie
The same to be a mighty Rock of Stone
So great, and of such weight that God alone
Could bring it thither: no created might
Can move it thence: Gates of eternal might
Can do it no harm, no force can make it shrink,
But who falls on this Rock shall split and sink,
Asking a workman of the name, he says,
This Rock icleped is Saint PETER'S FAITH.
On this foundation is built up a Wall,
Inuironing the Church, which we will call The walls Hope.

Firm Hope: So strongly made on every side,
That it all injuries of Storms shall bide.
No blustering persecution can it shake,
No tempting spirit, no rough vvinde can make
This Wall to shrink; nay every adverse blast,
(Ovvonderful!) does make it stand more fast;
And though this Hope seem to be founded lovv
Upon the humble CROSS; yet you must know
The workmen still will eleuate the wall
Till it do aequall high IEHOVAS Hall.
Look up my Muse, if thou can look so high, The roof Charity.

And to the Temples cou'ring cast thy Eye
Which thou shall see made all of purest gold,
Adorn the work, and vvalls together hold.
This Roof is Charity, who is a lover Jacob. 5.

Others defects will guild, his own faults cover
Love is amongst all Mineralls the best,
The Ophir where it grows is a good breast.
Humility the Earth in which most lovv, 2. Parel. 9. Ierem. 10.

As mines are wont, this precious Gold does grow.
God has ordained this Metal should so deep,
Lie buried in the Earth, that he may keep
It safe from Thieves: Vainglory and self-love
Soon would it steal, lay it the ground above.
The Merchants also must in digging sweat,
Before they can so rich a treasure get.
But that which made my Muse astonished more, The Sacrament of Baptism, is the
door by which we enter into the Church. Io. 19. The effects of Baptism.

Was to behold a strange conceited Door:
This was forsooth an euer-running flood,
A flood say I? a mighty Sea of blood
Which when our JESUS in Caluaria did,
Did issue forth his with Lance perced side.
As we the waters of this Ocean view,
Behold a stranger vvonder does ensue:
A Black-more borne, where Phoebus too much vvarmes,
full of diseases, having in his arms
A leprous Infant, in this stream his limbs,
And the Child vvasheth, then he thorough svvimmes
When presently they both are cur'de both sound,
No spot, no Ulcer in their flesh is found.
Amazed we stand, when see an Indian Foul,
In blacker body, having a worse soul,
Does as the former through the River pass,
When he is made more white then Crystal glass.
Good God say I, are ELIZAeVS years
Again reuolu'd? Jordan again appears 4. Rog. 5.

In whose fair streams vvhilest NAMAAN does bath,
He cured is, new flesh, new body has:
Or comes our JESUS to the Pond again,
Where for the Sacrifice much Sheep was slain, 10. 5.

With waters motion virtue to bestow,
To make foul Lepers clean, lame Crepels go?
This Church has windows, prudence, wisdoms eye
Discretion, which our motions does descrie, The intellectual virtues, are the
windows of the church

Whether from God, good Angel, or our self,
They come, or from the world, and Hellish Elfe.
Discretion teaching when we ought to go,
Into the field, when to decline our foe.
For some sins must be overcome by fight,
Others must vanquished be by prudent flight. 1. Cor. 6.

So IOSVAH did think, flight the best way
To get the victory against proud Haie. Ios. 8.

Nor think it shame to run away from sin,
We know the Parthians fly, yet the field win.
Though CAeSAR did from ALEXANDRIA swim,
Yet none of Covvardise dares censure him.
Of Machabaeus it was the least grace,
Against so many troops to keep his place. 1. Math. 9.

Wise men do judge too hotspurlike that fire,
Which scorns or knovves not sometimes to retire.
Who vvisely saues himself may fight again,
What good can he do more, who once is slain.
In this blessed Church, never sad darkness came, Apoc. 21.

For in the midst does stand a Holy Lamb,
Who with his Rays giving a constant light, A description of the Lamp.

Chaseth away the horror of dark night.
He does illustrate all with beams of grace;
But chiefly, when as many in this place Mat. 18. The good of a general
counsel, and the reasos why it is assembled.

In JESUS holy name assembled join,
And all their strengths in Unity combine;
Called together for some urgent cause,
As general contempt of Holy Laws,
Orsome vile Beast departing from the rest,
Does seek the flock with Errors to inuest:
Some ravenous Bear, some Fox, some sensual Swine,
Does with his Tuskes under the Temple mine,
That so (but t's impossible) with wall
The entire Fabrique might together fall.
Such Arius was, Nestorius long since,
Iouinian, VVitcliffe, and the like, frem whence The sects of this pre sent
time are fragments of ancient Heresies.

The svvinish brood of this our present Age,
In their Sires vizardes play on the worlds stage,
Where they do act, the digging part so well
That alvvaies the last Scene does end in Hell.
Who does together this grave Senate call,
And sits as President above them all,
On whose descision questions do depend, Of the infallible authority of the
Bishop of Rome. Mat. 16.

In whose last sentence Controversies end,
Is the Lambs Viceroye, in the Roman Chair,
Lavvfull successor, and Saint Peter's heir.
To whom our JESUS has such povv'r given,
That what he here does, is confir'md in heu'n:
PETER rule thou for me great JESUS says,
Of Sions City I give thee the Keys:
(Fond Sectaries this common truth conceive,
Who Keys accept, authority receive,)
Alvvaies by him the Holy Ghost does stand,
And ever as he writes, directs his hand.
So that vvhate're in doubtful points he says,
Must be embraced as Article of Faith:
What e'are he does command is good, and ought
To be performed, what he forbids is naught:
How many Beasts, how many wicked men
Has he destroyed only with his Pen?
Therefore as heretofore when; Syrias King, 3. Reg. 22. 2. Parel. 18

His Army against Israel did bring,
He did command his Soldiars to fight
Against sole Achab, him alone to smite.
Let the mean sort, says Benadad alone,
Against the King of Israel each one,
Direct his force, if he be killed or yeald,
Ours is the day, we gotten have the field.
Sin, Atheism, Heresy, Infernal Ghoasts,
Proclaiming war against the God of Hoasts, The hate of heretics and
schismatikes to the sea of Rome. Mat. 16.

To ruinate that City, which his hand
Has built, and mauger gates of Hell shall stand,
Observing that their Troops a daily harm,
Receive by PETER'S heavenly guided arm,
Chiefly on him they do their fury vvreake,
At him they shoot, on him their Lances break.
Proud Herod, and the first begotten Son Act. 12.

Of Satan, Simon Magus thus have don:
Neroes and Dioclesians shall tell,
How odious Cephas is to feindes of Hell.
In battle raye, none against JESUS go,
But they proclaim themselves first PETER'S foe,
Knowing if struck with Errors darte he die,
CHRIST'S Army with his loss dismayed will fly.
Your malice is in vain Tartarean feindes,
JESUS with love his substitute defends;
Firme-faith the shield is, which repells all blows, Mat. 16.

Gods promise is the svvord which kills all foes:
He is th'approued precious corner stone, Ps. 117.

Which Jews and Gentiles does conjoyne in one. Romans 9. 1. Pet. 2.

Proud scandals rock, on which what ships shall hit,
They suffer shipvvrack, and in pieces split.
Fairest Bizantium, Eastern Monarkes seat, The schysme of the Grecian Church
from the Latins.

Glory of Britains Constantine the great,
Who first in Eagles place, against proud foe,
Our JESUS CROSS in Labarum durst shoe;
Let me shed tears, when I reuolue thy fate,
Why vveart thou not contented with thy state?
To sou'raingty why do thou so aspire?
Then God would have thee, why would thou be higher?
PETER, not thou must wear the triple Crown, Mat. 18.

Who do exalt themselves, shall tumble down.
The tribes beguiled by HIEROBOAMS art,
From IVDAS royal progeny do part; 3. Rog. 12.

And scorning to have DAVID'S Son their King;
Scepter and Crown to JEROBOAM bring:
And though it was express IEHOVA'S will,
That in no place but holy Sions hill. Io. 4.

They should observe their Neomenian Feasts,
And sacrifice their Hecatombes of beasts:
The tipick blood of Paschal Lamb be spilt,
In that sole Church which SOLOMON had built:
In Salems streats so many times each year, Luc. 2.

Dilated JACOBS offspring must appear.
And none but those who are of Leuis race,
Shall in the Temple have a Church-mans place; Numb. 18.

When Isreal's sons amongst themselves contend,
By AARONS verdict must the question end.
Desire of sou'raigntie, and Empires cause,
Makes Jeroboam break these holy laws,
He Will have high places, and invent a God,
Which has freed Israel from PHAROES rod; 3. Reg. 12.

BETHEL and DAN, shall have two Calves of gold,
And many Idols shall Bethauen hold: Ose. 4.

His Pursiuants such passengers shall stay,
Who toward Jerusalem do take their way:
For Tyrant thinks his Crown not to sit fast,
Should Ephraim and Judas friendship last, 4. Reg. ^2.

He makes unworthy vvights the incense burn,
To play the Priest any shall serve the turn,
Divided thus sin, upon sin they add,
And though afflictions often make them sad:
Yet no ELIAS, no Assyrian rod,
Can make the stiffe-neck'd tribes return to God:
Until at last great Salmanazar came, 4. Reg. 17

Whip of Gods fury, guerdon of their shame,
Who with vvars-svvord, the Infants blood does spill,
Defloures their Virgins, and their vvarriors kill:
And where his murdering fury does not range,
They death for greater misery do change:
Having the marks of slaves, gyues on their hands,
They are led captive unto foreign lands,
Wherein eternal servitude they spend
Their woeful days: in servitude they end
Their vvretched lives. But Judah shall be taught,
With short captivity, to mend his fault. 4 Reg. vlt.

Though Babels Monarcke lead to Memphis town.
Subjects and King, yet when his Son falls down,
From Empires top, the Persian Kings shall give, Dan 5. 1. Esd 1.

Iudaea leave, home to return and live
In Sions towns: but Ephraims wicked race
Shall never come back unto their dwelling place.
Who did refuse to honor DAVID'S throne,
Under Idolaters oppressed shall groan. Isai. 14 The Grecian, and Eastern
Church, fitly compared to Samaria, and the ten tribes revolted, from the house
of David: which carried into Captivity, never returned back, according to the
more received opinion of interpreters.

Think Grecian Dame, my verse of thee have spoke
Who from thy hautie neck has cast the yoke
Of divine Order, and in Northern air,
Exalted have with Lucifer thy Chair:
Thinking to mean a Patriarchall seat
Above thy merits granted; yet more great
Thou striu'st to be: and casting PETER down,
On thy ambitious head, dare wear his Crown, Psalm. 10.

Carried in empty Clouds of a proud heart,
Thou leau'st Christ's sheepfold, and from Church do part
JESUS our humble God, does from his throne,
With angry eyes behold two made of one;
He hates schism, and has this sentence fixed,
The proud shall drink a Cup with much vvoe mixed.
Think the incursions of the Sarzen King,
Wear gentle rods, thee back again to bring.
And know that as thy schism and sin did grow,
So likewise did increase thy plagues, thy vvoe. 2 Pet. 2. The Greek Church
often reconciled, and again relapsed in to schism

How often did thou thy heresies forsvveare?
How often did thou return to PETER'S Chair?
How often did thou again with the foul Hog
VVallovv in mire, how often with the Dog
Return to vomit? but Gods patient hand
Can hold no longer: h'eele no longer stand
Waiting repentance, lenity must cease,
When often wrongs admit no speech of peace.
Barbarians shall be scourges of thy sin,
Fierce Mahomet shall proud Bizantium vvin,
Thy Caesar murd'red in the streats shall die,
Where heaps of vngrau'de Citizens shall lie.
At a high price some vvretches buy their lives,
With goods loss, and dishonor in their vviues.
Thy Roman Eagles yealde to Turkish Moon,
In Churches rights of Mahomet are done.
In fine thou suff'rest whatsoever harms
Use to attend a cruel conq'rours Arms,
And who aloft with Lucifer would dvvell,
With rebel Angel, tumblest down to Hell, Isa. ^4.

Thy shame confusion is, lavvlesse desires, The Greek Church since their
schism, have suffered many miseries, and have had none or very fevv learned
men amongst them. Zach. 12.

In practice put; are thy tormenting fires,
Thy Conscience is the worm, the Devils Turks,
The fires fuel is schism and evil works:
With envy thy teeth gnash (part of thy pain)
To see thy rival in such glory reign:
Darkness, thy ignorance, and want of grace,
Disordred Passions, horror of the place;
Thoughts of despair, thy miseries attend
To think this servitude shall never end:
For who in schism did with Samaria fall,
With her must suffer an eternal thrall.
But Rome in DAVID'S house, the Goth, the Hun
With Cities spoil, shall punish faults, which done,
Adaulphus leading his fierce Goths to Spain,
CHRIST'S Vice-roye, to his Rome shall come again, Ps. 88.

Where he shall sit on DAVID'S promised seat,
And give just Laws, whilst Sun gives wonted heat.
To deck the Church a cunning vvorkeman paints,
The lively Images of diverse Saints. What pictures are in the Catholic
Church. Act. 9.

But what does make most glorious show of all,
Is JESUS name, written on every wall.
There see we PAVLE, the name of JESUS hold,
Divinely stamped in characters of gold:
Which flying through the world with Cherubs vvings
He carries before Potentates and Kings.
I Will not with Silius go to Maroes grave,
And at his dust a holy fury crave,
To praise this vessel; but I Will ask to share S. John Chrysostom,
extraordinarily devoted to S. Paul.

A part of CHRYSOSTOMES Caelestiall air.
That sweetly guided by his serious sp'rite,
As they require, I may PAVLES praises write.
Pythagoras savv no Troie, yet vvish I,
His witty transmigrations wear no lie.
That whilst I treat of such renowned men,
Some Heroes spirit might direct my pen.
Let his deuotes commend him for his zeal,
Or that he has spread JESUS common weal,
Throughout the world, afflictions, sorrovves, bands, 2. Cor. 11

Yea what not suffered, both on sea and lands,
The love and chiefest object of my muse,
Shall be because our JESUS did PAVLE choose,
A special trumpet to sound out his fame, Act. (...).

And blazon through the world great JESUS name,
Exalting him with this peculiar grace,
For JESUS name to suffer in each place.
O three-times happy man whom JESUS chose!
For JESUS royal name to suffer vvoes.
As others praise him for his vvritings sake,
A title of their eminence they take,
Because proud Jews and Gentiles he makes know, Ep. ad Romans

That who disguised in servants shape did go,
Was the MESSIAH their Creatours Son, Ep. ad Heb.

Who for transgression with mankind had done,
A ransom pai'd: strong reasons he does frame,
To show that nature, and the law are lame, Ep. ad Gal. The name of JESUS
observed to be above two hundreh times in S. Paul's Epistles. Apoc. 4. The
Martirs are describde.

And never can toward heavenly Sion tread,
If JESUS grace do not them thither lead.
But his Epistles, I above the rest,
Commend and say, that they are therefore best,
Because in e'ury leaf, yea line is found,
Of JESUS name, the ears well pleasing sound.
Triumphant Martirs, are drawn all in red,
Each having a Baye Garland on his head,
Which at the Lambs feet humbly casting down,
They him acknovvledge giver of their Crown.
In the first place as Captain of the band,
Does glorious STEPHEN promartir stand.
Who whilst the multitude stones at him throvves, Act. 7. S. Paul's
conversion, was the effect of S. Stepha^s Prayer, according to S. Austin.

Prays to JESUS for his cruel foes.
No spiteful Jew, more svviftly flings a stone,
Then his loue-darts ascend to Heavens high Throne,
Where falling lovv before the seat of grace,
They humbly beg, that mercy may have place,
And how they speed, vv'eele ask of furious Saul,
Who shall hereafter be a Preaching PAVLE.
SEBASTIAN eke, shot through with many Dart,
Instructs Gentlemen to play a part
In true-loues stage, that others fall not down, Act. 9.

He labors, and so gets a Martyrs Crown.
Near to SEBASTIAN, seeing a void place,
We ask who they are shall have so much grace,
To stand nigh JESUS champion, and are told,
Our English Noble men, that room shall hold.
As no goods loss, no deaths fear could them quayle,
No dangers make in JESUS faith to fail,
For though not equal with the Martyrs row,
Yet as stout Squires of Martyr-Knights they go.
As we these Champions view with curious eye, The Martyrdom of MARIE
Queen of Scotland, and Mother, to our Sovereign K. James.

Amongst them we a Lady do epsy,
Whose Crowns proclayme, she ruled sundry lands,
But history complains, of savage hands:
The Arms of Scotland, and French Lilies teach,
That over these Kingdoms her command did reach.
Written in bloody Characters we read,
(Heavens weep, whilst I recount so foul a deed)
That she, whose head we see on this sad stage,
From body cut, to satisfy the rage
Of barbarous foes; whilst she did live had been,
FRANCIS of France his wife, and Scotlands Queen.
And though her style of Majesty was such,
Yet profane hands, durst Gods anointed touch,
As if no sacred Oil had been shed, 2. Reg. 2.

By holy Prelate on her Princely head,
Unto the Scaffold brought, (o cruel deed!)
By the sharp Axes blovv, she there does bleed,
Heavens did ye shine, was there a wicked Sun
To lend a day, whilst such a deed was done?
Surely all things as ruled by a new force,
Did go retrogradate to Natures course.
And as when Man, Jehovah did offend,
The universe for Man's offense did end Genesis 6.

Again so many Laws in one foul fact,
Being infring'de in penance of the Act,
All things are taught to go an other way,
In the accustomed order naught does stay. The Majesty of the Lacedemonian
Kings, was so religiously reverenced, that even their enemies in the open
field, declined from fighting against their royal persons

The pious Spartans evermore deni'de,
In battle Theopompus to have di'de,
They thought though millions of mean persons die,
Yet death durst not approach great Monarchs nigh.
And deemed his Kingly Majesty a shield,
Able to save his life in bloody field;
And can it be a person of such state,
Amongst her friends, should find so hard a fate?
Tiberius fearful of his after fame,
Hated Historians who would blase his name.
And teach posterity in this, and this,
Tiberius whilst he lived did do amiss.
That year when this was done (ye learned Men)
Forget to handle an Historians Pen.
Do not instruct the world that England durst,
Perform a Deed, of all bad Deeds the vvorst.
Not, but I read that Monarchs have been killed,
And the Majestike blood unjustly spil'd
But still the Murderers have careful been,
That such impiety should not be seen,
When we in Counsel sit, and in cold blood
Deliberate, as if the Act were good.
The sentence given, we justify the fact,
By public execution of the Act.
But what is the cause for which they shed her blood?
This one for-sooth, because she was so good;
And the world knevv, what right she had to reign,
These are the reasons, wherefore she was slain.
Should Herod know, that JESUS is Gods Son, Mat. 2.

Would he do less think you then he has done?
Cursed be ambition, which will know no laws,
Cursed be suspicion in a Kingdoms cause.
But as proud Iades shall trample with their feet,
Good Seruius carcass, in the WICKED STREET;
And Tullia hasting to set on her head,
Romes Diadem on Fathers corpse dares tread:
We will not vvonder when for Kingdoms crown
We see the Laws of God and Man cast down.
That waters do not ouer-vvhelme our land,
And Neptune swim, where Englands I Will does stand,
That yet no greater vengeance has been seen:
VV'eele thank thy prayers, untimely butchered Queen.
Shall we with tears bedevv thy Royal Hearse,
Blame the too-hastie fates with mournful verse.
The Sisters ask, how they durst use a Knife
So soon to cut thy golden thread of life?
We would do thus, but that faith makes us know,
Glories rich Crown, was given thee by that blovv
Which took thy life away; so Ammons pride, Est. 6.

Prepares a horse, for Mordechee to ride.
Our tears which else should alvvaies flow, are done,
When we behold our JAMES, thy glorious Son,
Who as just NOAH amongst mortals best,
Shall give our sorrovves end, our labors rest.
His Parent LAMECH did of him foretell,
That in his blessed time, things should go well. Genesis 5.

Renowned PRINCE, so use thy Royal Pen,
That we may place thee amongst these learned Men punc;
Our Churches Doctors, who next Martirs stand,
A silver Pen, each having in his hand. A short description of the Doctors of
the Church.

Above their heads, houers a holy Dove,
Which dictates lessons full of wit and love.
If to thy Harp wear added one more string,
Then thou, no Svvan could more divinely sing.
But we have hope all numbers now shall meet
To make thy Music absolutely svveet.
Thou DELOS Oracle of thy life time,
Thou Sun, thou star of parched Afriques clime:
Our Churches Pearl, bred in thy mothers eyes,
Again begotten by a sea of cries.
Great AUSTEN, shall I with more wondering eye, S. Austin converted by his
mothers Tears.

Behold thee when thy Muse does mount on high,
Or love thee more when thou do creep so low,
As do thy humble Retractations show?
To think amiss is fraile-Mans common case,
To change for better, is a special grace.
And can we think more forcible, more good, We describe the Confessors

The tears of love, then a best Martyrs blood.
The Desert Citizens wear also there,
Some clothed with leaves, others with shirts of hair:
Their visages all pale, their bodies thin, Ps. 44. Edward the Confessor, a
Prince devoted to God, and the good of his country, selected the flovvet and
best of all the constitutions and laws, established under the ancient
Britains, Romans, Saxons, and Danes, and put them in one body or volume,
which he called Leges populares.

Proclayme their greatest glory is within.
Their simple outsides give abundant shows,
That they to world and flesh wear alvvaies foes,
Here also we our English EDWARD know,
Among formest plac'de in the Confessors row.
A scepter in his hand, o'ns head a Crown,
Ye gentle Heavens, rain many EDWARD'S down;
Who to our Britain, upright laws may give,
And teach their People, as they do to live.
Great CHARLES the second Hope of Northern clime,
Ordained by God, to bless the present time,
Of EDWARD learn, that subjects best obey,
When they see Majestrates, first do, then say.
Such Edicts move Men's hearts, though written short,
Which first are practi'zd in the Princes Court
Of EDWARD learn, that only he is a King,
Who does his Passions in subjection bring.
Princes Dominions, may from Parents take,
To be a Saint, virtue alone can make.
In that strange statue, which great Babels King,
In vision sees each lim, each part, each thing
As they grow higher, so in goodness grow,
Which Potentates, and greater men does show, Dan. (...).

That unto honor should be joynd this grace,
To grow in goodness, as they grow in place.
The head was best of metals, purest gold,
You the heads place, amongst your subjects hold
Be gold in love, be better then the rest,
What e're your people are, be you the best.
But it may be a Patron of thy name,
Allures thee rather, France shall give the same.
CHARLES surnamed great, for his renowned facts,
Thou have his name, have thou his style, his Acts.
Let us behold thee with thy conq'uring bands,
Revoke to JESUS, faith reuolting lands.
With the fifth CHARLES Achilles of our days,
Beyond Alcides Pillars, Tropheies raise,
Plus vltra be thy motto, thy arms tend,
And where the world, there let thy Empire end.
Be evermore victorious, ever great, Charlemaine constrained the Saxons to
embrace the Christian faith. He was made Emperor by Leo the third. Otho
crowned by John the 12. The Electors ordained by Gregory the fifth. Henry the
8. honored by Leo the 10. with the title of defender of the Faith. The title
of Catholic was given, or rather having been discontinued: was restored to
Ferdinand, and Isabella, by Alexander the sixth. The kings of France, by
concession of the Apostolic Sea, have kept the title of most Christian, which
was given to Carolus Martellus, whom Gregory the third in one, and the same
Epistle, twice so styles.

Ever obedient to Saint PETER'S seat.
May Roman Prelate make our England glad,
As to thy Lions he shall Eagles ad,
And with high titles, thy brave house advance,
As he has done to Charlemaine of France.
Loose Matchiauels, and Atheists you mistake,
Rome uses to give Realms, and Kesars make,
Not to abuse the povv'r of triple Crown,
By foul injustice, casting Princes down.
By Romes authority, Otho the great,
In Germany did fix the Empires seat.
Henry Aniou, Plantaginet his child,
By ADRIANS gift, is Lord of Ireland stild'e.
Thy royal Ancestors, what better name,
Then Faiths defender have? who gave the same?
The Cath'like title, what a splendour brings,
To the still Conquering Hesperian Kings?
So Capets race of Christian style more brags,
Then of the Lilies, in their royal flags.
Faiths champion, Christian Catholic, these three,
Most glorious titles be combind'e in thee.
Besides my vvishes, O that I could give,
Then thou there should no greater Monarke live.
Momus found fault (and I would take his part,
VVeart not against my God) that each man's heart,
Had not a vvindovve, that the world might see,
What realties therein inuolued be.
Then the sly hypocrite durst not speak fair,
When from smooth words, his thoughts dissenting are.
Your Courtly Gallant, durst not your hands kiss,
When in his heart, all rancour lodged is.
False Judas durst not to his Master bovv,
With apish complements, protest, swear, vovv,
Heap on him blessings, vvish a world of good,
When in his purse, the price is of his blood. Luc. 22.

Here I could vvish my breast were made of glass,
That so thy Royal sight (great Prince) might pass,
Into my soul, and see that I would do
As I do vvish, had I a povv'r thereto.
But JESUS love (I hope) has made me poor,
And having wished, I can do no more.
BESELEEL Virgins carues of Iu'rie bone,
Of such King SOLOMON did make his throne 3. Reg.

An Eliphant, then which no beast does live The excellency of Virgins, and
Virginity. Ps. 44.

More temperate, more wise, his tooth does give:
If in Elections vvisdome has chief place,
By Virgins choice, vvee'le censure of their grace.
They need not envy PHAROES daughters lot,
Who for their Spouse, Gods vvisest Son have got.
Who can sufficiently describe how chaste
These are, who as terrestiall Angels pla'st
In our low Heaven through contemplation see
All things in Earth contemptible to be;
In God they do behold, as in a glass,
How all delights do like a shadovv pass:
Shadovvs leave naught behind: they are black, they are foul
Pleasures of flesh, how black make they the soul? An inuectiue against sin.

They in one instant end, in one begin,
Behind them nothing leave, but guilt of sin.
And tell me what is sin? nothing at all. Io. 1.

What e're is extant in the ample Ball
Of this large world, God made, and God was glad, Genesis 3.

That by his making hand it being had,
Only thou misbegotten Monster sin,
As Bastards use to do, came stealing in,
Ashamed of thy birth: God never put
Least finger to thy being; Hell was shut,
Thou were the Key to open it: Daylight
Thy birth did turn into eternal night.
Cursed be thy birth-daie, never it appear, Job. 3.

Nor be it reco'nd amongst days of the year:
Like Atreus feasts, do thou Apollo scarre,
Abhorring thee, let him turn back his Carre.
Thy hate make Titan hide himself, and stay,
T'vvixt Thetis arms, more then his wonted day.
Be thou expected, and as thou do fail, Job ib.

Of them be cursed, who do chase the VVhale.
Let Stars that day borrow no light of Sun,
And the sad Moon forget her course to run.
The universe be on that black day sad,
That thou vve'rt borne, let only Hell be glad.
O that our Curses, which on thee do lite,
Could turn thee to a sempiternall night.
We will be angry with thee vvretched EVE, An Apostrophe to Eve. Genesis 3.

The mother of this Child, thou did conciue,
The Monstrous Bastard, Satan was his fire,
But ye adult'rous couple do conspire,
And with such slights contriue the matter, that
ADAM must Father, the mis-gotten brat.
Fond woman, God made thee of the Man's bone, Of the transgression of our first
patents.

To help him that he should not be alone:
This was your end, and you perform it well,
You help him; but in what? to go to Hell.
No sooner wear you made, but you must walk,
To recreat your self, and enter talk. Genesis 3.

With Satan: when your bellies full of chat,
You cast your eyes, now on this fruit, now that:
The Devil by the won dring of your eye,
That your teeth water, presently does spy,
And with much kindness does an Apple pare,
Prays you to taste it, and to give a share
To your Good Man (for so good manners will)
It will suffice yea both to eat your fill.
O foolish Man! What do thou mean? that bit
Has many poisons, many Hels in it.
Trust not the looks, although it please the Eye:
Millions of Miseries, in it do lie.
Trust not thy Palate, though it do taste well,
It will not be digested, but in Hell.
He scarce does eat it, when infernal Gates.
With violence fly open, iron grates
Of Hell are burst, anxieties, cares, fears, The effects of Original sin.

Sorrovv with all her weeping Children, tears:
Suspicion, jealousy, lavvles desire:
Unbridled lust: pretentions to aspire,
Fond joys, sad discontent at present state,
Auersion from good, anger, envy, hate,
Darkness of mind, peruersitie of will,
And what in both, can be suspected ill:
These Monsters, with their pale Commander Death,
(Kept hitherto as Prisoners beneath,
And never should have seen the light of Sun)
Hearing what Man against his God has done,
Scorn longer to obey grimme Plutoes Laws,
But they will forth, and vindicate Gods cause.
What hauock amongst Rebels do they make,
How many souls send down to stygian lake?
By the effects judge ADAM of thy fault,
These mischiefs are the purchase thou have bought,
Corruption is the house, the land large vvoes,
In which though with tears vvat'red, no good grows
At hour of death, making thy latest will,
Thou us bequeth'st this legacy of ill:
And for Executor Satan do trust,
Who though a Banckrupt, yet in this is just,
And takes such care, that joyntlie with our breath,
We do receive thy legacy of death. Ephesians. 2.

Hence do proceed, if we reuolue out fate,
The vvoes which follovv Man's accursed state.
Hence those afflictions that attend our ways,
Those sad Catastroph's of our vvretched days.
Hence that unequal share of joys and pain,
A drop of pleasure, but of vvoe a maine.
O had thou loved God more! EVE not so well,
Thou would have left us heirs of Heaven, not Hell.
We see when substances do pass away
The empty shaddovves, can no longer stay.
But thou like to the Moth do live, foul sin
Having destroyed the soul, thou vveart borne in Job. 27.

Pleasures, whose shade thou art, long since are past,
When thy foul making Essence still does last.
Hence ugly Monster, why staiest thou behind,
To be the Hangman of the spotted mind?
To NAAMANS leprosy art thou a kin,
And must still stick to the defiled skin? 4. Reg. 5.

Unless with floudes of tears so often as he
In Iordans River was, thou cleansed be.
Great God bring all men to the sacred flood,
All Nations be baptized in JESUS blood. Genesis 6.

In the first age, when world did new begin,
With many raines thou did drown Man and sin The force of Contrition.

Again unto the watery floods give scope,
Again the Cataracts of Heaven set open.
We not of Abana and Pharphar dream,
We must be curd'e in only Iordans stream. 4. Reg. 5.

Blessed stream which from thy mercies head does rise
And thence descending runs through our eyes:
Waters beginning from earthes slimie veins,
Not able are to purify our stains.
Such are those tears, which from Hels fear do grow,
Such are those tears, which from self-love do flow.
The rain which this detested elfe must drown,
Must from above, must from high heaven come down.
Wherefore salt-teares, for sin send down apace,
(O happy dying in such streams of grace.)
A sea of grief in every place abound:
And in the waves let ugly sin be drovvn'd.
Each one of us a sinners title bears,
Let us be MAGDALENS in shedding tears.
Of Hesebon, large Fish-pondes be our eyes: Luc. 7.

The waters woeful plaintes, the fish sad cries.
What do thou mean my Muse, why gadst thou so? Cant. 7.

Recall thy self, and let the Monster go:
A better object shall delight thy eyes,
Behold Pulcheria, the fair, the wise,
Of whom to rule, shall Theodosius learn, Aristotle in his Politikes,
proves a woman unfit to govern.

And when he dies, leave her his Empires stearne.
Had Aristotle lived in her Court,
He would have deemed, his policies to short.
Had he beheld the actions of her life,
Her sex should have resembled Delphos knife.
Whilst she who did with such a grace obaye,
Shall ample Scepters, with like justice svvaye,
How much to her our Christian world does owe,
Let Fathers gathered by great LEO show,
She does on neck of proud Nestorius tread, Thefourth general Council of
Calcedon, gathered chiefly by the zeal of this holy Empres. Genesis 3.

And with his foil bruiseth the Serpents head.
All acts of vvorthie vveomen counted be,
None for the Church has done so much as she.
I hear you say, was her desert so much,
Why then as if there never had been such,
The world so little hears of her name,
No public meetings solemnize her fame?
Shall I imagine Eastern Empires loss,
Has added to our Christian weal this cross,
Or think our God unto some latter days,
The solemn honors of his Saint delays.
Mean time I vvish such virtue to my Quill,
That with her praise, I might all Countries fill.
And teach the world that in Pulcheria stood
Two rarely meeting graces, Great and Good:
Two other opposites wear likewise friends,
Whilst private thoughts did aim at public ends.
But since (great Queen) my forces are to vveake,
A better vvorke-man shall thy glory speak,
And with a Pencill rul'de by heavenly Art,
Delineate diverse Pictures, as thou vvearte:
Which when they are presented to our sight,
VVee'le forth-vvith say, here is Pulcheria right.
Fair Austria seat of greatness, honors tree, A true commendation of the
house of Austria.

Whose branches through the world dilated be,
What Land, what Kingdom does not make great suite
To have a plant derived from thy root?
Shall I an ample Roll of Caesar's shovv,
Or for great Monarkes to HESPERIA go?
Shall I recount how Hungary and Beme
Have governed been, and kept good by this stem?
Or shall I think Bauarias Duke so good,
Because his veins do flow with AVSTRIAN blood?
In large descentes of this illustrious line Cornelia a Roman Matro^ Mother
of Tiberius and Caius Gracchus, a Lady of admirable endovvments.

How many rare Pulcherias do shine?
Shall we of MARGARETS and MARY'S tell,
In whom Pulcherias many virtues dvvell?
The which when we in vain begin to count,
VVee'le judge how much the pattern did surmount.
CORNELIA (Mother of that vvorthie pair,
Whose fates unworthy of their virtues wear)
Thou scorn'st to have a Crown come on thy head,
Which must be bought with Ptolomeus bed,
Judging more honor in thy vviddovvs state, Rodulph the first surnamed Magnus,
the beginner of the greatness of the house of Austria: blessed for his rare
devotion to the B. Sacrament

Then to be styled the King of Aegypts mate:
Though in thy Noble sons consists thy grace,
Yet give unto our Austrian Ladies place:
Of whom how many Scepters shall refuse,
And for a Husband sweetest JESUS choose?
And those whom Heavens will have a Paean sing,
At Hymen's tryumphs, shall great Rodulphs bring,
Who with a bended knee and warlike hand,
Shall add new Kingdoms to their native land.
But shall the world be vvarm'd by Austrias son,
And to our Britain shall no good be done?
Must we be ouer-past, as if we stood
Under the Arctike Pole, where comes no good? Elizabeth daughter of Edward
the fourth being married to Henry Earl of Richmond, the deadly hate betwixt
the 2. families of York and Lancaster ceased

Ye gentle heavens forbid, now is the time,
When Austria shall give our Northern Clime
A MARIE, who like the fourth EDWARD'S heir,
In whom combined the different Roses wear,
Shall make wars Trumpet evermore to cease;
And bless our ENGLAND with eternal peace.
Impious Hostility shall end: no more
Shall Christian blades be sheat'hd in Christian gore,
But Spain and Albion joined against JESUS foe,
In Ievvrie land the bloody CROSS shall shoe,
And once again recou'ring Salems town,
From top of Mesquites cast their half moons down.
Take courage mighty PRINCESS at thy birth, Iconoclasts or Image breakers,
an. Dom. 786. in the time of Irene Empre I Will of Constantienopledid r^nounce
t^eir heresi. The true use of Ima ges is declared. (...) The adoration of them.
Phil. 2.

The Heavens unto the Universal Earth,
Did promise many blessings: thou art she,
In whom the world Irenes times shall see:
Again, Iconoclasts shall leave their sect,
And curse to Hell, their impious neglect
Of these fair Pictures, better taught to know,
That adoration does further go
Then the bare Image; which of vvood or stone,
The workman frames, and in it life has none.
Unapt, to whom we should our Acts direct,
Abstracting from all relative respect.
But when to Images we honor give,
Gods Saints are honored, who with him do live,
So when each knee to name of JESUS bends.
To JESUS glorious self, the honor tends.
Themistocles, as he walks Athens streets,
In every corner Marathonia meets.
As he beholds painted upon each wall,
The Persians conque'rd by Athenians fall. 2. They excite us to imitate the
Saints whom they represent.

He sees Miltiades, with plumie crest,
Like Thracian Mauors, animate the rest.
Whose divine virtue in that bloody field,
Made numberless to a small number yield.
First he is astonished, casting then his eyes
Back to his youth, and vvanton days, he cries.
At last he speaks: O would I had no sight!
That I might not behold Marathons fight?
Would I wear deaf, that I might no more hear
Of Trophies which Miltiades did rear
In Marathonian feildes. The children sing,
The very wales Miltiades do ring.
In every place sound Echoes of his fame,
Whilst I lie buried in the grane of shame.
But ah! let me more ponder, and not cry,
What was this Man so honored, more then I?
Had not Miltiades (in each place nam'de)
A body of the selfsame substance framde.
With my claie Carcass: have not I a share,
As-vvell as he, in a Caelestiall air?
This soul which in my house of dirt does dvvell,
Does aequall his; that it does not so well
Perform her functions, I my self must blame;
Who so with svveets, effeminate the same.
Had he as I, in Tauerns spent his days,
The world had been noe Echo of his praise.
Had he as I been daily drovvn'de in wine,
His statues had no other been then mine.
His statues which are objects of my eyes,
His statues which are causes of these cries.
Let me be good, and valiant as he,
The world will statues consecrate to me,
As it has done to him: here, here shall stand,
My follies period, with a drunkards hand,
I Will write no more an ignominious book,
Wherein the aftertimes my shame shall look.
But with Heroike deeds, and weapons dinte,
My name on front of Athens foes i will print.
There, there, the world, vvhi'lst lasts the worlds frame
In glorious Characters shall read my name.
You my youths deities, I bid adievv,
I mean no more to sacrifice to you:
For drunken Bacchus cups I Will use the spear,
For Venus favors in my helm I Will wear
Deaths grizly face. I Will go the world about,
But I will find a new Marathon out.
(Now is conceived a Salaminian fight,
So much mooues virtue, virtues painted sight.)
The hauty CAIUS CAeSAR, cannot sleep,
Nay ALEXANDERS statue makes him weep.
Quoth he (and sighs) at my years PHILIPS son,
Conq'uerd the world: and (beast) what have I done?
Shall I at home alvvaies ignobly rest,
And like a babe suck milk at my Mam's breast,
No no, as he my Monuments of fame,
I Will raise: or die in persuite of a name.
His son the Portratures of worthy Knights, Augustus Caesar adopted son of
Julius.

Sets in his Palace, that their very sights,
May move himself, and the succeeding Kings,
To the attempting of heroicke things.
As I behold my JESUS on the Rood,
With arms extended, shed his precious blood:
How am I moved? and when I know for me, How piety is fostered and
furthered by holy pictures.

My God was nailed thus upon a tree.
Does he not Preach, although he make no noise?
(His only Picture is a Preaching voice.)
The Sermon thus begins: behold Gods Son
Has so much suff'red, and has so much done
For thy souls health, that thou should enter in
Heavens gates, and freed be from hell and sin.
That thou eternally should with me reign:
I for thy sins, am as a victime slain.
This Picture represents unto thy sight,
My love to thee in Golgoth's bloody fight:
Where although in the battle I did die,
Yet made I sin with death and hell to fly.
Wear thou the spoils of that tryumphant day,
(The spoils are grace, and glories Crown for aye.)
As I this woeful spectacle do view,
What acts must follovv, what affects ensue?
Do not I JESUS love, who shed his blood,
To take away the lets which against me stood.
In my pretension to the promised land,
And di'de to abrogate that vvriting hand, 2. Colos.

Of Gods decree (and should have had its course,
Had not great JESUS disannulled his force)
Do I not vveep? yes, yes, not cruel Jews,
But my transgressions JESUS did misuse.
I, I, vyld wretch, with wickedness and sin, Isa. 53

His temples crovvn'd; and with faults tore his skin.
As I see JESUS often faint in the way,
And CYRENEVS help him, I thus say, Mat. 27.

No vvonder that our JESUS cannot go,
The weight of my transgressions load him so.
Shall I not sin detest when Gods sole son,
Sin only to destroy so much has done:
And know how hateful sin is in Gods eyes,
When to appease him no Host can suffice,
No victime make him his drawn vveapon sheath, Genesis 22.

But his Sons sacrifice, and ISAACS death.
Julian deface that Portraiture which she
Erects, whom JESUS from the flux set free, Mat. 9. Mar. 5. Luc. 8.

That so the memory might alvvaies stand,
Of benefit received by JESUS hand:
At foot against Iconoclasts shall preach This woman cured by our Savior,
erected his statue in brass, at the foot whereof grevv an herb, which
when it reached to the hemme of our Saviors garment, cured all diseases, as
witnesses: who in his time see it. Eusebius. lib. 7. Hist. c. 14. Julian the
Apostata broake it in pieces, and placed his own in the place, but a fire
coming from heaven and renting Iulians statue, casting also the head to the
ground, revenged the sacrilegious temerity of this Apostata Emperor. Soz. lib.
5. c. 20. Niceph. lib. 10. c. 30.

An herbs rare virtue, who when it shall reach
To JESUS garments hemme, JESUS shall daine,
With virtue of it to cure every pain.
Cast down this statue (renegate) and so,
In JESUS picture show thy self his foe.
And when thou have it broken in disgrace,
Erect thine own foul Picture in its place.
That from heaven coming down a fiery blast,
May burn thy Portrature, and to earth cast.
Shall we have Iulians in our vvretched age,
Show against JESUS Crucifixe their rage?
These Pictures which in such fair order stand,
Must they be with a sacrilegious hand
Cast out our Church? Shall Gentlemen no more,
Behold SEBASTIAN shed his manly goare,
For JESUS cause? and with the Martyrs sight,
Be animated manfully to fight.
For JESUS faith? shall they not ALBAN see.
Beheaded by stern Emperors decree,
For hiding in his house, against Kesars laws,
Iehouas Priest? and making here a pause.
Encourage thus themselves, this is our case,
Vilde Pursiuants have JESUS Priests in chase:
We will them intertaine, and if we die,
With wings of blessed eternity we will fly
To highest heaven, and there with ALBAN reign,
Who for like cause, with ALBAN have been slain
Had thy great house (fair ESTHER) been so good,
If Leopoldus had not pictured stood? Leopold. Marquess of Austna a Prince of
vvonderfull sanctity, 1. Reg. 10.

Telling his Nephevves it is a Princes grace,
To be as high in Sanctity as place.
Each virtue in a Monarkes breast must dvvell,
He must as SAVL the multitude excel.
By shoulders then the rest, he must be higher,
Carried aloft with a Caelestiall fire.
Take Pictures hence, where is the idiots book?
Our Faiths deep Mysteries therein to look.
In Images, the vn-taught svvaine shall read,
That CHRIST for him is borne, for him does bleed.
He shall as he sees JESUS borne so poor, 3. Pictures instruct the simple
and ignorant people, and therefore Saint Gregcals them the idiots book. lib. 9.
Ep. 9 Mat. 2.

Conceive that poverty in it has more,
Then the world thinks; affection shall him make.
Love the svveete babe, borne poorly for his sake.
When Ianus double fac'de the new year brings,
He shall behold the offerings of the Kings:
And learn those Kings who offer presents, are
First fruits of Gentiles, guided by a star.
If God would not have holy Pictures stand,
To grace his Church; why was the cut off hand
of Damascene restored by MARY'S praire?
Whose Pictures in his books defended are.
If worshipping of Images be naught,
I Will tax thee (Angels Empress) with a fault.
Why did thou give him his hand back again,
Who Images Relligion did sustain?
Can such a one find favor in thy sight, Our Savior, as witnesses, Euag.
lib. 4. hist. c. 26. sent his picture to Abgarus king of Edessa by which many
famous miracles wear done, and are related by the same author.

Who for Idolatries defense does write?
If worshipping of Images be ill,
Heavens Queen, let me ask thee why do thou fill
The world with miracles, and no where more,
Then where thy statues Catholics adore?
Had not (vouchsafe to answer mighty Queen)
Egyptian MARIE thy fair picture seen.
And praid before it, should not her blessed soul,
Have still remained, as a Blacke-more foul?
From JESUS Mother, i will go to her son,
And humbly ask of him what he has done,
As he the Messenger made back to bear,
His holy picture to Edessas Pere:
As he with Virtue vvonderfull did place
In Berenices hand-kercher his face.
Each follovving age will reverence the same,
And he for superstition must have blame.
Pictures, he says are good, but they are naught,
Who have their goodness into question brought. The finding of the Cross, on
which our Savior suffered, by Helen. Mother of the Emperor Constantine.
Cant. 3.

Shall not our English Queens see HELEN make
A holy journey for devotion sake
To Salem town? where miracles forth-bring,
The scepter of our vvith-thornes Crowned King.
(As on King SOLOMON the daughters stand
Of Sion gazing this was in his hand.)
This scepter long time hid in holy ground,
Is by devotion of this Empress found.
Part of it she unto Byzantium brings,
(So much that age did esteem holy things)
Part unto Rome, where piety does build
Marmorean Temples, and devotion yield
Just honors to those Relics, which did bear
JESUS, as he over hell did Tropheies rear.
Does not this Queen of those four nails make much,
Who holied wear by JESUS bodies touch?
In her Sons Diadem she places one,
(Which gives more grace, then any Iaspar stone.
And teaches CONSTANTINE although he rain,
That he is his substitute whom Nails did pain)
Two she does in his bridle raines enclose,
To keep him safe from menaces of foes. How S. Helen disposed of the nails,
which pierced our Saviors hands and feet, when he (...)vas Crucified for our
sins.

As IVSTINE on his head these raines will wear,
The Feindes of Hell him dare not once come near.
Hell as yet mindful of Caluaria fight.
Is daunted with these relics only sight.
Who has not hard of angry ADRIAS waves,
Where millions of ships have found their graves?
But now that passage shall no more be so,
For HELEN the fourth nail will in it throe,
And he who with his death made all things even,
Firming a lasting peace t'vvixt earth and heaven,
Will give the sanctified Nail a force
To make the billovves leave their wonted course.
Neptune appeaseth every troubled vvaue,
(So great a virtue holy Relics have:)
On every wall why should not Ladies see?
Such stories and by them instructed be?
What wear the actions of renowned Dames
In ancient times, vvhere-vvith they made their names
In catologue of Saints to be enro'lde:
And by Fames trumpe in aftertimes extold. Manes first denied the worshipping
of holy relics, as witnesses S. Austin lib. 20 conra ^^ust. ca. 21. and
lib. 32. c. 11. After him Eunomius and Vigilantius taught this heresy: al many
hundredth years since by the holy Church, and councels condemned for heretics.

Why should not every wall and corner Preach
And what religion HELEN was of teach?
Oh wicked days of ours! when Danaes rape,
And naked Goddesses immodest shape,
As for an Apple they contention had,
To be descided by the Phrygian lad:
When works of Aretines lascivious hand,
Shall curiously in chambers painted stand.
Casting lust darts through windows of the eye,
And with luxurious thoughts make the soul die.
But Images of Christ, his Mother, Saints,
Whom piety and true devotion paintes,
With sacrilegious hand shall be defa'st,
In pieces broake, and out of Churches cast.
In darkest shades let Manes ever bide,
And his two impious sons on either side,
Who worship due to Relics first did blame,
And piety fond superstition name.
Let them make Hell resound with woeful plaints,
For their impiety against God and Saints.
It is enough that Infidels and Jews,
Who Gods and his Saints Images abuse.
Do everlasting penance for their fault,
But let our Christian world be better taught.
Let none who in our common wealth do dvvell,
For such impiety go down to Hell.
Let all who are vvasht in great JESUS name,
With bended knee humbly adore the same.
Let all who JESUS, and his friends affect, Act. 19. Diverse nations converted
to Christianity, and reduced from heresies by their virtuous Queens Iugunde
Queen of Spain.

The Tabernacles of his Saints respect.
Surely blessed Nymph errors detested night
Thy happy times shall turn to fair day light,
Thy Hymenaean Torches are the Sun,
By which this good to Britain shall be done.
For Gods Eternal vvisdome by whose hand,
The world is governed as it first did stand,
By a proportioned means will bring to pass,
What but in vain by force attempted was.
We joye to read as sacred stories count,
That Clodoue was to the holy Font,
By his Clotilda brought: the Lombards King,
Does Ledolinda to the true faith bring, Didymus of Alexandria was from the
fifth year of his age blind, yet most learned in all sciences, but infected
with the errors of Origin, which errors he taught Ruf finus and Melania. 1.
Pet. 5.

Thy Ancestors the Goths are likewise seen,
Reuok'd from Errors by their pious Queen.
Who vvounded wear by great Achilles spear,
By the same vveapon to be cured wear.
Against a Scipio who was Caesar's foe.
In Caesar's army does a Scipio go.
When as Melania by her blind guide taught,
Errors of Origin to great Rome brought,
VVhere-vvith opinion of an holy name,
She and Ruffinus did dilate the same.
As Debora did not Marcella rise,
And make the erring. Romans open their eyes?
Made she not Barach to stretch out his hand,
And put to flight the nevv-sprung errors bands?
The Lions vvhelpe of Judah shall oppose
His force against that Lions force, who goes
About the world, seeking each where to eat
(The souls of men are this fierce Lions meat.) Ge. 3.

In Edens Garden the cursed tree did grow,
Whose fruit was death, leaves sickness, branches vvoe:
In top of Golgotha must spring a tree, The marriage of Henry the 8. with Anne
of Boleine, was theouerthrovv of Catholic religion in England 2. Reg. 20.

Which from these miseries shall set us free.
^nne was the EVE which gave us our deaths vvound,
MARIE the woman is, shall make us sound.
A lavvlesse Marriage ENGLAND did undo,
Thy vvish't for Marriage ENGLAND shall renew.
Against their King (when ABSALON was slain)
Rebellious SEBA moves the Tribes again;
But a wise woman in Abela town,
Does SEBAS head from City wales cast down,
And by the death of a seditious Knave,
From IOABS fury does her people save.
Shall we be troubled with eternal jarres,
Will no ALCIDES give end to the wars,
And Hollands many headed HYDRA kill, The character of the state, and common
wealth of Holla^d.

Which does with tumults our North-climate fill?
This Monster has a Cockatrices breath,
Threatening to Monarkes, and all Kingdoms death:
No DIONS now, no BRVTI live again,
Detesting lavvlesse tyranny should reign;
But Athens thirty tyrants, and Romes ten The Hollanders putting the Turkish
half moons on the flags of their ships had this Motto: Pius Turcae quam
Papislae.

Will change a Monarchy for diverse men.
Religion is too poor a Mask to hide,
Their Treason that it should not be espide.
The world be taught that breach of Faith to Kings,
First Heresy, then Atheism, then Hell brings,
Who do contremne the Church their Mothers lore,
Will at the last acknovvledge CHRIST no more;
And we have seen them count it a small loss,
For Turkish Moons to change the Christian CROSS
My worthy Countrie-men, why are you slaves
To Brevvers, Cobblers, Basket-making Knaves?
Why do you voluntary your selves thrust
To patronize a cause as Hell vn-just?
You answer that you part of Holland take,
For the Lords word, and for his Gospel sake.
The Gospel says, let CAeSAR have his due,
How for the Gospel fight you then, think you? Mat. 22.

Thieues their Kings rob, and you against all law,
That thieues may keep stolen goods, your weapons draw
But if you nearer to their Gospel look,
You Will find it is a Matchiuilian book:
Wherein each leaf contains damned things,
Conspiracies, and treasons against Kings.
Sovving sedition amongst other men,
That they may sleep safe in their Cacus den.
Let vvartes destroy France, Germany, and Beme,
What do they care, so vvarres be far from them?
What Gospel can they have, where Turks, where Jews
Their Synagogues, and profane Mesquits use?
Is not their Amsterdam the drugs, the fex,
The sink of all impuritie and sects?
Could Hannibal more sundry nations tell,
Then sects contrary in that Babell dvvell?
But that no matter is, Jew Atheist, Turk,
So he defy the Pope, is of their Kirk.
Moreover can rebellions cause be just,
When thieues true Lords out of possession thrust?
What if a D' Alua bore a heavy hand,
Must they forth-vvith up in rebellion band
Against their King, and take from him his own*
If so: what Prince can sit safe in his throne?
Lets pray that Princes may do what is right,
And not with trait'tous arms against them fight.
But you do not examine much their cause,
Their friendship you into the action draws.
Why should you take such tyrants for your friends,
Who affect none but for their priuare ends?
Let Massacres in remote Indies show,
If Holland be our ENGLANDS friend or no.
Oh that our Seas could speak: we soon should hear
What good-vvill Hollanders to ENGLAND bear:
Let jestes, let scoffs, let mockes at King, and state
Make known their little love, if not great hate
To Prince and us: as helps have been deni'de,
To back their Heresy, their theft, their pride.
Ill-nurturde svvaines, not taught what is a King,
A God on earth, a Consecrated thing. Ps. 81. 1. Reg. 24.

DAVID laments, that he cut his Kings coat,
When these with open mouth, with open throat,
Gods Vice-roies bite, their royal actions blame,
With frumpes, with quips Monarchs expose to shame.
Let base Typhaeus brood, whose pride is such,
That they the holy ones of God dare touch Ps. 104.

With slandring libels, expiate such vvrongues,
With loss of hands, and forfeiture of tongues.
Yea let such Caitiues for blaspheming die,
(Who touch Kings, touch the apple of Gods eye.)
Let every Simei, every slandring Knave, Zach. 2. 2. Reg. 16.

The saucy Eupolis misfortune have.
And here their often mentioned Tempel fayles,
It Is Satan's Ghost, which against Princes rayles. Ier. 7.

When the whole world is in combustuous fire,
Subjects against their Kings each where conspire: Iud. 9.

Base-borne Abimelech his brethren kills,
Mis-gotten Mansfield Realms with rapine fills.
And all these mischiefs framed, this world of harms
In Hollands Aetna, where Cyclops make arms.
For Hells black Prince, against God himself to fling,
And Sions City to destruction bring.
Let none it contrary to reason think,
That I have tempered some gall with my incke?
When I do hear base Eupolis so bold,
To rail at Kings, my spleen I cannot hold.
Though I at vices, not at persons aim,
I affect Holland, but rebellion blame:
And let the Netherlanders once be good,
Let them cashire this their rebellious mood,
And as Religion teaches again bring
Wonted obedience to Hesperias King.
Reasons and thousand arguments i will frame,
To eternise industrious Hollands name.
Mean while will none inspired with heavenly fire,
Fore-tel how Spaines great King shall sack proud Tyres
Will no Jove's seed once-more in Lerna lake, Ezech. 26. (...).

The many heads from this foul Hydra take?
No John de Austria their cities vvin,
No Parma take reuolting Holland in?
No demi-god (better then other men)
Grapple with theiuish Cacus in his den?
(Cacus who has his Father Vulcans shape,
Cacus who lives by Homicide and rape.)
No, no: our God will not have Jury land,
Set free alone by valiant Barachs hand:
But Iabins captain pierced in the head Iudie, 6.

By Iahels wife, shall at her feet fall dead.
Ambitious Ammon ever looking high,
By Esters Prayers hanged aloft shall die. Est. 7.

Great Princess thou art Judith, by whose hands,
Proud Holofernes leader of Hells bands,
Shall vanquished be: thou art Abelas Dame, Iudit. 13. 2. To. 28.

Whose Nuptial rites shall Holland Rebels tame,
Seditious Sebas head shall buy a peace,
And with the Tribes submission wars shall cease.
Thou have Pulcherias birth, her state, her face
In the attempt of great things have her grace:
So let thy Actions crown thy life with praise,
That aftertimes thy Monuments may raise.
And as thy Ancestors their Nephew Kings,
Excite to enterprise of vvorthie things;
So be thy deeds thy royal issues book,
Wherein how they shall live, they alvvaies look.
Antiquity does of an Atlas count,
On his back bearing up Olympus mount, Of the Pillars of the Church.

Our JESUS is wise Atlas, by his hands,
Sion was built, and on his back it stands.
Our Atlas dies, who shall supply his place,
Has he left heirs of this supporting grace?
Firme-pillars of best marble composed all,
Bear Sion on their backs, that it not fall.
(Who in Gods Church will have a Pillars part,
Must be well practiced in the bearing art.
Has not truths self his promise given that those, Apoc. 3.

Who triumph over their Infernal foes,
Shall in his Church be Pillars; whilst no frovvne,
No Hellish violence can cast them down?
When we see thee (Great CHARLES) vanquish each foe,
Which does in battle against virtue go:
When we behold in all thy acts such grace,
Shall not we promise thee a Pillars place?
Of JESUS Church a Pillar thou shall be,
VVhilest JESUS Church shall be borne up by thee.
With Hercules (where Sol his steedes does wet)
Thou shall thy Monuments and Columns set,
And write non vltra to the after-daies,
Forbidding all to aequalize thy praise,
VVhilest no great Monarke, nor great Monarkes Son.
Shall do so much for Church, as thou have done.
In first place wrought by JESUS cunning hand,
Most eminent does SIMON PETER stand. Gal. 2.

To PETER next vvhilst' he supporteth all,
In JESUS Church a Pillars place has PAVLE,
A cruel death, which did two whole days last, The 2. Apostles.

Could not firm ANDREW to the Earth down cast.
Great JAMES, JOHN'S brother, and ZEBEDIES child,
By HEROD killed, and Spains Apostle styled, Act 12.

Whether he went, and with victorious hand,
To JESUS faith subu'de that noble land,
JOHN of white Marble made, though his outside
Was gold in fyerie flames refined and tried.
Was not white marble his Parthenian breast?
Of Golden love was not made all the rest?
THOMAS eternal Monuments shall have
Amongst the Indians, where he has his grave.
SIMON, THADDEVS, PHILIP, holy JAMES,
Whose vvondrous virtue either knee proclaims.
Rough BARTHOLMEVV without, though fair within,
(for JESUS name Tyrant pulled off his skin.)
For IPHIGENIA HIRTAOVS may frovvne,
Yea kill blessed MATTHEW, but not cast him down.
MATTHIAS whom the holy Ghost did chose, Act. 1.

For that place which Iscariot did lose.
Sermons of BBRNABE will teach what can, Act. 11.

Persuasions which proceed from a good man.
Of the same matter, of which other men,
The Apostles wear composde, yet know, that when
JESUS them Columns in his Church did place:
He so them temp'red with caelestiall grace,
That mauger any vvinde or adverse blast,
They keep their place, yea rather stand more fast.
The last perfection, and supremest form,
Was given them, when as the vvisht-for storm Act. 2.

Of divine grace, and cloven tongues of fire,
Made the room shake, where Christ's friends did retire,
Before this storm, a silly wenches frovvne, Mat 26, Mar. 14.

Did cast the chiefest of the Pillars down.
CEPHAS as to him a poor Damzell calls,
Denies his JESUS, miserably falls:
But once confirmed by this dew of grace,
No threats, no whips, can make him leave his place.
Nay he esteems honors badge that shame, Act. 5.

Which he endures for great JESUS name.
The thundering Cannon at whose Echo quake
Strong Cities, vvhilest his bullets their vvalls shake,
Before the fire shall make him use his voice,
Is sport for children, ineriment for boys:
They play with him, they roll him hear and there,
And as upon his back they ride, not fear.
But let once fire inflame the charged Gun,
Who does not quake, and from his fury run?
So have I seen, the stoutest hearts look pale,
And as they heard his thunder, their heads veil:
Before Gods Ghoast did JESUS friends inspire,
PETER a Canon was but without fire:
No marvel then though at a vvomans sound,
He daunted wear, and fell down to the ground.
But after God had put an holy flame,
Unto this Canon, and discharg'de the same.
What City was there, what defensive wall,
Which with his thunderbolt he made not fall?
I pass how ANANIA's and his wife,
With his breaths only foarce did loose their life.
CAINE built a town nam'de Rome, the walls were sin,
Error and Paganism did live within,
Deriu'de by a long progeny from CAINE,
In this same City did proud Nero reign.
JESUS decreeing in the town to take,
And in it his own Empires seat to make.
So beats the walls with CEPHAS Cannon shot,
That at the last the batt'red town is got.
Idolatry and superstition fly,
A thousand errors in the City die.
There JESUS makes his seat, and there will reign,
VVhilest Sun gives light, floods run into the maine.
It Is true the last time, that this piece did roar,
He burst in two that JESUS host no more
As erst could use him: so when Spartans fly,
EPAMINONDVS does Victorious die.
Did Philistims or SAMSON the field loose,
When at his death he killed three thousand foes?
And when in Golgotha Golias head, Iud. 16.

By JESUS is struck off, is JESUS dead,
But potent God forth-vvith the broke-peece cast,
And making sound again in Sion plast'e
Upon the Battlements, whence he hurts more
Our adversaries, then he did before.
Petitions are the bullets, which he throvves,
From upper ground, and with them Kills our foes:
A POEM, OF THE HOLY NAME OF JESUS. The second Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of JESUS flesh (AMBROSIAN meat,)
Of Bell, of Architects we treat.
THE hour did now approach, in which men dine,
When see a Table set with bread and wine
Besides these two nothing at all was pla'st,
No dainty dishes to content the taste.
Who would not judge such silly Cates unfit,
For Potentates, whom there we see to sit?
But vvonder not though the fare simple seem,
The Master of the Feast will have us deem
By the effects his banquets vvorth, and know,
That best things make not alvvaies the best shovv.
And surely CLEOPATRAS Royal feast,
VVherevvith she entertained her Roman guest.
Nor ASSVERVS banquet to his states,
Which sacred volume with such care relates:
No not the Manna which the Jews did eat,
Can be compared with this Caelestiall meat.
What diet has such virtue as this food: Exodus 16.

Mortal to make immortal, wicked good?
Is your soul sick? eat here and it no more
Shall be diseased; heers Physic for each sore.
This bread makes strong this wine our arms does cheer
The Royal banner of CHRIST'S CROSS to bear,
When as the fancy objects, which are ill
Conceiues, and represents them to the will, Of the ble^sed Sacrament under
the form of bread.

That the short pleasure of an idle thought,
May with the souls eternal loss be bought.
Heers Bread (which God the Holy Ghost did make,
And in the womb of sacred Virgin bake,
Heating the Oven with Charities best fire,
The fevvell was many a Chaste desire:
The Loaves with name of JESUS marked be,
Having his hands and feet nayld to a tree.)
In such occasions here is that mistique bread,
In vision seen, which Madians blood shall shed.
And put the Eastern multitude to flight: The effects of the B. Sacrament.

Zeb and Zalmana their two chieftaines smite;
The svvord of Gedeon, which loose Venus Boy
Shall profligate, his Darts, his shafts destroy. Iud 8.

Corn of the chosen, substance of the good,
Expelling bad desires, breeding pure blood,
This bread, proud Babylon, thy little ones Zach. 9.

With holy wrath shall dash against the stones.
This elevated bread above top of hills, Ps. 135.

(Priests heads I mean), our world with plenty fills.
ELIAS, as he faints, it makes strong, Ps 71. 3. Reg. 19.

To take of forty days a journey long.
Nay some who daily Guests are at this feast,
Aver for truth that what meat you like best: S^^. 16.

What your taste pleases, be it flesh or fish,
You shall have here in this Caelestiall dish.
Manna such virtue to have had, we read
And much more taste it in this heavenly bread.
At Easter time you joye to see your Board,
(As was the Israelites) with a Lamb stord
Prepare with them your selves; take in your hand
A vvalking-staffe, with your loins guirded stand Exodus 12.

As Pilgrims do (yours is a Pilgrims case
The world your Inn is, heaven your dwelling place) Preparation to receive
the blessed Sacrament.

Gather vvilde Lettice, overcome I mean
Your imperfections, and extirpe them clean.
Make of such Lettice sauce a Lamb to eat;
The Lamb is JESUS, he shall be your meat.
JESUS has clothed himself with a Lambs skin,
From Sheep to take the heavy load of sin. Io. 1.

Is it not strange a Lamb should on his back
Carry a flock of Sheep, and their sins pack?
Had not our JESUS them supported so,
Not one of all the flock to heaven should go.
The Eliphant by Nature has this grace,
That in his furies heat, yet if in place
He shall a Lamb (mild peaces Emblem) see,
His fury is assuag'd, his angers be
Forth-vvith made calm; perchance some fell aspes tongue
With slanders poison has your credit stunge:
Or some ill-nurtur'd groom even to your face
Opprobrious speeches gives, words of disgrace. 2. Reg.

Your case is DAVID'S, ABSALON his hands
Against you lifts, and the rebellious bands
Are which your chief friends filled, who erst did go
Next to your side is chief cause of your vvoe. Ps. 5^

And where you wear with benefits most kind,
There you discurtesies do chiefly find,
By thieuish Pursuiuants your goods you loose,
And yet the Thieues you dare not once accuse.
Per chance with JACOBS sons, or DAVID'S Child Gone. 34.

You blush to see as Thamar is defilde
Kick'de out of doors, after a deed so ill
You vow you will incestuous AMMON Kill.
You rage, you chafe, you storm, you swell, you puff, 2. Reg. 13

The foming ADRIA is not half so rough.
Come angry Eliphant behold a lamb,
Meek JESUS who in Paschall season came;
That by his death Man might enfranchised be,
And by his slaughter the bound Goat set free.
MOSES a brazen Serpent did erect, Leuit. 16. Number. 21. 103.

Which cured Israel with his sole aspect.
Behold this Lamb, meek JESUS mark him well,
In him let all your meditations dvvell.
His only sight will cure your inflamed blood,
Chiefly if seen upon the Crosses Rood.
For know fierce Man, this Lamb is Gods sole Son,
Who when us silly sheep sin had undone,
And we by Tempters vvhistle led astraye
Through vn-couth paths to Hell went the next way,
To see our ruin grieuing at the heart,
With Fathers leave he played the Shepherds part,
Inuenting a proportioned means to gain
The vvandring sheep, and bring him back again.
He cloths himself with shape, with flesh, with skin
With all of Man, excepting only sin:
And in this form conuersing amongst the rest,
He teaches them what feeding place is best.
Sometimes in Valleys and lovv Dales he goes,
As how we should our selves despise, he shoes,
Auerring who to Sion mount will clyme,
Must gaze in these lovv pastures for a time.
Of Gelboe hills he bids his sheep take heed,
There is no faftie on those Cliffs to feed.
The fruitful shevvres, the Dew of heavenly grace,
Never refresh that miserable place.
There we see SAVL on his own svvord to die,
Whilst he the Philistaean blades would fly 1. Reg 31. 2. Reg 1.

The Hills with murdered VVarriors are filled,
Thy valiant there, o Israel are killed.
What are these Mountains where such worthies di'de,
But elevated hills of human pride?
Wits, who do lift themselves above the rest, S. Austen explicating that of
the 67. Psalm. increpa fe^as arundinis, says that heretics are, ferae calami
beasts who with their quils damage and molest the Church.

And ever judge their own opinion best.
Such wicked Arrius was, and after him
Pelagius, of the Devil each a limb.
Vrsacius, Valens and the gelded sort,
Who do frequent (Constantius) thy Court.
To JESUS all injurious: JESUS grace
Pelagius does deny: the Eunuchs race
Aver that God no more then they have done,
In generation of his only Son:
And Gods Son follovving Natures wonted laws,
In his eternal being has a cause.
These and all Heretics in Gelboe hills,
Have fallne on their own swords, I mean their quils.
Some times our Lamb on top of Thabor feeds
The flock instructing by Heroycke deeds
Of divine Counsails it is best there to graze,
From whence tovvard heavenly Sion they may gaze: Mat. 17

Then he inform's them of his Royal birth,
The reason why he came upon the earth.
How does he make Celestial Spirits mount,
When he the Eight Beatitudes does count?
Beginning thus, the Kingdom of high heaven
To those who are in spirit poor, is geu'n. Of the first beatitude. Mat. 5.

You ask who are spiritually poor,
Who looking on their nothing do not soar
With feath'red vvings of pride, but knovving well
That their offenses have deserved Hell,
They suffer injuries, that so his wrath
They may appease, whom sin offended has.
This poverty had Isreal's forlorn King,
When railing Simei at him stones did fling: 2. Keg. 16.

He does reflect as his rebellious son
Against him wars, what he before had done
To good VRIAS, and accepts this rod,
As a deserved affliction, sent from God.
Mark how our Lamb does earths possession give
To those who on the earth do meekely live,
Over their own passions their command is great, Of the 2. Beatitude. Mat. 5.

In The land of others hearts they have a seat.
Theirs is the land of everlasting bliss,
(The which alone land of the living is)
If poor have heaven, if meek on earth do dvvell,
What place is for the angry left, but Hell?
To Stygian pit, wherefore does Thubal go,
Let holy man by God inspired shovv.
Because he had no Target to ward blows, Ezech. 32.

But swords and Lances to offend his foes.
JESUS who do our hands with weapons arm,
When heaped injuries sound the alarm;
When we shall suffer opprobries, when wrong,
Bestovv on us that armor of the strong
Firm patience, who fight covered with this shield, Cant. 4.

Alvvaies return victorious out the field.
What was thy life but a continual pain,
A lasting labor to bring back again
The vvandring sheep, and put him in such place
Where wholesome pastures are, streams flovvvvith grace.
Whom did not thou instruct, to whom not Preach^
Whom virtue not by thy example teach?
When any with the rot infected vvare,
With what love did thou cure them, with what care?
Herafter Pastors thou do teach to rule,
Making thy life of every grace a School.
Thou bidst them often remember Ioathans tale,
How when supremacy was set to sale. Iud. 9.

The Fig, the Vine, the Olive would not buy
With their own detriment a place so high:
Only the Thorn accepts to be great,
(Thorns willingly do sit in upper seat)
Who follovv thee must choose the lovver end,
Until thy heavenly Father bid ascend. Luc. 14.

Thou shevvst wherein a Prelates place consists
Not in good fare, or doing what he lists,
Not to have complacence in being first,
Rather to judge himself therefore the vvorst. Mat. 23.

Not making the poor sheep to carry much
When he with his least finger will not touch
The burden others bear, nay the right way
To govern is, when Prelates do, then say.
Therefore still thou do to thy precepts join
This Rule, my servants actions be like mine. Io. 13. Mat. (...).

He is a Monster in whose mouth does stand
A tongue, in greatness which exceeds his hand.
How many such our Basan Pastures show?
How many such in upper places go?
Of God and virtue they do largely talk,
But have no hands to work, no feet to walk
After thy CROSS, such carry on their back
A Pastors title, but the virtue lack.
Who are in seat of supreme honor placed
Must keep themselves from a cold Northren blast,
Icleped pride, this had his birth on high, (...). 14.

And ever since contendeth up to fly.
What industry, what labors do thou spend
In gaining Judas? as if the whole end
Of thy conuersing in the world had bin
To make this wretch forsake his haunt of sin:
And what revvard? as Priests shall him out tell
Poor thirty pence, he will his Master sell?
And can a Lamb for such a price be sold,
More vvorth then Iasons sheep with fleece of gold?
When at this rate the Butchers had thee bought,
They presently unto the shambles brought,
Where with thy death though they did mean to end,
Thy vvisdome did beyond their malice tend.
Then thou did think upon this mystique board,
How with thy sacred flesh it should be stored,
Making theit furies, who did thirst thy blood
The instruments of our eternal good.
And alt'ring the old rites of Pascall sheep,,
Ordain'st that we a better Easter Keep.
The hautie Pharisees full little think,
They make a wine shall be soule-sauing drink
For hated Gentiles, little do they dream,
From JESUS veins can flow so rich a stream.
Do you think Scribes who sit on MOSES Chair,
That when in high Priests house you joined are,
Your consultation is, how you shall dress Mat. 23. A relation of some
passages of our Saviors Passion.

For Christian banquet a Caelestiall Mess?
Speak sacred Muse, how this great Myst'rie came,
That our foes dress for us our Paschall Lamb.
The cruel Knife that cut our JESUS throat,
In PILATES Hall was the base vulgars note.
As they the Heavens astonish with their cry,
Let Barrabas alone, let JESUS die. Mat. 27.

I find quoth PILATE of his death noe cause.
They answer let him dye (our wills are laws.)
Bring water, from this crime i will vvash me free.
His blood on us, and on our Children be.
Ye Impious jews, this was the sharp edg'de Knife,
Which did deprive meek JESUS of his life.
When TITUS shall your City walls cast down,
When fire your Temple, and destroy your Town,
When to the worlds end your accursed race
Shall wander vagabonds in every place; The misery of the Jews: all which
S. Hierome Ep. 129. ad Dardanum does attribute to Gods just vengeance for their
impious killing our Savior.

Then know that ABELS blood, whom you have slain
For vengeance cries against his Brother CAINE.
When common weals shall make you a sign use
To make the world take notice you are jews,
When Boys hoope after you, Dogs at you bark,
Have you not CAINE the homicide his mark?
Before a LAMB is for the Table fit
They use to fleye him, afterward to spit,
And so by gentle fires all sides to heat,
Till by degrees it be made wholesome meat.
But not the most hard-harted Butcher flaies
The silly LAMKIN, whilst life in it stays:
Oh then are Butchers, more inhumaine Jews!
How cruelly do you meek JESUS use?
As you do make the Roman Cohort strip,
And vvhilest he lives, flaie him with tearing whip.
From top to toe his skin they do pull off,
His wounds your sport are; at his pains you skoffe:
How else should his vvoes of all vvoes be chief:
How else should JESUS be a man of grief? Thren. 1. Isai. 53.

But can your malice as yet farther go,
Are you still witty to increase his vvoe?
Though you did stab him with your doubled noate,
Of let him die, although pulled off his coat
With many lashes, yet nor Knife, nor Rod
Quite kills the LAMB, who is both Man and God.
After a many deaths life does remain,
That having killed you may kill again.
You joye that he as yet not yields to fate,
That so you longer may protract your hate.
He joys to live, that we may see how much
He loved us, whose sufferings have been such,
And all for us; our sins struck every blow Isa. 53.

Our wickedness was cause of all his vvoe.
Witty Perillus and Mezentius stern
To torture shall of you inventions learn.
Proceeding in your malice you make fit,
To roast this holy Lamb a vvodden spit,
The CROSS I mean, to which his feet and hands
Your barbarous hangmen tie with iron bands.
What is defective now? a flame to roast
The victime, and so consummate the Host:
In The altar of our JESUS breast does burn
A sacred fire, the which shall serve the turn.
Not thornie Crown, not whips, not bloody sweat,
Not Crosses weight, but feruorous loves heat
Consumes our Lamb, as Phoenix in his nest
Our JESUS dies midst flames of fiery breast.
For were he not consumed bysuch a Sun,
How should an holocaust be rightly done?
Under the CROSS to have a place, vveel'e sue Spiritual profit arising from
meditating on our Sauionrs Passion.

Where we will immolated JESUS view:
And vvhilste on each sad passage we reflect,
We Will heal our sorrovves with his sole aspect
When we are angry we will on him look,
His taunts, his griefs, his vvounds shall be our book:
And as he suffers, whilst we hear no noice,
Not the least sound of a Complainctiue voice,
We Will set our spoonefull to his sea of vvoes,
Our adversaries to his savage foes,
And blush to fill each ear, each place with moan,
Whilst in respect of his our griefs are none.
The Lamb by Jews and Pharisees thus dressed,
For JESUS friends makes a continual feast.
But with what drink is this great banquet stor'de,
What Massique wine adornes this royal board?
My Muse declare in the ensuing verse,
And the strange nature of that wine rehearse,
The properties of that Caelestiall wine,
Which JESUS worthy ghestes drink as they dine.
Of which when you shall hear prodigious things,
Yet give us faith, and know this liquor springs
From Vine tree, which was set by Gods own hand,
And in the midst of Paradise does stand.
Be not incredulous this wine does grow
In JESUS veins, and from his wounds does flow,
The Heart whom Dogs have almost at a baye, Psalm. 41.

Peceiuing that his spirits do decay,
Forthwith unto some River has recourse, Of the blessed Sacrament under the
form of Wine.

Where svvimming through, he gathers new force,
With which, as if he had but then begun,
He svviftly flies, pursuing death to shun.
The soul of Man clothed with this fleshly furre,
Is this poor Heart, by many cruel Curr,
Hunted to death, the hounds names will you hear?
Sad grief, fond joye, stearne wrath, vain hope, false fear The passions of
the mind.

These as Acteons Beagles obe'id Man,
Whilst Man was good, and reason used, but when
Man in transgression was the Devils Ape,
And to a beast transformed, lost his shape.
The Curs which heretofore were kept in awe,
Will now obey no longer reasons law,
But as that Hunters Dogs their Master chase,
And often bereave him of his life of grace.
Amongst the rest one ugly Curre is found,
Icleped Mortal sin, this foul-mouthed hound
By nature has such an enuenom'd tooth,
That where he bites, assured death ensu'th.
The Nemrod or chief Master of the sport,
The Devil is, who with a graceless sort
Of worldlings, sons of the accursed CAYNE,
Pursue the silly HEART, till he be slain.
When sin is done an Euge blows the horn,
Their Huntesman hola is fair virtues scorn.
The vvoods resound with base detractions voice,
Foul slanders Echo makes a hideous noise.
When no temptation does the soul assault,
They storm and swear the Dogs are at a fault,
Getting the sent by customs tracke again,
They and their Curres follovv the Chase amayne.
The Heart pursu'de by such malicious foes,
Is tired often, often does his forces lose.
When lo good God (who the stayed course of things
Sweetly contriues) our Beast thus toyled brings
By secreet motions to a precious flood,
Which flovves with streams of vvounded JESUS blood.
Through this the chased Deer no sooner svvims,
But with new strength he innouates his limbs:
And thus refresht toward Heaven he trippeth so,
That we him judge rather to fly then go:
Nay sure he flies, (his vvings are love and grace)
VVhere-vvith toward Sion he mounts up apace.
Is this blessed River DAVID'S house of Arms
To furnish us with sheilds against all harms? Cant 4.

Or as in first creation great God brings Genesis 1.

Out of the waters feth'red foul with vvings?
Bark, bark ye Currs, ye cannot hurt us more,
Our soul has vvings, and in the Air does soar.
Who shall in Lethes streams his members bath
(Is it a benefit?) Oblivion has
Of his past deeds, forgetting good and ill,
(Else Poets with their lies the world do fill.)
On Alter table flovves a Lethes flood,
Breeding oblivion of each thing, but good.
Who are vvash't here forget their old desires,
Earthly propensions, and accustomed fires.
What vvonder then, if as Heart through here pass,
He seem to be far other then he was?
Shall I describe this glorious Nilus head
When it began? As JESUS blood is shed Io. 21.

By impious Jews on blessed Caluarias Hill,
And since through Edens Garden flovveth still:
When as the soldier with his Lance did open
Our JESUS side, he gave the stream full scope
To issue forth, which hitherto has run,
And ever shall until the world be done.
On Aegipt fruits Nilus bestovves a birth,
This River fertile makes our Christian Earth.
Once in a year seau'n-headed Nile or'e-flovves,
And benedictions on the land bestovves.
Each day, each hour, as AARONS sons think good,
We see the ouer-flovving of this flood.
Fruitful the Trees are, which in ordered ranckes,
With the streams vvatred grow along the banks.
Among'st these flourishes a vvell-spread Vine,
The Grape whereof does make a royal Wine,
With which our JESUS furnishes his Feasts:
None can it is virtue tell, but who are Guests.
O happy vines which in Engaddy grow
Where wine is made, from whence chaste virgins flow. Cant. 1. Zach 9. Cant.
5.

With this wine to be drunk, fear not this Cup
Ingenders worthy thoughts, drink it all up.
When we (fair Nymph) thy Austrian house and tree,
Throughout our Christian world dilated see,
All men the greatness of the Trunk admire,
Great Kings such branches as thy self desire.
We do reuolue old Oracles, and say
Therefore does Austrias Sun like the Noone day
Shine in our Hemisphere, and bright rays spread,
Because Great RODVLPH to this mistique bread,
By us describ'de, such piety did shovv,
From his devotion benedictions flow
Upon thy house: my Muse which here does treat
Of this rare MANNAH, and AMBROSIAN meat,
Offers her self, whilst she does Manna sing,
To you (Great Princess) who from Rodolph spring:
And knovves, though nothing else her gracious make,
Yet y'oule accept her for the Mannas sake.
The sacrifice whereof our Church does boast,
Wherein for Peoples sins Gods Son is host, Of the Sacrifice daily offered
in the Catholic Church.

Astonished we with silence will pass over,
And humbly him who is in it adore.
We anger JESUS when we do amiss,
To make our peace JESUS the victime is.
The Priest eake JESUS is: millions of times,
And in as many places for our crimes
Does JESUS offer victimes every day,
As if he nothing else but Mass did say.
The Bell which makes all people to repair, The Bell.

To JESUS Church, and tells them that there,
Gods service shall be done: is a strange bell,
And when it rings, does ring as strange a knell.
It is made of the voices of all those Even sectaries the^ selves are compelled
to say there is the Catholic Church, such a man is a Catho like, as
witnesses S. Augustine. lib. contra ep. fund. c. 4. Ciryl. Cat. 18, Io. 1. The
holy Fathers say that the church began in Abel a Virgin and martyr. Simon
Magus boasted much of faith with out good works. Clem. lib. 1. Recog. Mat. 7.

Who reason use; both JESUS friends and foes
Serve as a Bell, which Christian people tells,
That in our Church the true Religion dvvels:
In Church describ'de by me, built by Gods Son,
True service of eternal God is done.
At such an hour, at such a time of day,
JESUS himself will vouchsafe Mass to say.
Great God himself in this Bell has a share,
As he does in his testaments declare,
That the Church, whose foundation I have laid
Is that which he 'ith worlds beginning made;
The same which in the Patriarchall days,
And law of MOSES he from earth did raise,
But was unto a full perfection brought,
When JESUS grace, and truth his Christians taught
Nay God is angry, and does tell us plain,
His Church did not begin with impious Caine,
But founded in a righteous ABELS blood,
Has since supported by his right hand stood.
Have I built up my Church, IEHOVA says,
On Arrius, Hus, on Magus faithless faith?
Who so do build their house, build on the sands,
No longer then the builands.
Who not with me on JESUS build; at once
Their Church shall perish, with their rotten bones.
But my Church stands on an immoued rock,
And shall endure each persecutions shocke.
No Jew, no Heretic, no Pagans arm
Can do the Church which I have builded harm.
Nay every blustering vvinde, each adverse blast
Make the foundation of my Church more fast.
I built a neat, an ample stately Kirk,
And dare these say, their hogsties are my work?
With virtues Tapestrie my Church is fair,
Not with sins ugly, as their dunge carts are,
Perfumes of grace in my Church svvetly smell,
Vice makes their Synagogues a second Hell.
JESUS (the vvorth of whose brave name we tell)
Gives a voice to the making of our bell, We describe the Bell of the
Catholic Church.

And speaks thus, living it was my will
To build my Church and City on a Hill.
I built my Tempel on a mountain high,
Conspicuous and exposed to every eye:
Had I made man invisible to go, Mat. 5.

I would have likewise built my temple so.
I therefore spent a thirtie-three years time,
That mine should high perfections mountain clime.
A three-fould mountain then Olympus higher
As Aetna burning with perpetual fire:
The poor, the chaste, the virtue which obeies,
This mount more high then common earth does raise. The three Euangelical
counsels.

Good works, and alms bestovved in my name,
Make this high hill with Charity to flame:
The smell is likewise wonderfully svveete,
VVhilest Myrrh and Frankincense together meet.
And that these alvvaies reeke must be the care
Of mortifying acts, and mental praire.
How then dare these blasphemers of my grace,
Say I have chosen for my Church a place
With the earth even? those who never soar
With counsels vvings to heaven, what have they more
Then earth? in valleys and lovv dales they go
Who then commandments, will no more know.
Good works not only make my City fair,
But eake behoofull for the dvvellers are.
And shall such appertain unto my mount, Mat. 19.

Who of good works make none or little count?
But carelessly set all at six and seau'n It was one of the herefies of Simo^
Magus, in the Apostles time, and afterward of Aetius surnamed Atheist, that
faith alone was sufficient to salvation S. Hierome writ against Iouinian, who
made marrimony aequall with virginity. Mat. 8. Luc. 8. Cant. 4. 5. Io. 10.
Io. 21.

And say bare faith enough is to get Heaven.
My Church is not a Kennell for foul Dogs,
A nastie hogstie for all sensual Hogs.
Did not Iouinian a foul Hogstie make,
When from chaste life he did all merit take?
All such do Hogsties with Iouinian build,
Who to Virginity no honor yield.
How dare these Gerasines (feeders of swine)
Affirm their durtie village to be mine?
I claim a Church which on a mountain stands
Such, such is that which I made with my hands.
In this I give remission of sin,
And in none else, here (people) enter in.
This is my garden, this my dwelling house,
Here with me dvvels my Love, my Dove, my Spouse.
This Church my sheepefold is: sheepefold and sheep
With my own mouth I did bid PETER keep.
And shall I think my Church and sheepfold theare
Where my chief Vicar PETER has no care?
Those Synagogues, where Cephas has no Keie
Are shambles, wherein butchers the sheep slaie.
I in my Church (what nation can so boast?)
For peoples sins offer my self an Host.
I did die therefore, therefore I did bleed
That I my friends might with my own flesh feed. Of the ve ritie of our
Saviors presence in the B. Sacrament of the Altar.

And in my vvounded veins a Vine might grow
From whence a Nectar (drink of Gods) should flow.
Where you behold such Nectar and such fare
Go in; there is my feast, there my guests are.
But be assur'de there is no feast of mine
Where you no more have then bare Bread and Wine.
Not to a meal made up of of Foul and Beasts,
But to my Body I inuit my ghuests.
Am not I able to perform my word, Mat. 26. Mar. Luc 22. 1. Cor. 11.

And set my sacred flesh upon the board?
Who say my divine hand Almighty is,
Why give they limits to my power in this?
For wine I said my ghuests my blood should drink,
If I not give it them, they needs must think,
I either do delude, or else am vveake,
Not able to effect, what I do speak
Nor is it enough if I should make them eat
For my true body a phantastike meat,
My bodies figure, and a tipike Wine,
For I a substance promist' not a sign.
The Architect of lies makes such Feasts
And with like fopperies deceiues his guests.
He carries them to Castles of the air,
And makes them think they feed on dainty fare
When they eat nothing, all are tricks of his,
Each thing a sign, each thing a shaddov is,
They neither have before them flesh nor fish,
But idle faith composeth every dish.
Call they not me impostor with high Priests
Who say that I so jugle with my ghests? Mat. 27.

I bid them to a banquet, say their meat Berengarius anno 1028. denied the
real presence in the blessed Sacrament, and was condemned for an heretic by
diverse holy coun cells.

Shall be divine, my body they shall eat;
But when they sit down, an od fellovv says,
Take, eat this bread, and feed on Christ by faith.
The putid Berengarius mumbled so,
And long since for an Heretic did go.
And yet the people must persuaded be,
That such a dinner was ordained by me.
MARIE his Mother, who triumph'de over Hell,
Gives a voice to making of this Bell.
And bids all people to this Temple go,
Which in the former lines my Muse does show.
And thus she speaks: This Church unto my Son
Belongs for in it are due honors done.
To me his Mother: JESUS Priests are here,
For piety has builded every where,
Many fair Altars, and to honor me,
The world continual sacrifice does see:
Each heart is made an holy Altar stone
VVhereon due victimes unto me are done.
Petitions are the Hoasts which please me well,
As with devotions Frankincense they smell.
When as the world its first beginning had,
And sin had made the two beginners sad; Genesis 3.

Great God the serpent punishing, from whom
Both sin and sadness came, pronounced this doom;
That there should be an everlasting war
T'vvixt me, and Satan, betwixt those who are Io. 21.

His Sons, and such who from my bowels spring
(Such Children at the Cross I forth did bring.
That was the groaning Bed I lay upon,
When at my JESUS death I did bear JOHN
And in him the whole Church: my eldest boie
Borne without pain, but not without much joye
Great JESUS was: the earth and heaven smilde,
When my womb blessed the world with this brave child.
JESUS and JOHN'S acknovvledge I my seed,
(In sorrovv JOHN'S as RACHEL I did breed.)
JOHN'S knovving I am theirs and JESUS Mother
With filial love affect me before all other.
Know then that Tempel in the which you see
My progeny, JESUS true Church to be.
Now by these marks you shall my children know
A great respect and love to me they show,
They know what grace on earth God to me gave,
They know what glory in the heavens I have:
(Such Chrysostom, such Anselme, Bernard wear
By God instructed in my visions share) Admirable (...) the sentences of these
holy Fathers in the praise of our B Lad^e, ex tolling her above the Seraphins
and all the Quires of Angels. 2. Reg. 3.

They know what interest I have in my Son:
He ever has and will grant me each boon.
Like Bersabee I sit at his right hand,
And though I do entreat, yet I command.
Therefore to me they do direct their prairs,
My Son hears my petitions, I hear theirs.
A mothers title does my JESUS move,
Me to help them forces a Mothers love.
Where you see Virgins devout, humble, lovv,
There Is JESUS Church, into that Temple go
Where you see some with loves vvings mount on high,
They are my seed (so whilst I liu'de did I.)
Mine are those Children who make me their glass,
T'adorne themselves with virtues as I was.
By such apparel you my seed shall know,
But Satan's sons in different habits go.
Yet learn their marks, that when you shall them meet,
You may discern them by their cloven feet.
God promised a vvoeman who should tread Genesis 3.

On the old serpens neck, and bruise his head.
Am I not she who conceived without sin
In Mothers womb to bruise him did begin?
(Whom sin taints not (sin is the serpents head)
Such trample on him, yea such strike him dead)
EVE was a cursed tree, on which did grow
To ADAM, and his generation vvoe.
I bore a fruit, JESUS my royal Son,
Who did restore what ADAM had undone.
Growing in Caluarie upon a CROSS,
He did repair terrestrial Edens loss.
Wherefore against me, whom mighty God did choose,
And as a means in man's redemption use,
Against me the Mother of the God of Hoafls,
The Prince of Hell musters his damned Ghosts:
Against me each Goblin, each infernal sprite
Proclaims war, spitteth at me his spite.
But since my person they cannot come nigh
(Glory and grace have lifted me so high.)
That diu'lish malice which to me they owe,
In blasphemies and opprobries they shovv.
So does the Serpent and his wicked race
Diminish that all ouer-shadovving grace
VVherevvith the holy Ghost my soul did fill,
When JESUS leaving high Olympus hill,
Chose my parthenian womb, that flesh to make
Which on himself the Deity would take.) S. Anselme amongst other signs of
Predestination, auerreth that devotion to our B. Lady is one: and surly who
in the Catholic Church have been eminent for sanctity and lear ning: yea for
felicity and happienesse in Civil affairs, as Constantine and Charles the
great have been specially devoted to the blessed Virgin, the glorious Mother of
JESUS.

When they dare say, offenders with sin foul
As much grace beautifies as my pure soul.
If God my ANSELME did inspire as he
Affirms how those that are devout to me,
May firmly hope, that their names help to fill
That book which Gods predestinating will
Has writ; (this piety and filial love
My deuotes to enroll great God does move.)
Shall not such justly fear, their names to find
In the black book of death? whose cankered mind
Replenisht is with spite, with spleen, with hate
Against my person and my glorious state.
Can such more spit their rancourd malice forth,
Then in diminishing my graces vvorth?
They say, God me no gifts peculiar gave
So great a sanctity as I all have.
Days Festival ordained to honor me
By these my foes quite abrogated be.
They strive that I Mother of such a Son,
Should be forgot as if I naught had done.
The Serpent labors in the Desert vvilde, Apoc. 12.

First to devour the woman, then the child.
These Caitiues know, that honor which I share
Redounds to JESUS, whose my merits are.
(For what in me is eminent is good Io (...).

Is JESUS grace; That is the Ocean Flood
From whence Saints merits flow, and to the maine Apoc. 4.

By gratitude must back return again..)
And though they seem at me alone to aim,
Yet they well know what dart hurtes me the same
VVoundeth my JESUS, such relation is
Tvvixt him and me: my opprobries are his:
Therefore when moved by their du'ilish sire
They slander me; against JESUS they conspire.
When Antiochians will their hatred shovv
Unto their Kesars, they their statues throvv As the prototypo^ is honored in
the vvorsip of the Picture, so is it dishonored in the contumelious abuse of it

Contemptibly to ground: on Kings they vvreake
Their fury, as their Portratures they break.
Could these Iconoclasts with impious hand
My person touch, I should no more command
As Angels Empress: nor in highest heaven,
Injoye that glory which my Son has given.
But since their malice cannot reach so high
They in my holy Pictures me defy.
They break and despise these, out Churches thr(...)
And if they could they eake would use me so.
Nay worse then Saul, possessed with an ill sp'right
What serpent could not do, these sons of night 1. Reg.

Attempted have whilst their blaspheming tongue The Albigenses affirmed, our
bles sed Lady to have been agreat sin ner. S. Austen and The Coun cells of
Claramou^, Basil Tre^t. etc. alvvaies except the B. Virgin, when they treat of
sin. Lu. 1.

Has me defiled with transgressions dunge.
Counsels and Fathers have religious bin,
Me to exempt when as they treat of sin.
And yet these foule-mouthd'e Cerberi dare houle
That JESUS Mother is with black sin foul.
So did not the Archangel GABRIEL sing
When he from heaven his Embassy did bring.
But thus began, Hayle of thy sex the best
Store-stouse of grace amongst all women blessed.
The Fathers svvimme in this Embassage stream,
Making the Angels words my praises theme.
Who dare a note hovvle contrary to this,
Sing not as Angel, but with Serpent hiss.
But though Dogs bark, yet Cynthia keeps her course,
These Curres may houle, but have no further fource,
Although these Devils against me conspire,
Yet am I worshipped of Angels Quire.
Mauger the Serpent, mauger errors pride,
In glories Chariot, I triumphant ride. Gne. 4

These are the Clothes which Satan's children wear
The marks of Cain which on their fronts they bear
A deadly hatred and malicious spleen,
Against JESUS Mother, and the Angels Queen.
Such, such are Serpents offspring, Satan's seed,
When you encounter them, fly fly with speed.
Know JESUS love in such can never dvvell,
Who of his Mother know not to speak well, Tit. 3.

Avoid their companies, their very breath
Is dangerous, and can engender death;
How fatal was the serpents hissing noise
When he Eve murdered with his only voice?
Vild Heretics of worse site sons as ill
Have of their father learnd with words to kill.
Heretical assemblies are a schole,
Where Satan sitting on his pest'lence stole
False doctrine teaches, and with forged tales Ps. 1.

Against me, my Son, and his Saints daily railes.
But where are pious worshippers of me,
Assure your selves there JESUS Church to be.
Where JOHN'S assemble, there the true Church is,
If you find one you cannot the other miss.
Angels who not partake our speaking art The Angels.

By signs will utter their true meaning heart:
And say this is that Church, which JESUS built,
Those very vvalls he made, the roof he guilt.
Into this Church all nations enter in
Where truest Sacrifice is done for sin.
Here shed your tears, here JESUS vice-roies sit,
Who can your sins vvashed with tears remit.
Judges, to whom JESUS such power has given Mat. 16. Io. 21.

That what they here do is confirmed in heaven.
In this Church we (attendants on our King,)
As JESUS Prelates do the High Mass sing,
And eleuate our mighty Lord on High,
In sign of Homage on the lovv earth lie.
By Quires of Angels are song joyful lays, Luc. 5.

When sinful souls forsake their wonted ways;
In Penitents conversion shares have we Ps. 19.

Our ruins by their risings filled be.
Of it and those who in this Tempell are,
Are we protectours, and have special care.
Whereas those Synagogues, which schism and pride
Have cobled up, not Michael does guide:
But Lucifer with his black guarde attends,
And brings at last unto disastrous ends.
Chief Senators of JESUS Common weal
The Apostles in this manner ring a peale.
That Church which of The Apostles takes name,
Is JESUS Church, we did erect the same.
Against this Church Hell gates fight, but in vain, The Apostles.

We are the Pillars, who this Church sustain.
Firm Pillars, and strong firmament of Truth,
Supporting it, mauger what Satan does.
Those Synagogues on Pillars do not stand
Which wear built up by Magus impious hand,
By Cerinth Marcion, but in Pillars' turne',
Are rotten sticks, which in Hell fire shall burn.
The houses with them joyntlie shall decaie,
The houses which these workmen make of Claie.
Opinions Preaching nothing else but ease,
Opinions which (prone to ill) nature please.
Are rotten sticks, when Simon Magus said
To gain heaven faith sufficient is, he made
Of rotten sticks a stie for sensual hogs,
And like to him a Kennell for foul dogs
Eunomius built, saying that Faith alone
Can save our soul, though good works we have none.
Did not Nouatians build a house of claie,
Whilst Priests authority they took away?
A house where carnal libertines shall dvvell,
A house which is the Porters lodge of hell. Mat. 7.

No vvonder though broad be perditions path,
For Pilgrims toward Hell it alvvaies has.
No true Confession of sins in the way, Of the Sacrament of Confession.

No good advise the passengers to stay.
But in that Church which built by JESUS hands
On us Apostles as firm Pillars stands.
JESUS appointed there should alvvaies sit
His Viceroies, and the guilt of sin remit:
And Christians teach where feinds in ambush lie.
How they their treacheries and snares shall fly.
Doctors of Physic, who with wine and oil
Diseases cure; when Priests from sin assoile Luc. 10. Ps. 107. 144.

They power in oil: Gods mercy oil must be,
Which svvimming above his attributes we see.
Penance by Priests enjoined has the vvines place,
Which though it smart, yet has an healing grace.
His Viceroies, who when sinners go next way
To Hell, them by good admonition stay;
Teach Penitents that such and such a fault
Their predecessors to perdition brought,
That such acts are inordinate and foul,
Such customs dangerous unto the soul.
How by good customs they must o'rcome bad,
In Ghostly warfare what care must be had,
So AARONS Priests judged of the Lepers skin:
So JESUS Priests judge betwixt sin and sin. Leuit. 14. Luc. 17.

In Church which JESUS upon us did raise,
Such was the use; This even in our days,
The custom was; JESUS us power gave
To forgive sins, and we it practiced have:
But where of sins no true remission is,
Be sure you shall of JESUS tempel miss.
Of that Church JESUS no foundation laid, Io. 20. Mat. 16.

But schism and pride have the whole building made:
That Church Apost'like is vvhere-vvith great care
Traditions of Apostles observed are. Of the traditions of the church

Things which great JESUS us alone did teach
To the whole world we afterward did Preach,
And though all circumstances are not writ,
(The Majesty of God not thinking fit
So to confine himself) yet they are as good
As if they writ in sacred volume stood,
And in Religious hearts find as much faith
Who kovv it is as true what JESUS says,
As what he writes: so we have Christians taught, Baptizing of Infants is an
Apostolic tra dition, as also the 40. days fast of Lent and the worshipping
of holy Images, according to the 2. General Coun cel of Nice The Martirs. The
true Catholic Church increases by Persecutions.

That Baptism children frees from ADAMS fault.
Inspired by God we ordaind Lenten fast,
Worship of Images in Tempels pla'st.
These we as JESUS substitutes ordain'de
And have in Christ's Church hitherto remaind.
Where these are kept, that Church is JESUS spouse,
Go in all people, there keeps JESUS house.
The Martyrs who with death their Crowns did vvin
Ring such a peale and call all people in.
That Church which by sad persecution grows,
And more it is oppressed by her foes,
The more increases, was by JESUS made,
JESUS of it the whole foundation laid.
The Parget which this building makes so good,
And joins the stones is glorious Martyrs blood:
When other sects by frovvning Caesar's ire,
Consumed are like dry vvood in the fire,
We as true gold (such is Gods heaun'ly might)
Are purifi'de, and made to shine more bright.
Who should of Sixtus and his Laurence tell
If Valerianus had not been so fell:
Who e're had heard of brave Sebastians praise? Three hun dreth thou sand
Martirs, put to death in the City of Rome. And their* Popes.

Had he not liu'de in Dioclesians days.
Great Rome three hundredth thousand Martyrs shows
Exposed to beasts, burnt, rackt by cruel foes.
And thirty glorious Popes in order stand,
Who lost their lives by Persecutors hand.
(Can all the sects which have been since Christ's days
Together joined, such a number raise?
If it be chiefest love our lives to spend,
(Jesus says so) in service of our friend,
Was not the charity of Romans much? Ioh. 15.

Whose Massacres for Jesus sake were such.
No vvonder eake though Roman ground be good
A Nilus vvatred it of Martyrs blood. Dioclesi^^ and (...) (...)an though they
pretended satiecie of honors and imperial dignity to be the cause of their
resigning the regal state, yet they privately confessed to their nee, rest
friends that the true reason was the flourisshing and increasing of the
Christian church which mage^ their tyranny more and more through out the
world dilated it self. Act. 8. 10.

We lost our lives, and yet we vvon the field,
And made our bloody persecutors yield,
Two Kesars vanquished in these bearing fights
To CONSTANTINE resign their Kingly rights,
And first a Christian killing hand does want,
E're martyrs ready to be ki^d are scant.
JESUS ordaining that his friends shall gain
Not by resisting, but by being slain.
So he him self made Hell, and devils fly,
When on the CROSS on Golgoth he did die.
No armor must we bring into the field
But a sole Buckler, patience is this shield.
This is enough to gain the promised Crown,
Sufficent eake to cast Hells powers down.
The rising waves, which drown each other bark,
Lift only from the ground just NOAH'S Arc.
Though other Cocke-boates perish in the seas,
Whilst no mild Neptune makes the billovves cease,
Yet when the surges toss Saint PETER'S barge,
JESUS himself (best Palinure) has charge.
JESUS himself great Neptune of the Sea,
JESUS whom VVindes and AeOLVS obey.
He calmes the waves with his all-potent hand,
And brings our Pinnace to desired land.
Where is Iouinians Hoie; where Arrius Boat?
Though furnished with seamen of such noate.
Eusebij, and other learned men
Rovved in Arrius Boat with tongue and pen:
Rotten with time their Pinnace water drinks,
And to the bottom miserably sinckes.
Nor any ship can long against billovves stand,
Which is not built and gouernd by Gods hand.
Of Aibigenses what does now remain? It is a vvonderfull thing that the
works of Arch heretik^s, though most learned after some years all perish. The
Ar(...)a^s Donatists, Nestoria^s Manichea^s and other sects have written
books for the establi shing of their here ticall opinions, and yet none of
their works are extant, as if they were sub iect to that curse S^p. 4.
Spu^^a vitulamina non agent altas radices. And verily arch heretics are the
first begotten bastards of the Devil, as Policarpus called Marcio^.

But that they were by Simon Montford slain.
Who now for wicked Hus, and Arrius looks,
Must find them in great JESUS Doctors books.
But PETER'S ship, wherein did JESUS preach,
As he the multitude on shore did teach,
From JESUS days unto our present times
Has still made voyages to remote climes.
And carried Merchants, who not for base gold,
But death and blows their precious vvares have sold.
Their vvares wear charity, true-faith, firme-hope,
Which they for sorrovves and contemptes did cope.
Saint PETER'S ship made voyages to Chine,
To Iapons Islands which on Sinas join
To the remote America which shows
A flovvre, vvhereon the name of JESUS grows.
(Ye gentle heavens smile sweetly on that earth
So dignified with name of JESUS birth)
(Thrice happy they, on whose vvell-vvatred ground
The name of JESUS flourishing is found.)
JESUS svveete odor our stout hattes did fill,
When Tyrants us for JESUS sake did kill.
To all these Regions PETER'S Pinnace fraught
With Merchandise, celestial virtues brought,
And though it labourd has so many years,
Yet svvist it sails and as new made appears.
No dangerous syrts, no ship-deuouring sands,
No billovves, no perfidious Pirates bands
Conspiring with damnd Ghoasts to Hell cast down,
Are able Peter's vvell-built Arc to drown.
Her Pilote JESUS in no tempests fayles,
The holy Ghost fills with vvindes her sails:
That mauger Satan, and his stigian court
She safe ariues at heavens desired port.
Wherefore that ship, which through all ages has
Carried in her the Merchants of true Faith:
That ship which of spoils from Hell-gained brags,
And for her streamers has blessed Martyrs flags.
Is Jesus Church (which God like a ship forms
For it is exposde to Seas, to vvindes, to storms.)
Of this Boat Jesus himself has the charge,
(Who seek heavens Haven come into this barge.)
Virgins who Lavvrels wear upon their head,
Adorn'de with Lilies white, and Roses red. A description of Virgins, who to
their crown of Virginity, have added the lavvrel of Martyrdom. Apoc. 14

(Virginity the Lilie white bestovves
A glorious death brings forth the ruddie Rose)
These Nymphs I say Angelicallie sing,
And in this sort a holy peale do ring.
(A peale wherein all numbers friendly meet,
Virgins alone can sing a song so svveete.)
These flovvres which on our frontes make so fair shovv
And smell so svveete in Jesus Garden grow.
Thence Barbara, thence Agnes, did them take,
And a triumphant Garland of them make.
Jesus Church stands in an Elizian ground,
Where fragrant Roses are, and Lilies found,
Where Vestal Virgins have their deserved praise,
And Martyrs fronts adorn'de are with green Baies.
Where good works evermore do fragrant smell,
Is Jesus Garden, Jesus there does dvvell.
There is his bovver, there his Summer house, Can. 2.

There Jesus sporteth with his lovely spouse.
Among these in English tone sings EBBA slain
For Chastities defense by the stearne Dane,
With many Nuns, who under her charge were
(For of a Monastery she had care)
Offering their Laurels at feet of their King, Apoc. 4. Iud. 5.

With Deboraeh of victories they sing.
Relate my Muse the subject of their song,
And speak their Crowns gaind by Barbarians vvrong.
In Collingham eight hundredth years ago, A relation of the glorious
Martyrdom of S. Ebba. an. Dom. 870. burnt with her holy Virgins by the Danes
for the defense of their Virginity.

Or there-abouts (as Chronicles do shovv)
A holy Cloister stood (is it not strange
That aftertimes should cause so great a change)
Then Fathers joyd, when Cloistets had their sons,
Mothers rejoiced to see their daughters Nuns.
And thought their children bestovv'd vvondrous well,
When they serud' Jesus in a quiet Cell.
They thought when daughter chose a Cloister life,
That she was matched with Jesus for his wife.
But after-daies do better open their eyes,
And then their Ancestors are grown more wise:
Our times instructed in a deeper schole,
Have learnde to call each age precedent fool,
And put on their Dads backs a Motlie coat,
Affirming superstition made them dote,
But le'ts go on: Ebba was Abbess there
Many fair Nymphs to her obedient were.
Many fair Nymphs (though beauty was thought foul
Which was not grast'e with beauty of the soul.)
But when our Fathers sin (for know that sin
Often changes scepters, and brings strangers in.
(So Roderigoes fault brought Mores to Spain) Eccles. 10.

Had made God send to punish Crimes the Dane.
The Pagan soldier each where spoyld the land,
No place was free from his all-burning hand,
No holy Church but was consum'de by fire
No age, no sex could pacify his ire.
Though no where more the Devil his part played,
Then whereas piety had houses made
For holy Nuns, and consecrated vvights,
To spend in divine prayer their days and nights.
Satan too conscious of the daily maime,
By these he suffers, and how they proclaim
War against his Kingdom: with peculiar spite
Makes his infernal feinds against these to fight.
(Speak Alberstate and Mansfield as you brag
Of Monasteries spoils, under whose flag
Your warfare is? Satan will pay you well
And what wants here you shall receive in Hell.)
To Collingham the Mansion of our Nuns
A troop of Pagans came: (Satan these sons
On Gentilisme begat) The house they take
(For what resistance could poor women make?)
The Vestments, Chalices, the holy things,
(Surely my Muse of nevv-done mischiefs sings.)
They do profane: when they are full of spoil
The Nuns (Gods living Temple) they will defile.
The Wolf who for long time no food has eat
With fiercer appetite seeks not his meat
As leaving VVoods, when night has chas'de the day,
He to the Village comes to get his pray,
And having found either by cries or smells,
Where harmless flock by care of shepherd dvvels.
About the house he often walks round,
Espying where an entrance may be found.
He often assaies to break into the stall,
And often repeld is by the well made wall.
At last by force prevailing he makes way,
And in midst rusheth of his vvisht-for pray.
At sight of cruel foe the poor sheep quake,
And although many yet no head dare make.
(Shall we blame nature who makes stoutest Rams,
In presence of the Wolf, as meekest Lambs)
No otherwise the soldiers run about
Each corner of the Cloister to find out
These Lambs of God: they burn with wicked flames,
And naught can quench their fire but sacred Dames.
They each-vvhere raunge, no bars can stop their course
They break the strongest doors with deu'lish force.
So see we Humber passing his set bounds
With waters drown the ouer-flovved grounds.
Bridges, and houses which oppose his way
He carries with him, nothing can him stay. Dan. 13.

EBBA (now compast with Susannas care
Death or deflovvring the Elections are)
Was to the Church with all her daughters fled
(With fear the holy Maids were almost dead)
Daughters, quoth she; and would have spoken more
When furious Pagans rushing at the door,
Did make her leave, before she had begun,
Unto the door some bolder Virgins run,
And firm it fast, at least it shall keep out The Oration made by S. Ebba to
her Nuns.

For some short space the Danes intruding route.
EBBA again begins (daughters) quoth she
To free your self from Danes lust learn of me;
What law forbids to use a murdring hand,
To keep vovvd'e faith, the same law does command
For beauties sake Pagans have us in chase,
In steed of beauty a disfigurd face.
Our sights shall yield them: as you see me do
(with that she draws a Knife (Virgins) do you.
Our bodies hitherto have been kept chaste,
And unto death shall not this pureness last?
Our bodies yet are free from foul lusts stain,
And shall we now be ravished by the Dane.
Shall we polluted be with Pagans rape?
No no first perish this vvell-pleasing shape.
With streams of blood vv'eele quench unlawful fires,
With ugly looks vv'eele scarre vntam'de desires.
Our spouse is JESUS, faith to him we gave,
He shall our bodies chaste, though mangled have,
And though we be exteriorly foul,
He more will love the beauty of our soul.
In speech of men Euphrasia alone
Shall not hereafter live: of us each one
Shall act that Virgin, and not fear deaths blovv
That to our spouse unspotted we may go.
Empress of Virgins, of our sex the best,
To thee we consecrate our snovvy breast.
If any faint do thou stout thoughts inspire,
JESUS pure Mother, give a noble fire.
Having said thus, with knife she slits her nose,
Mangels her cheeks, cuts off her lips, yet shows
Not the least sign of sorrovv (JESUS love
In her chaste soul all sorrovv goes above.)
The Nuns who in obedience wear exact
Follovv their Abbess in this worthy fact.
Their Vizages (o nobly cruel deed!)
With plenteous streams issuing from vvounds do bleed.
Faces, where beauty dwelled, and every grace,
Religious Amazons) themselves deface.
Telling this act shall I a credit find?
Will men believe such an heroicke mind
Could in so many dvvell? Could England breed
So many Actours of so so brave a deed?
We see Zopirus daughters without Nose
With mangled Cheeks: the most inhumaine foes
Would pity them, yet they all pity hate,
(So much they JESUS love and Maiden state)
Imagine now what a deformed sight
These Virgins are: whom will not their view fright?
Let vvanton Dane attempt a Nun to kiss,
For lips a stream of blood he shall not miss.
What Church of Sectaries a Virgin shows,
Who slit for Chastities defense her nose?
Nay they shall Canonize such for a Saint,
Who does not her self for an husband painte.
If Teeth, if Nose, if Face have the least fault,
New Teeth, new Nose, new Face, shall straight be bought.
If Teeth, if Nose, if Face can be for gold,
At Painters shop, or Poticaries sold.
(So unlike is, so different the fire
Of Sions daughters, and the Gyrles of Tire.
The inra'gde soldiers bolted out so long
Breaking the Doors into the Tempel throng,
And every one, not knovving what was done,
Run furiously to sease upon a Nun:
But as they see their mangled faces bleed,
They stand amazed at the horrid deed.
The Captain of the sacrilegious band,
Thinking this Act was done by a strange hand,
Despairing eake to cool his impure flames,
By his Gods svveares, who had misus de the Dames
Should die the Death, for Venus sportes were made
(Quoth he) these faces: not by cruel blade
To be disfigur'de. Then did EBBA speak.
Tyrant on us thy savage fury vvreake.
We have offended, if offense it be,
By bodies maime to set the body free.
And in my Corpse first sheth your naked blades,
Whose counsel and example made these maids
Perform this deed, which follovving times shall tell,
And praise them to the heavens for doing well.
Convert your svvords on me, t'vvas I, t'vvas I,
Who counsel gave and courage; let me die,
This leader had no Porsenas brave sp'rit,
Who when the Roman maids in dead of night
Guided by Claelia down Tiber svvamme,
And safely to their sieged City camme, Lucretia, so generally commended for
killing her self is much reprehended by S. Austen in his first book de Ciuit.
Dei.

Astonished at the Heroike act
Did praise, and Crown the Virgins for the fact.
But these Barbarians, in whose savage breast,
Not the least true nobility did rest
Inrag'de, that the attempt of these Chaste Dames
Had quenched quite their ignominious flames,
With Hellish fury, and Erynnis filled,
Whom they did loath to violate, they killed:
And turning wicked lust to d'uilish ire
They set the Cloister with the Nuns on fire.
O happy Virgins, burning with your house
You offer holocausts unto your spouse Margarit Middleton Promartir of her sex
in the last reuolutio^. Cornelius (...) Lapide of the Society of Jesus, a man
famous for his profounde knowledge in holy Scrip tures and languages makes
honorable mention of her amongst the most glorious Martirs of the Primative
Church in his Commentaries upon Genesis cap. 1. I have here also made mention of
her at the urgent request of a worthy personage in these parts, who though a
stranger to our Country, yet is singularly devoted to our cou^ try vvoma^
this holy Martyr.

To keep your bodies incorrupt you die,
And with pure souls to high Olympus fly,
Where with your JESUS you in glory reign,
Who for your faith to JESUS have been slain.
Let not fame blazon more Lucretias name,
Who as she suff'red had a deed of shame,
With cruel blade her harmless self did kill,
And on her corpse reveng'de another ill.
Had she before the act with vvhetted knife
Sundred in two the gold thread of her life,
We would have given her a chaste Matrons praise.
And vviser times her monuments should raise.
As to the Doctors, I now take my way,
Her sex and times first Martyr bids me stay,
Whose glorious death did ring so loud a knell,
That it has made even learned strangers tell
How a rich MARCARIT in this our time,
Adornes our (from the world divided) clime,
Whose Lavvrel with such fragrant flovvers grac'te
Amongst the stoutest Champions has her plac'te.
If Vincent, Menas of the true Church be
Like cause, like virtue rings that so is she.
The holy Fathers who had wit at will,
And with a Pen made of an Eagles Quill,
Divinely writ for JESUS common weal,
To Martyrs next ring in this sort a peale.
Where Doctors teach of admirable wit,
In every science deeply learned, yet
As was their Master JESUS, humble, know,
There JESUS dvvels: into that Temple go.
We of our Fathers mysteries did learn,
And when we would faiths Articles discern,
For fear of our great Master to be shent,
Like Children we unto our Mother went
And although we above other men did soar
Yet did we listen to the Churches lore,
Knovving that truth was promised unto it,
But private men may err for all their wit.
Yea these wise men in wrangling fashion chime,
And make complaints against some of our time,
Who pulling them from heaven where they do dwell,
Rank them with Heretics condemned in hell,
Saying that they did teach the same with those
To whose opinions they were alvvaies foes.
Saint JEROME yet is full of holy Gall,
And who say so, he Heretics does call. The Doctors and holy Fathere of the
Catho lik church Humility a special sign of the Catholic Church: and it is
worthy to be observed, that the greatest Doctors, and most learned in the
Catholic Church have been most humble.

Have I quoth he so labourd with my Quill,
To fence a City built upon a Hill.
Have I so many Virgins taught to tread
The Counsels path, and to perfection lead,
And must I now be reccond'e amongst swine
Who nothing holy have nothing Divine?
Who more then I against Iouinian writ
And must I novv'mongst his Disciples sit?
By me just honors wear to Relics given
And do I now contemn the same in heaun?
Saint Austen wonders men can so much strain S. Norbert an Apostolic man
sounder of the order of Praemonstratenses, by his holy labors, he freed
Antwerp from the heresy of Tanchelinus. His white order has heretofore much
flourished in our Country. Fifty Orders in the Church of God, observe the
rule written by (...). Austen.

His Orthodoxal sentences, and feign
That he whilst in our Region he did dvvell
Held such opinions which he hates as hell.
What Church I was of, quoth he who will know
Unto the Rule writ by me let him go.
In that I counsels of perfection give,
And teach a life which I my self did live.
This as to Great Norbertus I appear
(Antvverpes Apostle) in my hands I bear
And promise that my rule observed well
His Canons shall secure from fear of Hell
When JESUS shall to stricter judgment come
And as they have deseru'de give souls their dome.
Noe less then fifty holy Orders stand
Obseruant of this rule writ by my hand.
Daily fresh vvreaths adorn my glories crown
As I behold (from high heaven looking down
My English Daughters keep with holy care
Those statutes which by me ordained wear.
They piously observe what I have writ
For Nuns and solitary livers fit.
These Virgins never call this or that mine
But alvvaies use this phrase, what is mine is thine
(As long ago in the Apostles time,
When Christian fervor was in chiefest prime,)
From Mothers knowledge the least thing to hide,
They think a trespass for which Achan d'ide. Ios. 7.

Each Virgin JESUS for her husband has,
To whom she keeps infallibly her faith,
Betwixt Great JESUS and each holy Nun Of the English Nuns of S. Monica,
in-Louaine, living under the holy rule of S. Auste^ The three Vows. 1.
Poverty. 2. Chastity 3. Obedience. The acts and exercise of a religious life.

As she is vested fiances are done
The Matrimonial knot is t'ide when she
Vovveth obedient, chaste and poor to be.
Heaven is the chamber, vvheare in joyful bliss
This holy marriage consummated is.
Then their superiors they do know noe will,
For they abjured have their own, as ill.
They Angels vvings have, when they should obey,
And forthwith fly if Mother once do say:
At midnight they (for sometime) leave their Cell
And come to Church called thither by a Bell:
Where they do pray whilst vvorldly people sleep,
And Vigils with the watching Angels keep.
When flesh against the spirit enters field
With prai'rs and fasting they make the flesh yield.
They often are guests at that Caelestiall board,
Which JESUS has with his own body stord.
There are they strengthened with heavenly grace,
Their ghostly enemies away to chase.
If the least spot contaminate their soul,
Confession does expiate what is foul,
I taught these Maids to tread the milken path,
Their Church is mine, as theirs so was my faith.
Shall we descend from heaven to our earths frame,
From earth to hell, and demand of the same?
What tune it rings, what battles have been fought
Tvvixt light and darkness, betwixt good, and naught
Jews Pagans Turks, our Region, lovv Hell
And all the Damned ghoasts who therein dvvell,
Shall ring that they against that Church spit their spleen,
Which in my verses is described seen.
Against PETER'S seat, against the Church of Rome
Did Heresy in battle arraie come.
Great Behemoth that Monstrous ox did dream Job.

To swallow up delightful Iordans stream.
But PETER (cunning Fisherman) with hook
Out of the sea Leuiathan has took.
Chiefly by PETER'S heavenly guided arm Job. 16.

Jews, Pagans, heretics have receiud harm.
Still PETER does in his successor fight,
And triumph over gates of horrid night.
Therefore of Stygian feindes the hate is great
Which they to PETER bear, and PETER'S seat.
But JESUS does make e'un Tipheus pride
To shovv this Church so hated is his bride.
Thus God, Christ, MARIE, Angels, Saints, Earth, Hell
Jointly concur to make our Church a Bell. Of the buil ders of the church

It remains only now we should declare,
Of this fair building who the workmen are.
The chiefest Architect who guides them all
And gives directions how they labor shall
Is JESUS self: he did devise the frame,
And learnes the Craftes-men how to work the same.
Best vvorkemaister, for he when ends the day, Mat. 22.

With glories penie does the workmen pay.
Now you must know there dvvels in JESUS heart Col. 2.

The fullness of each science, and each art.
With great election he his choice does make
And of a multitude some fevv stones take.
And those of which he means his Church to build,
He uses curiously with love to guild.
And by the way observe there can be none
Fit for the building, but a fowresquare stone.
A figure richly gracd', no fortunes frovvne
No Cross, no misery can cast it down:
And therefore NOAH fouresquare vvood did take,
Thereof his all-containing Arc to make.
And Sions City as no Hellish storm Apoc. 21.

Can it annoy, is built in this same form.
In every stone he does four virtues carue A description of the four Cardinal
virtues. Temperance.

Assisting man least he from reason svvarue:
He makes temperance sit in pleasures vvaine,
Curbing the sensual Iades with a strong rain.
Teaching amidst a world of sugared svveetes
To take no more then what with reason meets.
Next Fortitude whom dangers cannot quail, Fortitude.

Nor unexpected casualties make pale.
This virtue of mean men creates Kings,
VVhilest it excites them to attempt great things.
Justice whose fair integrity is known
In dealing out to every man is own. Justice.

She holds a ballaunce which is alvvaies true,
And vveighs to God, our self, our friend what is due.
He lastly prudence carues, of the four best Prudence.

As being sole directrix of the rest.
This Lady rides by Fortitude her side
And tells her, as it is folly and rash pride
In deaths occasions vvilfully to run:
So is it crauen covvardise to shun
All dangers, where renown and lasting fame
May purchased be, though pale death buy the same.
And you Svvash-bucklers of our English stage,
Think you discretion is your valors page?
Or well eyed prudence does your courage guide? The folly and vnlavvfulnesse
of single com bates.

When for mere toys you brable, quarrel, chide;
Nay for just nothing, lesser then a straw
You Will challenge to the field, and weapons dravv.
Tell me what reasons more can you allege?
Then that such would not in the Tavern pledge
Your vvoemans health, or drunk gave you the lie,
Therefore God damme you if he do not die:
Forthwith you send him the length of your svvord,
And fight you will, unless he eat his word.
You challenge others, for they took the wall?
Such worthy motives are for which you braule:
Say you have suff'red vvrong, right you it well?
In going soul and body unto Hell.
Who truly valiant are, will only fight
When as the cause, for which they jarre is right,
And also weighty, then with them along
They justice take, and so revenge a vvrong:
To fight for trifles, and with private hand
To right himself: Can this with justice stand?
How odious are Duellums in Gods sight,
Speak holy Church, which to prevent this fight, The holy Council of Trent.
sess. 25. c. 19. Exco^municateth both fighters in single com bats as also the
beholders.

And from such folly terrify fond man,
Strikes it with all the thunderbolts she can
Denying to their bodies Christian grave
Whose souls in hell choose sepulchers to have.
But you a refuge have by manhoods law
To save your credit you are forced to dravv:
Men would deemeyou a dunghill Cock, a Covv,
Should you put up such vvrong therefore you vovv
You Will die a thousand deaths yea to hell go
Rather then you vvil blot your honor so.
Why you are challenged and the vvorle would think
Should you not meet him that for fear you shrink.
Hark my wise man, what is the world? a fool.
Never read lesson in true wisdoms school;
God, Saints, yea wise men see with better sight,
It Is Bedlam folly in this sort to fight.
Now take your spectacles, chose which you will wear,
The true fools coat, or have fools think you fear.
Prudence instructs tem'prance when to use
Delights and pleasures, when them to refuse.
Who knovves not that the Dogs who live by Nile,
Are taught by dangers to make have the while
They drink the stream, for Crocodiles do lie
Under the waters, wherefore they must fly:
Vrg'de by necessity they needs must drink,
But Caution bids them only lap the brinke.
Man is composed after such a sort
That he must sometimes pleasures have and sport,
Our Constitution is of such a mould,
That without some delights we cannot hold.
But it is a truth that pleasures though they smile
As dangerous are as Crocodiles of Nile:
Who then will harms shun be his prudence such,
That he drink not of pleasures waters much.
Let him not long at delights fountain stay,
But having sipt, let him make have away.
Imagine now what a most goodly show
These stones do make plast'e in an ord'red row.
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Cloister keepers, Nuns,
And married folk, who fill the world with sons.
To all these does our vvisest JESUS Preach,
And how they should maintain their puesto teach,
He bids vvithall the workmen to have care,
That they do place each stone in that rank, where
It ought to stand: his calling must make fit
For the row every stone where they set it.
Let not affection put stones here or there,
When the chief workman would have them else where
Oh when the Architects observe not this,
Disastrous ends' cry something was amiss.
A cruel Lion the poor Prophet slaies, 3. Reg. 13.

VVhilest with fond tales him Bethels vvizard stays.
Our JESUS is his Fathers vvisest Son, Sap. 8.

And performs sweetly what he will have done.
He every one advises there to stand
As he was plact' by the chief vvorkemans hand.
If high keep there, if on the Temples side
Remain he there, if lovv, there let him bide.
Let not the ear, and hand desire to see
Nor where the head is the foot ask to be:
Oh how securely had Christ's people slept;
If every man this order well had kept?
Did not Bizantium set the Church on fire?
VVhilest her proud Prelate labored to be higher
Then God ordaind? And in our Northern line
A stone was placed which as a star did shine,
But falling from that rank wherein he stood,
He vvallovved with the Hog in sensual Mud. Apoc. 12.

Me thinks I see the Dragon once more fall,
And with his beastly tail from heavens high hall
Many fair star pull down: Priests my Muse means
Whom he made Marry, nay for vviues take queanes:
So he their Lucifer before had done,
When for his Paramour he took a Nun.
JESUS such cunning his Apostles taught
That with great praise their Maister-peece they wrought:
But amongst all who chiefly does excel
Is learned PAVLE, he bears away the Bell;
Whether we count his labors which are most 1. Cor. 15.

Or curious work, none like to him can boast.
We talk of Sages who have run about
The world to find a little knowledge out.
So Plato and Pythagoras have done,
Who for Arts sake was burnt by Indian Sun.
Plato unto Gymnosophists durst go
That he their abstruse mysteries might know.
Was there a land in that age to us known,
Whether PAVLE went not to fetch vvood and stone?
Arabia, Greekeland, Islands, Asia, Rome
Of his great industry to witness come.
What arr, what labor shows he in his work
As he fits pieces for our JESUS Kirk,
And for the stones which in this Church have place
Are living stones, (the life is Faith and Grace.)
He never thinks that he has done his part,
If JESUS name be not writ in each heart.
I Will travel where the Oriental Sun S. Xauerius conuerred above three hundredth
thousand Infidels to the faith of Christ.

With fiery jades does his carreire first run,
And fetching XAVER, place him with great PAVLE
Since in so many things, yea almost all
Alike they are: before Great states and Kings
Great JESUS name this chosen vessel brings.
Of conquered Sergius did PAVLE get his name?
Let conquered Iapon augment FRANCIS fame.
When in our world, France, Portingal, Spain, Rome
He gathered had of stones an endless some,
He goes, where first Aurora looks red,
(Blushing to think on her Tithonus bed)
There he plays PETER, and into the doors
Of JESUS Church lets many thousand Mores.
We will hereafter from that speech refrain
Who a More vvasheth labors in vain. A parenetical apostrophe to the
married and schismatik Churchmen of the greek Church.

How augments he our building as for it,
Three hundredth thousand stones he makes fit?
Ye pamp'red Chaplines, who in dovvnie beds,
Betwixt your Lemmans arms repose your heads:
Darkness infernal Monarke does not fear
That you to Indies JESUS name shall bear.
He knovves your Paramours, with whom you sleep
From such a warfare you at home will keep:
His Kingdom is secure these Sirens charms
From hurting him enfeeble shall your arms.
You are with Hannibal in Capys town,
And Citrie Dames shall take your courage down:
Though heavens again the Giaunts troops should dread
Vulcan can make no bolts in Venus bed.
Against God himself sin and hell a stir keep
Whilst you with your fair Cithereas sleep.
Up, up you sluggards from your slumber rise,
Frame boltes on Virtues Anuil in such wise,
As may befitt Jove from Olympus Hill
To fling, and with them Tellus offspring kill.
Now you make wooden daggers, leaden svvords,
Whilst your life is not ansvv'ring to your words:
The bullets which you shoot are made of claie,
Whilst you your selves perform not what you say:
Nor are they temp'red with that heavenly heat
Which in sole Sion has his proper seat, Act. 2.

And to one house alone by gift of heaven
In days long since of Pentecost was geu'n.
Thence with Prometheus fetch this divine flame
From private spirit such fire never came.
Tesiphone or some more Hellish Ghoast
Gives them vvilde fire, who of this spirit boast. Ierem. 16.

God promised he would Fisher men provide
Who should in PETER'S boat each time and tide
With Nets and Angles in fresh streams, and brooks
In the salt sea, in arms, in creekes, in crookes
A Fishing go (men's souls the fishes be
Of these at once PETER caught fifty three. Io. 21.

God promised he would likewise huntesmen give
Who should the hills, the vales where beasts do live:
The Rocks, the holes, yea every uncouth nooke
To find their game with great industry look,
Are you these Fishermen? then know much fish
Is in West Indies: PETER could not vvish
Genesareth more plenteous: thither go,
And make those Pagans JESUS belief know.
There Is game enough; in every stream, each brook
You may take Fish either with net or hook.
Are you these huntsmen then go seek your game,
In Mogor, Iaua you shall find the same.
Do we believe amiss? then to us come,
Tell us of CHRIST'S faith what is the true sum.
Do you fear death? tush that is nothing, know.
That JESUS faith by Martyrdomes must grow.
Oh burnt your souls with Charities true zeal!
You would dilate your JESUS common weal:
You'de not expect game should fall in your mouth
But you would go to East, West, North, and South
As huntsmen after souls, and every where
To JESUS holy service Churches rear.
But am I frantique? as I persuade those
Of the same City to be mutual foes.
Schism, error, paganism together dvvell
They all are Citizen of the same Hell. Mat. 12.

Those Kingdoms ruinated soon we see
Where civil enmities and factions be
Wherefore that long hels common wealth may stand,
You will not budge a foot out of your land.
Let those who will to farthest Indies go
You vvarmely sleep, and mean to keep you so
So did your Ancestors, and it is a sin
For you new fangled customs to begin. Never any conuersions of Nations have
been performed by heretics.

Tell me in histories can it be shovvne
That sects to JESUS Chutch have brought a stone?
O had you heavenly fire within your breast
Surely it would not there confined rest.
T'vvould make you leave base earth and mount on high
And with zeales vvings to distant regions fly.
There to communicate this heaunly flame
And burn all hearts with love of JESUS name.
So did this aemulatour of great PAVLE
Fly with seraphique vvings 'bout the worlds ball.
And in each land his JESUS tropheis raise,
Teaching all nations to sing JESUS praise.
So before him many a zealous son
Of Bennet, Francis, Dominick have done.
Men for such actions fit: of single lives
Not cumbered with clokebags called VViues.
In this fair building not the meanest hand,
Have thou dear youth, who by the CROSS did stand
At JESUS death, and loved above all other,
VVeart there Created Son of JESUS Mother. Io. 19.

When we see JESUS Church with gold so shine,
We Will say th'Embroid'ry work was chiefly thine.
To love thou do the hearts of mortals move
Thy Edicts command nothing else but love.
In life love is thy song, at hour of death
With a love song, thou yeeldest up thy breath.
With Charity thou guildest every stone
In golden words persuading every one,
To play a JESUS in the loving art, Ep.

And think each neighbor must be as thou were
Chiefly beloved, each man a JESUS be,
And love his brother as CHRIST loved thee.
Here we behold a troop of English men, Io. 13.

Who with their labors, and industrious Pen
Build JESUS Church; so BONIFACIVS taught
Germans our Faith, and to Christ's Temple brought.
And we will VVILLEBRORD who first of all
Made Frisons Christians, their Apostle call
Both appertaining to Cassinos Mount
Whose Catalogue such numberless can count.
Cassinos Mount a second horse of Troie,
Bringing forth worthies Hels town to destroy.
Cassineos Mount a Trojan horse where dwell
Heroes who sack not Ilion but Hell.
Saint BENNET was the Chiron who first taught
And these Pelides to perfection brought.)
Among these JOHN LIDGAT stands, of special note,
Crovvnd with green baies and clothed with the same coat
As I see him with others our Church build,
I am with joye and admiration filled.
I will approach the Man, and of him ask,
How he came thither, who gave him a task
Being a Poet, full of vvandring fires,
To work amongst these venerable fires
For I (fond man) made hitherto a count
That Poets went not past the forked Mount:
But since they climb up Sions sacred Hill;
I care not much if I make verses still.
O yes quoth LIDGATE, for though now a days,
The Crown of glory, and Apolloes baies
So seldom meet. whilst Poets suite their times,
After the vvanton humor of the times,
Yet former ages oftentimes have seen
Our Christian Prophets decked with Lavvrel green
Ascend Olympus Mount: where their chaste lays
Revvarded are with glories glittering rays,
And Poets brows with Lavvrels Crowned are,
(King DAVID (Poets Phoebus) has this care:
So is Sidonius Crovvnd, Prudence who writ
Things worthy of Apollo full of wit.
Prosper, Sedulius, who the nine have taught
When they sing hymns to blush as Maidens ought.
Leaving this worthy Man, and thousand more,
Of the same Coat whom time makes us pass over.
We come to Rochester, who lost his head
For not allowing HENRY'S lavvlesse bed.
Arts treasury, chief darling of the nine,
Historian, Poet, Orator, Divine.
Linguist Philosopher, Statesman to King:
Best husband, Father, what not? every thing. Sir Thomas More

If thou art grave we see a Cato sit,
If merry, flovves the Quintessence of wit:
Renowned MORE, Colleague in FISHERS Crown,
Whom no adversity, no HARRIES Frovvne
Can make approve what JESUS thinks not good,
Whose Church thou buildest as thou shedst thy blood.
Grave POLE her child, whom true Relligions sake
A MARGARITE in JESUS Church does make.
Whom does not BRISTOL with his vvritings move?
Who does not REIGNOLDS for his brave wit love?
Industrious HARPSFEILD, whose laborious Quill
Does with Church Records our Musaeum fill.
What SANDERS merits in this building be,
By his conspicuous Monarchy we see.
And shall we forget STAPILTON who goes
Armed Capapea against JESUS foes,
How does he rouse the Boar out of his den,
And strike him dead with a vvell-guided Pen?
We must believe when we his vvritings read,
Saint HIEROME vvhilest he lived was not dead.
And thou my Londons CAMPION, who at once
To our Foundation bring thy ten stones,
Never do think thy reasons fully good,
Till they be written with a Martyrs blood.
Illustrous ALAN of more honored note,
For thy great labors, then the Purple Coat
And Scarlet Hat, which SIMON PETER'S heir
Did cause thee for thy worthy acts to wear.
Chief Architect, best workman of thy days,
As thou thy Doway Monument do raise,
Thou found'st a quarry which fair stones shall yield,
Whereof our JESUS will his Temple build.
And when we see thy Children stones make fit,
We say that ALAN lives, and labors yet.
GIFFORD first Peer of France: of special note
Was thy great virtue, when Saint BENETS Coat,
Thou did put on: as thou the world do scorn
With flying it, thou do much more adorn Mat. 5.

Thy worthy self: A candle must not bide
Under a Bushel; Cloisters cannot hide
Thy virtues luster: mighty Princes see
Thy talents, and on Candlestick place thee:
Where like the glorious Sun thou give light,
Expelling with bright rays the shade of night.
Well on thy head (BISHOP) does Miter sit
Thy labors for our Church have made it fit.
Happy thrice happy would our England be
If all the Prelates wear like unto thee.
But since we see our dearest Country blessed
With such a BISHOP, we will hope the rest.
Whilst KELLISON each builders work does view,
He shows who have the false Church, who the true.
Sound WRITE in man's large volume deeply read,
Preparing ghuests for JESUS mystike bread.
Does not our CHAMPNEY the true Prelate Crown,
Whilst he casts from their throne usurpers down?
SMYTH a true Goldsmith ballaunces does hold*
With which he vveigheth dross, and vvaighty gold.
(The gold makes my new builded Tempel fine
With the Dross Satan's Synagogues do shine,)
His balance eake all sorts of money vveighs.
The Counterfeit (such is rife now a days)
Of Copper coined is, which very lovv
In an beretique mine called Hell does grow,
Satan chief coiner is, but he all naught
Arch-heretikes this Cos'ning art has taught.
Who having stamped Christ's picture on their Coin,
And with the scriptures making their brass shine:
They vovv and swear (so impudently bold
Are they) because it glisters it is true gold.
Many they do deceive, and would do more
As Smyth is, wear there not of goldsmiths store.
When they discouerd are by JESUS Law,
(Some punishing others to keep in avv)
On Pillaries as Cosoners they stand,
Where whilst ignoble shame their fronts does brand
They loose their ears, for lost they not each ear,
It is impossible but they should hear
An Oecumenick Council, where all wise,
And learned of the world make lovvdest cries.
Aemonian Boreas when as he does rage
And war against Neptunes vast Kingdom wage
Making the waves one against another fight,
And with contention foaming turn all white,
No, not great Jove, when with his thundering noyce
He shakes our Machin, has a louder voice.
Then Fathers thus assembled when they smite
With their Anathemas these sons of night.
Yet is it not vvonderfull? more deaf are they
Then Fish which svvimme in bottom of the sea.
(Waves of this world, of Pride, of Schism, of Sin,
Stop close their ears, and let no noyce come in.
More deaf then Fusius was, whom when he plaide
Afflicted Hecuba the woeful Maid
Polyxena ordained for an host,
To satisfy Achillis angry Ghost.
With hollovves, clamours, scrickings, loudest cries
Could not make him from his deep slumber rise.
Doctors, Church, Fathers hollovv every where,
Arch-heretikes are deaf, and will not hear.
Ingenious FLOVD, whose breast the nine did hire
Long since; thereof to make their Muses quire:
Thy breast, the mansion of each grace, each art,
Thy breast th'attractiue gainer of each heart,
True Israelite without unfaithful guiles
Without Pelasgian arts, and Sinons vviles.
In virtue thou art first, though some may go
In policies beyond thee, so we know
The children of this world have quicker sight
In the supplanting art, then Sons of light.
Thou art Achilles, and at Babel town
Able to kill Thersites with thy frovvne.
Art thou the Man, whose Pen again made right,
That stone which from his due place fell down quite
Spalatoes Prelate? when high Cedars fail,
Shall not their ruin make less shrubs look pale.
None eake despair, mercy for sins to find
When JESUS is to such a trespass kind.
Go forvvard worthy man, and with thy quill,
The Boar which rooteth JESUS garden, kill:
Go forwards worthy man and with thy wit
Write such brave works, as have not yet been writ.
Who see this Poem, jointly let them see
That I do love, yea owe my self to thee.
Into the greater Flood so less Brooks run
From whence at first their Origin begun. An Apostrophe to the clergy
laboring in England.

Ye learned Esdrae, who from Foreign lands,
Returning build Christ's Church with pious hands,
Prosper in this your work, again repair
Decayed Sion, aed make it more fair
Then t'vvas before, let true faith sustain all,
The roof be Charity; firm Hope the wall,
As IVDAS cleanse our Church; and in the same Agge. 2. (...). Mac. 4. 2. Paral.
36.

Each where advance great JESUS Cross and name.
With CYRUS Gods anointed you have grace,
Your ATTAXERXES graunts a breathing space,
Giving out Edicts in his royal name,
That none dare let the inchoated frame. 2. Esd. 2.

The pleased heavens promise a lasting peace,
And Sanaballats from molesting cease.
Esteem this gracious favor therefore such,
Because your Queen can do with King so much.
There founders of Relligious orders sweat,
Their diligence is much, their labor great:
For JESUS them commands with cunning hand
To fit those pieces which in chief place stand.
The stones they hevve when as they are too rough,
They plain the vvood, when it is not smooth enough.
We Christian Candor may the plane well call
With which they make what is uneven fall.
The Hammer which the rugged stones does smite,
Is a sharp tool of abnegation hight.
And first my Muse of glorious BENET count,
Who climing up Cassinos lofty mount, Of some principal Orders of Religion.

Hevv'de many stones by JESUS so much grac'de,
That they in Temples very top were plac'de.
Religious scholars of great Benets schole
For many hvndreth years the Church did rule.
How many thousands of the selfsame coat,
In Sions Quire chaunt Alleluias note?
And blessed FRANCIS who above the rest,
In that grace shinest which of all is best,
Humility: when I do think of thee,
I must recall what JESUS has for me.
And my sins suffered: thy marked body shows
JESUS five wounds causd by so many blows.
VVast not enough that thou did dravv so near
To JESUS in thy soul, but thou must bear
His likeness in thy limms? in feet hands side
Must JESUS holy characters be spide?
Because thy heart with JESUS love aboundes,
Therefore in thy blessed flesh are JESUS wounds,
And not alone from plenty of the heart.
Thy mouth speaks JESUS, but eke every part. Luc. 6.

Some as they see the work which thou have wrought
And view; the stones, which by thy labor brought
Increase the building, make a jest, and say
Without a fool there cannot be a play.
They think thee foolish, who thy riches store
Did give away, and afterward live poor.
And it is true a fool blessed man thou were,
And now thy holy sons play the fools part.
But he who what is folly knovveth best
What vvisdome, as he preaches does not jest.
That who are fools in the worlds purblinde eyes, 1. Cor. 3.

In Gods best seeing sight are truly wise.
And if we rightly censure he is a sott
Who judges that for good which good is not.
How many do we see, who are all ill
Have riches, honors, pleasures at their will?
When good are poor (if there can good men be
In this vilde world where most men bad we see,
Therefore Antiquity makes Plutus blind,
Because he seldom honest men can find
To pleasure with his dross: the very same
As to the good Jove sends him falls lame.
But when he is bid to wicked men repair,
He puts on vvings, and flies in the air.
In our great JESUS was all wisdoms store,
Yet did he live contemned here and poor.
What pleasures had he? whom he loved best
His Mother and Apostles nere could rest
Alvvaies in troubles; of all men thought vvorst
Despis'de, neglected, suffering hunger, thirst,
Clothed poorly, entertaind with scoffs, with quips.
Esteemd seducers, dangerous; beat with whips.
Surely if vvorldly men the right way go
JESUS would not have let his friends live so.
Further great Saint, though thy sons appear base, Innocentins the 3. savv in
vision, S Fra^ cis holding up the Laterane Church, by which vision God would
de monstrat, the benefit which the Catho lik church by the pious labors of
this holy man, and his of spring in aftertimes received.

This very baseness does the temple grace.
The stones are rough, which undermost of all
Support the building that it do not fall.
Such stones in vision that great Prelate savv
Who gave allowance to thy stricter law.
In the world is variety of things,
All cannot Kesars be and mighty Kings.
All are not persons fit for Princes court.
There must be some who are of meaner sort:
Some must to Indies go, some in shops stand
There must be contriemen to plough the land.
Yet this so much variety of place
Not only must be, but eke gives a grace.
Neither are riches equally to all
Out dealt; some are whom vvealthy men we call.
Others are poor, what then? there is no less art
In representing well the poor man's part.
Then in the acting of a King or Duke
Wise Men what part is played not so much look,
As how it is done: you will grant JESUS wise
Yet he played Codrus in a poor man's guise.
Codrus he acted and in beggars weed
To save his people willingly did bleed.
(Happy who chose with JESUS to be poor,
And with their Master beg from door to door.
Happy thrice happy such: this is my note;
Though the world laugh, and forth with say I dote)
Our JESUS knevv if he should keep his state,
No malice would praeoccupate his fate.
No Priests would for him thirty pence out tell
No Judas would his sovereign so cheap sell.
Wherefore he makes himself with Codrus poor
And by his death does man to life restore.
FRANCIS expressed the poor man's person to
Which he of JESUS learned so to do,
That when the dram with his life did expire
A clap was given by God and Angels quire.
And thou, though last, yet not LOIOLA least
As dainty junkets at end of a feast,
So now the world is old and almost past,
Thou do invite and please our Christian taste:
When with thee in thy banner thou do bring
The name of JESUS our all conquering King.
Blessed such true Sons, who in their heart and flag
Have JESUS writ, and with their Father brag
Not in fames shaddovv, sumptuous buildings, dross,
But only in their JESUS name and CROSS.
What has Semiramis obtaind the Crown, Of Orders of Religious women in
the Catholic Church.

And shows Magnificence in Babels town?
Or do the Amazons for ILIONS sake
By Argiues ransaked a new Troie make?
Has Dido as she sees Sichaeus dead
Into hott Afrique from Pigmalion fled.
Where she imploies the treasure of her Purse,
In the erecting of a stately burse.
Our chief Priest JESUS through false treason dies,
From second Nuptials his Eliza flies.
MARTHA the weeping MARY'S sister fled
First in this manner a Pigmalions bed.
And with her folk coming to Marsiles shore,
Of living stones gathered a royal store
To build a Church, where rightly should be done,
Best victimes to her Gods eternal son.
These stones were Virgins, Chrysolithes them name,
For they refined were in true loves flame.
A troop of royal dames to labor fall,
Some the foundation, some build up the wall:
Most of the Company ascend above,
And deck the highest roof with golden love.
As in a summer month we often see
The hiues frequented by the busy Be,
Some go from home, some come back to the Hiue,
Each pretty soul as Emulous does strive
Who shall do most? the drones and who are slack
As they approach, are from the hiue beat back:
Some to bring up the young ones have a care,
Some to unburden those who laden are
Whilst none are idle, none spend ill their time,
The honied house smells redolent with thyme.
In this Parthenian troop none idle stand,
But to the labor each one puts her hand,
And bring vvell-tasting honey to the hiues,
(Their actions honey are sucked from Saints lives)
On flovv'res of Saints brave deeds these Virgins rest,
And by praire. feeding suck out, what is best.
They learn of DOMINICK and KATRINE zeal
To pray and labor for their neighbors weal.
Of FRANCIS they humility do learn,
Of CLARE how to themselves they shall be stearne,
And full of svveete they come back to their home
Where they the honey make and honey comb.
All full of lovely svveet, amongst them all
Not one conuerseth who has the least gall.
That JESUS Church never has shades of night,
But a perpetual and constant light,
Thereof we must ascribe not the least part
To these Bees and their honey making art.
These Maiden Bees a Virgin wax do work
Of which are Candles made for JESUS Kirk.
Their lives are Torches, from whence light is gi'un,
Which as men see they praise the God of heaven, Mat 5.

MARCELLA, FABIA, PAVLA and her child
EVSTOCHIVM in such work were never toild.
(EVSTOCHIVM natures vvonder in whose breast,
Most arts, all virtues, chiefest tongues did rest)
We thee (SCHOLASTICA) amongst the first
Behold a Roman CLAeLIA, who durst
Be author to thy high descended Dames,
How they shall eternize their royal names.
When thy Eduina sprung of English Kings
Unto our Temple a rich Saphyr brings, Of the relligions vveomen of Saint
Benets order.

VVee'le say by her oblation may be seen
Although she spurn'da Crown, she was a Queen.
Of many Hildas, Rictruds could we tell,
By thee instructed in religious Cell
To offer amethysts whose virtues rare
Against intemperance approved are.
Of well tun'de voices to make up a Quire,
We will not go with JEREMY, and hire The Quire of our Church.

Lamenting women, who shall NENIAS sing,
For good JOSIAS death their slaughtred King.
Thy English Nymphs (Great Saint) shall never fail Ierem. 9.

By day, by night their JESUS death to vvaile.
They shall in streets of Adradremon moan, Zach. 12.

And in the black fields of Mageddo groan.
They shall fill Adadremmon with said cries,
Because JOSIAS in Mageddo dies. S. Gregory a Monk of S. Bennets order and
afterward Pope for his great zeal and labors in the conversion of our
country styled the Apostle of Enland, he ordained the manner of sing ing,
which is still retained in the Church, and of him call led Cantus Gregorianus.

Great GREGORY procurer of our bliss
The Quires chief Master, and directour is.
Though Pope, yet for his Father BENETS sake
He for his sisters holy songs will make,
And though the ditties with their tunes are plain,
Yet there is Majesty in en'ry strain:
Yea though deaths songs resound in every place,
Yet shall this sorrovv give the Music grace.
And men shall argue as their ravished ear,
Such pleasant strains of Melody does hear:
Whether on Organs once more Angels play,
VVhilest many Cecilies together pray.
Or else the Nine leaving their forked hill,
Our lovver Orb with Harmony do fill.
Here also we behold barefooted CLARE.
Her Damsels eake though noble bare-foote are:
I dispute with my self what shall be done,
By these so royal Ladies without shoone.
Does it by JESUS will to their lot fall,
To prepare Mortar for the Churches wall?
Yes sure, CLARE was a Mortar treading Dame,
The Mortar was riches, base pleasures, fame,
To trample on such Mortar CLARE did use,
This was the reason why she wore no shoes:
And that trash with whose love the world does burn,
Her chaster offspring with their feet do spurn.
Do we not see whilst these such Mortar tread, Genesis 3.

The vvoeman brusing the old serpents head.
JESUS to FRANCIS, he to CLARE did Preach,
And all of poverty a lesson teach.
She learnes her Nuns in spirit to be poor
And then what nature asks to use no more.
Nay the strict laws of poverty are such
That oftentimes it must not have so much.
For where sufficient is, nothing does want,
It Is certain that there Poverty is scant.
Where transitory things abundant are,
There we do want true daughters of poor CLARE.
Each Nun must be familiar with these four
Daughters of poverty all Christened poor.
Poor fare, poor Clothes, poor lodging, and poor Cell.
Let her not think her self in health, not well,
Unless to these four sisters whom her God
So much esteems, she join her self the od.
TERESA glory of novv-dearest Spain
Top of Carmelus, smoothing with thy Plane,
What rugged is: each sex thou make new
Whilst thou do both with abnegation hevv,
Surely blessed Nymph, ELIAS will not grieve,
If in his order we a share thee give.
Nor can his children justly make complainte,
As JESUS gives a Canonized Saint:
So when the troops of IABIN conqu'red are
BARACH and IAHELS wife the glory share.
It Is true, foyld Sisara from BARACH fled,
Yet IAHELS wife the nail struck on the head.
The great ELIAS put self-love to flight, Iud. 5.

Thou with thy perfect rule do kill him quite.
In MOSES law what only was in chase,
Is fully vanquished in the law of grace.
Sure ZEVXIS had much choice, who when he was,
To paint Jove's sister as a beauteous las,
A thousand Virgins had of feature rare,
Lims equally compacted, faces fair
Presented to his view, that every part
Which was most eminent by his great art
He might express; one Virgin gold thread wears
In tresses place: he draws her golden heirs.
He paints another forehead high yet plain
There Venus might make sport, and Juno reign:
And curiouflie observes all theit eyes
As vvanton Cupid up and down them flies;
And where the Boy is vvaggish, yet in awe
Of Mothers presence, he that eye does dravv.
He makes a nose rise like a marble tower,
He eyes too lips in which as in a bovvre
Fragrant with Roses delight lou'de to dvvell
(Roses they were for color and for smell)
He draws the Color with his pensil right,
To give the smell exceeds his Pensils might.
Ears as Bee-hiues he makes; though no Be there
(For Bees with stings might the beholders fear)
(But in the pattern may be there vvare some,
For how should honey else in the hiues come?)
Yet two rich perles (and they shevvd vvondrous well)
Did hang as Clappers at each silver Bell.
A dimple graced much a Ladies chin
Dravving that part he put the dimple in
A Nymph as her the painter much does view,
Dies her cheeks with a Vermilion hevv,
Those cheeks which by that blushing got much grace,
He blushing paintes, and so makes up his face.
Like to the face all parts down to the feet,
In handsomnes and just proportion meet.
To which he could no more perfection give,
Unless his cunning had made all to live.
But had Prometheus given heatc to this Dame',
We should again have hear of Paris flame,
And once more Phrigians through Sicilians ire,
Should have done penance with their Cities fire.
Surely when blessed TERESA did devise
The model of her work, before her eyes
God set each order, as a beauteous Dame
That what in each was perfect, in her frame
She might express, with every order stands
JESUS great self, the work of whose blessed hands
Each order is. TERESA on him looks
His words her lessons are, his deeds her books.
She marks that he does do far more then say
When he commands, he leads himself the way.
Therefore to Nuns she Preaches with her acts,
And teaches not so much by words as facts.
As she her life in vvritings forth does bring,
With Xenophon she faineth not a King,
But in her self truly expresses how,
A votarie is bound to keep her vovv.
If Virtues fullness any where does want,
It Is where the humble virtue made her scant.
As she each order vievves, a grave svveete Quire,
From one she learnes, though charities best fire
Descend from heaven: yet she observes the care
Another has by means of mental prayer
To keep it in: This prayer must serve the turn,
And in her Virgins breasts make loves fire burn.
And without this Relligion is night,
This must to each act give a cheerful light.
Her Nuns must often retire unto their Cell,
And there reflect, how idly or how well
They have spent precious time: how that or this
They may amend: when it is done amiss.
When in obeying they are slow, when halt,
What motives, and what means to mend this fault.
Terrene propensions do keep down their soul,
Some blemishes their purity make foul.
Here meditation makes them mount on high
And to the top of all perfection fly,
To vvash their sins in JESUS clensing blood
And bath their errors in a weeping flood.
Of him whose rare discretion is seen
In inward motions, the four virtues Queen
Prudence she learnes, this does direct her Quill,
VVhilest she her Papers does with precepts fill:
She teaches hers to meditate on sins,
And Heli; as complacence of good begins
To puff them up; again when fears cast down Purity of^ intention.

To ponder Gods great mercy, and heavens crown.
She hamm'reth much on this, does this much Preach,
How unto God alone their love must reach.
They fear love, honor must, and serve their God
For himself only, not for fear of rod,
Which punishes transgressors, not for lust
Of those svveete meats, vvherevvith he feeds the just.
She teaches them, although on earth they dvvell
To build within their souls an heavenly Cell.
(The Saints their God in the heavens alvvaies find,
God dwells in a recollected mind.)
Man's body is not made of iron or stone
As our soul is not flesh, so it is not bone.
Fond dissolution does the spirit spill
Too much attention does the whole man kill.
Wherefore of approou'de Orders she does take
Each best thing, and a temp'red medly make.
In MOSES law Gods people shevv'd their love, Leuit. 5. Luc. 2. Ierem. 8.

In sacrifizing of a Turtle Dove.
A bird which does due hovvres and seasons know,
And at fit times unto her home does go.
Her daughters offer Turtles when they spend
In pious mirth the hour, which for that end
Their rule appoints, nor is their wonted fire
With this made less, but rather flies higher.
As sacred birds they mutually do move
Each other by such conference to love.
They offer Turtles when they leave to speak,
For fear they should commanded silence break.
Then they go home, I mean unto their Cell
Where in reflection of past talk they dvvell.
She was instructed in great JESUS schole
In such a sort to mitigate her rule.
That the most tender may i'ts rigor bide,
And yet the strong complexion may be tried.
The flesh with too much pampring is too bold,
With too much curbing long it cannot hold:
She does not unto this or that side lean
But ever treads in the golden mean.
No vvonder then, though JESUS mother will
Make her chief mansion in white Carmel hill:
No vvonder eke though in our JESUS time
So many Nymphs the top of Carmel climb.
Thus (mighty Princes) we a Church have built
Even from the ground our walls reard, the roof guilt*
With lamp enlight'ned it, with Pictures grac'te
(Your ancestors) firm Pillars in it plac'te.
And set on top thereof a loud voic'de Bell
Which shall hereafter times and ages tell
Whose Church it is: the Priest, the Host (Gods Son)
What Sacramental rites in it are done)
We have describde, and added a svveete Quire,
Given eake unto our workmen their due hire
A grateful memory:) all which at first
We for your royal sakes begun, and durst
Go forvvardes in the inchoated frame,
Till we had fully perfited the same:
Wherefore in justice giving all their due,
Our Church and Architect belongs to you.
To you belongs the whole, to you each stone,
Accept then, and protect what is your own.
God Kings for fathers to his Church will give
For Nurces Queens: our Church begins to live, Esai. 49.

It is a Babe, in England nevvlie borne
You royal couple shall not think it scorn
To play the Nurces: Mighty CHARLES make fit
Such nutriment, which shall give strength to it:
Be thou our DAVID, who when a Bear came 1. Reg. 16.

And from the flock did bear away a Lamb
With Monsters death redeem'de the sheep let Bear:
Let rau'nous Boar thy Princely power fear,
Yea let the Dragon in the Desert vvilde
Not dare for fear of thee approach our Child. Apoc. 12.

Fair Nymph may our Babe in thy bosom rest,
May it suck milk, yea Nectar from thy breast,
If Agags race dare threat the Infant harm,
Shield and support it with thy Princely arm.
And you good times make have, ye moments run:
If ever, now it is requisite the sun
Should take Post-horse, and gallop to that sign
In whose conjuncture ALBION shall join
With Hesperie, and in perpetual bands
Of Amity unite two glorious lands.
Our CHARLES like unto whom the world has none,
Shall take a MARIE the worlds only one,
And jointly with their Hymenaean bed
England and Spain eternally shall wed.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 5. for Gates of eternal might. Read Gates of eternal night. page 8. for
with errors to inuest. Read with errors to infest. page 18. Best Martyrs
blood, Read blessed martyrs blood. page 37. in the Margent for Pius Turcae quam
Papistae. Read Prius Turcae quam Papistae. Page 47. for Are which your chief
friends filde, read are with your chiese friends filled. page 49. for must gaze
read must graze. page 80. for Promartyr. read Protomartyr.


