TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, THE LORD WENTWORTH and to
the right honorable and virtuous Lady his wife. W. B. wishes the certain
assurance of Gods favor in this life, and the full fruition of the same in the
world to come.
AT length I have presumed, (which I have long purposed) to offer unto your
Honors, some poor token of that duty which binds me unto your H^. while
life lasts. Hoping that you will accept of it as fruit in season, although
it be of two years growth and more. After I had yielded vnt^ the publishing of
these few Sor^^^^ I thought with my self of who^ I might m^ke choice, to become
a patron, and a refuge (...) so poor, and simple meditations: that under the
shadow of their favorable acceptaunce they might find some rest, and relief,
and when I thought of your Hh. I set down my rest, boldly presuming, yea fully
assuring my self, that this small testimony of duty (whatsoever it be) should
be no less acceptable the^ my self have been always welcome unto you, and to
your whole household. And indeed my good Lord, they do belong unto your Hh. in
many respects.

First, in regard of those manifold favors and honorable, kindnesses, which I
have always (although undeserved) found at your Lordships hands. Secondly,
when I was as a dry root removed, and unlikely to find a place to grow in,
your Lordship did receive me, and (under God) a was special means to preserve
me from such storms and tempests as did then threate^ to annoy me. Further,
by your Lordshippes good means a way was made, and a place was provided, that
I might exercise my tale^t to the gain of the Church. At my departure, your
Lordship also furnished me with books out of your Library, and with other
helps, more then ever I looked for, or deserved: and in all these, your only
care and desire was of my good, and the good of Gods Church. Reason therefore
requires, that your Lordship should once in 2. years space take a taste, at
the least, of some of that fruit, which (through the blessing of God) the soil
of your Lordships favor and kindness, has yielded. But principally in regard of
the matter it self, this treatise (If it be worthy of such a name) belongs
to both your Hh. and to your whole household, whose chief delight with your Hh.
was always (during my abode in your Lordships house) in the holy exercises of
religion and piety. And I doubt not but that your Hh. godly zeal, and
Christian care that way is still as great as ever, if not much greater then
ever it was.

As for the matter subject of this treatise (I mean the assurance of Gods
favor, and such things as belong unto the same) I am persuaded, it is so
heavenly, and comfortable in it self, that nothing can be unto your Hh. more
dear and precious, then to be conversant in the same: for I know you are
already persuaded thereof, and sufficiently confirmed therein: yet as the
Disciples said (when the Lord Jesus showed what a happy thing it is to eat
bread in the kingdom of heaven) Lord give us evermore of that bread (the very
hearing thereof did so please them.) Even so your Hh. having heard, and felt in
your souls, how blessed a thing it is to be assured of Gods favor to eternal
life, you will say, let us still hear of that matter. For all things saving
this, do in time consume and become tedious: but this is of that nature, that
the more is spent of it, the more it increases, like the widows oil, and the
longer it is fed upon, the sweeter it is unto the souls of the faithful, like
the water which Christ turned into wine, that who so ever drinks thereof, may
say as his mother said, (when all seemed to be gone) Lord thou have kept the
better until now, and the best is yet to come. If it shall please your Hh. to
vouchsafe the perusing hereof, and to measure the commendation thereof unto the
glory of God, but by the liking and feeling of your own hearts, I have what I
desire, and my pains are more then sufficiently recompensed. Thus humbly
craving pardon for my boldness, I commend both your Hh and it, to the gracious
blessing of the most high.

Your honors, in all humble duty, to be commanded in the Lord, VV. Burton.

TO HIS BELOVED AND Christian auditors in the City of Bristoll grace, mercy,
and peace.
FOr your sakes in general (beloved in the Lord Jesus) I have adventured to
lay my self open in these my poor endeavors, to the view and censure of all
the world. For your comfort, I first spoke them, and for your profit I have now
penned them, that if any thing were at the first mistaken, and not well
understood, or since that, has been forgotten, and as yet is unpracticed, you
might now learn it better, remember it longer, and practice it ever, to your
endless comfort. But that which has chiefly prevailed with me for the
publishing hereof, is the earnest desire of many, and special entreatie of some
poor Christians, afflicted in conscience, which came unto me since, with their
imperfect notes of their own gathering, which I took as certain pledges of
some comfort already received, and arguments of a holy desire to be further
profited thereby. Whose Christian desire, and godly hunger I take in this case
as a sufficient calling hereunto, neither do I yet see how I could well have
made them a denial, without some prejudice to their souls, some advantage to
the enemy, and some check unto my own conscience. For the matter it self: I
confess, it is of that Majesty, and excellency, that it requires both large
and deep discourses, wherein many both learned and godly have not been
wanting. My care has been to be found and plain, for the benefit especially
of the simpler sort. And as the woman in the Gospel thought her self happy if
she might but touch the hem of Christ's garment, so when I began to meditate
upon the assurance of Gods love, it seemed to be so excellent a point and so
full of comfort, that I thought my self a happy man if I might but touch the
points, and borders thereof, seeing I could not attain to the full ha^dling
thereof. If any ignorant may be instructed in the truth, if any hereby may in
time be converted to the love of the truth, if any that is converted, may by
this means be confirmed in the truth, give God the glory, and I hold my
travail sufficiently reco^pensed, neither shall it repent me to have passed
through good report, and bad report, through honor and dishonor, and the
censures of all, so that any profit may redound to your souls, and all the
glory may return unto God. That God which in his rich mercy has first
planted, and now watered it, continue his good blessing upon it, that it may
become fruifull in us, and we in it may grow up as trees planted by the rivers
of Gods love and favor, to bring forth fruit in due season, the^ shall not our
leaue^ wither, and that which we take in hand shall prosper, unto the full
fruition, and happy enjoying of that his love, whereof he has now given us an
assurance in his Son Jesus Christ. Read well, and reap much, po^^esse your
souls with patience, and assist me with your prayers.

Your servant for the Lord Jesus. W. B.

THE FIRST SERMON OF THE ASSVRAVNCE OF GODS LOVE November. 19.
Psalm. 41.11.12.13. By this I know that thou fauourest me, because my enemy
does not triumph against me. 12. And as for me thou vpholdest me in mine
integrity, and do set me before thy face for ever. 31. Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, without end. So be it, even so be it.


COncerning the author of this Psalm, it was the Prophet David, who was both
moved thereunto, and guided therein by the holy Ghost: and therefore we need not
doubt to receive the doctrine thereof, John. ^^.13.
because he which is the spirit of truth never led any but to the truth.

The time when he made it, was (as it seems in ye 9. verse) when Absalom
(aspiring to the kingdom) like a monster in nature, sought (by the wicked
counsel of that faithless counselor and fained friend Achitophel) to pull
from his own father the crown upon his head, 2. Sam. 16.21.
to lay his honor in the dust, and his life in the grave. No small temptation,
either to blaspheme, or to despair, and yet he did neither of both: because
God kept him from both: but then, eue^ in that hard time of winter (as we may
call it) bethought with him self how he might make his affliction an occasion
of further profit to himself and the whole Church of God, whereby it appears
that no affliction is able to quail the spirit of God in the godly, but as
oil makes the fire to flame out, which before did but only burn, 2. Cor.
4.16.
so with the godly, when the outward man does perish the inward man is renewed,
and their afflictions do make the spirit to flame out of the^ to the good of
others, which before did but burn within them to their own comfort.

Now for the matter of the Psalm. In general he shows. 1. How great his
affliction was. 2. How greatly he profited by it. But more particularly, he
records. 1. The blessed estate of such as did wisely consider of his
distressed estate, verses. 1.2.3. 2. He shows ye cause of his affliction to
be his sin. ver. 4.3. He sets down the greatness of his affliction, and
the danger that he stood i^, for his enemies looked every day for his death
and destruction.

And of those his enemies he names three sorts. The. 1. sort were flatterers,
of whom he complains and says that they would come to see him, but they
would speak lies, horde up wickedness in their heart, as in a vessel, and
when they could get fit opportunity they would empty it upon him. verse. 6. The
2. sort were malicious whisperers, which did nothing but privily contriue his
overthrow, of whom he complains in the 7. and 8. verses thus. All that hate
me whisper together against me, even against me do they* imagine my hurt. A
mischief is light upon him, and he that is down shall no more arise: The 3.
sort were a more treacherous brood, who while they pretended kindness intended
his subversion, like Judas, who covered his treason with a kiss. Of these
traitero^s companions he complains in the 9. verse after this manner. Yea my
familiar friend whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lifted up the
heel against me.

And therefore being thus beset with open enemies on one side, with flattering
clawbackes on the other side, with whisperers behind, and traitors before his
danger must needs be great, and his case (in man's sight) very desperate. 4.
4. He shows what means he used to prevent them all, and that was prayer to
God, as appears in the 10. verse. Therefore O lord, raise me up, so shall I
reward them.

But least Satan might persuade him to doubt of Gods favor toward him in
his affliction, as he would have done with Job in his temptation, and so make
him either cold in prayer, or distrufull in prayer, that so he might also have
lost the fruit of his prayer, therefore in the 5. place, 5.
he proves by two arguments yt all this notwithstanding, God does still favor
him. The 1. is drawn from his enemies person in the 11. verse. The 2. is taken
from the consideration of his own person in the 12. verse. 6.
Last of all, because God had given him such tokens of his love, therefore he
concludes his Psalm with thankesgeuing unto God in this sort, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, world without end. etc.

This Psalm was left unto the Church of God, and does teach us. 1. To take
heed how we do rashly condemn those that be in trouble, and affliction, and
are beset with diverse sorts of enemies, but wisely to consider, and charitably
to judge of their cause, if we look for the Lords help when we are in
trouble our selves, and not to measure Gods favor by outward prosperity, nor
his anger by outward adversity, as blind worldlings commonly use to do. 2.
That the use of affliction is to work in us repentance for our sins, and to
make us fly to Gods mercy for succor, as David did. 3. That Gods children
while they live, shall live in danger of open enemies, of malicious
whisperers, and false brethren, though they be as godly as David was. 4. That
if we the^ go to God by prayer, we shall prevent all our enemies, if they were
as many as David's were. 5. That in our prayers we must be assured of Gods love
in Christ to us ward, least otherwise we loose the fruit of our prayer. 6.
That when God has heard us we must with hearty consent praise unto him for it
as David did. So much of ye Psalm. in general, now to the text.

By this I know. etc. In this text we see two things. 1. How David assures
himself of Gods love toward him. 2. How thankful he is to God for assuring
him of his love. The.1. he does by two arguments. One taken from his enemies,
they were prevented of their expectation, therefore thou love me. The other
is taken from his own estate, which was no whit hurt, or impaired, but
bettered by them. In his thanksgiving we may note two things. 1. To whom he
gives thanks, namely, to the Lord God of Israel. 2. In what manner he gives
thanks: with doubling of his speech, in toke^ of his hearty and unfeigned
consent to that which he spoke, and as one afraid that it was not well enough,
when it was at the best, he says. So be it, even so be it* So much for ye
method now to the matter.

By this I know that thou fauorest me. etc.
First here, the Prophet speaks of his knowledge, and tells us that though
he knew not all things, yet he knew that God loved him, and so long as he
knows that, he passes not greatly for other matters, how the world goes
with him. etc. And to say the truth he need not, for he that is sure of that,
is sure of all. God loves all his creatures as a good God, and hates nothing
that he made, but he loves his elect children with a more special love then ye
rest, as a father in Christ Jesus, and he that is sure that God does so favor
him, is sure I say of al. For to him who^ God loves, he will deny no good
thing, no, not his own son, and if he gave us his son because he loved us,
John. 3.16 Romans 8.32
how shall he not with him give us all things else?

When the child is persuaded that his father loves him, he is bold to ask
this and that of his father: so may we be bold to ask any thing of God our
heavenly father that is good for us, when we be sure that he loves us. As Mary
and Martha put Christ in mind but of two things, the first was that Christ
loved their brother Lazarus, the second was that Lazarus was sick, John. 11.3
He who^ thou love is sick, it was no need to tell him what he should do,
for they knew he would do what might be done for him, because he loved him. So
we may say to the Lord, when we are sure that he loves us, Lord he who^ thou
love wants this or that for his body or his soul, we need not then
appoint him what to do, or when, or how, for look what he sees most
convenient for us, and for his own glory, he will surely do it. Therefore
whatsoever David knows, he will be sure to know this: and whatsoever he be
ignorant of, yet of this he will not be ignorant. To teach us, yt whatsoever
we seek to make sure, this must first be made sure, or else nothing is sure.
Peter bids us make our election sure. Job when he says, I am sure that my
redeemer lives, teaches us to make our redemption sure. And here David
teaches us to make Gods favor sure: now if we make that sure, the^ our
election is sure, our redemption is sure, our vocation is sure, and our
salvation is sure.

The suter desires but the favor of his beloved, what does the child desire
of his father, but favor? what does the subject seek for of his Prince but
favor? as Hester desired nothing but that the king would hold out his golden
scepter to her in token of favor: what does the prisoner crave but favor? And
all these think the^ selves in good estate if they may know that they be in
favor. And shall not we think our selves sure, when we are sure that God does
favor us, whose love is above the love of Princes, above the love of fathers
and mothers, yea above all loves? Yea no doubt of it, for if we make that sure,
then our Prince is sure, our kingdom is sure, our Cities are sure, our bodies
are sure, our souls are sure, and all is sure, for who dare hurt, or who can
touch him whom God favors? they touch the very aple of his eye. Shall we
labor, and travail to be sure of love, which is mutable, and not of that love
which is unchangeable? man's love is mixed with hatred, and is commonly more
like hatred then love, but Gods love is perfect without any mixture: whom men
favor, Romans 11.29.
they favor for a while, but whom God loves he loves to the end, even for
ever. Shall we then seek for the scraps, and let the feast go? shall we go the
crickes, when we may go to the sea? nay to filthy puddles, when pure fountains
are by? so we may soon prove as wise as Esaw, that changed his birth right
for right naught, nay so we prove as foolish as Judas, that valued ye goodwill
of the Jews above the love of Christ, but he gat nothing by it, by that time
he and the gallows had reckned together. David makes more account of Gods
favor then of his kingdom, yea then of victory against his enemies, as if he
should say, my foes do not triumph against me, that is well for me, but by this
I know that thou love me, that is better.

We have marks to know every thing by, saving the love of God, but of that we
think we are sure, for we think so well of our selves that God must needs
love us whether we will or no, as yt Papists which set their good works upon
the score, and make God indebted to them for their works, and therefore we
regard neither the time when, nor the place where, nor the persons by who^, nor
the tokens by which the Lord does offer to make his love known unto us.

When the seruau^ts of Benhadad king of Aram, went with ropes about their
necks to Achab king of Israel, to entreat for their masters life, they gave
dilligent heed if they could catch any thing of Achabs mouth that might be a
sign of favor, 1. King. 20 33.
and when they heard him call Benhadad his brother, oh how glad were they? How
did they play upon that word? how did they feed their hope upon it? they made
have and said, Thy brother lives. The Lord has greater advantage against us
the^ ever Achab had against Benhadad, for he did fly from Achab, so can not we
from the Lord, he did hide himself from Achab, so can not we from the Lord,
Be^hadad had servants to send to king Achab, but what spokesmen shall we send
to the Lord? we must come forth our selves. Achab had power but against the
body of Benhadad, the Lord has power against both our bodies and souls, king
Achabs power was subject to the Lords power, but who shall withstand the
Lords power, for his counsel shall stand? If Achab had exercised his power
upon Benhadad it had been but for a time, but if the Lord should execute his
wrath upon us, if it were kindled yea but little, it would flame for ever, now
if we did consider these things well, and if we were as much afraid of the king
of heaven, as they were of the king of Israel, and if our miserable dangers,
and dangerous miseries did as nearely touch us, as theirs did touch them, we
would take as diligent heed to ye words of God as they did to the words of
king Achab, and we would be as glad to hear a word that might be as a token of
favor, as they were, but alas we do not consider, we are not touched, nor
moved, and therefore when ye Lord does by his messengers entreat us to be saved,
and woo us by all the names and tokens of love, we regard not, the Lord open
our eyes to see in what a desperate case we stand and let us make more
reckening of Gods love tokens then we do, if not, shall not the Aramites rise
up in judgment against us?

When the Angel came down to stir up the poole of Bethesda, (wherein lay
many sick and diseased) there was waiting on every side, John. 5.2.3 4.5.
and happy was he that could step in first, for he that stepped in first after
the stirring of the water was healed, of what disease soever he had. We have a
better poole the^ the poole of Bethesda, for the word of God is water of life,
and able to cleanse the soul and body too, if we step into it when it is
stirred by the Angel of the Lord, how often has ye Lord by his Ministers,
stirred up this water, that we might be healed by it? no small favor no doubt.
But who waits for it? who steppeth into it? Nay who steppeth not from it
rather? who is cleansed by it? and yet who has not need of it? For none ca^
say his heart is clean. Now if we make no more reckoning of Gods love, and his
love tokens then thus, shall not those sick and diseased men of Bethesda rise
up in judgment against us? no doubt they shall.

We think that whatsoever we want, yet we are sure that God does love us, and
never make any reckoning of his love tokens, but we may be deceived. David was
not always so sure, for sometime he thought that the Lord had forgotten him,
sometime he thought that God had given him over to him self, hereupon he cried
out at one time, Psalm. 89.46 Psalm. 51.11.12.
how long shall thy wrath burn like fire? for ever? at another time he
prays, O take not thy spirit from me, restore unto me the joy of my
salvation, by which pitiful cries it may appear that he was half afraid.
Therefore he was glad to take a love token when it was offered him, for when he
was not sure of Gods love toward him, he thought that God was angry with him,
and that was of all things most terrible unto him and intolerable. So must we,
if we will be sure that God is not angry with us, we must be sure that he
favors us.

If Gods people must be sure of Gods favor toward them in Christ, as David
teaches, then we must not stand in doubt of it as Papists do teach, we have no
reason so to do. For does he call us his sons, and we call him our father,
that we should doubt of his love? Does he call us his friends, his brethren,
his spouse, his love, his dove, and by all the names of love, that we should
doubt of his love? Has he kissed us with so many kisses of his mouth? has he
sent us so many pledges of his love? has he renewed his covenant so often?
has he sealed it with the Sacraments, and bound it with an oath? and all this
that we might doubt whether he does love us or no? Thus you see one point of
popery ready to soune at the hearing of this doctrine. If there be any Papist
here that has a mind to it, let him take it up, and make much of it, for Gods
people (you see) care not for it, they had rather know for a certainty that
God does favor them, then to stand in doubt thereof.

To love God, and to be loved of God, is all that God requires of us, and all
that we desire of God. For if we love him, then we fear him, we worship him,
we trust in him, we hear him, we obey him, etc. If he love us, then he
provides for us all good things, and preserves us from all that may hurt us,
etc. Our love to him has marks, and so has his to us. God does not love us
and keep it from us, but he makes it known that he loves us, as Jonathan
made his love known to David, and as the father of the prodigal child made his
love manifest to his son when his affection was toward him.

By this I know that thou fauorest me (says David) because mine enemy has
^ot triumphed against me.
When God does deliver us from the hands of our enemies, or any trouble else,
we may persuade our selves thereby, that he has a favor unto us, as David did.

But then it may be demanded, If God does love his Church, why does he suffer
his Church to be troubled and molested with enemies? The reason is this,
because by this means his love may be made more manifest, in saving and
delivering them. For as a sure friend is not known but in time of need: so
Gods goodness and love is never so well perceived, as it is in helping of us
when we cannot help our selves. As Adams fall did serve to manifest Gods
justice and mercy, Romans 9.22 23.
the one in punishing, the other in pardoning of sin, which otherwise we had
never known: so the troubles of the Church serve to manifest 1. our deserts
by reason of our sins. 2. our weakness and inabilitie to help our selves,
and 3. the loving kindness of the Lord our God, in saving and defending, that so
we might be truly thankful, and return all the praise and glory to God, and
none to our selves. So that the Church of God may have enemies, and yet be
still the beloved of God, as Lazarus was beloved of Christ although he was
sick: for whom the Lord loves he corrects, and therefore he correctech
them, because he loves them.

Now, some men will say, Oh I thank^ God I am in prosperity, and I live well,
out of all danger, and trouble, and I want nothing, therefore I am sure God
loves me. Again, such a one serves God well I warrant you, for you see how
he does thrive and prosper in the world, he is come up of no^thing, etc.
therefore no doubt God does lou^ him: this is the corrupt judgment of blind
worldlings, which take all for gold that gli^stereth, and think there is no
other hea^uen but earth: but these men deceive them^selues, and so many as
listen unto them, for when God shall never visit us with any cross, but
shall give us all things at our pleasure, and let us have what we lust for, it
is a sign that he is angry with us, and then we are nearest to our
destruction. For as the ox that is stall fed, waxes fat, and the fatter he
is, the fitter he is for the butcher, and the nearer he is to the day of
slaughter: so it ^areth with the wicked worldlings, which never come under the
cross, and whose necks ^ould never abide the yoke of the word of God, Psalm.
2.3.
they are set up a fatting for the but^her of hell, and made ready against the
day ^f slaughter, which is the day of Judgment, when all these outward,
common, and gene^all blessings shall tend to their greater co^^emnatio^. They
live at ease in this life, that ^hey may feel pain in the world to come, ^hey
have their heaven here, that they may ^aue hell hereafter. The greatest
judgment ^f God that can be in this world, is to let us ^iue in security, and
to give us over to our ^wne hearts lust. And this is witnessed by many places of
Scripture. Ask Job, and he will justify this to be true, for these are his
words.

Wherefore do the wicked live, Job. 21.7.
and wax old, and grow in wealth? to show that a man may be a wicked man
though he be a wealthy man, and that honesty goes not by riches, he goes on
and says, 8.
Their seed is established in their sight with the^, and their generation
before their eyes. 9.
Their houses are peaceable, without fear, the rod of God is not upon them. 10.
Their bullock gendreth and fails not, their cow calueth and casts not her
calfe. 11.
They send forth their children like sheep, 12.
and their sons dau^ce. They take the tabret and harp, and rejoice in the
sound of the Organes. 13.
They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they dye, or go down to the
grave. That is, they lie not long sick Now see their Religion. 14.
They say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways: 15.
Who is the almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have
i^ we should pray unto him? Now see their end^ They shall be as stubble before
the wind, 18.
and as chafe that the storm carries away, God will lay up the sorrow of the
father for hi^ children, 19.
when he rewards him he shall know it: 20.
his eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the
almighty. Ask the Prophet David, and he will justify as much, for thus he
speaks of the wicked, They are not in troubles as other men, Psalm. 73.5.
neither are they plagued with other men. 7.
Their eyes stand out for fatness, they have more then heart can wish. 9.
They set their mouth against heaven, and their tongue walks thorough the
earth. Now see their blasphemy against God. 11.
And they say, how does God know it? or, is there knowledge in the most high?
Lo, these are the wicked, yet prosper they always, and increase in riches. Now
see their end. 18.
Surely thou (O Lord) have set them in slippery places, and cast them down
into desolation. 19.
How suddenly are they destroyed, perished and horribly consumed?

If this be not sufficient* he can prove it by an example of the Israelites, of
whom he makes this report. They lusted with concupiscence in the wilderness,
meaning, when they desired the flesh pots of Egypt again. Psalm. 106.
And (says he) The Lord gave them their desire [for he sent them quayles] but
he sent 14.
leanness into their souls [for he cursed it, 15.
and it did them no good, 16.
but they dyed with the meat in their mouthes] and what became of 17.
the rest that had their desire, 18.
they rebelled against Moses and Aaron, whereupon ye earth swallowed up some,
and fire from heaven devoured other some. If you ask the Prophet Esaias, he will
avouch this to be true, for (speaking in the person of God to the stubburne
Jews) he says thus, Esaias. 1.
Wherefore should you be smitten any more? 5.
for you fall away more and more, the whole head is sick and the whole heart is
heavy. Meaning that he would correct them no more, seeing they were never the
better for correction, but to let them do as they listed, that his indgeme^^
might be exceeding great, and just upon the^* For the follows in the 7.
verse. 7.
Your land is wast, your Cities are burnt with fire, strau^^gers devour your
land in your presence, an^ it is desolate like the overthrow of strangers* And
the daughter of Zion, 8.
shall remain lik^ a cottage in a vineyard, like a lodge in a gar^den of
cucumbers, and like a besieged City* And all this came upon them, when the
Lord left them to themselves, to do what they li^sted. All which places do
show and prou^ how mad, and foolish they are, which measur^ Gods love and
favor toward them, b^ outward prosperity, and his anger by ou^^ward
adversity.

On the contrary, his children he puts the always in mind of their duty by
whipping them with his fatherly rod, they do not so soon step awrie, but by
and by he fetches them home again. What is Dives the better for all his
wealth, being now in hell torments?

Lazarus a poor man, yet a godly man, was kept under in this life, but now is
exal^ed. And God indeed does many times keep ^is children under, and gives
them but sro^ ^and to mouth, and yet loves them neuer^helesse. As a father
keeps his son and heir ^hort, without any money in his purse, or any thing
else at his own will, till the time come that he shall inherit: and in great
wisdom he does it, for if his son should have ^he inheritance presently,
he would wast ^t, and spend it vaynely, so God deals with his children, and
for no other cause, both in singular wisdom and love, that they may say
afterward, By this I know that thou ^ouest me. etc.

So that this is not the thing that can assure us of Gods favor to have no
enemies, and no troubles, for if we be Gods children we must look for both.
Therefore is the Church called milita^t, always in battle, always beset
with enemies. 1. Cor. 1.18.
Therefore is ye Gospel called ye word of the Cross. Therefore S. Paul
describing the way to heaven says, Act. 14.22
we must pass through many tribulalations. Therefore Esaw and Jacob shall no
sooner have life, but they shall strive together in their mothers belly.
Therefore Abraham shall no sooner receive the promise, but he must look to be
banished, and therefore Abell shall be envied of his own brother, so soon as
the Lord regardes his sacrifice. The righteous man is like Lot amongst the
So^domits* and like Sampson amongst the Phi^listins. This is the state of the
Church calle^ militant, it is like a ship tossed with the wa^ues, driven with
the winds, beset with Pi^rates, on the one side, with rocks, and sande^ on the
other side, always upon the sea, an^ when it is safest, there is but a board
between life and death. Their peace is persecution their rest is labor, their
riches is pouertie^ their glory is reproach, their liberty is im^prisonment And
yet by this they know that God does favor them, because he does so t^^^per
these cups unto them, with his grace^ holy spirit, that in persecution they
fin^ peace, in labor they find rest, in pouert^ they find contentement,
therefore great riches: in reproaches they find glory, in imprisonment they
find liberty, and in death they find life.

It is no new thing you see, for good men to have enemies, nay the better men
the more enemies, Luke 22.32
as Peter the more faithful to Christ the more sifted by Satan, but as Christ
then prayed for Peter, that his faith might not fail, so he prays still for
the faithful that their faith may not fail, so that still they may say with
David. By this I know that thou love me, because my enemies do not triumph
against me.

But what? did not David's enemies triu^ph against him when they said, A
mischief is ^ight upon him, and he that lies shall rise no more. As appears
in the 8. verse of this Psalm. Why did David then so grievously complain? The
answer is at hand, they spoke evil indeed of David, and as they would have
had it, yea, and as they thought to have had it too, but the Lord delivered
him, so that they triumphed before the victory. When they saw that the Lord
did a little visit him, they cried out: now he is met withal, now he is down.
etc. And thus rashly they judged of the Lords anointed, and triumphed over
him, whom the Lord raised up again* So played the Popes Catholics, when they
would have come upon us, like the fat Bulls of Basan, gaping upon us, as
though they would have eaten us up, when they saw some of our men overcome in
battle, or when the Lord did a little frown upon us, they began straightway
to triumph over us, and marching into Ireland, as though all had been cock
sure for the^: but ye Lord put a bridle into their mouths, and so carried the^
back again by Senacheribs way. So likewise before they came last with their
invincible Navy, they divided our kingdom, and provided owners for every
country, City, Bishopric, Lordship, and whippes for every body. Indeed they
troubled us, and put many in great fear, but through Gods goodness the fear
was greater then the hurt, by which the Lord would give us to understand, that
he had a favor toward us. And that we might know it indeed, he would not
suffer us to destroy them, least we should say that through our own power we
gave the^ the overthrow, and gat our selves the victory, but with his own
hand, and with his holy arm he gat himself the victory, that the whole
praise might return to himself, and by this we might be assured of his love,
and favor toward us, blessed be his name for it. Surely this was one of the
greatest love tokens that ever he bestowed upon us (of te^porall benefits) the
greatness whereof shall appear, when we consider how they would have handled
us, if they had triumphed against us. For this purpose let us take but a little
view. First of their exactio^s in Naples, secondly of their savage cruelties
upon the poor Indians, and the^ shall we see what miseries and mischiefs such
a triumph and such triumphers would have brought upon us. And first of their
exactions in Naples, when they triumphed there. To pass over their treacherous
entrance, it is reported by one of their own Bishops (in a book that he
wrote to the king of Spain, Exactions of Spaniardes in Naples.
for the redress of these things) yt every four or five years they received
200000. or 400000. and a Million of gold. Their landed men were defeated of
their lands and houses, if they had not their evidence to show (which perhaps
might be lost) although they could make just proof of their lawful possession
and right for a 100. years before. The farmer of their butcherie, and powltrie
receives 300. Ducats daily for his fee Every chimney pays 6.^. Every
strumpet iij.^. what should I say? if all the payments were laid together,
that all the kings had before, they were not comparable to the extraordinary
exactions of the Spaniards in Naples.

As for their cruelties on the poor India^s they are not to be spoken, for
they dispeopled more then 10. Realms greater then all Spain, Arago^ and
Portugal. Within 40. years they butchered above 12. Millions of men, The
cruelty of Spaniards in India.
women, and infants. They would set up men and women naked against trees or
walls. etc. and would lay wagers, who should shoot or throw their darts
nearest the heart, and made a sport of murder, as ordinarily as we do of
shooting, or bowling etc. They would use to broyle men to death upon gridirons,
especially great men: whereupon it fell out, that certain Lords being
broyled, four or five, through their pitiful roaring and crying (which they
were enforced to make through extremity of torment) disquieted ye Captain
that lay not far of, and to make them hold their peace they had their mouths
stopped with bullets, until they were roasted to death. Their cruelties were so
great that a certain Lord, for fear fled to the I Will of Cuba, where he was
taken and burned, and being exhorted by a Friar to dye a Catholic, that he
might go to heaven, he asked the Friar whither the Spaniards went when they
dyed, to heaven quoth the Friar. Then I will not go to heaven said the Indian
Lord, because the Spaniardes (as you say) go thither, for it is better to go
to hell (said he) the^ to come where any Spaniards have any thing to do.

Another time, a certain Spanish governor entering the firm land, a Lord of
the country to gain his goodwill, and to avoid torture, met him, and
presented him with nine thousand ducats, in recompense whereof they bound him
to a stake, and set fire to his feet, whereupon he brought three thousand
Castillans more, with which sum this tyrant not satisfied, put fire again to
his feet, until the sinews burst, and the marrowe sprung out of the bones,
and so he died. The king of Mexico sent a thousand presents to welcome him,
besides that: him self in his own person met him with an honorable troop of
Lords and Gentlemen, he was laden with bolts for his labor, and being in
prison, ye rest came to solace their King with some pleasant sports and shows,
whereupon they were apprehended by the Spaniards: a solemn day of slaughter was
proclaimed, and at the day appointed two thousand young Gentlemen were put to
death for a terror to all the country.

The same tyrant going to war against any City, or province, would yoke many
together by the necks, allowing no sustena^ce to twenty thousand, but the
flesh of so many Indians as they could kill. They had as ordinary a shambles
of man's flesh as we have of beasts: Read more of these things in a book
called A complaint of England, and the Spanish (...)^^ties.
they kept mastifes, and other great dogs to hunt men and women, from which a
woman seeing she could by no means escape, she went and hanged her self upon
a tree with her babe tied to her feet, and yet before the babe was dead, the
dogs came and devoured it. Another, hunting venison, could find no game, and
coming homward he met a woman with a child in her arms, he took her infant,
and cut it in pieces, and threw it to his dogs for liuerie. It is not
possible (as one says) to utter in words the merciless dealing of Spaniards
in India, the ghastly remembrance whereof is able to daunt the stoutest courage.
Yet these are the men which pretend supporting of the Catholic faith. Now, by
this ^ast we may give a guess how our cup should have been tempered, if the
Lord had suffered them to triumph over us, for if they handled these poor
souls after this manner, which never did hurt them, nor their religion, how
would they have handled us, which always have been enemies to their irreligious
proceedings? surely their hatred against us, would have proved like
Nebuchadnezzars furnace, Dan. 3.19.
seven times hotter then it was before: yea they would have sent us Rehoboams
message, and his measure, vz. that their little finger should have been greater
upon us then their loins were upon them. 1. King. 12.10.11.
And whereas they did burden them with a grievous yoke, they would have made
our yoke heavier: and whereas they chastised them with rods, they would have
corrected us with scorpions, if they had triumphed over us as they made full
account. By this then we may know that the Lord loves us, (alas a nation not
worthy to be loved) because our enemies did not triumph against us. Blessed be
his name for ever.

But does God love none but those whom he delivers out of their enemies
hands? Yes surely, that he does: for it is no matter how we be overcome of our
bodily enemies, so that our spiritual enemies do not overcome us. For every
Christian has two sorts of enemies as David had, bodily, and spiritual: our
spiritual enemies be our sins, and the temptations of the world, the flesh
and the devil which fight against the soul (as S. Peter says). 1. Pet. 2.11
Now these do often trouble the children of God, rebelling against them, Romans
7.23
and many times leading the^ captives to the law of sin, yet finally they do
not triumph against them, because they do not willingly yield them selves to
sin, with delight in sin, as the wicked do: but they do continually strive
against them by earnest prayer unto God, by hearing the word of God, Romans 8.37
and by faith in Jesus Christ, they are made more then conquerours in the end,
as S. Paul teaches in his doctrine to the Romans

By this I know that thou fauourest me. etc. Without doubt the Prophet David
had need of many blessings more, which the Lord did not bestow upon him, but
kept them back from him, and all to humble him: and yet he did not murmr
against God, for the want of them, but gave him thanks for those which he had
already received. Although the Lord did not suffer him to take any rest,
because of his enemies, yet he praises God, because they did not triumph
against him, a good lesson for us to learn. When ye Lord shall afflict us with
any manner of affliction: as, loss of goods, loss of friends, loss of health,
or whatsoever else, we should remember then what benefits we have still, which
we are unworthy of. Then thus may Gods children say to God: Though the Papists
do molest us, and speak all evil of us, though our enemies seek and sift us,
yet they miss of their purpose, and thou do raise up friends unto us.
Though Athiests, scoffers, and worldly beasts do ^out at thy preachers, yet
thou do not let them discourage them, whereby we know that thou love us.
And has the Lord taken away thy goods, etc. yet remember that he has g^uen
thee leave to enjoy thy sight, thy speech, the hearing, thy understanding, thy
wits, his spirit, etc. all which are more then thou deser^est, and more then he
does for every one. So we may say for matters of reformation, although every
thing be not in all respects as it should be, and as if were to be wished, yet
let us thank the Lord for these good things we have. Though the growth of the
Church be yet hindered by many ignorant Ministers and idle nonresidents, yet
has the Church many good Pastors, and teachers to whom the porter Jesus
Christ has opened the door, and furnished with singular graces, for the good
of his Church. Let us thank his Majesty for them, and not as some do, which
for the want of some things, condemn all the things which we have, because the
Church (forsooth) is not so purely purged as it ought to be, therefore we have
no Church no Ministers, no Sacraments. etc. as it please our schismatiques to
affirm, and therefore in a man rage being carried with pride and tempestuous
spirits, whose glory is altogether i^ condemning their brethren, they cry,
separate your selves, come out from amongst the^, as though we had nothing
left amo^g^t us, which might be a token of Gods fauo^r, and love toward us.
Ah my good brethren: is this to show our selves tha^kefull for that we have
received? shall we acknowledge nothing good, because all is not perfect? we
ought to strive orderly, and lawfully (I confess) unto perfection if it may
be, that Zion may shine in perfect beauty. But in ye mean while let us fear,
that the Lord for our unthankfulness, and scornful contempt will take away
those good things which we have, before he give us any more. If we should want
nothing, we should wax wa^to^, and forget the Lord, as David did, Psalm. 30.6.
who thought when God had made him strong, he should never be moved, and
therefore to humble us, and keep us under, the Lord still keeps somewhat
from us.

But now let us see what use we may make of all yt has been said: we have
heard that ye Lord does not only love us, but also that he makes his love
known unto us, by saving us from the cruel hands of our enemies: this is no
small matter, for the Lord to bestow such love upon his enemies, which deserve
nothing but his hatred and heavy displeasure, should not this make us love the
Lord again? That we do, will every one be ready to say, Ioh. 14.1^
but if you love me (says our Savior Christ) keep my commau^dements, how is
it now that we say we love God, and yet for the love that he bears to us and
we to him, many will not leave one jot o^ their pleasure, nor any unlawful
gain? no nor a hair of their head? by this we may be sure that we hate the
Lord. The usurer, and whoremonger will say they love God: so will the swearer,
and the drunkard say, when their whole life is nothing, but a war against
God. You profane ye Lords Sabbath, and refuse to hear his word when it is
preached, and yet you will say you love God, a spiteful love. The scoffer at
Religion, and every hypocrite will tell us that he loue^h God, or else it were
hard, when yet they will do nothing that God commands them.

Ioh. 21.15
If you love me (says Christ to Peter) feed my flock, to show, that if
Ministers feed not ye flock of Christ, with the food of their souls, the
lively preaching of the word, they love not Christ: and yet both ignorant
Ministers, negligent Pastors, and careless non-residents, will bear men in
hand they love* God, O cruel love that suffers men's souls to sink down to
hell with their own, for who^ the Lord Jesus has shed his blood. You
Magistrates will say you love God, if you do so indeed, let it appear in
cou^tenau^cing his word when it is preached, and encouraging his Ministers, in
reforming his Sabbath, in suppressing of lewdness, in upholding of goodness,
and judging justly, which if you do not, by this you may be sure you love not
God. Ioh. 13.34.
If you love me, says Christ, love one another, to teach us, that if we love
not one another professing all the same Gospel, w^ love not Christ, for he yt
loves him which begat, loves him also which is begotten, 1. Ioh. 5.1.
and he that loves the head, must needs love the members. Now if we delight
still in quarrelling, and contending one with another, in censuring, and
judging one of an other for toys and trifles, in spiting, and vexing, in
mistaking, and misconstruing, in racking and rending, of words and half
words, if we continue still in bitterness and wrath, in malice an envy, and
will not be content to be courteous and loving, and in the bowels of tender
compassion freely to forgive as God for Christ his sake forgave us, Ephe.
4.31.32.
we may be sure we love not God. Again, if you love me (says Christ) do good
to the poor, which you shall always have with you, and look what you do to
them, I will take it as if it were done to my self: now if we be so straight
laced against the poor, as we have been, and do not exercise the works of
mercy toward them, according to our ability, how can we say that we love
God? I mean not to be a proctour for the idle, and slothful, which can work
and will not, for they ought not to eat, and in Gods name let the^ be driven
to work or be severely punished: for if you shall maintain such: when time
shall serve, they will cut your throats for that you have, to make you amends,
like Hanun who cruelly, 2. Sam. 10.4.
and shamefully entreated David's messengers, when of courtesy, and goodwill,
they were sent to visit him, but relieve while you may those that are
impotent, aged, sickly, diseased, and labor hard for their living, and would
work if they had it, see to such I beseech you on Christ's behalf, and
encourage the virtuous and godly amongst you, you use to say, God help you, I
have not for you, a cold alms God knows, but if God had suffered our enemies
to triumph over us, the^ we should have said: God help us, we have neither for
you, nor for our selves, therefore while you have wealth and are able, do good
withal, do not be-lye the Lord that has given you both for your selves, and
for them too, for in such time you may speak it, that your words may prove
truer then you wot of* as it did with Ananias and his wife, Acts. 5.3.
who said they had no more left, when they had as much more as they sold.
Furthermore, if we be assured that ye Lord does love us in Jesus Christ, we may
be bold to pray without fear, and not doubting that he will hear us.

Last of all this assurance of Gods favor, should breed in us a resolution to
leave all our odd shifts, and devises which we use to live by, and to rely
wholly upon his providence, using no means but good, knowing that he which
loves us, will not see us want any thing that he sees good for us. These
things may trouble us, but if they do not triumph over us, by ouerruling us,
the^ we are beloved of God: strive we then by faith and repentance against our
affections, and in the end we shall surely triumph in heaven, for the Church
can not be triumphant in heaven, until it be militant on earth: Now let us
pray.

THE SECOND SERMON OF THE ASSVRAVNCE OF GODS LOVE November. 21. Sabbath day.
By this I know that thou fauorest me. etc.
THe Prophet David cares not what enemies he has nor how many he has, so
that God be not his enemy, he regards not what the Lord does unto him,
neither how he does handle him, so that he may be sure he does it in his love
and favor toward him, and not in his wrath, and displeasure: therefore he
prays, Psalm. 6.1.
Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy displeasure, as if
he should say, I care not, O Lord, what you do with me in this life, so that
I may be sure of thy favor and loving kindness.

This serves to teach us, that when any trouble, or affliction shall come upon
us, we must not so much look upon that, and seek to be eased thereof, as to
look whether we be in favor with God or no. And being sure of his favor in
his son Jesus Christ, to arm our selves patie^tly to bear the cross
whatsoever it be, because whatsoever it is, outward or inward, it is laid upon
us in love, not to hurt us, but to help us forward in the ways of godliness.
We will take any thing well at his hands, of whom we are persuaded that he
loves us, for the assurau^ce of his love swalloweth up, and sweetly sends
down all the rest: if he teach us, we take it, if he admonish us, we are
contented, if he reproves us, we put it up, if he jest with us, we are not
grieved, yea, if he smite us, we are not offended, all is taken in good part,
because they come from love, who never did hurt his beloved. So God deals
with us, his children, he teaches us when we are ignorant, he corrects us
when we go astray, he admonishes us when we are unruly, he reproves us when
we transgress, he threatens us when we are stubburne, and he smites us when
there is no remedy, but is his favor and mercy he teaches, corrects,
reproves, threatens, and smites his children, that they might not be damned
with the wicked world. If he wounds us, his favor is oil to cure the
wound, if he sends floudes, and seas of troubles, the assurance of his
favor is like Noah's Arc to bear us up from drowning. If his wrath shall
burn like fire, his favor is water to cool the heat: whereof Dives in hell
could not get a drop: if he send sickness either of body or mind, the
assurance of his favor is a present remedy, like the brazen Serpent: if he
sends sorrow ouernight, his loving favor shall bring joy in the morning, and
a joyful tidings like, Son be of good cheer thy sins are forgeuen thee.
If he chide us, his favor that he bears unto us, will not suffer him to
chide for ever: if his wrath be kindled against his children* his favor puts
out all again, if he sets us up as marks to be shot at, he sets his favor
before us, with the assurance whereof, we are defended as with a shield. Psalm.
5.12.


When he punishes his children he pitieth them, for he does not punish them as
an enemy, but as a father, therefore David says, As a father has compassion
on his children, Psalm. 103.13.
so has the Lord compassion on all those that fear him. A fathers anger is
rather love then anger, and his correction is to be compted rather a love
token, then a punishment: So is Gods anger toward his children which fear
him, and keep his couenaunts: and therefore his correction is a love token and
no punishment.

Ask Solomon: and he will tell you so, nay the Lord himself will tell you so,
if he sin (says the Lord) meaning by Solomon) I will chasten him with the
rod of men, 2. Sam. 7.19.15.
and with the plagues of the children of men, but my mercy shall not depart
away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee. Ask Adam
and Eve and they will tell you so, for in punishing their first sin, he
wrapped up a blessing within the curse, saying to the Serpent, Genesis 3.15.
that the seed of the woman should break his head, meaning that Christ should
weaken the power of sin and of death, such was his love that he could scarce
punish for love. Ask David and he will tell you so. The Lord has chastened me
sore (says he) (belike then he was very angry) but he has not delivered me
unto death. Psalm. 118.18.
Therefore he made his choice to fall into Gods hands, rather then into men's
hands, 2. Sam. 24.14.
because (says he) the Lord is merciful in correcting. Who would not be
content now to bear whatsoever in this life such a a God should lay upon him?
When Jesus wept over Lazarus, the Jews said, behold, how he loved him, Ioh.
11.35
yea though he suffered death to cast him into his grave the common bed of all
flesh, yet behold how he loved him. So may Gods children say, when the Lord
corrects, or reproves, or afflicts the^, yet mark how he seeks us,
entreats us, and wooeth us, that when we see this, we must needs say, behold
how he loves us. Sechem deferred not to do all that was required of him, Genesis
34.19.
for the obtaining of Dinah, because he loved her. So when we stand in need of
the Lords help, he deferreth not to help us, because he loves us. Judge.
66.15.
Dallila said to Sampson, how can thou say, that thou love me, seeing that
thy heart is not with me? thou have mocked me these three times. But who can say
that the Lord does not love his children, seeing both his heart and his hand is
with the^, and he never mocked them? When the Lord does cross his people, he
deals with them as Joseph dealt with his brethren, which because it is so
lively a resemblaunce of the Lords proceeding with us, we will a little compare
the one with the other: both for our comfort and also for our instruction. When
Joseph's brethren came to Egypt to buy corn, Joseph knew them, and spoke
roughly unto them, Genesis 42.7.
and bare them in hand that they came as spies: so the Lord deals with his
children many times, when they come to him for such things as they want, He
knows them well enough: but makes himself strange unto them, and speaks
roughly unto them, by seeming to deny their request, yea sometimes by increasing
their sorrow and affliction, as Jacob striving with the Angel for a blessing,
Genesis 32.24. to 30.
received a blow on his thigh more then he looked for.

Well, Joseph turned from his brethren and wept, for he loved them, but he kept
it secret to him self a while: so the Lord loves his children, when he
handles them very roughly, but he keeps it sometime secret for a while.
Further, it is said of Joseph, that he took Simeon from them, and bound him
before their eyes: now all this while Joseph knew his brethren, Verse. 8.
but they knew not him: for if they had known it had been their brother Joseph
which loved them, no doubt they would have borne any thing at his hands. So if
we knew our troubles to come from our Father which loves us, would we not
willingly bear any thing at his hands to? 36.
Afterward Benjamin must go, the^ Jacob thought he had been robbed of all his
children, but he found Joseph, Simeon and Benjamin, and all again at the last.
So Gods children in the end find all, when they think they have lost all.
Well, Benjamin goes, and when he is come, Joseph reasons the matter with
them thus, Chap. 43.29.30.
Is this your brother or whom you told me? etc. He knew it well enough, but
before he could go any further, his affection was so inflamed toward his
brother, that he made have, and sought where to weep: all this while he loved
them dearly, but kept it to him self. Chap. 44.
After all this see a second trial no whit inferior to the former: As they
went home, hu and cry came after them for Joseph's cup, which was in policy
conveyed into their brother Beniamins sack, search was made, they thought them
selves clear, so do we many times justify our selves: they did afterward
condemn themselves, and when it was found in Beniamins sack, they were worse
apayed then they were before. Well Benjamin must stay by the reckening, and
answer the matter, this passed all the rest: so does the Lord many times find
out sin by us, when we think all is well: and then things go worse and worse
with us (as we think): and yet still the fear is greater then the hurt. Well,
hereupon Judah draws near to Joseph, Verse, 18.
and said, Let me speak but a word in the ears of my Lord, and tells him a
long story of the whole matter, from the beginning to the ending, as though
Joseph all this while had known nothing of the matter. So we oftentimes in the
grief of our hearts power forth many things, and complaints which the Lord
knows well enough. Chap. 45.1.2.
Now after many trialls, it is said that Joseph could no longer refrain before
all that stood by, but cried, Have forth every man from me, which being done*
he wept, and cried, so that all heard him, both of the Egyptians and of
Pharaohs house. And at the last his love breaks forth like the morning light,
and ouerfloweth after long restraint, as a stream (whose course is stopped)
ouerfloweth the banks. Now mark how he utters him self, 3.
I am Joseph (says he) is my father alive? but his brethren could not answer
him, for they were astonished at his presence: full little did they think that
Joseph had been so near them, they did not once dream of any such matter, or
of any such man. Even so the hand of God is many times in the tempring of
afflictions to the godly for their good, when they think full little upon it. 4.
But again (says Joseph) I am Joseph your brother whom you sold into Egypt:
(well fare all good tokens) come near I pray you unto me, 5.
be not sad nor grieved with your selves that you sold me, for it was Gods
doing for your preservation. Afterward they and their father, and all his house
came up and had Egypt to inhabit: after the like manner deale^h God with his
children as Joseph dealt with his brethren, but after many trials he utters
him self unto them, he puts them in good remembrance of their injuries done to
his Majesty: he freely forgiueth them, and gives them the inheritance at ^he
last, which is more then they deserved, and more then ^hey desired, and more
then they looked for, by which they are assured of Gods favor unto them.
Therefore who will not be content with patience to bear what trial soever
this our loving God, and merciful Father shall think good to lay upon him?

Although Israel were hardly entreated of Egypt, yet God said, Exo. 3.21.
I will get this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that when ye
go ye shall not go empty. Now if the Israelites went not away empty, when they
were in favor with the Egyptians, much less shall we go away empty from the
Lord if we be in favor with him: for seeing he has of his free mercy,
without any desert of ours, given us his only Son, how shall he not with him
(says S. Paul) give us all things else? Romans 8.32
Hereupon it came that the Martyrs were always so ^ocund and merry, for they
were never sent away empty from the bar, from the prison, from the stake, nor
from the fire, but still the Lord filled their hearts with joy and gladness,
and ever sustained their souls with the comfortable assurance of his favor:
and so fast as their persecutors condemned them, God justified them, so fast as
they stripped them, their God clothed them: so fast as they tormented them their
God did comfort them: when ^hey impo^erished, God enriched: when they frowned,
God smiled: when they spoiled the outward man, God renewed the inward man: when
they wounded, God healed: when they killed, God quickened: and finally when
they rejected them, their God received them, whereby they were not only assured
that he loved them, but also were encouraged to bear whatsoever came for the
assurance of Gods favor, so dear and precious was it unto them. Prou. 22.1
Therefore Solomon says that loving favor is above gold and silver: if the
loving favor of men be above gold and silver, how shall we value the loving
favor of God? which being lost, the whole world and ten thousand worlds cannot
redeem, which being obtained, is better the^ the whole world. And ten thousand
worlds, with all the devils in hell can never take it from Gods children, when
they have once the assurance thereof in their hearts, sealed up unto them by the
spirit of adoption. I say once again, whereat, or at what price shall we value
this favor of our God?

When Job was assured of this loving favor of God in the heat of his
affliction, he was so far from shrinking, or sinking down under his burden,
that he said like a valiant soldier, Job. 13.15.
though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. As if he should say, I love my
life well, but I love Gods favor better, to teach us yt if we be assured of
his loving favor once, we care not what we suffer in this life for it, no more
then Job did, for he knew that Gods killing would prove a quickening. So that
all our care and cunning (my beloved in the Lord) must be to see the loving
favor of God in all our temptations, troubles, and afflictions. 2. King.
9.20.22.
And then: as Iehoram said to Ie^u, when he marched in his fury, come thou
peaceably? as if he should say, if thou come peaceably, march as furiously as
thou will. So let us say to our God, O Lord come thou favorably? and in love
against us? the^ come as terribly as thou will. Shoot thy arrows, and spend
them all upon me, beat me to powder, take all away, and in this life do with
me what thou will, so thou do assure me of thy favor. So we pray in that
prayer, which is called the Lords prayer. Thy will be done, but Lord forgive
us our sins, and then do what thou will, deliver us from evil, and from the
devil, and then tempt us, or bring us into what battles it pleases thee. So
reasons the Prophet David likewise, Happy are they whose oxen are strong to
labor, happy are they which are free from foreign invasion, and civil
dissension, which a bound with many outward, worldly, and general benefits*
etc. but how if we miss of these outward things? Psalm. 144. last.
why then, happy is the people whose God is the Lord. So again, in another
place he makes the very same reckening, Many (says he) will say, Psalm. 4.6.7.
who will show us any good, that is, wordly goods, but Lord lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us. etc. to teach us, that we must not care what
we want so that we may be sure of Gods loving countenance in the Gospel of
his son Jesus Christ. Mat. 15.22
The woman of Chanaan was content to take many repulses at the hands of our
Savior, so that she might be sure of one grant: so let us be content to take
many repulses, so that we may be sure of Gods favor in our repulses. The birth
of ye child into the world, swalloweth up all ye pains, and panges of the
mother in forgetfulness, which went before the birth: so says our Savior
Christ. So we if after our manifold afflictions and sorrows for Christ's his
sake, we bring forth the assurance of Gods favor here, and of eternal life
hereafter being dead, let forgetfulness devour and consume all the rest. And
seeing as the Lord in his loving favor does thus and thus cross his children,
let patience bear it, let forgetfulness wear it, and by this let us learn
to trust in our God another time without fainting, or shrinking when troubles
come again. The wicked blind world takes another course, they cast their eye
altogether upon the cross, and study how to be eased of that, with odd
shiftings, and many unlawful devises and ungodly practices, but because they
see not the loving favor of God toward them in Christ Jesus, they are ready
to sink down in despair of mercy, and horror of conscience, like a lump of
lead in the sea. The Lord in one hand has fire to burn, and in his other hand
water to quench, but he holds it behind his back many times, that at the
first it is not perceived, no not of his dear children, but at the last they
both see it, and feel the comfort of it, and acknowledge the same, saying with
David, By this I know that thou fauorest me. etc. Therefore as the child is glad
when his father smileth upon him, and speaks comfortably unto him, although he
beats him, so let us be glad, and rejoice when our heavenly father does smile
upon us, in giving us the assurance of his love, although he does afflict us.

By this I know that thou love me, because mine enemies do not. etc.
Here further we are to consider of the providence, and wisdom of God, in
that he turns the rage and malice of our enemies t^ our great good, for by
this he assures us o^ his favor which is the greatest good that is Thus you
see that the enemies of Gods children do them good against their will, the Lord
by his ever watching providence so disposing their enterprises, and working in
the hearts of his children: for Gods providence does first work and bring to
pass good things, secondly it permits evil things to be done* but then
thirdly, it directs, and orders a^ things both good and bad to his own
glory* and to the salvation of his children. So God turned Adams fall to the
manifesting of hi^ own glory, and to Adams good, for by thi^ means, had Adam
experience of Gods great and infinite mercy, and might say, By this (...) know
that thou fauorest me, because tho^ forgauest me, and did not suffer the
devil to triumph against me, so all the slippes, and falls of Gods children
are turned to their good, in as much as by them they are made more fearful of
sin, and more watchful over their ways, as the child is fearful of the
candle when he has once burnt his finger in ye flame. And S. Paul tells us
from God, Romans 8.28
that all things shall fall out for the good, yea for the best, to them that
love God. Now of this point we may make a very holy use. It serves first to
confirm and uphold our faith in the providence of God, and not to fear the
endeavors of the wicked, because we see that God does still dispose of the^ to
our good if we be his children. Again this may stand us in good stead, when
our affe^tions begin to boil, in a burning desire of revenge against our
enemies, would we be revenged of the^? The best way to be revenged of our
enemies is to pity their case, and to make that profit of them, which David
did of his, that is, still to look to God in the^, the^ shall we be sure to be
no loosers, but gayners by them, whither they will or no.

But here some may demand and say, Does God use to handle his beloved so? or
may a man be sure of Gods favor being beset with so many enemies? and
overwhelmed with such heaps of troubles? especially sin being the cause,
wherewith God is provoked to anger? To which we may answer, that sin indeed
is the cause of all our troubles, but yet whatsoever the Lord lays upon his
children here, it is not a punishment of their sin, for that was discharged
by the hellish sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ, but it is a fatherly
correction, from which we are no more freed by the death of Christ, then we are
freed from our natural death. And it is laid upon us by our heavenly father
for two principal causes, first to prevent sin, which we might fall into, as
presumption, contempt, unthankfulness, forgetfulness of God, and many more.
Secondly, they are laid upon us as Physic to cure and heal sins, which we
are already fallen into, and this is that which David confesses, Psalm.
119.67.71.
when he says, before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep thy word,
and therefore he says, It was good for him to be afflicted, that he might
learn the statutes of the Lord. And in both these ends of our afflictions, 1.
Cor. 11.32.
the Lords purpose is to stay us that we run not with the wicked world
headlong to damnation, whom he has given over to them selves. Esaias. 1.5.
So that troubles and enemies are sent to us the children of God as Physic:
and therewith all he sends a private messenger to tell us that he loves us for
all that, and it is because he loves us, and to that end yt we may be assured
yt he loves us: Romans 8.15 16.
and that messenger is his spirit of adoption, which certifieth our spirits
that we are the children of God. And this being once made sure, then all is
sure. A needful question*
But now the question is by what ordinary means the spirit of adoption does
convey this certificate of Gods favor unto the hearts of Gods children in their
afflictions? for as God does assure his children of his loving favor in Christ
Jesus, so he does it by ordinary means, which means being not used, or
neglected, this assurance fails, and falls from us, and nothing remains
but either a bare fa^cie flotting in the air, in stead of a sure faith builded
on a firm foundation, The means whereby the assurance of Gods favor is
wrought.
and when trouble comes, an impatient spirit to bear up the burden, and when
death comes, a heap of sorrow, and a heavy weight of despair to press down
to ye lowest hells. The means then by which the spirit of God does work this
assurance in the hearts of the godly is the preaching of the Gospel, which is
called glad tidings, because it makes the hearts of the faithful to become
joyful, and glad. And S Paul (to put us out of doubt that the spirit works
not without the word of God) calls the word the sword of the spirit, Ephe.
6.17
to teach us that howsoever the spirit of God must beat down Satan, and cut
down infidelity, impatiencie, despair, presumption, and all our unruly
affections, and howsoever it works faith, Esaias. 11.2.
patience, joy, strength, courage etc. yet all this it effects ^and brings
to pass by the means of the word of God preached, read, heard, marked, and
meditated upon, for as the word without the spirit is but dead to the hearer,
so the spirit of God without the opening of Gods will in hi^ word, does not
ordinarily give this comfortable assurance of Gods love. Ask the Prophet David
himself, who had this comfortable assurance of Gods favor in affliction*
ask him (I say) how he came be it, or how i^ came to him, and he will tell us,
that by the word of God he came unto it, for so he says* Except thy law had
been my delight, Psalm. 119.92.
I had perished in my affliction: for therein he fou^^ many gracious promises
of his God, both for the punishing of his enemies, for the defending and
rewarding of himself, and all Gods servant, and for the forgiveness of his
sins, which were the cause of all his troubles, and therefore the promise of
God he chalengeth at Gods hand. Verse 49.50.
Remember thy promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to
trust, upon this promise of God he rests and stays himself. It is my
comfort in my trouble, for thy promise has quickened me. And when he looked
into this book of God, the storehouse of his promises, there he found also how
necessary affliction was for him he found the causes thereof, and what use to
make of all his enemies, and so through the inward working of the spirit of
sanctification, he behaved himself at all times accordingly, and therefore
when he says it was good for him that he was afflicted, he adds, Verse. 71.
that he might learn the statutes of the Lord, to show that the godly do not
know how good their afflictions be, until they have learned the statutes of the
Lord. And therefore at another time he said, that he was much moved at the
prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.
and had much a do to keep himself in an innocent, 13.
and upright life, hearing, and seeing the wicked so far out of square, 14.
until he went into the house of God, 16.
and when he came into that school once, 17.
he was taught by the word, 18.
and the spirit of God, what use to make of all: and then he saw how wisely,
and justly the Lord orders all things in the world, to teach us, that it is
impossible for us, to make right use of troubles, and to bear our selves in
prosperity and adversity as we ought, until we become scholars to the word
of God, and submit our selves unto the same.

Now as the word of God is the means of this comfortable assurance, so is it
not always effectual to work this assurance unto us, except we use it as it
should be used of us, some think it sufficient to have it in their house, like
the tale^t hid in the napkin. Some think it enough to hear it read at church,
or to read it the^ selves at home: some think it necessary to be preached,
and expounded, but not material whether they come at the preaching or no,
Judge. 17.13.
like Micah who thought himself safe when he had a leuite in his house: some
think it sufficient if they hear it, but they will be at their choice whether
to believe it or no: some give credit unto it, thinking it to be true, and hold
that to be sufficient: when they come neither reverently, nor humbly prepared
unto it, but will be at liberty to descant upon it, and to censure both
preaching and preacher at their pleasure, like the proud cauilling auditors of
Ezechiell, Eze. 33.32
which talked and iested against him when they were amongst them selves, and
made as much account of his preaching, as of a fiddlers song. Some think it
sufficient if they hear it once a year, once a month, or once a quarter:
some think it sufficient if the word sound in a Church, it is no matter out of
whose mouth it come, whether the speaker have a calling or no calling, but the
parish Clarke and the parish Priest is all one to them. But if they have a
Preacher, then all is cock sure on their side, then they must needs be sure
of Gods love. Some again think the plain and bare word of God not sufficient
to work this comfortable assurance, without a mixture of Rhetoric, Philosophy,
Schoole-trickes, Poetry, profane writers, Greek and Latin, and merry jests,
etc. as they that cry, Prophecy of new wine, and strong drink, and if they
have these things clattering about their ears, then they go away from ye
church as full as a bladder filled with wind. And some again hold opinion,
that if the preacher stand never so little above his hour at any time, it is
enough to mar all that went before. And some think, that if there be any
mention made of Gods judgments against their sins, it is enough to drive
them to despair, and so quite from the exercises. And many post off all
hearing of the word, or using any holy exercises of religion, until they be
stricken with age or sickness, like the foolish Uirgins, which put off all to
the last cast. Now all these would be assured of Gods favor when affliction
does assail the^, yea and think themselves sure of it, howsoever the world
shall go with them, but they all deceive them selves. The first sort.
First, they which think the bare reading of it to be sufficient, but the
expounding and applying thereof to be a needless thing, they deceive them
selves: for as reading is a good and holy means for the confirmation of faith,
and the consolation of the inward man: so without the opening of the word, and
applying of the same, this comfortable assurance of Gods loving favor is not
ordinarily wrought, whereby the soul is brought to rest in the bed of peace.
Psalm. 4.7.
For proof whereof we are to listen to the voice of God himself which is the
best judge in this behalf. Job both handles the case, and determines the
case very plainly, Job 33.19.
A man is stricken with sorrow upon his bed, and the grife of his bones is sore,
So that his life causes him to abhor bread, and his soul dainty meat. 20.
His flesh fails that it cannot be seen, and his bones clatter, So that he
draws to the grave, 21.22.
and his life to the buriers, meanig that his affliction both of body and soul
is so extreme, that by means thereof he is brought to deaths door. Now see
what must comfort this man. 23.
If there be a messenger, or an interpreter, one of a thousand to declare unto
man his righteousness. 24.
Then will God have mercy upon him, and will say, deliver him, that he go not
down to the pit, for I have received a reconciliation. 25.
Then shall his flesh be as fresh as a child's, and shall return as in the
days of his youth. 26.
He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see
his face with joy. etc. These are great things, and therefore Job says, that
he that should do them must be a messenger, he must be sent of God, he must be
an interpreter of the will of God, and a rare man, one of a thousand: therefore
a blind reader is not sufficient for these things. The Eunuch was reading the
prophet Esaias Act. 8.28.
by him self, 31.33.
but he knew not what he read until Philip expounded it unto him: 38.39.
and after that he believed, he was baptized, and he went on his way rejoicing.
The Iaylour was in his desperate dumps, and but in a mad mood, when for fear
he went about to kill himself, but after Paul Act. 16.27
had preached unto him the word of the Lord, 30.
he believed in Christ, and rejoiced that he and his believed in God: 32.
for then had he the assurance of Gods favor in Christ Jesus, 34.
which he had not before: to show us how necessary the preaching of the word
is, for the working of this assurance. To this agrees also the Apostle S.
Paul, Romans 5.1.
for (says he) Romans 10.
We being justified by faith in Christ, 14.
have peace with God, but this faith is wrought by hearing, 19.
and hearing by the preaching of the word of God. All which do teach us, that
if we would have the assurance of Gods loving favor in our troubles, and on
our death bed, we must frequent the preaching of the word of God, not because
God cannot work faith without the means of preaching, but because in his
singular wisdom and mercy, he has appointed this means, and promised a
blessing to his own appointment, and to none else.

This means being neglected, The neglect of the means what it does. Second
sort.
the comfort is abated, and the assurance is hazarded, our faith is weakened,
and the devil aduantaged against us. And this may appear to be true by the
parable of the worldlings, which preferred their oxen, farms, their ploughs,
and their families, before ye feast of the word, Mat. 22.
not denying it to be good, but they had business to do, and they could not
intend it, and therefore in the end were shut quite out from the feast of Gods
loving favor. This may further be seen in the confession of the Church and
Spouse of Christ, which Solomon has recorded in his book of Songs the fifth
Chapter. Cant. 5.2.
My beloved (says the Church) knocked and called, saying, Open unto me, my
sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for my head is full of dew, and my
locks with the drops of the night, meaning yt he had daunced long attendance
upon her, as one that stands knocking without the doors all night, but see
what cold entertainment she gave him, I have put off my coat, how shall I put
it on? I have washed my feet, Verse. 3.
how shall I defile them? her meaning is, she was in bed at her ease, and was
loath to rise to let him in, a little thing stayed her from rising, but what gat
she by her sluggish delays? etc. Afterward she arose, and opened the door,
but her well-beloved was gone and past, Verse. 6.
she sought him, but could not find him, she called, but he answered not. All
this is to teach us that if we would be assured of Christ his love, and
salvation by him, we must seek it betimes without delay while it is offered
unto us, for although he knock now, yet we know not whether he will call
again or no. And besides that, the more delays we make, the further are we of
from him, and the more unfit are we to receive the word hereafter: for when
Satan has so far prevailed with men that he can bring them to a custom in
sin, in negligence, in slouth^ulnesse, or any thing else, what follows, but
hardness of heart? and what follows, hardness of heart but impenite^cie? Rom
2.4.5.
as the Apostle teaches the Romans: this would be considered of all, but
especially of those men, which have so many lets and hindrances, that they can
not find any time for the hearing of the word of God. Thus you see that they,
which prolong the time thus of hearing the word preached, and yet think to
have the assurance of Gods love, they do but deceive them selves.

But (I) miss never a Sermon says one, A third sort.
I go every day to the lecture. But deceive not thy self, thou may for all
that be as far from having that sweet assurance of Gods love in Christ
Jesus, as he that hears it never a day, except thou come both with reverence
and humbleness of spirit, like a young child, tractable, teachable, and
willing to be reformed, for the Lord resists the proud, 1. Pet. 5.5. Luke.
1.53
and gives grace to the humble, and as he fills the hungry with good things,
so it is as certain that he sends the rich empty away, although they come
never so often. This you see that proud and profane hearers do likewise
deceive them selves.

Let the preacher say what he will (say some) we will never believe him, A
fourth sort.
but do as we think good, well be it so, and know this withal, that as a
sick body which says to the Physician, prescribe me what you will I will take
what I list, he shall perish for all his Phisitio^: so you which say, say what
you will, we will do as we list. etc. You shall surely perish, and go to the
devil, for all your hearing, without speedy repentance. For whosoever
believes, John. 3.18 and 5.24.
passes from death to life, but whosoever believes not is condemned already,
and the wrath of God abides upon him (says S. John) and thus you see how
unbelievers deceive themselves of this assurance and evidence.

A fifth sort.
I would hear the Sermon (says another) but he speaks no Latin, nor Greek,
nor authors. etc. Alas poor soul, if thou were condemned to dye thou
would be glad to see and hear thy pardon in plain English, and after the
plainest manner, that can be, Note.
without any tales of Robinhood, or Philosophy, or Poetry, or any other
authors, but thy Princes hand to it, but God must send thee thy pardon, and
must set it forth after thy fashion forsooth, and not after his own manner,
that is too base for thee, or else thou will none of it, as though God were
bound not only to save thee, which were a condemned and a wretched creature,
but to feed thy ears too (forsooth) with fine speeches.

Ask these wise me^ how their deeds, and evidences, and obligatio^s are made,
or how they would have them made, and they will say make them after the
plainest manner, yt can be, they care not in how plain terms and words they
be, so that they may be thereby assured of their money, Note.
houses, and lands. Now the word of God contains in it the evidence of the
faithful, which they have to show for heaven, and this evidence ^s Gods
promise, and Gods children care not ^ow plainly Gods promises be set down
unto them, so that they may be assured of Gods loving favor toward them in
the Lord Jesus.

I would hear the Sermon (says another) but I would hear comfortable things,
A sixth sort
^ love not to hear of my sins, and of Gods ^udgements, that is a terrible
thing: see how ^unning me^ are now a days to cousin their ^oules. As though
forsooth God would grant ^hee the assurance of his favor, thou dwel^ing
still in thy sins, or as though thou ^ouldest know how to be discharged by
the Gospel, until thou did know wherewith ^he law has charged thee. No no:
there can ^e no healing in this case, without a deep ^aunching, no, nor any
going to heaven, but the high way is to go by hell, and to pass a^ long by the
fearful sight of thy sins, an^ Gods vengeance due for them, and the^ shall
thou see how much beholding to ye Lord thou art for his loving kindness, and
fauo^^ toward thee in Christ Jesus, by whos^ stripes he has healed thee.

A seventh sort.
We have a good Churchman (says ano^ther) and a fair reader and he can tell a
goo^ smooth tale in the Pulpit too for a need.

All this may be true, and yet both thou he still far enough from the
assurance ^^ Gods favor through a lively faith: for the devils can speak
Scripture, and may speak^ a great while of Scripture too before tho^ by their
speaking shall be assured of God favor. And so is it with them whom God n^^uer
sent with message of comfort unto the^ for they run and run says the Lord:
Ier. 23.32.
bu^ I never sent them, and therefore bring the^ no good unto my people, if no
good, the^ wh^^ assurance can you have by their Minister^ who are not sent of
God, but intrude the^ selves for filthy gain, or vain glory?

Thus you see how many men deceive th^^ selves, in abusing the ordinary means
(...) the word, and yet think to be made as su^^ of Gods favor as any man in
the world. To his word, ye Lord has annexed and joined the administration of
his Sacraments in his Church, Sacraments.
as an outward means likewise, whereby we are more confirmed and strengthened
in the assurance of his favor, ^o these two outward means he puts the
^nward work of his Spirit, Spirit.
without the which the other are to no effect: then on our parts is required a
lively faith in Christ Jesus, the purchaser of this favor and love of his
father for us, and this faith although ^t has his beginning and increasing,
his weakening, and strengthening in this life, and her perfection in the world
to come, yet ^s it not idle, but working, nor naked, ^ut clothed with good
works the fruits of faith, 2. Pet. 1.5. Gal. 5.6. Act. 15.9.
so soon as it is begotten: to this justifying faith is always joined the
sanctifying spirit, which works by love, and is continually occupied in
purifying the heart ^or Christ Jesus, and in applying of Jesus Christ unto the
heart of the owner. And thus ^aue you heard both by what means the Lord does
convey the assurance of his lo^ing favor unto his children in affliction, ^
also how we are to use the same means.

Let us then diligently and carefully vs^ these means, and then shall we be
effectually assured of Gods love and favor in Christ Jesus, and being once
assured o^ that, we may baldly cast down the gant^ let, and bid defiance to
hell and all the deuil^ in hell, and make that challenge which the Apostle Paul
does make in the behalf o^ all Gods children, Who shall separate v^ from the
love of Christ? shall tribulation* or anguish, or persecution, or famine, o^
nakedness, Romans 8.35 36.
or peril, or sword? As it i^ written, for thy sake are we killed all the day
long, we are compted as sheep for the slaughter. 37.
Nevertheless in all these things we are more then conquerours through hi^
that loved us. 38.
For I am persuaded, that nei^ther death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
pri^^cipalities, nor powers, nor things present nor things to come, 39.
nor height, nor depth* nor any other creature shall be able to sepa^rate us from
the love of God, which is ^^ Christ Jesus our Lord. To this Jesus Christ which
has so dearly purchased this fauo^^ for us, to the Father of our Lord Ies^^
Christ, which has so freely bestowed su^^ favor upon us, and to this holy
spiri^^ which does so comfortably assure us of this favor, three persons, and
one eternal God, be all praise and glory for ever. Amen.

THE THIRD SERMON, November 28. 2. Sabbath.
And as for me thou vpholdest me in mine integrity, and do set me before
thy face for ever.
THe Prophet David by two sorts of arguments assures himself, that Gods
favor belongs unto him, the first is drawn from his outward estate in
respect of the world, which was very good: in as much as his enemies did not
triumph over him. The second arises from a view of his own inward estate, in
respect of God, which was much better, for that the Lord vpheld him in his
uprightness, and had a continual care both of his soul and body. The first
argument of Gods favor is strong: but being joined to the second it is sure.
The first is great, but because it is a general thing and may be given to the
ungodly to overcome his enemies (I mean the enemies of his body) therefore
David rests not in that, but searches within himself, to see if he can
find any inward tokens of Gods favor: and searching, he finds two within
himself, the first was Gods hand upholding him from falling away from his God,
the second was Gods eye always upon him for his safety. And having found
these at home in himself, he triumphs, and blessed God the giver.

Verse. 12.
So that now the king shows what inward token he had received of Gods favor*
for God does more for his children then for the wicked, he speaks comfortable
things to the souls of his people. Joseph loved all his brethren, but Benjamin
he loved with a more special love, and therefore he gave messe^ of meat to
them all, Genesis 43. vlt.
but Beniamins mess^ was five times so much as the rest, so Go^ gives
liberally to all his creatures as a good and a loving God, Psalm. 104.24.
in so much that the earth is full of his mercies, but his love to his elect
children by Christ, is a thousand times more then to the rest, for them he
vpholdeth in their integrity* and does set them before his face for ever. Gods
love is more to men then to beasts: of men, his favor is more to his Church,
then to all the world besides, Psalm. 87.2.
for he loves the gates of Zion more then all the dwellings of Jacob, he has
chosen that for his resting place, he has a delight in that, there brake he ye
bow he knapped the spear in pieces, Psalm. 132.13.
he burnt ye chariots with fire, Psalm. 76.1.2.3.
yea he wounded even kings in the day of his wrath for Zions sake, that is, for
ye love that he bare toward his chosen people. Again, in this visible Church
he favors his elect more then the rest, and his loving favor to themward is
greater then to all the world besides. For Gods Church is like a noble ma^s
house, 2. Tim. 2.20.
wherein are vessels of gold, and vessels of earth, and his vessels of gold are
set up safely, and kept more daintily under lock and key the^ the other. Psalm.
147.7.8.
Sing unto the Lord (says David) sing upon the harp unto our God, which
covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and makes
the grass to grow upon the mountains: 9.
Which gives to beasts their food, and to the young raue^s that cry. Thus
much he does for all his creatures, but as for his servant which fear him
and atte^d upon his mercies he delights in them, and takes great pleasure in
the^: such pleasure he takes not in the strength of a horse, nor in the legs or
stature of a man. From all the creatures in general he descends to the
Church in particular and says. 12.
Praise the Lord O Jerusalem, praise thy God O Zion. 13.
For he has made the bars of thy gates strong, and has blessed thy children
within thee. 14.
He sets peace in thy borders, and satisfies thee with the flower of wheat.
But has he done no more for his Church then so? Yes that he has. 19.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his Judgments unto Israel.
20.
He has not dealt so with every nation, neither have they knowledge of his
judgments.

In the first of the Canticles: the Church desires to be kissed with ye kisses
of Christ's mouth, that is, to have more testimonies and tokens of his love
then one, or of one kind, for by outward things (says the wiseman) a man can
not know love and hatred, Eccl. 9.1.2
because all things come a like to all. Therefore says the Church unto her
spouse, kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth, for thy love is sweeter the^
wine, that is, let me have a continuance of thy favor toward me, and many
sure tokens thereof, for no pleasure or profit is comparable to thy love. Cant.
1.1.
The kisses of Christ are his blessings bestowed upon his Church, his blessings
are either te^porall or eternal, corporal or spiritual. His spiritual
blessings are of two sorts, either outward or inward. His outward yet
spiritual blessings, whereby he witnesses his love to his Church, they are
the preaching of the word, and the administration of the Sacraments, these be
great benefits, and sweet kisses of the Lord our God: but because these are
common to the hypocrite which is close and crafty in heart, as well as to the
faithful whose heart is upright before the Lord, we are not to rest in these
outward things, but to search and never leave searching, until we find out
the inward kisses of Christ Jesus, which are most sure testimonies of his love
indeed. And those are faith in Christ Jesus, repentance unfeigned for sin,
patience in affliction, joy in the holy Ghost, and all the other fruits of the
sanctifying spirit, whereof we may read more in Gal. 5. Gal. 5.22.
Every one cannot show these, but only he, which has the spirit of
sanctification. Saul had the spirit, that is, some gifts of the spirit, and
yet was rejected, but David had the sanctifying spirit, and therefore was not
rejected of the Lord, neither did he reject ye Lord, but by this was sure of
Gods favor to his soul. If David had been a king, a conqueror, a man of
wisdom, of policy, of learning, and of riches, and in all these
incomparable, and had lost his integrity, he had lost his mark of Gods love,
and might have followed Saul well enough. So if we were rich, wise, and
learned, if we were Preachers, Bishops, Prelates, Lords, Earls, Dukes and
Emperors, and have lost our sincerity, our zeal, our love, our faith, our
religiousnesse, our godliness, a good conscience, we have lost our marks too,
and may follow Saul too well enough for all our outward pomp and glory. On the
other side, if one have enemies, or be in poverty, disgrace, imprisonment, out
of credit with the world, out of living, etc. and keeps a sincere heart, and
a good conscience in all these things, he may say, and sing too with Simeon,
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, if his time be come. Genesis
25.30.
They which have the outward kisses, and not the inward assurances, are like
Esaw with his pottage, but without his birthright. But they which have lost
all, but keep still their integrity, are like Jacob, who lost his pottage but
found the inheritance, and the love of God: for God loved Jacob, but hated
Esaw. Romans 9.13. Psalm. 4.6.
Many will say (says the Prophet) who will show us any good? that is any
worldly good, but Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, and
then I shall have more joy of heart, then they that have their corn, and wine,
and oil increased. So now a days, many seek for Gods love in the common
trash of the world, and they run about the world by sea and by land crying, Who
will show us any credit, any worship, any riches, any offices, any promotions,
etc. And some of the Ministry cry, Who will show us any more livings, any
Deaneries, any Bishoprics, any spiritual promotions, yea and this is the
voice of gaping Courtiers too by report: and if they speed of these and such
things, then they are sure (as they think) that God loves the^, as Achab
thought him self well if he might obtain Naboths vineyard: but many times it
falls out, that as Dinah while she wandered to see fashions, and sought to
feed her fancy upon the daughters of a strange country, she lost her
virginity amongst the sons of the country. So some men while they seek to
feed and fill their greedy worm of covetousness and ambition with diverse
pleasures and profits of ye world, they loose their sincerity amongst them,
and make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. And then they go away out
of their houses, 1. Tim. 1.19.
as Thamar went out of her brother Amnons chamber, with her maidens garment of
diverse colors rent, because she was enforced to leave her maydenhead behind
her. 2. Sam. 13.18.
So these worldlings which sometime with Demas followed Paul, but now with
Demas embrace the present world, are enforced to go away with their garment of
diverse colors rent and torn: for whiles they will venture through the bushes,
and thorns of worldly cares, to get worldly promotion, is it not a miracle if
they come out with their zeal not quenched, their courage not abated, their
faith not blasted, their love not cooled, their knowledge not withered, their
humility not defaced, their sincerity not decreased, and the whole garment of
piety and Religion not scratched, torn, and rent in pieces? And then a man
may say to them, as Absalo^ said to his sister, Has thy brother met with thee?
so, has not ye world met with them? Verse. 20. Judge. 4.21
And no marvel, for if Sisera look for any rest, or refreshing in Iaels tent,
he shall surely be made nail fast. So if any will seek for infallible marks
of Gods favor in Satan's tents, and in the worlds tents, or in pleasures
tents, or in profits tents, a thousand to one but their sincerity and
godliness will be nailefast before they come out again. What wise man will
seek for grapes upon thorns? or figs upon thistles? or, for gold amongst old
iron? or honey out of a spider? or heat in the ise? So no wise hearted Christian
will look for certain marks of the Lords favor, in such things as may be
marks of his wrath, as well as of his love. But if these outward and general
graces be offered them, they take them, and if they go from them, they go not
after them to loose their sincerity for the^, but thus they resolve with them
selves, O Lord my God I see that by no outward thing a man can certainly tell
whether he be in thy favor or no: but if thou vpholdest me in mine integrity,
and in the study of piety, and the true zeal of thy glory, etc. then I
shall be sure of thy favor indeed: therefore O Lord if want come, then keep my
faith in thy providence firm and strong, if thou sendest enemies to try me,
keep my love sound, if thou sendest sickness or adversity, keep my
patience entire, if riches and preferment come, keep my zeal unquenchable,
like Lot who when it was not granted him to abide still in great Sodom, Genesis
19.20.22.
requested that he might go to little Zoar. And then, although they have nothing
else but the inward testimony of Gods spirit, they have enough: for by these
inward kisses they are sure of Gods favor, because a good conscience is a
continual feast to ye afflicted, and makes merry at home in the house of the
inward man, Pro. 15.15
when there is nothing but war and trouble abroad.

As for me thou vpholdest me in mine integrity.
This same integrity is like Noah's arke^ wherein he was preserved when others
perished being without it: it is like the red third, which the spies of
Joshua gave to Rahab, it was a charter whereby she claimed her life when the
rest were destroyed which had not the like. So is this integrity, of small
reckning (I confess) with the men of this world, which think that there is no
other heaven but earth, but as Rahabs third was better to her then all her
goods and substance when the sword came: so this is better to Gods children
then all the world when death ^ome. If they have this within, they care not, nay
they need not care what can come without. If Satan's buffeting come, this ^s a
helmet of proof, if Satan's darts fly ^ut, this is a shield to quench them,
if floods ^f crosses come to carry us away, this is ^ boat to bear us up:
if all the world cast ^^ire and filth in our faces, we are never a ^hit the
more deformed, but still beautiful ^or all that, for the Kings daughter (says
Sa^omon) that is, the Church of Christ, is all ^lorious within. Psalm. 45.13


In mine integrity. What should David ^eane by his integrity? that he is
without ^^nne? no, not so, for he says in another ^lace, Psalm. 51.5.
in sin he was conceived, and in iniquity was he borne, and in another place
he says, that he could not number his sins, and therefore prays unto God,
to keep him from presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.12 13.
and to cle^se him from his secret faults, therefore that is not his meaning,
neither can it be his meaning, because he speaks by the spirit of God, which
in diverse other places does tell us, Ier. 17.9. 1. Ioh. 1.8.
that no man is without sin. Who can say my heart is clean, says one? And
whosoever says he has no sin deceives himself, and there is no truth in
him says another, and therefore that cannot be his meaning, and if he should
say so, we are not to believe him in this point. What is meant by integrity.
But when David speake^ of his integrity, and uprightness, or innocence, he
means that he is guiltless, and free from that which his enemies did most
maliciously charge him with all, so that it has always respect or relation
unto some particular matter, wherewith he is charged by men, or to something
that is in controversy between him and his adversaries. As in the 7. Psalm
the 3. verse. Psalm. 7.3.
O Lord, if I have done this thing, if there be any wickedness in my hands,
that is, if it be true that I am accused of. etc. if ever I were guilty of
seeking Saul's hurt, with which some did charge me. 8.
Judge me O Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine
integrity that is in me.

Here in this our text, it signifies two things. First, that there was no
cause in the world, why his enemies should triumph against him: for the Lord
had kept him free from that, which they accused him of. Secondly, it imports
that his heart and affections were still sound, and not moved to seek revenge
upon them, although they had given him great and just occasion so to do.

If we take it the first way, we may very ^well: for it is a special token of
Gods favor, and a notable means of comfort, when the Lord does keep us free
from the unjust accusations of the world, or when we are not guilty of those
things, which ye wicked may at any time charge upon us, and the doctrine ^s
this. That the best way to stay us in time of trouble, and to keep our
patience inuio^able, is to look in for a good conscience, and see that we be
falsely accused, which if we ^inde, then all goes well, and we are merry ^t
home, howsoever the world shall say or do ^broad, for still I say with Solomon
that a good conscience is a continual feast.

Oh if it were true (thou say) it would never grieve thee, nay then it might
justly grieve thee if it were true, which is reported against thee. Will thou
be grieved to be blessed? then be not vexed and moved out of order, when thou
are slaundered, for blessed are ye when men revile you, Mat. 5.11.
and persecute you, and speak all manner of evil saying against you falsely
for my sake, says our Savior Christ. Oh this is a special favor of God,
when we can without check of conscience appeal to God in our own hearts, and
say, Thou O Lord know my innocence in this point. But thy spirit (boiling
still in ^ desire of revenge) will say, oh but it is good to teach such a one, to
use his tongue better another time. Indeed in some cases it is good s^ to do,
as when a ma^s public Ministry* or the Magistrates government is by hi^
means defaced, but there is no cause for thee to be so out of quiet, or to
rage, and storm^ as thou do, defend thy good name in a good and Christian
sort, and be thankful to the God, which has kept thee free from that
o^^fence, that thou may say as David said. A^ for me thou vpholdest me in
mine integrity* If we take integrity for a sound heart, free from revenge, it
ministers no small profit, and instruction, for the king although his enemies
had so vexed him, and had thrown so many slanderous reports, and reproachful
speeches against him, yea all their trecheries and conspiracies
notwithstanding, yet he thanketh God for that he did not seek to revenge
again, but rejoices that the Lord kept him in the soundness and uprightness
of his heart.

A notable blessing of God, and a sure token of his favor unto us, whenever
we shall be afflicted, or any way molested, if we find our hearts sound, and our
affections to be settled within us, if we can say, Lord, lay what cross thou
please upon me, let men speak their pleasures of me, A good meditation.
and invent what ^yes they can, let the^ call me by what names they will, and
judge me at their pleasure, so that thou keep my heart sound I care not, for if
I have all the goods in the world, and not the integrity of my heart, I am but
in a mad case* And therefore O Lord, my God, if thou will needs raise up
enemies against me, yet O Lord, grant me that my heart may be entire, sound,
and upright, and then raise up what enemies thou will. Then I shall be sure to
speak nothing proudly, nothing vaynegloriously, nothing impatiently, nothing
uncharitably, nothing distrustfully, and nothing against thy glory, for if I
should do so, alas what should I get by it? I were the^ as deep in sin as
they. No Lord, I am content to refer the whole matter to thee, for although I
am falsely charged in this, yet it is thy goodness and favor, which did
uphold me, Note.
for if thou had let me go after my own will, then I had been guilty
indeed. And although in this I be innocent, yet I know my self to be guilty
of many things as vile as this, which they know not of: and that is also of thy
mercy and goodness toward me poor wretched creature. And as for them thou
have set them a work^ to try me, it is thy doing O Lord, though they have no
such purpose, neither know they so much, yet by thy grace, I am so persuaded,
and if thou did not keep me from falling, I should be as wicked as they are*
If we would but enter into this meditation with our selves as in the sight of
God, the^ should we put up many things more the^ w^ do, and not vex one
another, yea eat v^ one another at law as we do. Neither would we do so I am
persuaded if we did thoroughly understand the policies and slightes of Satan,
for he is very busy to raise up enemies against us, and then he is as busy to
s^irre us up to reuengeme^t: what? will thou put up this at his hands? etc.
then has he that he would have, for while he sets us one to ^unt another, in
the mean time he huntes us all and therefore let us pray to God to keep our
hearts sound and upright.

If we did but consider on the other side, what danger our enemy is fallen
into by vexing of us, when we give him no cause, we would be so far from
revenging, that we would rather pity him and lameut him, and pray for him, as
our Savior Christ did for his enemies, Luke. 23.34.
Father forgive them they know not they do. And as Steven did for his, Act.
7.60*
Lord lay not this sin ^o their charge. For well may Alexander the
Copper-smith do Paul much hurt, but the Lord will reward him according to his
works. 2. Tim. 4.14.
And the same God will no doubt see ^ur causes redressed in his good time.

And if it do come to this point that we be afflicted or wronged any manner of
wa^ whatsoever: the last remedy is to say, Lord if I must needs be thus
handled, or if thou will needs take away my goods. etc. thy will be done*
only keep my heart upright before thee, and put my affections in order, and
give me grace that I may be content and put it to thee O Lord, for I had rather
have all the world against me then to have thee against me: so long as thou
love me, I care not who hate me.

Oh but if I should follow this counsel thou will say, the^ my enemy will
laugh and rejoice, and insult over me, I will never bear that. No, I warrant
thee, and if he does laugh at thee, it is but from the teeth outward, for says
Solomon to the wicked there is sorrow even in laughter, Pro. 14.13
he will not tell thee what is within him, if thou did, or could see into
him, thou should see that, that would make thee to pity him, and even shed
tears for him. We can not be better revenged of our enemies, then to let them
see how little they prevail against us, and how little they move our patience.
For as there is no such greef to a iester or a iugler, as when h^ does see that
with all his iestes and foolerie^ he cannot move mirth nor change the
cou^tenaunces of them that hear him, and see him: so there can be no greater
torment to a wicked and a malicious enemy, then to see thee no whit grieved,
nor moved, at his malice against thee, but that thou do so bear his injuries
as if there were none at all, for thy adversaries purpose is to anger thee, and
to drive thee into thy dumpes, which if he cannot bring to pass, then is he
chafed and vexed ten times more then he was before. Therefore says the
Apostle, Romans 12.21.
Let us not be overcome with evil, but overcome evil with goodness, to teach
us that good is stronger then evil, and what is it that we desire, but to
overcome our enemies or rather the evil that is in them? the^ we must do it
with that which is contrary to their evil, and that is goodness, as fire is
quenched not with fire but with water. If the^ thy enemy be vaineglorious be
not thou so too, but be lowly giving glory to God, if he be puffed up with
pride, be thou of an humble spirit, if he boast himself, abase thou thy
self: if he curse, bless thou, if he be hoate, be thou cold, if he blaspheme,
do not you so. but reprove him in good words, and if he be mad, be thou
stayed, and so doing you shall in the end both wear him, wearye him. and stay
him too. And when they see this it will cut their very heart strings asunder,
and then thank thou God for that he has vpholde^ thee in thine integrity.
For Satan who^ they serve has not such a spite to our wealth, our learning, or
our cunning, or credit (though he love none of all) as he has to our
godliness, and the graces of Gods spirit in us. Was it Jobs wealth that
Satan so much envied? Job. 1.1.8.
or did he so sist him as he did, because he was a rich man? nothing grieved
the devil so much, Job. 2.3.4.
as to see Job still continue in his uprightness, and when he made him
blaspheme and curse the day of his birth, the^ he left him, for he cares not
greatly how rich men be, so that it be not in godliness, nay he will help
them to gather riches and learning, and credit. etc. if he see that
therewithal they may gather more sin, and he may gather them to hell, as he
was content, yea and ready to make Adam eat one apple more, Genesis 3.3.
when he had enough before, because he knew not else how to set God and him at
enimitie, which were before at unity. Now when Satan shall thus sift us, as
no doubt he does, and will sift us as wheat is sifted (says Christ) let us
the^ look to our faith, Luke 22.31
and pray yt it may not fail: then shall he and his instruments have their
labor for their travel, when we shall have ye assurance of Gods favor he
upholding us in our integrity, which God grant for his mercy sake. The Papists
taught men to know whether they stood in the state of grace or no, by many
toys and devises, as by going on pilgrimage hither and thither, by offering to
this stock and to that block, by going to shrift, and by taking absolution at
a balde Priests hand, by saying their stinte of Matte^s and beads, by keeping
of their days and hours, and a number of such odd devises: but they were all
deceived, because this was of the devils inuenting, for indeed by these things
men were sure of the devils geace, but not of Gods grace. But if we would know
whether we stand in the state of grace or no indeed, here is a trial, if we
find Gods spirit by the preaching of the Gospel subduing the corruptions of
our hearts, settling our faith in Gods promises, through Christ Jesus, and
upholding us in our integrity, when by course of nature we should fall into
iniquity, then be we in the state of grace indeed, for thus did David assure
himself of Gods favor, and so may we, if we will watch our selves as David
did.

THE FOVRTH SERMON. December. 5.3. Sab.
As for me thou vpholdest me, etc.
IN these words we are to note further, that the king does not say simply, I am
vpholden, or I have kept mine integrity, but he says, thou O Lord have
vpholden me, and do uphold me, where we may observe, that though David's
heart was sincere, and sound, and upright before God, free from his enemies
unjust accusations, and free from all de^^re of revenge: yet all this was given
him of God, it came not to him by nature to teach us that of our selves we are
not able to keep our selves, but God must and does uphold us in our
uprightness, or else we fall as others (...), and therefore we must crave this
grace of God, that he will keep us, and defend us with his holy spirit.

There has been a great controversy between the Papists and us (ever since
the abomination of desolation stood in the holy place) about this point. They
(intending to justify them selves with the Lawyer in the Gospel) say, This
have we done, and that can we do, affirming that it is in the power of man
(which is but dust and ashes) of himself, and by him self, to repent when he
will, to believe when he will, to obey God when he will, and to uphold them
selves in their integrity. And to make their matter good, they say, we have
the grace of God given us, to obtain the grace of God by our own power. Where
you see they speak flat contraries, if they had grace to see it: for if ye
grace of God be given us, then we have it not of our selves: if we have it of
our selves, then is it not given us of God. Again if we be vpholden by the
grace and favor of God, then we uphold not our selves: if we have this power of
our selves, then not of God. Thus they speak contrary to them selves, and are
divided in their own speeches, like the kingdom of Satan, which is divided
in it self that it cannot stand. And to speak the truth, they speak
confusedly they know not what, because Babell, that is confusion, is fallen
upon them, as upon those men which would presume by their own endeavors
without God to climb up into heaven.

Now on the other side, we hold, that we can get nothing but by the help of
God: and we admit no first grace, but if the grace of God be in us, it is given
us of Gods spirit, not gotten of our own power, and this we prove by the word
of God. God works both the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13.
says the Apostle to the Philippians. Of our selves we are not able to think
a good thought, says ye same Apostle to the Corinthians, and therefore he
demands of all flesh, What have thou, that thou have not received? as if he
should say, nothing: If therefore thou have received it, why do thou boast
as though thou had not received it? Ask S. James, and he will tell us, that
every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down from
the Father of light. As if he should say, from whomsoever evil does come, yet
all goodness comes from God. Genesis 20.
Ask Abimelech, and he will tell us, that if God had not kept him he had kept
Abraham's wife. Ask Peter's fall, and that will tell us, that if we stand by our
selves, we shall fall, although we were as strong as Peter. Ask Jeremy, and
he will tell us that the heart is deceiptfull, and wicked above all things: yea
and though it be borne and bred, and brought up with us, and we have daily
familiarity therewith, yet we can not know it. Therefore, if none can know it,
much less can any reform it. He that knows it can reform it, and does
reform it, where it is reformed: but that is ye Lord which searches the
heart, for so it follows in the next verse, Ier. 179.10.
I the Lord search the heart and try the reins. Ask Moses and he will tell
us, Genesis 6.5.
that the thoughts of man's heart are evil continually, as if he should say. If
they be good at any time, that is not of man, but of God. Moses him self being
in prayer, must have his hands holde^ up by Aaron and Hur, if Moses were not
able of him self to hold up his hands in prayer, much less was he able to
hold up his heart in prayer. What does this teach us, but this, that if we were
as zealous as Moses, yet God must hold us up, or else we faint.

There are but two things required of every one. The first is, to become holy.
The second is, to continue holy, to convert and turn into the ways of God,
and to continue in the ways of the Lord: now both these are of God, and not of
our selves. Of the first the Prophet Ioell speaks when he says, Joel. 2.
Turn thou us o Lord, and then we shall be turned. As if he should say, Except
the Lord do turn our hearts, we shall never be turned unto him, for of our
selves we cannot. How far and how long had S. Paul walked in the way of
persecuting the Christians, if the Lord had not stayed him by the way? When
would Saul have become a Paul, if the Lord had not changed his name and
altered his nature? When would so natural a persecutor, have become so holy a
professor, if the Lord had not called him? And when he was converted, who kept
him from falling back again? 2. Cor. 12.9.
My grace (says the Lord) is sufficient to uphold thee. The spirit of the Lord
is therefore called by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 11.2.
the spirit of wisdom, and understanding, the spirit of counsel, the spirit
of courage, the spirit of knowledge, and the spirit of the fear of the Lord:
to teach us, that if we have holy wisdom, understanding, or counsel, or
courage, or knowledge, or the fear of God, we have them of Gods spirit, and
not of our selves. When God gave Saul a Princely spirit, he spoke like a king,
but when his spirit was departed from him, he spoke like a clown and not like
a king. 1. King. 3.
Therefore Solomon prays unto God for a wise and understanding heart, to
teach us, yt we have no such thing of our selves but from above. The very
phrase of the Scripture, and David's manner of speaking does teach us no less.
Thou vpholdest me (says David) yea eue^ me thou vpholdest. Now David we know
had many singular, and excellent graces of God, and yet God must uphold him,
that is, hold him up from falling: what does this argue but thus much, that we
are subject to falling even the best of us? John. 15.
Therefore in the 15. of John God is compared to a husbandman, and in the 5. of
Esaias. 1. verse, Esaias. 5.5.
and in diverse other places of ^cripture his Church is compared to a vine,
which though it be most fruitful, yet is it most weak, and must be purged by
ye Lord, that it may be fruitful, John. 15.
and must be vpholden ^y the Lord, or else it will fall to the ground. This
doctrine has a double use for our selves. First it serves for our comfort, if
we ^e the seuauntes of God, for alb^it we be compassed about with many
weaknesses, and assaulted with infinite temptations on every side, yet the Lord
whom we serve does and will uphold us, If at any time he does let us fall, ^
it is to teach us that we cannot uphold our selves, but that we stand by him.
But assuredly though we fall daily, yet he will so uphold us if we rely upon
him, that we shall not fall finally from him.

If he takes all his graces from us (as we think) at any time, let us know
that he does it for no other purpose, but that we might know our selves of our
selves to be but naked, and so might beg all of him again. Therefore,
whatsoever we want, let us seek it at the hands of God, that gives to them
which want: when we feel any weakeness^ in us, or any sin strong, let us
beseech the Lord, to uphold us. Do not say, I ca^, or I will do this, and that,
I will believe, and repent when I list, no, for if the Lord by his grace and
favor does not uphold thee, thou shall do nothing but fall from him. Phil. 1.
Faith is ye gift of God, therefore pray, Lord increase my faith, and Lord
help my unbelief. A reformed heart, and holy affections be the gift of God,
Psalm. 51.
therefore pray with David, Create i^ me O Lord a clean heart, and renew a
right spirit within me. The love of wisdom is the gift of God, Psalm. 119.
therefore pray. Apply my heart unto wisdom. To understand the will of God in
his law, is the work of God, therefore pray, Psalm. 119.
O Lord Open my eyes that I may see the wondrous things of thy law. To set
light by vanity, that is by vain things and vain persons is the work of
Gods grace not of nature, therefore we must pray Turn away my eyes from
beholding vanity. What should I say more? Let us beseech the Lord our strength
to uphold us in our integrity, and he will uphold us, so far as shall make for
his own glory, and our own salvation, and what would we desire more? And this
we must desire: for else we cannot stand but fall. Secondly, this doctrine
serves to humble us, and may be a preservative against pride, the use of it is
at all times; but chiefly when we begin to wax proud of any good thing, which
the Lord does work in us, or by us, which indeed is our corrupt nature. And
likewise when we insulte ^uer our weak brethren, both which are our faults.

When such thoughts and temptations come to fasten upon us let us think, that
it is the Lord by whom we stand, and of him i^ is that we are that which we
are, and if w^ be proud thereof, he may and can take awa^ our hold, and we
shall fall, and our honor shall lie in the dust.

Rome was sometime a famous Church, the beloved spouse of Christ Jesus, and ^
daughter of the most high, but for her pride, God let her fall, and has now
given her ^ bill of diuorcement.

Of England it may be said, as it was sai^ of Jerusalem, our habitation and
kindred is o^ Canaan, Eze. 16.3.4.5. etc.
our father an Amorite, and our mother an Hittite. In our nativity our navel
was not cut, we were not softened with water, nor seasoned with salt, nor
swadled with cloutes, no eye pitied our case, we were ca^^ out into the open
field to the contempt of out person. But the Lord of mercy and compassion
passed by us, and seeing us even polluted in our blood, yea in our own blood,
sa^^ in great pity, and compassion unspeakable, Thou shall live. He caused us
to multipli^ as the bud of the field, he has bestowed excellent ornaments upon
us, our breasts are fashioned, our hair is grown, whereas we were naked and
bare, behold further, ou^ time is as the time of love, he has spread his
skirts over us, and entered into a covenant with us, and we are become his, and
he is become ours. He has washed us with sweet water, and anointed us with
oil of gladness. He has clothed us with broidered work, he has shod us
with badgers skins, and gir^ed us with fine linne^, and covered us with
silk. He has decked us with ornaments and put bracelets upon our hands, and
a chain about our neck. He has put a frontlet upon our face, ear rings in
our ears, and a beautiful crown upon our head, he has fed us with fine
flower, honey, and oil, he has made us very beautiful, and has caused us to
grow up to a kingdom, in so much as our name is spread among the heathen for
our beauty, which the Lord has set upon us. What should be said more? In a
word the Lord has compted nothing to costly or to dear for us, nay what could
he do more for his vineyard yt he has not done unto it? Esaias. 5.
but what of all this? shall we brag of our ornaments, and be proud of our
jewels? Eze. 16.15 16.
no: but let us serve the Lord our God with fear, and rejoice unto him with
reverence, for if we shall trust in our beauty, and play the harlot, because
of our renown, if we shall take our garments, and deck the high places with
diverse colors, if we shall abuse the riches of Gods mercy, what then? Then
hear the word of the Lord O harlot. Thus says the Lord, Verse. 35.
because thy shame is powered out, and thy filthiness discovered through thy
fornication with thy lovers, I will therefore judge thee after the manner of
harlots, and murderers, and I will give thee the blood of wrath and jealousy.
I will give thee into thy enemies hands, and they shall strippe thee out of
all thy clothes, and thy fair jewels, and leave thee naked and bare. Therefore
let him that think he stands, take heed least he fall, but let us make an
end of our salvation with fear and trembling, 1. Cor. 10.
not fearing least we should fall from our election, and loose our salvation,
but least we fall from our integrity and loose our manifold blessings, for
want o^ sober using of them.

But this is in general, let us go more particularly to work. Have any of us
her^ present, any knowledge more the^ he had, o^ more then others have, or
wisdom, zeal, or faith, or love, or patience, or any grace* whatsoever, let
us not be proud of them, because God gave them, and God can take them again.
If any of us do stand upright, and walk in honesty, when others do fall, let
us not insult over them, as the manner of some is, Note that
to vpbraide honester men then them selves by faults done forty year since,
and the law fully satisfied for them, and yet this is ye manner of profane
Atheists, which know neither God nor them selves, to cast the old rags and
sores of the servant of God in their face, to make the^ and their profession,
I mean the Gospel odious in the eyes of the world, and such as them selves
are. And for no other cause but because they will not run with them to ye
same excess of riot: Genesis 27.
and eue^ as Esaw hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith God had blessed
him, so do these men hate their brethren because they are better then them
selves, and seek to have them and their ways reformed according to ye word of
God. Is it think you a small matter thus to quench, or to grieve the spirit
of God in any of our brethren? do we stand by our selves? shall we never fall?
(i) we never fall our selves? what if the Lord shall pull the staff of his
grace from us? then we shall fall with shame enough and then others shall insult
over us, and rejoice at our falls, as we have rejoiced at their faults. For
further proof whereof, let us hear what the holy Ghost says to such kind of
persons in the 52. Psalm. Psalm. 52.1.2. etc.
Why do thou boast thy self in thy wickedness, O man of power? the loving
kindness of God indureth daily, as if he should say, thou think thy self a
jolly fellow, and take pride in thy wickedness, as though thou were a great
man of power and should never come down, and because God does suffer thee
from day to day waiting for thy repentance, thou think, either that he
cannot, or dare not, or that he will not meddle with thee, but now see thy
self in thy colors, and then judge what cause thou have to brag it out as
thou do against all the world, what art thou? what goodness is in thee? Thy
tongue imagines mischief, and is like a sharp rasor, that cutteth deceitfully.
Thou do love evil more then good, and lies more the^ truth. Thou love all
words that may destroy. O deceitful tongue. Now see thy end. So God shall
destroy thee for ever. He shall take thee and pluck thee out of thy
Tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of the living. The righteous also
shall see it, and fear, and shall laugh at him, saying, Behold the man that
took not God for his strength, but trusted unto the multitude of his riches,
and put his strength in his substance. But I (says David) shall be like a green
olive tree in the house of God: for I trusted in the mercies of God for ever
and for ever. But some will say this is spoken against the wicked sort of the
world, but I have, more grace, and more graces of God then they have: all the
world cannot detect me of such vices, therefore I may be more bold to speak my
pleasure of others then they may. But deceive not thy self: thou see a
child, while he will run up and down to show his new clothes, Simile.
and catches a fall, and seeing himself down, and his clothes soiled in the
dust he cries louder at his fall the^ he crowed before at his new coat: so
God has put many excellent graces upon thee, thou crowest at the sight of
them, as Nebuchadnezzar did at the sight of his palace, and like a fool thou
art in admiration of thy self, till thou stumblest even upon thy own gifts,
and when thou art down, thou which before did crow like a fool, do then
cry like a child, especially because thou see thy excellent graces, eue^ thy
coat of diverse colors, stained and soiled with thy fall, be not therefore
proud of thy gifts, nor insolent over thy weak brother, for God vpholdeth
thee, and God can set him up, and cast thee down: for promotion (says David)
comes neither from the East nor from the West, Psalm. 75.6.7.
but God is Judge, and he sets up one and pulls down another. Think we
upon this, and it will humble us: who would have thought that David's holiness
should have been so stained in the puddle of uncleanness? Who would have
thought that Solomon his wisdom should ever have been wrapped up in the folly
of women? Who would have thought that Sampsons strength had slept in the lap of
weakness? Who would have thought that such a valiant soldier as Peter was,
would have proved such a coward as he was afterward? what do all these but cry
with one voice, take heed how you walk, for it is God that vpholdeth. How
many Judges have come down from the be^ch to the bar? how many prisoners
have gone up from the the bar to the bench? how many Dukes, Earls, Lords,
Knights, and Gentlemen, how many I say both honorable and worshipful, wise
and learned, stout and valiant, have been plucked from their places of honor
and dignity, like untimely fruit from the tree? and been brought, some to the
gibbet? some to the scaffold, and some to perpetual imprisonment? and what
have they there confessed but thus much, while God vpheld us we stood, and for
want of grace we fell. Therefore let no man rejoice at our falls, for if you
stand, God does uphold you, and if he do not uphold you, you shall surely fall.
Haman was never so high in the kings favor, but at last he was as high on his
own gallows. Mordecai was never so near the point of death, but at last he
was aduau^ced to great honor. Judas once thought much with another, for
bestowing a box of ointment more then needed (as he thought) upon Christ, at
last he knew that him self had taken more then he ought by thirty pence, the
price of innocent blood. The swelling red sea was once divided in sunder, which
before threatened present death to any that durst go into it. The Sun which
runs his course as a swift giant, did once stand still. The ravens did once
feed Elias. The dogs bellyes were once a grave for Iezabell. The fire which
by nature consumes all, had once no power over the hair of a man's head. The
lice, and the flies did once prevail against a kings power. The hungry Lions
had once no power against Daniell. Little naked David, did once give great armed
Goliath the overthrow. There was once a song of Saul's thousand, and David's ten
thousand. And what was once, which may not be again if God will? Therefore let
no man be proud of that he is, but let him remember what has been, and what
may be, and that none vpholdeth from falling but God.

Thou vpholdest me (says David.) Think we upon this text when we see the hand
of God in justice upon any malefactor? we run out by troops to see some
executed, some whipped, and some to be some other way openly shamed: we see
them, we talk of the^, we wonder at them, and so we forget them. But if we
would then take so much pains, as to lay our inside to their outside, that is,
our own faults concealed in Gods mercy, with their faults revealed in Gods
justice, we would the^ pity their case, and fear our selves: we would pray
for them, and for our selves, we would humbly thank God, which by his grace had
kept us from falling. For if the Lord in mercy should not uphold us, we might
be thieves, or murderers, and commit any wickedness as well as others. And
this let us know, that the Lord does but pick them out to preach this unto us,
that except he uphold us we fall, and except we repent we shall fall. Thou
vpholdest me (says David, both a king and a Prophet) and therefore both
mighty and learned, to teach us that there is none so great for living, so
high for authority, nor so excellent for learning, but must depend on God, and
trust in God for all these, or else he is no body. The blind world is in
another vain, and their vain is vain indeed: for they think that honesty
and piety do go by wealth and authority, and not by the grace of God. And
therefore when they grow to be wealthy in the world, or when they have gotten
authority into their hands, they begin to lift up the head, and to turn up
the snout in the wind, then they dispense with themselves to disgrace all that
come before them, if they like them not: and to disdain al their poor
neighbors, be they never so godly, but themselves cannot choose but be honest,
and godly, because they are rich, and in authority.

But what if they chance to be taken in a trip, as the wiliest fox is
sometime taken in a snare? what if they be convinced of falling, or slipping,
or some notorious crime? what then? do they then fly to God? nothing less,
but to their wealth, or friends, or authority, or some worldly devise, and
thus they say in their hearts, Thou my money, or thou my countenance, or thou
my wealth, or thou my friend in the Court, shall uphold me: and so, many times
through corruption, for friendship, and favor, for a gift, a present or a
bribe, a bad man, and a bad cause are vpholden, which should be cast in ye
dust. But Achab shall be slain though he will not be known to be Achab, and
Ieroboams wise shall be known though she disguiseth her self: for only they
shall stand upright who^ the Lord vpholdeth, and none else, for the Lord
knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the wicked shall perish. Psalm.
1. vlt.
But see the blindness of these wise worldlings: because they are wealthy, or
mighty, or crafty, they think themselves safe enough, and what need they
pray to God for his grace to uphold them? nay, they make a wonder at him that
talks of any such matter: whereas indeed the more wealth, or authority, or
learning, or credit, or friends, or any worldly commodity a man has, the more
need he has of Gods grace to uphold him from extremities on every side, for
else all these things will be but so many ropes whereby Satan will pull him to
hell.

Last of all, if this doctrine were well learned, and steadfastly believed, it
would serve in steed of a moderator to end many bitter contentions, for
commonly in contending one with another, we say, Thou art this, and that, and I
am this, and that, thy better, and honester then thou, and so forth. But the
Apostle gives us other counsel, Gal. 6.1.
Brethren if any man (says he) be fallen by occasion, you that be spiritual
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest
thou also be tempted. And (says he) in another place, Tit. 3.3.4.
We our selves also were in times past unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving
lusts and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousnes, and envy, hateful and
hating one another, but when the bountifulness and love of God our Savior
appeared we were otherwise, and so may others be hereafter, which are not yet,
and we may be hereafter as others are now, if God does not uphold us: for it is
he that vpholdeth them which stand, which raises them that are down, which
strengthens the weak, and casts down the prou^ in the imagination of
their hearts.

Now let us pray.

THE FIFTH SERMON, December 12. 4. Sabbath.
And do set me before thy face for ever.
WE have heard already that God did uphold David in his innocence, whereby he
was assured of Gods favor toward him. Now we shall hear, how God preserved
him in safety, which is another pledge of his love toward him. In these
words we have two things to consider. First what God did for David, he set him
before his face* Secondly, how long this love lasted, for ever: when he says,
Thou do set me before thy face. It is as much as if he should say, by
manifest signs and tokens of deliverance, thou do let me know that thou
have me in remembrance: for when God seems to forget his children, he is said
to hide his face, Psalm. 44.24
as appears in Psalm. 44.24. where the Church complains in this manner,
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our misery and affliction? that
is, why do thou not show us thy help, that we may know thou do remember
us? Therefore when he does make it manifest that he does remember us, he is
said to set us before his face.

This shows what a care the Lord has of them whom he loves, and what
affection he does bear unto them whom he vpholdeth in the integrity of their
heart, as a thing which a man has always in his sight: (...) does God love
his children, that he can no^ abide for love to let them go out of his sight.
As the husband that loves his wife, thinket^ him self not well till she has
his compani^ and he her presence: so God loves the Church his spouse, that he
can not abide to be without her company, and thinks her not safe, except she
be in his presence to behold the light of his countenance, therefore it
pleases the Lord Jesus, not only to call himself the head of his Church,
Ephe. 1.23.
and the Church hi^ body, but also to term his Church the fullness of him
self, although he fills all in a^^ things, as though he were imperfect
without his Church. As the father or the mother will have that infant in their
sight, which they love most dearly, so God will have his Church in his sight,
which he loves most tenderly. As the tutour will have his pupil in his
presence to show his care and his love toward him, so the Lord, which has
taken upon him our tuition does set us before his face, that we may know what
care he has over us, therefore are such phrases used in the Scripture, Esaias.
49.15.16.
as Esaias. 49.15.16. Can a woman forget her child and not have compassion on the
son of her womb? though they should forget, yet will not I forget thee,
says the Lord. Behold I have graven thee on the palm of my hands, thy walls
are ever in my sight, to show that no enemies can come against his Church, but
he must know the^, and no breaches can be made in the walls of his Church, but
he must see them, and see who made them. And so long it cannot choose but go
well with his Church. And therefore it follows in the next verse, 17.
Thy builders make have, and thy destroyers, and those that made thee wast, are
departed from thee. In the 10. of S. John 28. John. 10.28.
The son himself says of his spouse the elect. I give unto them eternal
life, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand, to show how safe they are
with him, and how mindful he is of them. In figure whereof, Aaron the high
Priest (who was also a figure of Christ) was commanded by God in the 28. of
Exodus to wear a breast plate with four rows of precious stones. Exodus
28.17.18.19.20.
In the first row, a Rubie, a Topace, and a Carbuncle. In the second row, an
Emeraude, a Sapphire, and a Diamonde. In the third row, a Turkis, an Achate, and
a Hemetite, In the fourth row, a Chrysolite, an Onix, and a Jasper. And the
stones shall be according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve
according to their names, graven at signets, every one after his name, and
they shall be for the twelve Tribes: all this is to show what account the Lord
does make of his chosen people. But where must these stones (...) worn? he
shows where in the 29. verse. So Aaron shall bear the names of the children
of Israel, in the breast plate of Judgment upon his heart, when he goes into
the holy place, for a remembrance continually before the Lord. And Aaron shall
bear the Judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart continually. And
what is this for, but to show the continual care that Christ has of his
Church. For Aaron is a figure and resemblaunce of Christ, the precious stones
are a figure of the Church of Christ. Aaron must wear them upon his breast,
that is in his sight, so Christ has his people always in his sight. As it was
impossible for Aaron to forget the stones, which were in his sight, so is it
impossible that Christ our true Aaron should forget his people, which believe
in his name, but has them in continual remembrance, being now gone into the
holy of holies, that is the kingdom of his father, the most holy place of all.
And the same care which the Lord Jesus had of the Jews his choice people at
the first, the same care has he of the Gentiles, that is of us and other
nations of the earth, which believe in him: because the wall of separation is
pulled down, and there is now no respect of persons with the Lord, Gal.
but in all nations, he that fears the Lord, Act. 10.
and works righteousness is accepted of him.

As for me thou do set me before thy face for ever.
This then shows that none are in such safety as the godly, none so well
guarded as the godly, none so well provided for as the godly, for God does set
them before his face for ever, so that howsoever the world goes, yet God does
always remember the^, as he did remember Abraham when Sodom was destroyed,
Genesis 19.29.
for as he was mindful of his promise, which he made to our forefather
Abraham, Luke. 1.72 73.
which is called the father of the faithful, so will he be no less mindful of
his promise, which he made to his seed, yt is to all ye faithful for ever.
Because he is the Lord and ^haungeth not. Mal. 3.6.
Who dares offer violence to the Princes beloved in the presence of the
Prince? Who shall presume to take the ^^gnet off the Princes finger? Who will
take a pray out of the Lions claw? And who shall snatch the Lords chose^ out
of his hand, who^ he has set as a signet upon his right hand? I^ there be no
safety in the presence of ye owner where is safety? Nature does teach us no
less. The child (fearing to be h^^rt of any body) runs before his father or
his mother, and then thinks him self safe. Nature has taught the very dog
to run before hi^ master, when he fears any body, that comes to hurt him,
but yet these may be de^ceiued, for, what if the father be so unnatural that
he will not rescue his child? or if he be willing, what if he be not able,
being ouermatched? or if he be able and willing at one time, what if his mind
change, and what if his affection be estranged at another time? if he be not
altered in affection, what if he knows not when his son is iniuried? if he
knows when, what if he knows not by whom? if he knows by whom, what if he
cannot come by him? And many things more, what then? why then Vltra posse non
^st esse. He can do no more the^ he can. But with the Lord our heavenly father
it is not so: for, as he is able being almighty, so he is most willing being
our father through his son Christ. As he is willing, so is he unchangeable,
as he is unchangeable, so has he all knowledge, and therefore knows by
who^, at what time, in what place, in what manner, and for what cause any thing
is done in the whole world, and as he has all knowledge, so is his Majesty
every where present, therefore there is no flying from his presence. And as he
is every where, Psalm. 139.
so is he just and true, and therefore cannot be bribed, nor perverted, and as
he is all in all things, so all things are his, and of him are all things
whatsoever they be, and therefore he has need of nothing. What shall we say
more? shall not therefore Gods children be most safe, and most happy before his
face, in whose presence is life, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore? no doubt of it. Let the wicked then tremble, let Sanballat and Tobias
be astonished, let Ashur and Pashur be abashed, let Corah and his company be
confounded, let Ioab and Judas go hang them themselves with their treacherous
kisses, and their traitorous conspiracies, let Ananias disse^ble, and his wif^
take his part, and let them perish in their hypocrisy. And the foxes which
seek to destroy the Lords vineyard, (and their cubbes* by whose
vndermininges the vine has bu^ small grapes, Cant. 2.15
) let them take heed that they be not taken in their own wiliness, for they
cannot go so closely, nor yet so cuning^ly to work against Gods children, but
the Lord ^ee^h them well enough. For he has se^ his children before his face
for eu^^.

This was it ye dismayed Pa^rie y^ bloud^butcher, when he came with a full
resoluti^^ to lay hands upon the Lords anointed: h^ saw in her very
countenance the face (...) God, that is some little spark of his Majesty,
which did so cool his courage, that his traitorous hand was not able to
accomplish the bloody devise of his heart, the Lords name be blessed for ever.
And were it possible for her to have escaped so many dangers as she has
passed through even from her infancy, if the Lord had not set her before his
face, and given his loving kindness charge to wait upon her? The Lord
therefore set her in his sight, and defend her with the light of his
countenance for evermore.

But if this be true will some say, why do the wicked seem to prevail so
often as they do against those which fear the Lord? Surely it is true, they
seem indeed to prevail against them, when they confound themselves. And for
the most part their laughter is but from the teeth outward, Pro. 14.13
and the end of their mirth is heaviness. But ye truth is so, that God seeing
his children to were proud of his presence, and to forget themselves like the
Disciples, Mat. 17.4.
when they saw Christ a little transfigured, he hides his face for a while, and
sets the wicked upon them, and gives Satan leave to sift them, yet not so,
but that he has still an eye unto them, and will see the^ take no hurt. What a
comfort is this to the godly? to think that when heaven and earth go together,
yet their God has them in an everlasting remembrance: but for this they were
of all men most miserable, for but few in the world do care for them. But our
untamed nature will not so be answered. And our impatient humors will not so
be satisfied, for we fear that if we should strive to lead a godly life, to
put up wrongs, and to walk in innoce^cie and faithfulness, no body will care
for us, or regard us, we shall lie open to the injuries of all the world, every
bodies plough will go over us, Psalm. 129.3
and make long furrows upon our backs. This indeed is the voice of worldly
reason^, but faith in Gods promises is of another mind, that says, I believe
in God the father almighty. that is, I am persuaded that God which is my
father in Christ, is willing to save me, and being almighty is able to save
me, and according to his gracious promise will see m^ take no wrong. When my
father and mother forsook me (says David) the Lord took me up. Psalm. 27.
I am poor and in misery (says he) but ye Lord cares for me. But thou will
say, this is particularly spoken of David, what is that to me? yes says the
Prophet, it is for thee too, for who so dwells in the secret of the most
high, shall abide in the shadow of the almighty, Psalm. 91.1.
I will say unto the Lord, O my hope and my fortress, he is my God in him will
I trust, surely he will deliver me from the snare of the fowler, and from the
noisome pestilence. etc.

As this comfort is great, and large, yet it pertains to none, but to the
godly: for this love token is given to none, but to such as stand in the
integrity, and uprightness of their heart. Yet God is good to Israel (says
the Psalmist) but mark what follows, Psalm. 73.1.
even to those that are pure in heart, to teach us, that if we would be such as
God will be g^^d unto, we must first be such as God does delight in, for not the
Cananites, nor the Egyptia^s, nor the Moabites, nor the Hittite^* nor the
Amorites, but ye Israelites were represented by the precious stones upon the
heart of the high Priest. So, not the Idolatrous, nor superstitious, nor
covetous, nor ye malicious, nor proud, nor profane, nor beastly conte^ners of
God, but the true worshippers of God, the meek, the faithful, the lowly, the
godly, shall be had in remembrance before the Lord. Whosoever can truly say with
David, Thou vpholdest me in mine integrity, may undoubtedly follow, and
chearefully sing with David, and thou do set me before thy face.

But how long will the Lord set his children before his face? for ever, says
the Prophet, y^ is, he will never be weary of doing good unto the^, but from
time to time he will stand by them, Pro. 21.31
no power shall withstand him, no policy shall prevent him, no eloquence
shall turn him, no wisdom shall circumuent him, no bribes shall pervert him,
for he has sworn once by his holiness, that he will never fail his servant
David, Psalm. 89.35.
nor alter the decree that is gone out of his mouth. His knowledge decreaseth
not. his strength abateth not, his arm is not shortened. His gifts are without
repentance. Romans 11.
He is not like Isaac that has but one blessing, Genesis 27.38.
but the more he gives the more he has to give, his storehouse is ever
emptied, and ever full. The pooles of his mercy, are not like the poole about
Jerusalem, which might be dried up with tramplings of an army of horsemen and
horses, 2 King. 19.
but they are such as all the sins of a thousand worlds can never dry up,
much less the sins of his chosen. Therefore it is said in the Psalm, Psalm.
130.7.8.
with the Lord is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption, and he shall
redeem Israel from all his sins, if they were more then they are: for his
redemption is not scant redemption, no more then needs must, like a garment
that is but fit for one man's back only, but it is plenteous, and abounding,
Psalm. 136.
even for ever and for ever, Mat. 14.20
like the five loaves and two fishes, which fed five thousand to the full, and
yet were not spent, by twelve baskets full which remained, and that was more
the^ was set down. His love to his Church was before all worlds. In this life
he loves, and for ever he loves us: therefore his love is called everlasting
love. He does set his people before his face for ever, that is, in prosperity,
in adversity, in sickness, in health, in peace and in war, and at all
times, in bed and at board, in the house, and in the field, abroad and at home,
at sea and at la^d, in temple and in tent, and in all places: therefore is he
called ye God of ye hills and the God of the valleys, what shall I say more? 1.
King. 20.28.
He is for ever the same, and chau^geth not. He has not two wills, as the
Papists do teach: a former will, and an afterwill, a doctrine most damnable,
and uncomfortable, but he is God and never changes, Mal. 3.
and the righteous shall therefore be had in an everlasting remembrance, he
does not say the rich or the pleasant conceipted, or the mighty, or the
witty, or the beautiful. etc. But the righteous shall be had in remembrance.
Psalm. 112.6
As if he should say, the wicked shall be everlastingly forgotten, be they
never so wise, never so wealthy, never so mighty, never so crafty, or never
so well liked of amongst men, because they are not righteous.

Then you see that no infirmity, no sickness, no weakness, no simpleness,
no base parentage, no low estate, no misery, nor affliction, no devil of hell
can make the Lord either to forget or to forsake those, which have had once the
assurance of his love, for whom he loves he loves for ever. Therefore if
iniquity come, or if security steal^ upon us, let this doctrine be a staff
to stay us up in our integrity* if sickness come, or poverty come, or
crosses come, or affliction come, nay if all the devils in hell come, let this
doctrine uphold our faith in his promises, which is faithful for ever, 2. Tim.
2.13.
and cannot deny himself, let it be a brazen wall to thy conscience against
despair, let it be a preservative against the infection of sinners, let it be
a cordial for our fainting spirits, let it sweeten all our sorrows, and
swallow up all our cares. And while we live, let us comfort one another with
these words. It is the Lord that vpholdeth us in our integrity, and does set
us before his face for ever, for the words are comfortable, and the Lord give
a blessing that they may be profitable. Now let us pray.

THE SIXTH SERMON, December 19. 5. Sabbath.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel world without end. So be it, even so be it.
THe Prophet David having received assuraunces of Gods favor toward him, he
prayseth God the giver. What tokens he had of Gods love both without him, and
within him, we have heard in the verses before, of his behavior after the
receipt thereof, we shall hear in this last verse. He now returns to God, for
his jewels, such as he had, praise and tha^ksgiuing, love for love, praises
for blessings, as was his duty. The Lord of love wooeth David his beloved, he
has wo^ne his affection, David is ye Lords, both in body and soul, and in all
that he has, David is happy thereby, for he is samed thereby, but ye Lord is
never ye richer for his gift. In David's thanksgiving, we may observe two
things, first to who^ he offers his sacrifice of praise: secondly in what
manner he offers it. For ye first: it is y^ Lord to who^ he does offer it, and
to none but the Lord. Papists say, blessed be God, and our Laid, blessed be
God, and such a saint, and such a saint, for this and ye blessing: so does
not Gods child here, Ergo they are not Gods children in so doing. A man after
Gods own heart does not so, Ergo they are not men after Gods own heart in doing
so. Great reason had David, and great reason have all ye faithful to praise
God only: for first, who kept David's enemies from triu^phing against him but
the Lord? who vpheld him in his integrity, but ye Lord? who set him before his
face for ever, but ye Lord? therefore who must be praised but the Lord? This
was ye Lords own doing, and this was ye Lords only doing, therefore he only is
to be praised. Again, the Lord which saves us even for his own name sake, will
not have his glory parted between him and his creatures, but given wholly to
himself, as ye Prophet Esaias says, Esaias. 42.8.
^herfore, cursed be they, whatsoever they be, y^ dare join any whatsoever, as
partners with God, either in his works or in his worship. For his manner and
form of praising God, it is most excellent, for he does it in such words and
manner as notes a wonderful earnest affection in him toward ye Lord, a great
zeal of his glory, great humility in him self, and a great fear least he
should not do it as he ought: for first, he does not say simply, blessed be
God, but blessed be the Lord God of Israel, to show that nothing in him self
deserved such love at Gods hands, but only the covenant, which ye Lord made,
with his Church moved him thereunto, David being a member of the Church.
Secondly as Gods love is infinite and everlasting, so accordingly he praises
his name for it, saying, world without end. Thirdly, to show his hearty, and
unfeigned consent to that, which he spoke, he says. So be it, and as one not
repe^ting him of that he had said, but rather fearing that he came too short in
the first, he doubleth his speech, and with a second blow, to rouse up his heart
and affection, which were scant awakened with the first, he says, So be it,
and again I say So be it, So be it, even so be it.

The doctrine that is to be gathered from this verse, arises two ways, first
from the matter subject: secondly, from the form of ye words. The matter
subject of the verse is David's thanksgiving to the Lord, for that he had so
many ways sealed up, and made sure his love unto his soul. From which example
we may gather this general doctrine, that after benefits received of God, it is
our duty, and our delight to return thanks unto the Lord, if Gods love be
sweet unto us. And this duty can none perform aright but the elect children
of God, which are led by Gods spirit, endued with Gods grace, enriched with
Gods benefits, and inflamed with his love. All of us do beg and crave like
lepers, but scarce one of ten do return praises and thanksgiving for our
healing, as though Gods gifts were not worth thanks. We are not so kind to the
Lord for all his benefits, as we are to a mortal man for one courtesy. Only
the faithful being once thoroughly enlightened, and effectually called, are
afraid to omit or neglect this duty, and when they do fail therein, they are
not a little grieved thereat: and that they do, for Gods spirit is in them.
Therefore as they pray by the spirit, so by the same spirit they praise God:
always knitting up their prayers with thanksgiving, for they must not be
separated. Daniell prayed, Dan. 6.10.
and praised God three times a day on his knees: no doubt he did it oftener as
occasion was offered, but this he bound him self unto what business soever he
had, because of his dullness: to teach us what we must do. But how many devour
the graces of God one after another like a hog under the tree, never looking
up to the tree from whence they come: as though all that God sends were
nothing. Some are afraid to be acknowen who did them good, or gave them goods,
John. 9.21.
like the blind man's father, who for fear of the Jews durst not tell who gave
his son his sight. Some are ashamed like Sarah, Genesis 18.13.
who laughed at the Angels message, when she should rather have given thanks:
and this is because the wicked mock the godly for praising of God, as the
son of the bond woman mocked the son of the free woman, and it is now
become a reproach to speak any one word amongst many to the praise of God:
whereof it comes that the most part both at bed and board do so commonly
forget to praise the Lord, but like beasts they sit and lie down, and like
beasts they rise up again. But little may we do beloved, if we cannot by prayer
ask leave of God to take his blessings, when we have no right to any thing but
in Christ, and little may we do, if we cannot give him thanks, and acknowledge
him to be the giver. Thus like thieves we steal the Lords benefits and do
nothing for them, as if we should boldly go into our neighbors house, and
take our diner, and his plate, and go away, and never say, with your leave, nor
I thank you: the Lord open our eyes, and touch our hearts. Some that would
seem to be a little more manerly, will utter, nay I may more truly say,
smother out a few cold words of course, like gossips and protestants at large,
when they meet one another, Here is a goodly weather God be praised, Oh you
have a sweet child neighbor, God bless him, God be thanked of your
vpsitting, or your coming abroad again, and so forth: but if any thing be
added more then these common gratulations, whereby God may reap more glory,
that is a note of a Puritan, and he is too holy for our company. Some would
give God thanks oftener then they do, but they cannot remember him without a
picture, or a crucifixe, or some Popish relicke, like the Ioclatrous Jews,
which could not remember God til they saw a calfe. As though the Lords daily
benefits were not sufficient remembrances and lively pictures of the Lords
goodness, or as though when any does bestow a benefit upon us by his son,
we should not thank his father because we never saw him, and we want his
picture.

Some will for fashion sake give God a good word or two, and say perhaps, God
is a good God, God be blessed, I thank God for my deliverance, etc. but then
they must run a long discourse of them selves, but if I had not done this and
that, if I had not played ye man, and had a good forecast, etc. it had not gone
so well with me as it did. Thus many deal with God, like him that when he has
told out his money to his creditor which he ought him, and taken up his bond,
snatcheth up his money again, and for an hundred pound gives him a penie and
a box on the ear. But to leave all these to the Lord, this is most certain,
if we be afraid, or ashamed, or forgetful, or indifferent to praise the Lord:
or if we be vnreuerent, or idolatrous, or superstitious in praising God, how
can we assure our selves to be the children of God?

But note further in this holy servant of God, how he was qualified, and
prepared, before he would, or before he could offer any sacrifice of praise
acceptable to God. First he examineth his heart, and finds his affections
holy, and upright before the Lord, his heart free from revenge, his spirit
humbled under the hand of God, his soul assured of Gods favor, and his faith
settled in his promises: this being done, he proceeds and says Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, etc. assuring him self, that when his person is accepted
with God, his praises and thanksgiving shall not be rejected. This is to teach
us, that they which come unsanctified, and unprepared by a lively faith and
true repentance, and have nothing to commend them unto God but their pride,
their hatred, their infidelity, their impiety, and such like, they cannot
praise the Lord, and if they do, it is returned upon their heads as sin: and
so they are sent away not only empty, but in worse case then they came, like
the unworthy guest that came to the Kings feast without his wedding garment.
And this doctrine runs current thorough the whole body of the Scriptures,
and no man does ask from whence it comes or whither it goes, but every one
of the Lords Seers and servants gives testimony unto it. The Psalmist is of
yt mind, for he says, Psalm. 34.15 16
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their
cry, but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from off the earth, to show how little the Lord regards
their prayers, or any thing that they can offer unto his majesty. Solomon is
likewise of the same mind, for he says, Prou. 15.8.
The sacrifice of the wicked is abominatio^ to the Lord, but the prayer of the
righteous is acceptable unto him. He shows a good reason why. For (says he)
the way of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but he loves them that
follow righteousness. In another place he says, Prou. 17.7
High talk becomes not a fool. If high talk becomes not a ^oole, much
less does divine talk become a wicked man: for what talk hi^her the^ talk
with the most high? and who so foolish as the wicked and profane? The Prophet
Esaias is also of the same mind, for he (speaking in the person of God) says
thus, When you shall stretch out your hands, Esaias. 1.15.
I will hide mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not
hear you, for your hands are full of blood, that is: your deeds are full of
oppression, and therefore your prayers, and praises are stained with your
bloody hands.

S. Luke says, Luke. 4.41
That devils came out of many, crying and saying, thou art Christ the son of
the living God, but Christ rebuked them, and suffered them not to say that they
knew him to be that Christ, because they were devils. For our Savior Christ
will not be praised out of a devils mouth, for their commendation tends
rather to his discredit the^ otherwise: so deuilish men may perhaps come out
of many houses, to Church, and cry we praise thee O God, we know thee who you
art, Jesus the son of the living God, glory be to the father and to the son
and to the holy Ghost, and many good words and speeches more they utter, but
surely the Lord is so far from accepting any such thing at their hands, that
he is more provoked to anger against them for it, because they are deuilish,
and come without repentance into the presence of the most holy. The like in all
respects shall we read of in the 16. of the Acts. Act. 16.17.18.
A certain maid had a spirit of divination, she was such a one as some
ignorantly call a cunning woman, no better then a witch or a co^iurer, one that
wrought by the devil, and could by help of the devil tell where things were yt
were lost, and such a one followed Paul and Silas, crying, These are the
servant of the most high God, and this she did many days. But Paul being
grieved, turned about and said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of
Jesus Christ that thou come out of her. Now as Gods servant could not abide
the confession of the devil, much less can God him self abide it, being
only for fear and not of love. A strange thing that devils, which are at
defia^ce with God, should confess him. And yet (all things duly considered)
it is not so strange as it may seem to be, for what if they do it of
constrainte whether they will or no? or what if it be for fear only and not
for love? or what if they do it to bring credit upon their own matters, and to
bring Gods matters into contempt? then the strangeness of the matter is
diminished: for indeed this is common not only among the devils, but amongst
all the reprobate. Satan shall allege Scripture to credit his own cause,
and Balam will not (because ^e cannot) pass the bounds of that, which God
has put in his mouth, when his heart hunteth for ye wages of iniquity.
Sometime to make them inexcusable God will wring a confession from their own
mouths, as he did from Pharao. Sometime the wicked will do that, which their
heart goes against, to bring Gods servant in question amongst men, like the
cunning maid before mentioned. Sometime to deceive the more easily, and
strongly, he will change him self into the likeness of an Angel of light,
and put upon a foul matter a fair cloak of holiness. The truth whereof may
sufficiently appear in the kingdom or Popery, amongst the Monks and
Friars, which under pretense of holiness, commit all kind of wickedness. I
have known some Arian heretics* whose life has been most strickt amongst
men, whose toungs have been tired with Scripture upon Scripture, their knees
even hardened in prayer, and their faces wedded to sadness, and their mouths
full of praises to God, while in the mean time, they have stoutly denied the
divinity of the son of God, and have not sticked to tear out of the Bible,
all such places as made against them, such were Hamond, Jews and Cole
heretics of wretched memory lately executed and cut of in Norwich, what
shall I say of Fraunces Ket another Arian which succeeded them, F. Kett.
in opinions more monstrous then his predecessors, for he held that whosoever
will be saved, must before he dye, go to Jerusalem: that Christ with his
Apostles, are now personally in Judea gathering of his church: that ye
faithful should miraculously be preserved at Jerusalem, with a wall of fire,
and be fed with Angels food from heaven: but these were his dreams, and yet
such dreams as (rather then he would for go them, having once embraced them)
caused him to plunge him self over head and ears in most damnable and cursed
heresies, for behold: to maintain his former fancies, he held most impudently
that Christ Jesus is not God, but a good man, as others be, and that which was
never heard before, that Christ has suffered once for his own sins, and shall
(before ye end of the world) suffer again, for the sins of the world, and
that being done, he shall be then made God after his second resurrection. And yet
as monstrous as he was in opinion, see how holy he would seem to be in his
outward conversation. The sacred Bible almost never out of his hands, him
self always in prayer, his tongue never ceased praising of God, when he went
to the fire he was clothed in sackcloth, he went leaping and dancing: being in
the fire, above twenty times together, clapping his hands, he cried nothing,
but blessed be God, blessed be God, blessed be God, and so continued until the
fire had consumed all his neither parts, and until he was stifled with the
smoke that he could speak no longer: all which I was a witness of my self. But
shall we think that the Lord took any delight in the prayers or praises of
such a devil incarnate? far be it from us. A strange and fearful example
of a desperate, of a hardened, and a cursed creature, and yet not to be
wondered at, for the devil has his soldiers, and martyrs as well as the Lord,
and oftentimes they are more resolute in the devils quarrel, then some are in
Gods quarrel. As for his willing and ready going, with his constant enduring,
it was no more then is performed by such as hang them selves, or drown
themselves, but what pleasure has the Lord in the sacrifices of such? What
shall we say of our English Donatists, our schismatic Brownists, and
followers of Barrow and his crew? they hold our Church for no visible Church,
Schismatiques.
neither that we have so much as a face of a Church amongst us: they co^de^ne
all our assemblies at their pleasure, terming us and our Churches to be but
dunghils, and Sinagogues of Satan, our Ministry no Ministry, our
Sacraments no Sacraments, our teachers they term Baals Priests, the tail of
the red dragon, the whole Church of England, they call Babylon, Sodom, Egypt,
and all that naught is, thus they cast mire in ye face of their mother in whose
bowels they were first begotten (if ever they were begotten) to the Lord,
separating the^ selves from all the holy things of God, because every thing is
not just as they would have it. But in the mean time to get more credit unto
their pretended cause of separation, they seem to be very devout in prayer,
and as though the spirit of prayer were proper unto them, they conde^n^ all
other men's prayers, their mouths always thundering out the judgments of God,
while they take a felicity in condemning their brethren, they come under a
cloak of sincerity and reformation, while they go about to pluck up the
Lords vineyard by the roots, and none more zealous in their profession, none
more devout in praising of God, none more ready in the Scriptures then they,
yea as plentiful in their proofs, and textes of Scripture they seem to be
for upholding of their errors and shcisme, as Kett was for the defending of his
heresies, but what pleasure the Lord has in such schismatic prayers and
praises, which have nothing to present them to the Lord, but a spirit of
pride, and error, I fear to speak, ye Lord open their eyes, to see their
sin, that so many as belong to him may be converted and be saved.

Thus we see it manifest both by testimonies and examples that the sacrifices
of the wicked and ungodly are vile before the Lord, how holy soever they seem
to be amongst men, and they can not praise him, but as the devils did confess
him. But if any come before the Lord, as his beloved spouse, decked with their
garment of diverse colors, I mean their souls clothed with the riches of Gods
favor, as true repentance, a lively faith, brotherly love, lowliness of
spirit, integrity of heart, patience in affliction, joy in the holy Ghost, if
any come to the Lord depending on Gods grace, naked in himself* yet clothed in
Christ, doubting of himself yet assuring himself of Gods favor both promised
and purchased in ye blood of Christ Jesus they may bring their offering, with
David, and say, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, and the king of glory shall
then have delight in their beauty, for he loves the praises of his people,
and of none else.

This doctrine, if it were thoroughly applied, and closely laid to the
conscience of every estate and calling, it would I hope make us all more wary,
and careful in offering our selves with our presents of praises and prayers
unto the Lord while we live. And first of all, what will Idolaters, and
persecuters of Gods Saints say unto this. In a merry note they sing Te Deum
laudamus, and Benedictus Deus Israel. etc. But whether such Popish, and bloody
services be accepted of God or no, I would wish them to consider.

In our Church if there be any in ye plate of seers and watchmen over the Lords
people, and yet have neither will, skill, nor courage to lead the people of the
Lord in the ways of righteousness, and also do weary them selves in the
ways of looseness and profaneness, and yet will come into Gods house, and
without repentance offer up co^fessions, prayers, and tha^kesgiuings for
themselves and the people: how acceptable such sacrifices are unto the Lord, I
would wish them also to consider.

Again, there are some called Parish Clerks, which without any manner of
calling thereunto from God, do intrude them selves into the Ministers office,
only for a little filthy lucre sake, and most confusedly and disorderly tumble
over the holy things of God, as the Lords prayer, with diverse things, which I
blush to name, under pretense forsooth of helping the Minister to say service:
a thing which I never saw, but in this place. How acceptable the prayers, and
service of such men are, or rather how detestable it is unto God, I would they
had grace to consider.

What will hypocrites, and conte^ners of the word preached, say to this?
because they cannot choose, they come to common prayer, which indeed is too
much negelcted, but as for other excercises, of preaching, and Catechizing (of
all, the most needful, and most pro^^table) they dedicate those times to
bowls, or cards, or tables, or tippling, or wanton walking, and I know not
what, and then the exercises being done they repair to the ordinary service,
where they make a fained confession, and prayers, and praises for custom sake,
Pro. 28.9.
but, He that turns his ear from hearing the law (says the holy Ghost) even
his prayer shall be abominable. If his prayer be abominable, what is his
presumptuous prating, and proud blaspheming? Again, let pirates and rouers at
sea, with usurers, and oppressors by land, with swearers, drunkardes, filthy
livers, Sabbath prophaners and such like, lay this to their heart, and God in
mercy look upon them, for their service done to God, is as acceptable to his
Majesty as the harlots vows, and offerings, of which we read in the 7. of the
Proverbs, Pro. 7.14.
when she went about to entice unto folly: or as if they cut of a dogs head
for the Lord. Again, if there be any husbands and wives, or any neighbors,
living in discord, and suffering their hearts to boil in hatred one against
another, how can they think that the Lord will be delighted with their wrathful
prayers, and praises, when they do offer them, what should I say more? I would
wish, and I do earnestly desire, that every one would lay it to his heart, and
to consider with him self: first, what a sin it is not to pray, and praise God
at all: next, how the sin is increased, if they be not prepared and
sanctified before they do bless God, as David was: for the sacrifices of the
wicked are like the salutations of the Jews, when they bowed the knee unto
Christ, and spit in his face together.

THE SEVENTH Sermon, December 26.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel. etc.
THe last Sabbath day, we heard, that David having received assuraunces of Gods
favor toward him, returned praise and thanks unto the Lord for it: and how
he was prepared thereunto we also heard then declared at large, we will now
consider and see in what manner and form he praised God.

First let us consider why he says, not simply, Blessed be the Lord, but
blessed be the Lord God of Israel. In these words be two points to be
observed. First, the cause why God loved him. Secondly, the largeness, and the
greatness of Gods love. But first, of the cause why God loved him, and why he
did so assure him of his love and favor. And that was not, I warrant you, any
worthiness that ye Lord found in David, nor for his friends sake, nor for his
country sake, nor for his virtues sake, but only for his covenant sake,
which the Lord made with his Church, whereof David was a member, and therefore
must needs have his part amongst ye rest, because God had so promised.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel. As if he should say, I give the Lord
praise, and thanks, which has chose^ Israel, to be his people, which were not
his peeple, and has bound him self, by promise to be ye God of Israel, and to
watch over his people, and to assure the^ of his favor, which deserved ^^thing
but his wrath and displeasure, for by this means I am now assured of his love,
and favor toward me, which I should never have had if the Lord had not chosen
me to be one of the^, upon who^ he meant to bestow his love, according to his
gracious promise, which he made to my fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (which
was afterward called Israel:) and according to his promise which he made,
not only to them, but also to all their seed, that is to all the faithful, so
has he dealt with his servant, blessed and praised be his name for it.

Now we see the fountain from whence springs all the good that we have,
blessed is Israel, because the Lord is their God, and blessed is England,
because the Lord is our God. By this we may see what an excellent thing it is
to be of the Church of God, for the^ the Lord Jehovah, the Lord almighty, is
our God, and we are his people, and if he be on our side, who can be against
us? or if any be against us, who ca^ prevail against us? then are we in
safety from our enemies, then are we vpholden in our integrity, and provided
for according to our wants. So that the Lord does not save us, nor help us
because we deserve it, but because he has so promised in Christ Jesus, neither
does he choose us, because he saw some goodness in us, but therefore is his
goodness, and grace bestowed upon us, because he has first elected and chosen
us to be his people. But now see what a thing it is to be of the Church of God,
that is of the company of Gods people, and within the compass of Gods
covenant. Psalm. 87.2.
The Lord loves the the gates of Sion, that is, the gates of his Church, more
then all the habitations of Jacob, to show how he loves his Church, for if he
bears such affection to the gates, what affection does he bear to the City?
If he loves the most inferior, even the porters of his Church, that are set
to keep the gates, what does he for the chief Citizens, the common wealth of
Israel? no marvel though David desired to be a door keeper in ye house of
God, for to be such a one, yea, to be the meanest in Gods Church, is to be the
beloved of the Lord at the least, and that when it is at the least, is greater
then all ye pleasures, and treasures of the earth, yea it is better then wine,
Cant. 1.1.
says the spouse of Christ, in the Canticles: that is, better then all
pleasures and profits in the whole world. But what does he for his Church? see
what he does, God is known in Judah, Psalm. 76.1.
(says ye Psalmist) his name is great in Israel as if he should say, god has
made his will, and his counsels known to his Church, and the heathen have not
the knowledge of his ways. The godly are of his counsel as Abraham was, and
is this a small matter? Psalm. 147.
But see yet more. In Shale^ is his tabernacle, and his dwelling is in Zion, as
if he should say, the dwellings of ye Lord they are in peace, Psalm. 76.5.
for Shalem is peace. There brake he the arrows, and the bow, the shield, and
the sword, and the battle. The stout hearted are spoiled, they have slept
their sleep, and all the men of strength have not found their hands. At thy
rebuke o God of Jacob, both the chariot, and the horse are cast a sleep, and
therefore, because thou art the God of Jacob, for he is so tender over his
Church, that he will not abide any to annoy, or molest his Church, except it be
for ye greater good of his Church, and the further, and greater confusion of
their enemies. Who^ shall we now praise for our deliverance? we reckon our
ships, and give them high praises, we use to say in the forgetfulness of Gods
goodness, we may thank such a ship, such a thing, and such a means and so
forth, but we should say, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: for it is he that
will be, and must be known in his Church.

Whom have we to stand by us, if ever our enemies come again, but the Lord God
of Israel? Let us say the^ as the Psalmist says, God is our hope and
strength, Psalm. 46.1.
and help in troubles ready to be found. 2.
Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved. Some will say, we have
ships at sea, the hope, the revenge, the dread naught, and so forth, nay, God
is our hope, God is our revenge, and God is dread naught indeed. 3.
Though the waves of the sea be troubled, and rage, and the mountains shake at
the surges thereof. 4.
Yet there is a river, whose streams shall make glad the City of God, even
the sanctuary of the Tabernacles of the most high. 5.
God is in the midst of it, therefore it cannot be moved. 6.
The Lord of hosts is with us, 7.
the God of Jacob is our refuge. Now mark what follows. Come, 8.
and behold the works of the Lord, what desolatio^s he has made upon the
earth. He makes war to cease, 9.
he breaks the bow, and cuts the spear, and burns the chariots in the
fire. Now hear what ye Lord himself says. 10.
Be still (says he) and know that I am God, I will be exalted among the heathen,
and I will be exalted in the earth. In the next verse they do exalt him, 11.
saying. The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob i^ our refuge. Noting,
nothing to be the caus^ of all these works, but only his covenant which he
made with his Church. In the first of S. Luke this is plain. Luke. 1.54 55.
He has vpholde^ Israel his servant, being mindeful of his mercy. As he has
promised to our fathers Abraham and his seed for ever. The virgin Marie is of
the same mind. Luke. 1.71
He has sent us deliverance (says she) from our enemies, and from the hands
of all that hate us, but the cause thereof was his mercy, which he showed to
our fathers in remembering his holy covenant, and the oath which he swear to
our father Abraham, not mentioning any thing in her self. Therefore,
whenever we stand in need of the Lords help (as we do continually) let us
be sure that we are the Israel of God, and then claim his promise, and let us
not then doubt, 2. Tim. 2.13.
for he is faithful, and cannot deny him self. And so much for the cause yt
moved God to be so good unto David.

The second thing that I observe in these words is the large exte^t of Gods
love. For, therefore does the Prophet call him the Lord God of Israel, to show
yt God is not a God of one only, but of all ye faithful to the end of the
world. He was not only David's God, but he is our God also, or else perhaps,
some might say, Oh David was an excellent man, and a man after Gods own heart,
and God did assist him wonderfully. But God is the same God to us, that he was
to David, and will assist us as mightily as he did David, if we call upon him
as David did. Yea to every one of us he is the same, for God is no accepter of
persons, not the Jews more then the Gentiles, the wall of separation being
pulled down, Gal. Act. 10.34 35.
But in every nation, he that fears him and works righteousness is
accepted with him. Whosoever is a right Israelite is such a one as fears God,
and whosoever fears God is a right Israelite: therefore when Jesus saw
Nathaniell, he said, Behold indeed an Israelite, in whom is no guile, therefore
he that fears God, and is without guile, is an Israelite indeed, that is one
of Gods children indeed, what a comfort is this to all the faithful, though
they be never so poor, and base in the sight of men, yet God is their God,
they being his people, and they may challenge his promise as well as any other,
and God will surely hear them, and they shall say, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel.

Now are we to consider of the next words, why he says, world without end. He
does not praise God so long as the benefit of deliverance lasts, and no
longer, but so long as his mercy endures, and that is for ever: for it has
pleased the Lord to choose unto him self a Church and a kingdom, out of Angels
and men, which never shall have end, and those shall praise him continually, as
well for his judgments as for his mercies. And this is it that S. John set
down by the spirit of prophecy, Apoc. 19.1.2.
when he says, I heard a great voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying,
Halleluiah, salvation, and honor, and glory, and power be to the Lord our God,
for true and righteous are his judgments. We use to say, if a mortal man does
show us any courtesy, or bestow any benefit upon us, Oh give him great thanks,
but how great thanks, and what presents shall we offer to God, who gave it him
first, and gave him a heart to give, and gives for ever? If a Prince should
send us any thing (were it never so little) for a remembrance, we will thank
him according to the worthiness of his person, and not according to the value
of the thing which was sent. But God is the Prince of al Princes, and he gives
more then trifles, for in him we live, and move, and have our being, and he
has given us his Son, who has purchased a kingdom for us which shall never
have end. And if it were but our bare being here, he were to be praised for
ever: how much more for such, and so many benefits, as can neither be numbered,
nor valued? Yea for his infinite wisdom, which he has caused to shine in all
his works of creation: if we consider but the excellent wisdom of God in a
poor little fly, he is to receive infinite praises for the same. How much more
for his infinite goodness, power, mercy, justice and providence over all his
creatures, and his unspeakable love toward his children in his covenant of
grace?

If a sily man shall frame a cunning piece of work, or do some notable
exploite, or accomplish some hard and great piece of service, which yet he
could not do of him self, it is oftentimes presented to the Prince, and
published to his lasting praise and renown: but who is comparable with the
Lord of hosts, whose curious and cunning workmanship appears in all his
creatures, and whose right hand has the pre-eminence, by doing of valiant
things? shall not his name then be published to his everlasting praise in his
Church and congregation of his saints? By this appears what difference there
is between our God, and the false gods of ye heathen: for who does or can do
such things as our God does, who has his being, and all sufficiency of him
self, and all others have nothing but as he gives unto them? who deserves
everlasting praises but our God? By this it likewise appears, what dishonor
and disgrace have been offered by gross Idolaters, which would take upon them to
paint and picture out the invisible, and incomprehensible majesty of the
Almighty, like a man whose breath is in his nostrels, whose being is not of
him self, whose years are but a span long, and in his best estate is
altogether vanity. Col. 3.
What so ever ye do (says the Scripture) do all to the glory of God. That is,
strive to do it so, as God may get most glory by it. Are such representations
of God, to the advancing of his glory? what do they show and teach us that we
might give him everlasting praises for? he is painted as a man, as you see in
yonder story of the creation, In S. Tho. Church of Bristol.
in yonder window, in a dozen places together: what may we learn by them? A
man has his being from another, if God be as he is painted forth, he has so
too, which to say, is blasphemy. A man has father and mother, but who was the
Lords father, and his mother? A man is first a babe, and afterward grows in
knowledge, shall we think the Lord to be such? A man has need of meat and
drink and apparel, and of tutors and counselors, and many things me, but who
was the Lords draper or puruayour, or counselor at any time? O cursed
creatures that ever first invented them, and cursed wretches that dare
maintain them, if God give them not repentance: for they are such
abominations as God has flatly forbidden, and condemned to the pit, yea to
the very bottomless pit of hell. Are these the pictures of him that is to be
praised world without end? if they be not, why are they not defaced, which do
so much deface the glory of our Creator? if they be not, why are they
tolerated? nay if they be not, why are they defended as lawful, and not
hurtful to any? and that even now (with shame enough) in the clear light of
the Gospel? And if they be not, why should any keep such a stir, and be so
out of patience and charity with the minister of the Lord Jesus, for speaking
against such filthy and damnable abominations? The Lord open these men's
hearts, and give them repentance if it be his will: and so much be spoken for
that point.

So be it, even so be it. These words do show the agreement of his mind, and
consent of his heart to that which he said with his tongue, to teach us, that
in Gods service we must neither doubt of that which we do, nor waver in the
perfourming of our vows, neither must we do it fainedly, but with full consent
of heart and mind. Resolution is the thing indeed that we are here taught.
Resolution in Gods matters is very requisite, as it is for a soldier in the
field: for Christian soldiers shall have many assaults to make them retire.
For want whereof many leave their standing, and run after the world as Gehezi
left his masters house, and ran after Naman for gifts, till the leprosy caught
him. A Christian without it, is like a door without a lock, soon open and
soon shut, for all comers, open with Agrippa till Christianity be almost
come in, and that is just nothing, and shut with Festus, that Paul must stand
without like a mad man. Hereof it comes that many have lost their first love,
some are neither hot nor cold, some betake them selves with Demas to ye
present world, some are for all companies, and are of all religions, and so are
of no religion: and most men are like reeds shaken with the wind, when as
they which are resolute in Gods matters, go constantly through all assayes, and
stand steadfastly like mount Sion which endures for ever. Therefore David
having set down his mind, sets his hand, and his heart unto it. So be it
(says he) even so be it, as if he should say, I am well advised of that I have
said, I doubt not of it but that it is truth, and I know it is my duty, and
therefore as I have said, so I say again, So let it be. But will thou stand to
it David whatsoever come of it? Yea that I will (says he) and do not repent me
of it, and therefore I am so far from recanting of it, that I spoke it, and I
do speak it again, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel world without end. So
be it, even so be it. There be three things in man must agree together in the
service of God, the tongue, the ear, and the heart: if all these agree upon
the matter, the bill passes: if all these be in tune, the harmony is sweet
an^ the music pleasant. In every man that comes to hear the word of God
preached, or to offer up prayers to God, is a kind of Parliament holden, and
much a do there is many times to have bills pass, because all these do not
agree upon the matter. Gods Minister in Gods name propou^deth many things to
the people, A Parliament.
the equity whereof he groundeth upon ye word of God, and of all these bills,
some concern God himself, and some concern our selves, and our neighbor.
These bills come first to the lower house, yt is to ye outward senses, for
first the ear hears what the matter is: then the eye peruseth the bill, and
searches the statutes of God in his word, to see how they agree together: from
thence they pass along to the higher house, that is to the understanding, from
understanding to reason, if reason like of the matter, then it comes to the
will, and affections of the heart, when it comes there, if the spirit of God
be in the heart then is the heart framed and counseled by the same, if the heart
likes of it, the will does like of it too, the^ is the tongue sent back with
his answer from the inward house, to signify so much to God and the world:
then ask ye tongue, what says the heart? the tongue as the common speaker says,
So be it. On the contrary side, if any thing go against reason, then
understanding can no skill of it, ye heart forbiddes it, the tou^g is silent,
and So be it smothered. Many times a thing passes through all to the heart,
where the matter is debated between natural reason and the heart, and there
(for want of Gods spirit to countermaund natural reason) it stays, and
understanding can no skill of it. But what says the tongue? In stead of So be
it, he brings this answer, Sir, ye heart having co^sulted with worldly policy
and natural reason, does find this to be against his profit, or against his
pleasure, or against his gain, or against his custom, or against his credit
in the world, and therefore this bill cannot pass: my master the heart, with
reason, and policy do therefore desire you to be contented and speak no more
of this matter, but of something else that may stand better with their liking,
as for the rest of the house, understanding, will, and affection, although they
know the matter to be true, just and equal which you demand, yet they can do
no good in the matter, because the other two have nipped it in the head.
Sometime the tongue says Amen to that which the heart condemns, because reason
confirms it, and this is commonly when the eye sees some body whom he
fears, or the ear hears something that he cannot answer, and therefore
though ye tongue be a common speaker, yet is he not always a true speaker.
Sometime again the ear admits, and the heart affects, and desires that
which reason subscribeth unto, but for want of faith, reason reuoketh, ye heart
faints, and ye tou^g foltreth, and either for fear, or for shame dares not
utter what is agreed upon within. A miserable Parliament, yt has such a
speaker, but this is ye matter indeed. This house has two doors, at one door
ye bills are brought in, and that is by the ear and the eye, at another door
they pass out again with their answers and that is the lips within, at which
the common speaker stands. Now if ye Lord do set a watch there, and keep the
door of our lips, then they are open, and the tongue does boldly confess ye
truth, but if the fearful devil, or the bashful devil keep the door, the
tou^g durst not for his life speak the truth: God in mercy remove such
porters, yt we may boldly confess with our tou^gs, that which we believe in
our heart to salvation. So likewise in prayer, and tha^kesgiuing, if our tongue
does speak any thing, which the understanding is ignorant of, and therefore the
heart cannot affect, our sacrifices are but a mockery against God, because the
Parliament house is divided, and there is but a mutiny between the heart, the
tongue, and the rest, but if all agree upon the point, the^ the tongue shows
the consent of the heart, and boldly without fear of any whatsoever stands
forth and says. So be it.

But why does he double his speech and say So be it, even So be it? it should
seem that the speaker of the Parliament house, is but a simple man, and wanted
matter, he meant well it may be, but for want of matter he is feign to harp
upon one string much. Surely beloved, ye Prophet spoke as he was moved by ye
holy Ghost, and this is Gods wisdom, therefore let us not find fault withal,
this is ye plain, and simple dealing of a faithful soul indeed. It is usual
in the Scripture to have one thing oftentimes urged in teaching, and no oftener
then is needful: because, first it is long before we can learn Gods will,
secondly it is longer before we can remember Gods will, but principally, because
it is lo^gest of all before we can make a conscience to obey Gods will: therefore
let no man in hearing one thing often, be weary, because every man may learn
the same thing better: do not say, the preacher wants matter, but say rather
that we want grace, or understanding, or memory, or zeal, or love, or
something. Again, let no man in teaching stand so much upon his reputation, as
to compte it a disgrace unto him if he does often repeat one thing being
necessary, for we see it is Gods wisdom to teach so, and if any man will be
wiser the^ Gods spirit, he will prove him self a fool. In prayer also the
same spirit has taught Gods children to speak one thing oftentimes, partly
because there is in every one great dulnes and want of feeling, and partly to
note how earnest they are and desirous to obtain yt, which they pray for. So
does David here in this place say So be it, even so be it, as though his heart
had been scarce awake at the first. A man that would feign have a thing, which
he needs indeed, will say (being asked if he will have it) oh yea, yea, yea,
and if it be a thing that he cannot away withal he will say, oh no, no, no,
often together, as if he could not deny it too often, as the first could not
desire it too much. This may the Church do, if their hearts be touched with
their own wants and weaknesses. But this does not serve to maintain any
idle, and unnecessary repetitions, such as were used in Popery, and condemned
by our Savior Christ in the Scribes and Pharisees. Math. 6.
In Popery they babble one thing oftentimes, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, and you must
say over the Lords prayer so many, and so many times together, and then you
shall be heard, (say they). And so they play in their chaunting, and curious
singing, which is more like the hunting of ye fore, the^ any spiritual and holy
service of God, they are sometime a quarter of an hour almost in singing some
one word. Alas poor souls: they think yt God is delighted as man is, and
they think that the Lord is a sleep, as Baals Priests thought, and therefore
they call often, but Gods children feel their own hearts a sleep, and
therefore it is that they cry often in the same words.

So be it, even so be it, says the holy Prophet, as if he should say, did I
speak it? I will say it again, I do not repent me of it, I am not afraid, I
am not ashamed, if I said it not with such feeling the first time as I ought, I
will say it again. To show how careful, how constant, how bold, and how holy
we should be in praising of God. For many times in our prayers our minds are
crossed with one thing or other, so that God has not the heart, the^ to it
again, Heart what say thou? then So be it, even so be it. Some think a cold
word, irreverently blustred out, to be good enough for God, and are ashamed to
amend any thing if it be amiss, and afraid to stand to a thing if it be well.
Some will utter in table talk, whatsoever comes in their minds of God, and
against him too sometime, and when they should either defend it, or deny it, or
reform it, they turn it away with a jest: Nay sir, it is not my profession, I
will not reason of it, nor stand with you in it, you are to hard for me, this
is but table talk, and if there should be no arguing and disputing, how should
me^ come by knowledge? etc. But see their folly, or their weakness at the
least, if it be true, and expedient, defend it for Gods glory, if it be false
recant it to the shame of the devil, if it be doubtful, be instructed, for
thy further comfort. But Gods children are well advised what they say, and
being so, they are not ashamed nor afraid, if they hear of it again, but as
they said it, so they will say it again. So be it, even so be it.

This earnest and reverent kind of giving thanks does also notably reprove
the profaneness of some, who while thanks be offered up to the Lord at Table,
for nourishment received, they are otherwise busied, looking here, and there,
toying with one thing or other, according to the affection of their heart. And
when grace is done, they will not stand with you, for Amen, but it shall be so
snatchingly, and so shackled in the teeth and lips, that it would leath a man
to hear it, which they would not do if they thought the Lord worthy of
thanks for his benefits: but so they do, as if he were not worthy of one
cold word, and if he get any more, then they are at very great cost with him,
and he must needs be indebted to them for it: but Gods children come with
great fear and reverence, and to that which is said they give their hearty
consent in most reverent manner. So be it, even so be it.

Furthermore the person of David may teach us one thing more, for he being the
King, gives thanks to God him self: to teach us that it is an exercise for
Kings and Princes: but now most men set their little children to do it only,
and are ashamed to do it them selves, as though it were a childish thing to
give God praise for his blessings. Say not now (as some have said) yt I would
not have children say grace, yes I would have you train them up in it, else
when they come to years they will be as much ashamed of it, as their fathers are
now. But I would have your selves to be the principal actours in so holy an
action, because you have the best understanding, and if thou say no more but
God be praised for all his gifts, do it with reverence, and from the feeling
of thy heart in faith and true repentance. But if thou will be ashamed to give
thy child so good an example, and lay all upon him, it may be said, thy child
is come to grace, but thou art past grace. Last of all, as the king gives
thanks in his own person, so in his own person he confirms it, and says,
Amen, or So be it: he has not a Clarke to say Amen for him, as they have in
Popery, where the Priest, must pray, and the Clarke must say Amen for all the
rest of the people. God said to Moses, the Levites shall pronounce the curses,
Deuteronomy 27.15.26.
and all the people shall say Amen, if at the curses, much more at the
blessings must all the people say Amen, for the one is against them selves, and
the other is for them selves. In the primitive Church, when the Minister had
made any prayer in his Sermon, or before, or after. All the people (says an
ancient father) did say Amen, Amen, that the noise went up as a mighty
thunder in the skies. Now if we speak of a thing that is weighty indeed, and
say God grant it, not ten amongst a thousand, will say Amen, but we will
consider of the matter first, and fo we sit as blocks not one whit moved with
the matter, and this is a great sin* Again, at public prayer, the people
ought to attend to the words of the Minister when he prays, and all at once,
as one body to say Amen. The Clarke has no more warrant to do it for them,
then Vzzah had to hold up the Arc from falling, for him self with the rest he
ought to say Amen, but not alone for the rest, for not be, but the Minister is
ye mouth of God, unto the people, and the mouth of the people unto God in
prayer, but they must say, So be it.

Now to end, God does now exhibit a Bill unto us his people, requiring that
whatsoever he shall demand at our hands, if we see it stands with his glory
and our own salvation, we will give our consent and let it pass, or else the
time will come that we shall put up our Supplications to him, and they shall
not pass. God grant us grace, to grant our consent to all his will.

FINIS.

