A LEARNED AND NOTABLE SERMON UPON THE TEXT VOS AVTEM NON SIC. But you not so.
Lately preached upon special occasion, by M. Butler of Owndell, in S. Mary's
Church in the University of Cambridge: and succinctly debating the chief
matters, which are now in question in the Church of England. Very profitable
for the further resolving of them, who being brought into suspense by the
contradiction of Ministers, are content to lend an indifferent ear unto the
truth.

printer's device of John Wolf, featuring a framed fleur-de-lis seeding, with
two cherubs (McKerrow 294) I W


AT LONDON. Printed by John Wolf. 1593.

The Printer to the Reader.
THe necessity of these our times requiring the help of all hands, to the
quenching of that fire, which has of late been kindled in our English church,
by certain factious and sedicious firebrandes: I could not (gentle Reader) but
impart unto thee, the fruitful labors of the Author hereof, a diligent
labourer and assistant in that business, and that not without some scorching
of those flames which he sought to extinguish. And though that dangerous fire
(God be praised) be now so well allayed, through the provident circumspection
of some vvorthie personages, and no less worthy labors of diverse learned
men, who lately have laid their hands unto this work, that all danger of
further proceeding is clean taken away: yet this help also, shall come (I
hope) not out of season, if but to the quenching of that smoke vvherevvith that
smothered fire still offends the eyes of the better sort. The copy of this
Sermon coming to my hands, not by the Author self who first made it, and
then writ it: but by an auditor that heard it when it was preached, I
thought good to permit it to the censure of a private friend, before I would
commit it to the press. Who upon the first sight of it, even before he had
perused it, (having also been a hearer) gave this good testimony of it, that
it need not fear the censure of any private man, which had passed already
the censure of a whole University, and that with the general approbation of
the common suffrage: excepting only a fevv odd and singular fellows, who
being forestalled with a left hand persvvasion of the cause it self, cannot
brook the impeachment of their strong delusion: and therefore use of custom
to run against the common stream of all other men. This then, was his first
opinion of it. But having perused it, he further added, that of many books
which of late have been published in this argument, not many have contrived
in so short a a compass, so many great matters of question and controversy:
it containing the grounds of all the chief questions, which at this day do
exercise the Church of England. All which he has not only with singular
dexterity and art, and yet very naturally, raised out of his short Text, but
also laid open and dilated so fully as the quickness of so learned an
auditory required, and a great deal more fully, than in that shortness of
time could be expected. This judgment being delivered to me of this Sermon, I
could not with equity but send it unto thee, with the same commendation,
with which it came commended unto me, both by the first and second
cogitations of a learned man, I being content to have used another man's better
eyes, where the weakness of mine own, would not suffer my self so well
to judge.

Fare-vvell.
A LEARNED SERMON PREACHED NOT LONG SINCE IN S. MARY'S CHVRCH IN THE
University of Cambridge: succinctly debating the chief of those matters,
which are now in question in the Church of England.
Luke 22. ver. 26. But you not so: But let him that is or shall be greater
amongst you, be as the younger, and the ruler as he that ministers.
THese words of our Savior Christ, divide them selves into two parts. viz.

A dehortation: in these words: But you not so: in which our Savior dehorteth
his Disciples, from ambition and tyranny.

An exhortation: in the other words: but let him that is, or shall be greater
amongst you, be as the younger: and the ruler, as he that ministers. That is,
that in their superiority and authority, they should be humble: and behave
themselves as Ministers, ministering good to all.

Of the later of these two parts, containing very good, and fit matter for this
place (because of the time) I shall not be able to entreat. I will therefore
keep my self within the compass of the first, namely the dehortation: But
you not so.

Which words do seem to be somewhat imperfect, and therefore lest I should be
thought to ad any thing of mine own, I will borrow the words of the
Evangelist Saint Matthew chap. 20. 26. and Saint Mark chap. 10. 43. who writ
one and the self same thing: so to make the sense it shall be (...). In these
words there are three, which contain some difficulty in them.

(...): it shall not be. (...): so. (...) or (...): you or with you.
So that, for the understanding of the meaning of our Savior Christ, we must
search out, what is meant by, It shall not be; what by, so: what by, you.

It shall not be. This kind of phrase of speech, in our English tongue, is
used two manner of ways, either forbidding a thing to be done, or foretelling a
thing not to be done: As when a master says to his servant, This shall not be
done to day, or, It shall not be done to day. In this speech, he does forbid a
thing to be done. But when an Astronomer shall say, of the weather, It shall
not be hot, dry, cold, or rainie, on such a day, or such a month, In this
kind of speech he does not forbid, but foreshewe a thing that shall not be. In
these two senses, are these words (...): it shall not be, used in the
Scriptures: namely either forbidding a thing to be done, in which sense,
Imperatiuely: or foretelling a thing not to be done, in which Prophetically.
Prophetically, these words (...) are used Apoc. 10. 6. where the Angel
swears: (...): that it shall not be time any more: prophesying, and
foretelling a thing that shall not be. So likewise it is taken Apoc. 22. 5.
(...). and it shall not be night there, prophesying of the estate of the
kingdom of heaven. This I take it, is the reason, why some have thought Christ
to speak prophetically in this place.

If it be taken prophetically, then it must needs be either a prophecy of the
estate of his Disciples, in this life, or in the life to come. If in this life,
then the sense is this: The Kings of the Gentiles do rule, and those that are
in authority, are called good doers: But you not so. That is, I do foreshew
unto you, that you shall not be so. As if he should say: they, in their
authority, are called good doers: but you, exercising authority, shall be
called bad doers: they ruling euilly, are called good men: you ruling well,
shall be called evil men. In which sense, our Savior Christ is made to speak
in this place, all one with that, which in another place, elsewhere he says:
The Disciple is not greater than his Master: If they have called me Beelzebub,
they shall also call you. Me, that came to minister good to them, and to give
my life for them: even so you, that in your authority, shall procure the
welfare of all, and spend your lives to do good to all. This sense is true, for
by lamentable experience, we find it to be so, when as amongst us, some, for
their superiority are called Antichrists: some for their authority, Tyrants:
for dealing justly, without partiality, cruel men: for restraining the
liberty of certain persons, Persecutors. This sense though good, yet does it
not fit this place, my reason is this. Because our Savior Christ presently
after says (...), let him be, speaking Imperatiuely.

If we take it to be a prophecy of the life to come, then the sense is, The
Kings of the Gentiles do rule over them: But you not so. That is, in my
kingdom (which you falsely imagine to be upon earth) I do foreshew unto you,
that it shall not be so. In which sense, our savior Christ is made to rebuke
two things in his Disciples. First, that they ambitiously sought to be each of
them over other. Secondly, that they preferred earth before heaven, and the
having of a kingdom upon earth, before the kingdom of heaven.

This sense is the better thought of: First, because in this place our Savior
Christ does rebuke the ambitious strife for rule that was in his Disciples.

Secondly, because it was the manner of our Savior Christ, to draw them from
the cogitation of earthly things, as Luke 12. 32. from too much caring for
food, and apparel, to the earnest desire of the kingdom of heaven, in these
words, Fear not little flock, it is your fathers will to give you a kingdom.

Thirdly, because immediately after, verse 29. our Savior Christ speaks of
his kingdom. And I appoint unto you, as my Father has appointed unto me, a
kingdom: that you may eat and drink, at my table in my kingdom, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel.

This sense is good, for by lamentable experience, we find it to be true, when
as some so unsatiably hunt after honor, that if they may but sit in the seat of
honor, though they die so soon as they be set, they care not. These, do so
much account of earth, that they care not for heaven: as appears by so great
cost, bestowed upon great sumptuous houses and stately palaces, and little or
no provision sent up to heaven: by which they show plainly, that they never
mind to dwell there, and only to dwell on earth: whereas, alas poor souls,
they are but tenaunts at will, without any state of inheritance, or term of
years, and cast out to day or to morrow, at the will of the Lord. This sense
therefore, though good, and fitting other places of the Scripture, yet does it
not fit this place. my reasons are these.

First our Savior Christ, Matt. 20. 28. propounds his manner of living here
being conversant upon earth, as a pattern unto his Disciples: which can not be
understood of the life to come, but of this life, saying unto the^, As the
Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his
life for many: insinuating, that they in like manner, in their superiority,
and authority over others, here upon earth, should not propound this to them
selves, to be ministered unto: that is, to have others at their command, as
slaves to do their will, but to minister, that is, to employ them selves to the
good of others, and for the procuring thereof, to spend their lives.

Secondly, because the Evangelists, Saint Matthew and Saint Mark have these
words, He that will be greater: which words import two things: first a change
of estate, from lower to higher, and from lesser to greater. Secondly, a desire
to be in other estate: which two things cannot fit the kingdom of heaven, for
there all things are eternal, and therefore not subject to change. And our
estate there, shall be an happy estate, and we shall desire no other estate.

Thirdly, because the Evangelists compared together, do declare, that by (...),
our Savior means, (...), let it not be. For whereas the Evangelist Saint
Mark, Chap. 10. 43. has (...): verse 44. (...). Saint Matthewe 20. 26. has,
(...): verse 27. (...). It is therefore in this place spoken Imperatiuely,
forbidding a thing to be done, that is (...) and (...).

(...), that is, to tyrannize, which is, either over the goods, bodies, or
souls of men. Over the goods of men, by taking away by force violently, or by
deceit guilefully, the leases, lands, goods, or possessions of men. Over the
bodies of men: by hurting the^, by false imprisoning them, by murdering them,
by countenancing murderers, or acquitting murderers. Over the souls of men:
by causing them to swear, and forswear them selves.

(...): that is, to use will as a law, which is, when the will of some great
man, shall be a sufficient warrant to stay, or pervert justice, or when any in
authority shall be led by his own will, of affection, or malice, to pervert
justice. On the contrary side, he does command, or at the least commend, to
rule justly: for no forbidding precept, but does either command, or commend the
contrary, that is, does either like, or not dislike the contrary. And thus
much for the words (...), in which our Savior Christ does not forbid
authority to his Disciples.

(...), so. This word is taken diversely of sundry men. I do not purpose to
name the persons, but reciting all opinions, which with any show of reason
have, or can be gathered, I purpose to set down so near as I can, the purpose
and intent of our Savior Christ.

Some attribute (...) to the word (...): making the sense thus, They that are
in authority, are called (...): which word is of some translated gracious
Lords: But you not so: that is, you shall not be called Lords.

Others attribute (...) to the verb (...), making the sense thus, The kings of
the Gentiles do rule: But you not so: that is, you shall not rule.

Others, though they attribute it to the same verb, yet make the sense thus.
The kings of the Gentiles do rule: But you not so: that is, you shall not rule.

So either titles of honor, as Lord, ruler, or (...), or ruling, or so ruling,
is forbidden.

Titles of honor, whether Lord, ruler, or (...), are not forbidden.

The word (...) has not one syllable in it, that signifies Lord. It is
nevertheless so translated, because of the imperfection of our English tongue:
for having no one word that signifies a title of honor, and of doing good
(which this word (...) in this place does signify) The word, benefactors, does
best express the signification of the word, (...).
the godly interpreters (knowing voces to be rerum imagines) have by this
periphrasis gracious lords, sought to set down the meaning of our Savior
Christ, using Lord for a title of honor, and gracious for a title of doing good.

This title (...) I read to have been given to great personages, as to
Ptolomeus the third of that name, after Alexander, and the immediate successor
of Ptolomeus Philadelphus, and to Ptolomeus, the seventh after Alexander, and
successor of Ptolomeus Philometor, and as some write to Cleomenes king of
Sparta.

In this sense, being usually given to great men, our Savior Christ in this
title does not simply forbid the name of (...), but the ambitious affecting of
that title, and so of honor, according as Matthew. 23. 8. and 9. he forbids
the^ to be called Rabbi, or father: where not the name simply, but the
ambicious affecting of that title is forbidden.

Again, (...) is a title of doing good, and all one with (...), and (...):
which titles are indifferently given to all Christians, magistrates, people,
and Ministers, in the Scriptures. And that it may evidently appear, that this
title is not forbidden, the Apostle Peter does apply it to our savior Christ.
Acts. 10. 38. (...), which went about doing good. And in this sense our
Savior Christ does not forbid, simply, the name and title of (...): but the
having or giving of vain titles, according as the Gentile rulers, which were
called (...), being (...): good-doers, being in deed bad-doers.

In like manner, the title of Lord is not forbidden in this place, nor in any
other place of Scripture, to the Ministers. Our Savior Christ, in regard of
his superiority over his Disciples, was called Lord, John 13. 13. You call me
Lord, and Master, (...): yea the Apostles have this name given them, Acts 16.
30. (...). My Lords, what shall I do that I may be saved? In which place
neither Paul nor Silas do reprehend that title given them, which if it had been
unlawful, they would.

Likewise, the title of ruler, is in the Scripture given to Ministers, Hebr.
13. 7. (...). Remember those rulers which have preached unto you the word of
God. And in the seventeenth verse of the same chapter, (...). Obey those rulers.

As titles of honor are not forbidden to Ministers: so not to other rulers.
The old Testament is full of high titles given unto them: and so are there some
in the New. The Evangelist Saint Luke, in his Gospel, Chapter 1. 3. writing to
Theophilus, gives him this title: (...): most excellent, or renowned
Theophilus: which title also Paul gives to Festus, Acts 26. 25. (...), most
noble Festus. To be short, if any title of honor, were simply evil, it were
the name and title of God given unto men, but that title in the old Testament
in diverse places, is given to rulers, and the same is confirmed to them by our
Savior Christ, John. 10. 34. Titles of honor are therefore neither forbidden
to Civil, nor Ecclesiastical rulers.

Now remains the second sense: The kings of the Gentiles, do rule: But you
not so: that is, you shall not rule. This sense can not agree with this place,
for it is against all sense, that where the titles of rulers are given, there
ruling should be denied. And most certain it is, that Christ in this place,
forbids vain titles, and indeed there is nothing more vain, than bare
titles, without the thing itself.

Again, our Savior Christ, in the words immediately following, does grant
unto them to bear rule, saying, (...), whereas, if his purpose had been to
forbid rule unto them, he would have said, (...), rule therefore in this place
is not forbidden.

Now remains the third sense, and that is this: The kings of the Gentiles do
rule: But you not so: that is, you shall not so rule. And this is the true, and
natural meaning of our Savior Christ: but this so ruling, that is, the manner
of ruling, is diversely taken of diverse men, and the word (...), attributed to
diverse words, in the verse going before.

Some attribute (...) to the word (...), making the sense thus: The kings of
the Gentiles, do rule: But you not so: that is, you shall not rule as kings,
and so understand by kings, supreme rulers, making our Savior Christ in this
place to forbid supreme government.

Others attribute (...) to the verb (...): and do make the sense thus, The
kings of the Gentiles, do rule: But you, not so: that is, you shall not rule,
understanding by rule, civil authority, and so make our Savior Christ in
this place, to forbid Civil government to his Disciples.

Others attribute (...) to the same verb, but by it, understanding tyrannous
government, and so make the sense to be this. The kings of the Gentiles do
(...), that is, rule tyrannously, or oppress them: But you not so: that is,
you my Disciples shall not tyrannize.

So that in this place, our Savior Christ does forbid either Supreme, Civil,
or Tyrannous government.

Supreme government is not forbidden: my reasons are these. First, because the
word (...), in this place does not signify only the supreme governor, for he
speaks in the plural number, and of many, there being at this time but one
supreme governor, namely, Tiberius. And therefore by (...) are understood the
inferior rul^rs, according as in Scripture the word (...) is given to the
inferior ruler: as Mark 6. 14. (...): Herod the king, whereas Herod was but
an inferior ruler, under Augustus and Tiberius, and so Matthew 2. 22. (...),
that Archelaus was king: whereas Archelaus was likewise an inferior ruler.
And this is likewise made plain by the verb (...), do rule: spoken in the
plural number, of more than one, and in the present tense, whereas only
Tiberius did at this time exercise supreme government.

A second reason is this, To exercise supreme authority, is not simply evil,
as appears in that Paul does appeal to Caesar, as supreme governor. Acts.
25. 11. (...). I appeal to Caesar. As likewise, by the godly and Christian
government, of Constantine, Theodosius, and others: allowed of, by so many, so
learned, and godly fathers. Therefore supreme government is not in this place
forbidden.

Civil government, is likewise not forbidden: my reasons are. First, if it had
been the purpose of our Savior Christ, to forbid Civil government: in all
men: he would have said, The kings of Israel have ruled: But you not so. Or if
his purpose had been to forbid it in the Ministry, he would have said: The
Priests of Israel do rule: But you not so.

Secondly, our Savior Christ in this place, and in this verse, does grant to
his Disciples, that they may bear rule, when as he says: (...).

Thirdly, our Savior Christ in this place, speaks to the whole Church, in
which it is lawful for some to exercise Civil authority.

Fourthly, both in the old and new Testament the Priests did exercise Civil
authority. And the Apostles do by their own examples and writings, testify
the lawfulness Genesis 8 20. Genesis 13. 18. and 14. 14. Genesis 26. 16. 25 Genesis 34. 5.
and 35. 1. 2. Job. 1. 3. 4.
hereof. In the old Testament we read that Noah, Melchisedech, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and Job, did sacrifice as Priests, and exercise authority as Rulers.
But it may be, some will object against these, that they were extraordinary,
and before the Law.

What shall we then say to Moses, to whom many Exodus 19. 22. and 24 4. 5. 6.
7. and 8. Sic Bertramus in Politia Iud. cap. 4. ad finem. 1. Sam. 1. 9. and 3.
1 3. 1. Sa. 7. 9. 15. 17 1. Sam. 8. 1.
learned men have attributed both? But to come nearer, in the first book of
Samuel, we find Ely to be Judge and Priest: Samuel after him, Judge and
Priest: Ioell and Abia the sons of Samuel, Judges and Priests. All these
succeeding one another. Succession must of necessity take away extraordinary.
Yea, and of this government God does say, that it was his own ordinance. 1.
Samuel. 8. 7. They have not cast away thee, but me, that I should not reign
over them. The like may be said of Esdras, Nehemias, 1. Ezr. 7. 14. 25 26. and
Nehem. 12 1. Nehem. 5 14 15. and 10. 1. etc. 1. Mac. 2 1. 21
and Mattathias, commanded, for to do after the law of their God, and zealous
of the same law, who without all question, would not have exercised both, had
not both been lawful to them, by the law of their God.

Again, what shall we say, to those many examples, which diverse learned
writers have noted in Priests. Some being deuiders of land: chief of Princes
counsels: Joshua 14. 1. 1. Kings 4. 2.
Captains of armies: but especially to that 1. Chron. 26. 30. 31. of Hasabias
and Ieria, which by David are appointed Sic Bertramus de Politia Iud. cap. 10.
exponit.
in ministerio Dei, and regis: both in Ecclesiastical, and Civil causes.

But it may be some will object, that this was lawful in the old Law, but not
in the new. To which I answer, that if it were lawful in the old, much more is
it lawful in the new. For if the Priests, when the feasts were so many, and
their sacrifices (as I may term them) infinite, might intend to exercise
Civil authority, under Princes: much rather may the ministers of the new
Testament, when as their feasts and sacrifices do cease, and the Gospel is
far more plainly, and plentifully preached.

It may be some will farther object: What example have you in the new
Testament, of any Apostle, exercising Civil authority under Princes? To this
I answer, that though there were no example in the new Testament, yet does not
that prove, that it is unlawful: for then may we reason thus, There is no
example in the new Testament of any Christian exercising the office of a king:
therefore the office of a king is not lawful: I think if any should so
reason, he would be accounted a mad man. This therefore I say, that as we do
reason from the old Law, for the establishing of the authority of the king,
because it was God his own ordinance, and that over his own people Israel,
so from the same do we reason, that it is lawful for Ministers to exercise
Civil authority: because the Priests by God his appointment, did exercise
Civil authority under Princes.

But it may be some will still object, Yea but what is the cause then? if it be
so lawful? that none, or very few examples are found in the new Testament,
of Apostles, or other Ministers, exercising Civil authority? To this I
answer, that I take it, there were two especial reasons.

First, because immediate delegation of authority, was an argument of
exceeding favor, as appears in Herod, his sons, and the Agrippaes. The
authority, was now especially in the hands of heathen Princes, wicked men, and
cruel tyrants, such as hated Christ, the professors of Christ, and much more
the preachers of Christ, such as the Apostles were. Now to exercise authority,
without delegation, they would not, because of Christ his words, Luke 12. 14.
Who has made me a ruler? showing, that because he had not Civil authority
delegated, he would not then exercise it.

A second reason, which I also add to this, is. Because that the Apostles were
sent to preach throughout all the world, and therefore, having no certain
place, and country, in which always to abide: how could they exercise
authority by delegation from Princes: seeing they had no continual abode in
any place.

But lest any should think it unlawful for Ministers to exercise Civil
authority, the Apostles, by their own examples, (having this authority
delegated with the consent of the Church) have left us sufficient light, to see
the lawfulness thereof.

First of all therefore, we read Act. 4. 35. that the money was laid at the
Apostles feet. If any deny that to be Civil, yet what is it to take account,
both what they sold, and for how much, which thing the Apostles did. But if any
shall still say, that this was not Civil, yet to divide those goods must need
be Civil, as appears by Christ his words, Luke 12. Who has made me a
ruler, or a deuider? That the Apostles did divide this money, it appears in
that it is said, It was laid at the Apostles feet, and divided: why was it
laid at their feet, but to be divided? Again, certain it is, that they did
divide: for afterward, Acts 6. they chose Deacons, to take from them the
office of dividing, because the Church was now great, and they were to disperse
them selves, to preach to all the world.

Secondly we read Act. 5. that Peter sits, Iudicially upon Saphira: for
there Saphira appears before him, and Act. 5. 7.
he reasons with her, about the sale of her goods, saying, Have ye sold it
for thus much? He does also proceed Act. 58.
to sentence of death, verse 9. The feet of those that buried thy husband, are
at the door, and shall carry away thee. Act. 5. 9.
If any shall object, that this was extraordinary, I answer, that it was, in
regard of the manner of her death, but not, the sitting in judgment upon her,
to examine her.

Again, we read, 1. Timoth. 3. 4. that a Bishop may be ruler of a house: in
these words: ruling his own house well: the which, may at the first, seem
a small thing, to prove Civil authority to be lawful in the Ministry, but
being better considered of, it imports much. For, Civil authority is either
Political, or Oeconomicall: and Oeconomicall is, of the Father, Master, and
Lord. If therefore a Bishop as a Father, Master, or Lord, exercise Civil
authority, it cannot be, but that Civil authority is lawful. This again is
illustrated, in that the government of a father, is the pattern of the
government of a king, and therefore a king is called in the fifth Commandment,
a father, Honor father.

The same Apostle, in the same Epistle, 1. Tim. 5. 19. uses this exhortation
to Timothy, the Bishop of Ephesus, Against an Elder, receive no accusation,
under two or three vvitnesses. He grants to Timothy, to receive
accusations, or bills of complaint, and that he may proceed Iudicially, by two
or three witnesses, which is, by citing them, by examining them, and by
deposing the^. If any shall object, and say, that this is Ecclesiastical,
because of the Elder, a minister, I answer, that seeing Accusation is put
indefinitly, as in the Greek: or else, as we read it in English, no
accusation, generally, it must of necessity be Civil; for accusatio^s always,
against Ministers, are not Ecclesiastical, as appears, when as Ministers
accused for fellonie, treason, or murder, are conuented before the Civil
magistrate, without any claim of his clergy.

Again, if it were Ecclesiastical, in regard of the Elder, why should it not
be Civil in regard of the accusers, the accusers being lay men? for it is not
said, amongst Elders, that is, of one Elder against another: but against an
Elder: that is, of lay men against Elders.

Again, if we read the words with an Emphasis, as, Against an Elder receive no
accusation under two or three witnesses, the^ they infer, that against those
that are no Elders, that is, lay men, he may proceed without three witnesses.

Likewise the same Apostle proceeds, ver. 20. those that sin, rebuke before
all, that other may fear. verse 21. I charge thee before God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, and his elect Angels, that thou observe these things, (...):
without prejudice: (...) does infer (...), a judgment seat, and a sentence
of judgment, (...) infers (...), a judge: (...) infers (...), to judge:
(...), he must: not (...), that is, judge before hand, which is, before he has
cited the witnesses, examined the witnesses, deposed the witnesses, and had the
number of two or three witnesses. And therefore to express the meaning, he
adds: (...): which is, as Beza 1. Tim. 5. 21.
translateth it, nihil faciens, in alteram partem declinando. The like phrase
of speech being attributed Deuteronomy. 17. 20. to the Civil Magistrate. Therefore in
this place Civil authority is not forbidden. There remains, tyrannous
authority, which is in this place forbidden: my reasons are these. Either
Supreme, Civil, or Tyrannous government is forbidden. But neither Supreme, nor
Civil. Ergo Tyrannous. The force of this reason is manifested, in that which
went before.

Pontius Pilate, Ioh. 19. 6. 13. 16. Mark 6. 18. 25. 26.
who condemned Christ an innocent: Herod Antipas, who took away his brother
Philip his wife, and at the request of a woman, put to death John the Baptist:
Archilaus, of whose reign Joseph is afraid: Herodes magnus, Matthew. 2. 22.
who slew many infants, and under the color of worshipping Mat. 2. 16. and 8
Christ, sought the overthrow of Christ and his kingdom. That these were the
governors here spoken of, I prove, because Christ says, Mark 10. 42. you
know, speaking of those rulers, they knew, and these were they.

Again, Christ says (...): and here (...): they do tyrannize: and speaks in
the present tense: and some of these now ruled, and all these, in their
government tyrannized. And it plainly appears, that he only speaks of
tyrants, because he says, (...). That this word (...) does signify to
tyrannize, I prove by the use of the same verb, in other places of the
Scripture, both old, and new Testament, as 1. Pet. 5. 3 (...). Act. 19. 16.
(...). And so Esaias 3. 4. (...).

Again, the testimony of learned writers, and godly fathers, expounding these
places of the Evangelists, do manifest it.

Erasmus expounds it, Dominantur in eas, sieve, aduersus eas.

Musculus expounds it, potestate aduer sum illos opprimendos vtuntur. And a
little after, non regunt populum, sed premunt, suisque affectibus seruire
cogunt, id quod est, (...): and expounding the word (...), he interprets it:
potenter opprimunt inferiores.

Chrysostom upon these words, in Matthew, does expound it in like manner, and
upon the same words thus speaks, vt dominentur minoribus, vt seruificent,
and spolient, and vsque ad mortem abutentur vita eorum.

But it may be some will object, that in this place the simple verb is used,
and therefore not tyranny, but rule and jurisdiction is forbidden. To this I
answer, that the words which our Savior Christ here uses, do manifestly show,
and prove, that tyranny is forbidden, eue^ in this simple verb.

First, because the words are, (...): which words can not be read, (...): you
shall not rule. But (...): and (...): is (...).

A second reason, why in this simple verb, tyranny is forbidden, because that
this simple verb (...) is used in the Scriptures, not for rule only, but many
times for a perverse kind of rule and for oppression, as 2. Cor. 1. 24. (...).
Romans 6. 13. (...). And in the old Testament, Dan. 11. 4. (...).

But it may be some will object, that God in the Scriptures is called (...),
and said (...). I answer, that true it is: but God is said (...), because he
rules after his own will: his will being the perfect rule of justice, whereas
if man whose will is corrupt, should rule after his own will, it were mere
tyranny.

But it may be some will further object, that true it is, that the simple verb
(...), is thus used in the Scriptures, but how prove you it to be so used in
this place? To this I answer, that it is likewise used so in this place: and my
reason is this, because the verb (...) is opposite to (...), in this manner,
(...): and again, (...): viz. (...). That this, is a fit and natural
opposition, appears by comparing this with the other Evangelists, for so Mat.
20. 26. (...), subaudi (...), or as here, (...).

Again, for the confirmation of this opposition, the consent of all Harmonies,
agreeing, that in all these Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, one and the
same thing is handled and spoken, and therefore, all these must be compared
together, and the simple verb (...) in this place, is the same that the
compound (...) is in Matthew and Mark. Add unto this the exposition of all
learned writers, which so far as I have read, do interpret them, to be one
and the same thing.

As therefore in the words (...): authority was commended, and not condemned
in the Disciples of our Savior Christ: so in this word (...), ambition, vain
titles, and tyranny are only forbidden, not ruling, or having authority, nor
simply the desire of bearing rule.

There remains the last words, (...) or (...): you or amongst you. And these
must in like manner be discussed.

In this place there is no doubt to be made, whether our Savior Christ
speaks to his Disciples, Peter, James, John, etc. or not. etc.

The question is therefore, whether our Savior Christ speaks to his
Disciples, and none but them, or to his Disciples, and some represented by
them. If we understand it to be spoken to them only, then we take it to be
spoken personally, that is, to his Disciples and no other: so that then,
nothing in this place, is either forbidden or commanded to others. But this is
against sense, and has no reason whereupon it should be grounded, and is
approved of no learned writer, and therefore I stand not to improve that.

It is therefore spoken to the Disciples, and some other represented by them,
and thus it is taken Representatiuely, that is, as well to those that are
represented by them, as to them.

Hereof arises this question, whether our Savior Christ speaks
Representatiuely to the whole Church, that is, all Christians, Ministers and
people, or Representatiuely to the Ministers of the Church only.

In this place by you, our Savior does understand the whole Church, that is,
all Christians, both Ministers and people, and this I prove by these reasons
following.

First, the Disciples to whom Christ speaks, had not as yet the office of
preaching, and baptizing all nations, for this was after Christ his death
committed to them: Matt. 28. 19.
whereas this was spoken in his life, and therefore represent Christians, not
Ministers only. But admit they had that office, as these Disciples are in this
Chapter and other places of the Gospel, called Apostles: and likewise had Luke
22. 12. Matt. 10. 2. Matt. 10. 7.
the office of preaching, though I take it that were temporary, and to a
certain people; yet certain it is, that these Disciples in their persons
represent Christians, as in their office Ministers, and therefore, being spoken
to them, why should they not in this place, as well or rather, represent all:
Ministers and people, as Ministers only.

A second reason is. It were absurd, to think that our Savior Christ does
forbid tyranny to Ministers only, whereas tyranny, being a thing simply
evil, is more fitly forbidden to Ministers and people, that is, all Christians.

A third reason is: Our Savior Christ in this chapter, does immediately before,
and also presently after, using this word you, and speaking to his Disciples,
and none but them, as in this place, speaks to them, representing the whole
Church, and not the Ministers only: as in the 19. verse of this 22. of Luke,
in these words: This is my body, which is given for you: by, you: in that
place, (though it be spoken only to the Disciples, is not understood, the
Ministers only, for then none might be saved but Ministers: but it is spoken
to the whole Church, and the body of Christ is given to the Disciples, that is,
for all Christians. Again, verse 20. This cup, is the new Testament, in Luke
22. 20.
my blood, which is povvred out for you. In which place, by, you: Christ
means, not only Ministers, but all Christians, whom these Disciples did now
represent, otherwise none should be saved but Ministers, if the blood of Christ
were shed for none but them. And therefore S. Mat. chap. 26. ver. 28. expounds
these words, saying, which is shed for many. Again in the words presently
after, ver. 29. I have appointed unto you, as my father has appointed Luke 22.
29
unto me, a kingdom: by, you: he understands, all Christians: for unto all
true Christians, he has appointed a kingdom.

But it has been objected, that our Savior Christ, in this Chapter, speaks
to his Disciples, using the word you, and yet speaks not to them,
representing the whole Church. To which I now answer, that true it is, that our
Savior Christ in this Chapter, says, I have earnestly desired to eat with
you. etc. I say unto you. etc. But I answer, that in these places he speaks
Personally: that is, to his Disciples only, and no other represented by them.
Now the question is not, whether it be taken Personally, or Representatiuely;
for then this were (though little to the purpose) yet ad idem: but in this
place, the question is, whether he speak representatiuely, to the Ministers of
the Church only, or representatiuely to the whole Church. If therefore there
can be brought out of this Chapter, so many places, so manifest as these are,
in which Christ speaks to his Disciples, and none but them, as he does in
this place, and yet as representing the Ministers only, and not other
Christians, then shall that bear some stroke, and come to be balanced with
the weight of these reasons.

A fourth reason is this. The opposition in this place, which is between
Gentiles and you, does manifestly prove that it is spoken to the whole Church.
As for example, The kings of the Gentiles, do tyrannize over them: that is, the
people. Amongst these are kings tyrannizing, and people tyra^nized. But you not
so, or, it shall not be so with you. that is, I do command, that with you
there should be neither kings tyrannizing, nor people tyrannized. It is thus
with them: it shall not be so with you Ministers: is neither right, nor good
opposition. It is thus with the Gentiles, it shall not be thus with you
Christians, is a fit, good, and sensible opposition. So then, the opposition
between the kings of the Gentiles tyrannizing, and people tyrannized, and you,
does prove manifestly, that Christ means not only Ministers, but also
people, that is, all Christians, amongst whom he would have neither tyrants,
nor people tyrannized.

Again this is manifest to be Christ his meaning, because that in like manner,
in the scriptures speaking of Gentiles, and making an opposition betwixt them
and others, the opposition is between Gentiles and Christians, and not between
Gentiles and Ministers: as Mat. 6. ver. 7. 8. The Gentiles do think, that by
their much babbling they shall be heard. Be not you like unto them: that is, be
not you my Disciples, you that take my name in your mouths, that hear me, that
profess your selves to be Christians. And again in the same Chapter, verse
32. After all these things do the Mat. 6. 32. and 31.
Gentiles seek, and therefore says to them, verse 31. Be not you therefore
careful, etc. for your heavenly Father knovveth, etc. In which place, our
Savior does plainly make an opposition, betwixt those he spoke to, that is,
his Disciples, and those that heard him, and Gentiles, that is, those that were
spoken of, to whom he would not have his Disciples, that is, Christians to be
like.

A fifth reason is, this place compared with that of Mat. chap. 23. verse. 8. 9.
does show plainly, that it is spoken to the whole Church: for in that chapter
our Savior Christ speaks of the same matter, uses a like form of words, and
the very same words: as for example, The Scribes and the Pharisees are called
Rabbi, etc. But be not you so called and in this Chapter is the like. They that
are in authority are called (...). But you not so. Again ver. 11. But let him
that is the greater, be as the minister. Which words are in the former places
of the Evangelists. Now, if one place of Scripture is to be expounded by
another, and the darker by that which is more plain, these in like manner, may
one be expounded by another. If any shall ask, how I prove that our Savior
Christ, in this 23. of Matthew, speaks to the whole Church, I answer, that it
manifestly appears, in that in the first verse of that Chapter, it is said,
Then spoke Jesus, to the multitude, and his Disciples. Mat. 23 1.


This might further be strengthened and confirmed, by the opinion of ancient,
and late writers (some whereof I have before mentioned.) But these reasons are
apparent and very sufficient: I therefore conclude, that our Savior speaks in
this place to all men: forbidding all Christians ambitiously to strive for
honor, or to tyrannize over the people. What our Savior commands, is
contained in the words following, But let him that shall be greater, etc.

The Lord of his infinite mercy, grant, that all Rulers may learn, to follovv
the commandment of Christ, neither ambitiously striving for higher places, nor
by injustice and cruelty abusing the lovver: then shall God be glorified, and
we his people live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.
Which he grant, who has bought us with his precious blood, Jesus Christ
the righteous. To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory world without end.

FINIS.

