THE SIGNS OR AN ESSAY CONcerning the assurance of Gods love, and man's
salvation; gathered out of the holy Scriptures.

By NICHOLAS BYFIELD, one of the Preachers for the City of CHESTER.

2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except
ye be reprobates. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE for JONAS MAN. 1614.

TO THE TRVELY RELIgious, and his most affectionate friend, Mistress Jane
Ratclife, wife to Mr. John Ratclife, Esquier, Alderman and Justice of peace,
late Mayor of the City of Chester,
PEace be unto you and love, with faith from God the father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ. The impertunitie, of diverse of my hearers, and the expectation of many
of all sorts, together with my desire to yield some account of my long
vndelightfull leisure, have inclined me to prepare some of my public and
private labors, for the common view: hoping that the abounding respect of my
friends will cover the wants, and weaknesses which other men will sooner
epsy. Howsoever I have long meditated, a work of greater labor, then this
ensuing treatise yet in the mean time I have been willing to taste the
approbation of good men, and make my best advantage of the censures of the
many minded multitude, by aduenturing to send forth these first fruits, as a
handful gathered out of the rest.

Worthy Gentlewoman, there are many reasons induce me to publish these signs
under your name, your singular love and liking of my ministry, together with
your reverent and willing entertainment, of faithful Ministers (receiving
them as the messengers of the Churches, and the glory of Christ as partners
and fellow helpers, walking in the same spirit) challenges from us some
public testimony of our acknowledgeme^t of Gods grace, and of the joy,
wherewith we rejoiced for your sake; besides constant endeavor to make use
of all opportunities for your resolution, and direction, in the several
conflicts, and cases of your conscience. I have had occasion fully to know your
order, and manner of life, your desires, purposes, tears, and vprightnes, your
faith, your love, your obedience: and therefore being assured, that you are
marked even with every one of these signs; why should I not say unto you, as
sometimes Job said of himself. Job 31. 35
Behold your signs that the Almighty will witness for you. And I am well
assured, that this treatise will find good access unto the hands and hearts
of diverse in these parts, even for the love they bear to you, and for the good
they now hear you have by experience reaped from these. Neither had I been
easily drawn to publish these, but that having occasion in conference with
many to make use of the^, I could hardly satisfy them with coppies. I spare
to allege other reasons.

Now what remains but that I should beseech you, and all those who find by
these signs the assurance of Gods eternal love, even to honor the Lord with
the continual sacrifices of praise, the fruit of your lips, Heb. 13
with confession to his name, oh love the Lord with your whole heart, and
make his praise glorious, and abound more and more, in the fruits of sincere
life, and in all holy, and humble conversation, live by faith, and in nothing
be careful, Phil. 4, 6
but in all things, let your requests he made known to God, with
thanksgiving: and as you have received mercy faint not, neither be descoraged
under the sense of your infirmities and wants, 2, Cor, 4, 1
for they that wait upon the Lord, Esa. 40, 31
shall renew their strength, the Lord will power his spirit upon your seed,
and Isa, 44, 4
his blessing upon your buds: the sun of righteousness will arise, and
there is healing under his wings. You have a high Priest, Ma. ^4, 2
that is touched with infirmities, Hob. 5. 15 16
and therefore you may go boldly to the throne of grace, to seek grace and
mercy to help in time of need: the power of God is made known in
weakness, 2 Cor. 12
and his grace will be sufficient: the Lord keeps the feet of his Saints, 1.
Sam. 2, 9
and will supply all your wants with his riches in glory. Psa. 66, 8, 9
Blessed be the Lord that holds our souls in life, and suffers not our
fee^e to be moved.

Gracious gentlewoman be confident in this, Psa. 1, 6
that God which has begun his good work will perform it, till the day of
Christ* for his foundation remains sure: 2. Tim. 2, 19.
and he ever lives that makes intercession for you, Heb. 7, 25
and the mortal seed abides, 1. Ioh. 3, 9
and Christ will be, Reu. 21. 6
Omega as well as Alpha, the end as well as the beginning: neither fear the
reproach of men, for there is a hiding place with the Lord, Psa. 31, 20
from the strife of tongues; and he will put to silence those lying lips that
speak such grievous things, Psalm, 31, 18
so proudly, so contemptuously: wait on the Lord, and keep his way; they
shall assuredly make an account to the Judge of quick and dead, 1. Pet* 4, 5
that speak evil of the innocent, And the same God and father of mercy that
has directed, your heart unto his love, and refreshed your spirit with the
unspeakable ioies of his presence, finish his own work in you: and as you
have professed, a good profession before many that will witness, how
unblameably you have behaved your self among them that believe; so stand fast
in the Lord, be still an example of faith and purity, of love and feruencie, of
meekness, and humility, of tenderness, and harmelesnesse, of
shamefastness, and sobriety, of mercy and good works, as becomes a woman
professing godliness, that they may be ashamed which shall falsely accuse
your good conversation in Christ, keep the Doctrine you have received, seeing
you have learned Christ, as the tr^th is in him. Strive to increase in love and
obedience to your husband and care of your chrildren and family, and show all
faithfulness, and diligence in your particular calling. Provoke your kindred
and acquaintance unto repentance, faith, prayer, love, fellowship in the
Gospel, and good works, that thanksgiving may be given by many to God for
you. Let the word of Christ be still your guide: watch unto prayer, receive
them that fear God, and make much of such. Let patience have her perfect
work, and commit your ways to God, and trust in him. The Lord make you to
abound in love yet more and more, in knowledge, and in all judgment, that you
may still approve things that are excellent, and be blameless in the midst
of a crooked and perverse people: the Lord perfect in you whatsoever is
vvanting, and fulfill the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of your
faith with power. The Lord increase in you that holy covetousness, to be with
the Lord, looking for the blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Farewell. May. 1614. Yours according to the common faith. N. BYFIELD.

A SHORT Treatise concerning Assurance.
COncerning the assurance of Gods favor, three things may be considered of.
First the proofs. Secondly, the Lets. Thirdly, the signs.

That a Christian in this life may be infallibly assured of Gods favor to
himself in particular, and that he ought to seek this assurance, as a matter
of singular necessity, these places of Scripture prove. The Apostle Paul
charge the Corinthians to Examine themselves, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
whether they be in the faith, and requires this proving of themselves with
such earnestness, that he says, know ye not your own selves, how that
Christ Jesus is in you, except ye be reprobates? As if he would avouch it, that
a man can never have found comfort of his election till he get this assured
knowledge of Gods favor in Christ. And the Apostle Peter exhorts Christians to
use all diligence to make their calling and election sure whatsoever carnal
persons speak against it. 2. Pet. 1. 10.
Job vehemently desires there were a perpetual record of his words, when he
speaks of his assurance, that no man might think he spoke passionately, or
vainegloriously; Job. 19. 23. 25. 26. 27.
He knew that his redeemer lived, and that at the last day, his very flesh
should be raised, and he should see God with joy. By the spirit of God a
Christian knows the things of God: 1. Cor. 2. 10. 11. 12.
yea to this end have we received this Spirit which is of God, that we might
know the things which are freely given us of God: yea it searches the deep
things of God. 2. Cor. 5. 1
And in the second of the Corinthians Gods children are said to know their
glorification: as certainly as by sense and experience, they know, that their
bodies, which are their earthly tabernacles shall be dissolved: so certainly
are they assured of the building of God, not made with hands, 2. Cor. 5. 6. 8.
eternal in the heavens: yea they are always confident herein; and therefore
Gods servant are taught to pray for the spirit of wisdom and revelation, that
the eyes of their understanding may be enlightened, that they might know the
hope of their calling, and the riches of their inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 18. 19.
and the exceeding greatness of Gods power toward them, upon this assurance.
Paul knows whom he has believed, and no afflictions should hinder him, 2.
Tim. 1. 12.
but he will settle, upon this persuasion, that God will keep his soul, which
he has committed to him against the day of Christ. The Apostle John says, 1.
Ioh. 3. 14
We know that we have passed from death to life, 1. Ioh. 5. 13
And again, 1. Ioh. 5 19
ye may know that ye have eternal life. And again we know that we are of God.
And the Apostle to the Ephesians says, Ephesians. 3. 11.
that in Christ we have boldness and access, with confidence by faith in him:
yea the very words of assurance are found in Scripture where it is showed, 1.
Those. 1. 5
that we may have much assurance, Heb. 10. 22.
yea full assurance, Col. 2. 2.
yea the riches of full assurance: and men are earnestly exhorted, Heb. 6. 11
to use all diligence to get this full assurance to the end; and when it is
once had, neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, Romans 8. 38. 39.
nor any other creature should be able to separate them from* this love of God
in Jesus Christ.

Lets,
THe attainment of the sense, power, and comfort of this assurance is
exceedingly hindered in all sorts of people. is impossible to be had, or it is
needelesse, or it is presumption to seek it, or it would prove a nurse to
security if it were had. Secondly, in is certain assurance can never be had,
till there be some sound course taken, in the acknowledgement, bewailing, and
reformation of 1. Cor. 15. 58.
and contrariwise to abound in Gods work, has steadfastness, and a secret
rest of heart, as an unspeakable companion Melancholy also (that is terrors
and griefs, of which a man can yield no true reason) is in diverse a mighty
let to the settled assurance they might have. They are so eaten up with those
strong conceits that all the comfort is propounded most anend, proves as water
spilt upon the ground: especially when this humor is nourished by some
extraordinary distemper of the body; Physic, not arguments of Scripture must
here be used, or rather both of them. Sixthly, the love of earthly things is
another great impediment: many professors have their thoughts and cares so
eaten up with worldliness, that they cannot seriously hold out to follow the
directions requisite to the attainement of assurans. This grace requires a
mind some way fitted for contemplation. It is a knowledge will never be had
with looking downward. and quiet breast. Eighthly, 1. The. 1. 5
because they neglect the means of assurance, Ephesians. 1. 17
which are the word, Phi. 15, 6
prayer, or fellowship in the Gospel. Ninthly, In some there lodges some
secret

The signs generally propounded.
THere are sixteen infallible signs of a child of God, as may appear by the
testimony of most apparent Scripture.

First, Mat. 5. 3.
Poverty of spirit; for the poor of spirit are blessed and theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
Godly sorrow, for it causes repentance, not to be repented off, even such a
repentance as is unto salvation.

Thirdly, the love of the word, for this is a sure comfort in affliction, Pal.
119. 50.
and may quicken a man's heart, 2 Cor. 2. 15.
this is a savor of life unto life, in them that are saved.

Fourthly, The love of Gods children; 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
for hereby we know we are passed from death to life, 1. Cor. 13. 1. 2. 3.
because we love the brethren.

Fifthly, Faith; for god so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have everlasting
life.

Sixthly, Uprightness of heart: Psalm. 84. 13. 1.
for God will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from
them that are upright in heart. Psa. 97. 11


Seventhly, The spirit of Adoption. Romans 8. 9. 14. 16.
For it bears witness to our spirit that we are the sons of God: and if
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is not his.

Eighthly, Holy desires. For every one that thirsts, Revel. 21. 6
shall have of the water of life freely: and if they will hear, Esaias 55. 1, 2
3, 4.
their souls shall live, and enjoy the sure mercies of David, they are
blessed, Mat. 5, 6.
and they shall be satisfied.

Ninthly, The spirit of prayer or supplication; Io^l. 2, 22
for whosoever calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved. Zach. 12. 10.


10 The obedience of Christ, Heb. 5. 9.
for he is the author of eternal salvation to them that obey him.

11 Saving knowledge For this is eternal life, to know God, and whom he has
sent Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17. 3.
It is not only a sign of eternal life or salvation, but the beginning and
part of it.

12 The Sacraments in the right use of them are infallible signs of our
salvation, and to that end ordained, Mar. 16. 11
for he^ that belieueth and is baptized shall be saved. 1. Pet. 3. 21
Hence it is said, Baptism saves us: they are sure seals of the
righteousness of faith. Romans 4. 11


13 The love of God: for if a man love Christ the Father will love him, Ioh.
14. 23
and come unto him and dwell with him.

14 The fear of God: for it is a fountain of life, Pro. 14. 27
to depart from the snares of death.

15 Love of our enemies: Mat. 5 44. 48.
for it is not only a sign of a Christian, but of a perfect Christian.

16 Desire of death. 2. Tim. 4.
For a crown of life is laid up for all them that love the appearing of
Christ.

The signs particularly expounded; and first of poverty of Spirit.
Spiritual poverty may be tried either by properties, or by effect.

Gods poor have eight properties.

First, They are sensible, and that first of their own wants and misery, by
nature and daily sin. Secondly, they know when they see Gods judgments,
Zach. 11. 11.
that it was the word of the Lord. Thirdly, they tremble at Gods word, Esaias 66.
2.
and fear his displeasure, while it yet hangs in the threatening. Fourthly,
they are sensible of that special goodness of Gods mercy; Psalm. 109. 20.
when a man is poor and needy, he can say with David, mercy is good. Psalm.
109. 21.
Fifthly, they are sensible of their own mortality: they have feeling
impressions of their fading condition.

Secondly, they are thankful, and that for lesser mercies; a poor man is glad
of a penny, whereas a rich man cannot be touched with so small a favor, Gods
poor will praise Gods name for the very crumbs that falls from his table: and as
any are more poor and humble, they are more thankful.

Thirdly, they are teachable, and willing to be appointed and instructed; it
is a great sign a man's heart is not humble, when he must have so much to do,
before he can be persuaded to any truth, or dissuaded from any sin: pride
and ignorance is hard to learn.

Fourthly, they are hungry people, especially greedy after the food in Syon,
Psalm. 12. 26 and 132. 15
they love it, they desire it, they esteem it, they are satisfied with nothing
better then with it, it is the relief of their hearts forever.

And there are five effects of spiritual properties.
THe first is prayer: for Gods poor live by begging, if he be poor, he will
cry unto God.

The second is Abnegation: for this poor man, renounceth his own merits, he
sees no good will be had by deserving; for he deserves nothing but Gods
curse in all things he forsakes also the world, both in the lusts of it, and
in the company of the wicked, and all earthly things, as not having the chief
good in them.

The third is diligence in Gods work; yea Gods poor are willing to do the
meanest and hardest work God will be pleased to set them to: so as they may
find favor in his eyes to be accepted with him, they would account no work
too base for them to do, but they would be glad to do any thing they could
with their best desires and endeavors.

Fourthly, Gods poor, Pal. 11. 14
commit themselves and all their ways to Gods care and mercy; they will only
trust in the name of the Lord, Zeph. 3. 12
and be contented to let God dispose of them as pleases him.

Fifthly, The last is a fear to offend God in word or deed, by their good
will they would do none iniquity, Zech. 3. 13
nor speak lies, a deceitful tongue should not be found in their mouth, Gods
poor and Gods Turtle doves are all one; Psalm. 74. 19
so in seperable are harm less innocence and spiritual poverty.

2. Godly sorrow.
WE may know whetther our sorrows be Godly, if we consider. First, the
causes. Secondly, the properties. Thirdly the concomitants. Fourthlie, the
effects of them.

For the first of them we must consider what raises our sorrows and what
asswageth them, for godly sorrow, is chiefelie raised for sin: and so for
the sins of the time, because others keep not the law. For Ezechiel doubt
not to mark them with Gods mark, Ezech. 9. 4
that mourn for the abomination done in Jerusalem; Psa. 119. 36.
but we must understand that this sorrow must be simple, because God is
dishonored.

And further in sorrow for our own sins, we must mourn, for all sorts of
sins, for lesser sines, as well as greater, Esaias 6. 5.
for sins of our calling, for secret sins as well as open, for sins that
presntlie trouble us, as well as for sins past: Rom 7.
for the sins feared and the corrupt inclination of our natures, for beeloued,
Esaias 1. 16
gainefull and pleasing sins, finally for the evil of our good works as well
as for evil works. Now there are two notes of great use, in trial of sorrow
for our sins; the one is, that we must sorrow for sin as it is sin; and
the other is, that a man should not easily satisfy himself in the measure,
till he can mourn as much for sin, as he was wont, or now would for losses.
The Prophet Zacharias instanceth, Zac. 12. 10. 11.
when he says; the spirit of God, should cause them to mourn as in the
family, as one would mourn for the loss of their only son, or as in the
common wealth, the subjects would do, for the loss of a most worthy Prince.
He mentions their sorrow for Josiah, yet we must know that tears are not of
necessity, and specially in such natures, as are void of tears, for any
other causes.

Secondly, in as much as sorrow may be Godly even for judgments we must
understand that herein our trial will be, Psalm. 4^, 3. 2 137.
if we can mourn rather for spiritual judgments, Neh 1. 3^ 4
then for temporal: and among the rest, if we can feel, and bewail hardness
of heart, Esaias 63. 17
mourning because we ca^notmourne as we ought, and farther if we can be grieved
as well for the offense of God as for punishment.

Thirdly, a christian is principally stirred up in true sorrow, by the sense of
Gods goodness; so as nothing does more fire him to a desire to abase himself
and to humble himself, even in the very dust, in the sense of his own
vileness, then to feel and find the gracious goodness and readiness of God
to show mercy. Hos. 3.
He fears the Lord and his goodness.

And as godly sorrow is raised by spiritual means and considerations, so it
is assuaged only by spiritual means, those sorrows that can be healed by
sports, merry company or the like, are much like the medecines used to help
them; but in godly sorrow, Ho. 6. 1. 3.
the same God that wounded them must heal, and a christian desires help from
the same word that pierced him.

Thus of the causes.
THere are four properties of godly sorrow which among the rest, we must
labor after, and without which we can hardly have true assistance, that our
sorrows are right.

First, it is inquisitiue, it is a hard thing to make sorrow silent, and he
that is truly pricked in his heart, Ior. 50. 4. 5
cannot with contentment smother his doubts, he will ask the way to Sion, and
cannot rest till he have known what to do to be saved, Act. 2. 37.
those that find so little to ask, and can be so silent in the presence of
Gods servant, by whom they might be directed, may suspect their sorrows.

Secondly, it must not rest in the beginnings, or probabilities, or hopes, or
others good opinions, or the mending of many things: but a Christian that is
truly humbled will repent still, Ier. 31. 19
though he have turned, that is, he is so fearful of being deceived, through
the corruption of his own heart, and the wills of Satan, that he will
constantly hold on to confess and bewail his sins, till he may find
assured rest unto his soul.

Thirdly, it will admit nothing against God, but it makes a man condemn
himself, rather then God; when David lay in that mournful plight, that he
could find no comfort night nor day, Psa. 77. 1. 2* 27*
for a long season, and that the question, was to be debated whether God had
forgotten to be merciful, etc. He resolves, the fault was in himself that
it was his infirmity, and that his soul refused comfort.

Fourthlie, it will not rest without cleanenesse, godly sorrow is not water,
but washing nor every washing, but such as makes clean: Esaias 1. 16*
worldly sorrow may have much water, but cleanses nothing, but godly sorrow
greatly desires and loves purity.

Thus of the causes and properties concerning the concomitants there are
diverse things do accompany godly sorrow, by which it is discerned; for,

First it is joined with a secret trust in the acacceptation of God, so as no
misery can beat them from the consideration and inward affiance of hope of
mercy, in the very disquietnesse of the heart the desire of the soul is to
the Lord, Psa. 38. 9.
and before his presence though a child of God, be never so much cast down,
yet he waits upon God, for the help of his countenance, Psa. 42. 5. 11.
and in some measure condemns the unbelief of his own heart, and supporteth
himself with the hope of the never failing compassions of God: Tam 3. 21
thus it differs from the sorrows of Caine and Judas.

Secondly, it is joined with a wonderful love of God for hearing of prayer,
it is most deeply affected with every mercy of God felt in prayer; David
loves the Lord, Psa. 116. 13.
because he has heard his prayer at that time when his sorrows was as the
pains of hell.

Thirdly, Psa. 119. 20. 82. 33.
it is joined with a longing after the word.

Fourthlie, it is joined with a constant desire to glorify God by a fruitful
profession, every one that truly mourns in Sion, Esaias. 61. 2 3.
is a tree of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he may be
glorified.

Fifthlie, it is joined with a spirit of supplications, sorrow that is after
God, will teach a Christian to pray, that could never pray before; the spirit
of compassion, Zac. 12. 10
is a spirit of supplication.

Lastly, our sorrows must be tried by their effects, for godly sorrow.

First, drives us to a daily and serious confession of sin in particular
without hiding any sin. Psa. 38. 17


Secondly, it breeds a tender sense of the burden of sin; never does a
Christian feel the heavy load of sin as it is sin, till God has softened
his heart by his spirit. Psalm. 38. 5.


Thirdly, It works a mindefulnesse of God and his presence, Psalm. 42. 6.
and a deep impression and thought of good things.

Fourthlie, Psa. 51. 17
it causes a man to sacrifice and deuote himself to God. Romans 12. 1


Fifthlie, it breeds sensiblenesse and thankfulness for all sorts of mercy.
Lam. 3. 22 23.


Lastly, the Apostle notes seven effects of Godly sorrow, 2. Cor. 7. 11.
care, apology, indignation, fear, vehement desire, zeal and reueuge.

3. Love to the word.
IN so much as wicked men; especially such as are endued with a temporary
faith may have some kind of affections to the word, we must carefully try
our selves, and examine our selves seriously.

1. Ps. 119. 20
Whether we desire it as our appointed food constantly? Job. 23. 12.


2. Whether we love them that love the word.

3. Psalm. 119. 115.
Whether the love of the word seperates us from the wicked?

4. Whether we can mourn, Psalm. 119 136.
because others keep not the word?

5. Whether we love it above all riches and could esteem it as our heritage?
Psa. 119. 14. 72. 111


6. Whether it be our chief comfort in affliction. Psa. 119. 23 24. 50. 51.
54. 143


7. Whether in hearing we receive it as the word of God, 1. These. 2. 13.
and not of men.

8. Whether we receive it in power and much assurance? 1. The, 1. 5


9. Whether it work Ioh. 8. 33.
effectually in us theredresse Psa. 119. 45. 9. 59.
of our ways and freedom from the bondage of sin. 1. These. 2. 13.


10. Whether we love all the words of God, even the law that with threatening
shows us our sins as well as the gospel; Psalm. 1. 2 and 119. 11.
desiring to hide the word in our hearts that we might not sin.

11. Whether it be our desire and delight to exercise our selves in it day and
night. Psa. ^. 1


12. Whether we can account and feel the famine of the word to be a most
bitter cross. Psa. 42. 3.


13. Whether we could be contented constantly to labor for it, Amos. 8.
as men do, for the food that perishes. 12. Ioh. 6. 27.


14. Whether we find a constant sweet taste in it, Psa. 19. 10.
especially in the powerful preaching of it.

15. Whether for the gospel sake we can be content, Mar. 10. 2. 9.
to deny our reasons, 1. Cor. 3. 18.
affections, credits, 1. These. 1. 5. 6.
carnal friends pleasures and profits.

4. The love of Gods children.
Our love to the Saints may be tried. First, by the cause. Secondly, by the
extent. Thirdly, the manner. Fourthly, by the effects.

For the first, to love Gods children, Psa. 16. 2. 3.
because they are begotten of God, 1. Ioh. 3.
and for the grace of Gods spirit, 14 and 5. 1.
by which they resemble God (or rather for the Lord himself desiring to
express our affections to them, because we do no good to God himself) is
not found in any reprobate, and so to love them simply for the truths sake,
whereas to love them for beauty, profit, 2. Ioh. 1. 2.
company sake, or any natural or carnal reasons or ends in no sign at all.
3. Ioh. 1.


Secondly, he that truly loves the brethren, loves all the brethren; Ephesians. 1.
15.
he that loves not all the Saints, Col. 1. 4.
loves no Saint aright: Phile. 5.
a true Christian has not the glorious faith of Christ in respect of persons,
he loves the poorest, if he have true grace, as well as the richest, (...)
yea he loves the absent as well as the present, yea he loves for the truths
sake those he never saw yet this hinders not the difference of degrees of love,
so as some may be more beloved then others, and that by reason of the greater
measure of Gods gifts and graces, or else, by the special providence of God
when the Lord linketh the affection of some Christians in some special
eminency of respects; and so it is not alwaie needful, that the persons most
loved, be most gracious; it does not of necessity follow that John was the
most gracious of all the Apostles, though he were most beloved.

Again as our love must be extendent to all saints, so also must it be to all
times, we must love them as well when they are in adversity, disgrace,
temptation, sickness, or any misery; as when they abound in prosperity or
good estimation, etc.

For the third, this love is without dissimulation, 1, Ioh. 3, 18, 19.
it is indeed and truth, Rom, 12, 9, 10.
not in word or appearance only. And besides, it is a most affectionate and
brotherly love.

Lastly, there are six effects of true christian love, for it shows it self.

First, by honor, and this honoring of them that fear the Lord, Psa, 15, 4^*
has in it*

First, an estimation of them, as the only excellent people in the world. Psa.
16. 3


Secondly, Romans 16 19.
a free acknoweledgement of their just praises in all places, 3. Ioh. 6.
for their grace and obedience. 1. These. 18.


Thirdly, 1. These. 1. 7.
a willing proposing of them, as examples to imitate.

Fourthly, 1. Pet. 4. 8
a holy endeavor to cover their infirmities, taking things in the best part
and sense, not receiving disgraceful reports of them; 1. Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7.
suffering long, not vau^ting themselves in comparison of them, not easily
provoked, not envying them, hoping all things, enduring all things, and yet not
rejoicing in their iniquity.

Fifthly, Apology for them against the reproaches and scorns of the world.

Sixthly by delight in their fellowship, Psalm. 16. 3.
and society in the Gospel, Phil. 1, 5.
in which respect they can be equal to them of the lower sort. 3. Ioh. 8.
Such as find no need of, Romans 12, 16
nor delight in the company of Gods children, or are willing to sort with none,
but their betters or equals, may see great cause to be humbled, either for the
want of this grace, or for the weakness of it.

Thirdly, by simpathy and fellow-feeling* for in some measure, Rom 12. 9. 16
a child of God is like affectioned: He can in some measure weep with them
that weep, 3 Ioh. 3
and rejoice with them that rejoice, especially they rejoice, to hear, or know
their souls prosperity.

Fourthly, Psalm. 16, 3.
by weldoing, and mercy, Romans 12 10, 13.
this love is bountiful, Phile. 7, 1. Pet. 3, 8. and 4, 8.
pitiful, tender, has bowels both of spiritual and outward mercy, 1. Ioh.
3, 17.
it gladly receaueth the saints, 3. Ioh 5
it communicates to their necessity willingly, and with a ready mind.

Fifthly, by a desire to walk in offensiuely, he that loves his brother, 1.
Ioh. ^. 10
there is no occasion of stumbling, or scandal in him.

Lastly, the true love of Gods children, will make a man grow up Ephe. 4, 15,
16.
the faster into Jesus Christ, 1. These. 3. 12, 13.
in all grace and holiness. 1* Ioh. 5, 2.


5. Faith.
INasmuch, as there are diverse kinds of faith, and experience shows in many
that give no signs of repentance, that they will not be beaten from a
confident persuasion, that Christ died for them, even for them in particular.
It stands us in hand to try our persuasion by the true rules of scripture, and
if it will abide the trial of the touchstone, we may lay it up as hid
treasure, and a wonderful grace of God, and if otherwise we may repent of
presumption, as a deceaueable sin.

Faith may be tried. 1. By the Cause. 2. By the Properties. 3. By the
Concomitants. 4. By the effects.


For the first, true faith comes by the hearing of the word preached: It is
no natural endowment, nor gotten by natural helps; But first is wrought by
the holyghost, in the preaching of the Gospel, as is plain by the Apostle.
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard, Romans 10, 14.
and how shall they hear without a Preacher.

Secondly, there are 6. properties of faith.

First, it accounts all things most base, in Comparison of the knowledge of
Christ, Phil. 3 9
and the love of God in 1. Pet. 2. 6.
him. Christ is more precious then all the world besides.

Secondly, it will receive the testimony of Gods faithful Ministers out of the
world, 2. These. 1, 10
against the world.

Thirdly, it is such a persuasion as cannot abide hipocrisy, but purges the
heart of it, as of a most hateful sin, 2. Tim. 1. 5.
and is therefore called unfeigned.

Fourthly, it will endure trial; cast it into the fire of tribulation, 1. P^t.
1. 7
and manifold afflictions and disgraces, 2. Tim. 1, 12.
and temptations, yet it will not perish, nor be ashamed; it is a plate for the
breast, and a helmet for the head. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8^ Ephesians. 6. Whereas the best
faith that is not the faith of Gods elect, will prove but dross, if it be cast
into the furn^ce of temptation; further then it is supported by carnal ends
and helps. Luke 8. 13


Fifthly, it will believe all things that it apprehends to be required,
threatened, or promised in the word; Acts 24. 14.
to believe some things, may be in other kinds of faith; especially such
things as stand with reason, affecting common opinion, etc.

Sixthly, in affliction it lays hold on Gods promise or providence, so as it
will rest with quietness, Esaias 25. 16.
trust and patience, and not make have to the use of evil, and unwarranted
means, he that believes makes not have.

Thirdly, it may be tried by the concomitants of it. for;

First, it is ^ealed by the holy spirit of promise; for in every believer the
promised spirit does print in his heart the saving graces of Christ, Ephesians. 1.
13, 14.
from the sight of which, as from so many marks, compared with Gods promises
in his word, arises by the effectual working of the spirit, this assurance or
persuasion of faith: for though grace and faith be given together, and grow up
together, yet the assurance of faith discouers not it self, till it discern
those companions of it with which it is daily encouraged, and confirmed and
settled, that faith that can be without sanctification of the spirit, 2. These.
2, 13.
is not the faith of Gods elect.

Secondly, 1. Tim. 1, 19. 5.
it is joined with a good and pure conscience. 1. Tim 3. 9
He that is truly persuaded of Gods love in Christ, He. 10. 22.
makes conscience of all his ways, to seek or do thee good God requires,
and avoid the evils God forbids.

Thirdly, 2. Tim 3. 15.
it is joined with a spirit of discerning, or wisdom in matters of salvation,
the mind being enlightened, to observe in some comfortable measure, the
meaning of the holy ghost, in all things needful to salvation, in use of the
word, Psa. 119. 130.
through the power of Gods ordinances, so as the very simple may and do
attain to a holy kind of insight, Pro. 1. 4, 8, and 5, 9.
and sharpness of judgment.

Fourthly, 1, Ioh, 5: 10
The true believer has a witness in himself, even the witness of the spirit
of adoption, Rom, 8, 15 16.
infallible certifying himself of Gods love and his adoption.

Fifthly, faith may be discerned by certain effects of it; for,

1. It breeds joy unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. 1, 8
and that either through the sense of Gods savor and your presence, Romans 5. 2
or in the hope of glory to come.

2. It puts on and applies a righteousness, that is not by the work of the
same, Romans 10.
but in Christ only.

3. It will make a man speak in the confession, profession and defense of the
truth of God, I have believed, 2. Cor. 4 13. 14.
therefore I spoke.

4. It works the longing desires of 2. Cor. 5. 7.
Gods presence of glory. Gal. 5. 5.


5. It works an effectual love of God and Gods children, Gel. 5. 6.
and shows it self by the fruits of love.

6. It will maintain a Christian in some measure of sufficiency and
contentment in all estates; Heb, 2. 5.
the just lives by faith, Romans 1. 17
not by friends, Gal. 2^0.
money, earthly hopes, or helps etc. for it will make a man to lay houlde upon
Gods promise, and works an inward trust in Gods never failing providence, so
as he will leave the success of all his labors, or means to God.

7. It excludes, boasting of our own labors, praises, gifts, or works, Rom,
3. 17
and in the same measure works humility, Gal. 3 22.
that it makes any other grace.

8. It overcomes the world, 1. 1o. 5. 4. 5
so as profits, credit, pleasures carnal friends or hopes do not sway and rule
the believer, but he willingly and patiently rests in the treasures and
pleasures of a better world, yielding himself over to be guided by Christ and
his truth to the death. Psa. 48. 14


9. It purifieth the heart from ignorance, wicked imaginations, carnal
desires, Acts 15. 9
sinful perturbations, and all sorts of secret and inward sins. And this it
does by causing a man, daily to seek pardon for them in Christ, and by
casting them out by confession and sorrow, in the same measure, desiring inward
purity, that it reioyeeth in Gods love.

10. There is a spring of grace in the heart of every believer, Ioh. 7 38.
whence follows daily the exercise of sundry saving graces, which can never
be utterly dried up in the heart of a Christian; and that is it, our savior
Christ means when he says; out of his belly shall flow rivers, of living
water.

6. The spirit of Adoption.
THe spirit of adoption in the hearts of Gods Children, may be discerned.

First, by the fire of zeal and holy affections, with which it fills the hearts
of Gods children; Mat, 3. 11,
especially in the use of Gods ordinances, Ephesians, 5, 19
to the information and reformation of their lives.

Secondly, 1. The 1. 5
by the much assurance, which especially at som^times works in the heart.

Thirdly, by a daily holy strife, to preserve grace given us, 2. Tim. 1. 14
and to prevent falling away.

Fourthly, by secret suggestion or direction, by which Gods servants are
reclaimed when they go out of the way, Esa 30. ^1
either on the right hand, or on the left.

Fifthly, by the assise it keeps in the heart of a christian, Esaias. 4.
as a spirit of judgment by which he is made, to watch, arrest, accuse,
condemn and restrain himself, from every evil way, according to the rules
of the word, and before Gods holy presence.

Sixthly, by liberty from the power of reigning and presumptuous sins; 2.
Cor, 3, 17.
where the spirit of God is, Romans 8. 10
there is liberty.

Seventhly, by the groath and flourishing of true grace. Esaias 44, 3 4.


Eighthly, by unspeakable ioies, felt in the presence of God, in the due use of
his ordinance, by which a christian is enflamed to the love of God, Romans 14, 17.
and all holy duties, Ezec. 39 vl^
and abased to the dust in the sense of his own vileness, called therefore
the ioies of the holy ghost: For, as for carnal joys or illusions, either
they are not felt in the use of Gods ordinances, or else they breed pride, and
conceited security.

Ninthly, by requests and supplications, Rom, 8. 13
affectionable and with Zac. 12, 10
confidence powered out unto God as a father. Ephesians. 3, 12


7. Uprightness of heart.
IF thou would make trial of the truth and vprighnesse of thy heart, thou
must seriously examine thy self:

First, Psa. 32. 2,
whether thy spirit be without guile, Ioh. 1. 4.
more desirous to be good, Prou* 20, 6, 7.
then to be thought to be so, and seeking more the power of godliness, then
the show of it.

Secondly, whether thou love all good things as well as one, and hate all things
as well as one.

Thirdly, whether that thou can love and forgive thy enemies, that hate, and
disgrace, and wrong thee as well as thy friends, that either wrong thee not, or
but by infirmity.

Fourthly, whether thou can be content to receive evil at Gods hands, as
well as good, without murmuring or letting go thy integrity, Ioh 1, 1, and 2,
3. 10
being careful to approve thy self to God without respect of reward, yea
though trouble did befall thee.

Fifthly, whether thou dislike sin in all, 1. Kin. 15 12, 13, 14
even in those that are most near and dear unto thee?

Sixthly, whether thou find in thy heart a resolution to turn from nothing
that God commands thee all the days of thy life. 1. Kin. 15 5, 9, 4.


Seauenthly, whether thou be innocent from the great transgression. Psa. 1^, 13


Eighthly, whether thou find an inward combat and striffe against secret
sins, as well as open sins, bewailing the transgressions against the inward
worship of God, as well as against the ontward.

Ninthly, whether thy heart be humble, Heb. 2, 4
patient, Pro, 21, 29
teachable, and tractable in some holy measure, 1, Chr, 28. 9.
increasing herein by the use of Gods ord^niance? an upright heart, is a
willing heart.

10 Whether thy desire be to walk as in Gods presence. Gen, 17, 1


11 Whether thou find a desire to be rid of sin, and to humble thy self for
it, in prosperity as well as adversity, Job 8, 5, 6
and in the beginning of afflictions, as well as in the extremities of them.

12 Whether in wrongs and disgraces, Psalm 7, 10 11, 7.
when thou art innocent, thou can (in the sense of thine own unworthiness
of Gods love) make God thy defense, resting in his favor and acceptance.

13 Whether thou do endeavor to glorify God, Psalm. 33, 1 119, 7. 140, 13.
as well by giving thanks for blessings and graces, as for praying for supply
of wants, or pardon of ^innes.

14 Whether thy heart be steadfast, and settled, without lying, flattering, or
dissembling; so seeking and praying for pardon, and deliverance in aduersit^e,
that thou would practice it after release, this was a sign the Israelites
were not upright, Psa. 78, 36 37.
in that they would cry to God in their distress, but care not for their
vows and promises, so soon as they were delivered.

15 Whether the word of God do thee good above all things? Mich. 2* 7


16 Whether thy praise be of God, Romans 2, 29
and not of men?

17 Whether thou do serve God with thy whole heart: not having a heart and a
heart, 2. Chro. 6. 14. psa. 119* 34
either waiuering or divided? for unless the whole resolution of thy soul,
with the utmost of thy desires, be to walk in Gods ways, thy heart is not
upright.

18 Whether there be in thee a faithful heart, 2. Chr. 19. 8 9.
to deal faithfully in the charge and calling in which thou art, and to
discharge it in the conscionable fear of God?

19 Whether there be any sin thou could not willingly judge thy self for
it, without hiding it, so soon as thou know it to be a sin: This is the
joy of a Christian, Psa. 32. 11 and 5.
in the sense of his own wants and weaknesses, that though he have many
sins, yet there is no sin but he willing lie acknowledges it unto God.

20 Whether thou be good at home, Psalm. 101, 2.
as well as abroad.

21 Whether thou can be contented to make the Law of God, Psa 119, 1
thy only direction in all things? Deuteronomy 18 12. 13


22 Whether thou can be as careful to preseuere in grace, as once to be
good?

23 Whether thou keep thy self from thine own iniquity. Pro. 13
1. Whether thou do conscionablie endeavor to forsake thy particular, 2. Sam.
22 24.
formerly beloved and special sins?

24 Whether thou be free from the reign of frowardness in thy way, Pro. 11,
20* and 19, 1.
or perverseness of thy lips.

8. Holy desires.
Our desires may be tried five ways. First by objects of them. Secondly, by
the quallities of them. Thirdly, by the concomitants or companions of them.
Fourthly, by effects or consequents of them. Fifthly, by the causes or
accidents of them.

For the first, those desires are meant in the promises, Psa, 73. 25
that are carried after things above nature, as the favor of God, the pardon
of sins, Mat. 5.
the righteousness of Christ, Heb. 11. 10 16.
the presence of God, and the saints in the new Jerusalem, the coming of
Christ to judgment, Revel. 22 17. 20.
victory over the dearest sins, Rom, 7
the removing of spiritual judgments, Esa 63, 17
the damnation of their own souls, Rom, 9. 3
that Israel might be saved, and such like.

There are three principal quallities in the holy desires of Gods elect; Lu.
12. 49.
for

First, they are fierie^ that is, such as cause the heart of man, to burnewithn
him, with some measure of zeal for Gods glory, indignation at sin, and
fervent affection in Gods service, whereas the desires of the wicked, at least
are either dull and cold, or transported by the wrongs, ends to the favoring
of sin.

Secondly, they are constant: both because they are renewed daily, as the
metaphors of hunger and thirst do import; as also because they are alike
carried to the eternal fruition of the things desired, as to the present
enjoying of them, Gods servants desire the favor of God, the abolishing of
sin, the possession of grace, not to serve a turn for the present, but to be
enjoyed as their portion for ever; for look how the man unregenerate desires
to commit sin, so does the regenerate desire to forsake: but the former in
some sins does commit them, with a desire ever to sin and a secret
discontentme^t to think that at any time, he should not be able to sin.
Even such a contrary desire is there in Gods elect truly called, they so
desire not to sin, as it is their grief to think that at any time they
should again sin, yea affliction, does not quench them but many times
inflame them. Esa. 26, 9*


Thirdly, they are not idle, which may appear three ways. First, because
they are carried after themeanes of good as well as good things themselves: Psa.
27. 4 1,
and that in a great measure too. Pet, 2, 2
Secondly, Psa. 1, 63 1 ^.
because they are attended with a resolution to do any thing that their
desires may be accomplished: Acts 2, 37*
they ask what should they do to be saved? as taking it for granted, that
they must be industrious in Gods work. There is no labor, but they would
endeavor to do it, so the Lord would be merciful unto them to grant them
their desire, yea when they have done all, they still are humbled because they
can do no more, nor no better. Thirdly, they cannot rest till in some happy
measure they overcome, Reave. 21, 6
the most maisterly corruption either of nature or life.

Thirdly, holy desires are accompanied:

First, with a supernatural valuation of the worth of spiritual things
accou^ting them pearl of the best price not to dear bought if they buie them
with the sale of al they have; Mat. 13. 45. 46.
and contrariwise accounting themselves exceeding poor and distressed, Psa. 42.
if they want them or the means of them, Psa. 63. 1. 3
esteeming Gods loving kindnoss^ better then life.

Secondly, with avoluntary forsaking of the unnecessary pleasures and profit
of the world, Heb 11. 13
thankfully receiving the promises of a better life, and easily confessing that
they are strangers and pilgrims on the earth.

Thirdly, with a constant and secret meditation of heavenly things desired,
Isay 26. 9
what one desires fervently, Psa, 63, 1, 6.
he thinks on almost continually.

Fourthly, Holy desires show themselves by diverse effects or consequents of
them, especially if they be satisfied.

First, Pro. 11, 23
they chase out evil desires and raise up a daily combat against the most
secret corruptions of nature. Roae, 7. 25


Secondly, Lam, 2, 19
the excite a frequencie and feruencie in prayer to God in secret.

Thirdly they work a resolution to walk in the way, Es. 35. 7. 8
that is called holy, yea so gracious is the Lord, that the most simple, if
their desires be most true, attain to some happy measure of reformation.

Fourthlie, if the Lord grant their desires, there follows:

First heavenly kind Ps 63, 5
of satisfaction and contentation with singular delight in the soul. Ier. 31,
25, 26.


Secondly the vows and wishes of infinite and eternal thankfulness. Psa,
63. 4.


Thirdly a grows and springing up as among the grass, Esa. 44, 3
or as willowes by the water courses. 1. Pet. 2, 2


Lastly, they arise from a broken and humbled spirit, and the more they are
inflamed, Mat. 5. 4. 5 6.
the more humbled they continue to be.

9. The spirit of prayer.
HE that calls on the name of the Lord aright, discovers the spirit of
grace and prays in his heart, by these things.

1. He asks according to Gods will. 1. Ioh. 5. ^


2. He prays with persuasion that God Mar. 11, 14
will hear, Iam. 1. 6. 7*
he believes he shall have it, Psa. 6. 9.
he prays in faith and assurance of heart before God. 1, Ioh. 3, 19 22.


3. Job. 14, 13
He prays in the name of Christ in the sense of his own vileness by reason
of his wants and sins. P^a. 86. 1. 2 and 143, 4


4. Ioh. 17.
He will pray at al times. Psa. 116. 2


5. He is effectually fervent, Iam. 5. 16
he has the affections of prayer. Psa. 6. 8.


6. Prayer makes him exceeding weary of the world, Psa. 6. 8. 9, and 39. 12.
and willing to forgo society with the works of iniquity.

7. When he knows not how to pray as he ought the spirit prepares his heart,
excites holy desires supplies with words and power of affection, Romans 8; 26 27
or else works inward inexpressible groans.

8. He finds a holy rest and quie^nesse in his conscience and heart with
spiritual boldness and confidence of trust in God, Ps. 3, 4, 5, 6
if the Lord hear graciously. Ps. 116, 1, 7


9. He finds answers from God, Psa. 91, 15 17. ^ 1
by the witness of the spirit of adoption: Ier. 33, 3
in which the Lord deals sometimes wonderfully with his people. Es^y 31, 19 58.
9.


10. He loves God exceedingly for hearing his prayer, Psa. 116. 1. Jude 20.
and desires to keep himself in the love of God.

11. His prayers proceed from a heart that loves no sin: 2. Tim 2, 19. 22.
but willingly departs from i^iquitie, Job. 8, 5, 6
and desires to keep his commandments; 1. Ioh. 3. 22
and to do that which is pleasing to Gods sight.

12. He loves prayer in others. 2. Tim, 2, ^2.


13. He is oftentimes dissolved into much sorrow for his sins, Z^c. 12, 10
while he stands before the face of God. Psa, 55, 1, 2


14 He feels the confidence of assurance Gal. 4, 7
that God is his father. Romans 8, 15


15. If the Lord be silent and answer not, Psa. 28, 1 and 88, 13, 14, 15, 143, 7
but hides his face, his spirit fails, and he is as one that goes down to
the pit, Ioh, 1^, 23 24.
it troubles him as a sore cross, and contrariwise.

16. Prayer is his chief refug^, and he will pray, though prayer be in never
so much disgrace, Psa. 69, 10 13* and 142 2. 5.
and power out his complaint, and show all his trouble.

17. He strives against deadness of spirit and distractions as a heavy
burden. Psa 86. 4. 3


10. The obedience of Christ.
Our obedience will be approved and accepted in Christ, if it be an obedience
that will bear trial in the rules following.

First, if it arise out of love to God and goodness. The obedience of Gods
elect is from the heart, Deuteronomy. 30. 20
not constrained but volu^tary, Josh. 22. 5*
their hearts being inflamed with the sense of Gods goodness, and humbled when
they have done their best, Mat. 4. 19
that they cannot bring more glory to God; it is a ready obedience without
repining, Romans 6, 17
excuse or delay.

2 If it be in all things, Ex. ^15. 26
with respect to all Gods commandments, 1. Kin. 9. 4
a wicked man Iet. 11. 4
may obaie in many Ioh. 15. 14
things but there is some one commandment he would be dispensed Act 13. 22
withal as Herod. Deu. 30. 2


3 He can be content to obey against profit, Iet. 35
pleasure credit, Heb. 11. 8
liberty, Ge. 22 12
ease or the liking of the world or carnal friends, Pro. 7. 2
preferring Gods co^maundeme^ts above all things; Acts 5. 29
yea life it self. Mat 16. 25


4 If it follow the conscionable practice of the duties of mortification, of
sins past or present, 1. Pet. 1. 22.
the reformation and profession of such people as did never in secret humble
their souls for sin, may be much suspected, for our hearts must be purified
to obey the truth.

5 If it be in absence as well as presence, in all companies as well as
any, before mean Christians, as before the best, Phil. 2. 12
at home as well as abroad. Gal. 5. 7


6 If it be always, 2. King 18 6.
as well as for a fit. Psa. 106. 3


7 If we believe and obey Gods Ministers, as the overseers of our souls and
lives, Heb. 13
directing us out of the Word, 2, These. 3
as well as if we were commanded immediately from God.

8 If we obey in the Commandments of faith, as well as life, submitting our
selves to God, Ro^. 10 16
as well by believing as by doing, Ro^. 16. 26
yielding our service as well to the Gospel as to the Law. 2. The. 1. 8


9 If we obey in the least commandment, as well as in the greatest, making
conscience of the smallest things required, Mat. 5. 19
or forbidden in the Word. Gat. 5 7.


10 It is an obedience that follows the sanctification of the spirit. Holy
duties without they flow from holy graces within; 1. Pet, 1. 2
neither can the life be holy before God, if the heart be not made holy, by
the grace of Jesus Christ.

11 It is joined with the reign of no sin; a Christian that truly obeyes God
may have many sins, but there is no sin to which he yields himself wholly
over, Romans 6
by secret vows and resolution as a servant to obey it: he may fail in his
obedience, so as he cannot do what God requires as he requires; but yet he
consents to obey, Esa. ^. 19
and his will is to hire himself to do Gods work as well as he can. And to
this end he hearkneth to his voice, and seeks God with his whole heart, that
he may keep his testimonies, Psa: 119. 2
he consents to obey, Deuteronomy. 6. 2^.
and observes to do: he comes to the light that his deeds may be made
manifest. Ioh. 3. ^


Lastly, our obedience is right and acceptable, if GOD hear our prayers, for
God hears not sinners: Ioh. 9. 31
and David says, Psa. 66: 18
if there were wickedness in his heart, GOD would not hear his prayers.

11 Saving knowledge.
Saving knowledge may be tried: 1. By the objects. 2. By the causes. 3. By the
co^comitants. 4. By the properties. 5. By the effects.


For the first, by this knowledge the elect are enlightened by the spirit of
revelation.

1. To conceive aright of the nature of God, in some measure propounding before
the eye of their minds the Lord, as he is revealed in the word, Ier 9. 24
at least by way of negatio^ casting out al likenesses of any created nature.

2. To understand the true manner of Gods worship. Ioh. 4. 22


3 To know their own iniquities and vileness, in respect of corruption of
nature and life. Ier 3. 12


4 To know Christ Phi. 3. 9.
as their Savior. 1^. 1. Cor. 2. 2*


5 To know God in Christ. Ioh. 17. 3 8. 19.


6 To know the forgiveness of their own sins. Ier. 31. 34


7 To know the voice of Christ, discerning it in some measure from the voice
of a stranger. Ioh. 1^. 4.


8 To know their own conversion, 1. 10. 3. 14
and al needful holy things. Pro. 9. 10.


9 To know the things given them of God, 2. Cor. 13. 5
and especially the inhabitation of the spirit 1. Cor. 2. 12.
of Christ. Ioh. 14. 17. 20.


10 To know their own salvation. Luke 1. 77


Secondly, this knowledge may be discerned from other knowledge, by the
causes: for,

1 Flesh and blood has not revealed it, Mat. 16. 17
it is a wisdom in a mystery, it is given of God in Christ by the anointing of
the spirit. 1. Cor. 1. 30


2 Affliction of 1. Cor. 2. 7
conscience, breeds the 1. Ioh. ^. 27. and 5. 2^
and experience of it in many, who never came to sound knowledge, till they
have been wounded by the feeling of Gods wrath, Ho. 6. 1. 2. 3.
or their own sins, or the venomed temptations of Satan.

3. It is quickened and nursed by the sweet refreshings and contentments felt
in Gods house. Ps 36. 8. 9. 10.


4 It is founded upon the true fear Pro. 1. 7.
of GOD; Job. 18. 28.
the very first beginning of it, is excited by the fear of GOD, Col, 1, 9
and it grows as holiness, Ioh, 7, 17
grace, and good works grow in us. 2. Pe. 3. 18


Thirdly, it has six companions of it among the rest, that in special attend
it.

1 The love of the Law. Psalm. 119. 97. 98


2 A holy estimation of it above all possessions, Phil. 3. 8
showed, Pro. 3. 3. 4. 7. and 7. 4. and 8. 9. 10
in that a Christian above all, getting labors to get this understanding, and
rejoices in it as the fairest ornament.

3 Teachablenesse. Pro 8. 9. 17.
Isa, 28, 9.


4 A savor of spiritual Romans 8. 5*
things. 2. Cor. 2. 14


5. Sense, that is, Phil. 1. 9.
inward feelings of the power of the word and ordinances of God.

6 The love of Gods children which abounds as this knowledge grows. Phi 1.
9. 10


Fourthly it has six properties.

1 It is affectionate, it is not written in the head, Ier. 31. 34
but in the heart and bowels. Deu. 46


2 It tends to action Ps 111. 10
and practice. Isa, 33, 6
Ioh, 8, 55


3 It is constant and 1. Ioh, 2, 3 and 3, 24
indelible, it has deep Phil. 1. 9 10
impressions and much assurance, Ier 31. 34
so as it is not easily unsettled with the puffes of contrary doctrine, Pro. 4.
5, 16
nor can it be extinguished by trials or afflictions; Ephesians. 4. 13
therefore it is said to be written upon their hearts.

4 It is sincere, for first it inclines to receive all truth, Ioh. 16. 13
as well as any truth: 1, Cor* 3, 1^
secondly, it will receive the truth, though it be against reason, 1. Cor, 2 7
common opinion, profit, or the like.

Fifthlie, It brooks not the impotent rudiments and beggarly inventions of
men, in the things of the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Sixthlie, it leads a man principally to understand his own way; Pro. 14, 8
and by it a man teaches and admonishes himself. Col. 3, 16


Lastly, it bears fruit better then gold ^ro. 8. 19. and by the fruits or
effects it may be known.

1. It lasts out conc^itednesse, diffidence, insensiblenesse of Gods mercies
and judgments, and unthankfulness: he that has true knowledge, Pro. 3, 5, 6
will not lean to his own natural wisdom, he will trust in the Lord, and
acknowledge him in all his ways.

2. It makes a man humble and lowly, in the same measure that one abounds in
true knowledge, in the same measure he is made more lowly and meek, and
careful in all his ways; Pro. 8, 13 14*
no scorner can find this wisdom.

3. It mortifieth boisterous and unruly, hateful and hurtful affections, it
will make a lion become a lamb, and a bear, Isa. 11, 9
or a wolf, or a cockatrice, to be willingly guided, even by a little child,
etc.

4. It extinguisheth or greatly dulleth the savor of earthly things and makes a
man heavenly minded. Romans 8, 6


5. This and such like other affects are altogether set down by the Apostle
James in his third Chapter, Iam, 3* 17 18.
and the seventeen and eighteen verses.

12. Love of God.
OUR love to God, may be known.

First, Ephesians, 6, ^ ^4
by the sincere and incorrupt love of the Lord Jesus, the son of his love.

Secondly, by the love of his image in all the saints of God, 1, Ioh. 5, 1
that are begotten by him.

Thirdly, by the base estimation of the world and the lusts thereof, for if
any man, 1, Ioh, 2, 15
love the world, the love of the father is not in him.

Fourthly, by a deliberate inward inflamed estimation of God above all things,
Psa. 63. 2 1, 11.
accounting his loving kindness better then life, and the signs of his
favor our greatest joy.

Fifthly, by our delight in his presence which is then approved.

1. If we love to speak often to God by prayer, Ps^. 34. 5 37, 4. ^
and hear him speak often to us, in his other ordinances.

2. If we love, 2 Timothy 4, 8
and long for his appearing.

3. If we bewail his absence as a bitter cross. Cant. 3. 1


4. If we set the Lord daily be ore us. Psa. 16, 8


5. If we love his house. Psa. 26, 8


Sixthly, by our care to keep his commandments, Ioh. 14, 21
and to be as he is in holiness, 1. Ioh 4. 17
which may be further tried.

1. If we willingly receive his commandments, for this is the love of God,
that we keep his commandments, 1. Ioh. 5 3
and his commandments are not grievous.

2. If we serve him with all our hearts and all our souls. Deuteronomy. 10 12


3. Deu. 11. ^2
If it be our care to walk in all his ways and not to offend in any thing.
Ios. 22. 5.


Seventhly, by our sensiblenesse of his dishonor if we be more vexed for his
dishonor, then our own disgrace.

Eighthly, by remembering his benefits and Psa, 63. 2. 3 4. 6, 8 107 ^2.
magnifying his mercies, Ioh. 36, 24*
for what we love we easily praise. Deuteronomy, 6. 2.


Ninthlie, Exodus 15 2.
by our care not only to do his will but to please him, 1. Ch 28. 9
being more encouraged with his praise and approbation, 1, Co. 7, 23
then the praise of al men. Heb. 1^. 28


10. By a willingness to suffer any thing for his sake. Ioh 22, 15 to 19.


11. By a detestation as of sin, Psa. 97, 10
because God hates it, Psa. 139 21, 22.
so of sinners, because they hate God.

12. By our desire to stir up our affections after God, avoiding what might
steal away our hearts from him, and delighting in all the ways, Josh. 23. 11
by which our hearts might be inflamed toward him, and to this end taking
heed to our selves.

13. By our running to him in all adversity, making him our defense, our
rock, our refuge in all trouble, to them we first run to make our moan, Psa
1^. 1. 2
whom we most love.

14. By our willingness, affectionatelie to do the meanest office unto God,
or Christ, or for his sake this was a sign that Marie loved much, Luke 7. 44 4
5. 46, 47
because she was content to wash with her tears, and wiped with her hair the
very feet of Christ.

15 By our humility in the sense of Gods love to us, for ere the more a
Christian discouers Gods love to him, the more his affection to God, makes him
seem base and 1. Cor. 8, 3
vile in his own eyes.

16 By our sorrow for our sins and willingness to forsake and cut off from
us, the most gainefull gainefull and pleasing corruptions, Deu. 30, 6
this is meant by the circumcising of the heart, that we might love God.

13. The sacraments.
THe sacraments are sure seals and infallible pledges of Gods, love and our
salvation, to the worthy receiver: and he receives worthelie.

First, that desires to search his heart and examine his life, 1. Cor. 11.
before he receive.

Secondly, that discernes the Lords body that meditates often, and is in
knowledge infallibly persuaded of the inward and effectual presence of the Lord
to he worthy receiver.

Thirdly, that eats with sorore herbs, Exodus 12
that is, that comes with some measure of sense and feeling with the burden of
his sins, and desire to make them his greatest sorrow.

Fourthlie, that resolves and purposes and inwarldlie, couenaunteth in his
soul, to deuote himself to God, 1. Cor, 5, 8
and godliness, and to strive against every sin that ^hee knows may offend
God.

Fifthlie, that constantly desires to believe Gods mercy in Jesus Christ to
his own soul in particular; Mat. 16. 16
and comes with a persuasion, Col. 2, 12
in some measure of the operation of God, in the inward grace of the sacrament.

Sixthly, that feels the ioies of Gods presence, and the working of Gods
spirit, inwardly sealing in his heart the persuasion of his interest in Gods
promises, Ephesians. 1, 23
bearing witness to his spirit, 1. Cor, 1, 22
that God is graciously reconciled in Christ, and his sins are pardoned, etc.

Seventhly, that loves all the brethren and desires to be furthered in all
holy communion with them, both in grace and glory; 1* Cor. 10
being ready to witness before God and men his resolution to honor and
cleave to them above all other professions and sorts of me^ in the world

Eighthly, that desires to live in peace and godly unity, Ma. 5, 6, ^4
and willingly forgiueth all that have trespassed against him.

14. The fear of God.
THe true fear of God may be discerned; first, by effects; secondly, by the
properties of it.

First, The true fear God, works a care and endeavor to serve God and keep
his commandments, Deu, 6. 13 and 8, 6
and by the fear of God men depart from evil: Pro. 8, 13 16, 6
For it teaches men to hate evil, Reui. 15, 4
as pride, arrogancy, the evil way, and a froward mouth: the wise man says;
He that walks in uprightness fears the Lord, Pro 14, 2
and by that sign he may be known even by aconsionable care to walk
vprightlie with God in holy life.

Secondly, it casts out carnal fears, he is not in much fear of men, Ma. 10,
28
that can kill the body, that is truly touched with the fear of God, Man.
10. 28
that can destroy both body and soul, Es. 8, 12, 13
he fears not their fear, nor the fears of the wicked men, but in some
measure sanctifies God in his heart.

Thirdly, It makes a man desirous and capable of saving knowledge: for this
fear of God, Pro. 1, 7
is the beginning of wisdom.

Secondly, there be five properties of the true fear of God.

First, it is sincere, for he that truly fears God.

1. Fears Gods offense as well as pnnishment.

2. He will fear Gods presence being careful to a^oide such sins, as no
eye sees but Gods.

3. He will fear God though he see no reward in his hand.

4. He fears Gods word and is more troubled and humbled by the threatening of
it, Psa. 119
then by the threatening of any mortal man, and will obey the voice of Gods
servants, whatsoever comes of it.

5. He will obey against reason, affection profit, or pleasure, for so says
the Lord to Abraham; Ge^, 22, 12
now I know thou fear God seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thy only
son.

Secondly, it is filial, not servile, which may appear in five things, for
first it is joined with the love of God, Deu. 10. 12. 20
and so is not the fear of reprobates; secondly it is not compelled by fear
or sense of judgments, but excited by the sense of Gods goodness and mercy.
For so the conuerts in Hosea, Isa, 29, 23
are said to fear God and his goodness. Hos. 3, 5.
Thirdly, it guides the heart of man to run to God, and not from God) to be
healed of the wounds made by si^ne and to be protected, Ma, 4, 2
striving even before God, to discover and get strength against the sins that
trouble them; fourthly It makes a man trust in God, and ere the more it
increases, the more it works affiance and confidence in Gods mecry. 5. Psa.
31. 19 and 115. 11 and 147. 11
It causes a man to love and cleave to such as are Gods Children, though they
be in disgrace with the world. Psa. 11 9, 79


Thirdly, it is a speaking fear, it will speak to God by prayer, and to men by
conference, it cannot be silent; but will speak in defense of Gods glory and
Mal. 3, 16
truth and seeks to draw others from sin.

4 It is a contenting fear, it finds treasures in godliness, and is satisfied
with his portion, Esa. 33. 6
and will abide satisfied whereas the fears of reprobates are either full of
inward horror of conscience, Pro. 19. 23
or perturbation in the heart.

5 It is constant, it is not for a fit, but always, not in sickness or
misery, Ecc. 8. 11
but in prosperity, or all abundance, Deuteronomy. 6. 24
and contrariwise not in prosperity only, when men may fear God without
danger but in trouble also.

15. Love of enemies.
Our love to our enemies is sincere. Mat. 5. 44


1 If we can pray for them.

2 If we can voluntarily mourn and Psa. 35, 13 14.
humble our souls for them in their distresses.

3 If we truly desire their conversion, and find that we could love the^
unfeignedly if they had repented.

4 If we can forgive them their trespasses against us. Mat, 6. 14 15


5 If we be more grieved for their sins against God, then for their wrongs
to us.

6. If we can acknowledge freely their just praises.

7 If we can patiently and meekely endure their reuilings, 1, Pe, 3, 10
being willing to be at peace without revenge. Ro^. 12. 14


8 If we can forbear when we could bring shame or misery on them. 1. Sam. 24
18. 19.


9 If we can endeavor to overcome their evil with goodness, and to relieve
them in misery, Romans 12
or to do any other good, Pro. 25. 21* 22
either for body or soul.

16. Desire of death.
THE desire of death will be our Testimony.

1. If it arise out of the sense of Gods love. Luke 2. 2^, 30


2. If it be conceived in time of prosperity.

3. Especially, Ps. 39. 1, 4
if it arise out of a weariness of our own sins, Ioh. 6. 9. 10*
and Romans 7, 24
the sins of others. Heb. 9. 28*


4* If it come from a longing after Gods eternal Phil. 1*
presence. 2. Cor. 5. 8


5 If it be joined with a desire after the way how to be saved, 2, Pet, 3, 1^
12
and an indeauor after Psa. 90. 12
holy conversation and godliness. 2. Cor. 5. 9


6. If it breed cou^rage and patience under tribulation. 2. Cor. 4. 16 and 5. 2


7 If it make fervent in prayer. 2. Tim. 4. 7
Romans 5. 3
Psa. 3. 9* 12
Romans 8. 22* 23. 26.


8 If it extinguish the eager desires after He. 11. 16. 13. 15.
earthly things. Re 22, 20


9 If we be glad at heart of his coming.


