A SAXON HISTORY, OF THE ADMIRABLE Adventures of CLODOALDVS and his Three
CHILDREN.

Translated out of FRENCH, by Sr. T. H.

HORAT. -- Non, si male nunc; et olim Sic erit. LONDON, Printed by E. P. for
Henry Seile, and are to be sold at the sign of the Tygers-head, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1634.

TO MY VERY GOOD LADY, THE COUNTESS OF SAINT PAVL.
(MADAM,)
I Publish under the favor of your name a History, which has passages in it
very admirable, but (verily) can have none more happy, then the comfort of your
protection. This was a labor designed for you before its birth, and should I
deny it your Greatness, yet were I bound to yield you it by Justice: For it
has fallen out that a person worthy of all respect, to whom the habit I wear,
and pen I handle acknowledge infinite obligation, having discovered this piece
in my hands, which I had heretofore only rough-hewed, drew it from the Tomb,
wherein I obscured it, urging me to give it style and daylight, with a purpose
to present you therewith. I almost for a whole year resisted his powerful
importunities, my Genius transporting me rather into discourses of manners and
faith, then Histories. But he persisting to entreat me when he had (as it
were) his soul on his lips in a sharp sickness which surprised him, I with
good reason gave way to his authority; his rare virtues and singular friendship
conspiring and consenting, both by mouth, heart, and pen to honor you.

(MADAM) You know who it is I speak of, the choice you have made of his
person, thereon to confer an affection so celestial, plainly shows he
must needs be beloved of Heaven: I forbear his name, to spare his humility,
which desires here, no other notice, but that which has eclipsed him in your
lights. Notwithstanding I ingenuously confess that if I were to pass through
all the splendors, and pompes of the World to meet with you; my pen could not
reach you: but since God has inspired you with a life which takes its flight
above the tracks of the Sun, and Time, your goodness fails not to render
you communicable to all the World. I therefore willingly replenish my writings
with a name most lovely, to serve at this day thorough all France as a
Sanctuary for virtue, and a safe conduct to piety.

MADAM, I dare assure you, I have had a very sensible comfort to behold you in
this glorious luster of a Princess, daily to despise by election, what must at
the last day be left of necessity: To see how you trample the World under foot
even in your own house, how you shake the foundation of this Hiericho, of this
City of the Moon and Roses, where inconstancy is everlasting, and beauties but
momentarie, where men live by opinion, sin by precepts, amend not but
thorough impotency of offending, and (as it were) never die, but by sudden
surprisall.

I take part in your contentments, when I so often see you shut up in those
fortunate Islands, where (to speak with the Apostle) you live in spirit, and
converse with spirits, which have nothing mortal about them, but the veil of
their souls, where you taste sweetnesses of Manna, whereof the greatest
delights of the world's devotion has but the tenth part, and into which you
enter, as into most delightful Labyrinths, to loose your self with God, that
so you may never loose your self.

If most violent afflictions must be passed thorough to arrive at so wished a
port, ought you not justly to adore the divine providence, which has
sanctified your sufferings? as also to remember that the most resplendent
virtues spring from sharpest tribulations, as the purest flames of the Sun
(according to the sayings of those ancients) are enkindled from brackish waters.

Courage Madam; Confidently show your self to future times, by the better part
of your self, make us daily behold the most beautiful humility in the bosom of
greatness; make of your manners, a censure of vices, and of your life, examples
of piety, that so those who would prepare Images for virtue, may boldly plant
the Basis thereof on the footsteps which you shall imprint. It is the wish

Madam Of your most humble, most affectionate, and most obsequious servant, N.
C.

Advice to the Reader.
IT is now many years ago, since reading Historians, I fell upon the sect and
manners of the ancient Saxons, who finally were vanquished, and converted to
the Christian Faith, by the Arms and wisdom of our Charlemaigne. I thereupon
looked over such Authors, as I could get; for besides Crantzius, Godfrey of
Viterbe, Regino, who speak of those people. I read the Chronicle of Fulde, the
relations of Schaffenberge, Evodius, Albinus, and other Records, from whence I
have drawn this History, illustrating it with many admirable passages,
extracted from sundry Authors, to be presented to his Majesty in the beginning
of his conquests.

At that time, having taken another flight, and other employments, I was
diverted from this labor, which I accounted as buried up, had not a benign
hand drawn it out of its Tomb, esteeming it very fit to see daylight in the
goodly splendour of these times, and divine Lustres of the Kings Triumphs.

If the sound hereof seem somewhat harsh and rough, I beseech the
understanding Reader to consider, that the most part of Histories, of the same
Time, are of no other condition; that this subject was conceived upon an
occasion, wherein we ought more to regard the delights of a Royal Theater,
then a Method, dry, and polivique; Finally that there is nothing so
extraordinary, which cannot be verified by the relation of ancient Histories,
and that he who will take away the veil, shall see in the destruction of
Idolatry made by Charlemaigne, the desolation of Sects under the Arms of our
most Christian King, whom God for his glory preserve, for the good and
tranquillity of his people.

Maij 19. 1634.
PErlegi hunc librum cui titulus, (A Saxon History of the admirable Adventures
of Clodoaldus, etc. vna cum Epistola Dedicatoria, and ad Lectorem, qui quidem
liber continet folia 104. in quibus nihil reperio sanae doctrinae aut bonis
moribus contrarium quo minus cum publica vtilitate imprimatur, sub ea tamen
condition ut si non intra sex menses typis mandetur haec licentia sit omnino
irrita.

Gulielm: Haywood. Capell: domest. Archiep: Cant.

THE ADMIRABLE ADVENTVRES OF CLODOALDVS, A DANISH LORD, AND HIS THREE CHILDREN.
THE divine providence uses men here below as Counters in a reckoning, Diverse
conditions of men.
which now stand for pence, and straightwayes for Crowns: Some all the time of
their lives, are buried in a deep night, we neither know their entrance into
the world, not their passage out, and if we know them by any title, it is by
that of their miseries: Others are in the midday light, where oft-times they
burn more then they shine, and not knowing themselves, make themselves known
to all the world by ministering occasion for Histories of their lives, and
Fables of their fortunes. Others having for a long time been hidden, (as those
rivers which travel far under the earth,) present themselves to the eyes of
men, and make themselves renowned by incomparable acts, deriving rays of glory
from their proper obscurity. A matter very evident in this narration which I am
now about to publish, wherein you shall behold beginnings uncertain,
progressions embroyled, and events most happy.

Clodoaldus an eminent Lord, The foundation of this History.
and one of the noblest of the Kingdom of Denmark, wherein he sometime
governed a great Province, was a Widower and Father of three Children, of
which, two had been taken from him, to wit, a son called (first) by the name
of his Father, and afterward Ischyrion, and a daughter called Hildegardis. The
son was stolen away by Pirates, recovered again, and brought up by shepherds,
of whom having understood somewhat (although obscurely) touching his extraction,
he had a desire to travel with Faustin the shepherds son who bred him: both
which encountering many accidents, wrought great wonders.

The Daughter being about seven years of age, was taken by the subtle
practice of certain Priests of Idols to serve as a vestall Virgin in the
Temple of Irminsul in the Land of Saxony, wherein were infinite abominations
committed; for they sacrificed men to feed Lions, and Bears kept purposely in
that place: The third child of Clodoaldus was Iacinthus upon whom the lot fell
to have been sacrificed in the Temple of this bloody Idol: but this misery
was diverted as you shall understand by the victorious arms of the French, who
overthrew Idolatry, and caused in this matter unspeakable felicity to arise
after a great confusion of many calamities.

I here (Reader) request thee, that as this History aims to show the triumph
of the cross upon the remainders of impiety, which were (as then) in Europe:
thou would not slightly over-runne these lines by the way of a barren
delight; but that thou therein admire the obligations thou owe to the Savior
of the world, who has drawn thee from the servitude of Devils. I entreat thee
therein to behold the precious gift he has conferred on France, taking its
Arms and Flower de Luces to make them the true instruments of his glory: Sap.
4.
and in the end raising Charlemaigne, The original of Idolatry.
a most puissant Monarch wholly to demollish Idols.

The wiseman has said very well, that Idolatry was the cause, the beginning,
and the end of all evils: For, from thence proceeded the furious war of
ignorance; the perpetual illusion of life, the confusion of all things, the
neglect of God, the corruption of nature, and in the end an inundation of
blood, sacrileges, and impurities.

It is a wonder how this plague having begun a little after the Deluge, and
overrun all parts of the world; was not yet in the time of Charlemaigne wholly
extinct, which was Eight Hundred years after the Birth of CHRIST: But as the
evil spirit endeavored to spread his Net from the beginning of the World so he
sought to maintain it to the end, Cyril. lib. 1. con^ra Julian: Didymus lib.
Exegeseon.
accounting it to be the strength and band of his Empire.

I am not ignorant what learned men argue touching the first Idol. S. Hierome
in Epistol: ad Titum.
S. Cyril thinks it was a statue of Jupiter, consecrated by Cecrops King of
the Athenians. Didymus, and S. Jerome attribute the invention thereof to a King
of Creet named Melissus: Diodorus and Eusebius, to the Phrygians: The Atlantes
a people of Affricke boast above all others the antiquity of their god, (...)
Ammonius in antiquis.
whom they entitle by the name of heaven. Porphryrius imagines the beginning
of Pagan religion came from the Phaenicians: (...)
But Ammonius esteems it very probable that the first Idol was that of Nemrod
mentioned in Scripture: were it not that following the relation of Fulgentius,
we say that one Synoph^nes an Egyptian by Nation, having lost his son; first of
all consecrated a statue to sorrow: It were much more expedient to know the
last then the first of these abominations: The most probable opinion is, that
it began quickly after the Tower of Babel, and that the Babylonians and
Egyptians were the first who were infected with it. The ancient Gauls
proceeded far therein, F^* Taranis Scythicae non mitiorara Dianae.
for the Devils gave them Oracles in Trees, and statues, and they fell into so
deep a blindness as to sacrifice men to Taranis, whose altar (as Lucan the
Poet observes) was bloody and barbarous.

This was yet practiced among the Saxons, as we shall see in the progress of
this History: For it happened that Clodoaldus this distressed Father having
wandered over many Countries, perpetually in quest of his Children, came to
reside in Saxony, where he had some alliance: and seeking there for some
entertainment to sweeten the sense of his mis-hap, Hunting of Clodoaldus in the
Grove of Jrminsul.
was greatly delighted in hunting, wherein he used as much fervor as
dexterity.

Now it chanced one day, that he pursuing a Bore very eagerly, entered into a
huge thick forest which much astonished him to behold; for verily it was a
den of Devils, where they made very many bloody sacrifices: and there was still
to be seen a huge Idol of brass dedicated to a false Divinity, under which
this Bore casually hastened to sheltor himself.

Those, I who at that time accompanied Clodoaldus, failed not to give him
notice it was the Forest and Idol of Irminsul: and that hunting was forbidden
in that place: But he, whether neglecting the superstitions of a Country
wherein he had not yet been naturalized, or whether charmed with the pleasure
of chase, forbear not to pass further, and slew the Bore with his own hand,
whose head he cut off, and showed it in a bravery.

In the mean while (it being very ordinary with evil spirits to speak by
Idols, and to cause sterility of seasons, and sickness of bodies) there was
heard to proceed from this statue a voice frightfull, and menacing: which
protested to act strange outrages upon the person of this poor Lord, and the
whole Country, if he endeavored not to afford a speedy satisfaction. And
that which made it be thought these threats would not be without effect, was
that Clodoaldus felt himself suddenly strooken with a dimnesse, which for a
time took from him the use of his eyes.

This vigorous spirit of his was so overwhelmed with superstition, that casting
himself at the feet of a false god to beg pardon; he yielded up humble
supplications, which rellished more of the servitude of his fear: ^ad meet^^g.
then the generosity of his courage. The Devil seeing him in a state to yield
to any thing, required of him for the recovery of his sight, made him promise
to sacrifice the first thing he should chance to meet withal as he returned
to his house: He quickly found by experience the temeritie of his vow in the
disaster of this accident. For his son Iacinthus the sole object of his
thoughts, and only support of the frailty of his age, understanding he was
gone from his house on hunting; made haste to meet him with cheerfulness of
youth, and excess of joy.

The poor Father who had already both the portalls of his eyes shut up from
the spectacle of his calamities, held perpetually those of his ears too open
to his own unhappiness: which was the cause that hearing the voice of
Iacinthus, he waxed pale with horror, and casting forth a deep sigh, Combat
of p^etie between^ the father an^ son.
said nothing else, but, this is my son, I am dead: Grief at that time
choking up the rest of his words: On the other side the little Iacinthus
beholding his Father blind, and considering the discomfort he fell into at
the instant of his arrival, imagined himself to be the cause of his mis-hap:
whereupon he wept so bitterly, that it drew much compassion from those there
present, and made all the forest resound with his outcries. Never was the
story of Iephte seen better personated: This young innocent held himself fast
fixed to the knees of his father, humbly beseeching him by all that which was
most religious and sacred with him in the world, to declare the remedy might be
applied for his recovery; or else to take revenge on him, and kill him with a
Bore-speare, which he had in his hand, protesting he would direct the blow,
and open his breast to the point: which could not but find passage enough into
the heart of a Parricide. But the unfortunate Clodoaldus who then felt the most
horrible convulsions may be imagined, concealed his wound so much as he could,
as one who more apprehended the remedy, then the evil it self: The father,
and son were long in a combat of piety, which ministered matter of tears to
the most insensible, and of admiration to all the world.

In the end Clodoaldus retiring somewhat apart to confer with his friends,
who had accompanied him in hunting, concerning this deplorable accident:
perceiving those who were very willing to transfer the storm upon their
Neighbors field to free themselves from danger, became earnest to persuade him
speedily to accomplish this dolorous sacrifice, he growing very angry and
contesting with words sharp enough, some of them hastened to the ear of
Iacinthus, who presently understood the knot of the business, and offered
himself very freely to be sacrificed. But the father esteeming himself so
much the more bound to preserve a virtue, which he saw pressed to ruin it self
for him, ran to his son: Love which is too clear sighted, supplied the
defect of his eyes, and made so strong chains about him of his two arms, in
holding him strictly embraced, that it seemed death was not strong enough to
dissolve the knots tied by so great a charity: He weeping, said,

Iacinthus (my most dear son) think I am a Father and not a rock: That I
have all those sensible apprehensions which nature can give in the like
occasions: You know your eldest Brother, and your Sister have already been
stolen from me in their tender years, to make up the measure of sorrow which
I conceived upon the death of your Mother: You are not ignorant that you only
remain after this lamentable ship-wracke, and that holding you in my arms it
seems to me I possess a broken planke of a vessel which bare my Treasures:
I saw all the hopes of my posterity to flourish again in you: I saw a support
of my declining years: Finally I there there beheld my flesh and blood, and
yet have I given away your life to purchase eyes for my self: and do I throw
you alive into a Tomb, and make of your blood a plaster to enjoy a cruel
health, and a life most infamous? No (my son) let me rather die in my
miseries, for which now behold me standing within the gates of death.

The good blind man speaking this, sought to make a Bath of his tears for
this lamentable sacrifice, whilst others prepared one of blood for him, nor was
it possible to appease him until lacinthus had promised, that nothing should
be done without his consent: The youth notwithstanding seeing himself free,
secretly slipped aside with a purpose to visit the Priests of the Idols, and
obtain his liberty of them. But Clodoaldus desirous to hold him perpetually
(as it were) incorporated to himself, perceiving he was gone, entered into the
furies of disconsolate sorrow.

In the mean time the sacrificers being dealt withal in the cause of the
suppliant (as praetexts of devotion are ever the most inexorable) grew very
stiff in the bloodiest ways, encouraged in this affair by a people timorous,
and sottish, who entertain no motive more violently then that which
superstition suggesteth: the poor lamb is seized on, and taken by the throat
to dispose him for sacrifice, with so much fervor, as it seemed they would
purchase the Sun, wind, rain, and fertility of years through the effusion of
his blood.

(Reader) Let us here stay a little, and consider as we pass along, Tyranny of
superstition.
the tyranny of superstition, which forgeth horrible chains to restrain the
liberty of men, making crimes to pass for acts of religion, and rendering evil
immortal, under the color of a false piety.

We have seen Tyrants who have inflicted most strange violences upon free
men, as that of Basilius Duke of Muscovia, who commanded his people to bring
him glasses filled with sweat for tribute, and Nightingales in Winter; and one
(...) who forbad tears to the afflctied, which verily are the gentlest and
most reasonable ways nature has found out for the discharge of a heart
drenched in ac^^bities.

Yet never could these cruelties equal the rigours of a soul superstitions,
which is to it self, seafold, punishment, and executioner, when thinking to
perform some notable sacrifice, it becomes the instrument of its own ruin.
Who would not tremble to hear that men could persuade men to thrust a knife
into the throat of their Children, and that to sprinkle Idols with their blood
was an act merited honor, and which might draw along with it the imitation of
posterity.

We know that a vow ought to have three conditions, Condition of vowed.
Justice, Judgment, and Truth: Justice, because it should be of things just
and lawful, and therefore he that voweth a crime (as did the Jews) protesting
neither to eat nor drink till they had killed S. Paul: commits a double
sin, and if he execute his vow he commits a third: Judgment, in so much as
this vow ought to be accompanied with knowledge, deliberation, discretion, and
liberty, it being unreasonable to proceed blindfold in a matter of such
importance: Truth, because it should be only done to the true God.

Behold how that law of our Savior is resolved into reasonable services: but
that of Devils binds to most impious acts with knots of a necessity, that
admits no qualification. There is not a creature which defends the blood
of this innocent; but every one thinks to shed that with sin, which has
been vowed without reason. Whether the daughter of Iephte were sacrificed.
If the example of Iephte be here objected, who made the like vow as
Clodoaldus, it is answered, the promise was a rashness, and accomplishment a
great sin, according to the decision which S. Hierome gives here upon.
Lyranus, also on the gloss he made upon the Scripture (following herein the
greater part of the Hebrew Doctors) holds the daughter of Iephte was not
sacrificed, but shut up in a Monastery for ever, where she preserved her
virginity: attending to prayer, fasting, and austerity of the Nazaraeans, and
not seen by her Parents but four times in the year: this may in some sort be
insetred upon the Hebrew Text: But because Tertullian, S. Augustine, S.
Hierome, S. Epiphanius, S. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and so great a number of
ancient Fathers conclude on a real sacrifice, I find these elder opinions
cannot be contradicted, but with much temeritie.

Yet notwithstanding, whatsoever has been done without either Law or reason
ought not to pass for an example. But the Devil thirsty of humane blood,
falsely persuaded their Priests, the greatest mercy they might use in this
matter, was to become most cruel, which they did, all of them jointly
condemning the little Iacinthus to death.

Whilst the victime was in preparation, Arrival of certain Gentlemen for the
deliverance of Iacinthus.
certain Noble Personages bent themselves to free him: and behold among
others, two Gentlemen, who arrived in this Forest of Irminsul, as fitly, as if
they had been Angel-guardians of the father and child: The one of them was
Ischyrion, who wandered up and down the world to understand the certainty of
his own birth, and the other Faustin his companion. They had now sometime
remained in Sexonie, finding there matter enough for brave feats of Arms,
which had gained them reputation among Martiallists.

At the first entrance into the wood, An accident of a prisoner.
they fell upon a very strange adventure, for night beginning to rob them of
daylight: they perceived a mooving creature in a certain thicket; which was
the cause that Faustin who was ever very dextrous of hand, supposing it a wild
beast, shot an arrow, which took effect: for instantly they saw a man issue
forth, who besides that he was already much disfigured by the great toil he
had undergone, being besmeered with blood, appeared much more horrible, and
came to cast himself at their feet, vehemently entreating them to make an end
of what they had begun. But stricken with much horror, and compassion hereof,
having staunched his blood, and bound up the wound, which was but light: they
caused him briefly to relate his story, wherein they understood he had
heretofore been a brave Soldier, and borne arms in Thrace under one called
Mammuchan whom he much commended: That after his death he had traveled into
many countries, and that being taken by chance, he was sold to give matter of
pastime to the people in a combat with savage beasts, or to serve as a
sacrifice for some Idol: That being fallen into the hands of the sacrificers of
Irminsul, he was led along to the altar with a great number of other prisoners
to be sacrificed, but that he was saved by the help of a friend, who had
done him this good office, and that expecting the opportunity of embarquing on
the German sea, he was enforced to wander up and down in the forests like a
poor Wolf, not daring to trust any man, so much he feared to be taken
again, and to be led back to the place whereinto he no more would willingly
re-enter, then into his mothers womb: For he added that only to behold the
Idol of Irminsul, and the bloody sacrifices made at his altars, where men, and
children were massacred, was so hideous a spectacle, as it was able to tear
out of the body a soul which stuck less to the flesh, then did his.

Moreover he told them there was a general bruit, that the next day a very
solemn sacrifice should be made of a youth of a noble house, which was
exceeding much deplored. These gallants were hereupon greatly pricked on with a
spur of glory: and made a resolution to set him at liberty: But this man, who
considered them as hansome young men, and of great hope, much dissuaded this
enterprise which he judged to have in it most certain peril, and a most
uncertain victory: but they seeming to make little account of his reasons, he
added, they were not only to fight against men, but savage beasts which kept
sentinel about this profane Irminsul, and that Lions made not any differente
between the flesh of Peasants, and gentlemen: But that which was able to stay
the most adventurous, more enflamed the young valor of these brave Warriors,
in such sort, that they retiring into a poor Cabin which this Soldier showed
them, there to pass the night: they concluded to determine the matter the next
morning.

This project seemed to them not rash at all, for they imagined they had
nothing to do, but to force an assembly of Idol-Priests, assisted by certain
guards (wretched enough,) and that, were the act done, they had sufficient
intelligence with the Nobility of the Country to give order for their safety.

The Sun seemed to them on that day too tardy, Preparation for sacrifice.
such haste made they to enter into the List: but as they cast their eyes on
every side in expectation of this goodly spectacle, they afar off beheld all
the preparation of the sacrifice which came out of the Castle to enter into the
forest. All this much rather resembled some assembly of Sorcerers, then any
pomp or ceremony of religion.

Certain Children of an ill aspect marched before, and were clothed in black
Cassocks, carrying some of them Torches, others perfuming-pans in their hands:
After came a sacrificer, who held a round basin full of water, thereby to
notify one of the most necessary elements, Then two other bare on their
shoulders a little altar of silver, wherein there were crosse-barres which
discovered the holy fire within.

The poor Iacinthus destined to this office so magical, was in the midst, and
showed in his carriage a countenance confident enough. They had clothed him
with a garment of white satin, and set on his head a Coronet of flowers, which
made him appear amongst these ministers of Irminsul, as the day star over the
shades of night. Behind him a man vested with a loose garment of fine litmen
without sleeves, showed a naked sword, which was to cut off the head of this
miserable sacrifice.

Two or three paces behind appeared the she Priest Hildegardis, endowed with
an exquisite beauty, she on that day being adorned with a garment all over
tissued with rich embroderies, her hair discheveled, and the top of her head
crowned with a little myter: she also carried a great silver charger with golden
Scyzers to cut off the tops of his hair whom they were to sacrifice: When the
rays of the Sun reflected on the golden tresses, and the gloss of her
garment, seemed as a star crowned with lights: but otherwise she walked along
with a careless pace, and a dejected countenance, which sufficiently witnessed
the horror her heart conceived at these hateful sacrifices. Then marched the
high Priest with a most awful aspect, attended by a very great number of
bloody Priests, who were to have a share in this hideous office.

The gallants putting themselves in ambush, failed not very seasonably to fall
like Eagles upon their prey, Ia^inthus taken away.
and to use force to take the young man away: Whereupon certain of the guards
which encompassed the high Priest for the safety of the sacrifice, made a show
of resistance: but finding themselves from the beginning of the Combat so
roughly handled, that some arms were seen to fly off, they retired being as
sparing of their own blood, as prodigal of the innocents. Hereupon confusion
fell as well in their hearts, as into the order of this direful procession,
every one from thence forward thinking rather to save his life by the help of
his feet, then to accomplish his superstition. The matter had been dispatched,
had it not been that these enraged Priests threw themselves on the sacrifice,
crying out, and yelling in a most hideous manner. But being not able to resist
the valor of these two generous Lions, the high Priest very cunningly told
them they should get no honor by taking this young man from them in such a
manner, but if they desired to be victorious in a brave warfare: they ought
according to the custom of the Country to enter into combat with the wild
beasts which guarded the forest of the god. The gallants who feared lest
pressing any further they might stifle the little Iacinthus in their hands, and
having an ardent desire not to refuse any occasion which might honor their
arms, they freely accepted the conditions, so that the battle with beasts was
concluded on, and deferred but till after Dinner: It was an exercise so
ordinary with this Nation, that some were found, who voluntarily sold
themselves to give the people this contentment; some others hastened thereunto
thorough a furious ambition of glory, not considering the danger.

The bruit thereof being spread abroad, the Lists were encompassed with a great
number of spectators, who were infinitely delighted to behold the peril of
those strangers, in the safety of their own persons. The high Priest had his
seat in a very eminent place, and on the other side Hildegardis appeared among
the Ladies, as a rich Diamond amidst counterfeit stones: She began from the
first encounter to entertain a great opinion of the worth of these two
gallants. But when she saw the brave Ischyrion to leap confidently into the
List, and to expect with a stable foot the dangers, which others could not
behold without trembling: even then she felt most tender affections of his
person, and there were evidently observed during all this spectacle diverse
alterations of her countenance, which one while took the scarlet tincture,
presently became pale: and straight she lifted up her eyes toward heaven, in
such manner that she felt a fierce combat in her self, for him, whom she had
never known. First of all, a huge Bear was let loose, who raising himself
upon his feet, made a show he would grapple with Ischyrion: but the excellent
Champion deelining the first seizure with a dexterous agility of body: thought
this beast being very weak about the head, it were good to astonish him, which
he did, when nimbly leaping on him, and bestriding him as a horse, he gave him
many blows, wherewith the Bear became so enraged, that he many times ran up
and down the Amphitheater as swift as a tempest: whereupon loud outcries were
made on every side, the gallant finding himself assured of his seat,
courageously pursued the beast, which utterly ashamed, hastened to hide himself
in a corner of the List: no man being able to prick him forward again to
undertake the like course.

An other bear was dispatched against Faustin, whom he knocked down with a
clubbe he held in his right hand, a matter not difficult for his valor: since
many Bears have been heretofore killed with blows of the fist, by wrastlers
in the Roman Amphitheater.

The high Priest extremely offended, cried out a loud to the master of these
Beasts to put out one of his fiercest Lions in the face of the Combatants,
which made Hildegardis wax pale through fear she conceived thereat: This king
of beasts showed in the very beginning of the combat he had not much desire to
assail a man: For he long time stood a good distance off, with his eyes fixed
on the ground, so that needs must Ischyrion provoke him, which he did, throwing
a little Iavelin at him to serve as an eatrance into this perilous Duel: Then
began he to roar very loud, and beating his sides with his tail, ran upon
the gallant, who offered a Iavelin at him which he had in his hand, but he
avoiding the iron, flew upon the wood, which he rent, and pulled in pieces with
his teeth, thundering out again a hideous roar which cast astonishment among
the spectators: The valorous Ischyrion putting himself into a ready posture,
drew his sword out of the scabbard, on which the beams of the Sun reflecting;
made a luster to sparkle very lively into the eyes of his adversary which at
that time began to amaze him, and he remembering he had heard this beast bare
part of his strength in his sight, took a cloak which he then had wreathed
about his arm: and unfolding it threw it very successefully upon the eyes of
the Lion, where with he found himself much disturbed: so that watching his
advantage, he transfixed his belly with his sword which made him fall down,
rolling and tumbling in his own gore.

Upon this achievement the clamours were redoubled thoroughout the
Amphitheater, some crying out with joy and applause, others for rage: but the
high Priest, who at any price would have the life of these strangers, very
vchemently declared to the people.

They had killed the nurslings of god, thorough a most insolent bravado: and
that if they instantly revenged not his quarrel, nothing might be expected
all this whole year but dearths, ruins, and extreme desolations. As for
himself, he was satisfied with giving them advice, and that if these his
counsels were not followed, he at least washed his hands from the pollution of
sacred blood, unworthily shed before their eyes.

It is a strange thing, The taking of the gentlemen.
the motives of superstition proceed to points of fury, such as one would
hardly imagine. Diodor. ^. 4.
We know by the History of Diodorus, that a furious sedition was raised in
Egypt for the death of a Cat, one of the Beasts sacred among those, which these
Idolaters adored: and impossible it was otherwise to appease it, then by the
murder of a Roman Soldier, who by chance gave the blow, not thinking thereon.
Wherefore let no man esteem it incredible, if the people enflamed by the
orations of the high Priest for the revenge of a Bear, and a Lion, suddenly
raised so desperate a sedition, that almost the whole Amphitheater, fell upon
the poor Gentlemen, no man daring to afford them help, and there is no doubt
but they had been torn in pieces, had not the high Priest, who would husband
his crimes, and drink vengeance in full draughts, made a sign to reserve them
to be sacrificed, yet did they not yield themselves, but with giving notice
with their swords of the effects of their courage upon the confused heap of
dead, and wounded, who fell at their feet, but being overwhelmed with a
prodigious number of desperate men, who beset them on every side, needs must
they yield to necessity: and stretch out those hands to fetters, which deserved
palms and crowns.

The History now transferreth us to recount an honorable passion of the virgin
Hildegardis, An honour^ble passion ^^ Hildegardis.
toward these valiant prisoners, which we cannot omit without offering wrong
to this discourse: nor can we speak it but with much caution, therein rather
seeking the instruction of our Readers, then their delight. If those who have
consecrated their pens to the tickling of the ear, and vanity of an eloquent
style, had such an History in their hands, Concharum (...) semata.
I am persuaded they would make many dishes of this action, and trumpet out
worldly loves with conceptions, and imaginations like to those pearls which
being corrupted in their birth, promise in the beginning an excellent
substance, and produce nothing but wind: we neither can, nor will be so
affectedly fluent, having from our younger days devoted our style, as well as
our soul to the Altars of purity. Let us be satisfied to observe a notable
doctrine touching the diversity of loves and sincerity of true amities, to
serve for a help and guide in that which we here purpose to delineate.

The Soul according to the saying of ancients, Diversity of Loves.
is a shipp: the rowers thereof are loves, (as the noble Maximus of Tire has
wittily observed,) and as among rowers there are very many conditions: for some
are miserable slaves, who row of necessity, others do it out of bravery, or
virtue: as the incomparable King S. Lewis, who scorned not sometimes to take an
oar in hand to row in stead of a mariner whilst he sent him to learn his
Catechism. So may we truly say, there are loves wholly carnal, base, and
terrestrial, which absolutely adhere to slavery: others spiritual, noble, and
worthy, which we rather call by the name of amities.

All love has this proper in it, it goes, it saileth, and lives out of it
self in complacence of the thing beloved: but takes notable differences
according to the objects to which it adhereth. For the carnal, resembling
Noe's Raven, is wholly confined to carrion, and ends in bruitishnesse. The
Spiritual tends to virtues, to perfections, to the lively images of honesty,
which have in them contentments, and delights ineffable.

It is very true, this Hildegardis, who as yet lived in gentilisme, could not
imprint footsteps totally purified in these amities: yet was there nothing
carnal and gross in it, for she felt her heart worthily entertained with the
image of a great goodness, and equal worth, which she saw resplendent in
these gallants, since they had freely exposed themselves to death for the
preservation of a person, who according to the judgment of all the world
nothing co^cerned them, and had so bravely carried themselves in the field of
battle. Behold the way wherein ordinarily spiritual amities insist,
Proceeding of spiritual amities.
they begin by admiration of some excellency: which being a ray of the
Divinity strikes the understanding: and as the carnal is taken in the snare
which the flesh stretches forth, so the spiritual eye is enflamed, and
ravished with the object of a Spiritual beauty.

This admiration is attended by another degree, which is the conformity of the
will, with that good which is proposed unto it, causing the soul to begin to
take fire, and force sparks of desire to fly out in courting that good, she
figures unto herself. Then it gains another degree, which is, that of sharp
and sweet complacence, pleasingly entertained with the thoughts of its object:
one while in hope to possess it, another while in fear to loose it: and with
sundry other passions which accompany this delectation, as yet painful, and
suffering: From complacence one is transported to a search, where love assumeth
wings to fly to the bosom of its repose, therein employing all possible
means to content it self: and if it be favored in its pursuit, it comes to
mutual union of wills, of affections, good turns, communications, and
presence from whence finally arises another complacence no longer laborious,
Diverse agitations of mind in Hildegardis.
and embroyled, but satisfied, and pleased in the fruition of its object. This
poor maid not thinking thereof, ran thorough all these degrees in a very
short time: For after her heart was surprised with admiration of the great and
heroicke virtues of these young warriors: she felt her fair soul infinitely
transported to wish them well: and as she saw their innocence unworthily
oppressed under the Tyranny of the high Priest, so compassion coming to
entermingle with admiration, they emulously blew those generous flames, with
which her heart was enkindled. The entered she into languors, which were neither
soft, nor effeminate, into ardours sweet, and spritefull, which gave to her
heart an operation perpetually laboring for accomplishment of the good she
proposed to her self. She was bent on this design and resisted with
animosity of imaginations, all the obstacles which fear did present her. It
seemed to her, that should she hew thorough mountains, pass thorough thorns
and burning serpents, rush among swords and lances, her happiness would never
be too dearly purchased: She had but one desire, which was to dissolve her
heart into him, who had so gloriously gained it.

When she returned from the Amphitheater to her lodging, she took a singular
contentment to discourse with her self what had passed, and although the
condition of affairs permitted not freedom of speech, she notwithstanding
sufficiently discovered her self more to incline to pity, then rigor: and if
some one spoke any word in favor of the prisoners, she began to hold him in
good esteem, as a faithful servant, and worthy instrument of her pretentions.

But when she retired into her chamber to take some repose, (as solitude and
night are proper to foster passions) that was the time those cares which were
in the bottom of her soul, began to break forth, and dilate themselves in a
very long train of confused and ill digested purposes.

All the combat which passed in the circuit of the Lists was renewed in the
closure of her heart, still the brave Ischyrion returned into her thoughts one
while how he chased the Bear, then how he overthrew the Lion, sometime how he
was all covered over with sweat and blood amongst the huge heaps of the dead,
which fell under the valor of his victorious hands: But when she came to
consider the fetters on his feet in this dark dungeon, and that she reflected
upon this infernal sacrifice wherein she was to be employed in the
destruction of the most lovely creature of the world; she was engulfed in the
horror and affrightment of her thoughts. The mournful virgin a hundred and a
hundred times detested the day which destined her to this abominable
condition; she cursed to all the furies of Hell, both Priest, altars, and
sacrifices to which she had hitherto offered her service thorough a
superstition, which had therein as much infamy, as credulity.

It was the time, that all living creatures were involved in the veyle of
night, and charmed with the natural sweetness of sleep, when the sad
Hildegardis like a sick eye, did nothing but watch, weep, and tremble for her
wel-beloved: One while unable any longer to endure the disturbances of her bed,
as if it had been the cause of her cares, she walked up and down her chamber
like a ghost; sometimes she opened the window, and seeing Heaven enameled with
an infinite number of stars: she said to herself; Amongst so many eyes which
watch in this great Temple of God, is there not some one that undertakes the
commission of the events of the world, which may command some ray to arise in
the confusion of my affairs? Then remembering within her self the contentment
of her fathers house, which she had tasted in her most innocent years: her
taking away, her fortune, her employment, the tedious years, which saw her
drenched in this miserable servitude; she breathed forth sighs, and moystened
her bosom with tears, which seemed, ought to be without measure, as her evil
was without remedy.

Sometime it came into her thoughts, that perhaps some divine power had sent
these two young gallants for her deliverance, and that she should not refuse
the good fortune which now did (as it were) knock at her door, then instantly
she smiled at her own imagination, and thorough an infinite care she had to
preserve her virginity perpetually inviolable: it seemed to her that her mind
was too much employed on the image of her dear Ischyrion; her young heart
which had not learned to love any creature in this manner, doubted her first
flames, and feared to trust her self with her own secret.

Then she blamed her own simplicity as too scrupulous, being persuaded she
ought not to resist the inspiration of so holy an amity, and that this fire was
not unlike the rays of the Sun which enkindle the Phoenix his nest.

If in the agitation of her thoughts she strove to shut an eye; her repose was
presently assailed with affrightments, and fantasies which figured unto her
hideous images of her calamity: sometimes she thought she saw her best beloved
cut in pieces in this most enormous sacrifice, and that he implored her aid
with a dying voice: One while she brake prison with him, and found therein
resistance that hindered her designs: an other while she ran thorough
frightfull forests and wildernesses, in the company of her Ischyrion: another
while she sailed upon seas full of Monsters, and Tempests, and in an instant,
saw her self surprised by the high Priest, who reproached her with
ingratitude, and infidelity: His menacing countenance pursued her as a shadow
of hell, it shut her up in dungeons, it put fetters on her feet, and hands, it,
in her opinion condemned her to dye in flames, and to serve for a spectacle of
terror to all those, who had adored her as a Divinity. Amongst all these
horrors she had not any thought more sweet than death, which she began to
reflect on with an amorous eye, as the Haven of the perturbations of her mind.
She persuaded her self, that who can no longer hope for ought, should fear
nothing, and that the most undoubted remedy of all miseries was the extremity
of those miseries, which ended in the last period of their violence, since the
divine providence has not made an immortal evil, for things mortal.

So soon as she saw the first rays of daylight to break forth, she went to
seek out her faithful Araspus, Hildegardis discovered her purpose to
foster-Father Araspus.
who was at that time the only creature of the world, into whose heart she
might power forth her thoughts with full security: He was her foster father,
bred up formerly in her fathers house, a man of extraction noble enough, witty,
and courageous, no whit degenerating from his Nobility. He had ever bred the
young Maid with unspeakable tenderness, and being in her company when she was
surprised, had put himself into defense, and received some wounds which caused
him still to carry notable characters of his loyalty. Afterward he being taken
together with her by these thieves: they seeing the child was in danger of
death if she lost the company of this man, thought it unfit to remove him from
her. And he being very discreet, quickly got credit among the Barbarians,
mannaging with much dexterity the safety and repose of his Hildegardis, until
such time as God sent some fair occasion to work her liberty.

Araspus then seeing her enter into his chamber, well perceived she was not in
any good tune, and said unto her: Daughter, what brings you hither? He who
should behold your countenance would think your mind were full of discontent.
But she at that time laying aside all complements, and thinking of nothing but
to empty her heart of what surcharged it: demanded of him, whither he had
thoroughly observed all that passed in the matter of these gallants, and he
replying one must be without eyes, if they were not open to behold so
prodigious valor. This word extremely pleased the faithful Lover, and gave
her occasion to enlarge upon their praise with discourses superlative enough,
which she could not end, but with compassion of their misery: for she bitterly
bewailed to see such eminent virtues under the knife of furies. But Araspus
seeking to comfort her, and showing that in a matter already passed we have no
better remedy then forgetfulness, and in case of impossibility, no other power
but the acknowledgement of our infirmities, she wide opened her heart, and said
unto him,

Araspus,) you know you have been obliged to all our family, and by how many
titles I may account you mine: Needs must I confess, since my misfortune has
enthralled me with captivity, I have ever cast an eye on you, as an
Angel-guardian appointed by the gods for my safety. I have made you the
depository of all my crosses, counsels, all my thoughts: and if in such
confusion of affairs, I have received any hope, I no sooner felt it bud in my
heart, but have been willing to make it bloome in your bosom. You are not
ignorant that since my captivity I have lived on gall and tears, nor have
found anything else then thorns in an age, wherein Mayds of my condition use
not to walk but on roses. How often have you seen me in the accesses of
sorrow, so violent, as they were able to rend my soul forth, if my good
Genius had not preserved it for a more prosperous fortune: you used to tell me
I must be patient, and that a happy day would come which should break my
fetters, and wipe away all my tears. Now know (my dear Araspus) that day is
come that if I once neglect my happiness, it will pass away, nor ever shall I
again so much as touch the tips of its wings. It is most undoubted that Heaven
taking some pity on my grief, has sent us these two gentlemen, of whose
strength and valor you have had testimony enough, wherefore I am resolved by
some way or other to set them at liberty, and suffer them to take me from
hence, that so I may be restored to my Fathers house. This is a plot which
cannot be condemned by any, who have not utterly abandoned humane affection.

And if you allege, you therein find very many difficulties; I answer, good
things are not otherwise compassed: All must be hazarded to gain all, at the
worst I have nothing to loose; but a most miserable life. If you will not
expose your self to peril in this affair: at least deny me not your
counsel. The substance of it I put not into deliberation, I only ask what
course we must hold in the execution. (...)nswer of Araspus.


Araspus was much amazed to understand the bold project of this spirit, which
had never been unfolded in such manner, and assuredly judged this cogitation
had gained so deep roots in her heart, that it would be a matter very
difficult to oppose her resolutions. Notwithstanding he replied: (Most dear
daughter) it were superfluous to entertain you with discourse of the services
I have dedicated to your noble Family: yea, much less on the powerful and
ardent affections which transport me to desire your liberty, wherein I behold
mine own engaged:

Believe me (sweet creature) you ill desire the best thing in the world, and
by making an attempt unseasonably, you ruin all your endeavors for the future.
You will not (as far as I can perceive) descend from your prison, but by
precipitation, and once to preserve your self contrary to the rules of
prudence, you rejoice to undo your self for ever, by the ways of temerity.
All that, which ordinarily is used to destroy good affairs, is it which now
you employ to make yours successful Passion, Disorder, Have, Precipitation,
hold counsel in your young heart, whilst reason is exiled: You speak of
setting these two young Gentlemen at liberty: how would you give tha to
others, which you have not your self? Is there not a jailer at the gates of
these prisons? Are there not guards in the Castle? Are there not sentinels who
watch on all sides? And were all of them fast a sleep, what means will there
be to deceive a Priest who has Argos eyes perpetually open upon your person:
nay, should you break two iron gates, three others would make resistance. This
whole Castle is (as it were) nothing but a continual prison, wherein the birds
of the air would have enough to do to save themselves? But if it once happen
you be surprised in the act, (of which there are very strong apparances) you
thrust your self into hazard, either to be burnt alive, or to involve your
whole life in the deepest miseries which may be imagined. But (daughter) had
you all you could desire to your hearts wish: can you think it were fit to put
your self into the hands of these young strangers, who for the most part have
no more fidelity then the sea, and winds? Remember, you hitherto have preserved
the precious treasure of virginity, wherein the laws of the Country have
infinitely favored you, and that there needs but one hour to loose that in
peace, which has been maintained by ten years war. This virtue (if you know
it not) is all of glass, one unadvised touch of the finger, is of power to
break it in the brightest splendour of its luster.

Behold your self now in an estate wherein you have gained reputation, and
honors are done you as to a Divinity: Let time sweetly slide away, and expect
till the fruit be ripe, which of it self will fall. We hear the standards of
Charlemaign the prime Monarch of the world, menace this Country: what know you
whether heaven have not put your freedom and happiness into his hands. But
(dear and most honored Lady) if you have heretofore made some account of my
words, at this time despise not my tears. Yield your self up to reason, so to
render you to your self. I have ever heard it said, that the counsels of youth
have much promptness, but repentance which follows them, does likewise find
them out with ready wing: and never leaves them, but with leaden feet.

This Oration strengthened with wisdom, and affection, ought to have made a
powerful impression on the heart of a vestall: But we must affirm it is one
of the greatest miracles in the world to make a creature of this sex, which
has given admittance to some violent passion, freely to do homage to a truth
acknowledged.

Affections are oft-times as easily put on, Sticking passions.
as a shirt, but if we speak of dispoyling them, it is found they stick much
closer then the skin. Should you allege a thousand reasons to a soul
surprised with self-love, you shall gain but this one conclusion: I know what
I have to do.

Yea it has been many times observed in the experiments of humane life,
Proper judgment to be feared in Devotion.
that persons who make profession of a life most eminent, and to be purified,
and refined in devotion, and the knowledge of things divine, if they be not
fore-armed with profound humility, do eagerly stick to their own opinion,
nay certainly you shall find of them, who after they have overcome devils,
become devils to themselves. Hildegardis was in an age, and a degree wherein
the words of this good man had no longer that effect which they formerly had in
her education.

It is strange to see how soon lovers and sick folks become angry: she so
with-stood his advice, that she doubted not to say to poor Araspus. Prudence
of Araspus.
That either he was a coward, or a Traitor to her fortune: and that
notwithstanding all this discourse, she was resolved either to fly, or die.
He, who saw this spirit like to a swollen sea, thought it was but to loose
words to speak in so impetuous astorme of passion: but not wholly to disengage
her from his counsel, yielding to the time he very gently said, we must then
endeavor to handle this business with a soft touch, and to discover no part
hereof to any, who is not worthy of much trust: for oftentimes too many
Physicians, and counselors overthrow sick bodies, and doubtful causes: So
much rejoiced she in this consent, that instantly casting her self about his
neck, she embraced him, craving pardon, and promising that all this design
should proceed according to his intentions, that he alone should dispose all
things necessary for their departure: and she her self undertake the rest.

It is most true, her credit was not small, for besides that these Barbarians
honored this Princess of virgins, whom they served in the Temple as a
Divinity, Hildegardis by her sweet disposition, and obliging courtesies in the
space of Fourteen or Fifteen years, had with ease gained good servants, who
she thought would not fail her at her need: she likewise had so absolute a
power to visit prisons, to enter into dungeons, and many times at her request
to enlarge prisoners, as it seemed to promise her much facility in a project,
which was otherwise impossible: It also happened very fortunately, that the
execution of offenders was put off till another day, for certain customs of
antiquity, and religion, that are strong chains among people, and which gave
her full scope to accomplish her desires. Power of women.


We daily see among many occurrents of affairs, that to be verified, which an
ancient Author said, who having made a large recital of all the natural arms
which God gives creatures: he affirms a women eminently has them all, and
that there is neither fire, nor sword, which yields not either to beauty, or
cunning wyles which with them are very frequent. She is able to walk thorough
a Corps-du-guard, to pierce Rocks, and to seat her self in places, where
nothing can penetrate, but lightning. Hildegardis so managed her business in
a short time, that a hundred iron gates were all-most ready to fly open at her
command.

She having disposed so many affections to her service, Hildegardis visits
the prisoners.
failed not to visit the prisoners, whom she knew naturally, much to desire
their liberty. She went about midnight into the dungeon, accompanied only
with a trusty maidservant, and a page, who bare a Torch before them: The poor
gentlemen extremely weary with the labors of the former day, and who after so
great a perplexity of thoughts, began to sleep upon their sadness, hearing the
great door to open with a confused noise: they suddenly awakened, but when they
beheld this heavenly face which promised more daylight to their affairs, then
the torch could afford to their eyes, it seemed unto them some Divinity
favorable to their affections, was descended into the dungeon to comfort them:
but perceiving it was the she-Priest of the Temple, which had charge to attend
the sacrifices, they were somewhat astonished: But the generous Ischyrion cried
out aloud, (Madame) what is the matter, come you then to lead us out to
butchery? She desirous to sound them, answered, (Sir,) trouble not your self,
but as you have fought valiantly, dispose your selves to die bravely. To which
he replied, he was already thoroughly prepared, and asked her if it were she
must do the deed? To which she answered: That never had she learned the trade
to cut men's throats, but that she was only to assist in the sacrifice: and to
cut off the tipps of the victimes hair, to throw the first fruits into the
flames.

I, at the least render thanks to my fortune (says Faustin) that we are
fallen into so good a hand: and that since we must needs die, our death shall
be honored with the eyes of such a beauty. Upon this Hildegardis felt her
heart surprised, and stood some distance of time without speaking one word:
casting her eyes on the young Iacinthus, kept in the same dungeon: and who
notwithstanding the light and voice still slept securely. Behold (says
Ischyrion) how this child does allie the brother to the sister, that is, sleep
to death? Why should we so much fear death, since to speak truly it is (as
it were) nothing else but to perform once for all, what Iacinthus now does,
and what we daily do many times. Then turning himself with a smiling
countenance to the vestall, (Madame) says he should we dare to hope a favor
from you, we would not beg life: For we know we are accounted in the number
of the most wretched sacrifices, and that the people must be appeased by our
death: Do then but save this little innocent, pardon the tenderness of his
age, take pity on the sorrow of his father: verily we may vaunt even in these
dungeons, he is our dear conquest, and that we have purchased him in a sharp
combat, at the price of our blood: which causes his death to afflict us more
sensibly then our own.

At this word Hildegardis breathed forth a deep sigh, which she
notwithstanding sought to smoother: yet turning to her companion, she said,

Verily this heart is truly generous, what could he do more, should he
plead his brothers cause? Behold what contempt of death, what resolution? It
is fittest for such to live, since they so well know how to use life.

Thereupon drawing near unto him, (Sir said she,) Do me the honor to tell
me your name, and what you are: He replied there needed in him for sacrifice,
but body and soul, as for his name, it served for no other use. That all which
miserable men can do, is wisely to conceal themselves, and that among
disasters the most secret were ever the best for generous souls. This answer
more enkindled the curiosity of the Lady to enquire after that, which he was
willing to dissemble, so that seeing himself pressed on all sides, he said,
(Madame) I am called Ischyrion since you must needs know it, and I entreat you
to think, I do not now begin to fight with Monsters; for my whole life
resembles those pieces of Tapistry, where Dragons are seen among golden
apples; It is a perpetual web of miseries, and glories; there was never any
thing so various: I have been told I sprang from regal blood, but being very
young, and unknown, was stolen away by Pirates, and then recovered again by
shepherds; whereof Thoas, the most eminent among them, was pleased to breed me
with his own son Faustin here present; with whom I have vowed a most
faithful and strict amity: After that, I had a vehement desire to travel all
the world over with him, and to make enquiry into my birth, which I have
hitherto done: nor is there any place of fame in the habitable world, to which
in this my youth I have not traveled, and ennobled it with some conquest: we
together have seen above a hundred times the gates of death wide open to
receive us; but still our good Genius found some way for our deliverance,
until now I see no help at all: verily in my opinion, death alone must show
me the place, where my parents are.

He cut off these words very short, unwilling to seem either vainglorious in
recital of his own adventures, or suppliant to purchase life by the history
of his travels: But she who considered these discourses, like unto Pictures
which tell more then they express: not being able any longer to dissemble her
heart, which she seemed to distill with her tears, having broken some very
deep sobs, said unto him,

Worthy sir, and friend: God has not created me a rock to be insensible of
humane miseries: I plainly see your achievements very near approach the
fortunes of our house, and it seems the web of our destinies has passed
thorough the one, and the same hand: For my father had a son taken from him
when he was very young; a while after the death of his wife, (my thrice
honored Mother) which drenched him into so deep a sorrow, that thorough grief
he expected death. He notwithstanding comforted himself in me, beholding me
in most innocent years, of a nature very cheerful: and doubted not but that
I in time might bring him a son, on whom he might repose his decaying age.
But who is able to penetrate the turns, and winding ways of this great
Laborinth of time? and the employments of worldly affairs: In a short space I
was snatched from him by a notorious theft; leaving him with a child yet in
the Cradle, and after many adventures, I have scene my self confined to this
place of Massacres, to become the most unfortunate creature of the World.

But now that I may speak unto you with an open heart, I every moment die; and
each day a thousand times abhor my wretched life, captived under the most
infamous tyranny, may happen to a creature of my condition. Wherefore (most
heroicke and generous gentlemen) I conjure you by your inviolable friendship,
your adventures, your danger, and mine; take me from hence, to restore me to
the house of my Father. Save your own lives to preserve mine; and think not
you atchieve a slight conquest in redeeming your own selves, and making me a
pattern of your triumph, for perhaps it may prove one of the most glorious
acts, which the Sun enlightneth, or the earth sustaineth.

Ischyrion well perceived she had taken fire, and that she spoke in a good
tone, since she seasoned every word with her tears: Notwithstanding to make her
give more luster to this discourse, he said unto her; Madame, it is to make
trial of us, and to sound if in these images of death we be capable of vain
hopes? If you wished us so well, as your words witness; you might find men
fit enough to yield you true service. How (Sir) replyeth she, do ye think
these words which I moysten with the waters of mine eyes, are counterfeit? I
command in this place, and have absolute power to set you all at liberty, to
mount you on horseback, to arm you, so that you employ the sword which I will
put into your hands, for my safety. I use not to entertain any man with
dreams, and illusions; I am the daughter of a Prince, and my father commands
over a large Territory. Only make unto me a religious, and solemn oath, that
you will deliver me with all honor, and integrity into the Kingdom of
Denmark, in such a place as I will direct you; and believe me my father shall
not be ungrateful; nay, nor prove unable to requite your good office.

The brave Ischyrion became wholly ravished with such goodness, and very
faithfully protested to her all she desired. Thereupon she caused their irons
to be stricken off; and appointed the hour of their departures, which was to
be the same night. Behold hopes in flower, the most sweet and charming of the
world: but they were suddenly blasted by a furious storm of hail.

There was a certain Damsel among the virgins of the Temple called Geronda,
Hildegardis betrayed.
of an ill disposition, and a cunning wit; who for a long time, had fought
means to satifie the malice, she conceived against the poor Hildogardis: and
this occasion seemed unto her the most happy opportunity, which might be found
for her ends. It is a strange thing, how the most fervent friendships of the
world, oftentimes degenerate into the vehement^st enmities: What worldly
amities are.
and that the most desperate hatreds are such as spring from love ill managed.
There are certain bodies ill disposed (say Physioians) that quickly putrify
in balm, which is made to hinder corruption, so are their hearts which draw
corruption from love; from whence they should derive immortality.

These two virgins had been bred together from their most tender years; and
were so straightly linked in amity that they had but one heart between them.
Geronda sprang from one of the best families of the Country; being placed in
this Castle of Irminsul, to be trained up with the virgins; and seeing she
came at the same time, when the young Hildegardis was brought thither, she was
from her childhood so taken, with her worthy disposition, that she neither
had contentment, nor life, but in her conversation. The beam does not more
accompany the Sun, nor the shadow the body, then these two creatures esteemed
one another; they equally shared all their joys, and discontents, all their
affairs, all their recreations, and seemed willing to dissolve their hearts,
as one would melt one piece of wax into another.

Behold, there is a certain malignity in humane things, which so handles the
matter, that they never are so near declining, as when they arrive at the
highest period of their happiness: nay, the same is observed in the loves of
the world, which insensibly wither away, when they are mounted to the highest
point of the contentments which nature can expect. The great fervours of these
two companions changed first into a coldness; from coldness, into distaste;
from distaste into aversion; from aversion into enmity. It is true the spirit
of Hildegardis was too free and generous to give occasion that such effects
should grow from her: but the other was double, crafty, malicious, aiming at
particular ends; and walked in the way of not loving any body; in that she was
too much fixed on the love of her self. These fractions began by petty
jealousies, which in that sex are very frequent: For many with passion desire
to be singularly beloved, and courted; thinking a great affront is put upon
them, when they are set in the number of things indifferent. The worthy and
eminent quallities, which our Hildegardis received from nature, as a dowry: and
coming to sprout with years, as flowers which spread themselves to the rays
of the Sun; was the cause that courtships, services, and admirations seemed
only to be made for her. Geronda, who was entertained in her affection,
thought to divide her happiness with her, as she did her heart: grew very
angry to see her too much courted, and thought the honor done to her
companion, turned to her disadvantage. From this jealousy, envy was created,
which discolored her face, cast poison into her veins; withered her up alive:
and made her to behold all the prosperities of this admirable maid with the
same eye, the Owl does the Sun.

When for merit she was chosen out to be the Princess of virgins; this envious
heart was wounded to the quick at this election, and spared not to condemn
her discretion, and carriage: raising a great storm of fruitless words, like
to a cloud; which grown big with flames and tempest, cracks it self in vain
upon the top of the highest rocks.

It happened the innocent Hildegardis, who endeavored to cure this envenomed
spirit; having discovered some passages, where-into she very far had
proceeded, reproached her with it, which in the proud spirit of the other, not
able so easily to digest it; bred a mortal hatred, which never ceased to hatch
the vengeance in her bosom, that was in the end discovered in this mischievous
occasion. It is evidently to be seen in all this proceeding, that affections
which are truly natural, not speaking of the fire, which enflameth Angels in
heaven, and the most purified hearts on earth, are clouds without water; which
rent asunder with the least shocke: and bring nothing forth, but wind.

I have seen some who have taken much pains to decide in what sex the most
constant amities may be found: Amity in what sex most constant.
nor am I ignorant that diverse Ladies of honor have by all means endeavored
to draw the palm of victory to their side, (as we have seen examples very
singular of most exact fidelity in that sex) witness the Princess Blaunch,
who despising the love of Actoline, that sought her (though she were a captive)
escaped the hands of Soldiers, that she might hasten to breathe out her life on
the Tomb of her Husband, to whom she at first had resigned her heart.

On the other part we may likewise produce an infinite number of men, who have
done wonders unheard of; and not to be imagined in matter of amity; as that
Dandamis (of whom Lucan speaks,) who passed over a huge River by swimming
among haile-stormes of Tartarian arrows, which showred upon him, that he
might go to the succor of his friend imprisoned, and they demanding his eyes
for ransom, he most freely pulled them out, and delivered them up: giving by
this blindness, incomparable lights to amity.

We will not conclude in one History, that which requires along treatise,
Plin: l. 7. c. (...) velocitas cogit(...)tionum, animi celeritas, et in(...)nij
va^ietas mu(...)tiformes notas imprimit.
but passing on, tell you, that if we consider the love of many men of the
world, we shall find they love brutishly; begin fervently, proceed with fury,
and end with ingratitude. Women also considered in the infirmities of nature;
they being full of imaginations above all the creatures of the world (said an
ancient) have been transported, and have entertained affections very variable,
easily sticking on all sorts of objects; and suffering themselves to be
surprised with apparances, to be ensnared with novelties; to grow passionate at
offenses, and to be transported with distaste, in such manner, that one may
rest assured, there are no constant friendships, but those which are honest,
and watered with the sources of grace; from which this Geronda being alienated,
turned all her affections into poison.

That which furthered her passion was, that a certain man named Gandulphus, in
whom Hildegardis had heretofore reposed much confidence in the manage of her
affairs, perceiving what she went about; whether moved that he was not called
to this counsel, and desirous to secure himself whatsover should happen, or
whither he were in love with Geronda, whose affection he might pretend unto
(these virgins being not tied to perpetual chastity) went thorough unspeakable
indiscretion to tell all to this subtle creature: well manifesting by his
practices, the truth of the saying of that ancient, who affirmed that to be
wise, and in love together is more then gods can do. (...)apere, et amare
(...)ix Deo concedi(...)r. Publ. Syrus.
Geronda extending this relation to the measure of her hatred, adds that
Hildegardis was resolved to deliver the Cittadell to the enemy, to ruin the
authority of high Priests, to kill the Soldiers, to put the lives and fortunes
of all the Citizens into rapine; whereof she very speedily gave intelligence to
the Castle, discovering all the circumstances she had newly learned.

The high Priest having received notice of that which was intended, came
himself in person to the Prison, attended by his gards, where he found
Hildegardis at the door, (...)urprise of Hildegardis.
with the prisoners unfettered: What have we here to do (daughter, says he)
and what game have you now in hand? The poor Maid wished at that time the
Earth would open under her feet, even to the Abyss, so much was she oppressed
with grief, and confusion. Notwithstanding being very discreet, she in such a
surprisall forgot not the subtilties of her sex: for she protested that by the
duty of her charge, she came to sound these prisoners, of purpose to observe
whither they were pure, and perfect enough to be sacrificed, but that by
relation of their lives she found they were so despicable, and forsaken
vagabonds, that it were but to put a scorn upon the great Irminsul, to yield
such an oblation: And as for the fetters taken from them, they had begged to
get this release, so to gain one hour of repose, which she had granted them,
under a good and sure guard. The high Priest cried out aloud hereupon. Behold a
shameless creature, shall we then believe that she is a virgin? It is the
golden locks of this young stranger, that has woven nets for her profane
heart; It is those eyes, which have enkindled so many flames in her affections,
and made her put on a resolution to to forsake god and his Temple, to follow an
adulterer. She very sensible of reproach in the point of honor, entered upon
his speech into a desperate mood; calling the high Priest Hypocrite, Ravisher,
Bloud-sucker, crafty cheater, with all the injurious words which passion could
suggest: Whereupon he caused her to be laid hold on with her trusty friend,
and to be put into a dungeon apart: loading the prisoners with more irons, and
changing the guards.

The miserable Ischyrion forgetting his prison, and chains, sighed out all the
rest of the night for his dearest Hildegardis; he complained, that it being
once in his power to die, he would needs live to the prejudice of a soul so
precious: he asked a hundred bodies of the divine providence to suffer in a
thousand and a thousand members, if it were possible; and to satisfy the
cruelty of these Tartarians, so they would spare her, who (it seemed to him)
was worthy to surviue all ages.

The next morning a bruit was spread thoroughout all the Town, Passions of the
high Priest
that the Vestall had a purpose to betray the Temple: that she was in prison;
and that they went about to proceed against her. And verily the high Priest,
who for a long time observed some coldness in her, and had lately been so
touched to the quick, was resolved to satisfy his passion, under color of
service of the gods, and to ruin this poor maid, to subrogate another in her
place; whom he thought would prove more plyant to his commands. For this cause
he called together an assembly of Priests, Judges, and Magistrates, whereof
diverse had already sold themselves, to become the instruments of his vengeance;
He likewise willed the mournful Hildegardis to be brought forth in the
quality of an offender, she having manacles on her hands, which made her a
spectacle of pity to all those who had seen her tryumphant in the glorious
List of Honors rendered her by this Nation.

When they went about to handle the question of the fact; and that they most
severely interogated hereupon all which had passed the generous Maid, who
resolved never to beg life with words unworthy the greatness of her courage,
confidently said before all the assembly,

(Sirs,) There needs neither flames, nor tortures to evict from me the truth,
thereof I have ever made so singular an account; and which I would not in any
sort falsify, though with the hazard of my life. I confess my self to have
deserved death for two crimes, whereof the first is, That I have lived in this
place longer then was sit for an innocent; and much more then was expedient for
a miserable creature: I should have done that sooner which I performed too
late: but the fear to die once ought not still to have extended my
unhappiness so far, as to make me die daily.

The second crime I have committed, is to have so ill managed a glorious
action; so that now to day my intentions, and thoughts must be accused, which
ought never to have been known before the execution of my purposes: if heaven
had affo^rded me more happiness, or them fidelity, who most basely have
discovered my counsels.

Behold, all which burdeneth my conscience, and which makes me hate the life I
have so ill employed. As for the rest of the accusations, they are built on so
slight foundations, that as mine enemies cannot propose them without confusion;
so may not I refute them, without arrogating to my self that glory, which I
now affect not. Have I not (I pray) committed a goodly crime in desiring
liberty, and studying a lessen which public voice teaches us, which laws
approve, which all men practice, which nature distateth to little Nightingales
even in their cages? Had I been taken in the wars, my unhappiness would not
have deprived me of my right, which is to seek for the comfort of its being,
to unlose the chains of captivity; and to dissolve by virtue (as much as we
may) the miseries of evil fortune. And who sees not that by a more just
reason, being taken from my father's house, (a Prince illustrious) by a most
unjust and thrice unfortunate attempt; and being confined in a place of
Massacres, and to do work, which is suitable to none but furies, that I assay
by all the means I can to free my self from a bondage, where when I have lost
all I may hazard, I must daily also forsake mine oune innocence*

Consult (I beseech you) with the Saxon Laws which you taught me, Quicquid in
faeminam committitur, si virgo fuerit dupliciter componatur. Iu cod: legum
anliauarum.
and you therein shall find most express penalties decreed against those, who
ravish women, wherein you also have made a notable distinction in favor of
Maidens, desirous that such as shall practice in this sort against their
persons, should be doubly punished. It is an admirable thing to behold how you
destroy with one hand, that which you build with the other, and how you publish
laws, which at this time seem not to be made for any other purpose, but to
condemn your own actions.

But I ought to content my self (says one) with my liberty, and not break
prison to enlarge others. To that I answer, they were the instruments of my
designs, and being tied to my interests, they were necessarily to wait on the
condition of my fortune. I answer their detention was most impious and nujust:
and not to be tolerated by a soul, that has any least spark of zeal to
religion, or love to equity: For if it be now a fit time to speak truth,
since the plot is laid not to spare my life; who can approve these sacrifices
of humane blood, unless he will proclaim open war against nature?

The wisest among you confess, God is a spirit most pure, and most independent
on matter, and shall we therefore think we must sacrifice bodies unto him?
Would we have him fly up and down like a vultur to the massacres of men?
would we have him suck blood, like flies? Is not this to entertain thoughts
most unworthy of the Divinity, and were it not better to be wholly ignorant of
the gods, then to know them in this manner?

The most ancient Divine laws (which you have daily in your hand) teach us
that God is the Father of nature, and that he produced man, making use of
himself for a model: how can we then think he will be pleased in the
destruction of the most perfect piece of his works; and that he has less
affection toward a living man, who bears so noble characters of his glory,
then a wretched artificer would have for an Idol, made by his own hands?

It will be answered, these bloody sacrifices are ordained by the laws of the
country: But is there a Civil law, which ought to prejudice the great, and
infallible law of nature, which commands us to love our like, the law of
Nations, which decrees to entertain strangers with all courtesy, the policy
of humane conversation, which wills us to observe covenants, and promises?
Did you not give these strangers assurance to afford them life; and the
liberty of young lacinthus, if they overcame Lions, and Bears, which you breed
up for the slaughter of men? Why then after so many acts of valor, which draw
admiration from the most stupid, love from the most unnatural; will you crush
them under their proper triumphs?

These are the ruins, wherein I wish to be buried; and since there only
needs my death to give you full satisfaction of your design; I now to day most
willingly die, having already lived but too long, at least by this day, this
most unhappy day which has made me to be presented before your eyes bound with
chains that have never hitherto been employed; but on the bodies of rascals:
It is humanity you should afford a poor stranger, succor is dew to an Orphan,
courteous usage ought to wait on the daughter of a King; nay which I more
highly value, an unspotted virgin. Posterity (no doubt) will much honor you,
so to have treated my sex, so to have paid the services I have done you the
space of fourteen years, and with such indignities to have drowned my
virginity in my blood; which I hitherto most charily preserved. Perhaps it may
fall out, we shall not be so forsaken both of heaven and earth; but that a
bright day may enlighten my innocence: and powerful arms may come to search
into my ashes, to find out truth there buried.

Her heart was surprised at these last words, and ere they were aware, she
drew tears from many there present, who quickly found what sting a mouth may
have in it, which distilleth honey from lips of roses. Beauty persecuted.
Beauty persecuted commonly raises as many advocates as there are enemies of
virtue; that so they may seem friends of graces, and to favor all in a
creature, enriched with natures blessings: But as it is a great fault to steal
the ear from justice, to deliver the eye over to love; so it would be a
notable stupidity, not to exercise compassion toward innocence afflicted,
especially when it has on its side, the arms of Truth, Eloquence, and Beauty,
which ordinarily have predominance over the greatest affairs of the world.

Presently many of the counsel inclined to milder courses, and every one took
that color; which seemed to him the most fit to extenuate the fault which
others sought to augment, that they might satisfy their revenge: Some said
there ought pity to be taken of her sex, others of her age: Non punitur
fectus si non sequatur effectu(...)
some that they must yield to naturo, which would preserve its own right, the
rest that regard ought to be had, in so much as these projects, had not been
executed, and that laws used not to search with such rigor into intentions,
which were not concluded with ill effects; that it was expedient to take all
assurances possible for the future; but that there was no color to punish with
death an evil p^^pose, which passed away without the prejudice of any: In the
end, some insisted much on her religious profession, joined to an inviolable
virginity, and it was said, it would be a spectacle of an ill presage to
deliver into the hands of a base executioner a body consecrated so many years
to altars, and which had preserved it self within the limits of so singular
purity: and which was a thing rather to be amired then reprehended.

All this seemed very considerable to the most temperate spirits: but the high
Priest, who of his own nature was harsh, and felt himself touched to the
quick in this affair, disposed all his counsels toward rigor.

(Sirs) said he, if you have any feeling in you, reserve it for a god
betrayed, a Temple polluted, for a religion prostituted at the will of Pirates,
and not for a silly brazen face, who braveth us even in fetters. Had you no
other proof to condemn her, but her own apology, you would be just enough
to chastise an insolent creature, who no longer having an heart for the gods,
has showed herself shameless toward men. She speaks in chains as if she
were in Thrones, and if we will believe her, her discourse is more rational
then ours, much wiser then our laws, more religious then our Temple, and more
puissant then our gods. She will teach us lessons of piety, and justice; as if
they were most proper in the mouth of her, who was never willing to know them,
but to violate them; she alleges nature, against the Master of nature, she
dares maintain she did well to fly away, as if she had been in a prison, not
in a Temple, bound, not with fetters of iron, but with the bonds of her vows,
and her own promises, framed and contrived by her proper lips, whilst she
enjoyed full liberty: If you will have nature prevail against reason, there is
not any crime for which sensuallity finds not more excuses, then laws can
create punishments. It has been too great an honor for her to be stolen away,
thereby to make her reverenced here as a Divinity; nor is it strange that she
complain of injuries, since she takes the most solid benefits in evil part.

It is her great zeal to holy things which moved her to set men at liberty,
who by her own confession are the most wretched, and forlorn creatures of the
earth; and for this cause (forsooth) she is pleased to play the Divine,
condemning our laws, and sacrifices, as if we were to give an account to a
silly Maid, of the belief of our ancestors, which is common to us with so many
other Nations: and as if it were a matter unjust to sacrifice offenders against
justice, who are unworthy to live in the world, which they so often have
polluted with their wickedness. That she no more accuses our laws, to ezcuse
her passion; it is known well enough, love has caused her to attempt these
goodly tricks. It is no wonder if she betray Temples, who has betrayed her
chasti* tie, and that she separate her self from the gods, since she has
separated; that, from her body which ought to stick to the body, as fast as
her soul. Never is she virgin enough, of whom it may be doubted whether she
be a virgin or no: Is it not a goodly business for a Maid of a Family, to
cause her self to be stolen away by men, who have in the whole world no
greater innocence, then to debaush virgins? We found her in the night time shut
up with young strangers, we know not what she did, but if we consider what she
might have done: we can find no other proofs of her honor, then those we may
derive from the lips of thieves and lovers, to whom she has given those hands
which she so many times has offered up to altars; I here accuse not simple
desires, I condemn most wicked effects; which neither sex, nor age can
excuse, which the gods avenge, which religion condemns, which laws punish,
and which can never be expiated, but by fire.

The chaste Maid seeing her self so sharply persecuted by the practices of
the high Priest, Hildegardis pr(...)ueth her virginity, Robert Archbishop
o(...) Canterbury sait(...) the Saxons called this trial in their language
Ord^leum.
in all that which she held most precious, cried out aloud, her innocence was
charged with a black, and most mischievous imposture: and since he spoke of
fire, she was very willing to handle hot iron before all the company in
witness of her virginity. This was a trial very ordinary among the Saxons:
Hereupon the Counsel consenting thereunto, a piece of iron red-hot was brought
forth, which the courageous Hildegardis (lifting her eyes up to heaven,)
grasped hard, not burning, nor hurting her self at all; whereat many raised
loud cries of admiration in favor of her, but the high Priest with an enraged
voice pronounced she was a forceresse, and did all this by art magic, in which
he was seconded by this mercenary troop of counselors, who most basely
complied with his passion. All protested they ought to condemn to flames an
enemy of the gods, a Trayteresse, and a prostitute. And this unworthy high
Priest, seeing many waver; adds there ought no seruple to be made of her
profession whereof she was degraded, nor of her virginity, which she had lost:
that there were examples enough of Roman vestalls: and lastly that it was a
sovereign means to appease the gods: Yet notwithstanding it was concluded she
should be sent back again to prison, that they might not precipitate any
thing before a second audience.

We may see by this passage, that the judgments of men are very diverse; Trial
by fire, what it is.
according to those motions they take from passion. There is no doubt but this
trial by handling fire has been received into the ancient laws of many
people, and been practiced elsewhere by Christians with good effect. We know
what the most illustrious Cardinal Baronius relates, touching the Empress
Mary daughter of the King of Aragon, Baron. ^^^. 998. Otho. 3.
and wife of Otho the third, who most ignobly having solicited a chaste
Court-Lord to sin; Mary of Arragon
and seeing herself despised therein, accused the innocent man to have
attempted her honor, and procured his head to be chopped off by the decree of
the Emperor her husband. But the wife of the dead man most confident of her
husband's innocence; taking the head in her hand, went to the Emperor, as he
was fitting on his feat of judgment, demanded justice for a death so
tragical, and appealed to the trial of fire which she touched without
burning, and so persuaded Otho: that he caused the unchaste creature to be put
to death, to wipe away the stain of blood unworthily shed.

Notwithstanding as it is not lawful to tempt God, nor to have recourse to
things so extraordinary, so we cannot be ignorant, that such practices have
been forbidden by the Canons of the Church, a^ it appears in the Counsel of
Lateran, and in the decretalls, as well of Alexander the second, as Stephan the
first, because besides other reasons which might be alleged, it is certain
evil spirits would easily make their ordinary wiles to slide here-into: Yet
may we with very good reason think such miracles which happened sometimes to
Gentiles, proceeded from God in favor of justice; and I should conceive that
as the Father of light gave the spirit of prophecy to the Sybills in respect of
their chastity (as S. Hierome testifies,) so favoring the virginity of our
Hildegardis, he would have it resplendent, like a Carbuncle among flames.

But behold here a strange revolution of affairs, Revolution of affairs.
which caused bright splendors to arise in thickest darkness, and which
afforded an assured Port in the most desperate shipwracks. I here apeale to
curious wits, and ask of them, from whence comes it, that many times there
happen in the lives of Mortals so great changes of fortune, and condition, that
we have seen men trampled under-foot, as dirt in the streets; in an instant
to take wings, and soar up to the Temple of honor, place themselves in the
bosom of glory, exchange scaffolds prepared for their punishments into
Theaters of magnificence, pains into pleasures, and all thorns into Crowns?

God forbid we should attribute to the stars or destiny these Christian
adventures which we produce: Chances from whence they come.
For if we properly take Fate, as the Gentiles understood it; we shall find
that following their opinion, it is nothing else but the good, or bad hap of
our life, caused (as they said) infallibly by the stars. Now to go about to
maintain this doctrine, is to uphold an impiety.

But if by destiny we mean the order, and disposition of the first cause,
which is God, as well over things natural, as humane: we in this fence may
say there is a destiny: S. Thomas q. 117
yet notwithstanding this name becoming of late odious, by the ill use thereof
among Pagans, we will rather call it by the word of divine providence: For we
must consider how God the Father of Essence engendereth, and eternally speaks
his Son, or his Eternal Word; and that in this Word he once said all that he
should do, and all which should happen; Gulie^^s. Paris r. part. de ^niuers.
part 30. c. 24.
so that there is neither accident, order, nor mean in this contexture of
ages, enchayned one within another, which can escape the vivacity of his eye,
and extent of his providence. There it is where he has appointed all the
blessings of nature, graces, and glory; There it is where he has seen all the
evils of vice, and has neither willed, nor can will they should be of him, or
by him, as being unworthy of his sanctity, his glory, and his goodness.

But as for the fortunes, and misfortunes of men, in banishments, fetters,
prisons, maladies, afflictions, prosperities, riches, honors, treasures,
glories, and crowns, he has destined them according to his good pleasure, to
be instruments of good purposes, and glorious actions.

Besides there is no regard taken by this great moover of nature, either of
fortune, or of any thing casual: But when we behold things happen which were
out of our foresight, although they were never out of the limits of
providence; we call these events, Chances.

Stay here then (Reader) with firm footing upon this decision, which was
necessary to be produced for thy instruction, as being very essential for
this discourse, before thou come to behold the issue of these things, wherein
thou shall see admirable passages of the divine providence.

It is no small gift of God, Greatness of France.
that our French have been selected out to extirpate the remainders of
Idolatry in Europe and to plant the cross even in places all covered over with
blood, and darkness, which had so long time been in the possession of Devils:
We cannot deny but that this generous Nation has produced brave feats of
arms, yea before it was enlightened with the rays of the Gospel; for it is the
same, which under the Emperor Probus, with a very slender handful of men, In
Panigir. Max^^^iani.
made incursion into Asia, and Africa, gave matter of astonishment to the
Roman Empire, and made it to be said from that time forward, that there was no
achievement so great, which was not less then their courage.

It was the same which resisted the prodigious army of Attila, when it seemed
but by stamping his foot he could make men swarm from all parts, to the
conquest of the world: and who being puffed up with the success of his
Victories, learned the valor of the French, was so powerful in it is birth,
that there was nothing after to be looked for at their hands, but
progressions, which should mount to the highest pitch of admiration.

But we must ever affirm that arms, which are not sheltered under the
standards of the cross, though they may become remarkable in the Massacres of
men; and in the firing of Provinces: yet never arrive they to that bright
luster, they might derive from piety; which moderating all they have in them,
either unjust, or exorbitant, beautifieth them with great and divine lights. He
that will behold France in the vigor and splendour of it is arms, let him see
her trampling underfoot so many heads of Sarazins, cut off by the justice of
that sword, which God put into their hands: Let him then see her gather the
palms of Palestine, so many times watered with it is sweat; Let him then see
how under a Charlemaigne, it makes the Flower de Luces sparkle in places, which
seemed so much shut up against force, as they were inaccessible to piety.

To speak plainly, Virtues of Charlemaigne.
God made this Monarch, as a rare piece of his Cabinet, making use of himself
for a model; and setting him in so great a degree of earthly greatness, to
the end his virtues admired by people, and imitated by Kings, might pass into
example for posterity. Nature in him laid deep foundations, granting him
qualities both of mind, and body, which promised nothing of mediocrity, and
good education coming to build thereon, raised perfections, which rendering
themselves lovely to all the world, became profitable for the service of the
sovereign of Monarchs.

Pliny the younger said, those seemed to him the most fortunate of men, who did
acts worthy to be written: And in the second place, such as composed works
worthy to be read; but that such as could perform both the one, and the
other, were arrived to a high degree of happiness, and perfection. Now this is
it which our Charles has done; who was one of the most knowing among the
learned, and of the most courageous among the warlike: and as he signed his
edicts with the pommell of his sword; so he showed, that if the point were to
wound his enemies; he kept the other end for his subjects, making so sweet a
mixture of arms, and laws, that innocence, and valor which very seldom
accord; found in his person a most worthy temperature. He had a heart large as
a sea, which contained in it is capacity all the ornaments that use to dignifie
great Princes, and as there was nothing too high for his courage; so was there
not any thing so low in his Empire that was excluded from the care, and favor
of his goodness. He was religious in the exercises of piety, upright in the
decrees of Justice, innocent in court, holy in purple, and although the love of
women set some spots upon this glorious Sun, yet penance wiping them away;
he failed not to deserve in his title the name of Father of the world, and to
see in Heaven Altars consecrated to his memory thorough the peoples piety.

This is to show what kind of man God is pleased to make use of, to dislodge
Devils, and to make Idolatry yield up the last breath, which being banished
from the other three parts of the world, found yet among the Saxons, altars and
Temples to the prejudice of humane blood. Charlemaigne was enflamed with an
incomparable zeal, to subject all people under his obedience to Christian
laws, nor could he endure the point of his Lance should extend farther, then
the Empire of the Cross.

Behold the cause why he being confident, resolved to tame the Saxons; War
of the Saxons.
and to arrange them under the laws of the Gospel: yet there wanted not many
to dissuade him from this war, telling him he must fight with forests, and men
more savage then Wolves; who would dearly sell most base blood at the price of
the life of a brave Nobility: That conquest was painful, event uncertayne,
danger most assured, and victory little glorious; and although they were once
vanquished, it would be daily to be begun again: these men having nothing
more constant among them then perpetual inconstancy: That the ways were very
rugged, victuals very hard to be transported, the situation of places
infinitely advantageous to these people, and almost insupportable for
strangers.

All seemed sufficient enough to stay the purposes of this Prince, but his
great heart pricked on to generous actions by the spur of obstacles which
presented themselves to hinder his course after he had concluded upon this
war in his diet at Worms, he managed it so bravely, that he never let his
Target fall, till he saw rebellion wholly prostrated under his feet. There is no
question, but all these wars made by Idolaters, and Sectaries, for the
defense of a fantasy of religion, being blown into them by the breath of the
Serpent; and having no other soul then fury, ran to a point of resistance,
till it meets with the obstinacy of Devils. It is a strange thing that these
Barbarians held this invincible Monarch for the space of Thirty Three years
with sword in hand upon diverse reasumptions of arms, and never yielded to
justice, till they were by force quite exhausted of men, money, and blood: How
many times saw they rivers overflow with their blood? How often did they
behold mountains raised high with the bodies of their fellow-Citizens? How
many times did the strange desolation of their Countries, devesting the weeping
fields on all sides, invite them to peace? Yet these Barbarians when
Charlemaigne held his foot on their throat, thorough a dissembled piety
demanded Baptism: but so soon as they saw themselves the stronger side, they
forraged the Country with most desperate hostilities; they killed the
Garrisons, they massacred the Priests, they burnt the altars, to which they fled
for refuge; and never did these Anteusse's bow down their heads before our
Hercules, but to derive from thence new forces to his disadvantage.

They renewed wars afresh six or seven times, wherein necessarily he was
enforced to crush them as Serpents, and bury them in their total ruin, which
happened at that time, when Whitikindus their Captain, and the leader of these
incendiaries, weakened by so much effusion of blood; and vanquished in sundry
battles, yeeleed himself to the clemency of the King, and made a notable
conversion to the Catholic faith, which was followed by his Nobility, and
people, who commonly are tied with long chains of necessity, to the fortune
of great ones. Then was it that the City, and Cittadell of Ereshourge, (wherein
all the detestable sacrifices of Irminsul, The Castle of Irminsul rendered:
were made;) were wholly subjected to the Arms of this brave Conqueror, who
overthrowing the worship of false gods; planted there the standard of the
Cross. Charlemaigne entered into this Castle, as an Angel sent from Heaven;
for the deliverance of our prisoners; for the infamous sacrificers surprised
with his so unexpected approach; and astonished by the Victorious standards of
France, presently fled, no more able to endure the presence of this Prince;
then the night-bats can suffer the rays of the Sun.

In the mean time, the miserable Clodoaldus comfortlesly bewailed his little
Iacinthus, Clodoaldus prostrated to Charlemaigne.
whom he held for already sacrificed: and having once shut up his eyes from
the light, he perpetually opened them to tears; which ceased not to distill
from them, become blind. When he understood of the arrival of Charlemaigne,
he came to cast himself at his feet, to beg revenge for his sonne's blood,
being out of hope he was yet alive, and verily believing all was told him
touching certain gallants, that had endeavored to hinder this bloody sacrifice
was but an invention of his friends, who were willing to afford him this
charity to sweeten his torments. The King seeing this grave comely man so
disfigured, and overwhelmed by the violence of sorrow, was stricken with great
compassion, and considering he could not speak but thorough broken sobs,
which choked all his words: he truly judged this soul was infinitely
afflicted; whereupon encouraging him, he said, He should give some truce to
the sense of his grief, and that if fortune had made him miserable, he stood
before a Prince, who was able to make him happy. The poor Lord replied,

(Sir,) Why does your Majesty entitle me miserable, and not rather the true
anatomy of misery: For the evils I suffered, mounted to such a height, that
they admit no comparison among the strangest accidents of this age. Heaven
having granted me a fortune rich, and eminent enough in the World, made me
also a father of Three Children: Two whereof were taken from me in their
tender years, which I thought would have cost me my life, (so much have I
deplored them night and day without intermission:) but in the end (as time is a
wise Physician for our miseries, not suffering our dolours to be everlasting
in a life so short;) my wound which for so long time had been fresh, and
bleeding, began to become a scarre; and on a sudden brake out again, by
reason of a cruelty without example. I settled my self in this wretched
Country to see if I might discover some marks of my loss, when one day
afflicted with so many anxieties, as incessantly tormoyled my poor heart: I
had a desire to hunt, wherein extraordinarily eager I sought to kill a Bore,
retired to the foot of a statue of a god of of this Country, erected in the
woods.

I had no sooner dispatched him, but behold a voice dreadful and menacing came
out of this Idol, which condemned me to blindness, and the whole Country to
a most meager sterility: if this fault were not speedily repaired, and verily I
in an instant became blind, and my companions saw the grass dried and withered
up under their feet, whereat I being much amazed, most humbly prostrated my
self at the feet of this god, beseeching to know of him what satisfaction he
desired of me, he then appointed I should offer that thing in sacrifice which
first presented it self unto me in my return homeward, which I most
willingly assented unto, not thinking on the sequel of this unhappy promise:
When behold poor Iacinthus, mine only son, whom I with so much care had bred,
and who alone was able to comfort me in all my losses: upon the report that I
was hunting in the grove of Irminsul, came out to meet me with unspeakable joy.
So soon as I heard the voice of this tender lamb, I was so surprised in all
my senses, that I knew not what to say; he on the other side bemoaned my
blindness, and enquired with all his endeavors some remedy for my disaster,
when by chance having understood the knot of the business, this imcomparable
son hastened to present himself at the altar of Irminsul, where I verily am
persuaded, the sacrificers, who will not mittigate any thing of their cruelty
have offered up, and torn in pieces this little body, as flesh in the shambles.

But (Sir) at the least, revenge the blood of my poor victime, since you are
the worlds arbitrator, and if there yet remain any part of his ashes, or
bones, I beseech your Majesty they may be restored me, that I may bury them in
my bosom, and power out my soul upon them.

The King bitterly wept when he heard these Tragical accidents, and promised
to afford him all possible comfort; for which Clodoaldus lifting his hands up
to Heaven, gave thanks to the gods, and when a Bishop there present told him
he must take away this plurality of gods, and believe in one God, sovereign
Monarch of Heaven, and Earth; who had sanctified the world by the incarnation
of his Word, he required to be instructed in our Religion, which was quickly
granted; and so soon as his mind was enlightened with the rays of faith: this
mist which the Devils had caused, was dissolved, to the admiration of all the
World; and foorth-with he disposed himself to praise, and thank God, never
leaving the King, from whom he began to hope much, and that beyond all
expectation.

Charlemaigne entering into the Castle, saw the gods of the Saxons, Gods of the
Saxons.
and among other, the Idol of Crodon, whom Historians think to be the
Saturn of the Grecians; which verily was an Idol of blood, and massacres, and
to which they offered in many places, sacrifices of men and children, as we
understand from the relation of Pagan Antiquities. There likewise stood
Irminsul all armed from head to foot, holding in one hand a standard with a
rose figured in it, and in the other a balance, having besides a Bear
engraven on his Cuirasse, and a Lion on his Target: Whereupon Crantzius, and
other Historians give sundry explications, easy to be observed. Moreover
there was a statue of Venus, which showed it was no extraordinary matter for
these Idolaters to ad homicides and slaughters, to the ordures of the impurity,
whereof this Irminsul, bare the figure.

This brave Monarch breathed out a deep sigh seeing these prodigious deities,
which had hitherto amused this miserable people, and as he was about to cause
them to be demollished, one came to tell him there were prisoners of note in
the dungeon, reserved to be very speedily sacrificed: Whereupon he in all
haste appointed a commissary with guards about him to bring them forth, and to
be informed of the crimes wherewith they were to be charged.

The poor Hildegardis buried in this deep darkness, Sorrow of Hildegardis.
expected nothing but the pile and flames, fearing the high Priest, factious,
and enraged, would draw to himself a reputation of honor, signed with her
blood: Whereupon she wholly resolved for death; but it extremely troubled her,
that together with life they sought to bereave her of the reputation of honor,
and honesty, and endeavored to stamp an infamy on her Tomb, (If ashes which
fly away with the wind, may expect the funeral rites of a Tomb,) she
complained that having so charily preserved her virginity, of which fire it
self had rendered a most solemn testimony, yet did the rage of her enemies
handle her as a harlot.

She deplored that her ashes should remain in a barbarous Country, her self
to be buried in oblivion, as the most unknown, and abandoned creature of the
World; and that of so much kindred; and allies, there was not one would come to
strew some silly flowers on the place impressed with the prints of her
punishments.

And as we are free in our desires, she in thought wished, that some one at
the least would one day carry the remainders of her ashes to her father, and
say unto him. Behold here the lamentable relics of that daughter whom you so
much sought, so much have bewailed, never giving end to your search, or tears.
The poor creature is dead under most cruel torments, leaving her life, and
memory in the flames of a burning pile prepared by her enemies, but she is dead
as a child of honor; and has not disgraced the example of her Mother, nor the
virtue of her ancestors.

We all of us retain some love for the affection, and estimation of
posterity; which is a great note of the immortality of our souls. It seemed to
her, if some one would promise the accomplishment of this desire, she should
die with much satisfaction, that her father would be comforted therewith, and
willingly afford the last obsequies to this slender portion of her body.

Having dreamed sometime thereupon, she bitterly bewailed the death of her
dear Ischyrion, of little Iacinthus, and Faustinus, fearing least this unhappy
surprisall might redouble their punishments, she desired yet once again to
speak with them before she dyed, to assist, comfort, and fortify her self
with them for this last passage: she entreated she might be permitted to
speak one word to her foster-father Araspus, but it was told her, he was
lately arested, as being held guilty of the conspiracy she had plotted, which
redoubled her sorrow with the more violence, considering this innocent old man
was involved in her ruins. In the end, the disastrous Maid mourned in the
dungeon, wholly absorpt in deep miseries, and being deprived, the splendour of
the day, she saw in her imagination all the confusions of fortune, and a
million of the images of death which assailed her repose, when she desired to
shut up her eyes for sleep:

Then hearing the prison door open, she cried out aloud, Let us go, behold
here the hour appointed by Heaven; which must give an end to so many miseries
as instantly turmoyle thee. But one coming, who opened a little window to give
daylight to the darkness of the dungeon, she (much amazed) to behold other
countenances of men, then such as she had known; plainly discovered them by
their habits, and fashions to be strangers: They commanded her to follow them,
whereupon she replied, (Sirs,) whither will you lead me, and instantly she
understood she was no longer to give answer, to a company of Priests, who had
forsaken the place, but before the throne of the prime Monarch of the world.
This news made her conceive at first, great hope of liberty, imagining with
her self, she should plead her cause before a benign Prince, who would give
sentence with all equity.

But hearing some to murmr round about her, who spoke what fame published,
that she must be burnt as a sorceresse; and that it was she, who had lent her
hand to so many enormous sacrifices committed in this cursed place, this
greatly amazed her: But forgetting her proper danger, for the love she bare to
Ischyrion, she asked whither those gentlemen shut up in the next prison were
already put to death, or no; to which it was answered, they were alive, and
should be sentenced with her, and even at the same time they were taken out of
prison to be brought before the King, who called for them, and it happened
they both met upon the way. Verily, this was a very heavy meeting; for the
noble Ischyrion perceiving his dearest Hildegardis led along enchayned, The
meeting of Hildegardis, and ischyrion.
and knowing she had no other crime, but for obliging him, felt his heart so
seized with grief, that he thought to yield up the ghost between the arms of
Faustinus, and Iacinthus; who supported him (although bound) as well as they
could: So soon as he a little had recovered his spirits, and got liberty of
speech, he cried out,

What (Madame) am I then the instrument of your death? There needs no question
be asked whither I be criminal, since I see my self defiled with blood, and
am guilty of the murder of a person, in whom nothing may be desired, but
immortality. Where shall I find limbs enough in my body, to expiate such a guilt.
I from henceforth defy, Wheels, Gibbets, keen Razors, and flames; and if it
be true which is said, that the burning pile is already prepared for us, I
will mount to the top of it, without bands, or fetters, I will first of all try
the violence of the fire, I will render an honorable payment before the eyes of
Heaven, and earth: I most faithfully promise when my soul shall be separated
from my body, it shall every where wait on your most purified spirit as the
shadow of it, but if it must be condemned to darkness for eclipsing so divine
a light, I will only beg of thee (oh great intelligence) that from the
sphere of splendors due to thy merit, thou will some times deigne to send
forth a ray of thy clemency to enlighten the dusky nights of my miseries, and
offenses.

Hildegardis answered this speech, with her weeping eyes, the dart whereof was
not so blunted by tears, but that they made impression on the heart of her
beloved, and so much as her voice might cleave a sunder the sharp sighs of
her heart, she said, (Sir) accuse not your innocence, but my unhappiness,
which has made me become so unfortunate, that even mere benefits have power
enough to make me criminal. If death separate our lives, at the least I am
glad it may perhaps unite our ashes, and that we shall preserve the
immortality of our affections, in the immortality of our souls. This pleasing
spectacle softened the heart of the Commissary, and guards, that they almost
forgot themselves, so transported they were;

In the mean time Charlemagine sat on his Throne, Judgment of Charlemaigne.
covered over with a fair pavillion, and appeared on that day resplendent, in
the attires of a Majesty absolutely Royal, encompassed with his Nobility,
which afforded him the same luster, that leaves do roses: He caused Clodoaldus
to be placed in his Throne, that he might find out his son, if (happily)
he were yet among the prisoners. As they were put forward to be presented
before the King, it happened Iacinthus, who was very carelessly bound for the
assurance they had of his liberty, seeing his father, instantly brake his
cords, and ran to leap about his neck, in the presence of Charlemaigne, and
all this goodly company. The father tenderly embracing him, said, with a
confused voice. How my son! What come you now out of your Tomb? Ah my poor
son! Iacintbus delivered.
How were you to your father, when you left him in the Forest, to go to the
altar of Irminsul? Tell me who has raised you up again? The son on the other
side beheld his father with admiration, (a blind man become clear sighted,)
and said unto him (Father) who has restored you your eyes? There upon both
stood, seized with so inexplicable joy, that they were unable to express the
cause of their happiness, but that the father distilling some tears of
gladness, spoke thus, Oh my son! It is a work of God; and then perceiving
he had done an act of a man transported, not considering he was in the
presence of a King; he hastened to prostrate himself at the feet of
Charlemaigne, saying, Sir, excuse the power of nature, otherwise, this child
is more yours then mine. Then turning to Iacinthus, Son, draw near, and
kiss the feet of the chief Monarch of the World, to whom you owe your
happiness, and mine. His God hereafter shall be yours, his Altars shall be
your Altars, and you shall have no other Religion with me, then his. Upon which
the child making a most lowly obeisance, cast himself on the earth, and the
King causing him to be lifted up again, took him by the hand, and gave him to
the Bishop to be instructed in the faith.

This matter for a long time entertained the eyes of all the company with his
happiness, and this novelty, until Hildegardis was brought forth to take her
turn: then was the time when all the World showed it self to be moved with
much curiosity, Description of Hildegardis.
to know who this virgin was, and for what offense she was fettered in the
dungeon: she was of a goodly stature, and had a body well proportioned in all
the parts thereof, the lineaments of her face very delicate, her color bright,
and lively, port grave, and which sufficiently declared her to be borne of
some noble family.

And though her countenance was then dejected, her eyes dull, her hair
negligently discheveled, and attire very plain, yet all this did much grace
her, for her beauty failed not to shine through so many obstacles, as the Sun
in a winters day, which is ever constantly the Sun, though the sharpness of
the season rob us of the vigor, and luster of his rays. The King at the
beginning was amazed seeing such a creature reduced to this state, and
commanded her to draw near unto him, which she did with an excellent grace,
when prostrating her self at the feet of his Majesty, she said,

(Sir,) I render thanks to the divine providence, which governing the worlds
affairs, Her speech to the King.
has drawn me from Lions dens to die among men, and to yield my soul at the
feet of the most triumphant Monarch of the world. The fame of your Majesty
has found us out in dungeons, penetrating places where the Sun enters not; and
made us understand the blessings Heaven has poured on your Arms. For which
cause we have some reason to rejoice amongst so many objects of sadness, that
our eyes before they be shut up to all things mortal, shall be illustrated
with your conquests. Yet is not this the cause for which I desire my life to be
prolonged, for fortune having thrown me into the extremity of miseries, I see
nothing so prepitious to my condition, as death, which must entombe all my
pains; I only (dying) deplore the loss of these two gentlemen, whose
innocence I lately have seen oppressed, after so many testimonies of their
valor, and goodness, that it is a wonder how their virtues found fetters, in
a place where they might expect crowns.

But (Sir,) since God has made you arbitrator of mankind, and that having
given you a sword to hew Monsters, he has likewise affoorded you a balance
to weigh virtues, and crimes, save these innocents, make them capable to bear
your standards into as many places as the Sun discovers his rays in. If I
obtain this favor of your Majesty, I shall die contented, for I am unworthy
to see the light of the Sun, having lived in this fatal place, which of
necessity must be incompatible with my life.

The King wondered at the constancy of this virgin, joined to her charity
toward these prisoners, and was curious to know what she did in this Castle,
which seemed most of all to trouble her mind: Whereupon casting her eyes
down, and coloring her face with a modest blush, she besought his Majesty to
dispense with her the relation of a thing which bred in her so much horror, and
that it was enough he saw her resolved to expiate all her crimes by fire.

But the King powerfully urging, and giving her all manner of assurance, she
professed she excrecised the function of a Priest in the sacrifices of
Irminsul, and that she was present at the death of men, who were sacrificed;
and further being asked touching the causes which brought her to so hateful a
profession, she told how she had been taken away by a strange misfortune at
seven years of age; and after many adventures transported into this Castle,
where by maine force she had been constrained to execute the office of a
vestall of the Temple, she being a virgin, and of very noble extraction.

Clodoaldus, who was there present, hearing speech of the taking away of a
child of a noble house, felt his wound to open a fresh, remembering that at the
same age she was of, his own had been taken from him, and conferring the
years, the feature, lineaments of face, he said within himself, such should
my dear Hildegardis be now, were she yet alive. Charlemaigne continuing his
discourse, said unto her; being stolen at this age (as she said,) she might
well remember the name she then had, the house of her Father, and other marks
of her race. To which she replied, she could well call to mind her Father was
of Denmark, heretofore governor of an ample province, and that he was called
Clodoaldus: As for her self, she bare still the name of Hildegardis, which was
given her at her birth. Thereupon the father, who hearing these words, had
been strongly assailed with an ebb, and flood of imaginations, cried, as if
he came out of an ecstasy. Ha (sir)! This creature is my daughter, it is my
lost daughter, whom I have sought for, the space of fourteen years in so
great, and painful voyages; then turning himself toward his little
Iacinthus: (Son) this is your sister, and as he spoke this, both ran to embrace
her.

But she who during all this discourse, stood immovable as a statue, seeing
her Father drew near to kiss her, and doubting least there might be some
practice, she stepped back, and said (sir, excuse me if you please) I cannot
without further proof more evident acknowledge you for my Father. Clodoaldus
seeing this refusal, asked if Araspus were not yet with her, she answered, he
was, thereupon he prayed the King he might be called soorth, which was
speedily done. Araspus avowing his master received him as a man fallen from
Heaven, gave him many singular welcomes, and said to Hildegardis, Madam,
approach confidently, it is my Lord your Father. The virgin remained in a
strange rapture, and the father not speaking, but by broken sighs which issued
from his heart, as from a furnace of love, held her fast embraced, and bedewed
her with his tears. All there present were amazed at this sight, as men
astonished, or charmed; the King himself could not abstain from tears, and
calling Hildegardis, took her by the hand, and demanded whither she would
forsake the sacrifices of Irminsul, and embrace her fathers religion, which was
Christian: She answered, she had a thousand, and a thousand times abhorred this
superstitious imposture, and that with all her heart she desired to be a
Christian. Thereupon the King turning toward Araspus, asked him how this
creature had been taken, he relating that she sporting in a wood in some
childish manner, a troop of wandering Griphons assailed her, well discovering
their aim was at this young virgin, but he having kept her in this storm (as
a vessel wherein all the treasures of his master were enclosed) defended her
with all his power till such time as oppressed with wounds he was taken with
her. He added that she had lived in this miserable place in such languors and
distresses as cannot be imagined, expecting the much desired day which should
break her fetters, and wipe away these tears.

Well go to then virgin (said the King) behold the day, which you so long have
looked for, is come: But why were you thrust into this miserable dungeon? What
mean these chains, and burning pile you spoke of even now? The generous Lady
(almost) forgetting her own happiness, faithfully to assist her dear
Ischyrion; related with an atractive grace all that which had passed, as well
in the person of Iacinthus, as in the combat of Lions and Bears, extolling as
much as she could, the rare prowess of these two gentlemen: Then she added
the advice she took to free them, the accident which befell her in this
difficult affair, her imprisonment, her condemnation, and the desperate state
of her fortune. Here the Father embracing her again, long time wept over her,
saying, (My poor daughter) It is well you are pulled out of the paws of
Wolves, and I pray what had now become of you without the Kings protection?

But Hildegardis amongst these notable occurrents ever bearing her dearest
Ischyrion in mind, urged Charlemaigne, saying, (Sir) my father is still
possessed but of the one half of me, whilst this noble gentleman is in
fetters. Be your Majesty pleased to finish what you so prosperously have
begun. Forthwith the King caused Ischyrion and Faustine to be fetched,
Ischyrions gratitude.
commanding their chains to be taken off. Ischyrion feeling himself
unfettered, lifted his hands to Heaven, and said, Now is the time (oh Heavens)
I render you thanks, that I once again have my hands at liberty to die in
some battle, if you shall please to deigne me this favor: we at the least so
far as I perceive have escaped from these bloody sacrifices, where we were
to loose our lives, not illustrating our deaths with one ray of honor: but now
if we needs must make an end, we will conclude on the theater of Kings in some
glorious piece of service.

Charlemaigne hearing this young Eaglet speak with so much generosity, enquired
his name, race, employment, course, and progress of life: But he making a low
obeisance, said to the King,

(Sir) I beseech your Majesty to excuse me, if I give you not upon this
question that full satisfaction I could wish, For fortune has created me an
imperfect man, without Father, or Mother, kindred, allies, Country, house; or
riches, casting me as an abortive of the sea, risen out of the waves to arive
on some unknown shore. All I can say of my extraction, is, that I was taken
away in so tender years, that I could not have any knowledge either of my
self, or mine.

It only was told me, that Pirates stealing me away from I know not what
Country came to east anchor in a a part of Afric, where they were so hotly
assailed that one of their vessels was left behind, in which I was, and every
one running hastily to the pillage of this booty, the shepherds sought also to
have their share in it, whereof one of them seeing me, whither moved with
compassion, or whither he thought me a child of some good family, and that
one day restoring me, he might gain somewhat by it, he resolved to lay hold on
me, and bred me up with his son Faustine, here present.

We both grew up under his wings, like two young Ashes, planted by the favor of
Heaven near a rivers side; and although I had then no other opinion of my
self, but that I was the son of Thoas, my foster-father; yet being among
little Country boys of my condition, I played the Prince, and was infinitely
delighted to practice wars, and combats, wherein I almost everhad the upper
hand, from whence it came to pass the name of Ischyrion was given me, which
is a tite of valor, and glory.

The shepherd Thoas loved me tenderly, as his own son, and plainly perceiving
I was not borne to rest in sheep-coats all my life; Being now upon the degrees
of an age more vigorous, he took me apart, and said,

My dear Ischyrion, I must now at this time unsold a secret unto you, which I
have hitherto been willing to conceal from you, fearing least the greatness
of your courage might prove your ruin in these greener years; but now when at
this present you are come to more maturity, and strength, I would have you know
you are no son of mine; I found you in a ship of Pirates, and some Mariners did
secretly whisper, you were stolen away from a certain port, and that your
Father was a great Prince, whereof I could never learn any further. Perhaps
your good stars will show you more, I only entreat you to take care of your
person, which shall be most dear to me whilst I live, and if you one day
arrive to any fortune worthy your self, forget not your poor foster-father:
not (son) that I beg ought of your abilities; for God has affoorded us
contentments in our little Cottage, but much it shall please me to be continued
in your remembrance, as one who greatly have desired to breed you well, and if
any thing were defective in your education, excuse our poverty, Heaven has
created (...) such as you see, full of good will, though slender in fortune,
and means.

This discourse drew tears from me, and so far penetrated my heart, that in
few days, I resolved to travel thoroughout the world, and enquire out my
birth. But Faustin (knowing what passed) prayed me by all that I held most
precious, not to forsake him, but to make him the companion of all my dangers,
which was the cause I besought his Father, to grant it me, which he assented
unto, although the Mother very much opposed it.

Since, we continually have lived together, as one soul divided into two
bodies. True laws of Amity.
For our amity having taken root in a mutual temperature, and great
correspondence of humors has been maintained with a perpetual familiarity
arriving to that height, that neither death, nor hell is of power to separate
us. Good, and ill have ever been common between us, daily we obliged one
another by all the ways of friendly offices. There was never any thing secret
between us, both our hearts, and breasts were enter changeably transparent.

Dissimulation, and contradiction could no more approach the sincerity of our
love, then serpents the blossom of the Vine. Nor was there in so many years
as we lived together the least impression of inconstancy, distaste, or
coldness in our affections, but we loved with the same ferver, as if we daily
began, never to end.

When we had traveled over some Proninces of Affricke, we passed into Asia;
and from Asia are come into Europe, where we have borne Arms against the
Sarazins, and every where have opposed Monsters, Pirates, Robbers, wild-beasts,
trampling under foot those plagues, borne to afflict Mortals.

Finally, we have here been stayed by a most unworthy treason, as your Majesty
has understood by the discourse made unto you; I verily think, good fortune
now presents herself unto us, and that we here shall find, what is ^^ine to
search in any other part of the world.

The King well satisfied to hear this whole narration, asked him, whither
whilst he was in the Pirat-ship, any mark were upon him, which might one day
discover his birth. Thereupon he drew forth a little jewel, that had been
found about his neck, and which Thoas having faithfully kept, restored him at
his departure. The King taking it into his hand to see what it was, perceived
many out of our iosity lifted up their heads, and cast their eyes upon it, and
among others Clodoaldus, who said in his heart. Ah, what if the destinies be
pleased, I this day recover all my losses, good haps sometimes comes by heaps,
as well as bad. The God whom I now worship, is much greater then all my
desires. As he paused on this imagination, and came so near as he could;
Behold (says Charlemaigne a very rich jewel) I here among other things
discover an Agat, which bears two javelins crossed one over another. At these
words Clodoaldus fetched a deep sigh, and said (Sir) these are my Arms from
all antiquity; thereupon his speech was stopped by the deep resentments of his
heart, yet still his voice resisted the obstacles of passion, and said, Oh God!
what means this? my heart is so assailed with hope and fear, that it
forgets whither it be a heart, or no, (Tears) stay a while, till I behold
this Agat. The king having showed it him, he stood a good space without
speaking one word, rather resembling a statue of Marble, then a man; but when
he came again to himself, he could not say any thing but with a confused
voice, This jewel comes from my house, it is my son, I am his Father.
Ischyrion, Hildegardis, Iacinthus were on the other partall in an ecstasy, as
if they had been transported into Heaven, and thorough all the assembly there
was a marvelous silence: when Clodoaldus, recovering speech with some more
readiness, said to the King,

(Sir) It is strange, that the male Children of our Race, at least the eldest,
bare on their bodies these Iavelins engraven by a natural character. As for
myself I have it on mine arm which here behold, and I well remember, my son
had it on his right shoulder: I humbly beseech your Majesty, that part of his
body may be discovered, which was speedily done, and the Father acknowledging
the mark, stooped down to kiss his sons shoulder, saying, it is my son
Clodoaldus, at the same time, Hildegardis and Iacinthus likewise fell upon him,
and all spoke together by imbracements, sighs, and tears of joy, unable to
utter a word. The King had much a do to express himself, so much admiration
possessed him, when lifting up his eyes to Heaven he said, Behold most secret
passages of the divine providence.

In the end, this happy Father beginning to come out of his ecstasy, said to
his son Clodoaldus, oh my son, oh my pleasing light! now is the time when
the eclipse of so many years has suffered you to appear in your brightest
luster; I verily thought the waves of the sea had swallowed you, for which
cause I erected a Tomb unto you on the shore, (the monument of my
unhappiness, and title of my sorrows). How often did I moysten it with my
tears? How often did I strew it with flowers? I likewise planted Cypresses,
and other trees, on the barks whereof I wrote my disasters, and complaints; I
took delight to see them grow to the proportion of the plant's increase. When
I beheld any Tempest arise on the Sea, I said to the Nimphs, appease (a little
I beseech you) these winds and storms, keep my young Clodoaldus in peace; I
know he has no Tomb, make him a hearse of the Christalls of these waves; It
seemed to me the Sea understood my grief, and took pleasure to swell with my
tears: It seemed the rocks lamented my dolours, to echo them again to
ships, and sailors: and now where are my sorrows, and torments? Children,
you to day are borne. To day properly I begin to be a Father: To which
Ischyrion, who had hitherto been wholly absorpt in a deep rapture replied.

Most dear Father, with how many travels do I on this day purchase the right
to call you by that excellent title? and by how many wandering paths, and
trackes have I found out the right way? Yet notwithstanding there is not any
thing done, nor shall I ever be pleased, till I satisfy the estimation you
have made of me, avowing me for your son in the presence of the King, and all
his Court. Then casting himself about the neck of his sister Hildegardis, and
his brother Iacinthus, he embraced them with opennesse of heart, and profusion
of love, which seemed as if it would have dissolved the three souls, and make
them evaporate into affection. He said ah! it was a great chance the altar of
Irminsul had not been moystned with the blood of three. Let us give thanks to
the Christian's God, who by the victorious hand of this Monarch, has
vindicated us from the gates of hell.

Whilst he was saying this, the Father prostrated himself again with them at
the feet of Charlemaigne, and spoke thus, (Sir) you this day have created a
family, giving it being; and the perfections which attend it. If the Father and
his children gain one day the honor to bear your ensigns, they shall fly
from one pole to another like Eagles, and never pretend to any honor in the
world, but to obey your commands, To which the King answered; That, man was but
a little vein of water, that, God was the source of Essences, and goodness,
to whom we ought to render immortal honors. And saying this, He commanded them
to honor the Cross, and invited them all to the destruction of Idols, which
was performed with unspeakable alacrity, Heaven so favoring this design, that
as the History expressly tells, miraculous crosses were seen on the clothes
of those who were employed in this so glorious a work.

Thus does God conclude enterprises undertaken for the glory of his Name, and I
praise the holy providence, that having begun the design of this poor labor
in the beginning of the Victories, which our great Monarch has gained over his
Subjects; I finish it in the accomplishment of his Conquests.

His voyages, which always seem long to those, who so passionately cherish
the honor of his presence, are found in the end very short in respect of the
great things which God is pleased to work in so small a time by his victorious
hands; the mighty workers of wonders.

Behold him here returned from the Alpine snowes, and scorching heats of the
utmost limits of his Kingdom, like to those great mountains which at one, and
the same time; bare Winter and Summer, showing himself as invincible in
valor, as indefatigable in labor.

Speak no more of that ancient Timothous, into whose nets fortune cast some
silly Towns. The great hand of the God of hosts has put Provinces, and people
(in a moment) into that goodly golden snare of the Kings love, and clemency,
reducing under obedience all those rebellious places, that opened their eyes to
their own tranquillity, which they so many times had shut against reason. This
great king peaceful in desires, and warlike of disposition, is become the
peacemaker of Europe, plainly discovering, he loves not war, but to bring
forth peace, and that all his intentions have no other aim, but to build up
for his subjects the Temple of Repose, so often cimented with his sweats, and
exalted by his arms.

I here willingly end, not pursuing the events of chaste Hildegardis, or of her
brothers, being loath to extend this History beyond those memorialls, which have
limited me in this design.

Yet must I (Reader) shutting it up, avow, these so unexpected passages do
cause a sweetness to spring in my soul, which I have no power to express. The
conclusion, and instructions of the History.
I figure unto my self the joys of the last day, that perpetual day, which
shall never set; The day mocked at by the wicked, opposed by the Philosopher of
Gentilisme, not hoped for by mis-beleevers, and so much desired by the
faithful; when this long decrepitnesse of Ages shall be renewed by fire, when
all the elements shall be purified, when this great house of nature going out
from the last consumption by fire as from a furnace shall appear more
resplendent then ever, to the eyes of it is workman.

What a spectacle to behold the Savior of the world so long expected, to come
upon the chariot of clouds accompanied with so many Saints, and intelligences,
to command over the heads of Emperors, who have persecuted his Saints in all
the parts of the world! What rejoicing of Angels, what glory of bodies raised
again, what City of peace, what kingdoms of the Elect?

Then shall be the time when fathers and mothers, who have had the happiness to
become of the number of the blessed, shall embrace their Children so much
desired, and deplored, not as this Clodoaldus to desire, and bewail them once
more again, but to see them for ever triumphant over death in that glorious
immortallity, which shall cause all our torments to die, to make all our
glories survive.

Then shall be the time when chaste lovers, who have affected each other so
entirely in conjugall amities, and who were separated by deaths so dolorous,
that they (as it were) forced their eyes to dissolve with their hearts over the
Tombs of their dear consorts, shall recover their losses, and shall behold
those persons they so much esteemed, encompassed round about with inestimable
glory: what embracements then! what profusions of hearts! what entertainments!
what discourses! when all that which we shall see of the earth, (we being
seated over those vast Temples of stars, lights, and intelligences) shall
seem little and unworthy to possess a heart made for eternity.

There it is (great Countess) where I hope we shall behold that wel-beloved,
To the Lady Countess of S. PAVL
and so worthy to be beloved son of yours; there it is, where we shall see
that brave Duke of Frons;sac issuing out out of his Tomb, as out of the
enkindled pile of the Phoenix, out of a chariot of glory, from an Altar of
immortality. The blood of the most illustrious house of Orleans which ran in
his veins, those rays of Majesty which his celestial spirit imprinted on his
forehead, that grace of speech which dwelt on his lips, that valor which
possessed his heart, that piety which entertained all the powers of his soul,
all those gifts of God, which waited on his person, shall be much fairer then
ever, since they shall never desist to be fair. The mountain of Gelboa has
taken away from us this Ionathas yet mortal; and the mountains of Sion will
restore him us, immortal. He has printed the earth with his courage, and
loyalty, with the characters of his blood, voluntarily sacrificing himself for
the glory of God, the service of the King, the repose of France, in an age,
wherein the most deplored, die; but in a manner whereof none are fit to die,
but the most glorious. At this great day, he shall impresse on the firmament of
lights which shall issue from his body, the excellent beauties of his soul,
and shall appear to our eyes more lustrous, then the brightest of stars.
Lift up the eyes of hope, and faith above all that is mortal, to behold him
now in this state of immortality. Prevent your joys by the stability of your
belief. Let weak mothers weep, who think they have enclosed in a Tomb, all
they possessed, and confidently take palms, and lillies to crown his image,
and honor his ashes, oft-times repeating this noble saying, which so worthily
replenished your lips in the most vehement smarts of your wounds. My God, thou
have broken my fetters, I will sacrifice an host of praise unto thee.

Let us preserve our selves wholly pure for this great day. Let us sigh after it
in the fervor of so many miseries; Let us anticipate its splendors amongst so
much darkness; Let us look upon it thorough so many obstacles, with an eye
mingled with tears, and love.

And, that we may leave the mind satisfied in these discourses, Take (good
Reader) three notable instructions, where in this whole History is concluded.

The first shall be upon the subject of these reacknowledgements and Christian
accidents, to adore the divine providence with a most humble reverence, to be
willing to depend on it in all the parts of our life, to commit all the time to
come thereof, to it is direction, and to condemn the vanity of those who are
ready to maintain this History was an effect of the stars.

We have now a days in the World too many spirits ill rectified, Horoscopes.
which make no scruple to impute these great vicissitudes to Heavenly
constellations, and to appoint the stars to be as the distributors of all the
fortunes in the world. These discourses were tolerable among Pagans, borne
with a yoke on their necks, under the servitude of Devils; But to see
Christians dig into the sepulchers of Gentiles, to draw from thence
superstitions, observations, figments, and Chimeraes, how can this be tolerable
to those, who bear as much reverence toward Truth, as they have otherwise
prudence in their carriage?

It is not my purpose in this work to combat long against suchlike opinions.
A signi^ Coe^i n(...)li^e timere quae timent gentes.
I will not enlarge my self upon that Oracle of Jeremy, Hier. 10. 2.
which says; The faithful are not to believe stars, and signs of Heaven in
that manner as Pagans do, as if they had any superiority over our lives, and
fortunes.

I will not cite the counsel of Braga, Council. Braccarense 1 Tolat. (...)
Christ. et Greg. in Math c. 2. Ambr. Hex. l. 4. c. 4.
nor Tolledo against the Priscillianists, nor likewise borrow arms from the
sixth homily of S. Basil upon Genesis, nor from St. Chrysostom, nor St. Gregory
the great upon St. Matthew, nor from Eusebius in the book of preparation to the
Gospel, Sapientia Chald(...)o^um Tela araneae in quam si cu^ex inciderit exvere
se non potest.
nor from an infinite number of others. I only say with St. Ambrose for
instruction of those who shall vouchsafe to read these lines, that the
Astrology of these ill composed spirits, and the webbs of spiders are two
things of like nature, they are fit to entangle flies, not souls well grounded
in the sincerity of ancient belief.

They who undoubtedly promise themselves vain haps from their Horoscopes; and
those who deceive them, are so much unfurnished of reason, as disposed to a
coldness in Religion. And of this, there are clear pertinent proofs: For
first of all, those who deal with setting Horoscopes, as much understand the
great Economy of Heaven, and the pretended signification of so many stars, as
we know the Canadois, since we find their most knowing masters are (as it were)
involved in perpetual contradictions, not upon articles indifferent; but
things merely essential, upon principles, as it appears by the writings of
Ptolomy, Albumazar, Abenezra, Cardan, and others much later. In such sort, that
these contradictions destroy all experience which notwithstanding is the only
foundation of judiciary Astrology.

These great Temples of light are now reserved to God, and Angels; the
sovereign Creator has spread over a Cypres of night and darkness, to cast a
veyle on our curiosity. He who cannot perfectly know the slip of an herb, nor
the least little creature which creeps on the ground, how can he boast not
only to understand the courses, and measures of stars, but the most secret
impressions, they may have over the objects of this lower world? Moreover,
although these stars had power over bodies, over humors, and inclinations,
where would their command be over a soul immateriall, created to the image of
God, called by the title of glory in the Scripture? And which Tertullian dares
very well term the occupation of the divine spirit, Gene. 49. v. 6 Secundum
Hebr. Tertul. de resur.
the Queen of the universe, the sister of Jesus? Ptolomy the ablest among them,
does not he affirm, Carnis. Iugenij divini cura magna molitionis Regina,
Christi Sor^^
that wise men sway over stars, thinking it unreasonable to impute the happiness
of life, to the influence of celestial bodies, so to bereave them, the effects
of prudence? In the third place, Let us put case the stars govern us, and that
according to their diverse aspects we may devine upon the chances of men, that
we may infer such a child borne under such a constitution of planets, had
heretofore such a fortune: and therefore the other which follows in his birth
the same tracks, shall have the same hap. I demand what means have they to
establish this Maxim, and to make a science in so great uncertainty, since
those stars never return again to the same point, or if they do return, it
will be in the revolution of almost innumerable ages, which no man has seen,
not ever shall? It may be said, the planets finish their courses in a very
small number of years, which is the cause we may the more easily observe them,
but who will dare to affirm the planets alone have part in my nativity, and
that so many other unknown stars are idle in Heaven; without having any
influence upon mortal things? This is it which Seneca condemned in the
Astrologers of his time. They confine us (says he) to a very slender quantity
of stars, and see not that all these great celestial bodies which are over
our heads, are able to make great mutations.

In the end, who knows not that according to S. Augustines reason, the motion
of Heaven, is so swift, that to go about to write down the good happ of man
in this great book, is to engrave characters on the water? Experience is
exposed to these reasons: Some predictions of Astrologers are produced, which
are said to have been true, and it is no wonder, seeing the number of their
truths being so small, it will be no very hard matter to reckon them, but he
that would sum the lies and impostures, may equal them with the sands of the
sea.

Well now I ask, if so many wits who labor to turn names, and make Anagrams
sometimes by chance, happen right, as he who found upon the name of one Andre
Paion Pendis a Rion, that which afterward happened unto him, must we conclude
thereupon that the skill of Anagrams is divine and infallible? Every good
judgment will hold this proposition ridiculous, and who sees not that
Astrologers confounding stars, times, and celestial houses, make of our
lives, that, which Anagrammatists do with our names, shall we then believe
them? The Arabian Albumazar held as an Oracle of learning amongst them; having
once attributed the advancement of Christianity to the good concurrence of
constellations, went about out of madness to take the measure of its
progresses, to which God has appointed no limits: He left in writing two most
notable falsehoods upon this point, the first whereof is, that after the
revolution of three ages, changes of Empires should be made in the world, as
for example (says he) three hundred years after Alexander the great,
Arelazor advanced himself who conquered the Persians, which is most untrue,
and never heard of thorough all histories. He proceeds and says, that three
hundred years after this Arelazor, Christ the Messiah is borne, which by his
account should have been six hundred years after Alexander, although
according to the supputation of the most understanding, this Monarch lived, but
three hundred and fifty years before him. But let us pass over this
Parachronisme, the same man adds, that according to the course of stars, he
found Christian religion should continue, a thousand and four hundred years,
and (God be thanked) it has already exceeded those, more then two hundred, and
shall last to the world's end. Who can endure these lies, and impieties, if he
has not abjured verity* and piety, to become a slave to Jupiter and Saturn.

Great ones should at the least have regard to the experience of so many
Princes, who following the Maxims of judicial Astrology, led a timorous, and
painful life, which they concluded in most tragical events* The Pharao's of
Egypt, who were perpetually bent upon Horoscopes, and caused children to be
slain whose Ascendents imported predictions of scepters and crowns, were
destroyed by the omnipotent hand of God. The Tiberiuses and Dioclesians, who
were so happy among Astrologers, Cael. Rod. Nicatas. Cardan* Augustine. de
doctrina Christiana.
have been unhappy in their Empires, wherein they lived as Lions, ruddy with
blood, and fettered with many passions. Manuel Comnenus became by these ways
suspicious, Nugatoria, et noxia superstitio, ex quadam pestifera societate
hominum, et daemonum.
and cruel. Branas was taken by Isaacius Angelus, Peter of Castile miserably
deprived of scepter, and life. And Lewis Forza who did all by the direction of
a Mathematician, was vanquished, dispoyled, and put into an iron cage.

Let us then say with St. Augustine that all this superstition is not only
vain* Instruction concerning amity.
but pernicious, and that there is some appearance it is sprung from a wicked
alliance between men and devils.

The second lesson shall be, well to purify your amities, for as those persons
whom we have represented unto you, loving one another very chastely, yea with in
the bonds of love purely humane, have in the end reaped much contentment, and
glory from their charitable offices: So there is no doubt but that amity
elevated by a divine motive, besides, that it is one of the most delicious
charms of humane life, must of necessity be of much merit before the divine
Majesty.

Verily, we affirm those ancients saw much, when they said love was a desire
of immortality; For every creature necessarily loves its Being, which is the
foundation of all good and well-being, which alone makes Being to be desired,
and the ever Being, which is the accomplishment of well being. But as each
thing created proceeding from nothing, tends insensibly to nothing, and
cannot have from its stock this perpetual Being, it seeks to revive, and
produce it self it some kind of immortality by the means of love, which makes
alliances, and productions in all nature.

But the desire of a brutish immortality, is a thing very low, and abject in
comparison of the conditions of the spirit, which look toward another life,
another state, above all the ways of nature.

How much think we, do our souls (which are noble, intelligent, and divine)
desire not simply to be immortallized; for they already are immortal, but to
be eternized in a fullness of liberty by the help of love, which makes us
live in the thing we love.

These poor souls naturally desirous of eternity, tie themselves by love to
many objects, to find out the contentment they pursue; but, as all creatures
are necessitous, they starve, and deceive them, teaching them in the end by
their proper hunger, and deceit, that there is but one only means to make
them happy, and eternal, which is to enter into the heart and love of a Being
supreme, and independent. Notwithstanding God though invisible, traceth on the
lights of the Heavens, on the enamell of flowers, on the crystal of
fountains, and upon so many other creatures, Beauties, and Virtues, which are
visible characters of his divinity, and if we learn to use holy, the blessings
he powers upon essence created to apply them wholly to the essence increate,
we very soon shall arrive to the perfection of love.

But in stead of following these paths which the Saints tracked out unto us,
the most part of men, brutish of sense, and benumbed in Reason shut up the
majesty of love, in a caytive, and miserable passion, wherein they commit as
great a crime, as those Egyptian Idolaters, who lodged their Divinities in the
bodies of Rats, and reremice. The love which now adays bears sway in the
world with so much fury, is the house of storms, a sweet poison, a golden
snare, a pleasing cutthroat, an ungoverned fever, a perpetual folly, A
vertigo, a loss of wit, which having rendered man unprofitable to all things,
makes him unable for love it self: It enters into the heart, as the Indian
Rat into the belly of the Crocodile, where after it has left impressions of
qualities most malign, and infectious, it parcheth up all the flowers of it,
it vilifieth all that which is generous, and perverteth what is Religious. What
man is there who (as yet) having some little wisdom, and understanding, would
make himself a slave to such a passion, to deliver his soul over to sin,
his body to infection, his reputation to opprobry, and his life to a perpetual
bondage?

If we must love, (as one cannot live without it) let us go to this chaste
love, the altar whereof always pure, ever burning, is supported by four
Columns, which are Intention, Discretion, Faith, and Patience: Intention, that
one may love to the honor of God, and have an object, wherein virtue may be
exercised: Discretion, that amities may be guided, and contained in duty and
decorum: Faith, that promises may be kept, secrets, and rights of amity,
inviolably observed: Patience, that one may constantly persevere in loving,
notwithstanding all oppositions which may interpose to dissolve this union.

But when shall we find these qualities in the amities of the world? Is not
intention effeminate, and mercenary, discretion inconsiderate, fidelity most
unconstant, patience uncertain? There needs but one word ill understood, but
a cold countenance, but an ill tale, but a bad interest, to break amities that
were thought most strong, wherein they plainly show themselves to have been
never what they profess, since they so soon desist, to be what they protested.

If we speak of amities between sex, and sex, and that in those we observe
any to be most pure, and ardent, as some such may be found, they are Angels,
which exeecise it in mortal flesh, and howsoever the matter goes the
approaches unto them, are ever fearful, since virtues themselves (as said St.
Austine) cannot be loved without danger.

The ancients believed women by their conversation had transformed their gods
into beasts, to teach us, men might therein become something worse, and that
there was not any sanctity so strong, which had not ever in these amities a
slippery foot; if it took not the fear of God, and discretion for companions.
If we consider the amities of youth among the same sex they are for the most
part inconstant, inconsiderate, without weight, without reason, without
measure: They often begin by chance, proceed upon slights, and shiftings, and
conclude upon neglect. If they be amities of men tied to estates, fortunes, and
conditions of the world, they all reflect upon their own interests, and have
not that spirit of community, which is the soul of good will.

Finally all worldly loves resemble the statue of the god Moloch, which had
outwardly goodly semblances, and inwardly emptiness, and flames; how pleasing;
and gentile soever they seem exteriorly, they are hollow within; they are
burning, troublesome, and having possessed a heart, leave it nothing but
smoke, and bark. Let us then learn the love of God, and in God, and for God,
deriving our affections from Heaven, and perpetually making them reascend to
their source.

In the end (for a third consideration) strive by imitation of our great
Charles to destroy Idols, not of Temples, but of hearts, to render that glory
to the true God which creatures usurp, by defiling with such baseness, that,
which they stole away with so unbounded arrogance.

That gross Idolatry which set gods on altars, which we now would take for
Monsters, is no longer in vogue of this world wherein we live, but another is
slipped into the place thereof much more subtle, and spiritual, which makes
men and women, who live in some eminence of greatness, to adore riches,
beauty, and other gifts, much esteemed by the world.

All is full of idolaters, in the secular life, all is replenished with
flatterers, who reverence the fortune of great ones, and speak of them in so
bold terms, that after they have left shame, they put themselves in hazard to
loose Religion. A Lord, or Lady, is not now adays praised if we say not, It is
a creature to be adored. It is a Divinity sent on earth to make it self
known, and beloved in mortal members, that its spirit begins, where, that, of
the most supreme intelligencies ends; that it is the prime of faces so
renowned amongst the Hebrews, That it has nothing common with others, but
birth, and death. That there needs the life of a Phoenix, to make up such
another masterpeece, and such like vain complements, intolerable even to
those who are most greedy of applauses.

Is it not to fill the world with idols thus to proceed? and to make
cannonizations grounded upon Capritches of a giddy spirit, who desire to make
the dreams of lovers to pass into Maxims of verity?

Let us learn to look on all the greatnesses of the world, as things mortal,
and on all these images of vanity as gliding shadows, which have nothing solid
in them. Let us look on them, as eggs, which make a fair show outwardly, but
have oft-times an Aspicke within: Let us look on them as enchanted apples,
which invite all the world to taste, and poison all that eat them. Let us look
on them as those pieces of Tapistry, which on the best side show countries and
people, and on the back side, seames, stitches, knots, and ugly shapes.

When we see some prosperity which smileth on us, let us think it resembles
those Indian reeds, which grow not without knots, and windings.

If we behold some good in the creature, let us presently lift up our eyes to
the Creator, and give thanks to this spirit of lights, this most pure Act, this
intelligible sphere, fountain of Idaeas, source of Essences, the chief of
beauties, to whom I consecrate my heart, and pen in this little piece,
beseeching him to continue his blessings over my designs, and works. *

FINIS.

