PVRITANISME THE MOTHER, SIN THE DAVGHTER. OR A TREATISE, wherein is
demonstrated from Twenty several Doctrines, and Positions of Puritanisme; That
the Faith and Religion of the Puritans, does forcibly induce its Professors to
the perpetrating of SIN, and does warrant the committing of the same.

WRITTEN By a Catholic Priest, upon occasion of certain late most execrable
Actions of some Puritans, expressed in the page following.

HEREUNTO Is added (as an Appendix) A Funeral Discourse touching the late
different Deaths of two most eminent Protestant Deuines; to wit Doctor Price
Deane of Hereford, and Doctor Butts Vice Chancellor of Cambridge. By the same
Author.

Non est Arborbona, quae facit fructus malos. Luc. 6. Permissu Superiorum,
M.DC.XXXIII.

THE OCCASIONS (lately occurring) of writing this Treatise, are these following.
IN the year 1632. there was discovered in London a Society of certain
Sodomites, to the number of forty, or fifty; all of them being earnest and
hot Puritans, who had their common appointed Meeting Place, for their
abominable Impiety: Of which number diverse of them (and such as were of good
temporal estates and means) were apprehended, and the rest instantly fled.

In this year 1633. there is one called Henoch A peuen, being of age between
thirty and forty, and borne in Clun in Shropshire a most fiery Puritan, and
one who pretends learning. This man, lately killed with an Axe, his own
Brother being asleep, and instantly after his own Mother, because both of
them (being temperate Protestants) did some few days before, receive the
Communion kneeling. This Henoch Apeuen being apprehended, and sent to Shrows
bury Goal, and questioned of this his blouddy Act, justified and defended the
same; and produced for it certain misco^strued places, and texts of Scripture,
taken from the thirteenth, and seauententh Chapters of Deuteronomy.

In this year also 1633. there is one Cade a Minister, who was lately before,
for diverse years, a stipendary Preacher at Hayton, a parish Church in
Lancashire. This man being in Warington (a Town in the said shyre) at a
Vintners house, called Gryses, began to use most earnest words to the said
Vintner and others: That for his part, he believed that there was no Christ, no
Trinity, no God, besides other most blasphemous speeches, not fit to be set
down. The Vintner said to him; Sir, if you be of this Judgment, why then do
you weekly preach of Christ, of the Trinity, and of God? The Minister replied:
I do preach of them, with the same inte^tion that you do draw wine, that is, to
mantaine my self by this my trade of preaching. The Vintner, not brooking these
his blasphemies, accused him thereof (upon his Oath) before a Justice of Peace;
his Name the Author of this Treatise, living far distant from that Country,
could not certainly learn. This Justice (being a Puritan) did set at liberty
(to the great dislike of diverse) the said Minister upon his Answer, That what
he spoke, was spoken only by way of dispute and arguing: The which the Vintner
most confidently denied, auerring that he spoke them by way of persuasion.

Interrogate Gentes, quis audiuit talia horribilia? Ierem. 18. THE EPISTLE
DEDICATORY, To the Unlearned (but vvell-meaning) Puritans.
TO You only, whose Understandings, through your Grand masters wicked
indoctrinating of you, are corrupted; but Wills good and sincere, do I dedicate
this small Work. My Pen has here purposely descended so lovv (not only in
style, but even in Matter) as to accommodate it self to such of you, who are
unlearned, as indeed most of you are.

The conte^ts of this work is of that facility and easines, as that it best
may suite to such of you as be illiterate and defective in the Elements, and
mayn Principles of Learning For though the matter here handled, be of such
weight, as that it is able to convince the judgment of the most learned
Adversary: yet touching the Method used in the delivery hereof, it is facill;
seeing you shall not need here to spend the time in searching after the sense
of produced places of Scripture; or in reuoluing the Ecclesiastical Histories
of the Church; or in pondering and vveighing the places of the Ancient Fathers;
all which do stand subject to many difficulties.

But it will suffice, if so you do but read the many Positions and Tenets of
Puritanisme, (the Faith, which I presume your selves profess) and the lives
of the first teachers of them, most answerable to the said Positions; In all
which you shall find (and this from their own express Testimonies,) That
the very End, or as it were, the Terminus ad quem, Puritanisme in Doctrine,
does finally propend, and incline to, is impurity in manners, and dissolution
in life. And therefore the greater commiseration I have, that many of you, I
presume (whose wills and endeauours are upright and plain) are infected
with the said impious doctrines.

The first inducement, which importuned my pen to undergo this labor, is
the late discovery in London, of a company of Sodomiticall Persons; (vvherof
some are apprehended but diverse fled,) in number about forty, or more; in
state competent, and some of very good means; in Religion all Puritanes; and
in intercourse among themselves (a thing vvonderfull to be reported) so linked,
as that they made a peculiar Society or Body, having a common designed place
for their public meetings: So just reason I have to say a little before, Ierem.
18.
Interrogate Gentes, quis audiuit talia horribilia?

Now, seeing these prodigious Monsters (being so many stains to Nature; for
Sodomitae pessimi era^t, and peccatores coram Domino nimis) Genes. 1^.
are all Puritans in faith, and hold themselves far more illuminated in the
Lord, then the more moderate and learned Protestants; of which number of
learned Protestants, most do wholy abandone and disclaim from the others
Puritanicall Doctrines; And further seeing, that they may make shovv to
vvarrant this their Sodomiticall State from their own Principles, admitting
them for true: Therefore I have thought good at this present, to set down all
such Theoricall Positions of Puritanisme, which do even justify Sin, and
confidently teach its Proselytes, that the greatest Sin whatsoever, cannot
become prejudicial to the salvation of any of the faithful; of which number,
all the foresaid portentuous Wretches (as being Puritans) even by their own
Principles and Doctrines, are taught to be.

I would not have the moderate and more learned Protestant to think, that I
do insimulate him in the rank of the Puritans in general; seeing I well
know, that most of those temperate and sober Protestants do disavovv, and
reject diverse Puritanicall Theses, insisted upon hereafter by me. No It is
only the Hypocritical Puritan, who can vaunt, and brag of his Enthusiasmes,
and Illuminations from the Lord, who depresseth and betramples all Virtue, and
exercise of pious Works, and who does bla^ch and exalt Vice, against whom my
Pen is at this time sharpened.

I well know, that those, who did first stamp most of the doctrins of
Puritanisme, as Luther, Svvinglius, Calvin etc. were not vulgarly called
Puritans; Because in those firster times of Protestancy, the name of Puritan,
was scarce heard of; But now this denomination is peculiarly applied to such
Protestants, who believing certain most damnable doctrines expressed in this
Treatise (and first taught by the former eminent Protestants) do differ by such
their belief, from the more grave and learned Protestant, wholy denying them.

Well, My simple, and vprightly-meaning Puritan; for I presume diverse of You to
be such; (whose Judgment is vvronged by giving assent to thy more learned,
but vvithall more wicked Brethren) I will remit thee to the perusuall of this
ensuing discourse; which when thou have maturely weighed, and found (and
all, by the confessions of the Adversaries themselves) that the most flagitious
Lives of the first teachers of Puritanisme, were in practice most conformable
to their own exitiall doctrines therein; their wicked conuersations thus
serving, as a Comment to paraphraze their wicked Positions.

Then I hope thou vvilt cast off all thy Puritanicall doctrines, hitherto
embraced by thee; or at least vvilt have just reason, to censure with greater
indifferency, both of the doctrines, and of the first Authors thereof; and
then thou may call into thy remembrance our Saviors words; upon which
sentence be bold securely to anchour thy Judgment: Math. 7.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? And with this I cease.

Thine in Christ JESUS, B. C.

A Table of the twenty Puritanicall Doctrines, alleged in this Treatise, which
tend to Vice, Sin, and Impiety, in Faith, Life, and Manners.
1. THe Doctrine of the Private revealing Spirit.

2. The Doctrine, That God is the Author of Sin.

3. That Good works are not only not conducing, but rather hurtful to
Salvation; and therefore, That Faith only justifies.

4. The Doctrine of Imputative Justice.

5. The Doctrine, touching the lessening of Sin, in respect of Man's Salvation.

6. The denial of Freewill.

7. The Doctrine of Reprobation.

8. The Doctrine of Predestination.

9. The denial of Purgatory.

10. The denial of Auricular Confession.

11. The denial of the Necessity of Baptism.

12. The Doctrine of Divorce of Married Persons.

13. The denial of all Authority, in Princes and Magistrates.

14. The Doctrine of Parity of Ministers.

15. The Doctrine of Extraordinary Vocation.

16. The Doctrine, touching Salvation of Heathens.

17. The denial of Miracles.

18. The denial of Holy days, Ceremonies, and Images.

19. The Doctrine of the Inuisibility of the Protestant Church.

20. The denial of all Prayer, by necessary Inferences, drawn from diverse of
the former Doctrines.

The names of those six Chief Protestants, whose flagitious Lives, being
answerable to their wicked Doctrines, are briefly discoursed of, in this
Treatise.

1. Beza.

2. Calvin.

3. Ochinus, who first planted Protestancy in England, in K. Edward the sixth
his reign.

4. Iacobus Andraeas.

5. Swinglius.

6. Luther.

PVRITANISME THE MOTHER, SIN THE DAVGHTER.
The I. Part.
BEFORE we begin to unfold the particular doctrines and Positions of
Puritanisme, (all being even great, and as it were in labor with Libertinisme
in manners) I hold, it will not be reputed a superfluous (...), or By-matter
(but rather a point much conducing to our project in general) if I briefly
touch upon the necessiity of Holiness of doctrine, in the faith of Christ. For
the better understanding of which point, we are to conceive, that Gods sacred
Writ describes two ways of a Christian man; the one it terms The strait
way (meaning of austerity and piety) which leads Math. 7. and Luke 13.
to life. This is Math. 22.
the way of God; Esaias 26.
The way of Justice; Hebr. 19.
in which we ought to walk pleasing God. So deservedly did the Psalmist
celebrate the doctrine of God touching manners, in these words of praise:
Psalm. 29.
Lex Domini immaculata, testimonium fidele, praeceptum Domini illucidum. To
this way the Scripture opposes the way called, The broad way. This is that
Math. 7.
lata porta, and spaciosa, quae ducit ad perditionem: the broad and spacious
gate which leads to destruction; ^. Pet. 3.
promising liberty; and Jude l. 4.
transferring the grace of God into wantonness. Thus we see, that the faith and
doctrine of Christ (by which we are to regulate and govern our conversation
and manners) ought to be in it own nature, most incontaminate, pure, and holy;
voyding the soul of man, of unlawful concupiscence and desires.

That the Catholic Faith of the Roman Church teaches this strayte way of
virtue and piety, is most evident. For it teaches her children to make
restitution for wrongs committed; It teaches, Confession of sins (most
ungrateful to man's nature,) and tyeth the Confitent to sorrow for his sins,
and to perform his enjoined Penance; It teaches the keeping of set Fasts,
and of prescript times of Prayer; It teaches the practicing of all good
works; It teaches the perfection of Evangelical Counsels, to wit, voluntary
Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience; briefly, it teaches and instructs her
children in points, most opposite and contrary to all those licentious
Positions of Puritanisme, insisted by me in this ensuing Treatise: A course of
life so peculiar to the members of the Catholic Church, as that some of our
Adversaries thus fully confess hereof: Jacob. Andraea^ in Concione 4. in c.
^^. Lucae.
A serious and Christian discipline, is censured with us, as a new Papacy, and
a new Monachisme. And Calvin himself acknowledges no less of our Professors
of former times, reprehending them for the same in these words: Calu l. 4.
instit. cap. 12. sect. 8.
Qua in part excusari nullo modo potest etc. In which course (meaning a rigid
course of life and penance) the immoderate austerity of the Ancients cannot be
excused, which did wholly differ from the Commandment of the Lord, and was also
otherwise in it self most dangerous. Thus Calvin.

But now; if (on the contrary) we cast our judgments to the behoulding of the
many Theses, and Speculations of Puritanisme, (whereof I have made choice only
of Twenty, hereafter laid open in this short Treatise) all which are even
fraught, and laden with liberty of doctrine; and withal, if we do observe,
how no meaner men, then the first broachers of them (as willing to be most
firm, and true to their own Principles) have incorporated the said doctrines
in their own most wicked lives (both which points are the Subjects of the two
different Parts of this small Work, and both proved from the Adversaries own
express words,) we shall rest even amazed thereat: such a conformity and
precise correspondency did their lives bear to their doctrines.

We observe, that Nature, which is Gods subordinate Instrument, or Lieutenant
(as I may call it) governing under his divine Majesty the Universe of the whole
world, is endued (among many others) with this one Privilege; to wit, that if
no preueniency be made through the indisposition of the secondary causes, that
the like in Nature ever produces and begets the like. Thus irreasonable
Creatures do engender irreasonable Creatures, and men beget men; and this
oftentimes with such a great resemblance and similitude in the particulars, as
that we may easily glass the Fathers eye in the Child's face. The like (by
allusion) we may affirm of the Theoremes and Principles of faith, whose
immediate subject is Morality or Conversation of life. If the Thearemes do
resent of virtue, piety, and devotion; the fruits which they beget in man's
soul believing them, are vertuousnes of life, Practice of good works,
Austerity in manners, and the like. But if the Theoremes be of such nature, as
that they send and steame forth nothing else, the^ sensuality, libertinisme, and
voluptuousnes; then such as give assent and belief to the said Theoremes, do
in their manners participate of the same profane Qualities.

Touching the virtuous lives of Catholics in particular, proceeding from their
doctrines teaching virtue, I will not here in the displaying thereof
laboriously insist; since my main Project at this present is, to spend these
ensuing leaves in this later point, to wit, to demonstrate first, that the
Principles of Puritanisme do inuolue in themselves the warra^ting of vice,
falsehood, and Impiety, and the dishonouring of virtue: And secondly, that the
first Inuentors or coyners of them, sucking from their own grounds and
elements of doctrine (tanquam ex traduce) the secret poison lying in them, have
been men of most enormous, and facinorous lives. And now to begin with the
doctrines.

1. First I will begin with their chief Principle of the Private Spirit, which
they describe very gloriously to be, D. Whitaker. in controuers. 1 q. 5. c. 3.
and 11.
A persuasion of the truth from the Holy Ghost, in the secret closet of the
belieuers heart. With this I begin, in that it comprehends within it self (as
a greater number does many lesser) diverse other positions of liberty. For first
it begets an unaccustomed pride, and elation of mind, in the belieuers of this
doctrine; seeing it teaches, that every one; that enjoys this spirit (as
every Puritan by his own religion ought to believe, that he enjoys it) is
to prefer in exposition of Scripture, and determining points of faith,
Himself, above all other men's authorities of Gods Church whosoever. And
therefore Luther, as resting himself upon this ground, writes: tom. 2. contra
Regem Angliae. fol. 344.
Gods word is above all etc. I regard not, if a thousand Austins, a thousand
Cyprians, a thousand Churches stood against me. And another, as presuming to
enjoy this spirit, thus condemns all General Councels: Peter Martyr l. de
votis. p. 476.
As long as we insist in General Councels, so long we shall continue in the
Papists errors. And the same privilege of this spirit does every obscure
particular Minister (by the help of his own spirit) challenge to himself.
Now, what an insufferable pride is it for a fellow, being but one, a man lately
appearing, and for most part but meanly learned, to advance his judgment in
matters of faith and Religion above so many, so ancient, and so learned
Doctors and Fathers of Christ's Church, as have flourished?

The second kind of Sin flowing from this Principle, is Multiplicity of
Heresies; Seeing all Heresies fortify themselves for the time, under the
rampyer of this Private Spirit in interpreting the Scriptures. And from hence
it is, that Vincentius Lyrinensis complayneth of the Spiritualists of his days
in these words: l. aduers. haeres.
An Haeretici diuinis Scripturae etc. Do Heretykes cite the divine testimonies
of Scripture? They do, and that most vehemently; but therefore they are so much
the more to be taken heed of. And hence also ryseth that Hydra of different
Sects and Heresies in these days, as the Moderate Protestant, the Puritan,
the Brownist, the Anabaptist, the Anti-trinitarians, and others; all which
Heresies did first take their root from each particular man's private spirit,
interpreting the Scripture in a different sense and construction from the rest
of his Brethren. And hereupon it proceeds that so many hundreds of books
mentioned by Coccius, and by Coccius in thesauro tom. 2. and Hospiniam in his
Historia Sacramentaria part altera.
Hospinian the Protestant, are written by the Professors of the foresaid
Sects, one against another; and often by men of the same Religion, even against
others of their own Brethren.

The third current of this Revealing Spirit runs not only to interpreting of
passages of Scriptures, which merely touch Speculation in matters of faith;
but also to give most sensual explications of such Texts thereof, as may best
sort to liberty and sin. Thus (but to instance in one, in place of many) the
private Spirit has cast such an exposition of these words: Matthew. c. 5.
qui dimiserit vxorem suam, excepta fornicationis causa, facit eam maechari:
and Qui dimissam duxerit, adulterat. Whosoever shall dimisse his wife, except
for cause of fornication, makes her to commit adultery: and he, that shall
marry her that is dimissed, commits adultery. As that it teaches that in
case of fornication on the wives side, the husband may marry again; and
consequently if his future wives should offend therein, might have a dozen,
twenty, or more wives living all at one instant. Thus the Private Spirit for
his better maintayning of his voluptuous doctrine of Polygamy refers those
words, excepta fornicatione, to be the cause of taking a second wife, which
are to be referred only to the cause of a man's dimitting, or parting with his
wife, according to the exposition of In exposit. huius loci.
Jerome, and almost all others.

2. In this next place I proceed to that doctrine of theirs, which teaches
that God is the Author of sin; seeing this blasphemy implicitly contains
within it self (as a greater circle does the less) diverse other strange
Paradoxes, taught by the Puritans. And first we find Luther thus to teach:
Luth. in assertion. damnat. per Leonem. art. 36.
How can man prepare himself to good, seeing it is not in his power to make
his ways evil: for God works the wicked work in the wicked? Again; Vbi
supra. Art. 36.
Nullius est in manu etc. It is not in the power of any man, to think evil or
good; but al things proceed from absolute necessity. Swinglius heerto accords
saying: Tom. 2. de Prouident^ Dei. fol. 166. says: Mouet Deus latronem ad
occidendum etc. and there again: Deo impullore latro occidit. and finally,
Latro coactus est ad peccandum.
God moves the thief to kill, and the thief kills, God procuring him. Yea,
the thief is enforced to kill. Mela^cthon thus affirms of the adultery of
David: In Romans 8.
The adultery of David was the proper work of God, as was the conversion of
Paul. Which sentence in Melancthon L. de universe. Great. p. ^09.
Hemingius the Protestant recites, and utterly condemns Melancthon for such
his judgment therein. Calvin says: Instit. l. ^. c. 18. sect. 1.
That God pronounces Absaloms incestuous pollution of his fathers bed, to be
his own work. And further Calvin lays the foundation of this his doctrine
in these words: Iustit. l. 3 c. 23. sect. 6.
What thing soever God does foresee, the same he wills: and upon this false
ground concludes, that God causes sin in man, because he forefeeth it in
him. Beza conspireth in judgment with the former Authors, thus plainly
teaching: In his display of Popish practices. p. 202.
God exciteth the wicked will of one thief to kill another, guides his hand
and weapon, justly enforcing the will of the thief.

Finally (to omit many others) D. Willet thus iumpeth with the former, saying:
In Synops. Papism. pa. 563.
God not only permits, but leads into temptation, with an active power,
and not permissiuely. Now, howsoever the forenamed Authors do seek to avoid
in words, the scandal necessarily attending on this their blasphemous
doctrine; yet they stand so justly chargeable with teaching, that God is the
author of sin, as that they are for their maintayning this their doctrine,
written against by diverse other most learned Protestants, as by Osiander the
Protestant, whose words are these: Enchirid. contra Caluinist. c. 7.
There opens a gulf of hell of Caluinian doctrine, in which God is said to
be the Author of sin. By Castalio, thus inueighing against Calvin: Lib ad
Calu. de praedest.
By this means not the devil, but the God of Calvin is the Father of lies; By
Iacobus Andreas, who thus plainly writes; In epit tom. Colloq. Montisbelgar.
p. 47.
Deus est author peccati secu^dum Bezam; finally by In Ecclesiast. Policy. l.
5. p. 104.
M. Hooker, In his defense of M. Hooker. page 62.
D. Couell, and diverse others for breuity here omitted: so crasse and repugnant
is this their doctrine to those words of holy writ: Non Deus volens
iniquitatem, tu es; as also to the sentence of S. James the Apostle: Cap. 1.
let no man when he is tempted, say he is tempted of God; for God is not a
tempter of Evils, and he temptteth no man; but every one is tempted of his
own concupiscence etc. Psalm. 55.


Now, admitting this doctrine of God, being the Author of our sin, to be
true; how willingly is man drawn to Sin by giving assent thereto? Seeing by
this doctrine he may disburden himself of all fault therein, and transfer it
upon God, as being the highest and most forcible cause or agent thereof: so
strong a sanctuary he has for his Sin. And which is more, he may pretend,
that if it be the part of a dutiful Subject, officiously to perform, what his
Prince commands; much more then does that man deserve reward (rather then
punishment) who with all sedulity, and readiness of mind and will stands
prepared (as an inferior and serviceable Instrument) to put that in execution,
which God) who is the supreme Lord of all) commands, wills, and even
forces him to act, or do. And yet more; this doctrine even potentially
commands us to sin; seeing the Scripture exhorts us in infinite places to
do good, and consequently to sin; for sin (if God be the Author thereof)
is good; for we read: Genes. 1.
Cuncta quae fecerat Deus, erant valde bona.

Lastly by this doctrine, we ought not to repeat that passager in our Lords
Prayer: Forgive us our trespasses etc. by reason we do not offend in
committing them; since not we, but God works them: yea, we should rather be
blamed and rebuked for reciting of the said sentence; because it would imply
that we had some penitency, and repentance of them; but it is a thing
displeasing to God, for man to have a dislike of that which God works in him,
or to be refractory or stubborn to his will and disposal; since the same
Lords Prayer teaches us, that we ought in all things to say, Fiat voluntas
tua. See thou not (good Reader) not only how potently this former blasphemous
doctrine moves man to commit any sin whatsoever, as laying the fault thereof
upon God; but also how it freeth him from all future grief or repentance
thereof; as presuming himself to be but a naked Instrument, necessarily
concurring to the performance of Gods will and pleasure in him? And thus far
of the working efficacy of this most impious doctrine, of God being the Author
of sin.

3. In this next place we will descend to the doctrine touching Good works,
first broached by Luther, and others, and now entertained by the Puritans of
these days; where we shall find, that in their depressing of them they are
most luxuriant and plentiful; and consequently, that they bear a favorable
eye to vice and sensuality. And first I will display their doctrines of good
works in general; that performed, I will descend to good works in
particular. Now for the greater vnderualewing of them, Luther thus
endodoctrinateth his followers. In his sermons englished 1578. page 47.
Works take their goodness of the Author; and Ibid. pa. 276.
no work is disallowed, unless the author thereof be disallowed Luther further
thus teaches: Luther upon the Galath. englished. fol. 68.
It is impiety to affirm, that faith, except it be adorned with charity,
iustifyeth not.

Swinglius expressly says (thereby to deter men from practicing of good
works) that, quaecunque promissa operibus nostris facta sunt, Hyperbolae sunt;
All promises made in the Scripture to our works: As, if thou will enter into
life, keep the Commandments etc. are but amplifications of speech above the
truth.

M. Fox records, Tindall the Protestant to say: Act. Mon. page 1336.
That there is no one work better then another: as touching pleasing of God:
to make water, to wash dishes, to be a Sower, or an Apostle, all is one to
please God. These men yet proceed further: for Illyricus (the famous Lutherane)
thus writes: Il^yrie. in praefat. ad Romans
To affirm that good works be in any respect necessary to salvation, (he
meaning only, but by way of accompanying faith) is a Papisticall error: he
futher terming it: The doctrine of the new Papists. And Conradus Slussemburg
(the great Protestant) writes: that In Catalog. Haeret. l. ^3. in epist.
dedicatoria. p. 22.
Good works are not necessary (necessitate praesentiae) by way of presence to
man's justification. Yea Luther proceeds yet further, teaching (mark good
Reader and be amazed) that, Luth. tom. 1. propos. 3.
Fides nisi sit sine etc. Faith, except it be without even the least good
works, does not justify, nay it is not faith. Which saying In his defense of
M. Hooker, printed 1603. pa. 42.
D. Couell, acknowledging it to be Luthers, terms: In his defense of M.
Hooker. page 42.
Harsh, and justly called in question by the Church of Rome. Upon this former
doctrine these men further teach, Luth. sermon. de Moyse.
that the keeping of the ten Commandments do not belong to us Christians. And
the Deuines of Wittenberg (as also Melancthon) are also charged with this
error by Hutterus in his explicat. libri Concordiae. printed 1608. art. 5. c.
1 page 478.
Hutterus, public Protestant Professor at Witte^berg: He calling the
defendours of this position: Anti-nomi, that is, Enemies to the Law.

The same doctrine is (to omit others) taught by M. Fox, thus saying: Act. Mon.
1335.
The ten Commandments were given us, not to keep them, but to know our
damnation, and to call for mercy of God. With whom agrees herein D. Whitakers
in these words: Contra Camp. rai. 8.
Qui credunt, ij non sunt sub lege, sed sub gratia etc. They which believe are
not under the Law, but under Grace. What is more to be said? Christians are
freed from the curse of the Law; meaning from the punishment, due for the
breach of the Commandments. I will conclude this point with D. Willets
words: Synops. Pap. page 564.
The law remains still impossible to be kept by us, through she weakness of
our flesh, etc. Thus by these men's doctrine we sin not in breaking any of the
Commandments, as in stealing, committing adultery, and the like; for man
sins only in breach of those precepts which are given him to observe and
keep. To conclude this passage of good works in general, Luthers judgment of
works is this: Luth. in Assert. Art. 32^
All good works, God judging them, are mortal sins, God resting propitious,
venial and more pardonable.

Now, if Luthers doctrine be here good, then follows it, that who labors
to perform a good work, is of the devil: my reason is this: we read, that 1.
John. 3.
who commits sin is of the Devil: but who does a good work, sins:
because by the former doctrine of Luther, we are taught, that every good work
is sin. Thus according to Luthers doctrine, he sins, who prays, who
practices the works of faith, hope, and Charity, seeing all these in the
judgment of Luther, are sins. Again, Gods word commands us to fly sin:
Psalm. 36.
Declina a malo, Therefore we are commanded by God to fly the doing of any
good work; because every good work in Luthers judgment, is sin. See how
forcibly this doctrine of Luther by necessary sequels and deductions
withdraws us from the practicing of virtue, and exercise of Good Works. Now
to come to good works in particular.

The three principal Good works, which necessarily and essentially concur
to the vows of every Religious order are; to wit, Chastity, by the which a man
voweth perpetual continency from the pleasures of the flesh, according to
that, Math. ^9.
Sunt Eunuchi, qui seipsos castrauerunt, propter regnum caelorum. Poverty, by
the which is voluntarily renounced the enjoying in private of any temporal
goods, as riches, honors etc. only resting content with poor fare, or diet,
and apparel; Math. 19.
Si vis perfectus esse, vade, vende omnia quae habes, and da pauperibus, and
habebis the saurum in caelo.

Obedience, through which the will and mind of one sta^ds, in all lawful
things subject to the will and disposal of his superior. Now mark, how these
three virtues are betrampled upon by our Adversaries, with all indignity and
scorn. Touching Chastity, D. Whitakers judgment is, That Contra Cam^rat. 8. p.
15^.
Virginity is not simply good; but after a certain manner. But Luther
proceeds further, saying: Tom. ^. Wittenberg. ad cap. 7.1. Cor.
If we respect the nature of Matrimony, and single life, Matrimony is as gold,
and the spiritual state of single life, as dung.

Concerning Voluntary Poverty, D. Willets censure is this: In his Synops. page
245.
He is an Enemy to the glory, of God, who changes his rich estate, wherein he
may serve God, for a poor. Touching Obedience, you may see how they stand
disaffected toward it even out of their own not practicing of it, since they
loath all Obedience with a most inexplicable dislike. I will close this point
with their doctrine of fasting, to which virtue the Religious men of the
Catholic Church are most devoted; M. Perkins judgment is, that In his reformed
Catholic. page 220.
fasting in it self is a thing indifferent, as is eating, and drinking. And D.
Willet accords thereto, thus writing: In Synops. page 241.
Neither is God better worshipped by eating, or not eating. And more
particulerly touching the denial of set times of fasting, appointed only for
spiritual ends, D. Fulk against the Rhemish Testam. in Math. 15.
D. Fulke is not ashamed to object and insist in the authority of the old
Heretic Montanus, for the denial thereof. And D. Whitakers blusheth not to
call the Catholic Churches use therein, D. Whitaker, cont. Duraeum. l. 9. pa.
839.
The doctrine of Devils. Thus far of the former points, of Vowed Chastity,
voluntary Poverty, voluntary Obedience, and fasting; in the depressing whereof,
our Adversaries do withal depresse our Catholic doctrine of Evangelical
Counsels, which teaches man to arrive to more high points of perfection in
virtue, then the vulgar and common sort of Christians are accustomed to
exercise. And upon these grounds and doctrines they deny the lawfulnes of
Monasteries, and other Religious houses; whitherunto men and women retire
themselves, for the better serving of God in austerity of life, and abandoning
the pleasures of the world, so pernicious and exitiall to man's soul.

4. In the next place we will touch a little upon our Adversaries doctrine, of
Imputative Justice; by which they teach, that man has no true and real
Justice contracted of faith, hope, and charity, inherent in his soul, but that
his Justice is merely relative, as being only an application of Christ's
Justice unto him. By the which nevertheless Calvin teaches, that L. 3. Instit.
c. 2. numb. 28.42.
a man is as secure of his salvation; as if he did already enjoy heaven. And
accordingly hereto our Adversaries further teach, that Illyricus in varijs
libris de Originali peccato Calui. Insti. l. 2. c. 3. Kempnit. contra cens. Col.
the Image of God is wholly obliterated in man; all his fair impressions are
so extinct, as that the regenerate and Holy man is intrinsecally nothing else,
then mere Corruption or contagion. Now these doctrines are forged by them,
thereby to withdraw us from seeking to be truly virtuous, (seeing by this their
former doctrine, man is not possibly capable thereof;) but that thereby we
disburdening our selves of keeping the Commandments, or exercising of virtuous
actions, may only by faith seek to lay hands upon the kingdom of Heaven.

5. But now to cast our eye upon the other end of the balance, and as we have
here above seen, how our Adversaries have depressed and beaten down the worth
of all virtue and good works; so let us a little consider, how they labor to
extenuate, and lessen by their positions, the atrocity of all Vice and Impiety,
that so they may seem less worthy of reprehension and dislike, for their
embracing of such courses. And first. Let us take into our consideration, that
Position of theirs, which teaches, that all sins So teaches Calu. in
Antidot. Conc. Trident. And Wickliff apud VValdens. de Sacram. c. 134.
are equal, if so God, as Judge, do weigh and ponderate them. Now does not
this doctrine much encourage that man, who is resolved to commit but any one
lesser sin, also to perpetrate the most sacinorous crime whatsoever, seeing
he is herby taught, that the lesser sin, and the greatest are alike, and of
the same nature, in Gods just trutination and weighing of them? But to proceed
further. Touching the division of sins, they teach, that to the true
Professors of the Gospel, the most flagitious sin that is, is only
Musculus in loc. com. de peccat. sect. 5. D. Fulk against the Rhemish Test. in
epist. loan sect. 5 Calu. Instit. l. 3 c. 4. sect. 28.
Venial: thus they, making the difference of sins not to proceed from their
difference in their own nature, but from the diversity of the parties
committing them. Now every one of our Precisians is bound by the Principles of
his own Religion, to believe himself to be one of the faithful: Therefore let
him sin in never so grievous a manner, such sin in him is but venial, and
easily pardonable. O Phrensy of Judgment! And hence it is, that some of them do
thus write: D. Wotton in his answer to the late Popish Articles. page 92. and
41.
To the faithful the sin is pardoned, as soon as it is committed. And D.
Whitakers accordingly teaches, that, De Eccles contra Bellar. controu. 2 q. 5.
page 301.
Si quis actum fidei habet, ei peccata non nocent; who exercises an act of
faith (to wit, that Christ died for him) that man no sins can hurt. And hence
further it is, that D. Fulke teaches that In the Tower disput. with Edm.
Cam^ian, the second days Conference.
David when he committed adultery, was and remained the child of God: And
again, M. Fox thus writes: Act. Mon. page 1338.
When we sin, we diminish not the glory of God, all the danger of sinning,
being the evil example of our neighbor. Another says: That Vide Epitom.
Colloq. Montisbelg. p. 44. and 48.
He, who does once truly believe, cannot afterward fall from the grace of God,
or lose his faith by adultery, or any other like sin: and accordingly, Beza
affirms, that Beza in respons. ad Colloq. Montisbel part. alter p. 73.
David by his adultery and murder did not lose the Holy Ghost, and fall from
his faith. And if David still continued in that happy state, why may not other
Adulterers and murderers enjoy the same privilege and warrant? To conclude,
the last up shot of them in this point is thus delivered in Luthers words:
Luth. in captiuit. Babylon. fol. 74.
Ita dives est homo Christianus etc. A Christian man is so rich, as that he
cannot lose his salvation, quantiscunque peccatis, by any sins how great
soever, except he will not believe. And for a close of all, he further thus
teaches: Luth. in loc. com. cl^ss 5 c. 17. p. 68.
Vt nihil iustificat, nisi fides; ita nihil peccat, nisi incredulitas. As
nothing iustifyeth, but faith, so nothing sins, but unbelief and
incredulity. Thus far hereof.

Now to recapitulate a little. If a man cannot loose his salvation, but only by
want of belief: if a Murderer and adulterer, even during the time of
perpetrating these acts, do not loose the Holy Ghost, but remains the child
of God; if who once belieueth cannot after fall from the grace of God; if one
act of faith takes away all Sin; if sin be pardoned to the faithful,
as soon as it is committed; if to the faithful the most atrocious Sin is but
venial; if the greatest Sin be but equal to the least; To conclude, if we are
to believe, that not we, but God himself is the author of our sin, he
forcing, and compelling us to theft, murder etc. and that the Adultery of
David was Gods proper work; I leave to any indifferent judgment, whether
considering how prove and propense Man is to Sin of his own corrupt nature,
these Theoremes and Principles of our Adversaries do not mightly encourage men
to commit Sin, and this with all impunity, and want of fear of punishment.

But I will conclude these two former paragraphs of good works, and sins, with
some acknowledgements of the learned Protestants touching these two former
points; and how prejudicial this doctrine of a Justifying faith is to virtue,
and grateful to sinners. Iacobus Andreas (that learned Protestant) speaking in
the person of these defendours of only faith, with reprehe^sion of them, thus
discourses: Concione 4. in c. 21. Lucae.
We have learned to be saved only by faith, we cannot satisfy by our Alms,
fasting, prayer; therefore permit us, that we may give over these things,
seeing that we may be saved otherwise by the grace of God. And further the same
Protestant thus writes: Andraeas, vbi supra.
That all the world may know them to be no Papists, nor to trust in good
works, they take course to put none in practice. Whereunto M. Stubs the
Protestant, thus accords: In his Motives to good works, printed 15^6. page
^2.
The Protestant trusts to be saved by a bare and naked faith (deceauing
himself) without good works, and therefore either cares not for them, or at
least sets little by them. Who further thus writes: There are (I fear me)
mo good works done daily by the Papists, then by the Protestants; he giving
his reason thereof in his former words: so evident it is, even by the
confessions of the learned Protestants themselves, that the doctrine of only
faith, of disualewing the worth of good works, and of lessening the
grieuousnes of Sin, opens a fludgate to all Impiety whatsoever, and
precludeth or shuts up the way, for the exercise of Virtue, and Piety.

6. In this place I will treat of Freewill. The which our Adversaries deny to
be in man, The Protestants are so full and confessed in the denial of
freewill, as it would be but superfluous to amasse together the many such their
aknowledgments. Therefore I will content my self with Luthers doctrine herein.
His words are these: Luth. in assertion. Art. 36. Th same doctrine is taught
by Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 3. sect. 11. by M. Willet his Synops. page 808. 810.
and by all other Precisians.
Freewill is a fiction in things, or a title without substance, because it is
in no man's power to think any thing evil or good, but all things etc. happen
by absolute necessity. And thereupon in hatred of freewill, Luther did write a
book, entituling it, de seruo arbitrio; in one place whereof he thus further
teaches: The foreknowledge and omnipotency of God fights against our
freewill. So forgetful it seems was Luther of those words of our Savior:
Math. 23.
How often would I have gathered thy children together etc. and thou would
not?

Now does not the denial of Freewill become a Sanctuary for all Sins
whatsoever? May not the thief say in his own defense by force of this
doctrine; that it is not in his Freewill or choice to forbear stealing, the
Murderer to forbear Homicide and Mansslaughter, the Fornicatour and
adulterous man or woman to forbear Adultery or Fornication, the traitor to
forbear committing of treason against his Prince or common wealth? and are
they not all secured and justly exempt from al punishments for such their sins,
admitting (as they are catechized by this their denial of Freewill) that it
was not in their power to abstain from the perpetrating of the forsaid sins?
Since punishment is due only to such transgressions, which are in the power of
the tra^sgressor to perform, or not to perform.

7. I will next come to our Adversaries doctrine of Reprobation and
Predestination; since they chiefly depend upon the denial of freewill.
Touching Reprobation they thus teach. Calvin thus writes of this point: Calu.
Instit. l. 3. c. 23. sect. 6.
Co^silio nutuque etc. God does ordain by his Counsel and decree, that among
men some be borne destined to certain damnation from their Mothers womb; who
by their destruction may glorify God: and this without any respect had to their
works good or evil. And Beza further in defense hereof maintayneth that In
respons. ad act. Colloq. Montisbelg. part. alter. page 215. and 221.
God did not suffer death for those men, so ordained to destruction.

The same Beza further yet proceeds herein, thus saying: Beza vbi supr. in
praefat. p. ^1. et. p. 123.
Many Infants (of believing Parents) being baptized, are notwithstanding damned
though the secret decree of God. And hee^pon he most blasphemously thus
concludes: Bez. in his Treatise Englished and entitled the display of Popish
practices. page 17. and 31.
God creates some to destruction, creates to perdition, predestinateth some
to his hatred and destruction. So little Beza regards those words of holy
writ: Ezech. 33.
As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his ways, and live. And again: 2. Petr^ 3. and 1. Thessal.
5.
God is not willing, that any perish, but that all return to penance.

8. Now, touching the doctrine of the Certainty of man's salvation, or
Predestination, thus our Adversaries teach. Luther affirms, that Tom. ^.
epist. Latin. fol. 334. ad Philipp.
no sin can draw us from Christ, although we should commit fornication, or
kill a thousand times in one day. And Iacobus Andraeas confirms the same in
these words: In epitom. Colloq. Montisbelg. page 48. and 44.
He who once truly belieueth cannot afterward fall from the grace of God by
his adultery, or any other like sins; And heerupon (as above it is set down)
they teach, that David, when he did commit murder, was, and remained the Child
of God, and consequently, he was certain of his salvation. To which end of
certainty of Salvation, D. Whitakers thus writes: Fides D. Whitak. contra
Camp. rat. 8.
aut perpetua, aut nulla est. And hereupon they conclude, that even during man's
committing of Sin, he is certain of Salvation, seeing it would otherwise
follow, (which our Adversaries will not admit) that his former certainty was no
certainty at all: so cross these men tread to the steps of the holy Scripture:
Ezech. 18.
If the just man do turn away from his righteousness etc. in his sin he shall
dye. And, Romans 11.
If we abide in his goodness, otherwise we shall be cut of.

Well now, to look back upon these two doctrines of our Adversaries, touching
Reprobation, and Predestination or Election: mark, how forcibly they incite a
man to all turpitude in manners: may not any man believing the same doctrines
to be true, thus dispute with himself? Either I am already vnalterably and
infallibly reprobated to Hell, or predestined to Heaven, and this without any
reference or foresight of my works, good or bad. (this the former alleged
Protestants teach me to believe, and this I am to believe) If I be reprobated,
let me exercise never so many good works, and live piously in the highest
degree, yet certain it is, I shall be damned. If I be predestined to Salvation
and Heaven, then cannot any sins committed by me (though never so great and
enormous, seeing my predestination is without preuision of works) hinder my
Salvation, but certainly and assuredly I shallbe saved. Seeing then a bad life
cannot hinder my salvation, nor a good life prevent my Reprobation, I will
during the time I live, enjoy all pleasures whatsoever (though never so
unlawful and prohibited in the Holy Scripture) without any remorse of
conscience. Upon these said grounds the belieuers of them may, in this former
manner discourse, and I probably assure my self, that many hundreds in England
believing our Adversaries doctrines therein, do upon such their belief,
ingulfe themselves in all wickedness, and dissolution of life and manners. Thus
far briefly of this point.

9. I proceed to their denial of Purgatory. By the denial thereof men are
taught, that let them practice all wickedness whatsoever, either in murder,
adultery, fornication, Robbery, extorsion or any otherwise, yet if at the hour
of his death, a man have but on act of faith, he is certain to go immediately
to Heaven, without suffering any temporal pains for his former Sins, or
without making restiturion for the injustice, losses, and wrongs by him
proffered to others. Now this doctrine (I say) much encourages men to Sin;
and the rather, seeing their final Salvation rests only but upon a bare act
of faith and belief, which they maintain, ever to be in the power of the
faithful to perform: So little ear they give to those words of Holy
Scripture, spoken of the state of the man cast in prison, whereby is shadowed
the soul in Purgatory: Math. 5.
Non exibis inde, donec reddas nouissimum quadrantem.

10. The denial of Auricular Confession of our sins, in like sort much
harteneth a man to sin, seeing by that doctrine he is taught, that it is
sufficient to confess them in heart only to God: whereas on the contrary, to
believe, that God has appointed, that there are certain men allotted by him
in his Church, to hear all particular sins of others, much deterreth and
withdraws us from sinning, considering that shame is a great hinderance of
sins, and how ungrateful and unpleasing it is to man's nature to reveal
every secret sin, even in express and particular words (or else not to have
the^ remitted to him) to another man. But we must rest contented with the
Institution of Christ: Ioa^. 20.
Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven; and whose you shall
retain, they are retained. But how shall it be known, what sins are to be
forgiven, and what sins to be retained, except it be first known, what the
particular sins are?

11. Our Adversaries denial of the necessity of Baptism, causes (no doubt)
that many Children borne of Puritaine Parents are not baptized at all, but
remain during all their life in that Heathenish estate, subject to eternal
damnation. That the necessity of this Sacrament is not required, is taught by
Luther, who thus teaches: Lib. de captiu. Babylon.
If thou have received Baptism, it is well, if thou want it, no loss:
Believe, and thou art saved before thou be baptized. That Baptism of Children
borne of the faithful, is not necessary, is further taught (as appears from
the Page 105.
Survey of the book of Common Prayer) by In his meditation upon the 122.
Psalm. page 92.
M. Willet, and most resolutely by Calvin, and Beza in many places ouerlong to
recite. But we find Gods Holy Word to teach the contrary: Joan. 3.
Unless a man be borne again of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God.

12. Touching the licentious doctrine of divorce in case of any impotency, or
otherwise, Luther thus teaches: Sermon. de Matrimonio.
If the wife will not, or cannot (to wit, perform the act due to Marriage) let
the maid come. Of which sentence D. Whitak. was so ashamed, as that he thus
writes: Contra Camp. rat. 8.
Luthers judgment in this kind of divorce, I do not defend. Yet Luther further
teaches thus: Luth. in Proposit. de Big^m^a edit. 1528. propos. 62. 65. 66.
Poligamy, or having many wives at once, is no more abrogated, then is the rest
of Moses Law; and it is free, as being neither commanded, nor forbidden. Bucer
is as indulgent and full herein as Luther, for Bucer teaches divorce, and
marying again with another, in case that Bucer in Script. Anglic de regno
Christi. l. 2. c. 26. c 37. c. c. 42.
one depart from the other, in case of Homicide, or theft, or but in repayring
to the Company or banquets of immodest persons; or in case of incurable
infirmity by Childbirth, or of the man's falling into Lunacy, or otherwise. And
further it is taught expressly by Beza lib. de repudijs and diuortijs. p. 1^3.
Beza, In Synops. of the year 1600. page 685.
M. Willet, In partition: Theolog. page 739.
Amandus Polanus, and others, that in case but of the husbands departure, he
might becaused by his wife to be proclaimed, and if he did not return within
the time appointed, that thereupon the Minister might give the wife license to
marry again. I assure my self, there are many hundred wives in England, who
would be glad of their husbands long absence, and not return, and of the
execution of this doctrine, thereby to satisfy the flesh by marying again; So
dangerous is this Position of divorce (if full practice thereof were made, as
in part it is) to the state of wedlock, and to the inviolable bond of
chastity, which the one party in marriage owes to the other. But let us
remember, that we read: Math. 19.
Which God has joined together, let no man separate.

13. Touching the authority of Princes and all Magistrates, our Adversaries do
strangely dictate. And first Luther thus teaches: Luth de secular. potest. in
tom. 9 German.
Among Christians, none can, or ought to be a Magistrate; Luth. vbi supra.
each one is to other equally subject. And yet more: In se^mons Englished, and
printed. 1579. p. 97.
As Christ cannot suffer himself to be tied by laws etc. so ought not the
conscience of a Christian to suffer them. With Luther agrees Swinglius in thus
betrampling all sovereignty: Tom. 1. in explana. Art. 42.
When Princes do evil, and contrary to the rule of Christ, they may be
deposed. Calvin is no less sparing in censuring Princes, for thus he writes.
^n Daniel c. 6.
Earthly Princes deprive themselves of authority, when they erect themselves
against God etc. and we are rather to spit upon their faces, then to obey them.
I will close this Scene with Beza, who did write a book entitled, de iure
Magistratuum in subditos: A book so destroying all obedience to the Prince and
Magistrate, that D. Sutcliffe thus censureth thereof: In his answer to a
certain Libel supplicatory. p 75.
Beza in his book of the power of Magistrates, does arm the Subjects against
their Prince, in these cases etc. And further says thereof: Vbi sup. p. 98.
It is a book, which overthrows in effect all authority of Christian
Magistrates. But here I would demand of these men, how do they answer those
divine Testimonies? Romans c. 13.
Who resists the Power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist,
purchase to themselves damnation. And again: Romans vbi supr.
We ought to be subject even of necessity, and for conscience sake.

But now let us contemplate a little upon the dangerous effects ordinarily
ensuing of this doctrine of denial of the authority of Princes, and
Magistrates. And first if Luthers doctrine be true, that each one is equal to
another, and that there ought to be no Magistrates: This being (I say) once
granted, what an insufferable confusion, and Anarchy would there be in the
society of Christians? seeing from hence it would follow, that there should be
no laws to keep men in duty, no Magistrates to punish the delinquents, no
rewards for well-deseruing men, no chastisement for malefactors. Would there
not be in such a State daily perpetrated all homicide, theft, rapine, incest,
Adultery, fornication, and all other most flagitious crimes whatsoever, and all
this with all impunity, and without the least fear of any castigation* Were
not this a Common wealth fitting to be instituted rather by man's Ghostly Enemy,
as being the high way to lead souls to Hell, then by Christ, who suffered death
for our sins?

Again, admit that the subjects might rise at their pleasure in arms against
their King, as the former sentences of Swinglius, Calvin, and Beza do warrant;
what tumults, what intestine seditions, and simulties, what insurrections would
there be in every Monarchy, and absolute State? finally what utter euisceration
and disbowelling (as it were) would be made in every such nation even by it
own borne subjects? And were it not far better, for such Princes rather to
hide themselves in solitude and obscurity, and to live under the hatches of a
private state, then to be placed upon this glorious (yet most dangerous)
Theater, or Stage of supreme sovereignty and domination?

14. To this former may be adjoined their doctrine, of Parity of Ministers in
the Church, by the which they teach, that there ought not to be any Bishops,
but that every Minister should have equal authority and Jurisdiction. All the
Puritanes are so precipitate and headlong in this doctrine, as that it would be
needles to set down their many sentences thereof: Therefore I will content my
self with the words of our English Puritanes, who thus write: This is to be
seen in the book entitled: Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, printed
1604.
The government of the Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops, and Deanes,
is Antichristian, and repugnant to the word of God.

Now if all Ministers should have one and the same authority, and that there
should be no subordination amongst them, what a distraction and confusion would
follow to be in the Church? And how ready would every illiterate Minister be to
ve^t out new doctrines and Heresies, without all control; and such Heresies,
as would not only infect the understanding with falsehood and error, but also
the will with Sin and wicked conversation? Again, who then would there be to
chastise the Ministers themselves for their great dissolution of life, touching
drinking, fornication, and adultery, too much used by many of the^ at this day
in England, to the great disedifiing of many more sober and temperate
Protestants.

15. To the former I may range their doctrine of extraordinary calling; by the
which they teach that there is extraordinary of calling Ministers immediately from
God himself, without the concurrency thereto of man, or imposition of any
Bishops hand. And accordingly we find Calvin thus to writ of himself and other
first Preachers of the Protestant Religion: The Protestant Lascitius recites
this saying of Calvin. l. de Russor. Muscouit. etc. c. 23.
Quia Papae Tyrannide etc. Because through the tyranny of the Pope, true
Succession and Ordination was broken of, therefore we stood in need of a new
Course heerin; and this function or calling was altogether extraordinary. To
which accord the words of M. Perkins, saying: In his works printed 1605. fol.
916.
The calling of Wickliffe, Hus, Luther, Oecolampadius, Peter Martyr etc. were
extraordinary. As also those of D. Fulk^: Against Stapleton, Martial. etc.
page 2.
The Protestants, who first preached in these days, had extraordinary Calling.
But how repugnant is this their calling, to the calling of the ministry
mentioned in holy Scripture? Hebr. 5.
No man takes the honor (vz. of Priesthood) to himself, but he that is
called of God, as Aaron was. And again: Romans 10.
How shall they preach, except they be sent?

But now here I urge, that as Calvin and the rest, by challenging to themselves
an extraordinary Calling, broached the former new doctrines, touching liberty
and licentiousnes of life, never before heard of; so why may not others in like
manner hereafter, as of late the Libertins, the family of love, and other
sectaries have done, arise, and assuming to themselves the like privilege of
Extraordinary Calling from God alone, dogmatize other new doctrines, as
pernicious to manners, virtue, and good life, as these former wicked doctrines
are?

16. In this place I will touch the string of the most wicked doctrine of
Swinglius, and other his fellow-Ministers, who teach plainly, That Heathens,
not believing in Christ (and so ever continuing) may yet be saved. For first
Swinglius does thus gentilize: Swingl. in l. epist. Oecolamp. and Swingl. l. 1.
page 39.
Ethnicus, si piam mentem domi foueat, Christianus est, etsi Christum ignoret.
A Heathen leading a good life, is a Christian, though he know not Christ. And
Swinglius further particularly writes: that Swingl. tom. 2 fol. 118.
Hercules, Theseus, Socrates etc. are now in the same Heaven with Adam, Abel,
Enoch. Finally Swinglius proceeds also further teaching thus: L. epist.
Oecolamp. and Swingl. l. 2. p. 513.
Gentilium liberos nulla lex damnat. No law damneth the Children of Gentiles.
This Opinion of Swinglius is also defended (and himself for teaching the same
highly extolled) by Vid. Swingl. tom. 2. fol. 550.
Bullinger, as also by ^n vita Bullingeri.
Symlerus, the Protestant, and others. This doctrine is so resolutely
maintained by Swinglius and others, that Echarius (a learned Protestant) thus
by way of complaining thereof, writes: Echarius in his fasciculus
Controuersiarum, printed Lipsiae. anno 1609. cap. 19.
Quod Socrates, Aristides, Numa, Camillus, Hercules etc. Swinglius writes to
the King of France, that Socrates, Aristides, Numa, Camillus, Hercules, the
Scipions, the Catoes, and other Gentills are partakers of eternal life. And
Swinglius is defended for teaching this doctrine, by the Tygurine Divines,
Bullinger, Gualterus, Hardenburgius, etc.

Thus far the foresaid Echarius. O, what Scholia or Paraphrase can Swinglius
and his compartners cast upon those choking words of divine Scriture? Acts. 4.
There is not any other name under heaven, given to men (then that of JESUS)
wherein we must be saved. And John. 4.
Christ is the Savior of the world: 1. Joan. ^.
The reconciliation for our sins; and not only, but also for the sins of
the whole world.

But now what indignity to the Redeemer of the world, and to all Christian
Religion, does this former most blasphemous doctrine of Swinglius and his
fellows exhale and breath forth? Are they Christians, who teach thus? Were the
many Prayers, watchinges, whipping his most sacred body, crowning his reverend
head with thorns, buffeting of him by the Jews, and finally his most painful
and precious death and passion (of all which pains every little touch, in
regard of the impretiable and infinite worth of the person so tormented, was
able to redeem thousands of worlds) so needles and superfluous, as that
Profane Heathens (who only believe in general (if so much) that there is a
God, or a Divine Providence,) though wholly disclayming in the belief of
Christ, and treading all Christian faith and Religion under their feet, can
nevertheless be saved? Hier. c. 2.
O you Heavens, be astonished at this, be afraid, and utterly confounded.

17. Here may occur the Adversaries doctrine touching their denial of all
Miracles since the Apostles times: A doctrine which secretly leads the way to
Atheism. For the greatest reason that the Atheists allege in defense of their
blasphemous Atheism, is, that they hold Nature (that is, the connexions of
Physical causes with the effects) to be the supreme cause of all things, and
therefore these incredulous persons desire nothing more in trial of this their
misbeliefe, then to see any thing performed above the ordinary, and usual
course of nature; which they absolutely deny, that it can be performed. And
accordingly hereto, I know a man (witty enough, but dissolute in manners, and
partly suspected of Atheism, but in external show a Protestant) who is
accustomed to say, that he would gladly see the devil, because he would gladly
see something above the ordinary course of nature. I beseech God, that his
desire in the end of his life be not accomplished.

Now, how forward our Precisians are in denying all Miracles since the Apostles
times, may appear from the liberal Confessions in this point of D. Fulke, who
thus acknowledges: Against the Rhem. Testament. in Apocalypse. p. 13.
It is known, that Calvin, and the rest, whom the Papists call Arch-Heretikes,
work no miracles. And of D. Sutcliffe: In his Exam. of D Kellisons Survey,
printed 1606. page 8.
We do not practice miracles, nor do we teach, that the doctrine of truth is to
be confirmed with miracles.

Thus we see, that these men are in their Judgments so strongly persuaded,
that all Miracles (by the which God suspendeth stupendiously the working of
nature) are so fully ceased, since the days of the Apostles, as that they
freely confess all want of working Miracles to have been in the plantation of
their own Religion; directly impugning that course of working Miracles granted
by our Savior to his Apostles, at the first preaching of the Gospel: Math. 10.
As you go, preach, heal the sick, cleanse the leprous, raise up the dead,
cast out the Devils etc.

18. Our former Adversaries do in great riot of splenefull acclamations, cry
out in their Pulpits and writings against Holy Days, (the Sabbath day only
excepted) with great auersion and dislike of them. This their so much affected
doctrine wholly introduces a forgetfulness of the Mysteries of Christian faith:
for those days were instituted by the Church of Christ, in her Primitive
times, to put us in mind of the mysteries of our Faith. As for example,
Christmas day, in remembrance of Christ's birth and Nativity; Innocents day, or
Childermas day (as it is vulgarly called) in remembrance of the slaughter of
the Infants, at the time of our Saviors birth; New years day, in remembrance
of our Saviors Circumcision; Epiphany, or Twelft day, in remembrance of the
Coming of the three Kings with presents to our Savior. The Annunciation day,
in remembrance of the Angels salutation of our Blessed Lady, and bringing her
that most joyful message, that she shall bring forth the Savior of the world;
Good Friday, in remembrance of our Savior Christ his death and passion on that
day; Easter day, in remembrance of our Lords resurrection from the grave;
Ascension day, in remembrance of his ascending in Soul and body into Heaven;
Pentecost, or Whitsuntide, in remembrance of the descending of the Holy Ghost;
Trinity Sunnay, in honor and remembrance of the most Blessed Trinity: finally
Corpus Christi day, in remembrance of our Saviors Institution of the most
blessed Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist.

Now, most of these great festival days are much neglected and vilifyed by
our Adversaries: nor for the most part do the Puritan Ministers instruct their
Proselites, and followers, why those Feasts, and upon what occasion, they were
first instituted: which want of care in the Masters, and ignorance in the
Scholars, do beget a great forgetfulness of our Christian Mysteries. And this
my Assertion is warranted with all experience. The like we may proportionably
conclude of our Adversaries small respect they bear to the Feast days of the
Apostles, or of diverse other great Saints: For example the ignorant Protestant
knows when Midsomer day (as they call it) comes, but that that day was
instituted in the honor of S. John Baptist, as being the Precursor of our
Saviors coming, few of them know.

In like sort our Adversaries reject with full mouth all Ceremonies in Faith,
(styling them, superstitious, and Idolatrous) though the said Ceremonies were
first instituted, and are still used, the better to recall to the mind of the
ignorant, the Mysteries of Christian Religion. And upon the same ground they
mainely vociferate, and cry out against the true use of Pictures, which serve
only to put us in mind of the virtues, and lives of the Saints, of which they
are the Pictures. Neither can they endure the sight of the Cross, though it be
only to put us in mind of our Saviors death and passion, suffered upon the
Cross: so willing they are to extinguish and wholly blot out all remembrances,
prints, and cognizances of Christian faith. Thus we see, that our Adversaries
proceeding herein finally tends to the obliterating and cancelling of most of
the chief Mysteries of our Christian faith and Religion, and of the most godly
Professors of it.

19. The Adversaries acknowledged doctrine of the Inuisibility of the
Protestant Church, has induced many to forsake the Christian Religion, and in
lieu thereof to become Arians, Jews, or Turks. For first, seeing the Old
Testament is most full in its authorities, for a Esaias 60. Dan. 2. Psalm. 28.
Continual splendor, and visibility of Christ's true Church: and further,
seeing, that this exacted visibility has been wanting in the Protestant Church
by their own Confessions, whereof I will here for breuity allege the
acknowledgment of Sebastianus Francus (a learned Protestant) who thus
confesses: In epist. de abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis
Ecclesiasticis.
For certain through the work of Antichrist, the external Church together
with the faith and Sacraments vanished away presently after the Apostles
departure, and for these fourteen hundred years the Church has not been
external and visible.

To whose judgment D. Fulke subscribeth in these words: In his answer to a
Counterfeyt Catholic. p. 1^.
The true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles. And lastly seeing such
Protestants, as acknowledge the want of the visibility of their own Church,
will not acknowledge the Catholic Roman Church to be the true Church of God,
though they do acknowledge, that that Church has been ever visible for these
fourteen hundred years: Therefore diverse of the said emine^t Protestants
through the want of fulfilling of the Prophecies touching the Churches
visibility in their own Protestant Church, have thereupon Apostated from
Christianity, some of them embracing the doctrine of the Jews, others of the
Turks, and thereupon have employed all their days after, with infecting other
Christians with their new embraced doctrines, whereby they have secretly
instilled into their followers minds and wills the poison (both for doctrine,
and impious conversation of life) which Iudaisme or Turcisme do teach and
warrant.

Many examples of diverse learned Protestants, forsaking their Christian
Religion, through the acknowledged doctrine of the Inuisibility of the
Protestants Church, may be alleged. As of So witnesses Beza in epist. 65. p.
308.
Alamannus a great Protestant, who became a Jew. Of In historia Dauidis
Georgij, printed at Antwerpe. 1568.
David George once Professor at Basil, who became a blasphemous Apostata. Of
Ochinus, who first brought Protestancy into England, with Peter Martyr in King
Edwards days; who finally turned an As witnesses Zanchius in his book, de
tribus Elohim and Conradus Slussenburg (a Caluinist) in Theol. Caluinist. l. 1
fol. 9.
Apostata. Neuserus chief Pastor at Heydelberge, who became a So witnesses
Osiander the Protestant. Cent. 16. part. 2. p. 818.
Turk; and diverse others here for breuity omitted: So certain and undoubted
it is, that the confessed doctrine of the Inuisibility of the Protestants
Church has caused diverse to forsake the Christian faith, and wholly to
disclayme from our Savior; ingulfing themselves into all those wickednesses
and Impieties, which Iudaisme or Turcisme at this day maintain and defend.

20. The last doctrine here to be alleged (to omit that Usury is defended by
Bucer, in Script. Anglican. p. 789. 790. 791. By Geneua it self, for M. Wotton
in his second part of the Answer, etc. in his preface to his fellow Brethren
thus writes. Two Ministers at Geneua were deposed and banished, for speaking
against Usury, allowed in that state. Defended also by Matthew V^rell in his
principal grounds of Religion, englished and printed 1595. page 148. and 149.
As also defended by many others, mentioned by D. Pie in his epistle dedicat. in
his Answer written against a Treatise in defense of Usury. pa. 20. and 22.
Usury is defended by our Adversaries) which resulteth necessarily out of some
of the premises, is, that our Adversaries (howsoever they make show, to
practice in some sort the contrary) do take away all Prayer, (as is above
intimated) as a thing needles, unprofitable, and superfluous. This I prove
several ways. And first our Adversaries teach, that only faith iustifyeth:
then if faith only iustifyeth, it iustifyeth without prayer, or any other good
works. Yea it iustifyeth according to Luther and others above cyted, being
accompanied with the greatest sins; seeing they teach (as above is showed)
that nothing loses their faith or hope of salvation, but only infidelity, or
want of faith.

Secondly, they teach, that there is no merit in any of our good works,
therefore not any in Prayer; for if our Prayers do nothing merit, they nothing
obtain: because impetration and obtaining does import some desert (at least de
congruo:) if then our Prayers do neither merit, nor satisfy for the offense,
nor for the punishment due to the offense; to what end then are Prayers to be
powered out?

Thirdly, to what purpose should we pray (for example) that we shall not sin
hereafter: seeing God (as Luther, Calvin and the rest above specifyed do teach)
so forcibly impelleth us to sin, as that it is not in our power to resist his
ordinance and decree therein? But who dare pray to resist, what God has
infallibly appointed shall be?

Fourthly, it is showed above, that according to our Adversaries Principles and
Theses, Faith consists, in that a man firmly belieueth, that his Sins are
already forgiven him, that he is one of the Elect, and that he shall infallibly
obtain salvation. Now, this faith preuenteth, and takes away all Prayer for
remission of Sins, and man's salvation. The reason is, in that Faith does
precede all this prayer, according to that, Quomodo inuocabunt, in quem non
crediderunt? Romans 10. Therefore it follows, that we are assured by faith of
our salvation, and eternal life, and this before we pray for it.

Fifthly, Prayer is ever for the obtaining of that, of which who prays, is
(though hopeful yet) partly doubtful and uncertain of his obtaining of it.
For if he be certain before his prayer, that he shall obtain his request, to
what purpose the^ are his Prayers made? and to pray for that, which we either
already have, or are certain that hereafter we shall have, is most ridiculous
and absurd. Now, from this ground it rises, (as in part above is intimated)
that we cannot, nor ought not to pray for the remission of our Sins, or for
obtaining of eternal life: seeing our Faith (according to our Adversaries
former doctrines) instructs us, that we are aforehand assured of both. And
thus upon this ground, he no more foolishly prays for the remission of his
Sins, or for eternal life; then a man should pray, that the Sun might shine
to day (seeing that already it has shined) or that it would shine to morrow,
of which he is assured, that it will shine.

Thus according to the force of these reasons, ineuitably rising out of our
Adversaries former doctrines, no man ought to pray, or so much as to recite (by
way of Prayer) our Lords Prayer, Our Father which art in heaven hallowed be thy
name etc. Thus far now of these former twenty several doctrines of our
Adversaries, displayed in the precedent leaves: all which (we see) breath
nothing but Sensuality, Enormities, and Sins, in the wills of the belieuers
of them.

Now, here we are to conceive, that these former Positions (as they are
doctrines) do consist in speculation, and rest in the Understanding; yet
because the Object of most of them is manners, virtue, vice, and the like;
therefore the belief of them is the more dangerous for man's will. For the
better understanding whereof we are to conceive, that there is such a strayt
intercourse between the Understanding and the Will in man's soul, that the
will works not, but as the Understanding out of its own received Principles,
does dictate to the Will, as true, or false; and so the Will puts in execution
those said Principles in its operation in manners. If the Theories and
speculations be true, then the Will by working accordingly, works well and
laudably. If false, then the Will works viciously: and of this nature are the
former above recited doctrines of our Adversaries; so as they being most false
and wicked, as tending to extirpate all virtue, and to plant impiety in man's
soul, they most forcibly beat upon the Will, and never cease their battery,
till they have forced the Will to exercise all its operations and actions
touching manners and conuersations of life, according to the said false
doctrines: and therefore the Will of man is so much the more endangered by such
impious and blasphemous Principles and doctrines: but otherwise, and in this
respect, with less, or no danger, it falls out in those merely speculatiue
doctrines (though false) which have no necessary reference to the working of
the Will according to them. Such were the Heresies of Origin, who taught that
the Devils should in the end of the world be saved; of Cyprian, in defending
Rebaptization, and the like; from which (though erroneous) the Will sucketh no
poison.

But to pass on further in the speculation of these former doctrinall
Positions; let us by way of recapitulation see, how potent and forcible they
are for the patronage and defense of the most flagitious crimes and sins; as
also on the other side, for the preventing of all good works of Virtue and
Piety, though both these points have in part, been above touched. And as
concerning the first, I will exemplify it in the most facinorous crimes that
may be, as Sodomy, Adultery, Fornication, Murder, Theft, and the like. May not
the Workers of such Impieties, and particularly these Sodomits, or Gomorreans
of London, thus apologize for themselves, even from the Principles of their
own Religion, and this in their chief Masters own words?

First, may they not thus reply: We want Freewill in all our actions, and
therefore what we have committed, we could not but commit: but punishment is
not in any sort due to actions, proceeding from an absolute Necessity, or
Stoicall fatum: for we read, So Luther above in assert, damnat. per Leonem.
Act. ^6.
It is not in our power to think evil or good, but all things proceed from
absolute necessity.

Secondly, Luth. above in sermon de Moyse.
the Ten Commandments appertain not unto Christians. And therefore though what
we have committed be prohibited by the Commandments; yet we Christians are not
commanded to forbear the violating of the said Commandments, under any
penalty or punishment.

Thirdly, what is committed, is no Sin in us, for we know we are of the
number of the faithful, therefore we are good: for Luther teaches us, Luther
in his sermons englished. page 178.
that a faithful man works nothing, but good works; neither can it be but
good, which he being good before, shall do. Again, we believe, and therefore
we cannot sin; for Luther has taught us, that, as nothing iustifyeth but
only faith; so nothing sins, but want of belief.

Fourthly, Admit it be a Sin, yet it is no Sin in us but in God; and
therefore we are wholly excused therein, as being but Gods bare Instruments
therein; for we are taught: Luther above tom. 1. de prouidentia Dei. page 166.
That God moves the these to kill, and the thief is enforced to sin. And
further, that (i) The adultery of David, was the work of God. Now if these
actions be of God, So Melancth. above in Romans 8.
they are so far from being Sins, as that they are good: Genes. 1.
for all things which God made are good.

Fifthly, admit it be a sin in us, yet it is no greater, then any other Sin,
though it be tragically amplifyed by our Enemies; for Calvin teaches, and we
believe, That Calvin supr. in Antidot. Council. Trident.
All Sins are equal.

Sixthly, if there be any Sin in us, yet it is but a venial sin in us, and
therefore easily pardonable; for we are taught, that D. Wotton above in his
Answer to the late Popish Articles. page 92. 841.
to the faithful (of which number we assuredly are) the sin is pardoned,
as soon as it is committed.

Seauenthly, admit our sin be a mortal, or grievous Sin in us; yet it is
in no sort prejudicial to us; for either every one of us is already without
preuision of any works, even from our mothers womb, reprobated to damnation,
or predestined to salvation, as Calvin ^boue (...) Instit. l. 3. cap. 13. and
sect. 6.
Calvin assures us: if reprobated, then this our Sin no way furthereth, or
causes our damnation; seeing that was decreed from all eternity without any
respect of our lives and conversation. If predestined, then can neither this
our Sin, nor any other how flagitious Sin soever, hinder or prevent us of our
salvation.

Eighthly, admit it to be a Sin in us, yet we are more to be pitied, then
rebuked; seeing we are taught, that the Illyric. above cited. de Origin.
peccati. Kemnitius above cited.
Image of God is wholly obliterated in us, and all our fair impressions are
extinct, and that even the regenerate and holy man is nothing else, but mere
Corruption and contagion. Now here then, can any man expect to gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thisteles? Matthew. 7.

Lastly, let our Sin be what it will be, great or small; yet no detriment
(touching our salvation) can it bring to us, (who are true belieuers) for our
perpetrating of it: Seeing we are taught, that a Luth. vbi supr. in captiuit.
Babil. fol. 74.
Christian man is so rith, that he cannot lose his Salvation by any sins how
great soever, except he will not believe. And further it being in our power at
any time to exercise an act faith; how can either this, or that Sin hurt us,
seeing D. Whitakers assures us; that D. Whitak. above in l. de Eccles. contra
Bellar. co^trouers. 2. q. 5. page 301.
Siquis actum fidei habet, ei peccata non nocent. Sins cannot hurt him, who
produces an Act of faith. So certain it is, (as our own brethren do teach)
that See Acts and monuments printed anno 1563. page 488.
We cannot be damned, except Christ be damned with us. And as for suffering any
temporal pains for the expiating of sin after our death before we come to
Heaven, it is but a jest to surmize any such thing; since we wholly account the
doctrine of Purgatory, a mere forgery, or fable.

Thus far now may the greatest sinners that are, proceed in defense of their
wickedness, even from the head- Theoremes, and Principles of their own
Religion. O execrable Monsters! did Christ (think you) incarnate himself and
suffer death for the taking away of the Sins of the world; and yet would
institute and leave behind him a Religion for all men, upon their souls
salvation, to follow, which should patronize villainy and Sin in the highest
degree?

But now let us cast our eye upon some other of the premises mentioned in the
beginning, and recall to mind, what is, above delivered by our Adversaries
touching the depressing and vilifying of virtue and godliness of life. And here
now I demand, that considering, it is a most nauseous, and ungrateful thing,
and naturally cross to man's disposition to spend his time in laborious and
painful works of virtue, if so there be no rewards (as pleasing Allectiues)
proposed to him for such his endeauours: Here I say, I demand (as above in
part I did, though I here iterate it, for the better imprinting of it in the
memory of the Reader) how such a man believing the former doctrines, can with
any alacrity practice good works, or be sollicitous to lead a regular and
pious life: when before hand he is persuaded by his own doctrines, viz.

1. That Read the Authorities above set down touching all these several
branches of this Periode, or Paragraphe.
Prayer is needles, and unprofitable. 2. That a man (labor he never so much in
virtue) cannot become truly virtuous, but only imputatiuely lust, or virtuous.
3. That the practice of Chastity, Poverty, Obedience, and fasting are not
pleasing to God. 4. That all good works) God judging them) are mortal sins.
5. That we are not obliged to keep the Ten Commandments. 6. That, Good works
are not only not necessary to faith, and salvation, but hurtful thereto. 7.
That one work is not better, then another; and that to wash dishes, is as
good, as to be an Apostle. 8. That these works, which we call good works, are
not our works (seeing we want freewill to perform them) but that God only
uses us as dead Instruments (or as the writer uses the pen, as an insensible
Instrument, whereby he writes) in all such operations-To conclude, 9. That all
the Rewards in Holy Scripture proposed for the exercise of good works, are not
truly and sincerely intended by God, to be given to the practizers of the said
good works; but are only amplifications of words, above the real, and true
measure of Gods meaning.

Thus we see how our Adversaries doctrines, by disualewing the dignity of good
works, are no less potent in the belieuers thereof, to induce them to
forbear the practice of virtue, sanctity and piety, the^ they are forcible
(through their lesning of the atrocity of Sin) to encourage men to the
perpetration of all abominable and most detestable Sins, and crimes, that can
be imagined.

Now, who shall deeply consider the different Natures of these two different
doctrines of our Adversaries (I mean of blandishing Vice, and dishonouring of
Virtue) will the less marvel, how Luther and other first broachers of their
Religion, could in so small a time invade with these their most pestilent
Heresies so many Countries in Europe. The reason hereof is, in that their
doctrines in respect of their multiplicity, may well be compared to a Magazine
or great Warehouse, furnished with all diversity of merchandise, and wares,
sorting to each man's state or condition of life to buy; as of Silks, Cloth,
Wines, Oils etc. So Luthers doctrine is so various, so choice, and so select,
as that it was made fit and apt to meet with every man's different humor and
appetite. For example: 1. Is he a Prince, King, or State, that would advance by
any unjust means the greatness of his Signiories? Then is he by our Adversaries
taught, that he may take into his hands all Bishoprics, Ecclesiastical
livings, and lands of Monasteries, and other Religious houses, as our Genesis 10.
Nemrod of this age (I mean King Henry the eight) and some other Protestant
Princes following, have done. For this King Henry made accordingly, an utter
depredation, and spoil of Monasteries, impropriating their livings to himself
and his Parasytes.

2. Is he a dissolute religious man, and weary of performing the rigid
austerity of his undertaken life? Then may he by these men's doctrine, break
out of his Cloister, and cast of his habit, and inworld himself again in all
temporalities. 3. Is he a loose Priest, and will not lead a chaste and continent
life? He is here catechized, that he may lawfully mary. 4. Is he married, and
yet either the Husband or the wife (as being weary one of the other) would
seek to be divorced? Then may he, or she lawfully pretend diverse impediments,
as of impotency, incontinency, absence, and others above mentioned for divorce,
and presently mary again.

5. Is he of the Laity, and of that height of pride, and elation of mind, as
that he cannot, or will not brook to live in subjection, or to acknowledge any
soueraingty? He is above indoctrinated that now among Christians, there ought
to be no Magistrates or Princes at all. 6. Is he of the Protestant Clergy, and
yet scorns to be under his Diocesan, or any other? He is thereof
disinthralled, by the doctrine of the Parity of Ministers. 7. Is he a Man
Theathralis, that affects to have many followers, for stamping and preaching of
strange and new doctrines, and this without any control? He may then allege
the privilege of the revealing Spirit, and Extraordinary Vocation.

8. Is he of a covetous and muddy disposition, not caring by what iniust and
base ways he may increase his stock, and silver? Then he may be warranted to
practice Usury, and so to breed upon silver. 9. Is he of a fearful
conscience, and rests doubtful of some temporal punishment to hang over his
head, for his former finnes, though forgiven him? He may be freed from all such
fear, by the denial of the doctrine of Purgatory, and by believing that no
te^porall punishment is reserved for man, after the Sin is once forgiven. 10.
Is he willing to wallow in all turpitude of wickedness and enormous life, whiles
he breaths in this world; and this without all fear and change of colors?
He may by the doctrine of his justifying faith, and certainty of Predestination
assure himself (as is above said) that he cannot be damned, except Christ be
damned with him.

11. Finally, is he so plunged in sin by a continual custom, as that by
reason of the infinitenes of his sins, he may doubt himself to be of the
number of the Reprobate? Let him for fear he should forsake sinning, remember,
that he is taught, that a change from a vicious to a virtuous life, cannot
hinder Reprobation. So crafty (we see) was the serpent (for from him all the
former Theoremes originally streamed) so to poison Luther, and the first
Gospellers with such choice and variety of Heresies, as might severally suite
to several men's estates, conditions, and dispositions. And thus accordingly we
may here observe, that the foresaid doctrines of Luther and his Compartners
speak to every man in that Dialect or language, in which he would have them.

O, had Sardanapalus the King, who became a prey to all sensuality, or Epicurus
the Philosopher, who theorically placed man's chiefest felicity and good, in
voluptuousnes and pleasure, lived in this our age; how much by embracing of
many of these former Principles, might they have better warra^ted their
proceedings? So true is that censure of Osiander the Protestant, saying: This
is reported by Sleydan, englished l. 22. Anno 1550. fol. 3. 58.
Luther and Melancthon have compiled a Divinity, which sauoureth more of the
flesh, then of the spirit.

Now if by way of recrimination, following this method, it be objected by any
(as by diverse Puritanes it already has been objected) that the Papists teach,
that the Pope can aforehand give pardon for the most atrocious Sin, as for
murdering hereafter of Princes; or by his Indulgences can pardon any Sin,
before it be committed: Which doctrines (say they) much open the way for the
perpetration of many most great Sins; seeing the workers of them are by these
doctrines assured, that such their sins are forgiven them, before they be
committed.

To this I answer, that here is wonderful mistaking, proceeding either from
ignorance or malice; for not any Catholic does so teach, or believe. Therefore
to take away this foolish and absurd stumbling block, let the Puritan and all
others know; that the Catholic Religion teaches, that the Pope can no more
give liberty to a man hereafter for to sin, or can aforehand forgive a sin
hereafter to be committed, then he can create a new world. For the Catholic
doctrine is, that the Object of the Sacrament of Penance, is a Sin already
committed; the guilt of which Sin (I mean the eternal punishment of
damnation) is taken away only by force of the said Sacrament; and yet the
Penitent must confess such his Sin with an absolute determination not to
commit it, or any other Sin hereafter; and must have Contrition (or at least
Attrition, and sorrow, for his committing his said Sins; or else the very
confession of his said Sins is so far from affording him any absolution of
them, as that by such kind of confessing his Sins, he commits a new sin.

Again, where it is above objected, that the Pope by his Indulgence, can
pardon the greatest Sin that is: here again I say, is the like ignorance,
or malice. For the eternal damnation for any mortal Sin (though of the
least) cannot be remitted by any Indulgence, but only (as is said above) by the
Sacrament of Penance and Confession. The reason hereof is, because the Object
of an Indulge^ce is only a temporal punishment, due for the guilt of Sin,
already remitted by the Sacrament of Confession; and therefore it follows,
that no man can take the benefit of any Indulgence, but at the same time he
must be in state of grace, to which state he is brought by the virtue of a
sincere and sorrowful Sacramental Conf^ssion, with a resolved purpose never
to sin more. Now this being the true and acknowledged See S. Thom. Aquin. 4.
sent. did. 10. art. 5. Sotus 4. sent. d. 21. Bellarm. de Indulg. etc.
doctrine of the Catholi^e Church herein; I refer to any indifferent Reader,
whether this our doctrine does not rather much deter a man from sin, then
inuit and impell him thereto?

But to return to the deformity and vglines of these former doctrines of the
Puritans; It is to be observed, that commonly the Professors of them are the
only men, who usually have in their mouths (so wickedness m^sketh it self in
words of devotion) Math. 5.
the saving faith, Abba Romans 8. and Galat. 4.
Father, the Unction 1. Joan, 2.
of the Holy One, and other such passages of Scripture, wherewith they may the
better varnish over the foul grain of these their documents, that so they may
appear in other men's eyes more specious and regardable. From hence now may the
Reader discern, what he is to conceive of other doctrines, different from the
faith of the Church of Rome, maintained by Luther and other his Brethren above
alleged. For if they did grossly err in these their positions, touching Vice
and Virtue, why may they not also err in other speculatiue articles of faith
taught by them, which do not concern Morality, or conversation of life; seeing
the certainty of erring in one point, necessarily implies a possibility of
erring, in any other point.

And from the mature consideration of all the former passages it may be further
irrepliably inferred, that once granting the former Theses and Tenets of Luther
and the other Protestants to be false, that the Protestant Church is not the
true Church of God: since we read, Ephesians. 4.
Vna fides, vnum baptisma. And therefore Christ's Church is one, entyre, and
perfect in faith; not brooking the entertaineme^t of any one dogmaticall
Error: De vnitate Eccles. post initium.
Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi (says S. Cyprian) incorrupta est, and
pudica. And with this, I close the first part of this Treatise.

THE SECOND PART. Touching the wicked lives of the first Broachers of
Puritanisme.
IN the precedent Part (good Reader) there is laid before thee, a Synopsis of
the Theory, or Speculation of such Puritanicall doctrines, which inuit man to
vice, and deter him from virtue: In this Section now, we will show how the
first stampers of the former doctrines have incorporated the said doctrines, in
their own lives and actions; I mean, how they have given themselves over to
al dissolutio^ in manners, and so have caused their own vicious lives, and
deportment to comment their own doctrinall Positio^s. Thus they bear
themselves like to honest and well meaning Physicians, who are loath to give
any thing to their Patients, either good or evil, but themselves before will
taste it.

I will not here expatiate into any long discourse by alleging the lives of
many of the former Protestants, whose names are above mentioned. I will content
my self by displaying, (though in part) the lives of six of them, to wit,
Luther, Zwinglius, Iacobus Andraeas, Ochinus, Calvin, and Beza. Of these I
particularly make choice because these men were chiefly, and with greater bent
and endeavor busied in first planting the said former Paradoxes; and the rest
of the Authors above co^parting with these in their doctrines were but their
Scholars (as it were) and followers. But by that, which hereafter will be
delivered of these me^ we shall have full reason to recall to our memory those
words of Christ: Math. 7.
Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly
are ravening wolves.

I will begin with Beza, and so ascend higher. And first that the Reader may
see, how some of our first Publishers of this their new Gospel and faith
(wholly different from the ancient faith of Rome) did practice the most
execrable Sin of Sodomy, and therein led the way to other Sodomiticall
persons; I will set down certain verses made by Beza himself, touching a boy
called Andebertus (which Beza kept as his Adonis, or Ganimede, by abusing the
boys body) and his whore Candida. In which verses he co^pareth the pleasure of
the one with the other Sin; and in the end prefers the sin with his boy,
before the Sin of fornication with his woman. This Epigrame of Beza touching
his Ganimede Andebertus, and his whore Candida, is extant among other of his
Epigrames, printed at Paris in the year 1548. by Robertus Stephanus. The
verses are these following, which shame forbids me to English: but every one
that understands Latin, may pick out the sense.

Abest Candida, Beza quid moraris?
And bertus abest, quid hic moraris?
Tenent Parisij tuos amores,
Habent Aurelij tuos lepores.
Et tu Vezelijs manner pergis?
Procul Candidula, amoribusque,
Immo Vezelij procul valete,
Et vale Pater, and valete fratres:
Nam Vezelijs carere possum,
Et carere parente, and his, and illis;
At non Candidula, Andebertoque etc.
Next there follows.

Sed vtrum, rogo, praeferam duorum?
Vtrum inuisere me decet priorem?
An quenquam tibi Candida anteponam?
An quenqua^ anteferam tibi Andeberte?
Quid si me in geminas secem ipse parts?
Harum vt altera Candidam reuisat,
Currat altera versus Andebertum.
At est Candida sic auara, noui,
Vt totum cupiat tenere Bezam:
Sic Beza est cupidus sui Andebertus,
Beza vt gestiat integro potiri.
Amplector quoque sic hunc, and illam,
Vt totus cupiam videre vtrumque,
Integris frui integer duobus.
Then next after follows.

Praeferre tamen alterum necesse est;
O duram nimium necessitatem!
Sed postquam tamen alterum necesse est,
Priores tibi defero Andeberte:
Quod si Candida forte conqueratur,
Quid tum? basiolo tacebit vno.
That Beza did write this Epigram, is auerred by Conradus Slussenburg (the
great Protestant) thus charging Beza herewith: In Theolog. Calvin. printed
1594. l. 1. fol 93.
Constat and hoc etc. This also is evident, that Beza did write obscaenissimos
versus, most obscene and filthy verses to Andebertus at Orleans, whom Beza kept
as his Adonis. And Heshusius (another Protestant) charge Beza with this his
Epigram in these words: In his book entitled verae and sanae Confessionis.
Beza nefandos amores, illicitos concubitus, scortationes, faeda Adulteria
sacrilego carmine decantauit orbi. Beza did publish to the world in
sacrilegious verse, his beastly and inhumane love, his unlawful pleasures, his
whoring, and filthy adultery. Thus Heshusius.

The same is confessed by In his answer to M. John Albins, printed 1592.
D. Sparks, De Turca. Papism. printed 1599. l. ^. cap. 10.
D. Sutcliffe, and In Apolog. Cathol. part. 1. l. 2. ^. 21.
D. Morton, though weakly excused. And lastly confessed by Beza himself; who
being charged therewith, thus excuses the writing of the forms Epigram: See
this confessed, in these words by the Author of the Answer for the time to
the defense of the Censure. printed 1583. fol. 99. Also the same Auth^ur in his
said Answer relates, How Beza makes m^ntion of his Epigrams, and testifies,
that there were many things in them, for which he was heartily sorry.
Indeed Andebert was a young man most dear unto me etc. to whom being at Vezel,
I wrote triflingly certain verses, wherein I did declare my singular desire of
seeing him. But let any man understanding the Latin, give his true Judgment,
whether these verses do not import more, then his only seeing of Andebertus.
And further touching his woman Candida, the foresaid Protestant Schlussenburg
Schlussenb. in Theolog. Calu. l. 1. fol. 92.
writes, that Beza kept her four years, as his whore, before he would marry
her.

I here will not much insist, how Beza sold his Priory for ready money then
received, and after leased it to others for five years then to come, with
receiving money aforehand for such his leasing. Upon which occasion there began
a suite (presently upon his secret stealing away) between the two several
parties, with whom he severally had contracted, which suite depends on Record
in the Court of Paris.

Also I pretermit his getting of his maid with child at Geneua, at what time he
feigned himself and his maid to be sick of the Plague, to prevent that any
should come to them; and thereupon entreated, that he, and his maid might be
lodged in two chambers of one Petrus Viretus, in an outward garden, where he
caused a Surgeon to let the woman blood, who presently after was brought to bed
of a dead Child. I say I will not peremptorily insist in these points, (though
I assure my self, that they are most true, as being circumstanced with time,
place, witnesses, and other proofs of Moral certainty, and all written and
published in Beza his own life time) in that they are written by one Hierome
Bolsecke, a Catholic Doctor of Physic, to whom the Surgeon confessed the
deed. Because I here chiefly tie my self to the Testimonies, and
acknowledgements only of the Protestants (and none others) in relating the
deportment and conversation of Beza, and the other five above specifyed. Thus
far touching Beza his Sodomy, and incontinency of life.

Now to observe Beza his conscience (or rather want of conscience) In his
Survey cap. 8. page 127.
D. Bancroft (Archbishop of Canterbury) charge Beza with dissimulation in
Religion, thus saying: Beza was a busy body against the lawfulnes of Bishops
calling etc. And yet (forsooth) he can write to other men, and pretend quite
the Contrary. In like sort Cent. 1^. l. 3. cap. ^8. p. 657.
Osiander (the Protestant) accuses Beza most highly with his dissimulation,
touching the doctrine of the Real presence; he maintayning different doctrines
thereof, according to the different places he came unto. But no Christian
fearing God, or having any Conscience would, for a thousand worlds, dissemble
his Religion.

Touching Beza his pride; he is charged therewith by the foresaid Archbishop In
his Survey. c. 3. p. 54.
D. Bancroft. And his pride more fully discovers it self, in his contemning
of all the Ancient Fathers and Councels: for thus we find Beza to write in his
ballancing of the ancient Fathers with the Protestants of this age: to wit,
that the Fathers had (to use his own words) Beza in ^pi. Theolog. printed
1572. Epist. 1. page 5.
plus conscientiae, scientiae minus: more conscience (then the Protestants) but
less learning. And as touching all the General Councels of the Primitive
Church, Beza thus betrampleth them: In his epistle dedicatory to the Prince of
Condv set before his new Testament.
In the best times a man may plainly see, that Satan was President in their
Assemblyes and Councels.

In this last place I will come to Beza his Insolency and boldness with the holy
Scriptures; which insolency proceeded from the authority of his assumed
revealing Spirit: I will touch a Text or two of Scripture, depraved by him in
his Translation of the New Testament; and then I will conclude with the
Censures of learned Protestants passed upon his said Translation. And first in
that sentence, Heb^. 13.
Honorabile connubium in omnibus; Let marriage be honorable in all: as much to
say, Let marriage be inuiolably preserved in all points. Now Beza translateth,
Marriage is honorable (inter quosuis) in all men; so he, adding in defense of
Priests Marriage, these two words, Is, and men, contrary to the Translations of
his own Brethren In omnes Pau^^ epist. Hebr. 13.
Calvin, and In Castalio his great Bible dedicated to K. Edward the sixth
printed at Basil. 1573.
Castalio (the learned Protestant) who translateth thus: Honestum esto
matrimonium in omnibus; so retayning the Imperative mood and Neuter Gender,
whereas Beza used the Indicative mood, and Masculine Gender.

For a second example of this kind; whereas the Text in S. Luke 22. Hic ca lix
in sanguine meo pro vobis ^ffusus, is in these express words according to all
Greek copies whatsoever: by which Grammatical contexture of the words is
showed, that blood is in the Cup. Now to prevent this so necessary a
Co^struction, Beza in nouum Testam. page 317.
Beza is not afraid to say, that S. Luke committed a manifest Solecophanes, and
incongruity of speech; or else, that it is a corruption, crept out of the
Marge^t into the Text, in defense of the Real Presence. Now in regard of these
and many other corruptions in his Translation, had not Molinaeus (a learned
Protestant) just reason to say, that See Molineus in Testam. part. 20. 30. etc.
Beza, de facto mutat Textum, actually changes the Text? And In his defensio
suarum Translationum. printed at Basil, per Ioannem Oporinum. pa. 182. 183.
Castalio to auerre, That he might gather a long Register of Beza his errors
out of his whole work (meaning, touching his Translation of the new Testament)
for Beza oftentimes erreth (says the foresaid Castalio) not only in words
etc. But also in things, and the same most weighty. And yet further the said
Protestant thus charge Beza his said Translation: Castalio vbi supra. page
170.
I will not set down all Errors of Beza his Translation, for that would
require too great a volume. Thus much briefly (leaving out much more for
greater expedition) of Beza his carriage, and comportment.

To come to Calvin, who (as it should seem) was the first of his Tribe, that
did lead the dance in this Gomorrhean and abominable Sin. Calvin living in
Noyon (a City in France) was charged with the crime of Sodomy; and thereupon
was burned on his shoulder for the same crime; upon which occasion he presently
fled to Geneua. That this is most true, appears (besides from the life of
Calvin, written by the above mentioned Bolseck) from the Testimony of the
foresaid learned Protestant In Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. 7^0.
Schlussenburg, who auerreth the same to be justified by public records and
Testimonies yet extant; as also by the yet common report of the City of Noyon;
which City did testify the said sin of Calvin, and his punishment inflicted
upon him for the same, to Monsieur Bertilier (Secretary to the Council of
Geneua) under a public and sworn Notaries hand; which Testimony is yet
extant, and has been seen by diverse men. This Crime of Caluins Sodomy is so
true, as that the forsaid Schlussenburg says in plain terms: In Theo. Calu.
vbi supra.
I do not yet see any sound and clear refutation thereof; and as, that it
being objected against him (by that blessed Martyr, Father Campian) D.
Whitakers in his Answer thereof, denies not the fact, but lesneth it in these
words: Contra Camp. rat. 3.
Si stigmaticus fuit (Caluinus) fuit etiam Paulus, fuerunt alij: So most
profanely and impiously the Doctor comparing Caluins burning on the shoulder
for Sodomy, with S. Paul's like punishment, for the profession of the name of
Christ.

I will let pass his lesser Sins of Incontinency, as his stealing away of a
Gentil-woman of Mongis, who privately departing from her husband at Lausanna,
kept company with Calvin at Geneua; as also his attempting of the wife of James
Bourgoigne, Lord of Fallaice. In like sort I pass over, how Calvin contracted
with one Brule, and his wife, that the said Brule should counterfeyte himself
dead, that in the sight of many people, he might seem to be restored to life
by Calvin. But this Brule, so cou^terfeiting in the beginning, was found to be
dead indeed. At the sight whereof Brules wife was so astonished, as that she
exclaimed publicly against Calvin, and revealed the whole matter to many.

I finally pretermit, how Calvin was so curious and choice in his diet, that
when he went abroad to dyne, his own wine was carried about with him in a
silver Pot; and his bread was made of fine flower, wet in rose water. All this
(I say) I forbear to insist in, (though I presume they were most true) because
they are recorded by the foresaid Bolseck a Catholic, (who did write also the
life of Beza*) for my method here undertaken, is to charge Calvin and the rest
with such Crimes, as are reported of them, by the learned Protestants, their
brethren.

Therefore I will next come to unfold his great Sin in detorting and
misconstruing diverse Texts of Holy Scripture, from whence all the Ancient
Fathers and learned Doctors ever mainly insisted upon, for the proof of
Christ's divinity: and yet Calvin has corrupted them in the behalf of the
Arians, for the impugning of Christ's divinity. The places among others, are
these; I and the Father are one. John 10. Calvin thus says hereof: Calu. in
Joan. 10.
The Fathers abused this place, to prove Christ to be of the same substance
with his Father; for Christ speaks not of the unity of substance, but of
Consent: contrary to the judgment even of Zanchius, Detribus Elohim, part. 2.
l. 5. c. 3.
the great Protestant.

Again, That Text: Thou art my son, this day I have begotten thee: Psalm. 2.
which Text is alleged even by the Apostle in proof of Christs-Diuinity, as L.
de filio Dei, printed 1586.
Simlerus a Caluinist confesses: Yet Calvin thus disualeweth this place to the
contrary: Calu. in Psalm. 2.
I know this place to be expounded by many of Christ's eternal generation etc.
but the reason of Austin is frivolous, who by the word, Hodie (this day)
feigneth Eternity. Briefly (to omit his blasphemous Construction of many other
Texts against the Divinity of Christ, wherein he comparteth in the Constructions
of the same Text with the Arians,) that other passage: The Lord rayned upon
Sodom fire from the Lord etc. Genesis 19. D. Willet thus writes hereof: In
Genes. c. 19.
This place is well urged by the Fathers, to prove the Eternity of Christ: Yet
Calvin thus writes to the contrary: Calvin in Genes. cap. 9.
Whereas the Fathers labored to prove Christ's Divinity from this testimony, it
is nothing firm.

I will contract this point of Caluins Arianizing in his Construction of
Scriptures, against the Divinity of Christ, with the Testimonies of learned
Protestants charging him with the same. For according hereto I find, that
Hunnius (the great Protestant, and public Professor in the University of
Wittenberge) has digested Caluins expositions of Scripture of this Nature,
into three One of them is entitled: Caluinus Iudaizans etc. 1595. Another
Antiparaeus. printed Wittenbergae, 1063. The third, entitled: Antiparaeus
alter printed vt supra.
several Treatises.

Touching Caluins false translating of the Scripture to serve his own turn, I
will content my self with the judgment of Molinaeus herein, (a learned
Protestant.) His words are these: In sua Translat. Testam. Noui. part. 12.
fol. 110.
Calvin in his Harmony makes the Text of the Gospel to leap up and down; he
uses violence to the Letter of the Gospel; and besides this, he adds to the
Text.

Touching Caluins peremptory pride with the Ancient Fathers: And first touching
the doctrine of Freewill, Instit. l. 2. sect. 4.
Calvin charge, and reprehendeth the Fathers therein. Touching Grace and
Justification, Calu. Instit. l. 3. c. 11.. 15.
Calvin betrampleth S. Austins authority. Concerning the Reall-Presence, L.
epist. and respons. printed 1597. epist. 208.
he opposes himself against Hilary and Cyrill. Calvin Instit. l. 4. cap. 13..
17.
in like sort reprehendeth Nazianzen, Basil, and Jerome, for their commending,
and defending of Monachisme, and austerity of life.

I will omit all other Controuersyes between the Catholics and the
Protestants, in all which Calvin opposes himself to the joint consent of all
the Ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, and I will conclude with his
reprehension of Chrysostom, Austin, Epiphanius, and others, concerning the
doctrine of praying and offering up Sacrifice for the dead: his words for
close of all, are these: In Tract. Theolog. de ver. Eccles. reform. page ^94.
Fateor eiusmodi preces etc. I confess, that the custom of these prayers was
ancient; and that such prayers were allowed by Austin, Chrysostom, and
Epiphanius, as received by succession from their Ancestors; the usage whereof
the aforenamed Fathers followed without reason etc. Thus we see, that Calvin
does fully parallel, and equal Beza in contempt of the Fathers of the
Primitive Church: such a fastidious Magistrality, and pride in the highest
degree, do their former doctrines of their Revealing Spirit, and extraordinary
Vocation, beget in the minds of the belieuers thereof.

But to conclude with relating of Caluins death, which was most suitable to his
life, (for Psalm. 33.
Mors peccatorum pessima) Conradus Schlussenburg the foresaid Protestant,
delivers it in these words: ^n Theolog. Calvin printed 1594 lib. 2. fol. 72.
Deus manu sua potenti etc. God in the rod of his fury visiting Calvin, did
punish him before the hour of his death, with his mighty hand: for he being in
despair, and calling upon the Devil, gave up his wicked soul, swearing,
cursing, and blaspheming. He dyed of the disease of lyce and worms, increasing
in a most loathsome ulcer about his privy parts, so as none present could
endure the stench. These things are objected against Calvin by Public
writings, in which also horrible things are declared concerning his
lasciuiousnes, his sundry abominable vices, and Sodomiticall lusts, for which
last he was burned by the Magistrate at Noyon, where he lived, being branded
upon the shoulder with a hot burning Iron. Thus far the foresaid Slussenburg,
an earnest Protestant, and as great an Enemy to the Pope, as Calvin ever was,
and therefore his Testimony is to be reputed less partial, and more
indifferent.

The foresaid miserable death of Calvin is confirmed with the unanswerable
Testimony of Herennius (a Caluinist Preacher, and therefore the rather heerin
to be credited.) His words are these: In libello de vita Caluini.
Caluinus in desperatione siniens vitam etc. Calvin ending his life in despair
dyed, being consumed of a most filthy and loathsome disease; and such as God is
accustomed to threaten to the wicked, and such as be rebellious against him.
This of Calvin I dare testify to be most true, because I my self being there
present, did behold that calamitous and tragical end of his, even with these
mine own eyes. Thus the said Herennius, and thus far of Calvin, though most
briefly. This one observation touching his death I will add, to wit, that it is
the less to be wondered, that Calvin should dye despayring of his Salvation,
seeing it may well be thought, that Christ by way of special punishment (in
withdrawing his grace from Calvin,) did inflict this particular kind of death
upon him, because Calvin taught, that Christ himself was for the time Caluins
words in Latin are these in Math. 27. Sed absurdum videtur Christo elapsam esse
desperationis vocem: Solucio facilis est etc. and in the same place thus more:
Sic videmus (Christum) omni ex part vexatum, vt desperatione obrutus, ab
inuocando Deo absi. steret.
in despair, and as being overwhelmed in desperation, gave over prayer. O
monstrous (and never before heard of) Blasphemy!

The next shall be Ochinus: This man with the help of Peter Martyr, first
broached Protestancy here in England in K. Edwards the sixth reign; as
Osiander Cent. 16. l. 2. c. 67.
Osiander witnesses, and the whole world knows. Ochinus was first a
Religious man of the Catholic Roman Church; but being weary of serving God in
that austerity of life, left his So says Sleydan, l. 9 at anno 1547. fol. 297.
Monstery, with breach of all his former vows of Religion. This Ochinus did
write a book Lauather. in histor. Sacrament. fol. 50.
against the Mass; and him Calvin thus exalts in these words: Lib de
scandalis. extat in h^ Tract. Theolog. printed 1597. p. 111.
Whom can Italy oppose (for they were both Italians) against Peter Martyr, and
Bernardine Ochine?

There is not written against Ochinus so much touching his extraordinary
licentiousnes of life, as touching his doctrines: for first he began to defend
(by writing of certain Dialogues) the doctrine of Polygamy, or having many
wives at one and the same time; of which Dialogues Beza in lib. de Polygamia.
p. 4.
Beza makes mention. But Ochinus did not content himself with this; but
proceeded to the height of all Impiety; For he confessing the doctrine of the
ever necessary Visibility of Christ's true Church, grounding himself (and but
truly) upon the predictions thereof in the Old Testament; and on the one side,
not acknowledging the Catholic Roman Church to be the true Church, though in
it he could not deny, but that it ever enjoyed a continual visibility: and on
the other side, seeing the predictions of the Churchs uninterrupted Visibility
were not accomplished in the Protestant Church, did heerupo^ wholly forsake
Christ and Christian Religion, and betook himself to the embracing of
Iudaisme.

That Ochinus became an Apostata, is witnessed by Beza, who calls him thus:
L. de Polygam. p. 4.
Ochinus, impurus Apostata. And further Beza more fully enlarges himself thus
writing: Beza in epist. 1. pa. 11.
Ochinus, Arianorum clandestinus fautor, Polygamiae defensor, omnium
Christianae Religionis dogmatum irrisor. Ochinus is a secret favorer of the
Arians, a defender of Polygamy, and a scoffer of all the doctrines of Christian
Religion. The Apostasy of Ochinus, is further witnessed by In his book de
^ribus Elohim. printed. 1594. l. 5. c. 9.
Zanchius (the Protestant) and by Conradus Slussenburg, the before mentioned
Protestant, writing heerin against Ochinus most particularly; the title of
which passage in this Protestants book, is: In Theolog. Caluinist. l. 1. fol.
19.
Responsio ad Ochini blasphemiam.

Thus far touching Ochinus his Apostasy, and of his embracing Iudaisme, and
finally dying therein One thing chiefly I refer to the judgment of any
indifferent Reader: seeing this Ochinus was one of the two Apostles, who first
planted Protestancy in England; to wit, whether it sorteth with the accustomed
proceeding of God (who ever uses means proportionable and suitable to their
ends) to use as his Instruments, for the planting of true Christian Religion
(suppose Protestancy be such) a man, who should afterward turn his pen to the
absolute denial of the Redeemer of the world, reputing him to be a Seducer, to
the embracing of Iudaisme, and to the utter renunciation of all Christianity?
And conseconsequently whether it be not a great dishonor to England, to
ascribe her first plantation of Protestancy to such a Man?

I come next to Iacobus Andraeas. This Andraeas was Luthers prime scholar and
a great spreader of Luthers doctrine. He was for his presumed worth made
Osiand. Cent. 16. l. 1 cap. 7. page 13.
Chancelour of the University of Tubinge, and was as famous and eminent in So
says Osiand. vbi supra. l. 4. c. 43. page 1084.
Germany, as ever Beza or Calvin were in Geneua.

Now, concerning the comportment of this presumed worthy man, charged even by
his own Brethren, read what follows. First, In Zanchius in his epistles
printed 1609. l. ^. page 340.
Lauater (a Protestant) auerreth, that he was taken in public Adultery: and
that certain verses were made against him, upon this occasion by certain
Caluinists. But to proceed. Hospinian (the Protestant) thus blazeth him:
Hospinian in Histor. Sacrament. fol. 389.
Andraeas nullum omnino habuit Deum, si Ma^monem and Bacchum excipias etc. and
quando cubitum iturus, vel de lecto surrecturus etc. Andraeas had no other God,
except Mammon and Bacchus etc. And when he went to bed, or rose from thence, he
was observed never so much as to recite the Lords prayer, or to make any
mention of God. And in the whole course of his life and actions he showed no
spark of piety and virtue, but extraordinary great lightness. Thus Hospinian.

The same Hospinian speaking of the wonderful Inconstancy of Andraeas in
matters of Religion (from which point may be gathered, that he prized no
Religion at all) thus writes: Hospinian, vbi supra.
Iacobus Andraeas doctrinam, and sententiam suam de Religionis capitibus
mutauit saepius; vnde Anhaldini promittunt se ex eius autographis demonstrare
posse, ipsum octidui spacio, ter suam de Controuersis capitibus, fidem and
Confessionem mutasse. Iacobus Andraeas often changed his judgment in points of
Religion, in so much, that they of Anhalt did undertake to show, out of his
own handwrytings, that in the compass of eight days, he changed three
several times his confession of faith, touching some heads of Religion then in
controversy.

To conclude, the said Hospinian thus further discourses of the pride and
disposition of Andraeas, saying: Ho^pin. vbi supr.
Conuitijs, calumnijs, mendacijs etc. Andraeas did strive to abound in
reproaches, deceits, lies, and impudent taunts and jests. He thought very
highly of himself, and contemned all others. And yet more. Hospinian vbi supr.
Selnecerus and Musculus (says Hospinian) have termed Andraeas to be erronem,
leuissimum scurram etc. A wandering fellow, a most giddy and light gester or
scoffer, and One that never had any religion. Thus far Hospinian of this
Andraeas, and with this I end.

Now in this next passage, Swinglius presents himself Whose doctrines
tending to liberty and licentiousnes of life above alleged, I will here pass
over. This Swinglius did take his degrees of Schools in Basil, and thereupon
was made Hospin. vbi supra fol. 22.
Priest; but after he intended to revolt from the Roman Church, he chiefly
labored to impugn the Mass, and this from an apparition in his sleep, which
Swinglius calls his Monitor, saying: Swingl. tom. 2. in subsid. de Eucharist.
printed 1581.
Ater fuit an albus, nihil memini. Thus did Swinglius first forsake the Mass,
doubtlesly from the instruction of the Diuell^ for his own Brethren censure it
to be no less, then a mere illusion, as Tract. de Eccles. printed 1598. page
^8.
Benedictus Morgensterne, In Swenkfeldio Calui^ismo, printed 1597. in praefat.
Iacobus Heilbrunerus, and others. And the words of In Theolog. Caluinist.
printed 1594 in prooem.
Conradus Slussenburg, of this vision of Swinglius, are these: Sole meridiano
clarius est, non Deum verum, sed ipsissimum Diabolum Swinglio per somnium etc.
It is more clear then the Sun, that not the true God, but the Devil
himself inspired Swinglius in his dream. Nevertheless Swinglius so rested upon
the force of this his devilish apparition, as that being warranted therewith
(most irreligiously and impudently, and the rather the better to impugn the
Sacrifice of the Mass,) he dared to alter the very words of Christ saying,
This is my body; and in lieu thereof, did translate in his own printed Bibles
(as though they had been the very words of Scripture) Swingl. in his new
Testament in Latin dedicated to the French King.
This signifies my Body.

But to proceed to Swinglius his behavior: for the better apprehension
whereof, we are to conceive, that Swinglius and other certain Ministers in
Heluetia (all which before were devoted Priests) upon their forsaking of the
Roman Religion, and undertaking to plant their own new Gospel; did first make
a general petition to the Heluetian Commonwealth, within which state they
lived, that they might be suffered to take wives, and marry. The title of their
petition is this: Swingl. in tom. 1. fol. 11^
Pietate and prudentia insigni Heluetiorum Reipublicae Huldericus Swinglius,
alijque Euangelicae doctrinae Ministri, gratiam and pacem a Deo. The Petition
begins thus: Hoc vero summis precibus contendimus, ne matrimonij vsus nobis
denegetur etc. We earnestly contend, that the use of Marriage be not denied to
us, who feeling the infirmity of the flesh, perceive that the love of chastity
is not given us by God. For if we consider the words of Paul, we shall find
with him no other cause of Marriage, then for the lustful desires of the flesh;
which to burn in us, we may not deny, seeing that by means thereof, we are
made infamous before the Congregations.

And then Swinglius proceeding forward, thus expresses the burnings of the
flesh: Aestu vero libidinis etc. By Swinglius vbi supra.
the burning of the flesh, we understand those desires of the flesh, wherewith a
man being inflamed, tosseth in his mind the studies of the lustful flesh; in
these only he spends all his thoughts, upon these he meditateth, and is
wholly busied in this, that he may satisfy the fury of the flesh. Thou see
here (Good Reader) how lustfully, and goatishly Swinglius, with his fellows,
writes of this subject.

But to proceed in this their supplication. They further thus write: Si carnis
Swingl. vbi supra.
licentiam quaerere etc. If we respected the liberty of the flesh, who sees
not, how much more commodious it were for us, that we should forbear the laws
of Marriage, as hitherto we have done? etc. For we have known, how easy in this
free and loose estate, being glutted with satiety, we might change. Wherefore
for the love not of lust, but of Chastity, and the souls to us committed, we
desire marriage; least that the souls committed to our charge, by example of
our sensuality (diutius offendantur) should be any longer offended. And yet
more: Quare Swinglius vbi supra.
cum carnis nostrae infirmitatem etc. We have proved, that the weakness of our
flesh has been (proh delor!) O for grief! cause of our often falling. Thus
far in the petition of Swinglius, and the rest to that State.

Now in another epistle to the Bishop of Constance, written and subscribed
unto, by Swinglius, and twelve more Ministers there named, Swinglius thus
confesses and says: Tom. 1. fol. 121. 122. 123.
Hactenus experti, quod etc. Hitherto we have tried, that this gift of Chastity
has been denied us etc. We have burned (O for shame!) so greatly, that we have
committed many things unseemly. To speak freely without boasting; We are not
otherwise of such uncivil manners, that we should be evil spoken off, among
the people to us committed, for any wickedness (hoc vno excepto) this one point
excepted. Thus far Swinglius with his Accomplices.

By this now we may conjecture of the extraordinary sensuality of Swinglius,
and of his incredible thirst after a woman. For here we see, how himself with
the rest, are not ashamed to confess themselves to have lived (till that day)
most incontinently and dissolutely: a course little sorting to those, who
undertake the first planting of the true Religion and faith of Christ; which
Religion utterly forbids all unchaste and lustful actions: Galat. 5.
The works of the flesh are adultery, fornication etc. Who do these, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God.

I here pass over Swinglius his temporizing liberty in writing of matters of
Religion. For speaking after, of certain of his writings some years before
penned, he thus blusheth not to say: That when he did such and such things
before, Swing. tom. 2. de vera Religione, fol. 202.
Tempori potius scripsimus quam rei, sic iubente Domino etc. We rather fitted
our writings to the time, then to the truth of the matter, God himself so
commanding us etc. A most irreligious and heathenish saying; and so disliked,
that at the Alphabeticall table there under the letter z. it is said: Swinglius
docendo seruiuit tempori, Swinglius in his teaching, served the times. The
death and end of Swinglius was so calamitous, that diverse most markable
Protestants do write, that he was infallibly damned. For first Luther thus
censureth thereof, by the testimony of Hospinian. Hospinians words are these:
In histo. Sacrament. part. 2. at anno 1544. fol. 187.
Lutherus dicit Swinglium miserrime in praelio a Papistis interfectum, ideo in
peccatis suis mortuum esse. Luther says, that Swinglius was miserab^y killed
by the Papists in wars, and that he dyed in sin. And again the said
Hospinian thus further writes: Vbi supra.
Lutherus se etc. Luther says, that he wholly despayreth of the salvation of
Swinglius soul. And Gualterus speaking of the judgment of diverse Protestants
herein, thus writes: In Apolog. fol. 30. and 31.
Nostri illi etc. Those our men are not afraid to pronounce, that Swinglius
died in Sin, and the son of Hell. Thus much of Swinglius.

Now to conclude this Scene with that Prodromus of Antichrist, I mean Luther,
who first laid most of the chief corner stones of Puritanisme: Luther was
first a Catholic Luth. in his Epist. to his Father, extat tom. 2. Wittenberg
fol. ^69.
Priest and Monk; during which his state of life, he thus writes of himself:
See Luthers words hereof in in his Comme^t upon the epistle to the Galathians,
englished in cap. 1. fol. 35.
I then honored the Pope of mere conscience, kept chastity, poverty and
obedience; and whatsoever I did, I did it with a single heart, of good Zeal,
and for the glory of God; fearing grievously the last day, and desirous to be
saved from the bottom of my heart. Of whose pure and sincere intention at that
time In epist. ad Thomam Cardinalem Eboracens.
Erasmus speaks fully; and Simon Voyon more particularly thus dilateth
thereof: Upon the Catalogue of the Doctors of the Church, ^nglished, page 180.
Luther in his Monastery punished his body with watching, fasting, and prayer.
But after he had once apostated from the Church of Rome, and cast of his
Catholic Religion; then he began to speak in another Dialect, and thus
writes of himself: (mark here good Reader, the difference of one and the
same man, when at one time he is Catholic, at another, Protestant:) Luth. tom.
1. epi. Latin. fol. 334. ad Philippum.
I am burned with the great flame of my untamed flesh; I, who ought to be
fervent in the Spirit, am fervent in the flesh, in lust, sloth etc. Eight days
are now past, wherein I neither did write, pray, nor study; being vexed partly
with temptations of the flesh, partly with other troubles.

Again the same Luther thus acknowledges further of himself: I am almost mad
through the rage of lust, and desire of women. And yet more: Luth. tom. 5.
Wittenberg. sermon. de Matrimonio, fol. 119.
As it is not in my power, that I should be no man: so it is not in my power,
that I should be without a woman etc. It is not in our power, that it should be
stayed or omitted; but it is as necessary, as that I should be a man; and more
necessary, then to eat, drink, purge, make clean the nose. And yet he
cease not, but further says: Luth. in Proverb. 31. adds these words in
Ducth, which are englished, as are here set down.
Nothing is more sweet, then is the love of a woman, if a man can obtain it;
and finally: Luth. tom 7. Wittenberg. epist. ad VVolphangum. fol. 505.
He that resolves to be without a woman, let him lay aside from him the name
of a man, making himself a plain Angel or spirit. And according to these his
speeches, he having cast of all his former Religion, took Catherine Bore out
of a Monastery, and married her.

Behold here (good Protestant Reader) and blush at the Primitiae of that
Spirit, which in this age first sowed Protestancy, or our new reformed
Religion. For where are now those former words of Luthers keeping his
chastity, poverty, and obedience? and what he did, he did with a single heart,
to the glory of God, and desirous to be saved from the bottom of his heart?
etc. So just reason had even Calvin himself to say of Luther: These words of
Calvin are alleged by Schlussenburg. in Theolog. Calu. l. 2. fol. 126.
magnis vitijs abundat. As also so fully is warranted, from Luthers sensuality,
that phraze used among many of his followers, who when they would give assent
to the provocation of nature, by accompanying lewd women, were accustomed to
say amongst themselves: This Benedictus Morgensterne the Protestant (in tract.
de Ecclesia, printed Francofurti 1^98. page 22. affirms that the Caluinists
were accustomed so to say.
Hodie Lutheranice viuemus: to day we will live Lutheranlyke. And here now the
less wonder it is, that Luther (for the patronizing of his own most sensual
and lascivious life) did vent out such his fleshly doctrines, mentioned in the
first part of this discourse; as If the wife will not, let the Chamber-mayd
come, besides many others. But let us proceed to other Acts of Luthers Scene.

And touching his pride; Where first we will speak of his presumed certainty
of his own broached doctrine, proceeding from the pride of his own private
Spirit, of which point he thus vaunteth: Luth. aduersus falso nominatum
Ecclisiasticum statum.
I would have you to know, (speaking to the Ecclesiastical state) that I will
not hereafter vouchsafe you so much honor, as to suffer either you, or the
Angels to judge of my doctrine etc. For seeing I am certain of it, I will
judge of you, and of the Angels. And more: Tom 2. VVittenb. fol. 333.
I am certain, I have my opinions from Heaven etc. they shall continue. And
yet more fully: Swinglius charge Luther with saying these words. to. 2. ad
Luther. Confess. respons. fol. 478.
If I be deceived, God has deceived me.

Touching Luthers pride of censuring Moses, and the Apostles, he thus speaks
of Moses: Luth. Tom. 3. Wittenberg. in Psalm. 45. fol. 423.
Moses had his lips full of gall and anger etc. Away therefore with Moses.
Touching S. Peter, Luther thus writes: Luth. in epist. ad Galat. c. 1.
Peter (the chief of the Apostles) did live and teach (extra verbum Dei)
besides the word of God. S. James the Apostle is thus charged by Luther,
touching Extreme Unction: Luth. l. de Capt. Babil c. de extrema unction, in
tom. 2. VVittenb. fol. 86.
I further say, if that in any place it be erred, in this especially it is
erred. But though this were the Epistle of S. James, I would answer, it is not
lawful for an Apostle (by his authority) to institute a Sacrament.

Touching Luthers pride in controwling, or rather rejecting the Holy
Scriptures, it is evident, that Luther denied for Canonical Scripture, the As
witnesses Bullinger upon the Apocalypse. Englished. 1573. c. 1^ ^^rm. 1. fol. 1.
Apocalips, Luth. in praefat. in epist. Iacobi, in editione Ieuensi.
the Epistle of James, As witnesses Oecolampadius in epist. ad Hebraeos,
printed Argent orat. 1534.
the Epistle to the Hebrews. Touching Luthers pride in condemning all the
Fathers, read what here is set down: Luth. lib. de seruo arbitrio, printed
anno 1551. page 434.
The Fathers of so many ages have been plainly blind, and most ignorant in
the Scriptures; they have erred all their life time; and unless they were
amended before their deaths, they were neither Saints, nor pertaining to the
Church. Thus he.

To thing Luthers proud boldness in translating the Holy Scriptures, one place
shall serve instead of many. Where S. Paul says: Romans 3.
A man is justified by faith, without the works of the Law: Luther in his
Translation thereof translateth: Man is justified by faith alone: and being
expostulated for adding the word alone, he instead of any other answer says:
Luth. tom. 5. Germ. fol. 141. 144.
I am sorry, I did not translate it worse: and a little before the said words:
sic volo, sic iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas. Thus much touching Luthers
deportment: of which Subject I do assure the Reader, I relate not the sixth
part, contenting my self to pick here and there, where I think most
convenient, and suting for the present.

If now it be here demanded, that seeing Luther was in the beginning of his
time a Catholic Priest; and (as it should seem) devout and religious in his
faith; how came it to pass, that he first altered his Religion? To this is
answered, That he had a true and real disputation with the Devil, and upon
the force of the Devils reasons, he renounced (first) private Mass: and then
after by degrees, and through the violence of his own sensuality, he proceeded
further in forging the rest of those voluptuous Paradoxes, above ascribed unto
him.

That Luther had this disputation with the Devil appears from Luthers own
words delivered thereof, for he writes: Luther. tom. 7. Wittenberg. printed
anno 1558 lib. de priuata missa. etc. vnct. sacerd. fol. 228.
Contigit, me sub mediam noctem subito expergefieri: ibi Satan mecum caepit
eiusmodi disputationem: Audi (inquit) Luthere, Doctor perdocte etc. It happened,
that about midnight, I awaked, and Satan then begun with me this kind of
disputation: Hear (says Satan) O Luther most learned Doctor etc. And the
Devil proceeds to his arguments; to the strength whereof Luther finally
subscribed. And thus Luther did first leave the saying of Mass by the
persuasion of the Devil. And which is worthy of observation: Luther writing
after this disputation, against the Mass, is not ashamed to use all those
particular reasons and arguments against the Mass, which the Devil before had
used to him.

This disputation of Luther with the Devil, is so certain, as that (besides
it is testified from Luthers own words, above alleged) it is acknowledged,
(though most weakly avoided) by In his reply to the Censure, printed 158^. fol.
d. 5. and d. 6.
Mr. Charke, In his Treatise against the defense of the censure, printed by
Thomas Thomas. page 234.
D. Fulk. Sutcliff. de vera Catholica Christi Ecclesia printed 1592. l. 2. c.
4. p. 298.
D. Sutcliff, D. D. Mort. in his Apolog. Catholica. part. 1. printed at London.
1005. l. 2. c. 21. page 351.
Morton. Balduinus in his book entitled de disputatione Lutheri cum Diabolo,
printed Islebij. 1605. c. 4. and page 81.
Balduinus, and others. All which several particular Protestants do give
several answers hereto, (a point, which deserves chiefly to be noted) so
little confidence did each of them, for the avoiding of this most foul blemish
to Luther (and indeed to Protestancy) put in one another Answer.

And with this I will conclude with these former six most remarkable and
eminent Reformers, assuring the Reader (as before) that I have related scarce
the sixth part of their licentiousnes and impieties, with which most of them
stand justly charged by the pens of other Protestants, their own Brethren,
having for greater expedition contented my self (as above I said) with
discerping here and there such their acknowledgments herein, as might seem
best to sort to my present project, and intention.

Only here I will demand, if it can sink into the brain of any judicious
indifferent man, but to ween that God would ever suffer the true faith and
Religion of Christ (admitting it had vanished away for many ages before, as is
pretended) to be restored to Christians, by the instruments and means of such
most profane, sensual, beastly, and flagitious men, as these former six
Authors are confessed by their own Brethren to have been: their very souls
being become even the sinkes or channells for the receite of all ordure and
filth of Sin and abominable impiety? No: it is impossible, it should be so.
Let no man therefore think his divine Majesty, would ever for the
re-establishing of his Church (the most supreme end, that can be conceived)
make choice of a company of obscure petty Doctors, and these but few, lately
stepped up, but competently learned, jointly broching in their doctrines sensual
liberty, and finally in their conversation most wicked, profane, and
execrable: so certain it is, that the wine ever tasketh strongly of the vine,
the water of the fountain, the fruit of the tree, and the life, of the
Doctrine.

But now (good Reader) to reflect back. Here thou may see, what Puritanisme is
either in speculation, or in the practice or execution. If then whether we
respect the doctrine, or the conversation in life of such men, as were the
first Institutours thereof, we do find all to be seated, (or rather grounded)
upon sensuality and impiety; how can thou be persuaded that Puritanisme is a
Religion, wherewith God himself will be honored? To the which thou can
never give thy full consent, except thou be first persuaded, that God is a
Patron and defendour of Sin and impiety: Therefore least any such profane
conceit should by the suggestio^ of the Enemy seize upon thy soul: I will
(for the close of this Treatise) partly display the vglines and deformity of
Sin, and consequently the infinite and invtterable hatred which God bears
to Sin, and Iniquity.

My first proof hereof shall be taken even from the Nature of sin in it
self, to the which God bears an infinite hatred. Which infinitenes of hatred
is proved by this reason: To wit; every offense committed against another, is
the more great, by how much the Personage, against whom it is committed, is
greater: but God, against whom each Sin is perpetrated, is of infinite
Majesty, worth, and dignity; therefore it follows, that every Sin committed
against God, deserves infinite hatred; and consequently deserves to be
punished with infinitenes of pains. Again; by how much God does transcend man
in goodness, by so much he loves goodness, and hates Sin, more then man does:
but he surpasses man infinitely in goodness; therefore his love to goodness, and
hatred to sin is infinite. And more, we may observe, that every time a man
commits a mortal Sin, there passes through his judgment a practical
discourse, by the which he compares together God, and the pleasure of the
Sin which he is to commit, and thus in this trutination and ballancing, he
finally preferres the pleasure before God; and therefore the wrong done to his
Divine Majesty, by making choice of a base fading pleasure before him, is
infinite and inexplicable.

The second Reason, showing the atrocity of Sin, may be taken from Gods
comminations, and thundering of punishments most abundantly in his holy
Scriptures against Sin, and the perpetratours thereof. As where we read: Esa.
1.
Behold, I will be revenged upon mine enemies (speaking of Sinners) and will
comfort my self in their destruction. Again: Psalm. 91.
Sinners and workers of iniquity do perish everlastingly: Psalm. ^^.
God shall rain snares of fire upon sinners; brimstone with tempestuous wynds
shall be the portion of their Cup. Ecclesiastic. 40.
Death, blood, contention, edg of sword, oppression, hunger, contrition, and
whips; all these things are created for wicked sinners. Proverb. 14.
Sin brings all men to misery. Ecclesiastic. 21.
Fly from sin, as from a serpent: Eccl. 20.
the end of a wicked man's flesh, shall be fire, and vermin: And to conclude
(omitting infinite other passages, all serving to denounce Gods future reserved
punishment for Sin (and consequently his hatred thereto) that most dreadful
relegation of Sinners: Math. 25.
Depart from me, you accursed, into everlasting fire.

The third Reason, which sets out the hainousnes, and atrocity of Sin (and
that more fully, then either of the former two) is, the consideration of the
mystery of the Redemption of mankind. Which God in the inscrutable Abyss of
his wisdom, would not otherwise perform, then by descending so low, as that
himself (being of infinite power and Majesty, Esaias 66.
Whose seat is Heaven, and the earth his footestoole; and, Job. 9.
under whom do crouch and tremble, even they, that do bear up and sustain the
world) should be content to become Man, to converse here upon earth
thirty-three years, to taste in the mean time all kind of afflictions, griefs
and indignities, and in the end to suffer at the hands of most base and
unworthy persons, upon the Cross, a most ignominions and dishonorable death:
and all this for the expiating of our sins, and Redemption of mankind: He is
John. 4^
the Savior of the world; 1. John. 2.
the reconciliation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world (says the holy Scripture.)

But now to wind up in few words (and so to give the last stop to my pen) the
force of the necessary inferences and deductions, resulting out of all the
former Reasons of this whole discourse. Thus then I conclude: If on the one
side, Puritanisme be a Religion defending all turpitude of Sin and Vice, as
also wholly discouraging men from the exercise of all Virtue; and that the first
broachers thereof have been men of most flagitious conversation, incorporating
in their vicious lives their own positions and doctrines: And if on the other
side, the atrocity of Sin be such, and the hatred of God to sin so
infinite, and inexplicable, as that the understanding not only of Man, but even
of the Angels cannot comprehend it, (much less in words unfold it) what then
can follow, but that Christ, should sooner cease to be Christ then resolve
first to institute Puritanisme, and the former doctrines thereof above
mentioned, and willingly to suffer himself to be truly worshipped therewith,
and to ordain, (as a means necessarily conducing to man's salvation) a faith,
or Religion, so profane, vicious, and blasphemous? And with this I end this
short Treatise.

FINIS.
A FUNERAL DISCOVRSE (by way of Appendix) Touching the late different Deaths
of two most remarkable Protestant Deuines: The one, Doctor Price, Deane of
Hereford, who dyed Catholic. The other, Doctor Buts, Vice-Chancelor of
Cambridg, who hanged himself.

Written by a Catholic Priest in England, to his Protestant friend in
Amsterdam.

Pretiosa in conspectu Domini, Mors Sanctorum. Psalm. 115.

Mors Peccatorum, pessima. Psalm. 331.

Permissu Superiorum. 1633.

A Funeral Discourse of the late Deaths of two most remarkable Protestants,
Doctor Price, Deane of Hereford; and Doctor Butts, Vice-Chancelour of
Cambridge.
DEAR Friend, toward whom neither distance of place, nor disparity of
Religion can diminish my love. There are several Months passed, since we have
had any intercourse by our pens: Therefore to defer the time no longer, but to
perform my Calendary, and prescribed task, I have thought good now to break
silence; and by these leaves (the poor Messenger of my rich Affection) to
advertise you of the present good state of my corporal health. But the main
allectiu^ inuiting me to write at at this time is, thereby to acquaint you with
the chiefest Occurrents happening of late among us: A subject of weight, and
such as may well seem to force my Pen, to spend some time in the unfolding of
it.

Now these Occurrents are, touching the different deaths of two heertofore most
remarkable Protestants; the one of their deaths being Heteroclite, or irregular
in nature; the other natural, but withal supernatural, since the party so
dying now lives (as we may comfortably hope) with Life himself: So true is
that sentence of Gods word (which is his peculiar Dialect) thus celebrating the
death of the virtuous, Ecclesiast. 7.
Dies Mortis, melior die Natiuitatis: But the tragical end of the wicked
(though that cannot be their end) it thus depresseth, Prou. 11.
Mortuo homine impio, nulla erit vltra spes. Which two Oracles, or divine
Motto's are doubtlesly verifyed of the eminent men here to be spoken of;
joined together in the neerenes of the time of their deaths of Body; but most
distant in their now present state of Soul. These two the^ were Doctor Price,
late Deane of Hereford; and Doctor Buts, Vice Chancellor of Cambridge.

And first to begin with Doctor Price: since in priority of time his death was
before the others. This man through the worth of his good parts and learning,
was honored, by being particularly known and respected by his Majesty (whom
God grant to reign over us in a happy government many years) and then after
was made Deane of Hereford, a place of great estimation.

It is reported, that during all his life time, he enjoying his health, showed
himself much adverse to the Catholics, and troubled diverse of them: But in
the time of his last sickness (for Eccles. 28.
Afflictio dat intellectum) God (to whom nothing is contingent, yet foresees
all contingencyes; and who before all time, foresees all things done in time)
did so efficaciously move with his grace this dying Doctor, as that he being
most mercifully called to work in Christ's vineyard at the Math. 20.
eleauenth hour; and casting from him all other cares, did solely care for the
good of his soul, by the detestation of his former dissimulation, and
thirsting desire of dying Catholic. And thus finally he ankered his hopeful
thoghts (notwithstanding his former course) at the Cape (as I may call it) of
Buona Speranza, which stretches it self out into the Main Ocean of Gods
boundles Mercy; he acknowledging therein the truth of our Saviors words, Luc.
^9.
Porro, vnum est necessarium. O he is truly wise, who is wise to his own Soul!

This Doctor using in time of his sickness the help of a Catholic Doctor of
Physic, entreated his Physician (as is certainly diuulged) to procure the
access of a Catholic P^iest to him. His Physician (as knowing his former
comportment in matters of Religion) rested much aghast at his request, and
answered: Sir, I now not what you mean by these words: The world has taken
full notice, how much you have in disaffected toward Priests and Catholic;
and a Priest will hardly adventure to come to you for fear of some intended
danger. To which the Patient thus replied: O Mr. Doctor, you see in what poor
case I lie, I look for death, and this is not a time of further dissimulation:
I protest, my desire of having a Priest is, for the saving of my soul. Whether
these words were preuayling with his Physician, or some other means were
used, I know not; But within a day or two after, a Catholic Priest came to his
lodging.

At the Priests first entrance into his chamber, D. Price thus saluted him:
Gentleman, you are most welcome; I have sent for you, not to dispute with you,
for (I thank God) I am already fully settled in your own Religion; but to
entreat your help and furtherance, for the disburdening my soul of all her
sins. Howsoever in my lif^ time, I have borne my self malignantly against
Recusants (which great Sin I humbly beseech his Divine Majesty to remit) know
you, that at this present, I am in judgment a Catholic, and do intend to dye a
member of that Religion; and for the accomplishing of this my desire, I do
humbly entreat the help of your Priestly function. The Priest showed himself
most glad of such his pious Resolution, and used diverse comfortable speeches to
the said end. And thus within few days after, through a penitent Confession of
his sins, and by means of the Holy Sacraments, the Doctor was incorporated
into the mystical body of Christ's Catholic Church; and so with a most
constant resolution dyed a member of the Roman Church.

But before his death, his Majesty being advertised of his sickness (see here a
rare example of Princely benignity) did send (as is confidently reported) a
Bishop to visit the Doctor from himself. The Bishop coming into his
lodging, and finding him lying in his bed, asked him, how he did; and withal
told him, that he was sent from the King, to visit^ him. To which words the
Do. (even with tears in his eyes) answered: I most humbly thank his Majesty
for this his most gracious and undeserving favor, O, that it were in my power
to express my acceptance hereof; and withal, my Lord Bishop, I thank you for
your pains. Touching my self my Lord, you see, and I feel, in what pitiful
case I lie. Never worse in body, and never better, on so well in soul. And for
the more fully expressing of my meaning* and to prevent mistaking, your
Lordship may take notice, that now I am, and intend to ^ye a Roman Catholic:
and if God restore me to my health, I will make a more full declaration of this
my change.

These words amazed the Bishop; and thereupon the Bishop used some short
speeches to alter his pious determination. To the which the sick Doctor thus
replied: O my good Lord, these your words are but health-discourses; If you
did lie in that case, in which I now am, (and your Lordship must once come to
this) at what time the veyle of all transitory motives must be drawn aside,
you would no doubt discover your self to be of a different opinion in
religion, from that, which now your words import. For I must tell you plainly,
I am persuaded, that there is never a learned bishop, nor learned Divine in
England (if so he has spent much time in the study of Controversies) but that
he is inwardly, and in soul a Catholic, howsoever he may be content to
dissemble his Religion, through the temporal Motives of Wife, Children,
Riches, honor, and the like. And why should not I be thus perwaded; seeing it
is most certain, that all Authorities both divine and humane (if they be truly
weighed) make wholly for the Catholic Religion, and against the Protestants?
The Bishop seeing him in fervor of speech, began to take leave with him. The
Doctor in most humble words did prostrate his loyalty and service to his
Majesty with all grateful acknowledgment of this so high a favor.

And thus (good friend) you have the Relation of this Protestant Catholic
Doctors happy departure out of this vale of misery. In discoursing whereof, if
I err in any Circumstance, (for I will not justify the certainty of each of
them, though of the main point of his dying Catholic, no man doubts:) I am
to be pardoned, seeing I deliver it (as near as I can) in that manner, in
which I did hear it. But now (my friend) to reflect upon the death of this
learned Doctor: Whether he was ever in his heart, or but only for some short
time before his death Catholikely affected, I know not; neither do I know what
were the Motives, first inducing him to make this Catholic end. Nevertheless, I
did hear it from the mouth of one of his inward acquaintance, who at one time
being in the Doctors company, did hear Doctor Price much commend a Book,
lately written by a Priest of the Society of JESUS, styled; The converted Jew,
and did say, that the Doctor himself had read it, and finally giving his
judgment of it in these words: If the Protestants authorities alleged in
that Book, be truly and faithfully alleged (as he had no reason to think the
contrary, and the rather considering (says he) the Book is with great
confidence dedicated to both our Universities, who would instantly discover and
diuulge any impostures, if such were used) that of necessity it must then
follow, that either the Papists Theoremes, and Tenets (for that was the
Doctors phrase) are most true; or that all the chief and most eminent
Protestants (without exception of any) even from Luthers days down to us,
were most simple, indiscreete, and wholly unlearned: but this (said he) I have
no reason to think; for their voluntary Confessions and acknowledgme^ts (some
in on point, some in another) are clear, in behalf of the Papists Religion,
to which acknowledgments (supposing the matter of them to be false) they had no
reason so unadvisedly to yield.

Now whether his perusing of that Book might alter his judgment, or it was
altered before, I know not. But whatsoever the Motives of his dying Catholic
were; among other of his inducements thereto, this following perhaps (though I
in no sort do absolutely affirm it) might be one. His own Reading could not
but tell him, that as on the one side, the Protestants among themselves
maintain such irreconciliable disagreements in matters of faith, that
therefore they account one another for Heretics, each one depriving another of
all hope of Salvation: so on the other part, many of the most judicious, and
learned Protestants do freely teach, that Papists (as they are called) dying
Papists, may be saved; But it is not to be found, that the Papists do so teach
of Protestants, dying Protestants.

This then being thus, the Doctor might well thus reason with himself;
(though as before, I ever grant, I do not know articulately any one of his
particular motives) The Protestants do deny to one another all hope of
Salvation, dying without recalling their presumed Protestanticall Errors: The
Catholics in like sort will not grant, that Protestants, dying Protestants,
can be saved: But both the Protestants and the Papists teach, that Papists,
dying in state of Papistry, may be saved: Therefore it is a more secure course
for me, now lying upon my deathbed, to dye in that Religion, which by the
acknowledgment of all sides, promises hope of Salvation; then to dye in that
faith, to which but only some few Professors thereof affoard a saving
expectation.

That the Protestants do nourish among themselves such disagreements in faith,
as that they consequently deny their Protestant Adversaries (dying in that
state) can be saved, I will here briefly prove from their own reciprocal and
mutual recriminations, and from the very Titles of their Books, written in
great acerbity of style, against other Protestants, their discording Brethren.
Now in the discovery hereof, I am content, my pen shall for the time
pertinently digress, and withal transgress the bounds of an ordinary Letter;
chiefly (dear friend) to the end, that my words might gain some ground upon
your judgment; for I grieve to observe, with what a strong bent of dislike,
you are violently carried against our Catholic faith; and glad I should be to
see, that as you are learned, so you would employ your learning, as a
Hand-mayde to your souls salvation.

Well then, to come unto the point, and to omit for breuity most of what might
be alleged to this purpose; and but to gather here and there some few
Testimonies out of such great store and abundance. Do we not find Luther thus
to conuitiate the Sacramentaries? Luther. these. 21. contra Louaniens.
We seriously judge the Swinglians and Sacramentaries, to be Heretics, and
Aliens from the Church of God. But Oecolampadius (the Swinglian) retaliates
Luthers kindness in these words: Dialog. contra Melancth.
The Lutheranes only bring forth a color and shadow of the word of God, (as
Heretics commonly are accustomed to do:) They bring not the word of God; and
yet they will seem to build upon the word of God.

It is certain, that the Lutheranes cannot agree among themselves; And
according hereto, we find In catal. haeret. nostri temporis.
Conradus Schlussenburge (a Lutherane) to place six sorts of his own
Lutheranes in the Catalogue of Heretics. The Caluinists do thus charge one
another: Castalio, a learned Sacramentary, thus writes of Calvin, for his
teaching God to be the Author of Sin: In his medit. upon 112. Psalm.
By this means not the Devil, but the God of Calvin is the Father of lies:
But that God, which the holy Scripture teaches, is contrary to this God of
Calvin. And then after: The true God came to destroy the works of the Caluinian
God: And these two Gods, as they are by nature contrary one to another, so they
beget and bring forth Children, of contrary disposition; to wit, that God of
Calvin, children without mercy, proud etc.

Now touching our English Protestants (forbearing to show their disagreements
about the Communion Book, and the Translation of the Scripture) we find the
Puritanes thus to anathematize the Bishops: All this is related, as spoken by
the Puritanes in the Book of Constit. and Canons Eccles. printed anno 1604.
The worship in the Church of England is corrupt, superstitious, unlawful: the
Articles of the Bishops Religion are erroneous, their rytes Antichristian etc.
And more: The government of the Church of England under his Majesty by
Archbishops, Bishops, and Deanes, is Antichristian, and repugnant to the word
of God.

Now to requite the Puritanes Charity herein, we find them thus charged by
other English Protestants: In the Survey of the pretended discipline. c. 5. c.
24. and cap. 35.
The Puritanes pervert the true meaning of certain places both of Scripture
and Fathers, to serve their own turn. And again in this sort: The word of
God is troubled with such choppers and changers of it. M. Parks is no less
sparing in his reprehension, thus writing: In his epist. dedicatory. p. 3.
The Puritanes seek to undermine the foundation of faith. And finally M. Powel
thus does recriminate the Puritanes: In his Considerations.
The Puritanes are notorious, and manifest Schismatikes, cut off from the
Church of God.

Neither do the Protestants thus inueigh one against another in short
sentences, or Periods of speech; but they have written several hundred whole
Treatises, in reproof of each others doctrines, and have printed them in
Protestant towns and Universities; as appears from the Catalogues heretofore
yearly returned from Frankefort, mentioned by Hospinian the Protestant, in his
Historia Sacramentaria, part. altera, and by Coccius his Thesaurus tom. 2. The
very Titles whereof sufficiently discover, that the Protestants do hold one
another for Heretics, and therefore not capable of salvation: see here the
viperous brood, issuing from the loins of one Luther.
Apostata Friar.

For greater expedition, I will here content my self with setting down the
Titles only of Ten of their Books (of which not any of them touch the sole
Doctrine of the Eucharist, because perhaps it may be replied, that the one side
speak^ therein rather like Papists, then Protestants.) And out of these ten you
may easily conjecture, with what spirit of Contention and division, the rest of
the Books are written. The ten Books are these following.

1. Conradi Schlussenburgi Theologiae Caluinisticae libri tres: in quibus seu
in tabula quadam quasi ad oculum, plusquam ex ducentis viginti tribus
Sacramentariorum publicis scriptis, pagellis, verbis proprijs, and Authorum
nominibus indicatis, demonstratur, eos de nullo fere Christianae fidei articulo
recte sentire. Printed Francofurti. 1594.

2. Oration de Incarnatione filij Dei, contra impios and blasphemos errores
Swinglianorum and Caluinistarum. Printed Tubingae. Anno Domini, 1586.

3. Alberti Graueri Bellum Ioannis Caluini, and Jesus Christi. Braptae, 1598.

4. Gulielmi Zepperi Dillinburgensis Ecclesiae Pastoris, Institutio de tribus
Religionis summis Capitibus, quae inter Euangelicos in Controuersiam vocantur.
Hannouiae. 1596.

5. Aegidij Hunnij Caluinus Iudaizans: Hoc est, Iudaicae glossae and
corruptelae, quibus Ioannes Caluinus illustrissima Scripturae sacrae loca, and
testi^onia de gloriosa Trinitate, Deitate Christi, and Spiritus Sancti; cum
primis autem vaticinia Prophetarum de aduentu Messiae, and Natiuitate eius,
Passione, Resurrectione, Ascensione ad caelos, and Sessione ad dextram Dei,
detestandum in modum corrumpere non abhorruit. Wittembergae 1593.

6. Pia defensio aduersus Iohannis Caluini, Petri Boquini, Theodori Bezae,
Gulielmi Ctebitij etc. and similium calumnias. Item, Refutatio Pelagiani seu
Anabaptistici Caluinistarum erroris de Baptismo, and peccato Originali.
Adduntur Collectaneae plurimorum Caluini contra Deum, eius Prouidentiam, and
Praedestinationem. Erfordiae, 1583.

7. Christiani Kittelmanni december graves and perniciost errores Swinglianorum in
doctrina de peccatis, and baptismo; ex proprijs ipsorum libris collecti, and
refutati. Magdeburgi. 1562.

8. De gaudijs aeternae vitae, and quomodo Sacramentarij nobis illa gaudia
imminuant. Erfordiae. 1585.

9. Ioannis Mosellani Praeseruatiuae, contra venenum Swinglianorum. Tubingae.
1586.

10. Denominatio Imposturarum and fraudum, quibus Aegidius Hunnius Ecclesiae
Orthodoxae doctrinam petulanter corrumpere pergit. Bremae. 1592.

Thus we see (My worthy Friend) in what inueterate, intestine, and
irreconciable simulties, dissensions, and Booke-warres, the Protestants of all
kinds and sorts do live among themselves: from the true consideration of which
point, it may evidently be inferred, that the Protestants by such their
disagreements, cannot, nor do affoard the hope of salvation to other
Protestants, dying in a contrary faction to themselves: except the said
Protestants should grant (contrary to the Scriptures, to all Antiquity, and to
the force of all reason) that men, who are Heretics and Aliens from the Church
of God; who urge only a shadow of the word of God, but not the word it self;
who are Heretics, maintayning two Gods; whose Religion is erroneous,
Antichristian, and repugnant to the word of God; who pervert the Scriptures to
serve their own turns; who undermine the foundation of faith, and as being
manifest schismatikes, are cut of from the Church; finally who are charged by
other Protestants, their own Brethren (and this in set Treatises) not to
believe aright almost any one Article of Christian faith, but to maintain
blasphemous and impious errrours; as to wage war against Jesus Christ, to
defend Pelagianisme, and Anabaptisticall errors, and lastly, to corrupt the
most illustrious passages of Scripture, urged by all antiquity in proof of the
most glorious Trinity, of the Divinity of Christ, and of the holy Ghost: except
(I say) that such men as these, dying in this state irrepentantly, can be saved.

But now, if we will turn the leaf over, and observe, what the most learned
Protestants do confess and teach in behalf of the Papists, dying Papists; we
shall find, that both by necessary Inferences, resulting out of their own
granted Premises, as also in express terms, they maintain, that the
Papists, dying in their own Religion, may be saved.

This shall be proved several ways, thereby to justify Doctor Price his
election and choice, in dying a Catholic, and member of the Roman Church; and
not a member of the Protestants late erected Conuenticle.

And first this Verity takes its probation, from that other acknowledged Verity
of the Protestants; who confess, that the Roman Church is the true Church of
God, and that in the same Church Salvation is to be obtained. To this purpose
we may allege D. Field in his own words: In his book of the Church. lib.
3. c. 46.
We doubt not, but that the Church, in which the Bishop of Rome with more then
a Luciferian pride exalted himself, was notwithstanding the true Church of
God; and that it held a saving profession of the truth in Christ. M. Hooker
thus worthily honors the Church of Rome: In his book of Ecclesiast. policy,
ag^ 88.
The Church of Rome is to be reputed a part of the house of God, a limme of the
Visible Church of Christ; and we gladly acknowledge them, to be of the family
of Jesus Christ. D. Barrows: In his Sermons and two questions disputed ad
Clerum. page 448.
I dare not deny the name of Christians, to the Romanists, since the learneder
writers do acknowledge the Church of Rome, to be the Church of God. M. Morton:
In his treatise of the Kingdom of Israel, and of the Church. page 94.
Papists are to be accounted of the Church of God, because they do hold the
foundation of the Gospel, which is faith in Christ Jesus, the son of God,
and Savior of the world. But I hope no man of judgment, will deny, but that
such, as are of the family of Jesus Christ, whose Church is the Church of God,
and who hold the foundation of the Gospel, which is faith in Christ Jesus,
may be saved.

But to proceed. Doctor Some thus more expressly writes of this point: In his
^^^^^e against Penry. page 176.
If you think, that all the Popish sort, which dyed in the Popish Church, are
damned, you think absurdly; and do dissent from the judgment of all learned
Protestants. D. Couell: In his defense of M. Hoo^ar. pa 77.
We affirm them of the Church of Rome to be parts of the Church of Christ; and
that those, that live and dye in that Church, may notwithstanding be saved. Yea
this Doctor so far proceeds herein, as that he charge the maintayners of
the contrary doctrine (to use his words) D. Co^^l vbi. s^^ra.
with ignorant zeal. But to press more particularly this point, D. Whitakers
Cont. r^^. Camp. page 78.
grants, that diverse ancient Fathers, houlding the doctrine of Satisfaction,
and merit of works, are nevertheless saved. M. Cartwright thus favorably
writes: In his reply against D. Whitguif a defense. page 82.
I doubt not, but that diverse Fathers of the Greek Church, who were Patrones
of freewill, are saved. I will add one annotation hereto; which is, that we
commonly find the more grave temperate and learned Protestants to affoard in
their writings the title of Saint, to Augustine, Jerome, Ambrose, Cyprian, and
to most of the Fathers of the Primitive Church; All which Fathers, by Luth.
lib. de seruo arbitrio. printed anno 1551. page 434.
Luther, and almost all other Melancth. in 1. Cor. c. 3^ D. Humfrey in vita
Iuelli, page 212. and D. Whitaker. contra Duraeum. l. 6. p. 413.
Protestants of reading, are acknowledged for Papists: from which ascribed
title given to the Fathers, the Protestants must needs grant, that the said
Fathers are saved, since only such as are saved, are Saints.

But to descend yet more articulately I will insist in some particular men who
are acknowledged (and but truly) by the Protestants, for Papists; and yet the
Protestants do afford them such Encomia, high praises, and extollings, as that
they could not give to them truly the said lauds, except such men were saved.
I will ex professo pick out only four or five, who were so notorious Papists
(as I may say) as that no forehead is so meretricious and shameless, as to
deny the same.

And first, S. Dominick, who was Author of the Religious Order of the
Dominican Friars. His great holiness is at large acknowledged by the Cent. 13.
col. 1^79.
Centurists; and Pantaleon (the Protestant) celebrateth it in these words: ^n
Chronico, page 100.
Dominicus erat vir doctus, and bonus, and Praedicatorum ordinem instituit. S.
Bernard (who was an Abbot, and Osiander epitom. Cent. 12. p. 309.
Author of many Abbyes and Monasteries in France, and Flanders) receaueth from
the pen of D. Whitakers this commendation: L. de ^^^les. pa. 3^^.
Ego quidem Bernardum vere fuisse Sanctum, existimo. Which Saint, Osiander
styles; a very Osiand. (...) supra.
good man: from both which Commendations it follows, that Osiander and D.
Whitakers thought that Bernard was saved; since who are saved, if not those,
who are truly Holy, and who are very good men?

To Gregory the Great, and Austin, who planted in England all the Romish
Religion taught at this day (as In I^^ (...) part. ^. r^^. 5.
D. Humfrey truly affirms) D. Goodwin affoards this worthy praise: In his
catal. of Bishops. page 1.
That blessed and holy Father S. Gregory, and S. Austin our Apostle. And no
small praises are given to these two, by D. Fulk against Heskins, Sanders, page
561.
D. Fulk. Lastly, Beda is so extolled by D. Humfrey, as that he pronounces him
(to use his own words) In Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 3.
To be of the number of Godly men, and to be raised up by the holy Ghost: And
yet so great a Papist, Beda was, as that Osiander thus writes of him: In
epitom. cent, 8. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Beda was wrapped in all Popish errors, wherein we at this day dissent from
the Pope.

Thus far of these men: to whom we see, that the Protestants do ascribe such
transcendent praises, as are only compatible, and agreeing to such as are in
state of salvation. And thus far (my learned friend) of this subject in
general, to wit, of the Salvation of a Papist, dying in his own Religion:
where we have seen, how abounding the Protestants have been in their
testimonies of several sorts, for the truth of this undeniable Verity.

And now (good friend) if we call to mind, how the Protestants deny (through
their immortal mutual dissensions) salvation to each other; and withal, if we
will rest upon the cauen and impartial judgments of other sober,
dispassionate, and most learned Protestants, who fully teach and mantaine, that
hope of salvation belongs to the Catholics, dying in their ancient Roman
faith: what man then of judgment can justly conceive any dislike against
Doctor Price, for his dying a Catholic, and no Protestant? O no. The Freewill
and election of Man in things but of small moment, naturally enclines to the
choosing of the Best; and shall then the Soul be so treacherous and disloyal
to it self, as to choose the worst, when it concerns Eternity either of joy
or torments? And heerewith I will cease to enlarge my self further upon this
our Daniel, who by his happy end, avoided the jaws of the Lion; that 1. Pet.
^.5.
Leo rugiens, circumiens, quaerens quem deuoret: That roaring Lion going about,
seeking whom he may dedeuoure.

Concerning Doctor Butts.
NOW in this next place to come to D. Butts, Vice-Chancelour of Cambridge,
whose death ought to be delivered in the Dialect of black notes of Contumely,
and dishonor; and whose disastrous End affoards a greater luster to the
glorious death of the former Doctor: so shadows placed in a picture, give
greater light to the Picture.

This man the^ (as the world knows) was advanced for his presumed sufficiency
and Virtue, to stern and govern the most famous University of Cambridge: yet
his Death was so calamitous (by a voluntary making away of himself the year
1632.) as that his best friends are never able to vindicate his name from
eternal reproach. And therefore what learning he had I know not: but certain I
am, his Virtue, whereby he seemed grateful to the eyes of others, was merely
extrinsecall, and hypocritical; and his Religion, but a shadow or image of
Religion: So a du^ghill or any other foul place covered with snow, is not for
the time discovered from a fair meadow.

What were the Motives of this his death, is severally rumored by several
tongues. Some diuulge (for Fame oftentimes variously multiplies it self in its
own cogitation) that (besides certain intestine simulties, between him and
some others of the University) he was unexpectedly called openly to a
reckoning, how he had disbursed certain sums of money, gathered for the
relief of the poor of that City, in time of the sickness there; a great part
of which money he had intended, to engrosse to his own particular use: and
that this occasioned his dreadful resolution -- Aens^^.
Quid non mortalia pectora cogis, Auri sacra fames? -- Others report otherwise.
But whatsoever the immediate occasion might be; such was his most deplorable
death (attended with the everlasting Death of his soul) here set down.

This man the very day (which was Easter day) of his acting this unnatural
Part (by being become his own Parricide) was to preach in the chief Church,
to the whole University, (for he was Doctor of Divinity) who that very morning
faigning some occasion of staying in his lodging longer, then his intended
Auditors expected he should, it was observed, that the door was barred upon
him; and some suspicion growing thereof, his door was presently broken down,
and himself was there found to have hanged himself with his Garters: his own
chamber thus being become the mournful stage of his own Tragedy. Thus it
happened, that that day, which our Savior did rise from Hell, this poor
wretch descended into Hell. But I grant my words are over languide and faint,
to paynt forth this atrocity of fact. For we see, that He, by forbearing to
preach, did more fully preach, and made a Sermon, not to the University alone,
but to the Whole Realm, more moving (though without words) then ever his
tongue could have performed.

For who hearing only, that the Vice-Chancelour of Cambridge had hanged
himself (in which short Relation, every word has its Pathos, Emphasis, and
Energy) rests not astonished? Or who will not be amazed, when he shall be
told, that a man seated in such a height of government; supposed to be most
learned and pious; graced for his presumed wisdom and prudence, with the
title of Vice-Chancelour; being a Doctor of Divinity; a most remarkable man in
his zealous professing of the Protestant faith; and a great adua^cer of the
English Gospel; should by such a weak and vnmanlike apprehending of temporal
distasts be moved thus in Soul and Body to cast himself away for all
eternity? A Document to teach every man, with all humility to lie battering at
the ears of the Almighty, with incessant and feruorous Prayer, (by which we
overcome him who is invincible, and procure him to work in our affayre, who is
immovable) so to arm his soul with Divine Grace, as to be able to subdue all
wicked molitions of our Ghostly Enemy, and all other arising Temptations
whatsoever; least otherwise through want of the said Grace, he might complain
with the Prophet: Psalm. 142.
Anima mea, sicut terra sine aqua tibi.

Let no man think, that out of a malignity to the Vice-Chancelours Religion, I
do amplifye thus upon this most ruthful Theme. No. I do greatly commiserate
his endless and interminable calamity, since a soul in Hell lives in death,
which never dies: so far I am from insulting over the dead, and I have read
that sentence, Eccles. 8.
Noli de mortuo inimico tuo gaudere.

But it may be here urged by some, that seeing this is but the Example of one
man of Note, my Pen is over luxuriant in exaggerating his disconsolate and
dismal fall. To this I reply, first, that diverse, even of his own Coat and
Profession here in England (I mean of Ministers, though men of far lower
rank and estate) by offering violence to themselves, have made the like
shipwreck of their souls, within the compass of this very year, and some few
last past. Secondly, the more fully to confront this bold assertion, and for
your further satisfaction (my much respected friend) in this point, who do so
highly preiudge of the first Restorers of your Gospel; I do here avouch, that
several Protestants of far greater eminency for learning, and popular fame in
the world, then the Vice-Chancelour ever was, and such as have been the first
broachers of Protestancy, have (by Gods permission) come to most calamitous
Ends, though not in an unnatural hastening of their own deaths, yet as
banefull and pernicious to their own souls, as if they had become their own
Butchers. And this shall be proved even from the free acknowledgments of other
learned Protestants.

And first to begin with these later days, and so to ascend higher: It is over
manifest, that Andraeas Volanus (a Caluinist) dyed a In Paranesi.
Turk, and had (before his death) poisoned diverse persons with his blasphemous
writings, against the Blessed Trinity. In like sort Stancarus de mediatore,
fol. 38.
Georgius Paulus (an eminent Protestant in Cracouia) at his death denied the B.
Trinity, with the Turks. Again, Laelius Socinus (brought up at Geneua) by the
Confession even of Beza, In epist. Theolog. 81.
dyed, wholly renouncing the Christian faith. Alamannus (once a familiar friend
of Beza) did, as witnesses In ep. 65. page 308.
Beza, dye a blasphemous Jew. David See Historia Dauidis Georgij printed at
Antwerpe, anno 1568.
George (once Professor at Basil) dyed an execrable Apostata. Osiand. in Cent.
16 part. 2. page 828.
Adam Neuserus (the chief Pastor of Heidelberge) dyed a circumcised Turk. And
Ochinus (who first disseminated Protestancy here in England, in King Edward the
sixth his Reign) in the end dyed (by the Confession of Beza) an impious Lib. de
Polygam. p. 4.
Apostata, and Beza Epist. 1. pa. 11.
a derider of all Christian Religion.

Thus far ^or a taste only (omitting diverse others) of these men, whose deaths
were as calamitous and Tragical (since their souls thereby have incurred
eternal perdition) as if they had massacred themselves.

But to leave these, and to come to some others, more, remarkable Protestants,
who were great enlargers of the new pretended Gospel of Protestancy, and who
died Professors of the said Religion: We do find, that a most learned
Protestant thus writes of Caluins death: Conradus Slussenburg. in Theolog.
Calu. l. 1. fol. 72.
Deus manu sua potenti etc. God with his mighty hand did visit Calvin; for he
despayred of his salvation, calling upon the Devils, and gave up his Ghost
swearing and blaspheming. Calvin dyed, being eaten away with lice; for they so
bred about his privy parts, that none could endure the stench. Thus the said
Protestant of Caluins death.

And the same is further witnessed by In libello de vitae Calvin.
Ioannes Herennius (a Caluinist Preacher) who was witness and present at
Caluins death.

Melancthon (the famous Protestant) made so miserable an End, as that Morlinus
(his Protestant scholar, and otherwise a great aduancer of Melancthons worth)
in these doleful words, performs his Masters Exequyes, and funerals: See
hereof Slussenb. (...) Theolog. Calu. l. 2. ^rt. 1^.
Si possem redimere etc. If it did lie in my power, to redeem the Salvation of
our Master Philip Melancthon with the hazard of my life, I would do it: but he
is carried to the terrible Tribunal of God, there to plead his cause. Thus
Morlinus.

Iacobus Andraeas (an Eminent and most forward Protestant) so lived and dyed
(as In Hist. Sacram. part. 1. fol. (...)
Hospinian the Protestant witnesses) as if he had no God but Mammon and
Bacchus, he never praying going to bed, nor rising from thence.

Carolostadius (a great Protestant) was killed by the Devil, as certain
Ministers In their epistle de morte Carolostadij.
even of Basil do justify. And of the said Carolostadius, Luther thus writes:
Luther in loc. com. class. 5. cap. 25. p. 47.
Carolostadius traditus est in reprobum sensum: Carolostadius is delivered up
into a reprobate sense etc. And further Luther thus says of him: Puto non vno
Diabolo etc. I do think that miserable man was possessed, not with one only
Devil God take mercy of him for that sin, wherein he sinned, even to the
last hour of his death.

Oecolampadius (that transcendent Protestant, and supposed Bishop of Basil)
Coclaus in act. Luther. 1537.
went healthful to his bed, and was found by his wife dead, in the morning.

Swinglius so dyed in the wars, as that Gualterus (a forward Protestant) thus
censureth his death: In his Apology pro Zuinglio.
Nostri etc. Diverse of us are not afraid to pronounce Swinglius to have dyed in
sin; and therefore to have dyed the son of Hell.

Now to close up this Scene of death with Luther himself, the Father of
Protestancy, then whom no other Author was more sorting to such a Religion;
no other Religion more sorting to such an Author. This Type of Antichrist dyed
most suddenly; for Coclaeus in vita Lutheri.
being at Supper, and feeding vnctuously upon great variety of meats; and
entertayning his invited friends with dissolute discourse, the very same night
dyed: A truth so evident, that David Cytraeus (a markable Protestant) thus
accords to this former Narration: David Cytraeus Orat. funebri Christophori
Di^cis Megapolitani.
Lutherus ipse vesperi mensae assidens, paucis post mediam noctem horis
discessit. Luther himself sitting in the Evening at the table, a few hours
after midnight, dyed.

Thus we see what deplorable Ends these former Protestants of greatest Note
(besides diverse others here omitted) have made; as if it were a privilege
granted to Protestancy, that the chiefest Patrones and spreaders of it, should
leave the Theater or stage of the world, with acting most Tragical
Catastrophes or Conclusions. And therefore with less reason it can be replied,
that only the Vice-Chancelour of Cambridge (and no other Protestants of
transcendency) have been subject to such untimely deaths. Which death of his
(how lamentable soever) must needs be a scarre to the fayrenes of that most
celebrious University, but deprive it wholly of its luster and beauty it cannot:
for the fairest and richest Diamond is seldom seen, without some blemish; and
Cinthya (the second light in Heaven) has her spots.

But to return more particularly to the Vice-Chancelour. It is further
reported, (whether rumors herein have wronged him or no I know not) that he
was an earnest maintayner (against the Arminians in that University) of the
most dangerous doctrines of Reprobation, and Predestination. To which I am the
rather induced to give credit, in regard that a man encountering disgraces and
losses in the world, (which himself through his own pusillanimity and softnes
of disposition cannot, or at least will not subdue) is the more easily drawn
by the suggestion of the spiritual Enemy, for the avoiding of the longer
endurance of the said disgraces and losses, to take some one desperate course
or other in shortning his own life; and the rather by reason that his own
doctrine of Predestination assures him, that if he be predestined (as every
illuminated Puritan, by his own Principles of faith, ought so to believe of
himself) no desperat^ course, sin, end, or death whatsoever can deprive him
of the Benefit of his own Predestination; according to those words of Luther:
Luth. tom. 1. epist. Latin. fol. 334. ad Philip.
No sin can draw us from Christ, although we should commit fornication, or
kill a thousand times in a day. With whom (besides many others teaching the
same) Iacobus Andraeas thus conspireth: In epist. Colloq. Montisbel. page 48.
He who once truly belieueth, cannot afterward fall from the grace of Christ,
by his Adultery, or any other like sin. And D. Whitaker. lib. de Eccles contra
Bellarm. controuers. 2. q. 5. page ^01.
D. Whitakers plainly teaches the same in these words: Si quis actum fidei
habet, ei peccata non nocent. And then might the Vice-Chancelour thus suggest
to himself: I live in disgrace; I suffer Contumely, reproach, and losses; I
cannot hinder my own Election, do what I will; I can produce, and exercise an
act of faith, that Christ dyed for me, at my pleasure, even at my last gasp;
Therefore as loathing to suffer these opprobryes any longer, I will instantly
separate this body of mine from my soul, by a violent dissolution. Ierem. 2.
O you Heavens be astonished at this!

Whether the Vice Chancellor had such secret disputes with his soul, God only
knows; though in regard of this fatal Heresy of Predestination, it may well
be coniectured he had. But howsoever it was with him; certain it is, that
daily experience seals up the truth, that diverse both men and women here in
England, who have sucked the Protestants doctrine of Reprobation, and
Predestination from their Ministers mouths and pens, have within these few
years last past, upon their belief thereof, utterly cast themselves away; some
through a black despair of their sins; others, through a presumed certainty
of their salvation, by drowning themselves, by hanging, or cutting their own
throats. Wretched souls, that remember not, that whiles they live in this
world, the sea, or Ocean of Gods Justice is bounded on all sides with his
Mercy; but after their deaths it breaks out, and ouerfloweth with a fearful
inundation over all mankind, according to the particular works of every one.

Now seeing the Protestants doctrine of Predestination threatens an utter
overthrow to the soul of man, by ingendring a seared and obdurate conscience
in the Belieuers thereof, for the perpetrating of the most facinorous sins;
since they are taught thereby, that no such Sins (how atrocious soever) can
hinder their salvation; I will therefore stir a little the mould or earth
about the root of so wicked a doctrine, in briefly showing how repugnnant it
is to the Holy Scripture, to the Authority of the ancient Fathers and to the
more grave and recollected judgments of diverse learned Protestants themselves:
A labor, I hope, neither impertinent in this place, nor unprofitable for you
(my dear friend) to read; since you know well, I know, that you are overmuch
enclining to the said Protestants Predestination.

And first to show the uncertainty of our Election, which clearly impugneth
Predestination in the Protestants sense, I thus produce my argument, grounded
upon the Scripture. A Justifying faith (even by our Adversaries Positio^s) must
ever be accompanied with Charity; and according hereto we find D. Fulke thus
literally to write: D. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in 1. Cor. c. 13.
A justifying faith cannot be without Charity: but Charity may be lost:
therefore a Justifying faith may be lost; and consequently upon the loss of a
Justifying faith, a man rests doubtful of his Salvation.

That Charity may be lost in the faithful, (which is the hinge wherevpo^ the
force of this Argument turns) is proved from the example of the Prophet David,
who lost his Charity in committing Murder 2. Reg. 11.
and Adultery; since a premeditated murder is incompatible with Charity; it
being a mere Privation thereof for how can a man be in Charity with him, from
whom he intends wrongfully to take his life? Now then the inevitable resultancy
out of the former Premises, by way of recapitulation is this: If David did want
Charity, then did he want faith; if he wanted faith, then was he uncertain of
his Election, and Predestination (for Romans 1. and Galat. 3.
by faith the just man lives.) If David, who was once the servant of God, was
uncertain of his Predestination, and by committing of sin, became for the
time the servant of the Devil, (for 1. Joan. 3
he that commits sin, is of the Devil:) then with much more reason may
any Protestant (whose faith leanes upon the weak Crutch of his own Private
spirit and Conceit) rest doubtful of his Election, and Predestination.

Now, in further proof of this Verity, we thus read in Holy Writ: That Romans 11.
the boughs may be cut off, etc. And that, Ibid.
the goodness of God belongs to us, with condition, if we abide in his
goodness, otherwise we shall be cut off: in which words is expressly taught,
that the goodness of God is given, but conditionally. And which is more plain,
we further read: Ezech. 18.
If the just man do turn away from his righteousness etc. in his sin he shall
dye. And therefore the less we have to wonder, that the Apostle Paul (who was
once rapt into the third Heaven;) Nevertheless thus fearfully speaks of his
own state: Philip. 3
If by any means I may come to the Resurrection from the dead etc. 1. Cor. 9.
least perhaps when I have preached to others, I my self become a Reprobate.
Which Apostle further in express words thus writes of others: Heb. 6.
Some, who were once illuminated, have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
partakers of the Holy Ghost etc. are fallen.

And hence it is, that such who, by reason of their present Justice and Grace,
are said to be, Exodus 33
Written in Gods book; are notwithstanding upon their loss of their said
justice and grace, affirmed Exodus vbi supra.
to be, razed, or blotted out: So express and unanswerable (we see) is Gods
holy Word, for the impugning of this vapourous and imaginary phantasy, of the
Protestants Certainty of their Salvation and Predestination.

The ancient Fathers unanimously subject their judgments to my alleged sense
of the former Texts. For thus S. Austin writes: De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 11. cap.
12.
Licet de suae certae perseuera^tiae praemio certi sunt, de ipsa tamen
perseuerantia sua reperiuntur incerti. Although men be certain of the reward
of their perseverance; yet of their perseverance they are found uncertain. And
S. Gregory is so full in this point, that Calvin reprehendeth him him therefore
in these words: In his Instit. c. 8. de praedestinat. and provident Dei.
Pessime ergo and perniciose etc. Gregory most badly and perniciously makes us
uncertain of our Election, by making us (vocationis nostrae conscios)
doubtfully-knowing of our vocation. I might urge Testimonies to this purpose
out of ^n cap. 3. ^onae.
Jerome, Hom. 11. in epist. ad Philipp.
Chrysostom, and others, but I labor to be brief.

To conclude this point, Diverse learned Protestants, upon their more mature and
serious consideration of this point, have utterly rejected (as a mere phantasy)
this presumed Certainty of Salvation. To instance in few, for a taste of the
rest. The Protestants of Saxony, in their public Confession of faith, thus
say: In the Harmony of Confessions in English. p. 80. and 233.
It is manifest, that some, who are regenerate etc. are again rejected of God,
and made subject to eternal punishment. And the Confession of In the Harmony
of Confessions in English. p. 244.
Auspurg censureth the contrary doctrine for Anabaptisme. Finally Hemingius and
Snecanus (two learned Caluinists) are so full in denying their other Brethrens
doctrine heerin, that D. Willet (a great Patron of this Protestanticall
Predestination) thus censureth them: In his Synopsis. p. 811.
These Patrones of Universal Grace, and conditional Election, do consequently
hold, that men may lose their Election and faith. And thus much for a taste of
this subject of the pretended Necessity of Protestants Predestination, so much
applauded by our Anti-Arminians.

Now to close up my discourse, so far forth as concerns the miserable End of
this former poor man, in whom we are in this place not to respect so much the
person, as the dignity of the person; so in the fall of any thing the weight of
the thing fallen is less to be considered, then the place from whence it did
fall: I will therefore in these few lines following, parallel and
counterballance the deaths and circumstances of the two former Doctors.

And to begin. The first of these was Deane of an Episcopal seat: The second,
the Vice-Chancelour of Cambridge, and therein placed, as the Eye, over the one
of the two Eyes of England. That man did voluntarily expose (upon his recovery)
his temporal state to loss, for the spiritual good of his soul: This man for
hope of unjustly gayning a little temporal dross, made shipwreck of his
soul. The Deane leaving the world, did withal leave behind him, a most worthy
and honorable remembrance of his Christian Profession of the ancient true
faith: The Vice Chancelour by leaving the world did withal leave behind him an
unsavory stench of everlasting reproach and contumely to himself; I will not
say to all Protestancy.

To conclude, D. Price, like a worthy and Christian Confessor of the true
Catholic and Roman Religion, by means of a natural death, (we hope) now
enioyes the felicity of Saints: Doctor Butts, maintayning (as is reported) the
Heretical Doctrine of Reprobation, and Predestination, in the end dyed a
Reprobate, and by the help of a rope, wherewith he hanged himself, does
remain in insufferable torments with the Devils.

But now (my worthy and dear friend) after I have finished this my Funeral
Discourse, touching the foresaid two Doctors; give my pen leave (in steed of a
farewell) to turn it self, unto your self.

You cannot but remember, that you and I, as being opposite in Religion, have
had several times, during your former stay here in England, certain
Fayth-skirmishes (as I may term them) both of us laboring to maintain our
own Station. I grant you are learned, but therein perhaps more hardly to be
drawn to acknowledge the truth; since it oftentimes falls out, that that
eye, which sees nothing at all, is more easily cured, then that which is of an
imperfect sight. But to redress this fault, imitate the Iron, which (we see)
moves not to the iron, more like; but to the load stone, less like: so suffer
not your judgment to be enthralled to those Positions, or Placita, which are
best sorting to your own Private Spirit, or Conceit; but force it to be
drawn in matters of faith with the Magneticall, and attractiue tuch of the
Authority of Gods Universal Church, how strange otherwise this Authority may
seem to you to be. But now to renew this our former Duellisme by Pen, in a
friendly and well-wishing manner, for the advancement of your soul in her
chiefest good, I have thought it expedient to refer to your judgment at this
time two forcing reasons, and such as well may draw you to make an intense
introuersion upon your own dangerous state, in matters of Religion.

Well then, The first shall consist in displaying (from head to head of
proofs) the graduall Euasions of the Protestants, made to the several kinds
of the said proofs, produced by the Catholics in defense of their Religion: by
which course the Protestants discover themselves to be most fugitive and
fleeting in their grounds of faith, since they will not stand vnappealably to
any kind of proofs whatsoever, produced against them; and accordingly hereto
by this Paragraph following you shall discover, that though the chain (as I
may say) of our Catholic Proofs is made of many linkes, yet that the
Adversary will not suffer himself to be tied to any of them, but through the
violence of his own Private Spirit, breaks them all.

1. As first, let us draw our Proofs from many congruentiall Arguments, taken
from the force of Reason (being Gods peculiar Character, impressed by himself
in man's soul.) The Protestants answer, that (besides this is but an humane
inducement) they can produce as many Counter-reasons to the contrary,
ouerballancing in their judgments the weight of ours.

2. Let us repair to most authentical Histories, recording matter of fact,
which matter of fact is touching the Visibility of the Church, the
Administration of the word and Sacraments, Vocation and Ordination of
Ministers, The Conversion of Nations to the Roman faith, and some others
necessarily to be enquired after. D. Whitakers repels all this, by making a
subtle transition from History to Scripture, in this sort: Contra Duraeum. l.
7. p. 478.
To us it is sufficient, by comparing the Popish opinions with the Scriptures,
to discover the disparity of faith between them and us. And as for
Historiographers, we give them liberty, to write what they will. In like sort,
touching the supposed change of Rome in faith, the said Doctor disclaimeth
from the authority of all Histories, saying: Contr. Duraeum, p. 277.
It is not needful to us, to search out (in Histories) the beginning of this
change. Thus he. And yet all experience shows, that Truth or falsehood of
Matter of fact (many ages since, said to be performed) is either to be
discovered by History, or not to be discovered at all.

3. Let us go on forward, and rest for the proof of our faith, in the
particular authorityes of Austine, Jerome, Basil, Cyprian, Tertullian, Origin,
and the rest of the Doctors of the Primitive Church, we being instructed to
this Method by those words, Deuteronom. 4.
Interroga de diebus antiquis; Luther answers heerto, auerring: That In
Colloq. mensal. c^ de Pa^ Eccles. l. de seruo arbitrio.
The Apology of Philip Melancthon does far exceed all the Doctors of the
Church, and excel even Austin himself. Luther further thus inueighing: Luth.
vbi supra
In the writings of Jerome, there is not one word of the faith of Christ, and
perfect Religion: Basil is of no worth; He is wholly a Monk: Cyprian is a weak
Divine: Origin is long since accursed: Tertullian is superstitious. See you not
(my good friend) with what a bold forehead Apostasy rayles at the true
ancient Religion of Christ? But to proceed. Another great Arch of the
Protestant Church is not afraid, to advance the Protestant faith (in respect of
those times) in this manner: The Archbishop of Canterbury in his Defense of the
Answer to the Admonition. p. 472. 473.
The Doctrine taught and professed by our Bishops at this daey, is more
perfect, and sounder, then it commonly was in any age, since the Apostles.

4. Let us urge whole General Concells of firster times (to which our Math. ^^.
Savior himself has promised his assistance) Luther basely casts them of, by
auouching: That the decrees of the Nicene Council are, Luth. lib de Council.
foenum, stramen, lignum, stipulae. And Beza thus censureth all the ancient
Councels: In his preface of ^^e (...) Testament anno 1^87.
The ambition, ignorance, and lewdnes of Bishops was such, as that the blind
may easily perceive, that Satan was President in their assemblies and Councels.
And if we appeal to more modern (yet General) Councels, Peter Martyr
replies, thus confessing: Li. de votis. page 476.
As long as we insist in General Counsels, so long us shall continue in the
Papists errors.

5. Let us call to mind the vn-interrupted practice of Gods Church, even from
Christ's time to these days, and the answerable Apostolical Traditions,
derived to us by a long hand of time (both being the securest Scholia, or
Paraphraze of the true Christian faith,) Beza blows all this away in two
words, saying See hereof Doctor Bancroft^ Survey, p. 219.
Ad verbum Dei prouoco.

6. Let us according to Beza his provocation, anchour our selves upon Gods
Word, as upon Ecclesiasticus, Toby, the Machabees, and some other parcells of
the Old Testament; In his answer to M. Reynold^ refutation. page 21. and 231.
D. Whitakers, and the rest of his side, reject all such Books, as
Apochryphall. In like manner, if we insist in the Epistle to the Hebrews, in
the Epistle of S. James, in the second and third Epistle of S. John, or in the
Apocalypse; do we not find the Epistle to the Hebrews to be rejected by Exam.
Council. Trident^ Sess. 4.
Kempnitius, Confess. Wittenberg. de sacra scrip.
Brentius, and the Cent. l. 2. c. 4. Col. 55.
Magdeburgenses? As also who knows not, but that the Epistle of S. James is
utterly discanoned by In Prolog. huius epistolae.
Luther? and that the foresaid Kempnitius, Brentius, and the Magdeburgenses (in
the place above alleged) rest doubtful whether the second and third Epistle
of S. John be Scripture, or no? And lastly, does not Luther in most unworthy
terms, discard the Luth in prolog. huius libri.
Apocalypse, as holding it neither Prophetical, nor Apostolical? to whose
judgment Brentius and Kempnit. locis supra citatis.
Brentius and Kempnitius do subscribe.

7. Let us allege such parcells of Holy Writ, as our Adversaries do
acknowledge for true Scripture; then they will needs rest doubtful of the
Translation of it: for the Latin Translation, commonly called the vulgar
Translation, made by S. Hierome in Latin, is over Papisticall, and therefore
condemned by Li. aduersus Council. Trident.
Calvin, In Exam. Council. Trident.
Kempnitius, and others. And as touching the Translations of Scripture, made by
the Protestants, they will not admit one another Tra^slatio^. Thus for
example: Luthers Translation is rejected by Lib. de (...). fol. ^1^.
Swinglius, and Dialog. (...). Me^^cth.
Bucer. Caluins Translation disallowed by Transl. Testam. ^oui. part. ^1. fol.
110.
Carolus Molinaeus, a Protestant. The Translation of Oecolampadius, and his
Brethren of Basil, condemned by In res. (...) ad (...). Casta^^^nis.
Beza. Beza's Translation disallowed by Castalio, and the foresaid In Translat.
noui Testam. part. 64. 65. 66.
Molinaeus; who expressly affirms, that Beza de facto textum mutat. Beza
does actually alter the Text.

And as touching our English Translation, how it is condemned by other
Protestants, these two Testimonies following do manifest: The Ministers of
Lincoln in the abridgement of a Book delivered to King James.
The English Translation takes away from the Text; and this sometimes to the
changing or obscuring of the meaning of the holy Ghost. In like sort, the
English Translation with the notes of Geneua, is thus censured by M. Parks: In
his Apolog. concerning christ^ descending into hell.
As for those Bibles, it is to be wished, that either they may be purged from
those manifold errors, which are both in the Text, and Margent, or else utterly
prohibited. But if leaving these Latin and English Translations, we recurre to
the Translation of the Septuagint, ^ho being Hebrews borne, translated the Old
Testament into Greek; our Adversaries (the Protestants) do charge it, as false
and corrupt in behalf of us Catholics; to wit, in Thi^ appears by our
Adversaries translating of these texts here cited, differently from the
Septuagints Translation of the said Texts.
Psalm. 15. touching Christ descending into Hell; in Psalm. 18. touching merit
of works; in Daniel 4. touching the redeeming of Sin by Alms; in Psalm. 18.
concerning the honor to be exhibited to Saints, besides some other places.

8. Let us arrive higher, and rest in the Original of the new Testament: of
which all, or (at least) most of it was first written in Greek by the Apostles
and Evangelists: The Protestants reject, as corrupt and impure, all copies of
the Greek Original, extant at this day. To instance but in one, or two places
for breuity: Whereas S. Matthew c. 10. ascribes a prerogative to Peter, above
the rest of the Apostles, in saying, The first Peter, it being thus in all
Greek Copies; Beza says, that the In his annotations upon the new Testament
set forth, anno 1556.
Greek Text is corrupted, by adding the word (...).
first, by some one Papist or other, to establish the Primacy of Peter. Again,
where in Luke 22. we read: Hic calix, nouum Testamentum in sanguine meo, qui
(vz. Calix) provobis funditur. Here the relative (qui) by force of the Greek,
and all true construction has reference to For it is in Greek in (...)
Copie^. (...), and not (...).
(Calix) and not to the word (sanguine:) But Beza here seeing, that if the Cup
be shed for us, thereby the blood in the Cup is understood; and consequently,
that after Consecration, Blood is in the Cup; Beza (I say) foreseeing this
illation, peremptorily affirms, Beza vbi supra.
That the Greek is here corrupted, and that the words thus fortifying the
Real Presence, are mere surreptitious, as creeping out of the Margent into
the Text.

9. Let us produce (in behalf of our faith) such passages of Scripture, in
which our Adversaries do grant, both the Originalls, and the Translations to be
pure and uncorrupted; the Protestants do then make their refuge for the
interpreting of the said passages of Scripture (contrary to the interpretation
of all Antiquity) to their own Revealing Spirit; which Spirit is by the^
defined: Doctor Whitak. contra Bellar. in controu. 1. q. 5. c. 3. and 11.
To be an inward persuasion of the truth from the holy Ghost, in the secret
closet of the Belieuers heart. But indeed, this Spirit, is the Root, from
whence the bulk of all Heresy ryseth. And then according heerto can Luther
dissolve the hardest knot of Scripture, objected against him, by saying; Luther
tom. 2. contra Regem Angliae. fol. 344.
The Word of God is above all, the divine Majesty makes for me; Non sinam
ipsos Angelos de mea doctrina iudicare. And D. Bilson will maintain, that this
Private Spirit belongs to every Laicall, and ignorant man; for thus he writes:
In his true difference between true subjection, and Antichristian Rebellion.
The People must be discerners, and judges of what is taught.

10. Let us reply, that if so they rely upon Scripture only, as it is
interpreted by the Private Spirit, that then they compart with all ancient and
modern Heretics, in the manner of the defense of their Heresies; according to
those words of S. Austin, spoken of the Heretical Scripturists of his time:
Epist. 222. ad Consentium.
Omnes, qui Scripturas etc. All those who allege Scripture for Authority, make
show to affect the Scripture, when indeed they affect their own errors. The
Protestants salve the matter by justifying, that all those Heretics wanted the
means for the finding out of the true sense of Scripture; which means
themselves infallibly enjoy, as prayer, knowledge in tongues, Conference of
places etc. But to confront this evasion, how comes it then to pass, that
Luther, and Calvin, both enjoying (in their Conceits) this Private Spirit; both
being (forsooth) Holy men; both skillfull in the tongues; both using Prayer,
Conference of places etc. did nevertheless mightily disagree in the Construction
of these few words, Hoc est corpus meum: Hic est sanguis meus. And their
disagreement is such, and so diametricall, that the one of them must of
necessity teach Heresy, by such their different Construction? But here our
Adversaries are at a stand, and this is their, Non plus vltra, beyond which
they cannot pass.

11. Let us in this last place (for higher it is impossible to asce^d in
proofs) urge the sundry stupendous Miracles, exhibited by God and his
servants in warrant of diverse Articles of our Catholic faith, recorded by Li.
^. Confess. c. 7. and 8. and l. de ciuit. Dei, c. 8.
Austin, In vita Hilarionis, and contra Vigilant.
Jerome, Hist. l. 3. c. 13. and l. 6. c. 28.
Zozomene, In Cyprian.
Nazianzene, Epiph. Haer. 30.
Epiphanius, Chrysostom. de Sacerdot. l. 6. c. 4.
Chrysostom, Cyprian. Sermon. de lapsis.
Cyprian etc. and tell our Adversaries, that since Truth cannot impugn Truth,
that therefore the said Miracles (wrought to the foresaid end) do unanswerably
fortify our Catholic exposition of Gods word, drawn out by us, in proof of
our Catholic Religion: Our Adversaries most scornefully traduce all such
Miracles. For Osiand. Cent. 10. 11. 12.
Osiander, and the Cent. 4. Col. 144^. and Cent. 5. Col. 1486.
Centurists (observe here the humility of this Private Spirit) term all such
Miracles, Antichristian wonders, and flying signs. But D. Whitakers more
strangely answers to all such Miracles, for thus he writes: D. Whitak. l. de
Eccles. p. 349.
God does give power of working true Miracles to false Teachers; not to
confirm their false opinions, but to tempt those, to whom they are sent. Thus
he Galat. c. 3.
O insensati Galatae, quis vos fascinauit?

Thus (my Dear Friend) you see, how your Protestants in matter of Faith and
Religion, endeavor to wave all proofs, and to break with all Authority, both
Divine and Humane: and seek to reduce all finally to the trial and
touchstone of the Private Spirit; which Spirit, is with them the Oedipus,
which must resolve all Enigmaticall doubts. And thus the Protestants being but
parties, will either finally judge all Questions of faith, or else they will
suffer no judgment to pass on the at all. Is there any candor ingenuity, or
upright meaning in this their proceedings? Or is it hard, to defend any
Religion (how false and wicked soever) if so the maintayners of it could justly
reject all sorts of Arguments and Authorities, produced for the impugning of
the said false Religion: advancing their own private judgments above all
proofs whatsoever?

But seeing our Adversaries will admit no Authorities but their own: I will
therefore in this next place, and in proof of my second Reason, (which shall be
to euict, that, The Protestant Church is not the true Church of God) tie my
self only to the Testimonies and authorities of the learned Protestants
themselves, forbearing purposely all other kinds of proofs whatsoever: so
ready (my good friend) I am for the time, to humor our Adversaries in their
own Method: and this chiefly, for your more full satisfaction.

My Media, or Premises for the proof of this foresaid Position (which
potentially inuolues all other Controversies within it self) shall rest in two
points, both clearly and abundantly taught by the most learned Protestants,
that ever with their pens endeavored to honor their Religion.

My first Medium shall be, that the Protestants teach, that the true Church of
Christ, must at all times, without the least interruption, be visible: and
enjoy her Pastors and administration of the word and Sacraments. For proof of
this undeniable verity, I produce these following Testimonies, from the
Protestants own penns. And first D. Field thus writes: Li. of the church ^.
10. p. 190.
The persons of whom the Church consists, are visible, their Profession
known even to the Profane. And again, thus he says: Vbi supra. page 21.
Bellarmine in vain labors to prove, that there is, and always has been
a visible Church: and that, not consisting of some few scattered Christians,
without Order of Ministry, or use of Sacraments: for all this we do most
willingly yield unto. M. Hooker thus writes: Ecclesiast. Policy. p. 126.
God has had, and ever shall have some visible Church upon earth. Hunnius (the
great Protestant) thus acknowledges: In his Treatise of Freewill p. 91.
God in all times has placed his Church in a high place: and has exalted it
in the sight of all Nations. Iacobus Andreas: In his book against Hosius pa.
^10.
we are not ignorant, that the Church must be a visible Company of teachers,
and hearers.

Melancthon is most strong in this point, for thus he discourses: Loc. com.
edit. 2561. c. de Eccles.
whenever we think of the Church, let us behold the company of such men, as
are gathered together, which is the visible Church; neither let us dream, that
the elect of God are to be found any other place the^ in this visible Society:
neither let us imagine any other visible Church. And again the said
Melancthon: Melancth. in Council. Theolog. part. 2.
It is necessary to confess, that the Church is visible etc. Whither tends
then (haec portentosa oration) this monstrous speech, which denies the Church
to be visible? Peter Martyr: In his Epist. annexed to his common places printed
in English, page ^53.
We do not appoint an invisible Church, but do define the Church to be a
Congregation, which the faithful may know, that they may adioyne themselves
thereto. D. Humfrey thus teaches: In Ieisuitism part. 2. c. 1.
Non clancularij secessus Co^uocationes sunt Christianae etc. The Societies of
Christians, are not secret meetings. And he thus ends: Oportet Ecclesiam esse
conspicuam, Conclusio est clarissima.

The same D. Humfrey also gives a reason, why the Church must ever be visible,
thus writing: D. Humf. in Iesuitism. part. 2. tract. ^. rat. 3.
Dum Ministri docent, alij discunt etc. Whiles the Ministers do teach, others
do learn; whiles these Men do Minister the Sacraments, those do communicate of
them, whiles all do call upon God, and profess their faith: He that does not
see these things, is more blind then a Moale. Instit. c. 1. parag. 10.
Calvin, In his defense of the censure, page 81.
D. Whitgif^, Contra Camp. rat. 8.
D. Whitakers, Art. 7.
The Confession of Augusta (almost with all other Protestants) do teach, that
the Preaching of the word etc. administration of the Sacraments, are essential
Notes of the Church: and that the preaching of the word does constitute a
Church, (as Contra Duraeum, l. 3. page 249.
D. Whitakers words are) the want of it does subvert it. But how can either the
Word be preached, or the Sacraments ministered, but to such men, as are visible,
according to the former judgment of D. Humfrey? And thus far in proof of my
first ground or Positio^: to wit, that the True Church of Christ must ever be
visible.

Now I come to the second Proposition or ground, which is: That the Protestant
Church, even by the doctrine and acknowledgment of the most remarkable
Protestants, has been wholly latent and invisible, for more then a thousand
years together.

To prove this, first I produce M. Perkins: His words are these: In his
exposition of the creed. pa. 400.
we say, that before the days of Luther, for the space of many hundred years,
an universal Apostasy ouerspred the whole face of the earth: and that our
Church was not then visible to the World.

Caelius Secundus Curio (a Protestant of extraordinary Note) acknowledges no
less, thus writing: De amplitud. regni Dei. page 12.
Factum est, vt per multos iam annos Ecclesia latuerit etc. It is fallen out,
that the Church for many years has been latent, and that the Citizens of
this Kingdom could scarcely (ac ne vix quidem) and indeed not at all, be
known of others.

D. Fulke sets down, in his judgment, the time of the Inuisibility of the
Protestant Church, he thus saying: In his answer to a Counterfeit catholic, p.
16.
The Church in the time of Boniface the third (vz. anno 606.) was invisible,
and fled into the wilderness, there to remain a long season.

M. Napper includes more ages within this inuisibility, thus confessing: Upon
the Reuelat. c. 18.
from the time of Constantine until our days, even one thousand two hundred
and sixty years, the Pope and the Clergy have possessed the outward visible
Church of Christians. And again: M. Napper vbi supra, in c. 11. and 12.
during the space of twelve hundred and sixty years, the true Church has
abyded latent and invisible.

D. Fulke (as forgetting the time, before limited by him) grants thus: In his
answer t^ a counterfeit catholic, p. 33.
The true Church immediately decayed, after the Apostles time. With whom Peter
Martyr seems to agree, thus confessing: Lib. de Votis. page 477.
Errors (he meaning our Catholic Articles) did begin in the Church, presently
after the Apostles time. And the Protestant Author of the book called
Antichristus, sieve Prognostico^ finis mundi, has the like saying: vz. Pa. 13.
from the Apostles times till Luther, the Gospel had never open passage. And
with both these conspires Sebastianus Francus (that noted Protestant) who thus
has left recorded: In epist. de abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis
Ecclesiasticis.
For certain, the external Church, together with the faith and Sacraments,
vanished away presently after the Apostles departure: and that for these
thousand, and four hundred years, the Church has been no where external
and visible.

But D. Downham (with whom I will close) fears not to include even the
Apostles times within this granted late^cy of his own Church, he thus writing:
L. de Antichrist. l. 2. c. 2 pa 22.
The General defection of the visible Church foretold 2. These. 2. began to
work in the Apostles time. I here pass over, how our learnedest Adversaries
confess all want of ordinary Calling of their Ministers, at the first arysing
of Luther: which want ever includes an interruption of the Protestant Church
at that time: for if that Church had then been in Being, it had not then stood
in need of such their imaginary Extraordinary calling, but might have
rereceaued it by Imposition of hands, from their own Cergy of those days. But
no such men of their Clergy then were, and therefore we have the less reason
to marvel, why Calvin of this point thus writes: Lascicius (the Protestant)
recites this saying of calvin, lib. ^e Russ. Muscouit. etc religione. cap. 13.
Quia Papae Tyrannide etc. By reason of the tyranny of the Pope, true
Succession of Ordinatio^ was broken of; therefore we stand in need of a new
course herein; and this function, or Calling was altogether extraordinary. With
whom D. Fulke iumpeth in these words: Against Stapleton and Martial. page 1^
The Protestants, which first preached in these days, and had extraordinary
Calling.

Thus far (My dear fryend) touching the continual radiancy, and resplendent
Visibility, which is necessarily exacted to be in Christ's true Church, at all
times, without the least interruption, and yet, which nevertheless, is not to be
found in the Protestant Church: And all this proved from the often
ingeminated, and inculcated acknowledgments of our own most learned
Adversaries. Now then to encircle the concluding force of all the said
Protestants authorities, within this ensuing Argument; that thereby the
inevitable resulta^cy out of the Premises may more intensly strike your
judgment, I thus dispute.

The true Church of Christ, even by the doctrine of the Protestants, must ever,
and at all times be Visible.

But the Protestant Church, even by the Protestants Confessions, has not ever,
and at all times, been Visible.

Therefore the Protestants Church, even by the Protestants Confessions, is not
the true Church of Christ.

Which last Proposition is the Compound made of the two former Ingredients.

What can any learned Protestant reply hereto? 1. Will he maintain, that the
Protestants above alleged, in teaching a Necessary Visibility of the Church of
Christ at all times, were deceived? But this is weakly said; because all of
them (or the most) do reject the doctrine of Traditions; as holding nothing to
be believed, but what has its warrant from the express written word of God;
and therefore they did, in their judgments, build this their doctrine upon the
Written word, which in diverse most clear passages both of Prophesyes, and of
other Texts (here Esa. 2. and 49. and 54. and 60. and 66.1. Psalm. 18. and
28.1. Daniel 2. and 3. Mi^o^as. 4. ^ec^ Ierem. 33. Ephesians. cap. 4.
cited in the Margent) does inculcate this so necessary a Visibility of the
Church. And according hereto Melancthon (the former Protestant) after he had
alleged diverse places of Scripture to this end, thus concludes: In loc. com.
edit. 1. 61. cap. de Ecclesia.
Hi and similes loci etc. these and such like places of Scripture, non de Idea
Platonica, sed de Ecclesia Visibili loquuntur; do not speak of Plato his Idea,
but of a Visible Church.

2. Or secondly, Will the Protestants say, that though the former Protestants
do grant, that the Protestant Church for so many ages together (above set
down) has been Invisible, yet that there are other most learned Protestants,
who confidently aver, that the Protestant Church, has ever been Visible, and
therefore that by their former Brethrens Confessions, they are in no sort
endangered?

But observe the insufficiency of this second evasion, and the disparity
between them, that do acknowledge the Inuisibility of their own Church, and
the others maintayning the ever Visibility of it. Seeing the first sort of men
(being grave, candid, and learned) even through the rack of truth, do confess
(and this to their own main prejudice) the Inuisibility of their Church for
so many ages together, so speaking in behalf of the Catholics their
Adversaries, and against themselves; which they never would have done, but that
the undeniable euidency of the Truth compelled them thereto. Whereas these
others, (which perhaps may be alleged) do speak in their own behalf and in
defense of their own Religion, and consequently such their words are to be
accounted more partial, and therein less to be regarded. And here the words
of Tertullian may most truly take place, In Apologetico.
Magis fides prona est in aduersus semetipses confitentes, quam pro semetipsis
negantes. Credit rather is to be given to those, that confess against
themselves, then to those that deny in their own behalf.

Again, why will not such Protestants, as are so impudent as to maintain
their own Churches ever Visibility, insist plainly and sincerely in the
alleging of the Visible Members thereof (if any such Visible Members were) for
every age, the which to perform not any one Protestant has been able? For
when they are urged thereto by us Catholics, then they fly to the Scripture,
(through the false understanding of it, the main Ocean of Heretics) as it
fell out in the Conference some years since, between D White, and D. Featly on
the one side, and certain Fathers of the Society of Jesus, on the other side.

3. Or lastly, will your Brethren seek to decline the weight of this our
Argument, by urging, that it is taken but from the Testimonies of our
Adversaries, and therefore it is not much to be regarded? Hear (My good
friend) how much this kind of proof is pryzed, both by the ancient Fathers,
and learned Protestants. S. Austin says: Contra Donatist. post Collat. cap. 24.
The truth is more forcible to wring out Confession, then any rack or torment.
And Irenaeus thus writes: Li. 4. c. 14.
It is an unanswerable proof, which brings attestation from the Adversaries
themselves.

To come to your own Brethren, D. Whitakers thus acknowledges: Contra
Bellarm. l. de Eccles. controu. 2. q. 5. cap. 14.
The argument must needs be efficacious and strong, which is taken from the
Confessions of the Adversaries etc. And I do freely grant, that Truth is able
to extort Testimonies even from its Enemies. And to conclude, Peter Martyr thus
speaks: Loc. tu. de Iudais. fol. 390.
Surely among other Testimonies, that is of the greatest weight, which is given
by the Enemies. And with this I will close up this Miscelene, and compounded
Discourse, referring the Contents thereof to your impartial, and vnpreiudging
Consideration. Only before I end, give me leave (my worthy and dear friend) to
take leave with you in these my last words.

Therefore I most earnestly entreat you, even for the honor of God, 2. Petr.
^.
who is not willing, that any should perish; for the love of your own soul,
which must either by true faith, and an answerable life, enjoy the happiness of
Heaven, or by false belief incur the insufferable and interminable torments of
Hell, for Marc. 16.
qui non credit, condemnabitur; for the different effect of Good or Evil,
which may be derived from your example, You being known to be a man of good
literature, and eminent in your profession of Protestancy; and lastly, by the
most bitter passion of our Savior, who 1. Tim. ^.
gave himself a Redemption for all, that you would not suffer the transitory
smoke of any temporal respects (how pote^t soever in a worldly eye) to
interpose it self, between the light of Truth, and your understanding,
assuring your self, that Every thing is Short, which passes away with Time;
and Eternity, only long. Imitate then the most happy and Christian resolution
of the former entreated-of Doctor, I mean D. Price, that so before the time
of your dissolution, you (now being in years) may with him implant your self
in our Catholic and Roman Church, out of which there is no salvation; and ever
have this ensuing point, imprinted in your remembrance: To wit, that Jerusalem
(whereby is figured the celestial state of man's soul) is said to be best
peopled, when she has no Jews within her, that is, no stiff necked and
obstinate thoughts of misbeliefe, or Heresy, ever resisting the Holy Ghost;
since we read: Heb. 11.
Sine fide impossible est placere Deo.

But yet (my dear Friend) let me shut up this my admonition, with this ensuing
wholesome Caution: that is, Imitate the foresaid Doctor in dying Catholic, but
in one circumstance of his dying Catholic, imitate him not; I mean in
defering his Conversion, till his last sickness: O no. The event of such a
Conversion is most dangerous.

And though God out of the bowels of his inco^prehensible Mercy, did most
efficaciously touch the Doctors heart with his Grace; yet others cannot assure
themselves of the same favor from God; seeing extraordinary and unexpected
favors and dignities (imparted either by God, or temporal Princes to some
few) are not to be drawn into general examples, upon which others may rely.

True it is, that God knocks Reuela^. 3.
at the door of each man's heart, with his holy inspirations; but how often he
will knock thereat, himself tells us not: for though God proffereth his
grace to every Man, yet not at every time. In respect whereof (my good Friend)
both you, and all others ought to yield to his holy inspirations, at the first
knock, without any delay at all, when his Divine Goodness shall vouchsafe to
send the^.

Therefore to conclude, remember, that as it is thus recorded (for our
inestimablc comfort) in Gods sacred Word: Ezech. 33.
As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked etc. so also
(for our greater fear and solicitude) it is thus registered in the said holy
Word: Psalm. 81.
My people would not hear my voice, and Israel would none of me; so I gave
them up to the hardness of their hearts.

Your most dear, and Soule-well-wishing Friend. B. C.

FINIS.

