A poor Knight his Palace of private pleasures. Gallantly garnished, with
goodly Galleries of strange inuentio^s and prudently polished, with sundry
pleasant Posies, and other fine fancies of dainty devices, and rare delights.

Written by a student in Ca^bridge. And published by I. C. Gent.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Jones, and are to be sold at his shop
over against Saint Sepulchers Church. 1579.

I. C. To the Reader of the poor Knight his Posies.
GEntle Reader, the fear of Ignomynie and shameful reproach, has caused the
Author of these Posies to withholde his name from the same, whom for this time
I have thought not much amiss, to color and set forth in the name of the
poor Knight, and I do duly protest unto thee, that without my great entreaty,
these few Posies had not as yet come unto thy hand* Wherefore, if that any
thing in the same be acceptable, and worthy of commendacion, attribute the same
unto the poor Knight, which shall be both joyful unto me, and no small
encouragement to him. But if on the contrary, any thing demerit blame, I
submit my self to bear the reproach, (which was the publisher of the same,)
desiring to quite him, and set him free, which is the Author: least by his
discouragement we should lose that, which hereafter we look for. But by the
way (gentle Reader) I do admonish thee, that in the first three Posies, thou
take Judgment to thy reading, least with the Spyder thou find poison, where
the painful Be may gather Honny: For although the name seem somewhat vain,
(yet the outward apperance does not judge the matter, according to the
Proverb: Cuculus non facit monachum: The matter is delectable, and requires
to be red with Judgment. Thus I end, desiring thee to accept (my friend) the
poor Knight his Posies in good worth.

From my Chamber in Grayes Inn. I. C.

The letter of the Author to J. C. concerning these Posies.
IN Summer tide, and gallant prime, when troes do bud and blow,
And when as Ver with ha we^e hue, in every feelde does show.
When as each grove bedect with clothes, ^^st meet for his degree,
Did make a shade to all the Nymphs, in sile^^t woods that be.
When as Don Phoebus schorchinge beams, with scalding heat did burn,
And when as hoary VVinters head, his hue did change and turn.
When Neptune granted favor free, to A^^ion his love,
As well roughe Boreas boisterous blastes* as Tritons heart to move,
Being void of all solace and mirth, I laid me down to sleep,
In weary woods betaking me, unto the Fawnes to ke^pe.
Where neither Philomelas noa^e, nor fragrant smell did want,
To set me in that pleasant pathe, or finish my intent:
And as I walkte that pleasant way, the tedious time t'expell,
Behold I saw I know not where, a thing tha^ liked me well.
And they to whom I did commit, my body to defend,
Did show me this at whose request, this vision I have pende.
And unto you gentle I. C. being pend, I send the same,
To read, to race, to blot, to burn, the faul^s that merit blame,
For why? since first you did command him, whose deny was gone,
Yea him I say whom to this task* you should command alone.
Accept this Posie which I send, imperfect though it be,
And call to mind those gentle word^s, which once you spoke to me.
And spurd me forth which erst was bent, no such attempt to gin,
But answered thus: it is good to sleep being wrapped in a whole skin.
But then hard by the Temple Bar, you said you did expect,
The sum of that which now in sum, is brought into effect.
And for your own sweet self I writ, the sequel that I send,
And wish you well to show the same, to foe (...) yet to friend.
And least perchance ere you beware, some chance to spy the same,
I thought it good by good advise, for to detai^e my name.
Thus fare you well my friend I. C. commend me to your brother,
For whom before three Months be run I will prepare an other.
From his Study, yours as his own.

The vale of Venus, with all the ways and footpathes unto her Forte, being
situate in the same.
The Argument.
The Author penneth, whereof he has no proof,
But as in dream, so does his knowledge come:
He warnes all those whose case it does behooue,
To fly these panges, or else to taste of some,
Which he displayeth, as proper unto Love:
The woeful state, of those which run that race,
By others fate, which hertofore did prove,
Whom he by heaps, has brought into this place:
But if that love do bring no pinching pain,
The Author says, he will recant again.
WHen as my dazzled eyes, by Sopor were oppressed,
God Morpheus with his fethered limbs would let me take no rest,
But with his wonted guise, did feed my mind with dreams,
And showed to me, fair Helicon, with all the silver streams.
The mansion of the dames: with every Laurel tree,
With Herbers, Brooks, and pleasant flowers, that on Parnassus be,
From fiery Phoebus throne, to Pluto his pudled Den,
Yea all that lay in Neptunes gulfes, and in Leerna Fenne.
Nothing was then concealed, each God in his degree,
From Jupiter and Iuno^ right, unto the Furies three:
My Angel then was bent, to visit every place,
For why, he said that it was long, since he did run that race:
And though that weary way, were tedious steps to me,
Yet thought I not my labor lost, such strange delights to see.
Within a valley low, there stood a Castle hye,
Which by the might of Phoebus beams, did glister in mine eye.
No man could pass thereto, to foe nor yet to friend,
But that he should assure himself, some hill for to assend:
For why? before the walls, (which were exceeding good)
By Natures free munition, four hugy hills there stood,
Which seemed a great defense to fear the foming foe,
Menacinge fear to faynting hearts, and to the dastard woe.
And yet about the hills great beaten paths there were,
Which did the store of passengers unto that place declare.
Wherewith I was amazde, this strange devise to see,
Yet durst I not demand my God, what building it should be.
But when he did perceive, how trembling I did stand,
Fear not (quoth he) (and therwithall he took me by the hand)
For lo that shining place being situate in the vale
The Castle and the fortress strong, of Venus men do call.
The Valley where it stands, has Smyrdo unto name,
By whole consent of heavenly Gods, allotted to this dame.
The Father of the Gods, with Iuory staff in hand,
Has given unto his Daughter dear, this sweet and fertile land.
And every foreign coast, do yield her homage due,
Some sacrifice unto her shrine, her wrath for to eschew,
Behold the hills (quoth he) which compass in the same,
And bear in mind if that thou can in order every name.
The first unto the North, is called Change of Joy,
For he that enters on the same, is entered to annoy.
The second Fickleness, the second chance in love,
Now hot, now cold, now quick, now dead: as many men do prove.
The third is Apetite, as red as raging fire,
Such is the chance of lovers poor, to vanquish their desire.
The fourth is Crabbed Care, imployd with ^^reekes of red,
Upon this Mount alas I rue, lay many Cap^iues ded.
My guide there stayed, but I des^rous of the same,
Did ask of him why every Hill, inioyd that proper name.
Within each Hill (quoth he) a furious Fee^d does rest,
And in the hill has dug a Den, to be his nightly nest.
The Mountes enjoy the name, and does that title win,
As does that hellish hound enjoy, which has his Den therein.
None enters to the Forte, which will displayne to fight,
With him which stands, with club in hand* and challeng it by right.
And none shall pass the Mount, but he shall him withstand,
And he shall quite him passing well, that shall not feel his hand.
Yea Hercules him self, which erst had bin at Hell,
And bound the barking Cerberus, which in the Lake did dwell:
Could not resist these strokes, nor ward these battering blows,
But yielded him to Crabbed Care, as well his toombe forshowes,
And dying on the Mount, with fire it is suspected,
He has his Tomb and Monument within that hill erected.
For none can come to Love, or to her Castle rare,
But that he must ascend them all in order as they are.
Good sir (quoth I again) I pray declare to me,
What is the cause that in this place so many paths there be?
For if the case were such, as you have erst declared,
The passage should be perilous and much for to be feared.
Morpheus replyde again, I find none other cause,
Why such resort of mortal men, unto her tent she draws,
But that she does delight the mind of man and beast,
And tickleth forth the willing mind, unto Dame Venus neast.
For first in Saturns days, when men did simply live,
She showed forth that was unknown, and precepts she did give.
In Venus trade and did instruct them in such sort,
That ever since to Venus Vale, they cease not to resort:
Yea since those flourishing days, she fed their fancies so,
And opened unto them the door, which erst they did not know.
That now in every Region, a costly shryne she has,
From whence unto her Mansion, there lies a beaten path:
A path I say she has, which comes from every place,
For to conduct those passengers, which run in Cupids race.
Lo see the path of Troy, where Troylus lies dead,
And see where good Diophoebus by Greeks is murdered.
Corebus with the love, unto Cassandra borne,
Among the rest do couched lie, on carking care forlorn.
There Paris has a Tomb, far distant from the rest,
A gorgious Tomb no doubt it was, excelling all the best.
Upon each end thereof a furious Feend does lie,
The one does sound a doleful Trumpe unto the cloudy sky:
Wherewith each place resounds, as well the vale as hill,
The other shouteth often and shrickes, with trembling voice and shryl.
And with his ravening mouth does never cease to tear,
The ^^nes of Paris which long since, upon the Mountain were.
Oh sir (quoth I to Morpheus) what mean those doleful mones,
And what means he, that often shrykes and feeds upon the boues?
The one (quoth he) who sounds, his Trumpe unto the sky,
It is Defame which will not let, young Paris fact to die.
The other Envy hight: whose cankred mind does fret,
And with Defame against the Knight, his hand and tooth has set.
But muse not then (quoth he) though Paris lies here,
For through Defame and Enuies force, his fact is every where.
The Troyans lie by heaps, next unto them is Greece,
Where lies the Dame which did betray her fathers golden Fleet.
And Laodomia in like care does rest her heavy head,
Because her love and only joy, Proteselaus is dead.
Here Cephalus entered is, and wayleth still with care,
For that he killed his Procris dear, before he was aware:
He wished full often as Acteon did heartily wish the same,
That he had never known his Bow, nor used the hunters game.
One thing in Grecian Path, did make me for to muse,
And for my ignorance of the same Morpheus di^ me excuse.
Two gorgious Tombs there were, the one against the other,
(It seemed at first unto my eyes, as Castor and his brother)
Above these tombs there stood a woman fair and bright,
And not far of with frantic sword, there st^d a raging knight.
And all did seem to wayle, and mourn most ^iteously,
Except the armed knight which smilde, when as the rest did cry.
My Morpheus said, the Queen, fair Chtemnestra hight,
Which with Aegistus killed her spouse, which came from Trojan fight.
Orestes then in rage, for Agamemnons death,
Did shed Aegistus vital blood and stopped his mothers bre^th.
Orestes then returnde unto his sense again,
Did rule in Agamemnons steed, and in his rou^ne did rain:
So he began to smile, when all the rest were slain,
And they being paid for duty due, in Crabbe^ Care remain.
Within this Grecian path, while that we t^^ied still,
Behold four birds which orderly, did fly about the hill.
The Nightingale complainde, the Lapwing sled for fear,
The Swallow she no doubt was swifte, the Phesant lyude in care,
In care all four they nest, in care they do remain,
The Father, Wife, and silly child, with sister there complain.
Now have we past from Greece, and unto Carthage came,
Where Hanniball among the rest, did win immortal fame.
From Dido unto Thrace, from Phillis unto Rome,
Where Porcia with Lucrecia, be linked in one Tomb,
And Camma lies behind, as faithful as the best,
But these have almost passed Care, and come to perfect rest.
Orestilla lies there where Cataline does couch,
Tarpeia lies by Tatius, for gold does make them touch.
Pompeia lies there, whom Clodius seeks to cover,
And eke Terentia Tullyes wife, about the hill does houer.
A thousand more there were, which on that mount did sleep,
Whom Crabbed care with other feends upon the mount did keep.
But as we passed those Tombs, of all the Roman rout,
And when bychance we had espide religious persons out:
One Monument there was, excelling all the rest,
The form so strange can not depart out of my fearful breast.
The Tomb^ did cross the path, when none beside did so,
Whose left side seemed a man to be, the right a woman show:
A monstrous key of length, her left hand always bears,
And on her head of glistering gold, a triple Crown she wears.
And with a glauncing look, and with a stretched right hand,
She does receive a lively youth, which naked there does stand.
Oh sir (quoth I to him) which was my careful guide,
In all the Mount the like to this, I have not seen beside.
Quoth Morpheus this is she which all the Church beguilde,
Whom all men thought to be a man, till that she had a child.
Pope Ioane she has to name, whom once within the Lake,
I showed unto Robinson, as our viage we did make.
Her tomb did cross the path, because the passers dye,
When as they saw her shameful fact, to her reproach should cry.
The young man it is he, which was her Minion ever,
For whom upon this Hill for aye, with care they shall persevere.
The Roman path we left, when we had vewed at will,
The Roman Knights and Monuments, which were within that Hill.
From thence to Babylon, where Thi^be did complain,
Because that valiant Piramus, through her default was slain.
Then did the Theban path appear within my sight,
And Hemon with Antigona, did well enjoy their right.
There Cadmus shrined was, Hermione ius^ hard by
Whose tombs were garnished with gold, where crawling serpents ly^
Semeles there was laid, next to her fathers side,
For whom her dear twice borne Bacchus most carefully provide.
And Ino with her child, is taken from the sea,
And in the Mount with Athamas, have long time been all three.
Creusa, creons child, which was young lasons dear,
Whom scorching fire consumed from yert^, has her abiding hear.
But yet one tomb there was, among the The^an route,
Which till I had perceived well, did make me stand in doubt:
For why hard by the same, did flow a little flood,
Where many women washed their hands, imbrued with lively blood.
It was Agaue the Queen, which Pentheus had rent,
Because that he disoayned the feasts, of Baccus to frequent:
And yet her only son, about her tomb remain,
The parts of him whom she and hers, with cruel hand had slain.
And many more there were, whose tombs I would have seen
Which for their long antiquity, with mos^e be covered cleene.
Verona path we lest, where Romeus does lie,
Where Juliet with Iconia, enjoy a place the rby.
Gualfrido lies in Venis, Barnardo does the same,
And eke Arestons only child which Gnesia has to name.
All Germany I think, each town that therein was,
Had captives there, which tediousness, do cause me to let pass:
At last my guide did smile, and thus to me he said,
Lo here what English prisoners, in Crabbed care are stayed.
Great heaps of valiant knights, of noble youthful peers,
Which in the feelde most Martially have broken many speres:
Among the which I spied, those which I will not name,
Least y^ my pen through my default, perhaps should purchase blame.
Both Abbots, Friars and Monks, and all that learned rout,
Hermites and holy Hipocrites, which now be rooted out.
In care nere Venus vale, they had a place to lie,
Whereas they have their monuments whereas they chanced to die.
Among the which I romed: desirous for so see,
If any of those learned Clerks, were known before of me.
Whereof perhaps I could, rescite you many a one,
Which lived in joy, but now in care, do make a dreadful moan.
At last I spied out Bond, that fat and lazy Friar,
Which died whereas fair Astoloth would grant to no desire.
This Champion lived by love, as Larkes do live by leekes,
He wept, he wailde, he sighed so much, he could not see for cheeks.
Of Ireland and of Wales came many a careful wight,
And out of Cornwale valiantly came Labeale I soundes knight.
From path to path we went, as Morpheus did give leave,
He showd me all that did beseem, my knowledge to conceive.
At last we entered in, the valley by the hill,
And left the lofty mount of Care, which we had vewde at will.
And lo, into the vale, when as we were descended,
And come unto the Castle wall, as Morpheus had pretended^
Upon the Castle strong, and in Dame Venus Forte,
Her cumly shape and rosiall hew, was drawn in seemly sort.
And in her hand she held, an Iuory Comb most clear,
And by the aid of Phoebus beams did kembe her golden hear.
Whereat I was amazde, but Morpheus helps me out,
And with his sweet and sugared speech, assoylde me of my doubt.
The Iuory Comb (quoth he) which Venus has in hand,
In trymming of her crystal hair, will let thee understand,
That those which do delight, to run in Venus vale,
Will trim themselves, as some brush ware, before it come to sale.
For as Dame Venus does, so all her darlings do,
This is the cause quoth he again, why she is pointed so:
The Castle gate we did approach and would not stay,
The Porters let God Morpheus pass, but me they thrust away.
Sir boy quoth one to me (a grim and ugly knave,)
Come not so nigh, stand back in time, and seek thy self to save.
To whom God Morpheus said, my friend, content thee still,
That he should pass unto this place, it is my mind and will.
Command not me quoth he, and therewith began to rave,
Quoth Morpheus then from Heaven and Hell, authority I have.
I am the God of dreams, which pass through every vale,
Resist not then, let him approach into the Castle wall:
The knave when he perceived, that it was so indeed,
Of with his cap and crowching low, he let me in with speed.
Affuction kept the gate, as fearce as Satyr wild,
And Doubt was his companion, yet he was somewhat mild.
The Porters prison was bedecked all with green,
And changing colors now and then, were often to be seen.
Out of the narrow grates did Cleopatra prye,
And beckned with her trembling hand to valiant Antony:
Naera with Car^^n^ which waited on this Dame,
With Ply^s poison made an end, and ^er^ do ^epe their shame.
Whom often Cleopatra (...), and often them embrace,
And joining (...), they do lament their (...) and heavy case.
And as I pryed by chance, I saw a damsel morn,
With (...) weeds and La^^rs spots, (...) to much forlorn.
Quoth Morpheus (...) thou see, whereas that cay^i^^e lies,
Much like the wretched Crocodill, (...) now how she cries.
That is Pandare his Nice, and Calcas only child,
By whose deceits and policies, young Troylus was beguilde.
^hee is kept in affliction where many other are,
And veweth Troylus lying dead, upon the Mount of Care.
She wept, she sighed, she sobd, for him she does lament,
And all too late, yea to to vain, her fact she does repent:
How could that steadfast Knight, (quoth I) love such a dame?
Morpheus replied in beauty bright, she bare away the fame:
Till that she had betrayed, her Troylus and her dear,
And then the Gods assignd a plague, and after set her here.
An other wretched wight, within Affliction kept,
Who for her false perjured faith, lamented sore and wept.
Eriphile, she it was, and spronge of Grecian blood,
(Yet all the Grecian pollicyes, could never do her good)
Who for desire of coin betrayed her loving make,
And now she must content herself, a traytresse due to take.
King Pretus wife is here, alas alas what tho?
Affliction held her in so fast, she is like to die for woe.
Galatea she poor soul, must hold her self content,
Which said would weep if other-could, prevail which do lamente,
What should I say, a thousand more, with in this prison were,
Whom neither time nor memory, will suffer to declare.
But all that therein were, have said their joy apart,
And give themselves to utter plaints, imbrued with swelling smart.
From thence we marched forth unto a little Lake,
The spring was swift although but small, the course did never slake,
Leander here did row, here Helena did dwell,
Achilles loves Polixena, and drinks at this Well.
Here Aeolus daughter dear, here Silla Nisus daughter,
And here Pasiphae (...) drink, and never thirsted after.
One thing was very strange, which at this Well was seen,
Within the brook in (...) array there stood a gallant queen.
And on the bank a Bull, with guilted horns did stay,
Which when she would have issued out, did stop her in the way.
Whereat I wondered much, and greatly was dismayde,
And asking Morpheus of that (...), he quickly to me said:
The Queen she Diece hight, which was King Lycus wife,
A Theban borne in Nicteus days, the sates did grant her life.
Who through a ielious mind: and false surmised love,
Such discord in the Theban Court, this devilish Dame did move.
That if young Amphion, and Zetus his dear brother,
Had not brought reskew happily: this Bull had slain their Mother.
Whose iclosie the Gods, in such displeasure took,
That they have placed this roringe Bull, to keep her in the brook
An other Dame there was, which at this Well did live,
Which never ceast for to assay to fill an empty Sieve.
And when the cause thereof, on Morpheus I did ask,
He said the Gods allotted it, to be the Ladies taslie.
Which all in vain bestowed, (unto her pinchinge pain)
Her love upon Narcissus fair: which in the woods complain:
Near to the little Lake, a Dungeon grounded was,
As black as pitche throughout the which, this runninge stream did pass
Despair did keep the same, which was both stout and strong,
A wafull wretch whose greedy gorge, delighted much in wrong.
Poor Captives in distress, he keeps many a one,
Whose flintie heart does often rejoice, when other make their moan.
Hipsiphale which loved, king Peleus Nephew dear,
Erigone which hanged her self: has purchased house room here.
Here Dianeira lies which kilde her self for woe,
And Hero which on fominge floods, her life sought to undo.
Euadne has a place, Di^^aire deo love her well,
With thousands more within that place, which were to long to tell.
Among the rest one stood, ready to come away,
But that Despair through feigned tales, did cause her for to stay.
Quoth Morpheus, see the Queen, that weare^ the mourning gown,
She fled from ri^^h Pigmalion, and built up Carthage town.
This salse Report (quoth he) a foe unto good ^ame,
Has pla^de his part upon that wight, which never descrude the same
For in the court of chastity, her deeds be fresh and new,
A crown of Glory she deserves, i^ that she ^ad her due.
For Poets say, she loved, Aeneas Knight of T^oy,
And when he privily fled from thence, her self she did distroy.
But ta^ling Poets lie, Aeneas was unknown,
And Troyan seed in Carthage to^^e, by him was never sown.
Iarbas griyed with love, and could not her attain,
(For once she made a faithful vow, that chaste she would remain)
Laid seege unto the town, Dame Dido to mollest,
But she to save her plighted oath, to die did think it best.
And with a glittering blade, she banished breathing life,
This was the constant end of her, which was Sicheus wife.
This said, we left Despair, and all his raging train,
(With watery tears for Didos sake, my Morpheus did complain.)
We past the gallant court, and entered very far,
Unto the place where Venus sat, while Cupid went to war.
There Ceres kept with her, and Bacchus did the same,
And Mars stood waiting at the door, desirous of the game.
The house was full of Clyents, each corner had great store,
God Morpheus as his custom was, he entered in before.
Whom when Dame Venus saw, she quickly began to rise,
Saluting him with cumly cheer, and in most courteous wise.
My Lord (quoth she to him) how does my ancient sire,
And how does Neptune in the seas, and Pluto in the fire.
While Morpheus told his tale, I vewed among the rout,
To see if some acquainted friend, by chance I could find out.
No Englishmen were there, of Wales a worthy band,
Whom, when they came to greet me well, I could not understand.
Whereby no doubt I lost, the truth of every case,
And many a hearty welcominge unto that princely place.
But if my Cuntry men, had layne in Venus Uale,
Then might I have discribed at large, the truth of every tale.
Thus while I pryed about, in every vacant place,
And while I saw God Morpheus, was still with Venus grace.
And Venus did perceive me, to Morpheus thus she said,
My Lord the presence of this lad, does make us sore dismayde.
Fear not (quoth Morpheus then) there is no cause to doubt,
For he which is within your Court, can never issue out.
Wherewith I trembled sore, for fear he said to true,
I wept, I wailde, and thus I said, I have my wages due.
Then Venus sat her down, among her Lordly peers,
And Mars his soldiers guarded her, with Bills, with Bows and speeres.
I asked Morpheus then, whither Cupid did resort?
He said that he was marchte to feelde, against Dianas court.
Whom I would feign have seen, but time did it deny,
And Morpheus said it is time to go, the stars be in the sky.
But yet he promised me, against another day,
For to address himself again, to show me all that way.
Wherewith he plucked me back, and said, come let us go,
I was preparde with willing mind, for why I wished it so.
The way we past before, we entered in again,
Where fearce Affliction and Doubt, as Porters did remain.
By Care and Appetite, Fickleness and Change of Joy,
By every Path, and every Tomb, we past the former way.
(Quoth Morpheus now adue) till Cupids Host do fight,
Then will I have thee to the feelde, and show thee all that sight.
Wherewith I wakte and saw, what folly I had seen,
And what in vision did appear, as it had perfect been.
Parnaslus now is gone, and Helicon his stream,
And though this Treatise be not true, yet sure it is a dream.
The Argument.
The Gods in Heaven assembled all to feast,
In midst of glee Dame Venus tells her fate:
VVherat the Gods in order be addressed,
Against her foes, for to maintain her state.
The world set wide, the fight therein shall be,
Dianas force with wavering hands does fight:
But blody Mars, with Venus does agree,
And Dians troop at last is put to flight.
Whom Cupid chase when she to woods does fly,
And Venus son, returns triumphantly.
Of Cupid his Camp.
ON Friday at night I laid me down, with sleep to take my rest,
And as in wonted guise before, so was I now addressed:
With slumbring sleep to take my leave, of Phoebus glittering bemes,
Till Morpheus should bedecke my head, with fantasies and dreams.
And as I lay, so did I look, with looking long dismayde,
With sudden sightes my dazeled eyes did make my heart afraid:
For why within my (...) ear, me though a trumpe did sound,
The noise whereof did seen so strange, it ^ast me flat on ground.
Strait way there did appear to me, a vision where I lay,
Most strange to tell (so much this sight my courage did dismay)
An aged Sire whole glistering face with h^ary hears bede^t
Did sore appale my dreadful heart, that scant I could erect.
My lingering lymmes, in weried wise I couched one in place,
And glaunced often with leering looks, to view his cumly face.
His limbs were fethered on each part, and winged on each side,
Wherewith he took his speedy flight: at last he me espyde.
And thus he says with whirling voice, make haste do not delay,
Qyrde up thy loins, address thy self, to walk this tedious way.
Wherewith as one berefte of wits, and of my senses clean,
I was amazd but did not know, what these his words should mean.
Fear not (quoth he) stand not in doubt, for Morpheus is my name,
Which led thee forth to Venus Vale when as thou vewedst the same
And as by promise I was bound, so now I come again,
To lead thee where thou may behold Diana with her train.
In Martial feelde being ready bent, against Dame Venus son,
But let us go least or we come, the battle be begone.
My Lord (quoth I) I thank you much, for this your double pain,
Make haste (quoth he) let us depart, make haste quoth he again.
Then went we forth to lofty skies, our journey we did take,
Unto Appollos curious Tente, for he a feast did make
To all the Gods and Goddesses where Jupiter did sit,
Within a golden chair of state, and for his honor fit.
Then entered Mars and took his place, whereas he thought it best,
And Mercury most welcome there, unto Apollo his feast.
But gentle Ceres was not come, nor Baccus was not there,
And til they came al things were whist, ye Gods could make no chere,
Neptune bespangled all with skales, ascended to the sky,
And Protheus as his custom is, did sound courageously.
Then Tartar Lake began to flash, and Cerb^^s began to yell
And all the Feends did homage due, when Pluto came from Hell.
And Pan came forth, with Oaten pipe the shepherds all began play,
The sheep stood still and gazed on him, as he past by the way:
Saturnus with his withered legs, had almost come to late,
But that the Master of the feast, regarded his estate.
Thus every one did take his place, in order as they came,
Yea all the Gods and Goddesses, did likewise do the same.
The Table where these guestes did sit, was rounded round about,
That where the noblest seat there was, twould make one for to dout.
Apollo bearing great goodwill unto the Muses nine,
To them when as he thought it best, a room he did assyne.
Then Iu^o sat by Jupiter, which did her make abide,
And Pallas twixt God Mercury, and sweet Apollos side.
Dame Ceres with her curious cost, behaved her self so well,
That she and Baccus at that feast, do bear away the bell.
Musitions sounded orderly Proserpine would not hear,
Though Orpheus with his warblinge Harp, did think to find her there
Arion with his silver sound, did praise the Delpins love,
And with his quauering melody, did all the Sages move.
And Amphion that Theban wight, did streeke his stroke so even,
That Pan is risse from Bacchus camps, and dance about the Heaven.
Then glauncing forth my rowlinge eye, by chance it came to pass,
That I espyde at first unknown, whereas God Vulcan was.
Who in the kitchen curiously, did work his wonted feate,
And kindled coals most cunningly, to roste Apollos meat.
The seruiters at instant feast, were laureat Poets all,
Who ready were at beck to bow, when as the Muses call.
There Hom^^ with his ^^led Pen, a grave and worthy wight,
Among them all did bear the sway, inioyinge it by right.
Hesiodus was not behind, whom Pan esteemed much,
With Laureate Euripides, and many other such.
The Romans flocked there by heaps, old Ennius bare the sway,
Whose merits with antiquity, the learned ought to way
There witty Virgill did his best, and Naso there did serve,
And many more there were at hand, whose merittes same deserve.
Then Morpheus said, lo where he stands that worthy Chauser hight
The cheifest of all Englishmen, and yet he was a knight.
There Goure did stand, with cap in hand, and Skeleton did the same,
And Edwards he, who while he liude, did sit in chair of fame.
Thus every thing past merely, and Pan good sport did make,
For Baccus with his sugared tales, had made his brain to ache.
Then when the Gods had feasted well and good pastime had made,
It Was Cherill his course to come in place, and use the Amners trade:
Who carried forth the Amners hutch, unto the Porters gate
And freely gave unto the poor, which were preparde thereat.
At last when as the Gods had washte, and rune did well betide,
Juno and Pallas, with the nine, withdrew themselves aside.
Then entered in among the Gods, a Dame of cumly cheer,
Although besyrent with scalding sighs, she mourning did appear,
It Was Venus with her smiling lokes, which came from Smyrdo (...)
And to the Gods which sat at feast, thus she began her tale.
Venus Oration to the Gods.
Renowned Lords, to whom my tale I tell,
And worthy Gods, which rule the Heaven and
The ^^uds the brooks, the furious feends of Hell,
And every thing, that in these subjects be:
Bend down your ears, and listen unto me,
Hark and give ear, regard my plaint and tale,
Whom you have placed, to rule in Smyrdo vale.
From time to time, since that you gave me power,
Within my Court to sit as Judge of might:
You Gods do know, that neither day nor hour,
My mind has been, to swerue from truth and right,
(For all that I do, I know is in your sight)
And all my acts, with truth have been approved,
By Justice laws, whom I have always loved.
Lo now you Gods, regard my piteous moan,
Lend me your hands, which do your aid implore:
Rebellious wights, out of my tente be gone,
And vow till death, never to serve me more.
Diana she, which went long time before,
Has armde her self, with bended bow in hand,
By force to drive, my son and me from land.
And thus she said, but salted sighs, would let her say no more,
And trickling teres ran down by stremes, whereof she had great store
And flatling fell before the Gods, and mighty Jove his throne,
And often she dubled forth these words, regard my piteous moan.
Wherewith the Gods began to weep, and every one was moved,
For Venus in that part of heaven, of all the Gods was loved.
At last the Father of the Gods, took up his loving daughter,
And kissed her with lovely lips, these words he vtred after.
Ah Venus, Venus, take good cheer, Dian shall not prevail,
We will resist her martial might, when as she shall assail.
And Cupid he, whom she detests, shall lead thy host to feeld,
And I my self will wend with thee, to make her for to yield.
Yea all my mates and faithful friends, I hope will be content,
Perdy my Lord (quoth every one) we yield to this intent.
Then Mars began to smil^, and then, the Gods did rise together:
And every one in cumly sort, did welcome Venus thither.
Then Mercury did sound the trumpe, that all the (...) did ringe^
The noise thereof, great fear no doubt, to all the earth did bring.
Then Pelion began to shake for fear, and Ossa trembled sore,
Olimpus with the mighty Alps did never s^before.
But mighty Mars did shake his ^^d, he (...) and ran for joy,
And kissing Venus often he said, thy foes I will distroy.
By this the Gods he furnished, and armed ^t all need,
And Jove himself rides first in rank, upon a barbed ^eede,
The Go^te suffiseth for his badge, whose milk he loved well,
When mild Meliss^ gave him suck, which then in Crete did dwell.
Then Mercury does sound again, and all the Gods assemble
And as before, so Heaven and earth begins again to tremble,
Among the gods which present were, old Priasus did resort,
Who wi^h Dianas Champions, did think to make some sport.
A garden spade this God did bring, even as his custom was,
Bedeckt with crowns of smelling flowre^, he rid upon an ass.
The Gods rid on before apace, for Venus made great haste,
And Pryasus was left behind, he could not ride so fast.
His Ass did trot so hard (alas) and put him to such pain,
He thought the journey was to long, and turned back again.
Then Morpheus turned himself and said, it is no time to stay,
To follow them unto the Camp, let us no more delay.
Wherefore I thankte him much that time, for long I wished to see,
The royal tents of Cupids Court, with all their dignity.
A description of Cupid.
GOd Morpheus was more swift the^ those, which with Dame Venus came
(Or else by right he should not seem for to enjoy his name^.)
Wherefore by his assent we past, Dame Venus and her train,
With speedy pa^^ unto the tents, where Cupid did remain.
Who deygned I my poor request, to ease me of my charge,
And with his pl^^sant tales of truth, described the God at large.
Whom when (...) vewde I was amazde, and all abasht with fear,
Whereat my guide began to smile, and thus he did declare.
Within that tente and cumly couch, whose covering seems red,
A grisly ghost behold, by whom the mighty Gods be led.
Whose power exceeds Mars his might, whose strength the rest dot^ tam^
Yea none in heaven, in earth nor hell, that can resist the same.
Alas my Lord (quoth I again) this seems most strange and rare,
Should all the Gods which rule in skies, of one boy stand in fear.
In deed (quoth he) this withered wight, does so mollest their brain,
That those which be of feebled age, he turns to boys again.
For why in tricks of childish years, he causes them to stay,
Neglecting duties of great weight, delighting naught but play.
My God (quoth I) to know all things, I greatly do desire,
What is the cause that Venus son, is naked without attire,
(Quoth Morpheus) he that lives in love, in folly pass his days,
And has that has but half an eye, may set his wavering ways.
Ah silly wight, ah shadow poor, (for flesh in him is skant)
And as he seems to be blind, (...) brow so does he want.
He is a type, (quoth Morpheus then) you know well what I mean,
And too much lust, and lechery, has made him very lean.
Not lust alone, but care and thought, which does perplex his mind
For to much lust may be a cause, why Cupid seems blind.
For those which live in lovers laws, regard not what they do,
And often they think to bathe in bliss, but sink in wretched woe.
A brow he wants, for by the same, his soldiers (...) divine,
Whereto the motions of the heart, do purpose to declyne.
And as the brow does bear the badge, that brings death or life,
So they that badge does hate and shun, which seem to tell some strife,
But oh my God, why has he wings, adjoined to each side,
Because that Cupid changes often, and never long abide.
A bow is bent within his hand, two quiuers at his back,
Well may he shoot, and wide enough, that does his eye sight lack.
It is not so among the Gods, as men suppose to be,
He shootteth often, but nere in vain, so steadfast holds he.
That lean and naked boy, with force his mighty foes do quell,
That blind and winged Champion, does shoot exceeding well.
And though he browlesse seem to be, yet does he pearce the brain
Through skin and bone, he hits the heart, whereas his Dart remain.
Then marvel not, though all the Gods, do yield for want of might, Since none
have force for to resist, the strength of such a knight.
Both man and beast, both sish and foul, and all that life does bear,
Are subject unto Cupids bow, which all the Gods does fear.
The quiuers which thou do behold, which stand this God in stead,
The one is full of golden shaftes, the other full of lead.
The golden strike, the seruent wights, which pas their days in lou^
The lead does wound the brazen hearts, wh^ no complaint can mou^
Poliphemus with Stenobia young Phedra felt the gold,
Galatea Belerophon, with the lead were stricken cold.
This while we talked at leisure, lo, we heard the trumpet sound,
Whereby we knew the Gods were come, from skies unto the ground
And as they had pretended erst, did set themselves in ranckes,
To march with Venus to the Camp, who yielded them great thanks
And sounding out, God Mars his trumpe, to set them in array,
They marched forth unto the feeld, whereas their foes did stay,
But freendly Morpheus had me first, for to discribe at large,
The order of God cupids camp, the which I will discharge.
And if it please my Angel then, to call me to that sight,
I will discribe Dianas hay, which did befall in fight.
A description of Cupid his host.
THe Gods being met and Venus son, being garnished in this wise,
By whole consent to vanquish her, which did his laws despise,
Mars is assended up the Couch, to guide the horses right,
And Cupid stands with bow in hand, to send forth every knight,
Then Venus laid her heavenly head, upon God Mars his lap,
And said my Lord, we trust on you, to govern well our hap.
The cheifest Captain of the rout, Audacity was named,
Whose safe conduct of all the host, deserves not to be blamed.
With him he led forth Policy, Cupid his only stay,
These undertook by Mars his will, to guide the host that day.
The second Captain, curtesy, a valiant host did lead,
Who had Delight adioynde to him, to help him at his need.
The Captain graund, did bid them both, the right wing to p^ssess^,
And always to attend the same, to drive a way distress.
And on the left side, ietted Rage, with cruel Tyranny,
Which were as aids unto the host, led by Audacity.
I have not here rescited those, which petty Captains were,
Only my Morpheus charged me, the cheese for to declare.
But this I saw, that Idleness, did bear a worthy sway,
That Drunkenness and Drowsinesse, did set them in array.
Dissension ran from host to host, and Riot stood not still,
But all adioynd their helping hands, and furdered with good will
I let pass all the Soldiers names, the labor were to long,
And yet my book would not contain, the names of all the throug.
Thus every thing being finished, each Soldier standing still,
Behold a proclamation, was made by Cupids will.
Which offered gifts abundantly, to any soldier there.
To undertake in Dians tente, a message to declare.
And greet her heartily from him, which blinded bare the bow,
Commanding her to yield in time, and quiet peace to show.
Or else with di^t of martial blade, he would dispatch her quite,
And teach all other to beware for to resist his might.
Desire a champion of great pride, whose force deserved fame,
Before the Gods, and Venus fair, on knee did ask the same.
Which when the Gods had granted him, and Cupid gave consent,
He took his leave of all the train, and forth to Dian went.
Come let us go (quoth Morpheus then) this greeting for to here,
I am content my Lord (quoth I) to attend both here and there,
To view Dianas Court (quoth he) for to discribe the same,
To hear the answer to Desire, to know the Captains name.
For she was ready furnished, of Soldiers at her will,
And every court garnished, with Captains of great skill.
Desire, who longed to tell his tale, approcht this Dame unto,
With duty done for courtesy, had chargde him so to do.
But since my Angel bad me first, for to discribe her train,
And since to sound a true report my Morphes took such pain.
I think it most convenient, seeing time does serve so fit,
Before Desire have told his tale, for to discover it.
A description of Diana and her army.
Just by Eurota flowing stream, where many Lanrelles grow,
A pleasant place, which all the Nymphs, of Dians train do know.
Behold God Morpheus offered me, a place to view at will,
The safe return of Dians train, which her hest does fulfill.
From out the shade this Goddess came, from cha^ing of the Bore,
With bow in hand so ready bent, and well ^^drest therefore.
Her couch was couerd al with white, white Hearts the same did draw
Whose swiftness pleased Diana well, to bring the Bear in awe.
For solely in the woods she kept, in groves she did remain,
And Acteon has his tale to tell, although unto his pai^e.
Within the Couch kept Modesty, as ruler of her will,
Where Praise and Honor were as guides, to hold the helm with skill.
A crown she wears of precious price, bed^cte in rich array,
Whose pleasant looks, in seemly sort, her nature did bewray.
Thus while from wood she did return, unto the feelde to fight,
And when her host assembled was against Dame Cupids might.
Behold the Captains do discharge, the duty that they owe,
And every one his good intent, to Dians hos^ do show.
The rout by Chastity is swayde, the Misterisse of the rest,
Who set the Soldiers in array, as she esteemde it best.
There Constancy is called to aid, and help^ them at a need,
And Tempetance is well esteemde; as Dian has decreede.
Sobriety has sage Advise, to counsel Dian well,
And Labor stands against his foes, their sloth for to expel.
Fidelity a faithful friend, within the wood does stay,
Who seeks to spoil the foreign foe, as h^e pass by the way.
For Dian has commanded him, to rest within the wood,
And camp himself most orderly, just by Furota stood.
With whom Dame Thisbe takes a place, where is Pandor his Neete,
And Phedra she which sometime was, Duke Theseus wife of Greece,
And if I should resite them all, which couched by this brook,
My pen would saint in half the way, in wrighting of this book,
But sith I have discribde the tente, as breefely as I may,
And as my Morpheus would give leave, the same for to display.
Behold Desire presents him self, before this Dame on knee,
And from the saint, wh^m he did serve, th^se voices uttered he,
Desire his message unto Diana.
REnow^^ed Dame, whose fame the (...) contains,
Whose glistering face throughout the world appear:
Cupid my Lord, in martial feel^ ^^^^ines,
And sent me out my me^^ag^ to do:
Whose valiant force, the Gods themselves d^^st fear,
Cupid I say in whom such joy I find,
Has sent me forth, to know thy willing mind.
He craves of thee that justice (...) request,
That thou do yield, and let thy army go:
Thy false attempts the Gods themselves detest,
And every one, is sworn thy future foe,
Each one is bent to work thy grief and woe.
With glittering blade, to seethy blood (...),
If thou disdain, as recreant to yield.
And Mars himself, with Venus is ascended,
Into the Couch, where Cupid ^raweth his bow:
But yet my Lord, thus much has thee befrended,
If thou will yield, then he will mercy show:
This for thy sake on thee he does bestow.
But if thou nill, he will dispatch thee quight,
Both thee and thine, by dint of bloody fight.
Accept therefore his mercy and good will,
And deigne to show, obedience for the same:
Pity thy self, do not the army spill,
Least all the world report this to thy shame:
And none that lives, my loving Lord will blame.
Consider this, and think upon the pain,
And speak thy mind, that I may return again.
Thus when Desire had told his tale, to Dian and her train,
Diana quickly answered, Sir knight return again.
Let Cupid do his worst he can, his force I do not fear,
Ne will I yield unto his laws, nor none that with me are,
Wherewith a lofty shout and noise, unto the sky was raysde,
And Dians courage and good will, of all the rout was praysde,
Desire being hot with raging hate, did thus reply again,
I do lament the rufull lot, of them which shall be slain.
For lo as does the rau^^ing (...), the sheep in strength excel,
So Cupid with his martial (...) these stately words can quell.
That neither Captain shallbe left^, nor soldier for to fight,
Of all this rout, whose hands be piest, against my Lord his might.
Then Modesty, Dianas guide, in her behalf did say,
Although we die in Dians cause, our deaths we do not way.
This said, Desire returned again, and unto Cupid went,
And showed at large, Dianas words, as of her whole intent.
And that within the silent wood, whereas Eurota flow,
Fidelity did hold his camp, their force to overthrow.
And added this that neither Mars, with all his weighty stroke,
Nor all the Gods should bring her neck, under God Cupids yoke.
Then cupid sent Desire before, the Amb^^sh for to tame,
Or else perforce to scatter them, before the army came.
Desire does seek to be reuengde, of his appointed foe,
And wandering in the Laurel woods unto Eurota go.
Whereas Fidelity was pressed, his force for (...) withstand,
And in defense of Dians right, did fight long hand to hand.
But what could Thisbe then res^st, when Pyram came in sight,
Or when as worthy Troylus came, how could Dame Cressid fight.
Phedra she was content to yield, Desire did force her so,
And from Dianas faithful friend, to Cupids camp to go.
What shall I say, Dianas host, which in the wood did stay,
Was sore abasht, Fidelity was chased quite away.
And many yielded recreant, not able to deny,
Desire perforce did force them so, either to yield or dye.
But rather then Dame Cressid would, so quickly seem as dead,
She vowed her self from Troylus true, to slattering Diomede.
So that the perjured Grecian, or else the Troyan knight,
Should have Dame Cressid unto love, yea both if so it might.
Thus while Desire do clear the coast, and make the passage free,
The host marched on into the feeld, with thundering harmony.
The noise whereof do beat the skies, and eke from thence reboundes,
And Mars his music in the seeld, aloft Tantara soundes.
The soldiers set them selves in ranks, the wings to succor go,
Audacity by Mars his will, he had commanded so.
But Dian and her worthy train, when as her friend was fled,
And for the loss of all those friends, with fury was much led,
And often repeating worthily, my hearts take cheer (quoth she)
My life for yours, continue still, so shall you victors be.
The soldiers fought so valyantly, the Captains did so well,
That cupid began to Crouch for fear, and Dian did excel.
Audacity then shook for fear, when chastity withstood,
And Constancy she followed fast, to see the foreign blood.
And if God Cupids policy, a reskue had not found,
Both Venus and her darlings dear, had ^^^lyng fell to ground.
But Policy came rushing in, and sent forth mighty Jove,
Who then descended from the skies, to serve the God of love.
Who vanquished Dame Dians host, and made them for to tremble,
And sundry kinds of ugly shapes, he (...) not to dissemble.
Aurora loved the snowy Bull, and L^d^ word the Swan,
And Io lickt her fathers face, which then was pale and wan.
For as the Woolfe among the lambs, so Jove among the host,
I mean among Dame Dians flock, of whom she vaunt and bo^^^
But when as Fame had sounded forth, and Brute had blased his will,
That Jove did vanquish worthily, with Policy and Skill.
Then Danae fled her way for fear, unto Acrisius Tower,
Till Jupiter through Policy descended in a shower.
Achilles then began to rage, before that Troy was sackte,
And craved of Policy his guide, the armur that he lackte.
Who armed him corragiously, in Maidens feate array,
Till Derdanna swelling womb, his policy did bew^ay.
And Licomedes was deceiude, the father of the May,
And therefore could not stop the step^, of young Achilles way.
Then Clodius rushed in in haste, Pompeya for to quell,
Bedect like to the vestall Dames, whereas his love did dwell.
Thus Cupid was incorraged, with all his warlike train,
Diana which was erst aloft, is now beat down again.
And all the Gods and Soldiers the, did play their parts so well
That Cupid is extolde to heaven, and Dian fell to Hell.
Medusa Gorgon hearing this, to Pallas alter fled,
Hoping by her assisting hand, in time to be relieved.
Whom mighty Neptune through deceit, entangled in such sort,
That she forsook Dianas camp, and fled to Venus Court.
Then Phedr^ whom desire had brought, from Dian and her train,
Ceased not in Cupids cause to fight, till Hyppolite was slain.
With Policy came Gluttony, and Idleness his mate,
And Drowsinesse he followed fast, for fear he came to late.
Antonius resisted long, Queen Cleopatras host,
But yet at last through Gluttony, did yee^^ to her request.
When Constancy had seen the force and havoc of their foes,
She vowed, both life and lands, and fame, in Dians cause to lose,
Rather then Cupid should prevail, unto their utter shame,
And all Dame Dians valian^wights, accorded in the same.
And joining hearts and hands in one, that battered Cupid so,
That he was near constraind again, out of the feeld to go.
There Temperance stood stiffly too, and Labor laid on lode,
Sobriety did help at need, when they in danger stood.
But yet alas, this wished joy, was soon brought to an end,
For Curtesy came rushing forth, and brought Delight his friend.
For to revenge this fresh assalt of Dian and her train,
And to renew the wonted state, of Cupid once again.
With him came Duke Protesilaus, with him came Alcyde stout,
He sought for Laedomia, this found Dianeira out.
Hector vanquished Andrqmache, that worthy wight of Troy,
And Pryamus with Hecuba, did live in perfect joy.
Thus when Dianas Soldiers, began to slip away,
Through Curtesy, a thousand fled, to Cupid in one day.
And few there were, which would remain, with Dian to abide,
But yield them self unto Delight, betide what might betide.
Who pardned every one of those, which came with free consent,
And did remit each ones offense, before he did repent.
Then Pluto posted out for rage, which did this while abide,
And kept the winge with Cruelty, which lay on the left side.
Who sent forth tryple Cerberus, that deuillish dog of Hell,
To fetch away Proserpina, which then (...) Greece did dwell.
Then Appius swelled with rage, Virginia to deflowre,
Achilles spryte did rage from Hell, Polixina to deuowre.
Lucrecia was took in trip, Rage was her foreign foe,
Apollo cursed Cassandra fair, for Rage bid will him so.
Thus cruel Rage, with Curtesy, and with his friend Delight,
With fond Desire, and Policy, which wear God Cupids might.
Have chased away Dianas force, that she her self must fly,
Or yield to those, whose bloody hearts, would cause her for to dye.
And to a pleasant valley hard by (her train being very small,)
She did convey herself, by flight, as woeful of her fall.
Quoth Morpheus mark this well my friend, and note her train I pray
Which when I purposed for to do, their backs were turned away.
So was I much unable left, their names for to rescite,
Which tarried with Diana fair, when she was put to flight.
And so my guide himself, could not their names unto me show,
But this he had me publish forth, the Soldiers were not few.
Whom Cupid with his lovely rout, persuade with might amayne,
But yet Diana fled so fast her foes returned again.
And unto Cupid his curious tent, they went for to return.
With bibbing Baccus and his mate, a while for to soiorne.
But as they began for to return, to their appointed (...),
Behold they saw a virgin pure, which gallantly did come,
(Although to late) to aid her dear, which then had lost the day,
But Theseus stepped from the rout, and stepped in her way.
Oh then (quoth I) unto my guide, whom keeps he in the tent,
It Is Hellena, which too to late, unto Dame Dian went.
(Quoth Morpheus then) whose chastity, was won by Theseus might,
Who when ten years had run their race, was took in Dians fight.
Thus while my God did end his talk, Cupid at palace is,
With all his soldiers banketting, with heavenly joy and bliss.
The feast endured, very long, the triumph was not small,
These joy their goodly victory, the other rue their fall.
At last a trumpet began to sound, and Preco said his will,
That Venus did command them all, no captive for to kill.
But that with joy, each one should wend, and with his prisoner play,
Till Beauty should command them all, to walk an other way.
Then every God departed forth, unto his heavenly seat,
And led with him such prisoners, as he did think it meet.
Then Mars with Iron arms did kiss, his darling and his dear,
And that without suspicion, for Vulcan was not there.
And after said adieu my dear, then she from couch descended,
And took God Morpheus by the hand, since fate have me bef^^nded.
My Lord (quoth she) rejoice with me, and thank the heavenly might,
And you shall wend no further now, but rest with me this night.
With whom my God departed thence, beckning his hand at me,
As who should say, go pack away, I cannot come to thee.
Wherewith my Angel left me clean, and Sopor did the same,
And I to former sense and wit, at Natures pleasure came.
The Argument.
In Beauties Palace met, as Cupid had ordaynd,
The Captain with his crown, and captive led away:
All strife, debates, and iarres, which erst before remaind
When Beauty sat as Judge, were ended in that day.
And Hymeneus he, exhort them all to wed,
But those which can live chaste, he do exempt therfro,
So Cupid is content, to rest him in his bed:
And Dian chose her path, in wandering woods to go.
Let Dian take her dear, and Cupid his delight,
For Beauty sat in throne, to pleasure every wight.
Justice and Judgment, pleaded at Beauties Bar.
YEt once again, before the year was spent,
I did return unto my wonted wise:
When as the Sun, to the woods a shade had bent,
Whose smell, and hew, my fancy did suffice:
Whereas I couched, and covered both my eyes,
And drowsy sleep, did soon arest my heart,
And wished rest, did bind each weary part.
And loc as erst, my fethered Angel came,
And bad me come, and wait in wonted sort:
Doubt not (quoth he) to undertake the same,
For as I have, so will I be thy forte,
And eke thy guide, to bring thee to that port:
Whereas (be bold) no danger shall in sewe,
Give credit now as thou have found me true.
Wherewith I rise, and gladly passed forth,
Not knowing whence, nor whither I should go:
But followed him, whose counsel was much worth,
To ease my pain, and rid me of all woe:
No love of friend, nor dread of frowning foe,
Abasht my mind, or struck my heart in fear,
For drowsy sleep had cleene expeld all care.
My God went fast, whose steps were never slow,
And guided me unto a fertile Fen:
Where many shrubs, of sundry sorts did grow,
A place no doubt, unknown to mortal men:
Which when I saw, I was amas^d then,
And gladly would, have known the place his name,
But that I durst, not ask my guide the same.
Within the Fen, there stood a Castle fair,
Most strongly built, most cumly to behold;
The top whereof, assended to the air,
And every part, was gilted with pure gold:
My guide unasked, the circumstances told,
Beauty (quoth he) within this place does dwell,
Who veweth this Fen, and rules it passing well.
Whereby I saw, that which I did not know,
And did perceive the end of his intent:
At last he dayned, his purpose for to show,
What was the cause, and why that way he went:
Wherefore to him I yielded my consent,
And forth we past, as he did think it good,
Into the place, whereas this Castle stood.
No sooner did we enter in the same,
But lo a trumpe, did sound within my ear:
And every one, gave ear to sounding fame,
And noted well, what news he did declare:
Yea all those knights, which in the Castle were,
Attended well what news there should befall,
From her which was the Judge, and Queen of all.
The Preco said that all which were assembled,
With free consent, their Captives should rescyne:
(Whereat no doubt, the fervent lovers trembled)
Till Phoebus beams, began in morn to shine:
Till Lucifer from his love should decline,
To him which had, Dame Beauties birds in store,
And kept them clean, full many years of yore.
To him therefore, the prisoners were committed,
Who kept them well, as Beauty did request:
And every knight, a pleasant place has f^t0ted,
Where he alone, that silent night might rest*
To sport him self, as he should think it best,
But blame them not, though some were weary then,
Which came that day unto that joyful Fen.
But when Dame Nox has covered every thing,
And Cinthia, by Phoebus is sent out:
Which to the world, most joyful light does bring,
And aydeth those, whom Phoebus left in doubt:
Even so I guess that most of all this rout,
Have yielded up, when Sopor seem ^o ^^ll,
I need not guess, when Morpheus showed me all.
And those likewise, which in the Closet kept,
(Excepting some) did lay them down to rest:
Who sighed sore, while that the other slept,
And wayled the loss, of them whom they loved best:
Of whom that night, there passed many a jest,
Which if I should rescite them as they came,
It were enough sor to discorse the same.
Next to the gate, fair Juliet did lie,
And in ^he Court young Romeus did stay:
F^ire (...) gave leave, to peke and pry,
(...) sfyd, when will thou come away.
Windows (quoth he) I would assend fair May,
I look to see, the place where erst I came,
But Tibalt he, has closed up the same.
Then mighty Jove came slidinge down from Heaven,
And thought to fall, within young Danaes lap:
But yet behold, the tyles were not laid even,
And he his head, against the stenes did rap:
And on the ground, he did complain his hap.
Alas (quoth he) this fall has made my pain,
Then look (quoth I) before you slide again.
Then Orpheus gat leave to come from Hell,
To cheer up her, which was his whole delight:
Which in the Luke, with Tartur king did dwell,
Whose Harp did sound, almost the silent night:
Pluto saw that, he thought he did not right,
But with his might, he troubled Orpheus mind,
Who fled for fear, and left his Harp behind.
Then Priamus out of the gardaynes came,
Into the place whereas young Lotis lay:
Who while she slept, did think it was no shame,
In silent night, with her to sport and play:
His Ass brayd out, for fear he ran away.
And durst not bide, her courtesy to try,
Whereat the Nymphs did laugh exceedingly.
Then Tethis son, began his form to change,
In sundry sort, as well he could devise:
A cunning art, a work which seemed most strange,
Whose fiery flames, out of his mouth did rise:
The Iayler fered, and stopped both his eyes,
Then Pr^teus he, unto Pomona went,
Which turned him self, even for the same intent.
Neptune saw that, and causde Triton to sound,
And Eolus for him did raise the weather:
He sought so long at last his love he found,
And Alcion said, my Lord your are welcome hither:
I will not say, how that they went together,
But yet behold, the keeper spied their play:
The God for fear, did breechlesse run his way.
Thus merrily we passed all the night,
For Morpheus was, contented in the same:
But yet me thought, there was one passing sight,
Whereat my guide, did find good sport and game:
Which to let pass, I think I were to blame,
I fear no foes, the truth I do not fear:
For this I saw, which now I shall declare.
When Clodius, unto Pompeia went,
And Vestall omnes, had took him in the ^rip:
They all at once trust him in continent,
And in their use, began this youth to whip:
And what though he allow did hang the lip,
They sent him forth, and this charge did him give,
To come no more, so long as he should live.
And thus the night, has run her timely race,
And Lucifer, has left Auroras bed:
Don Phoebus now, begin to take his place,
And with this Dame, does rest his heavenly head:
His burning beams, do stand us all in shed,
And Cinthia says: adue, my brother come:
Unto whose rule, I must yield up this rome.
The morning came, the Preco sound again,
And charge all, in place for to appear:
Where Beauty does in Judgment seal remain,
Their direful doom, or joyful news ^o here:
They were content, and Morpheus did draw nere,
But Pryapus, when all were in the pla^e,
Sadled his Ass, and rid away a pace.
For why he said, such fate did him betide,
And such erployts, that night by him were done:
For fear this God, alas could not abide,
That need he must, Dame Beauties judgment shun:
For well he knew, before it was begun,
That he by her, should justly be condemned,
And for his fear of all the Gods contemned.
When Preco had told forth his sounding tales,
And all the knights, which came from Cupids war:
Addressed them selves, out of these grievous gales,
To plead their case, before Dame Beauties Bar:
Pretending there, either to make or mar,
Then Beauty sat, just Judgment for to give:
To trust, to save, to die and eke to live.
There all the Gods, assembled were in place,
And dainty Venus, sat by Beauties side:
To hear each plead, and way of every case,
And eke to know, what end there should betide,
To every one, that captive did abide,
The keeper stands, and cries Lordings give rome:
Stand from the Bar, and let the prisoners come.
Thus every thing was brought to perfect stay,
The prisoners all do tremble where they stand:
The trusty keeper, he make no delay,
But does resign them to Dame Beauties hand:
To have each case, with wisdom duly skande,
When all was whist, and statutes red at large:
The Crier began his duty to discharge.
Then Lemnon knight, and of the Ciclops chief,
Judgment did crave, and Beauty grant the same:
I will quoth he, you grant me some relief,
For mighty Mars, has put my wife to shame:
Whereat the Gods did find exceeding game,
And when they saw what thing he went about,
Be whole consent, they hoyst the blacksmith out.
Amphy^rion did crave a full deuorce,
For Jove he said, with him had bin vnkinne:
Then Jove stood up, and asked some remorce,
And said he would, content his troubled mind,
Yea Beauty then, did crave some grace to find:
He was content, and mighty Jove therefore,
Did vow himself, never to serve so more.
So great complaints, against this God were brought*
That at the last from bench he slipped away:
Juno was wroth, and due reueng^^nt sought,
Of those which had deceived her of her pray:
She rage and fret, she curses day by day,
But Beauty sought, to recompense the wrong,
Whom he had made, to singe the Cookoes song.
I let pass all, till Menelaus came,
And did complain, because he lost his piece:
The Trojan knight, he only sought to blame,
Which had conuayed, this Diamond from Greece:
More loss then he, which lost the golden fleece,
The grief whereof, did hazard much his health,
For that the knight, had took this Dame by stelth.
Oenone then did hear this great complaint,
And fiatling ^ell, upon her tender knee:
Lo worthy king behold thy wished Saint,
Has stole away, my loyal knight from me:
With trickling tears, these voices uttered she,
And wished the Judge, her sentence to declare,
To assuage her pain, and rid her of her care.
Then Beauty said, since Paris has dealt so,
And left this dame, which cherished him before:
(When as his sire, did seek to work his woe,)
Who unto him two children has ybore:
Oenone lives, thy loss for to deplore,
Cherish thy babes, which for their fathers cry,
Defame has vowed, his fact shall never dye.
And as for her which has this act committed,
The blood of them, whose bones at Troy do stay:
Reuengment craves, the Gods have it permitted,
Wherefore (quoth she) let her be led away:
But whither it was, I cannot truly say,
Yet Morpheus said, that Robinson should tell,
As well her pain, as where this Lady dwell.
Then Menalaus was sorry for his make,
Whose tricklinge tears, the Trojans did inuie:
Who in the feeld, had perished for her sake,
So did the Greeks, which buried there do lie:
And with consent, they ceased not to cry,
Woe worth the time, that Hellen came to Troy,
Woe worth that knight, which stole y^ wretch away.
Then Troylus true, stepped up among the rout,
And offered up the bill of his complaint:
How that by chance, he found his Creslid out,
Whose shrine he served, who^ he had made his saint:
For as he said, Beauty had drawn constraint,
Wherefore he craude, true sentence for his doom:
That Cressid might possess deserved room,
But Diomed when as he hard the truth,
He gate (Perforce) to parle in his cause:
Who moved the bench, with Pity, Moan, and Ruth.
And said that she, had never broke the laws:
But yielded there, where need so strongly draws,
Do what she could, Perforce compeld her so:
When she was driven, from Troy to Greece to go.
Knight Troylus then, removed the suit again,
Unto a place, whereas the ground was sure:
And by advise, he ceased not to complain,
With hot assault, he sewed her a periure:
But Diomed scant able to endure,
Let fall the suit unto Dame Beauties pleasure,
To end in haste, or to defer to leisure.
Then Calcas he, which was her loving Sire,
Did offer Mines, and glistering gobs of gold:
To spare his child, the Judge he did require,
But yet alas, Beauty would not behold:
Nor yet give ear, unto the tale he told,
But judged her which was the Prophets daughter
A Leper vile, and so she lived after.
And as for him, which was the Trojan knight,
With lovely looks, she often gave good cheer:
Though for her sake, he ended in the fight,
Yet truth shall try, it plainly shall appear:
That his deserts, so long as man live here,
Shall pearce the clouds, for every man shall show
That he was just, and to his Lady true.
Achilles then came trembling forth of Hell,
And brought with him Polixina the bright,
Whom he did crave, because he loved so well,
And should have had if Paris had done right:
But Beauty she, desired the Grecian knight,
To stay his hand, and hold his lively breath:
Contenting him, by fair Polixines death.
Orestes came into his former rage,
Which Pirrus felt, before Dame Beauties har:
The Judge did rise, his fury to assuage,
And did demand the cause of all that iar:
Nestor auoucht, before he went to war,
Hermione was young Orestes right,
Wherefore my thought the Jury set him quite.
Leander cried and craved to have the law,
And Hero she, began with sobs to wail:
Of Neptunes force, they both did stand in awe,
They labored much, but yet could not prevail:
They daily sought, but yet therein did fail,
Neptune (quoth he) does love my Dame so dear,
That through his force, I am driven back by fear
Then Neptunes love, began thereat to frown,
And for his sake, Dame Hero did inuy:
And did not cease, to seek to put her down,
In Neptunes lap, she often times did cry:
Whose silly tears, her lovers love did try,
And he content, to please this gallant Dame:
At her request, reu^nged him of the same.
And on the Seas, he taught this silly knight,
And sonke his boat, within the flowing floods:
Where he was drowned, and quesned by dispight
This did the God to do his lady good:
But she alas, being fed with furious mood,
Cast up his corpse, which Hero did espy,
And fell from Tower, and with her love did dye.
Amulius brought in his brothers child,
Whom he had locked within the vestall cave:
Accusing Mars, which had that Dame beguilde,
And caused her lose, the life that she would save:
But Mars in wrath, this speedy sentence gave,
That Illias Impes, should work Amulius shame:
Who after that had tasted of the same.
Then Minos wife came raging all in ire,
And Beauty asked, her purpose and intent:
That speckled Bull (quoth she) I do desire,
The Gods began laugh, and yielded her consent:
Forthwith from thence, to Dedalus she went,
But Beauty should, and did this fact detest,
And sent forth Ire, to gnaw king Minos breast.
Then Theseus friend, she stood on Naxus I Will,
And cried alowd unto the powers above:
Whom Baccus caught, and brought from long exile,
And in the end, did choose her for his love:
Whose rufull moan, Dame Beauties heart did move,
But all the Gods sent Theseus into Hell:
Whose pains were more, then any tongue can tell.
Then Alpheus did Arethusa chase,
And left his course, even as he thought it best:
Diana she, did stay her of her race,
And yet deceived this long desiring guest:
And since in her, she saw a faithful breast,
By Beauties will, she changed her form away:
Into a spring, which in her name did stay.
Then Cepheus child, fearing the monsters might,
Cride to the Gods, upon her mothers pride:
But Perseus heart, relented at the sight,
And truly vowde, no longer to abide,
Till for her sake, the monster he had tryde:
And on conflicte, he ended breathinge life,
And Beauty gave, this damsel for his wife.
Apollo he, which gave Cassandra wit,
To tell all things, which after should insew:
Before the bar, whereas the Judge did sit,
His whole complaint in open pleaded show:
He said that she, had never proved true,
Whereat the Judge, did ware exceeding wanne:
And long amazde, at last she thus began.
Since you (quoth she) which gave to her this gift,
Can not obtain, the troth which she did plight:
It Is good for you to use some other shifte,
Her false attempt, some other way to quite:
Wherefore the God, thus said in open sight,
The words she spoke, no Trojan shall believe,
But each man's mind, they shall molest and green.
A thousand more, to long for to repeat,
Came thronging in, the Judgment for to hear:
Such preace was made, before Dame Beauties seat,
Of those which came, their matters to declare:
That if I should name all that did appear
It were to much, the labor were to long,
My pen would faint, and say it had great wrong.
Sardanapalus, sometime Thassirian king,
With strange attire he entered into place:
Upon his head a helmet he did bring,
And in his hand, he held a glistering glass:
In Queens attire, this fool bedecked was,
A rout of Hoares, and Concubines he led,
Which while he liude his greedy humors fed.
But Beauty blushed, and bid him pack away,
And Venus smilde as one which likte it well:
Arbactus came of him to make a pray,
Whose wicked use in presence he did tell:
Whose life in pomp, and pleasure did excel,
Then Beauty said procure his timely death:
Arbactus went, and stopped his fatal breath.
What should I say each one which did complain,
Has out of hand, a judgment and redress:
The Crier he is gathering of his gain,
Each ^^^icer is busied with no less:
The inhabiters, provide for gallant guess.
And eueryone, prepares passing cheer,
But every thing is sold exceeding dear.
Since Saturns days, and golden years ypast,
Since Jove his birth, and all his brethren ^eere:
If ought were done, whose fame till now does last,
You may suppose that it was truly there:
Yea every thing in order did appear,
And every iar, that present time was ended,
And each offense, by judgment was amended.
And since that time, I truly must confess,
All strife is done, Dian loves no debate:
She lives no more in woods and wilderness,
But every one has choose a cherefull mate:
And some so much this life of hers do hate,
That for the fear of Cupids cursed check,
They yield to bow, and come at every beck.
Then marvel not, though Cupid rule alone,
And though each wight is ready to obey:
For surely now Dianas host is gone,
Her troop is small, which in the woods do stay:
When Cupid comes, each one does run his way,
Yet some there be, I can it not deny,
Which live with her, with whom they mean to dye.
There Pity stood, and pleaded many a^ase,
The blinded boy, had wished him so to do.
And often times, the Judge to him gave place,
As well for friend, as eke for foreign foe:
For sure she thought, most meet for to do so,
That friend and foe, might join them both in one,
And as they ought, worship Cupid alone.
Thus every thing, being brought to purfit end,
And every one contented with the same:
Then mighty Jove, from lofty clouds did send,
His trusty knight, which unto Beauty came:
Who merrily began the Court to blame,
For that it stayed, and did defer so long:
While Vulcan thought, the kitchen had some wrong.
For when as Jove from of the bench did part,
Whose ears did glow, to hear so many cry:
The sore complaints, did moan his tender heart,
With speedy pace he mounted to the sky:
And caused his cooks with Vulcan for to try,
Till all delights for Beauties train did stay:
For whom he sent and wished to come away.
Then Beauty risde, and thus she began to say,
My noble Lords, and Ladies of estate:
Much are you bound, for this your happy day,
Your hearty thanks to yield unto your fate:
For that this Court, has banished debate.
Then mark what he, which is ordainde to speak,
Shall brefely say, and then the Court shall break.
From of the bench, a cumly Lord did rise,
Which unto all dit pleasantly appear:
And unto Heaven, he fixed his steadfast eyes,
Whose color came, which did increase his cheer:
Whose voice was such that every man might here.
And at the last (making no long delay)
With filed speech thus he began to say.
Himenae his Oration.
Renowned Lords give ear, and mark what I shall say,
Which now have seen the whole exploires of all this lucky day.
I Hymenaeus hight whose force you do obey,
In whom (twice happy may you be) if you do rightly stay.
Now therefore since each case, has bin discoursed at large,
And since the Judge, by Justice rule her duty did discharge.
Leave of those wanton toys of love, being used amiss,
And love the laws of wedlocks bond, which much more seemly is.
And you which long have erred, and wandered to and fro,
Revoke your selves, and stay your race, and cease for to do so.
For holy be the laws, which wedlock do maintain,
And duty must perforce be given, to those which there remain.
To range abroad in woods, as many used before,
Beseem the brutish beast to do, then use that use no more.
Let Juno serve for Jove, sufficing for his wife,
And let not Neptune with his mate, despise to lead his life.
If Hypolite the chas't, can lead his life so still,
Why should not P^^edra suffer him, to do after his will?
What ill affectes be these, cut of those Impes I pray.
Which may both bring the ^oote and stock, with branches to decay.
And thus I end in brief, as e^st I have begone,
Desiring you to set your ^^lues, in wedlockes laws to run.
This said he ceast, and settled down again,
And Beauty rose, and uttered all her mind:
Requesting them that they would take the pain,
To wend with her, as Jove had then assi^de:
They did consent as duty did them bind,
But ere they went, behold what did betide:
To me poor soul, which did that sight abide.
For as I looked, on every thing that fell,
I did neglect, whereas my guide did go:
And glauncing looks, within that place did dwell,
With speedy pace, came running me unto,
Who drew me forth, even as a furious foe:
Who straightly said, thy judgment ^s;halbe given,
Be sure to dye, God bring thy soul to Heaven.
He drew me forth, and urged me to go,
Yea Mauger all my force and all my might:
Alas said I, what mean you to do so,
Take some remorse, and cease to work your spite:
Do well (quoth he) if that thy case be right,
Wherefore I wept, but yet alas in vain,
And on my guide, I ceast not to complain.
I sweat for fear, I tremble for to tell,
My hair stood up, my senses were aghast:
My reddy blood, this terror did expel,
Before that time, which in my cheeks was plaste:
And yet my foe did draw me forth in haste,
Who told the Judge, where he had found me out,
When all the throng began topreace about.
And when they saw, what nouelty had hapt,
Then every one, began to shout and cry:
And on my head, their tender hands they clapped,
And said good Sir, you are welcome heartily:
Wherewith I thankte them for their courtesy,
When tears and swet, ran down my face by stremes
They awakte me out of this dreadful dremes.
So since that time I neither saw my foe,
Nor yet my guide, which then was slipped away:
Nay can I tell, if they to skies did go,
As Beauty had pretended all that day:
Of this nor that, no more I have to say,
But when I wakte, I went from silent shade:
For darkesome night, the earth did then invade.
And here behold, I breefely will conclude,
For why? my pen is weary of her toil:
But yet I pray, bear with these terms so rude.
And for my pain, yield not my work ^he foil:
Now gentle Muse, unto thy Cave recoyle,
I yield thee thanks, for this thy gentle heart:
Thy Master he, has played his wished part.
And though not so, as he has wished to do,
Yet for his skill, he has displayde his due:
He craves remorce, if that it chances so,
That any crime, thereof there should ensue:
Or if his pen, has writ more then is true,
Judge you which have, run in this tedious way,
The Author does expect what you will say.
To I. C.
IF it had not been, gentle I. C. for your earnest entreaty, whose words
might command me, I assure you, that these three trifles had not come unto
the hands of any reader, for fear of infamy, which I doubt that they shall
incur, by means of the unskillful reader. But beeinge persuaded that they
shall never be red of any, (you only excepted, and your loving Brother) I have
taken the pain, (which for your cause, (...) account but a sport) for to set
them down in the forefrunt. Partly for that they fight all under one Ensign:
Partly for that the other which follow, be written unto sundry persons. Let
me therefore gentle I. C. entreat you to keep these close, lest they come to
the hands of them which may for the publishing of them, be by right moved
with me. Fare you well.

The life and death of Master, T. Cicero, who was slain, beeinge 63. years
of age.
NO legend lie, no fable fond, no tatling tale I tell,
No treasure of Thalias School, my shop has for to sell:
Come Chapmen come, come view and see, and bargain for the best,
And see the hap of him, whose hand, held Rome in perfect rest.
Whose ill reward for pains being past, when as you do perceive,
Although they move not watery streams, to weep yet give me leave
For when I writ with painful pen, that which I had begun,
The tears distild from watery eyne, whence flowing floods did run.
And sorrowed down my moistened cheeks, repleat with grievous moan,
And seas^ed sighs with salted Seas, I uttered many a one.
And thus my Muse amazde my mind, and kept my heart in fear,
Since first I took my quiuering quill, his acts for to declare.
In Italy an ancient Town, that once Arpinum hight,
Which erst the Volscian kings inioyed, by title truth and right.
Yet after subject unto Rome, as custom did constrain,
Sometime there was, and yet perhaps, to this day do remain.
Herin did Olbia hide her self, a Matron pure and mild,
And to her Tullius joyful spouse, brought forth a lovely child.
A blessed babe whose noble stock, never brought unto decay,
(Of ancient Volscian kings he came, as writers did bewray.)
Did claim and challenge rightfully, that which long time was lost,
And hope did make the hearts rejoice, within Arpinum cost.
In youth (as well beseems youth) in school he spent his days,
Who wan renown unto the same, and to it purchased praise.
And happy might that Master be, which such a scholar taught,
Who to the seed that he did sow, such great increase has brought.
And one thing does revive my heart, and fill my mind with joys,
In gallant youth with Poets art, he published many toys.
Whereby I judge that Poets skill, in youth is not condemned,
Nor practice of such painful works, in it should be contemned.
For what can more revive the heart, or sharpen dulled wit,
Or else to recreate the mind, few studies be so fit.
As Poetry wherein I find, that Plato did delight,
While youth did last as erst did he, of whom my Muse does wright.
When ryper years began run their race, and tender times were spent,
With humain arts being furnished, and not therewith content.
To civil law he lent a time, where he long time did stay,
And while he lived through Roman rout, did bear the price away
And joined true Philosophy unto the law an aid,
A help to those undoubtedly, which in that trade are staide.
Whereof how much he pend with skill, your witness I implore,
(If all his works had come to light) which have his works in store
At last when courage began to prick, and strength his mind did move
And martial feats did put him forth, the force of Mars to prove.
With shining sword, and battering blows, his golden spurs did win
By dint of blade in Scillas seege, by chance he entered in.
Whose peerless prowess of youthful years, delighted Scilla so,
That he by grant permitted him, in peace to Rome to go.
And line among his faithful friends, to couch himself in rest,
Each thing was free for him to use, even what he fancied best*
Where while he used his former use, which erst did seem him good,
And for his friend in open plea, his frettin^ foes withstood.
Lo Sextus Boscius is accused, by Scilla and his train,
And Tully must come tell his tale, to set him free again.
Wherewith the Tyrant began to swell, but him for to prevent,
He does abstain from royal Rome, and unto Athens went.
And practiced the Roman ^^ing, annexed with the Greek,
That Athens never since that time, in her containd the like.
For at that time though Rome did rule, yet Athens did excel,
In knowledge of the Sciences, where all the Arts did dwell.
Till Tully tried and found the truth, which he in time revealed.
And found out art, in native speech, which long had bin concealed.
Which Apollonius told before that then the crown did bear,
And purchased praise in Orators, which then in Athens were.
Alas (says he) I rue your case (you Grecians) and decay,
For that which once was left to you, Tully shall take away.
Now Scilla draws to his end, and death has paid his due,
And Tully did return to Rome, which crst he did eschew.
From thence to Cicilye he went, being Questor of the same,
And did the duty meet for him, which in that office came.
So well he ruled, that friend and foe, his is wisdom did content,
His perfect time, being brought to end, again to Rome he went.
In tracte of time the consulship, was given unto his lot,
Which he discharged worthily, true justice not forgot.
His counsel and his gravity, his duty did discharge,
His wisdom and authority, did show exceeding large.
He caused Ca^elyne to trudge, whose flight his ma^^^ did wound,
And by his policy, he kept the City safe and found.
And they which threatened fire and sword, with slaughter to their soils
Do groueling groan upon the ground, whereas they have the soil.
And he triumphing of his hap, as did beseem his might,
Is called Pater Patriae, by Justice law and right.
The first also which wan that name, being never heard before,
The good estate to native soil, he sought for to restore.
His wife was named Terentia, in whom he was beguilde,
Of whom he had young Cicero, and Tullia the mild.
A friend he was to verity, no feigned words to utter,
Ne would he speak dissemblingly, nor gloss in any matter.
As well appeard in Clodius fact, for then in Rome there were
The sacred Dames which vowed themselves, the vestall weeds to bear
A law there was and well observed, that none but women should,
Do rites and homage in that place, for so Dame Vesta would.
Within that place Pompeia kept, which was then Caesar his wife,
Whom Clodius with unlawful lust, did love with all his life.
And when no way he could attain, his pleasure to possess,
To offer wrong to Caesar's bed, his heart was in distress.
But yet he did attempt this feate, bede^t in maids array,
And with the vestalles offered rites, and duties all that day:
In hope Pompeia to embrace and vanquish in the night,
But after when this famous fact was published in the light:
The Vestals think they had great wrong and strait an action draw,
Accuu^ng Clodius they do crave, the rigor of the law.
Then Clodius to award this blow, and to drive back this dome,
Protest that ^ee that present day, was not in royal Rome.
And for his witness brings out him, of whom my Muse does wright,
But Tully sticking to the truth, lays out the cause aright.
That Clodius that present day (which Clodius did deny)
Met him in Rome, which many more, affirmed steadfastly.
Thus Clodius all inwrapt in care, of gold did make a friend,
Who set him free from Judgment bar, and did the Judges blind.
Whose flattering face and privy bribes, did soon corrupt the law,
And favor of all noble men, from Tully did withdraw.
Who persecuted Tully so, as well with w^rdes as might,
That he perforce constrayneth him to fly from Rome by night.
And as an exixe sixteen months, in exile did remain,
Till he by Pompyes good success, was called home again.
Whom Clodius ceast not to assail, and sharply to invade.
Till Milo stopped his lively breath, by force of glittering blade.
When Clodius had his true desert, and Tullies foes where gone,
Then fortune favored his success, which erst had cause to move.
And Crassus is become his friend, which erst did him inuye,
And Caesar did maintain his case, which long did look awry.
And who so good a friend to him as Pompye through whose plea,
His goods which Clodius did consume, to him restored be.
And when as death with dancing Dart, did end by Crassus race,
Cecylia ceast was given to him, the Parthians for to chase.
Who ruled the province in such sort, that Parthia cease to fight,
And Tully was ordained at Rome, to triumph by his right.
But discord moved between the peers, he did refuse the same,
And gladly did prefer the weal, before his praise of fame.
But woe is me with battering blows, the state of Rome decay,
And Caesar sekes by dints of sword, to take the same away.
What shall I say, no fear of foes, appaled Tullies heart,
No freendship has withdrawn his mind, to leave the rightest part.
But Pompye slain, and Cato dead, and Tully quited free,
He left the sword which erst was wont, his whole delight to be.
And Soly sought his Cuntries wealth, and Homer to maintain,
And that which long was hid before, by skill he made most plain.
So that throughout the Roman coast, wh^ spoke of Tully then,
Might justly say that he was borne, to profit other men.
For as he did deserve great fame, by profit to the weal,
Even so the laws of Eloquence, he justly did re^eale.
And has a title of renown, drawn out of learnings lore,
Which many Greeks in Grecian soil, could not attain before.
But yet alas I rue to tel^, I tremble all to late,
That cursed slippery Fortunes wheel, inuieth all men's estate.
Who erst had raisde him to the Mount, of pleasure and delight,
Who had renowned his famous fact, where Titan gives light.
Who had exalted all his deeds, with honor and renown,
Does now begin with boisterous storms, to beat him clean adow^
Terentia proves most untrue, whose faith should not have swerued,
With whom he made a clean divorce, as well her deeds deserved,
Then poor estate began to prick, and panges of pinching death,
By ill success of Fortunes spite, did stop his daughters breath.
Antonius then began to rage, the greatest grief and smart,
Who seeks the state of Roman seat, by all means to subvert.
Octauius is appald with fear, the Egiptians flockt by rout,
And all the Senate quake fordread, and make their prayers devout.
The Tyrants train and grisly ghost, could not old Tully quell,
Nor cause his tongue to stay from talk, Antonius fact to tell.
But might (alas) expels truth, as plainly did appear,
When force laid wait to trip the just, then Tully fled for fear:
To him whom erst hes had preserved, whose aid he did implore,
His help he sought, whom he had helped, and fostered long before,
Who through his aid then ruled as Prince, and Caesar over all,
But hark alas, I rue to tell, what hap did him befall.
Octauius thyrsty of the Crown, inflamed with heat of wealth,
Neglecting Tullyes small request, he did not way his health.
And for a true (oh cursed wretch,) he yielded to his foe,
The wished pray of Tullyes life, which he desired so.
The Sparrow hatched the Coockoes bird, which soon did see his end,
He fled alas unto his foe, whom he esteemde his friend.
Oh devilish deed, oh lucklesse lot, oh day of doleful dome,
Oh hellish hound, unworthy wretch, to rule in royal Rome.
Has cursed care bewitched thy brain? has pride or peevish pelf,
Made thee betray him whom thou oughtst, regard more then thy self
Alas alas, run Tully run, the bargain now is made,
Thy blood must make great friends of foes, oh tricks of tigers trade.
Antonius seeks to lay thee flat, it is time to pack away,
When sounding fame this true report, to Tully did bewray.
To Seas he hent, whose washinge waves did cause him to return,
For why, I think the fatal Dames, his dedly wound had sworn.
Whom Antony did never cease, with hasty speed to chase.
Till he by Fortunes crooked blast, had won him in his race.
And sent Popili^s (whom long since, Tully had ^aued from shame,)
To stop his breath whose stony heart, accorded to the same.
From whom he took both hands and head, and le^t the carcass still
And brought to Antony his Lord, his greedy ^orge to fill.
Who caused them on Senate top, for to possess a place,
Where Tully ^ft had tried his wit in many a worthy case.
Whose (...) each one (...), which pas^ed to and fro,
And sent forth many sobb^^ and tears, for grief of Tullyes woe.
That now not only Romans wayle, but all the world lament,
And cease not for the loss of him, to curse his foes intent.
Vt voce sic vultu ac vita.
This Epitaph following of P. Ramus the Poor knight, has often told me, to
be a friends of his in Cambridge, and not of his own indightinge, which if
it be, I crave pardon of the Author, and I love it to the consideration of the
Reader.
An Epitaph upon the death of the famous Philosopher, P. Ramus, who was
murdered in the persecution of France, 26. Augusti. Anno Domini. 1572. Etatis
circiter. 57.
YE Ladies fair of Hellicon, come help for to deplore,
The loss of him who while he liude, your Alters did adore.
The baw, y^ branch, which bare such fruit, whose taste and pleasant savor,
Did move the hearts, of all the impes, which sought to win your favor.
Who plighted pain to Hellicon, in Parna^ was his pleasure,
Who drunk of Aganippas well, in Thespias was his treasure.
By sundry sorts he sought to clyme, the Mount which merit fame,
No thorn this was, but fruitful tree, his faults declare the same.
Oh would you could permit the pen, and quiuering quill to wright,
Wherewith old Homer did discourse, the toil of Trojan fight.
Or else from of Carmes^as bed, Apelles raise again,
To hew his tomb cunning hand, who^ denting death has slain
Fie Poets, fie: fie, fie, for shame: unjust you seem to be.
To pen the praise of bush and shrub, and to let pas this tree.
Who yielded fruit to every one, of sweet and sugared savor,
Now winters blast has blown him bare, shall none requite his labor
If Virgils verse I could atchiue, his renown to declare,
No Textor his toil, should quail my Muse, or put my mind in fear
Or for to yen old Ramus proise, then blessed wight I were.
If I of him as he could do, while he was living here.
A Iem, a joy, a friend to France, yet France to him a foe,
A Lamp of light, to those which seek, to Parnas Hill to go.
What should I say, a peereles perle, and of a precious price.
A teacher to the silly soul, a Judge amongst the wise.
A Spectacle to studients, to youth a perfect glass,
A rescue to Religion, when discord moved was.
A light to good Logicions, a pen to Tullies praise,
A Pilot unto passengers, which be to sail those seas.
A Mirror to Philosophy, an aid to them which be,
Minded to feed upon the fruit, which grow upon this tree
Thus while he lived in skilful schools, and taught most perfect ways,
The root, the stock, which bare this branch, did win immortal praise
And while he sought to clear the springs, being stopped with filthy mier
His pai^es did purchase public foes, as payment for his hier.
And while he sought the truth to tell, by proof to try the same.
Alectos shaked her snaky snout, and from Cocitus came,
Whose grisly ghost did move the minds, of those whom furyfed,
How tumults stirred their libels lost, such fruit Alectos bred.
Old Ramus he, whose tongue was truth, whose pen did puchase fame,
By straight edict must silent rest, his pen must do the same.
His paper has no liberty, his pen may not display,
That which his Muse in learned style, is now forbid to say.
His auditors who willingly, his lectures did frequent,
By public charge they must abstain in fear of punishment.
Till mighty Jove which raised up, this bow, this branch, this tree,
Sent silver ^^wes, and crystal springes, his comfort for to be.
By whom this branch did blow again with bloomes that were most bright,
With ^^led pen and reasons rule, he put his foes to flight.
The combat was proclaimed on hye: old Rumus must begin,
In liftes his manhood for to try, his foes b^e entered in.
Not one nor twain, but many foes, assembled were together,
To lanche the bark into y^ waves, against the storms and wealthe^^
Old Ramus he whose worthy wit, whose force to few was known,
Ariueth in port, but in the seas, his foes be overthrown.
And they which made this fire for to consume this flourishing tree,
Through heat of kindled coals, them selves to ashes wasted be.
The pit with Pretus wife did dig, Belerephon to intray,
As pleased the fates to wind their clew, returned to her mishap.
Even so Don Phoebus dained at last, his glittering beams to show,
Erpulsing Winters hoary head, with boysterous-windes that blow,
And Ramus gates which erst were locked, ^ee now vnbard again,
Free passage is permitted there, where bondage did remain.
The learned route frequented him, the Muses did him favor,
The graces sought by gracious means, ^or to requite his labor.
The bows did flourishing fruitfully, while summer did remain,
When season came he yielded fruit, and France did reap the gain.
And eft old Ramus said: come, come, come learn if that you will,
I have the key that does unfold, and opens unto skill.
Grammarians, come and learn I pray: come Re^ors come (quoth he)
In Logickes art I will you teach, so shall you perfect be.
Oh happy place, oh joyful man, which have such ware in sight,
Twice happy France, if France had known, to use thy fruits aright
Oh blessed man whose listening ear, might hear thy dubled voice,
What cause had they which were thy friends, of thee for to rejoice.
Thus while the skies were clear, while calm did bear the sway,
Old Ramus wan his fame and praise, which shall remain for aye.
And pend his fruit in volumes great, which all the learned know,
The g^ine they reap, which taste his fruit, the pain he did bestow
What cause have they that studients be, and taste his fruits aright?
For him and his to yield great praise, unto the Lord of might.
But as they have cause to rejoice, so may they weep and wail,
Though d^lefull d^^pes, and trickling tea^es, his cause will not avail.
Wail, w^ile, and w^^pe they may: for why the tempest raised on hye,
When foes did frown then wind did wrest, and fruit did scattered lie
The tree was dug up by the root, the branch was lopped low,
And France disdayned at the fruit, which on this tree did grow.
When hundreds which professed the Lord, with heart, with deed, with word
With these was Ramus put to death, and m^rdred with y^ sword,
When noble peers and Gentilmen: when men of martial might,
By bloody hands and ^inty hearts, (alas I rue that wight:
Partaker of such misery) by those of Tigers train,
Whom pity never seemde to move, for Christ his cause were slain.
Then Ramus he, that Lamp of light, of learning in our days,
Did end his life, and purchased fame, which shall remain always.
Whose death although his foes did wish: which have thereto consented,
Yet all the world no doubt the loss, of him have long lamented.
In Christ he lived, in Christ he died, with Christ he does enjoy,
A place no doubt for which he died, which nothing can anoy.
As then his life deserved fame, his death deserves more,
Then cease the loss of such a life, ye Muses to deplore.
And grant to him his guerdon due, which all his deeds do merit,
I mean within your Courts of fame, his meede he may inherit.
Vt voce sic vultu ac vita.
An Epitaph upon the death of P. Starling, Sometime Schoolemaister of Bury
School.
CEase sighing now, and think no more of care,
Go grisly ghost, go tell thy heavy hap:
Come doleful Dames, cast of these weeds you ware,
Rejoice with me, which lie in joyful lap:
Where joy it self, long since did keep and dwell.
Cease from your plaints, and hark what news I tell.
The pretty bird, which you have fostered long,
Which buylt her neast, within the Iuory tree:
Which did delight your ears with sugared song,
Though from her kind, those notes dissending be*
Has now of late, built up her neast on hye,
And sunge her song, within the lofty sky.
For while he served, with sheeld of learned lore,
And wan such things as furnished his nest:
Judge you ye Dames, which knew this bird before,
Might not he well compare him with the best:
In learnings lap, and virtues brants br^d he,
Oh happy wight, what gift could better be.
And every day, upon Parnassus hill,
He tought his young, most sweetly to recorde^
His pleasant tune, each vacant place did fill,
His joyful notes did please the living Lord:
A constant heart, in him was truly tried,
Thus Starling lived, thus Starling lately died.
And in the clouds he does possess his place,
When as the Dames, his fatal clew had spun:
Untimely death did win him in his race,
And stopped the steps, which he did think to run:
Yet since in heaven, he does enjoy his bliss,
He lives in place, where perfect pleasure is.
Vt voce sic vultu ac vita.
An Epitaph on the death of M. Sharp, of Trinity College in Cambridge.
IF wailyng would prevail, if we would vaunt at will,
Or if the faries three, were linked all in one:
To help them for to moan, whose grief have banished skill,
Then happy we the case, of him which made this moan.
But since the penu^ue heart, man linger where it lie,
And since the doleful doome^ will not release the hue:
While that I ^eade my life, I will not cease to cry,
And wail with them which say, my own good Sharp adue.
And wail with them which say, my own good Sharp adieu,
Adieu farewell, adieu unto thy clampe of clay:
Whom when thy breath forsook, to that which should insew,
A proo^e o^^eruing life most glorious for aye,
No panges which wicked fear, could break thy heart in sunder,
But ^^edfast in thy trust, Christ Jesus was thy stock:
To whom in all thy woe (which caused the wicked wonder,)
Thou only calest for aid, to him which was thy rock.
Thou only call to him for aid, which was thy rock,
To whom thou yeeldest life, hoping for sweeter gain:
Whole use is not disceite, the faithful for to mock,
Rewarding just with life, the wicked with their pain.
The foolish live in sin, the wicked asks woe,
Their woe is burning f^er, whose flame shall ever last,
Then happy may thou be which passed thy time so:
Whom tempests could not shake, nor billows make aghast,
Whom tempests could not shake, nor billows make aghast,
Such was thy faithful trust, such was thy trusty faith:
That what soever affliction his silly corpse did taste,
Lord Jesus, come, assist me, yet often times he says:
And yielded up the ghost, to him which framed all,
When as few (...) were run, such was his fatal lot:
And after ^^^^full study, this to him did befall,
Who for his life once lost, a double life has got.
Who for his life once lost, a double life has got,
The (...) hawty skies, hsi spirit does enjoy:
The other here in fame, the which nothing can spot,
Which Momus can not break, nor Zoylus destroy.
Then since it happens so, and since our Sharp does ^iue,
And since he does enjoy, a life which last for aye:
Great cause have we, great praise, to mighty Jove to give,
And to our Sharp farewell, ten thousand times to say.
This Epitaph before of Master Sharp, he made in such grief of mind, that
he had small or no regard to the measure of the Verse. The poor Knight
therefore desires pardon.
Four of the poor Knights complaints made as he has declared, in great
grief of heart, applied to sundry theames. The first complaynt.
(...) have I wept alone, for sorrow and for care,
(...) has long been plunged in pain, grief, and distress:
(...) ye fatal Dames, and help for to declare,
(...) wail with me which weep, the fate of my success,
(...) Fortunes crooked chance, has broke my doleful heart,
(...) it self has sworn, to work my grief and smart:
(...) that heavy hap, which all men ought to weep,
(...) soul is prisoner still, and care my heart does keep.
And yet any grief find no avail,
I sulke in seas without a sail:
I (...) about with every wind,
My he li^e is an unquiet mind.
A woeful fate.
No love nor lovers laws, has caught my heart in snare,
No want of worldly wealth, has bred so great anoy:
No loss of Fortunes gift, has clad my heart with care,
No fear of dinting death, has banished perfect joy:
No frowning force of foes, which does my life invade,
Nor want of worthy blood, this heavy heart has made:
It Is none of these I vow, nor none of these shall be,
Which have increast my woe, and banished joyful glee.
But that which has renewde my moan,
It sticks far nearer to the bone.
Whose gripes of greefs, will make me ^ry,
With sorrowing sighs till that I dye. Alas the while.
So shall I quickly fade, and perish quite away,
Which now I gladly wish, and often have wished before:
That this my brittle slesh might perish unto clay,
And that within the ground, my bones might lys in store:
How happy should I be, how joyful man were I,
Oh gentle death come strike, that I may fade and die:
For life is present death, and death would bring me life,
And end my woeful days, which I consume in strife.
Grant this good living Lord I pray,
That as I wish, even so I may:
End this my life, and end my care,
That in this place I may have share.
Grant this O Lord.
The second complaynt, which plainly bewray the matter of the first. Onus
aetna grauius.
IF Ossa Mount, and Pelion hill, were cast upon my back to bear,
And I as strong as Atlas hy, which in his badge y^ stares did wear
Or if my task by pain of death, allotted were to clean the sea,
Or if to pass by Stigian flood, to view whereas the blessed be.
I think of truth, and as I guess,
So shall the truth it self come try:
Not half the pain I should sustain,
Come gentle death and let me dye.
For since I left my staggering state, and did the crable mild (...)^^
And since to suck my mothers breast, I did my mind therfro (...)
Yea since y^ time by mothers death, I spent my days in care and (...)
And since that time I thank my God: of other friends I found rele^^^
As now I do and long have done,
Yet this by proof I plainly see:
I find it so, no care and woe,
Like to a troubled mind can be.
A troubled mind is cause of pain, a quiet spirit reuiueth joys,
A quiet mind increases mirth, a troubled mind the same did royes
Then if y^ Jove would kill the cause, y^ care no doubt should fade away,
And yet my care cannot depart, while y^ the troubled mind does stay.
And thus I dare in brief conclude,
No ^arking care that ever I find:
Upon the mould, I dare be bold,
Is like unto the troubled mind.
The third complaint.
Sit erracti medicina confessio.
AH, ah, my heart, my heart, my heart, my heart.
What pincking panges? What danger do thou feel?
I see my friends, have left to take my part,
My heart, my heart, can not my grief conceal:
My pen has sworn, my matter to re^eale,
Perforce my hands, these scribled lines did write,
And wished some means my trespass to requite.
What shall I say? what shall I take in hand?
My mind is dull, my brain is battered ^ore,
My eyes be dim, where trickling tears do stand:
My soul has sobbed, my heart can sighe no more,
But now behold, your mercy and implore:
I crave for grace, and pardon (...) my cr^me,
Condempe me not, before my a^^otted time.
But try again, and see what fruits shall flow,
No labor lost, no travel shall be spent:
Be willing then, some mercy for to show,
To him that has, a mind for to repent:
(...) ^ot of the fruits, of such a good intent,
And when the like, you shall in me detect,
Then shake your hand, and pay me for neglect.
And this is all, and more then all I think,
Yea this is all I purposed to wright:
Then save the ship, which void of hope must sink,
And lie a pray, unto the Ocians might:
The day in sighs, in tears I spend the night,
Then stay my tears, release me of my pain,
I have confessed, and do recant again.
The fourth complaint of this, and of the third I can set no true cause of
wrighting, for the poor Knight has denied to tell it.
Pyraustae interitus.
AS does the Fly, whose life the fire maintains,
Give up the breath, when fire is take her fro:
Or as the worm, within the snow remains,
Yield up the life, when she from snow does go:
Alas the while, so happens it to me,
For heat and cold, have been my great delight:
What grief is this, that I must distant be?
From out the place, whereof I have my might?
Come denting death, come strike the end of strife,
Pyraustae she, is weary of her life.
Farewell to thee, which gave me breath and blood,
Farewell to thee, which did maintain my state:
Farewell to thee, in whom my pleasure stood,
Farewell to thee, which did prolonge my fate:
For why? the snow is melted with the sun,
And flashing fire, is quenched out with rain:
The fate^ have said, short be thy days to run,
From whence thou came* thou shall return again:
Come ^enting death, come strike the end of strife,
Pyraustae she, is weary of her life.
So goes my time, so runs my fickle race,
And all is gone, nothing is left in store:
Imbrued with tears, I must bewail my case,
I wish for death, what should I look for more:
For since the aids which did prolonge my strength,
Be ^led from feelde, and banished from c^ust,
With willing heart, I yield to him at length:
Which come to call whom I desired most.
Come denting death, come strike the end of strife,
Pyrausta she, is weary of her life.
More of the poor Knights Posies, of sundy matters, and writ to sundry persons.

A letter to William Th. who sending to him for a looking glass, writ unto him
this letter, with the Glass following.
The Letter.
TO blame my self, or pinch me to the quick,
To rub the bare, which feign would ranckled lie:
To raise the mier, within the water thick,
Is all in vain, experience plainly t^ice:
To warn of that, as Horace did in Rome:
Erhorting thee from that which I should use,
That guerdon dew, unto my share would come:
Which for his hier, Se^la could not refuse,
Erhorting those, which then in Rome did stay,
To sober life: when he a Ruffian was:
Lo every one, with ready tongue would say,
Scilla, Scilla, seek to amend thy case:
Amend thy life: a good e^ample give,
So we by thee shall better know to live.
So we by thee, shall better know to live,
Whose life we seek, whose words we do not way*
If I to thee, the like to this should give,
And thou my hier, with like account should pay:
Then were I well rewarded for my pain,
And had enough allotted to my task:
But this I know, thou never wilt disdain,
For to perform, the sum that I shall ask:
Then since I trust, to trial of good will,
Peruse the same, which I to thee have sent:
Which would I could delate with so much skill:
As he which first moved me to this intent,
But here, to him, to thee, to his, to thine:
And as to thee, even so to me and mine.
And as to thee, even so to me and mine,
For thee I do, account among my own:
And as my own, from thee shall not decline,
But join in one, whose seeds in one be sown:
So read thou this, which cummeth from thy friend,
But as thou read, remember my good will:
And way this well, which I for thee have pende,
As for a glass, to stand before thee still:
And when thou vewest, thy formal face therein,
Though I be gone, and happily out of mind.
Thus for to muse, on me thou may begin,
God rest thy soul, my friend which were so kind:
And after if thou can perceive thy spot,
To look in this, my Glass disdain thou not.
The looking glass of the poor Knight, to W. Th.
IN him which made and framed all, repose thy hope and trust,
Who as he made thee out of clay, can turn thee unto dust.
In him I say which guides all, the Heaven, the earth the sea,
(...) thy hope, in whom I hope, eternal life to see,
(...) every thing, yet never seen of any,
So is he present every where, as has appeard to many.
Yet he which clears his heart from spot, an^ purge his mind from yt
He sees the Lord: he knows the Lord. ^ee does the Lord his will.
In him to put thy confidence, as loyal duty charge.
Forget not for to put thy hope, in him (which holds the large
And lofty sky within his hand) do not his hust neglect,
For godly duty at thy hands, he solely does expect.
Which if thou do he will thee bless, yea in most bounden sort,
And bring thy ship through wallowing waves, unto ye happy port.
Then after duty done to God: (sweet William) keep in mind,
The straight and lincked knot of love, which native soil does bind.
To whom thou owe thy life, thy land, toy body and thy blood,
For whom thou ought to spend the same, if it may do her good.
For what can be more near the skin, or stick more nere the bone,
Then joy with parents, when they joy, and moan when as they moan.
And lo thy cuntry does maintain, both thee and all thy kin,
Thy life their land, thy joy their hope, and all that is therein.
Herin thou ought not to forget, thy parents of good fame,
And seek for them, as they for thee, for to increase the same.
Do duty to thy elder Sire, and love thy younger brother,
And hold upright the falling staff, of thy gray hedded mother.
Whose hoary hair does smile for joy, whose fainting feet renew,
The running race with lively blood, with fresh and pleasant hew.
And thou in whom her heart does rest, do walk that wished way,
Oh joyful stocks (says she) whose imp^s does keep you from decay
Now learn (my Will) thy duty done, to God and parents then,
To shun those wicked ways, which ought to be dispysed of men.
First fly from pride, whose puffed cheeks, will bring thy heart to pain,
Eschew the Pope, with all his pelf, for why he is but vain.
Whose bellowing Bulls in Basan bred, have rored against the light,
And clean apposed their wicked ways, against the Lord of might.
Whose great confusion and decay, no doubt is near at hand,
Although he clime the suprem head, of every christian land,
In riot run no rechles race, regard thy good estate,
And way thy wealth, for riot has acquainted many a mate.
Where riot rules within the sh^p, there Whoredom holds an Ore,
And Sloth does hold the sickle belme, while Envy row to shore.
There Cruelty does turn the sail, and these the Ancor cast,
There Gluttony sleeps under hatch: and Sickness comes in fast.
Blaspheming of the living Lord, with Riot shakes his hand,
And false attempts with Flattery, do sink the ship in sand.
When Riot lies, and all his mates, the sea does make her pray,
And swalloweth quick those passengers, which walk that weary way
In youth my friend, while years be green, beware of Circes charm
And stop thy cares when Sirens sing, whose noates pretends harm.
For why the bait which fishers use, were of to great a price,
If that the pleasant taste thereof, the fish did not entice.
And subtle foulers would account, their labor lost in vain,
If that the draught of simple birds, did not requite their pain.
Be not to bold to trip thy self in Cressids subtle train,
For he that reche his foot so far, can not return again.
And wanton words may rule thy will, and turn thy wit away,
And wise men often be to seek, in that they ought to say.
This is the glass, the which I sent, thy cumly face to view,
Till other glasses may be bought: and thus my friend adieu.
A letter to Richard Ra. lyinge in his death bed.
Memento mori.
OH call to mind, forget not thy estate,
And ponder well, within thy musing mind:
Whereon thou ought always to medita^e,
That man is man, by property and kind.
Yea man is man, experience this does try,
Who flourishes here, but yet at last shall dye.
For flesh is frail, and framde of fickle clay,
Yea life is short, and breath is quickly gone:
Of whom the worms do seek to make a pray,
When thou art dead, and covered under stone.
And to the womb, where thou at first did lie,
Thou shall return, prepare thy self to dye.
Remember death, and think upon the end,
Bequeath thy soul, unto the Lord of might:
And crau^ of him, such mercy for to send,
That when thou die, thou may enjoy the light:
Which few attain above the clowdy sky,
which to attain, prepare thy self to die.
And faint not ( Dicke) though denting death be nere,
For why thou have, run forth a royal race:
Pull up thy strength, take heart and be of chere,
And (...) thy mind, upon that blessed place:
Whose joyful joys, were never seen of ey^,
Nor thought of heart: prepare thy self to die.
For every man which lived the age before,
Could not resist, the denting stroke of death:
The strongest men, whose fame is kept in store,
Unto the fates, did yield their lively breath:
Old Adam he, to this could not deny,
For why he knew, that he was ^orne to die.
The former world, to this gave their consent,
Saturnus lived, and after died again:
Yea all his stock, with this was well content,
When death does come, none can resist his pain:
Death play thy part, and life away shall fly,
All must confess, that they are borne to die.
The stately strea^s, and Turrets all of Troy,
Be now cast down, and flatling lie on ground:
All Pryams stock, the Grecians did destroy,
Rare was his chance, and seldom to be found:
Alas what tho, the Turrets all on hie,
Yielded to dust, and Trojans all did ^ie.
^neas (...), Ant^nor did the same,
(...) pursued, with all his lordly route:
(...) some other die in flame,
(...) has seerched other ^ut:
For when as death, this present life defy,
Prepare thy felfe, for then need shall thou die.
Die (oh my Dicke) why should thou gru^th to die,
What would thou wish, to live in this animy?
What is there lost, that should delight thy eye?
What is there now, that should augment thy joy?
Then farewell life, and welcome death say I,
Come, death, come, come, let us prepare to die.
Ah welcome death? alas what have I said?
Nay welcome life, and farewell death again:
But oh my friend, I pray be not dismaide,
For where we live, in death we do remain.
Then farewell death: the life it is why,
Which to obtain, let us prepare to dye.
To die I mean, out of this deadly life,
To die I mean, out of this care and woe:
To die I mean, out of this woeful strife,
To die I mean, and free my self from fo:
To live to life, and die to sin mean I,
To live in joy, let us prepare to die.
To live in joy, to live in heavenly bliss,
To live in joy, in mirth solace and glee:
To live in joy, who would not die for this,
To live in joy, where all the Angels be:
To live in joy, which joy none can ^escry,
To live in joy, let us prepare to die.
Prepare to die, out of this world of woe,
Prepare to die, out of this sea of sin:
Prepare to die, to hauty heaven to go,
Prepare to die, the heavenly life to win:
Prepare to die, to live within the sky,
Prepare to die, I say prepare to die.
And though the pains, and pinching pangs of death,
Perhaps do stinge thy silly naked heart:
Be not dismayed, fear not to yield thy breath,
To him which can aswage thy swelling smarte
And dreadful dumpes: for of this mind am I,
With Christ to live, fear not with Christ to die.
And this thou know, that worldly life is vain,
And though thou live, perhaps yet forty years:
Confess good Dicke, dissemble not nor fain^,
Shall not those years, be garnished all with cares?
And yet at last, all this by proof we try,
When death does call, then Dicke perforce must die.
Perhaps thy friends, do sit in high renown,
And thou by them, may have of good estate:
Perhaps thou wish to wear a Counsuls gown,
Or else to spend, thy life with joyful mate:
Whereto being raised, and to this state so hye,
Alas (thou say) twould green thee for to dye.
I know thy mind, thy friends often have I seen,
Their good estate I must confess no doubt:
I know their care, which upon thee have been,
I know the means, which parents have sought out:
I know thy love (oh Dicke) I do not lie,
But for all this, prepare thy self to dye.
For why thou know, the soul it is most dear,
To be preferred, before the body vilde:
Then if thou seek for pleasures that be here,
To beautify that part which is defilde:
Seek, seek, and search: thy diligence apply,
^adorne thy soul: prepare thy self to dye.
And thus I end, but one thing by the way,
If God grant life and longer days to thee:
Thank him therefore, to whom cease not to pray,
Both for thy self, and then think upon me:
Who for thy sake to mighty Jove will cry,
To aid us both, but yet prepare to die.
And thus I end, as erst I did begin,
Prepare to die, for why thy flesh is frail:
And call to mind, that Haven to enter in,
Whose joyful banks, in winter will prevail:
In winters rain, when winds do blow in say,
Coch in this haven, so shall thou never die.
The poor Knight his Paramour, written to M. John Com. Physician, and his
singular Mecaenas.
Nudior Leberide.
A Parramour I have, you shall not know her name,
Which never ceast to follow me, since I to Cambridge came.
She loves me passing well, I can not her abide,
And yet perforce, do what I can, she hangs on my side.
She coucheth every night, next to my tender breast,
And many times she says: what Will? and lets me take no rest.
Among my deadly foes, my body she does keep,
She keeps the key of all my chestes, both when I wake and sleep.
I bring nothing to end, nothing I do begin,
But ere I go about the same, I have her mind therein.
For this her gentilnesse, I can not be content,
But wailing of my heavy hap, alas I do lament.
And unto you I send, as to my only stay,
To ask that Phisikes Art, may drive my Paramour away.
To Thomas To. the poor Knight sends greeting.
Asinum tondes.
THou wailes thy heavy hap and chance, thy state thou did lament,
Thou seekst y^ which thou can not find: alas be thou content.
And build no more upon the sand, the flint no iuce will give,
And from the Well thou can not fetch, thy water in a Ciue,
To pull a balde man by the crown, what vantage can thou see,
To teach the Iron swim above, great wonders these should be.
To sow thy seed among the Rocks, or plow the sand for salt,
The one declares a vain attempt, the other shows a fault.
But if thy mind have doted erst, and Glaucus change have made,
I wish thee well for to be wise, and learn a better trade.
For as Ulysses proffered Wine, to Poliphe^us stout,
And when as Wine had won his wit, he bored his eyes out.
So she by thee if thou continue, in this thy dotinge mind,
Thou shall prevail as some time he, which would correct the winds
Be ruled then and take thy rest, and mark my words again,
For if thou strive against the streme, thou beatest the clouds in vayn
To his friend John R.
IF that two euilles, be offered to thy choice,
Then take the least, as reason will thee guide:
And for thy chance, thou may with heart rejoice,
That of them twain, the least did the betide:
But this I say, and council thee beware,
Which long time since, was snarled in the snare.
For when I did the smoky house abstain,
Least that my eyes, with wattery streme^ should flow:
Behold I chanced, in cottage to remain,
Where flaming fire, did bring the Rafters low:
The stone, the tyle, and all was burnd with flame,
And I alas, consumed with the same.
Much like to him, which in another case,
Eschued the rain, which from the sky did fall:
With speedy flight, he hastened in his race,
Till he in pit was drowned horse and all:
Whereby I see, I may conclude no doubt,
The least of evils, is to be chosen out.
To his friend Bartholmew Ien. Esquilla non nascitur Rosa,
IF Roses spronge of white thorn bows, and grapes on thistles grew
Or (...) from Oaks, where Acorns he, good Apples did insew,
Then wine and fruit, should not be skant, our senses plainly tell
And every shade and pleasant grove, should yield a fragrant smell.
But these be wonders for to see, we have not heard of such,
And Nature in this sudden thance, should change her self too much.
But yet more strange, me think it is, both to my mind and eyes,
That from the wet and watery seas, great flames of sfire should rise.
Then way my friend, not what I speak, but what I mean hereby,
What do thou mean to heat thy self, in freesing frost taly.
Can fire give forth an yt^e cold, which does pertain to frost,
Or else to yield a burning flame, have Ice their nature lost?
No, no, my friend, infected salues, can not make whole thy wound,
Then walk out on the fickle floods, in steed of surest ground.
For why with the^ which be not sound, thou shall corrupt thy mind,
And in the dry, vnsaudry chip, no savor thou can find.
Then way my words with reasons rule, and prove my saying true
The Thistle can not bear a Grape, and thus my friend ad^w.
To Abraham Johnson. Nusquam tuta fides.
IF Ancient writs do bear record, and seem the truth to tell,
No faithful freendship as I find, in mortal men do dwell.
For why? the Father sley the Son, the Son the Father kill,
Upon the Son, and father eke, the mother work her will.
The Brother with the Sister iar, the daughters bane prepare,
To see the Mothers final end, and pay the fathers share.
The kinsmen stands aloof and see, the one not trust the other,
The naybors as the kinsmen all, have banished faith together.
The foe sees this, and gins to smile, for strife does like him best,
The ravening Coocko lays her eggs, within the Sparrowes nest.
And every thing runs out of course our time is almost spent,
The night is almost near at hand, it is time for to repent.
Wherefore my friend, counsel thy friend, as I shall counsel thee,
For to prepare against that time, when direful dome shall be.
The poor Knight his love, to Rich. Ron.
A Lady bright I love, which in this ^le does dwell,
I love and not alone, for many love her well:
Her mansion where she keeps, few do attain to see,
About her place fair gates, to enter three times three.
Yet few do enter in, she calls, but few do come,
She becks to me and says, she will prepare a rome.
And when I think to go, with fresh assalte to prove,
I enter in and search: but cannot finds my love.
And yet I see a far, where other men do play,
And with the price I bid, to bear my love a way.
Then tell to me my friend, and writ to me thy mind,
For lovers laws thou know, how I my love may find.
And that your learning might absolve me of this doubt,
Within these written lines, her name is quoted out.
To his friend Roger Phil, Metuit cautus.
THe little lad which once has felt the fire,
Eschueth the same, and fears the flittering flame:
The silly Mouse which has escaped the wire,
Will long beware for touching of the same.
The simple Bird, which thinks not of the Grin,
Is took in snare, and made the foulers pray:
The foolish fish, that swims with floting fin,
Fulfilles the wish, of him which bait does lay.
Then well I see, that which I have not known,
Experience makes, the disarde to beware:
And they which know, not where the Hemp is sown,
Unto their pain, be snarled in the snare.
Then would that I had known long time before,
That which with price, I have most dearly bought:
But now I hope, to fail therein no more,
But yet I have, the duty that I sought.
For if I had, been warned by my friend,
I might have feared, the price whereof I feel:
But when I thought, thereof to search the end,
i dr^nke so much, it ca^^ed my head to reele.
Then where thou wished, to know my good success,
And why I cease to sew again for grace:
Lo here I live, in mestfull heaviness,
And of my suit, I leave a vacant place.
To William Godf. Frontis nulla fides.
IN Summer tide, and flourishing Month, when every herb was green,
And every bow began to bud, most cumly to be seen.
In pleasant Herbar where I walkte, to recreat my mind,
Behold I pray, what ill success, I chanced for to find:
Under a set of Margerom, which in that place did grow,
For pleasant shade, and fragrant smell, when I had couched low.
And Margerom had given me leave, under her wings to rest,
I thought my self as near to Heaven, as is the Egles nest.
Whereas I had not couched long, but tumbling too and fro,
Behold a Serpent venomous, forth from her Den did go.
And hissing forth her venomed tongue, she stonge my breast most sore,
Which done, she did return again, from whence she came before.
Take heed therefore by my ill lot, take heed therefore say I,
For under Honey oftentime, does cankred poison lie,
And in that head of whose fair branch, my Posie I would make,
I must confess, though to my pain, I found a stinging Snake.
To his friend Robert Dyne. Vulcanium vinculum.
NO Iron chayn, nor fetter strong, no band which hand could make
As thou allege, have halde me back, my promise for to break.
Nor yet that ielous thought of thine, have made me slack and slow,
No curious charms have touched my brayn, y^ make me sloth to show
He is my mind changed so much: my state is not so good,
He have my lips I vow to thee, once sypt of Letho flood.
But yet believe me, gentle friend, though I so long delay,
And though I break my coucnant made, my mind does not decay.
Which often my letters have bewraide, which I before have sent,
As well the cause whereof I stay, as of my whole intent.
The curious Arts of Parnas Hill, do ask a longer race,
And he which wish for Thespias spring, must watch for time and space
And he which once begins to go, and faints with his labor,
The Muses have declarde long since: to show to him no favor.
But all his pain is clean forgot, his labor all is lost,
Lo this it is, which held me back, from coming to the coast.
But if that God shall grant me leave, this Letter is the last,
Then look for me, and thus adieu, from Cambridge in all haste.
To Master Iobson. Qui e nuce nucleum esse, vult nucem franget.
TO mask within the Front of Fair, to wear the Laureat crown
To march with worthy Martial might, to purchase high renown.
It is not won with cowards hearts: for why such slickering fame,
Deserve such deeds as justly may, demeritall the same.
And first the labor must be spent, before the end ensue,
And he which seeks the sounding blast, no labor must eschew.
For as we plainly see by proof, that he which gapes for gain,
No dangerous death, or dint of sword, is given to disdain.
So he which seeks to live for aye, within the mouth of men,
Will not refuse the strong conflict, within Leerna Fen.
Had Jason left the golden fleece, when he to Colchos went,
If Ajax in the Trojan toil, at Greece had bin content:
The fleece had been at Colchos still, Medea had bin true,
And Ajax might have held his hands, such valiant acts to show.
Had Caesar stayed in Britanny, had Brutus kept his ire,
^mpey had lived in royal Rome, and Percia kept from fire.
Yea neither he, nor this nor that, had lived so fresh in mind,
But fame did force and prick them forth, which came of gentil kind.
Glaucus, of whom the Poets pen, have found pastime to wright,
Feared not the floods to follow her, which was his chief delight.
Then mark the end, and way the end, the end is cause of fame,
And he which hopes to win the end, does never fear the same,
To his friend Richard Bently.
BEyond sea boy, beyond sea will thou wend,
Christ sh^^lde my bird, and keep my child from care:
Before thou go, read this that I shall send,
And think on it when we a sunder are:
For when I heard, thy ship thou did prepare,
To sulke the seas, and forrow foming flood:
(Alas my boy) absence did make me fear,
And want of time, did streeke my mind in mood,
But since that Jove, has so esteemde it good.
To turn thy mind, and keep thee hear a while,
Lo if it rain, I send to thee a hoode:
To keep thee dry, and dangers to exyle,
To keep the dry, least rain thy clothes defile.
Then way it well, which shall be said of me,
And though perhaps thou do not like the style:
Of truth I know, the matter fit for thee,
First fear the Lord, which rules Heaven and sea:
And every thing that moves in the same,
Which when thou see, let God remembered be:
And think on him, which every thing did frame,
The subjects here, behold to thee I name.
For every thing is too long to rescite,
The Heaven, the Earth, the Water, and the flame:
The Sun, the Moon, the day and clowdy night,
Such is his power, such is force and might.
Which when thou see, then thus begin to muse,
O Lord thou know, each thing is in thy sight:
It is but vain, my sin for to ercuse,
But grant me Lord, thy graces so to use.
That to thy praise it may redound at last,
For without grace each thing I shall abuse:
Thus think my friend, when thou the seas art past,
Another thing I warn thee of in haste.
Each forran land, has many a subtle sleyght,
And foreign snares, will make thee soon aghast:
Each sundry place has many a sundry bayt,
Here lurketh one in Dungeon of deceit.
An other there, in secret Den does ly,
The Romish Church for thee will lay great wait:
But oh my friend, from p^lting Papists fly,
Fly, fly from those, keep not their company,
Avoid those mates, whereof I have thee told,
For surely friend, they stinge so secretly:
That if the wound, begin once to be cold,
It is as hard the same for to unfold:
As to remove the Pope out of his place,
Trust not to far, good friend be not to bold:
Least you be sick, before you know your case.
Another thing, beware of in your race:
Beware I say, of those which fawn with g^^le,
Which merrily will cheer you in the face:
And sooth you forth: with many a wanton smile,
And heaps of words, they stick not to compile.
I need not name them in more plainer sort,
Which rediest be, at all times to beguile.
Eschew all such, unto your own comfort,
Unto their tents, in no wise do resort.
But when they beeke, beware least that you bow,
Oh gentill friend, eschew that filthy sport:
And say your friend, of this has counseled you,
Then if thou mean, his counsel to allow.
And think on it, when you have past the Sea,
Then shall you see, and for this perceive hew:
Thou of hye Jove, shall always blessed be,
Blessed I say, so will he comfort thee.
That though thou chance, not to return again^
(God sheeld my child, and keep both thee and (...))
Yet shall thy srule, alofte with him remain,
And though thou chance, to soio^ne long in Spain:
In Germany, in France, or else in Rome,
Do not forget, that mind for to retain:
Which erst thou had, when thou thereto hidst come,
Remember still, the dreadful day of dome:
Be courteous still, be sober, meek, and wise,
And hasten thee unto thy native home:
Ill company, see that thou do despise,
Least that by them, some danger should arise:
And if thou chance in Venice for to stay,
I say no more, thou know what I surmise,
Unto my friend commend me by the way,
And wish him well, to make no more delay:
But to return when time shall him permit,
And this is all, thou know what more to say:
Which unto Pen, I mean not to commit,
Thou know my mind, and so know I thy wit:
Lo this is all, I give unto thy task,
And thus farewell, unto a season fit:
Whose safe return, of mighty Jove I ask.
To Thomas Tur. by the example of Perillus, alluding to Quod tibi non vis
fieri, alterine feceris.
HAd not the cruel bloody kind, imbrued it self with blood,
No doubt the life of Phallaris, might soon have done much good.
For why? ill manners did corrupt, and banished ciuell kind,
And gasping thirst of human blood, defilde a worthy mind.
Whose works be yet this day, to see how much he stood in awe,
Of Sages wise, whom he esteemde, which did neglect the law.
Of him and of his Tortures great, all void of sparks of love,
Who has not read, and yet once red, whose hearts does he not move*
Did not Perillus bloody wretch (whose factes my grief renew)
From Athens bring the brazen Bull, if Poets works be true?
Hoping of him which loved the same, for to obtain the prise,
Whose words did soon bewray his Art, and uttered his devise.
Oh noble King (quoth he) behold, in Athens where I dwell,
Thy fame is spread, for whyeche one, thy tyranny does tell.
The Brute whereof unto my ear, by chance did come of late,
As well of thee as of thy life, and of thy prosperous state.
And by my trade (oh noble King) I use to work in Brass,
Lo here a work, which of good will, I offer to your grace.
The like to it since Saturns days, was never wrought before.
Nor as I think by mortal hands, can never be made more.
For lo, the Torture is so strange, the torment is such pain,
The like to it you have not had, nor shall not have again:
These words inflamed his furious heart, which thirsted after blood,
And to Perillus furiously, he spoke with raging mood.
And said, Perillus show the use, cease not for to declare,
And I will well reward thy pains, Perillus do not fear.
The Bull is hollow (noble Prince) a man therein may lie,
Aslender flame being made with out, he shall consume and fry.
His speech shall turn like to the noise, that living bulls does make,
And for a terror to thy foes, I made it for thy sake,
Possess the same: which done, the King his glosing words to try,
First put Perillus in the Bull, where he him self did die.
And after him that cursed Bull, to many brought great smart,
And Phallaris did end his life, within Perillus Art.
By whose cruel end, I do perceive that counsel wise to be,
Do thou no worse to other men, then they all do to thee.
To R. Baker, Virtus post funera viuit.
TO tell of them whose famous factes, have won no small renown,
Either with glittering blade in feelde, or else with Consuls gown.
As Well within our native land, or else in foreign soil,
My Muse does loathe that labor great, it were to great a toil.
But yet she daines at your request, for to discribe at large,
And as the season will permit, her duty to discharge.
In Virtues race guide well thy steps, in her put thy delight,
For Fame does favor Virtues house, from whence she takes her slight.
Whose sounding Tromp does warn all those, which seek renowned state,
To arm themselves in Virtues tent, and fight in Justice gate.
Who often says, cheer on my hearts, your manhood seek to try,
I will preserve your deeds on live, your fame shall never die.
Alcides he, whose heavy hand, the Centaures do lament,
Whose direful strokes the Stigian Knights, with pitteous plaints repent.
Was moved to force, by flickering fame, his faithful friend to fetch
Whose lingering lives, y^ furies ferce, on whirling wheel did stretch
With prick of praise, King Peleus dear, did sail from gallant Greece
And conquered the golden Ram, and stole away the Fleexe.
When praise did prick the panting heart, of Pallamedes Prince,
He rygde his ships, and hoysed sail, the Trojans to convince.
If Pirhus father had not ceast, the handmaydes weed to wear,
Then Homers hand had stayed his quill, which does his acts declare.
Come subtle Sinon tell the truth, what did thy heart inflame,
To hazard health with foreign foes, but hope of future fame.
Iyeurgus leave thy exilde life, come home, come home again,
Nay, nay, I mean while life does last, an exile to remain.
For though I die a banished wight, yet this I know most sure,
That all the world shall pen my praise, while Aestas years endure.
So fancy fed the fainting minds, of them which lived before,
That they in hope of perfect praise, Dame Virtue did adore.
For nothing was esteemed so much, as for to leave behind,
To those which should succeed his room, as was a virtuous mind.
For praise did tickle toward wits, and made them search the way,
To purchase fame, which should remain, when they were shrind in clay.
This caused Alexander stout, to take the war in hand,
In hope to conquer all the world, as well by sea as land.
And Tully with his filed tongue, did seek to purchase fame,
And all the Roman Emperors, have leaueld at the same.
What should I say? I faint to tell, or to discourse of all,
And bare remembrance of the same, do make my pen to fall.
And bid me cease, for why? Dame Fame have sworn and can not ly,
That she will not permit the deeds of valiant wights to die.
Then let us seek to hit that mark, whereto we should assend,
I mean to win eternal life, which never shall have end.
For Fame in tract of time will fleet, but that shall ever last,
Fame serves but for this present life, but that when life is past.
So let us trust to Virtues ways, in hope the same to try,
That we by proof may plainly plead, that Virtue can not die.
To his freende and kinsman I. Tin. Satius est initijs, mederi quam fini.
THe Pacient which by ill success does bear the dangerous sore,
Whose swelling smart, and painful panges, increases more and more
Does seek the Surgeons skillful hand, his pain for to aswage,
Before the wound be festered far, to mitigate his rage.
For why? the Surgeon wills this, before the cure be past,
Which done, he lays his helping hand, and heales the wound at last.
When wind has rent with raging blast, the tender stock and tree
At first if help begins to fail, then no redress can be.
And hunters use to trade their hounds, in youth to hunting game,
Least that in age when time shall serve, they should neglect the same.
For that which breeds by the bone, will hardly be removed,
And men in age will scarsely loathe, the thing which once they loved.
Then must I needs rejoice my friend, that fortune does reveal,
That thing to me, which thou from me did purpose to conceal.
Fame tells to me with sounding Trompe, that thou begins to love,
I do believe, yet Fame at first, could hardly credit move.
But when as true Report was blased, Misdout was banished quite,
And thou were said to sue for grace, which is a lovers right.
I speak by guess, for why I lack experience of the same,
I never served her whom thou seruest, nor never playde her game.
Yet this I think and do confess, that love may well be used,
I know the same, I read the same, it ought not be refused.
So long as love keeps lawful love, and flies from Cupids Court,
Or if unto Dame Venus Vale, it ginnes not to resort.
From whence (my friend) I counsel thee, with tender love and care,
That thou abstain, as well becomes thee to eschew that snare.
And fix not thou thy fancy there, where care is banished quite,
But if thou love, love such a one, as may yield thee thy right.
For if thou run in Laborinth, without Ariadnes clew,
It Is hap if thou find out the door, wherein thou did insew.
First look, then leap: for why to leap, before thou sedst the ground
Perhaps thou may leap in the Sea, whereas thou shall be drowned
Or else upon some craggy Cliffe, whose stones thy head will dash,
Or else upon some pointed Spear, which in thy side will lash.
Then will thou say, ah ha my friend, thy words are proved true,
Then look I pray, before you leap, and thus my friend adue.
Master Alexander D. gave this Theme. Multa cadunt inter calicem supremaque
labrat.
BE not to bold, in chance and change, is often a sudden sight,
And none do know the victorer, while foes be at the fight.
While Sailors sulke upon the seas, they know not where to land,
And some which think to hap in Haven, d^ sink within the sand.
The fish which byteth on the bait, has clean forgot the snare,
And every thing in prosperous state, has banished mortal care.
But yet so quickly turns the wheel, the fates do change so sone,
That good success, do seldom come, good days be quickly gone.
And he which lives, can not prolonge, his years by half a day,
But when time comes, say what he will, yet must he needs away.
The corn which grows upon the ground, before it sh^ote to blade,
Reuiues his heart, which long before, a good account has made.
But yet before the Harvest come, it falls and fades away,
And when the Barn does ask his right, the corn lies in decay.
Then trust not unto fickle fate, for why from sun to sun,
I mean from Morn to Even we see, that diverse things be done.
And in the Moment of the time, and twinkling of an eye,
Behold the man that lived in joy, is ready for to dye.
Such is our state, such is our strength, whereon we daily trust,
But if we hope whereon we hold, needs must we ly in dust.
The poor Knights lamentation: wherein he earnestly bewayleth the late loss
of diverse worthy Gentilmens lives, that died of a very strange disease, at
Oxforde, in July 1577. among whom died Sir Robert Bell, Lord chief Baron, and
Master Nicolas Barham, Ser^ant of the Law, both Justices of the Assise there,
with other Knights and Gentlemen, beside Studients and others of all degrees,
as follows.
STand still ye Feends of Limbo Lake, ye hellish hounds give ear,
Stay Theseus on thy whorling wheel, hark what I shall declare.
Come plonge in pit of paynfull plight, ye Furies three I pray,
Oh Pluto mark my doleful moan, give ear what I shall say.
And rue with me the rufull chance, and moan the ill success,
The doleful dole, the heavy hap, the dumpes of deep distress.
Which Oxforde Town has had of late, most fresh and new in mind
Hark, hark, ye Dames of Stigian flood, and wail by course of kind
And though no tears of furies eyes, will ease the fatal fall,
Yet plaints of you which Furies be, may move the mind of all.
To say with me, as I have said, alas help to deplore,
And wail y^ chance, like to which chance, no chance has chanst before
In Oxforde town, or English soil, since worthy Trojans time,
Since Brute in coast, did seek by fame, to clustering clouds to clime.
Oh strange disease most strange to tell, and strange to call to mind,
As thundering fame has told for truth, as reason did her bind.
Alas, alas, I rue to think, I tremble for to tell,
My fainting heart is much apalde, my soul in grief does dwell.
But yet alas what hoote to moan, where tears will not a^ayle?
No gentle words will fence the Forte, where denting death assail,
No sugared terms will stay his stroke, no force will make him fey,
No subtle sleight of mortal mind, he wayeth no hydeous cry.
No worthy acts can bannish death, or cause him to relent,
No fame, no name, for good deserts no days in Justice spent:
Can him entreat to hold his hand, no hope of future gain,
Which might redound to common wealth, can cause him to abstain
But often that Impe by whirling wind, is blasted to decay,
And sonest bears the withered leaves, whereof most hope does stay.
Of Trojan soil, let Hector say, let Pyrhus speak^ for Greece,
Or join Achilles if you please, and Paris with his piece.
Macedons Prince may tell his tale, and Caesar may discharge,
That good Hamilcars eldest Son, by proof may tell at large.
What need I range, since ranging far, does br^^de to great annoy,
Since Bell, and Barham may blaze forth, which once were Englands joy
Ah sounding Bell, ah Barham bold, (I mean in Justice cause,)
Ah true maintainers of the right, and strengthners of the laws.
How often can Westminster report, whose record can not ly,
Your true deserts in Pleas of price, your worthy wits to try.
How often can al Assizes say, lo Bell, lo Barham he?
Perdy in skill of Lawiers trades, those worthy champions be.
How often has Bell been sounded of, through every Sheere and Town?
How often has Barham through his deeds, atchiued high renown?
But out alas, the Bell is broke, and Barhams tongue does stay,
For Death has struck, whose daunting darts each worldling must obey.
Both Judge and Shrife, both Shrife and Clarke, yea Clarke and Crier al
Must give account before the Judge, when Christ his Crier call.
And well I hope has Bell deserved, and Barham shall have meede,
With all the rest aloft in skies, whereas the Angels feed.
And you ye doughty Knights whose corpse, be laid in mourning grave
Whose bones shall long be kept in store, a good reward shall have.
And though ye wail, ye Templers all, for them which you did know
Which often within your costly Courts, their sage advise did show.
Yet since the Fates have cut their clewes, since Lachesis has said,
That she would stretch her hand no more, then be you well apayde.
And stay from murmering at their fate, such fatal hap had they,
(Whom God had long ordaind before, to visit in that day.)
As few have seen or heard the like, with watery eyes lament,
With salted sighs, and gushing tears (which all in vain be spent.)
In Oxford Town and every where, where fame has blown her blast,
And scalding sighs in sundry breasts, have vowed for ay to last.
What shall I say? what shall I wright? or shall I leave my verse?
How can my hand hold fast my pen, these dollors to rehearse.
Nay, nay, as great a grief as that, did more augment my pain,
Which yet-hath lurkte, concealed fast, but can not so remain.
Eue^ for your sakes ye Studie^ts all, whose grief increase my smart,
For whom my mind was troubled sore, (all flattery set apart)
Not mine alone, but thousands more, did see themselves agreeued,
And asked on knees of mighty Jove, your time might be relieved.
How many hearts have wept with us, which never saw that town,
How many cheeks were moistened here, with tears y^ ran adowne.
Should Cambridge smile, and Oxforde weep, then Camb. were unkind
Nay, nay, my hearts, your swelling smart, did beat in every mind.
And floods of tears, for you did flow, repleat with mestful moan,
So Cambridge swear that Oxforde town, shall never morn alone.
Nay God forbid that Cambridge heart, should ever harden so,
That would not send forth gushing tears, to weep for Oxfords we.
For why? no heart was hardened so, though it were made of brass,
That would not weep for France his fall, when feirce Affliction was
And rue with Antwerpes ruinous ruthe: alas what heart had he?
That would not say Antwerpe adieu: or France, Christ fight for thee,
Then who could cease (although he would) your fate for to deplore?
Since wounds that stick more nere the bone, do breed the greter sore
And though the case were far unlike, to France and Antwerps ruthe,
Yet was your case as strange to tell, as Fame has told for truth,
Yea though your chance were much more les, yet ought we to co^plain,
Since that your joy increase our mirth, your woe does bring our pain
Then what was left for Cambridge town, when Oxford felt the rod,
But still to wail and weep for you, and pray to mighty God:
That he when his good pleasure were, his heavy hand would stay,
And with his power as well he can, remove his scourge away.
And cease not you, as we for you, to Jove for us to call,
That he would hold his stroke away, and keep our town from thral
That you which felt his heavy hand, and we which rued the same,
May join in one to laud the Lord, and praise his holy name.
And be content to bear the blow, which he to you has lent,
Though you had taste of bittter pangs, (good hearts) yet be content.
For why? when God shall think it good, in the twinkling of an eye
He can revoke that he has sent, your constancy to try.
Till then we weep, and pray for you, and listen what insew,
Desiring Christ to stay his hand. From Cambridge thus adieu.
The poor Knight his farewell to his Book.
IF Robinson, which has no cause to fear,
Did stand in dout, that he should have a rome:
Where Cheryll keeps, that he I say even there,
Should stand and tell, what Poets thither come:
Behind the door, there Cheryll tells his case,
And whips the dogs, out of that sacred place.
If he I say, this infamy did fear,
Which has deserved, such fame in English coast:
Then farewell Book, thy Masters hay declare,
Who thinks himself, inferior unto most:
Thy Master fears, by crooked chance and fate,
To have a place without the Porters gate.
Not once to see, the Lawreat Poets place,
Ne yet to speak unto that dogged wight:
Then farewell Book, bewray thy Masters case,
Who stands in dout, to put his name to light:
Least that as he, which Cheryll has to name,
The world should seem, to blaze thy Masters shame.
And since thou art in years my eldest Son,
Disdain thou not, this viage to begin:
From hand to hand, address thy self to run,
And seek good will, of every man to win:
If Momus bark, and Zoylus gin to chat,
Be of good cheer, and do not blush at that.
And if thou speed, ere many years be past,
Thy brethren shall insew thy former race:
If thou speed not, then shall thou be the last,
As thou were first, which did begin this case:
Speed well, speed ill, her of shall be an end,
Adieu good Child, commend me to my friend.
FINIS.

