THE Euer-burning Lamps of Piety and Devotion. Kindled by many Excellent and
Heavenly Prayers, Divided into the several days of the Week, and other
Occasions:

To avoid which weak Man has continual cause to retire into himself, and
humbly confer with Almighty God.

By I. C.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslewe for Richard Hawkins, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Chancery Lane near Serieants Inn. 161^.

TO THE HONORABLE, EXCELLENTLY VIRTUOUS, and truly Noble, the Lady VILLIERS,
Wife to the worthy, and every way accomplished Knight, Sir EDWARD VILLIERS.
MADAM,
I Have not chosen this Text to paint your Virtues, but cure mine own
infirmities, who desperately ill of a surfeit, and given over by the best Doctor
of my fortunes, found no comfort but in retiring, and asking counsel of that
heavenly, and neuererring Physician, who came into the world to cure all manner
of Diseases; which ever intending to publish for the good, I hope, of others,
that dare take so much time, to think of their sickness, and practice a
recovery: I did not long labor for a Dedication, knowing no Lady (as far be
it from arrogance, as I know it is from flattery) that deserves trulier and
realler, to be a Patron (being the subject of all virtues) then your self;
your life and manners better commending you, then can my pen, who may express
my own Devotions, but cannot reach yours: Though to those who only know, or,
to speak properly, have only seen you, in the colors and attire of the
Time, equally graced and behau'd with the best of those that affect Court most,
it may appear otherwise, who never seeking Virtue, but in rough and wild
places, imagine Solitariness, and Neglect surer companions of him, then State
and Ceremony: Yet since the excellency of goodness, (as the Sun in foulest
weather) in all Callings, maintains her own perfection, and that in public
and great persons, singularity and niceness of Attire, would rather boast
then forward Virtue, you wisely and most Religiously, follow that precept of
our Saviors, to wash your face, and put on your Ornaments, that in your chief
austerity and retiring, you may appear not to proclaim it: For those light
brains (full of fault-finding, and as faulty) who may accuse me to have given
good time to so excellent Music, which sounds well in Ladies ears, when I
should have applied my self to my subject, in setting out the excellency,
height and reward of prayers: I would he could understand, there be such
Myrrors as I hear speak of, and that your Ladyships practice can better
redeliuer these things, then my rude precepts, having been an eyewitness,
for the better part of twelve Months, of your inward and holy recollection,
from which daily no business, nor other recreation had power to withdraw you,
to whose holy inspirations, and wonder-working fervor, I leave your good and
great fortunes, assuring my self, your virtue cannot fall so guided, nor your
fortune so accompanied, but that you shall still remain a sweete-smelling
sacrifice to God, and an attractiue and flourishing example to men, amongst
whom, though not only, I chiefly, at least most desirously, remain

Your Virtues honorer and Obseruer: I. C.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IT is a general complaint of all ages, and of all men, that the times are
bad, they most finding fault with it, by whose corruption it declineth and
waineth in goodness: But indeed, if ever virtue her self had cause to put on
widdowed garments, and mingle her constancy with lamentations, it is in our
days to see her self thus forsaken and abandoned, being seldom entertained
for her real worth, without some secondarie respect of popular applause and
preferment, which though she rarely attain for her own sake, yet great Ones
are content in her likeness, rather to serve their own appetites, then when
they appear nakedly clad in their own Deformity; which is the cause we
mistaking the grounds, complain of Honors, how they alter, and (as it were)
vnnaturize the dispositions and manners of the people, when indeed they
cunningly disguising and hiding with false seemings, their cankred and
malicious inclinations, steal to their aspired height, which once grown
Masters of, they pull off their Visor, and armed with their greatness, fear
not to please themselves with the manifesting their vices. This I think, as it
moved the Printer to advise me to the publishing of these Meditations and
Prayers, so above all he entreated to have a care, they were not long or
tedious, lest the people (who measure it with their eye) might take a surfeit of
it before it came to the stomach: Like men, willing, for their recreation, to
walk a mile to disport themselves, but if necessarily enforced to any longer
journey, growing weary before they set one foot abroad; I have, I think,
satisfied the Printers desire, and the humor of the people, rather dieting
them with what is extremely necessary, then ouer-charging their weakness to a
satietie, till by these they shall be enabled (virtue gathering strength by
practice) to feed on larger Discourses for their weal and salvation: to which
to draw the^ more, by setting forth the excellency of prayer, there can be, I
hope, nothing better, or more knowingly spoken, then that often and earnest
precept of our Saviors, commanding us to Watch and Pray continually, lest we
enter into temptation: which joined with his own example (made precious by his
unparalleled and inimitable love to us) cannot but melt the most frozen and
hardened carelessenes, making it apt to receive so blessed an impression. That
his life was nothing but a Divine Rapture, and Heavenly Meditation of high and
excellent Mysteries, is no way to be doubted; and that he did usually breathe
them forth in zealous and most devout prayers, the holy Scripture testifyeth,
how often and humbly in the accomplishing of his Miracles, how often and
fervently before his Passion, and at the instant of his betraying, and taking,
when the blessed Apostle and follower S. Peter, violently ravished with the
extremity of love to so excellent a Lord, took out his sword, and with it cut
off one of the ears of the Ministers, he rebuked him, saying, Think thou
that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he will give me more then twelve
Legions of Angels? ever intimating unto us, the excellency and efficacy of
prayer, as the only means to obtain virtuous purposes.

For the set times of vocal prayers (heavenly and short eiaculations being at
all hours to be used) it has been thought fit, by many learned and Religious
Fathers, to be divided into Morning, Noone, and Evening, it being most fit to
offer the Immortal and high Deity, our first thoughts, that seasoned with the
knowledge of him, we may with the more care and attention behave ourselves the
day following; recalling our selves at Noone to desire strength for the
continuance and perseverance in holy and good purposes; and closing and
shutting up all actions and transitory thoughts in the Evening, with
thanksgiving for the blessings of that day, and an acknowledgement of our sins
and transgressions, committing our selves to his Fatherly protection the
ensuing night, that awaking in the morning, we may find a wel-pleasing
relish of holy thoughts timely and maturely digested.

For the better composing our selves at the time of prayer, we ought before,
duly and earnestly to consider his Greatness and Immensitie to whom we pray,
the necessity and height of what we pray for, and our own unworthiness to
obtain a grant and accomplishment of our petitions, that being truly humbled
and cast down in our selves, it may please the Lord of heaven and earth, to
have the more pity and compassion on us.

And if men that appear to speak before an earthly King, seriously prepare
and examine themselves, calling every word to a just weight and measure,
strictly taking care of the lest gesture; How ought we in the presence of so
great, and above all comparisons, infinitely excelling a Lord, be sollicitous
and heedfull, that nothing pass from us unworthy, or il-beseeming his
Divinity and pureness?

Thus praying, and behauing our selves, we shall (no question) find to our
neuer-dying comfort, the euer-liuingnes of his promises in the accomplishment
of our just petitions, being made witnesses of the dissolution of heaven and
earth, and the vanishing away of all things transitory at the command of his
Word, one jot or tittle whereof shall not be taken away or diminished, but
remain pure and perfect, in the justification of his Elect, clothing them with
eternity and immortality; to which state of happiness our blessed Savior send
us all, for his holy Names sake.

A Table containing the several Prayers.
A Prayer for Monday Morning. 1 A prayer for Monday Noone. 2 A Prayer for
Monday Night. 3 A Prayer for Tuesday Morning. 4 A Prayer for Tuesday Noon. 5 A
Prayer for Tuesday Night. 6 A Prayer for Wednesday Morning. 7 A Prayer for
Wednesday Noone. 8 A Prayer for Wednesday Night. 9 A Prayer for Thursday
Morning. 10 A Prayer for Thursday Noone. 11 A Prayer for Thursday Night. 12 A
Prayer for Friday Morning. 13 A Prayer for Friday Noone. 14 A Prayer for Friday
Night. 15 A Prayer for Saturday Morning. 16 A Prayer for Saturday Noone. 17 A
Prayer for Saturday Night. 18 A Prayer for Sunday Morning. 19 A Prayer for
Sunday Noone. 20 A Prayer for Sunday Night. 21 A Prayer to our blessed Savior
for Humility. 22 Another for assistance in dangers and troubles. 23 A Prayer
against Pride. 24 A Prayer against the concupiscence of the Flesh. 25 A Prayer
against Sloth. 26 A Prayer against Covetousness. 27 An acknowledgement of
sins, with promise of amendment. 28 A Prayer in afflictions and troubles. 29 A
prayer for Remission of sins. 30 A prayer for Chastity. 31 A prayer to be
said in a journey. 32 A prayer against Lightening and Thunder. 33 A prayer or
Meditation concerning the benefits after creation. 34 A prayer against vain
Attire. 35 A prayer for a Maid against temptations. 36 Another to the same
effect. 37 A prayer for a Maid, not to be puffed up with her own perfections.
38 A prayer for a Maid to be directed in her choice. 39 A prayer for a Maid to
be obedient to her Parents. 40 A prayer before a Journey. 41 Another for the
same. 42 A prayer in afflictions. 43 A prayer for a Merchant. 44 A prayer
before Study. 45 A prayer for the Fatherless. 46 A prayer in afflictions and
troubles. 47 A Thanksgiving. 48 A prayer in time of Pestilence. 49 A prayer
in time of War. 50 A prayer for a Husbandman to receive the fruits of the
earth. 51 A prayer for a Widow. 52 A prayer for a Wife. 53 A prayer for
Maryners. 54 A prayer for Children. 55 A prayer for Servants. 56 A prayer for
one that is sick. 57 A prayer for women's deliverance. 58 A prayer going to bed.
59 A prayer against idle talk. 60 A Thanksgiving. 61 A prayer for direction
in all the course of our life. 62 A prayer for great men seated in places of
Honor. 63 A Thanksgiving for the recovery of our high and mighty Sovereign
King James. April. 1619. 64 Another Thanksgiving. 65 A prayer against our
enemies. 66 Another prayer for deliverance from our enemies. 67 A Thanksgiving
for the overthrow of our enemies. 68 A Prayer for present necessities. 69
Another prayer entreating remission of sins, and constancy in good purposes.
70 A prayer in sickness. 71 A prayer to be said before any work we go about.
72 A prayer for remission of sins. 73 A prayer for perseverance. 74 A prayer
in affliction. 75 A prayer in extremity of sickness. 76 A prayer in the
Spring time. 77 A prayer in Summer. 78 A payer to be said in Autumn. 79 A
prayer to be said in Winter. 80 A prayer in adversity and affliction. 81 A
prayer to our blessed Savior. 82 A prayer in time of Lent. 83 A prayer against
temptation. 84 A prayer for preparation against the Day of Judgment. 85
Certain Eiaculations of the Spirit. A short Meditation upon these words of
Pilate; Behold the Man. A Meditation upon the Resurrection.
THE EVER-BVRNING Lamps of Devotion and Piety.
MONDAY MORNING.
1. Morning Prayer.
O ETERNAL and everliving God, what humble and hearty thanks ought I render
thy divine Majesty, who have called me from the image of Death, and safely
brought me to the beholding of this day; giving me yet farther time to call
upon thy holy Name, and to ask forgiveness for my sins and wickednesses.
Receive, O Lord, an humble and contrite heart, and despise not the voice of a
miserable and dejected sinner, who can offer thee nothing for these and all
other thy innumerable benefits, but what must graciously proceed from thy own
clemency and mercy; possessing no good, but from thee, and by thee,
exercising nothing agreeable to thy will; but through thee, even at this
instant, mercifully led by thy power and gentleness, to make my humble
supplications unto thee. Season me, O Lord, with thy Spirit, endue me with thy
gracious and holy gifts, that I may bestow this day to thy honor and glory,
and my own comfort and eternal salvation. Defend me from the snares and
subtleties of Satan, who howrely watches to enter and overthrow me; and
unless, withstood by thy divine hand, how can so poor a Worm resist so
mighty an Enemy? Save me, O Lord, from his Minister, the World, who with the
glory thereof seeks to beguile and deceive me: and let not the flesh have
any power over me; which, suggested by him, lays continual siege to me,
bringing my sins, like fearful Canons, before me; my own weakness
desiring to let him in, and all my senses conspiring against me. Hasten, O
Lord, to my aid; come speedily, and redeem me: let not the work of thy hands
(how mean soever) be a prey to thy adversary, who labors to win me from
thee, and hates me for thee; that being protected by thy outstretched Arm, I
may go forward in goodness and virtue. Give me, O Lord, a heart full of
Charity, Patience, Obedience, Humbleness, without Malice, Vainglory,
envying none, and fix all my thoughts, actions, and endeavors, to recover
thee, in thy Kingdom; to whom be all honor, power, and glory, world without
end. Amen.

2. A Prayer before Dinner.
Almighty and everlasting God, which have created all things for the good and
benefit of Mankind, giving him power and dominion over all thy creatures;
grant, O Lord, that I may so moderately use these blessings thou have in thy
mercy provided for me, as may stand with thy good liking and pleasure: Let me
eat, to help, not pamper Nature, lest of a servant she become an enemy, and
make me unfit for thy service and glory, which is the only end of our
creation and being: Let Temperance, not my Appetite, ouersway me, ever
remembering, and with dutiful thanks acknowledging thy love and favor, who
have vouchsafed to refresh and comfort me, when many thousands of my poor
brethren, whose fearful sins call not for vengeance like mine, suffer under
the Tyranny of Hunger: Give me grace (O Lord) to pity them, and means to
relieve them, that we may together glorify thee in thy Works, and praise thy
Judgments, which are unsearchable, showing mercy on whom thou please,
chastising thy children, that being made obedient in their punishments, they
may come to thee, and be made partakers of that neuer-ending glory, which thou
have prepared for those that truly serve thee, even for Jesus Christ his sake,
our only Lord and Savior who with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons, and
one God, lives and reigns world without end. Amen.

3. Evening Prayer.
MOst merciful and loving God, Father of all Consolation, who in thy infinite
wisdom and providence have ordained the night for rest, by which our bodily
senses, wearied with the days labor, might be renewed and refreshed; we
praise and glorify thy holy Name, in that thou have vouchsafed, of thy
accustomed bounty and goodness, to protect us from all the bodily dangers of
this day, which our Enemy, the Devil, practices for our destruction. How
many, O pitiful and sweet Savior, has his snares betrayed and undone,
leading them by temptation and strong persuasion, with their own hands to be
their own Murderers? How many have thou suffered to fall by fire? some, by
the cruelty of their Brother, Fathers by their Children, Wives by their
Husbands, suddenly, and unexpectedly, in apparent danger, without thy mercy
and benediction, of eternal woe and damnation. How shall a heart, laden and
overcome with these thy benefits, express thy power and glory, with his own
shame and opprobriousnesse? I acknowledge and confess (most blessed and
pitiful Lord) that my sins daily increasing, nay howrely growing upon me,
have deserved Hell fire, and everlasting damnation: I have known thy
Commandments, and not followed them; I have hearkened to thy will, and not
obeyed it, pursuing with swift feet the unlawful desires and lusts of my flesh
Give me grace, O merciful Lord and Father, that I may with all the power of my
soul strive and endeavor to amend and reform this sinful and abominable
course. Be pleased to call me unto thee, by what means soever thou shall
think my unbridled and stubborn disposition will be tamed and subdued: I
refuse no punishment, without exception of greatness, or choice of quality;
Poverty sent by thee, shall be my chiefest Riches; Shame and Contempt, being
thy affliction, shall be the propagation of my glory; the neglect of Friends
shall not trouble me; for in all things, O Lord, let thy will be done, who
wishes not the death of a sinner, but that he may repent and live with thee,
in the company of Angels and Saints, who are filled with thy goodness, and
continually sing thy praises, to whom only belongs just praise and honor,
world without end. Amen.

TVESDAY.
4. Morning Prayer.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, which have opened the eyes of thy
servant to behold thy glorious and wondrous works, sending thy blessed and
comfortable Light, to banish and put to flight the thick and black darkness
which covered the face of the Earth; lighten, O Lord, my understanding, that I
may see thee in thy revealed will, and not curiously wander farther. Give me
grace to know what is good, and rectify my will to follow it, that in my life
and conversation I may glorify thee and profit others.

I confess, O Lord, and humbly acknowledge my sins and offenses, and my
transgressions are ever before me: Pardon, O merciful Father, and be pleased
to put away from thy remembrance all my iniquities: Let the blood of thy dear
Son, and my only Savior, be available against thy Justice, and bury my
misdeedes in his Sepulcher, that they may never rise up against me.

Bless, O mighty and only powerful God, all the labors of this day, and
grant, thou will help us to perform what is thy pleasure we do, that
every speech and action having his beginning from thee, may tend to our own
comfort and salvation. Let not, O Lord (which art the comfort and succor of
all distressed and afflicted) the greedy and unlawful desire of gain and
increase, raise our hearts to affect falsehood and dissimulation: Set a watch,
O Lord, before our lips, that we may speak truly to every man; in the
uprightness and sincerity of a good conscience, we may be at peace with our
selves.

Set over us, thou great and only Protector, thy holy Angel, to guard and
defend us, that the Devil, who lies in wait to betray us, may be put to
flight and confounded: either take away, O Lord, or give us strength to
overcome his subtleties and temptations, that endeavoring to spend this day
according to thy holy Word, we may rest in peace, till thou again shall call
us to perform our duty; even for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and
Savior.

5. A Prayer at Noone.
I Will not cease to cry unto thee, O Lord, because thou art merciful, and
regardest the complaints of thy servant; who, as in a Wilderness, encompassed
with ravenous beasts, were it not for thy assisting grace, looks instantly to
be devoured. My flesh rebelleth against me, and my unbridled and lawless
senses would give me up as a prey unto the enemy. Be near, O Lord, unto me,
and assist me in the Conflict, lest I shamefully fall, and be confounded.

Inspire me, O Lord, with virtuous and holy motions, irresistable and
neuer-yeelding graces, that I may fight manfully under thy glorious Standard,
following thee, my Captain and Leader, through all the dangerous and fearful
oppositions which Satan brings against me. Give me, O Lord, an unwearied
courage, that I may neither faint under the heat of my desires, nor be dulled
and benumbed with the cold and ^^^^tie carelessness of my lazy and lukewarm
devotion; but with able and lusty vigor ouercomming the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, I may in spirit rejoice with thee, and sing thy praises and glory,
who art the only blessed and gracious Redeemer from all temptations and
troubles.

6. Evening Prayer.
O Most mercifully loving God, who gatherest and keep thy beloved under thy
wings, as the Hen does her Chickens, defending them by thy mightiness from
all the perils and misfortunes which their weakness and the Devils
suggestions might bring upon them. I give thee most humble and hearty thanks,
that thou have safely protected me this day from all bodily dangers and
mischances, from the cruelty of Fire, the mercilesnesse of Water, the rage of
the Sword, the spoil of Sickness, and the vnsparing hand of Death, which has
suddenly and unexpectedly overtaken many, feasting and rioting. But now, O
Lord, and above measure, am I to glorify and praise thy everlasting goodness,
that with thy assisting grace thou have blessed me from horrible sins and
transgressions, crying unto thee for Judgment; Incest committed with the
nearest of our blood, and remotest from the blood of our Savior; Murder of
man's body, with the slaughter of our own soul; Rape of Virgins, with the
deflowring of our own virtue; and many other offenses, which thou
(vnknowingly) have taken from us, delivering us from the occasions, which
hanging over us, were (unperceived) ready to devour us.

Continue, O Lord, thy loving kindness, and in the darkness of this Night
shoot forth thy beams into our souls, that we may inwardly behold and
meditate upon thy neuer-ending mercies: Ouer-shadow us with a company of
Angels, who may watch and guard our sleeping bodies, lest the Devil enter and
unawares surprise us. Keep from us, O Lord, all wanton and lascivious dreams,
vain and idle fancies, that having peaceably and quietly obtained an
untroubled and unpolluted Repose, we may awake in thy fear, to remember all
thy kindnesses, employing both soul and body to do him homage and service,
by whose mighty and loving power we have enjoyed them safe, from the
oppositions of all our enemies.

WEDNESDAY.
7. Morning Prayer.
Almighty and everliving God, the first Beginner, Mouer, and Creator of all
things being, I render thy divine Majesty humble and hearty thanks for the
quiet Repose and Rest of the passed Night; humbly entreating thee, of thy
favor and goodness; by thy holy direction and assistance, to govern and
command all the actions of this day, that they may bring forth a Comfort, and
Repose of a good Conscience. Give, O Lord, unto me thoughts pure and undefiled,
beseeming the presence of so great and holy a Majesty, before whom I
continually stand; speeches sparing and modest, with the consideration of an
account to be made for them, that my actions arising from these, may be a
warrane to me in the peace of a settled mind, a profitable example to my weak
brethren, and a neuer-ending glory and honor to thee, whose workmanship I
am. Take from me, O blessed and careful Father, the occasions of sin, and
the opportunity of committing them: Let no evil company (the Nets of Satan)
ensnare my weak and frail determinations, seducing me by wantonness, or the
desire of vainglory, or what other secondarie cause soever, to the
forgetting thee, and my own duty and salvation. Give me grace and strength, O
blessed and all loving Creator, to labor in the vocation thou have ordained
for me, and bless, O Lord, the labors of my hand, that I may see the comfort
and increase of them; for which, let thy holy and euer-comforting Spirit
inflame me with a burning desire of thankfulness, and humble acknowledgement,
that I may not lose thee, for not praising, honoring, and adoring thy holy
Name; to which, be ascribed all honor and glory, world without end.

NOONE.
8. A Prayer, or Meditation, acknowledging Gods benefits: with an humble
Confession of our sins.
WHat is Man, O Lord, that thou do so much respect him? Or the Son of Man,
that thou give heed unto him? Why have thou sent thy only Begotten, who in
glory excels all Creatures, to be a Sacrifice for him, and given thy Angels
charge over him? Why has thy own hand conducted him, and Miracles made way
for him? Is he not, O Lord, slime of the Earth, created of nothing, and without
thy mercy, should be happy to return to nothing? Was he able to help thee,
when he had no being in thy great Workmanship? Or when it was made; without
thee, could he distinguish it? Was he not last formed, and all other things for
his use and service? And in requital of all this thy exceeding and infinite
bounty, did he not leave thee, his only God and Creator, and take part with
thy enemy against thee? And have thou yet gathered him to thee, and by thy
revealed Will left him thine heir of all those glorious Possessions, whose
Title cannot be questioned? Those inestimable Riches, which neither Thieves nor
Moths can beguile him of, or take away? What excellency is there, O merciful
Father, in this thy handy work, to deserve such innumerable and vn-imitable
benefits? What can he, O Lord, repay thee for these great and unspeakable
bounties? What proportion can there be of a finite uncertainty, with an
everlasting and infinite Deity? With what admirable, and inconceivable Art,
do thou fashion him in the Womb? How wonderfully, and strangely, do thou
bring him forth? How carefully after, and most lovingly, do thou cherish and
succor him, his Parents being thy Nurses; in whom thou have inspired such
Nature and Love toward him, that they account and call that Trouble, a
Blessing? How most prouidently, for this despised Clay, did thou, in the
beginning, divide the great Time, disposing the one half for the Rest and
Repose of this thy Creature, rocking him asleep with thy all-powerfull and
favorable hand? And when he comes, in progress of time, to exercise and use
that Reason and Understanding, in which thou have made him lord over all thy
Creatures; what, O Father of all Comforts and Blessings, does he return thee
for this thy care and blessings? How does he, in part, and to his power,
answer these thy exceeding great and high benefits? Does he walk in the Way
which thou have instructed him? Or is his delight in seeking after thy
Commandments? Does he not leave the known Path, revealed in thy Word, and
wander after Vanities, searching for their footsteps, which lead unto
destruction? O all merciful and loving God, whose Charity and Bounty does
well express thy Godhead and Power! since it is not in Mortality to love so
abundantly, so fervently: so, causelessely, grant, I beseech thee, even for
the bowels of thy mercy, to inflame my heart with the like desires and
affections, that I may love thee above my self, with all my soul, with all my
heart, all my understanding; despising all things, in respect of thee: since
there is nothing great, glorious, and high, nothing of infinite Beauty,
everlasting Majesty, unspeakable Charity, but God alone; who has filled
every thing with his Blessing, with his Being, with his Presence; who confines
all things, without being confined; who is, was, and ever shall be, of endless
power, honor, and glory. Amen.

9. Evening Prayer.
LEt me never be unthankful, O Lord, that thou have yet continued thy
favorable and commanding hand over me, in placing me before thee, reserving
me, and redeeming me from the continual assaults of Satan, who awaiteth to
make a prey on me: mercifully, O Lord, forgive the evil which I have
committed; and the good which I have had means to lay hold of, and
ouerslipped, be pleased not to remember against me, who am nothing but
pollution and uncleanness, incapable, without thee, of goodness, and
unworthy, by my own negligence and carelessness to be called unto it.
Forgive, O Lord, my customarie and irreligious taking thy Name in vain, my
wandering and idle speeches, pride of my self, or toward others detraction,
for my own glory; Envy, or whatsoever, in thought, word, or deed, this day
committed; displeases thy divine Majesty; that my soul, unloaded and
unburdened of the deadly and condemning weights of sin, may comfortably take
the refreshing of this Night, thou in thy mercy have ordained for me, even for
Jesus Christ his sake, thy only and well-beloued Son, and our only Lord and
Savior. Amen.

THVRSDAY.
10. Morning Prayer.
AS out of my grave, O Lord, by thy mighty hand and outstretched arm, have
thou this day called me, raising me from the depth of sleep, wherein many have
been unexpectedly and suddenly for ever buried, and called me to the beholding
of thy glorious and all-comforting Light, and in that, the admirable work of
thy hand; and more especially and graciously, taking away the dark and thick
clouds of sin and wickedness, have illumined my inward spirit with thy
merciful beams, to think and meditate upon thy holy Name and neuer-ending
kindnesses, opening with the day, my eyes, as thou did to Hagar, that I might
be comforted in beholding (desperate of help and succor) the bottomless
Wellspring of thy favor and providence, wherewith thou cherishest and
maintainest all things created, taking care, by thy eternal wisdom, of the
poorest things in Nature. And since (O Lord) one hair cannot fall from the
head, without thy foreseeing knowledge, mercifully and lovingly sustain and
uphold me this day, and ever, that I slide not and fall from thee, the head and
author of my being and well-being, without whom I was nothing, and should be
happy to return to nothing. Plant in me, O Lord, the timely fruit of
Consideration, and water it with thy heavenly dew, that seriously and carefully
setting before my eyes the end of my Creation, the dreadful account I must
render, in not applying my self to it, with the glorious certain promised
Rewards, belonging to Goodness and Virtue, I may now and ever, in all my
thoughts, words, and deeds, so carry and behave my self, that I may be
thought, in the precious blood of thy only Son, worthy to be made capable
of that eternal Sacrifice he has long since offered for all sinners. Amen.

AT NOONE.
11. A Prayer or Meditation for Patience.
WHither will thou go (O my Soul) to find a Pattern of all Virtues? Where
will thou ensample this perfect and divine Patience, of which thou stand in
need of? Get upon thy wings, and fly to Bethleem, sacred by the birth of our
Savior; thence, trace him through the whole course of his blessed and innocent
life, where thou shall behold it so rarely pourtrayed and set forth, so sweetly
and modestly described, that thou can not, if thou have any feeling of
Goodness, but be enamoured with her beauty. Did ever this blessed and meek
Lamb, for all his despightfull and base usage, grace a frown with his
Countenance? Did ever an angry word dwell upon his well-formed lips? Did he
so much as rebuke those which contemned him, resist those which buffetted him?
nay, gainesay those which spat in his reverend Countenance? Art thou oppressed
with Poverty? Consider, that the Lord of Heaven and Earth had not wherein to
hide his head. Art thou wronged with slanderous and disgraceful Speeches? Was
not this temperate, and all-vertuous Man, termed a Glutton and a Wine-bibber?
Does Shame and Ignominy compass thee in, on every side? See, see, my Soul,
the King of Kings, and Lord of all Lords, who raised the dead to life, lying
upon the Cross; and he, who by his Mightiness and Power exalted sinners to be
glorious Saints, hanging between two Thieves, condemned as a foul Offender.
Mark his mild and lovely Countenance, his sober and demure Speeches, the
modest glance of his Eyes, and the composure of his whole Body, cast in so
Noble a Mould of unconquered Patience, that they sooner wanted occasions to
tyrannize, then he virtue meekely to suffer them. Here fix thy self, kneel
at the Root of the Cross, and with all those blessed Women, and Saints, which
accompanied him, reverently say unto him: O thou eternal and most bountiful
Savior, who vouchsafedst to descend from the Throne of thy glory, and putting
on our frail and weak humanity, did for the redemption of Mankind, wander
so many years hungry and naked, contemned, and despised, suffering
intolerable Pains and Torments, without being moved or troubled; grant, I
beseech thee, by thy precious Death and Burial, that I may willingly embrace
those crosses thou please to lay upon me, that I may, run to meet them, as
thou did the betraying Kiss of Judas. Give me (O Lord) power and strength,
most meekely and patiently to undergo and abide all Persecutions,
Tribulations, Wants, Shames, Sicknesses, Hurts, Maimes, without inwardly
repining, or grudging, outwardly murmuring, or speaking against them; let me
freely go, not violently be drawn to entertain them. Did not thy glorious
Martyr and Soldier, Saint Stephen, whilst they stoned him, praise thee, and
pray for them? Could he begin this Work, without thy grace, or finish it,
without thy Power? No, no, my most merciful and gracious Lord, it is thy
Spirit which quickens, for the flesh profits in nothing, but repineth
against it. Be liberal therefore unto me (O Lord) of thy sovereign and
precious Balm, which heals and cures all sorts of Diseases; anoint my
rancorous and angry flesh (big-swolne with Malice) that the sting being drawn
out, it may appear white and fair: let me drink (O Lord) a large draught of
this Cordial, to confirm and strengthen me against all the poisons and
infirmities of Nature. For certainly (Lord) who is perfectly patient, obeys
thy will, and who is obedient, humbles himself to all disaduantagious losses,
or what dishonor else the World can inflict: Which Humility brings us to
that height and glory, which only they shall enjoy, that have patiently
endured and expected this their reward to the end.

12. Evening Prayer.
TVrne not thy face away from me (O Lord:) incline thine ear, and bow down
unto me: Hear me for thy mercies sake, and according to the multitude of thy
bounties, blot out all my iniquities: for what flesh is righteous, or who dare
stand up against thee? Do not the Hills fly before thee, and Mountains melt
at thy indignation? Does not the Sun lose his light, and the stars, when
thou command them, hide their glory? Be merciful (O Lord) and gracious to
thy servant, who remembering thy promise, humbly prostrates himself before thy
divine Majesty, confessing all his sins, and acknowledging all his
iniquities. Remember not (O Lord) our offenses, nor the offenses of our
forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of our sins: for who dare abide thy
Judgments? Cast me not away from thy face, but say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation. Have mercy upon me (O Lord) have mercy upon me, and let my cry
come unto thee; for my sins are heavy upon me, and threaten to overthrow me;
yea, they say unto my soul, Where is now thy God? Turn unto me (O Lord) and
they shall be turned; speak unto me, and they shall be scattered. Be unto me a
sure Rock in the time of my trouble, that I fall not under it, for I have
hoped in thee: Oh forsake not thy servant. Forgive (O Lord) all the passed
errors of this day; pardon my irreuerence in thy company, my negligence at
prayers, my faintness in good purposes; and what evil I have committed, or
what good, through frailetie and my own heedlesnesse, I have omitted, be
pleased not to remember; even for thy own Names sake, who art God most
mighty, one, and the same, world without end. Amen.

FRIDAY.
13. Morning Prayer.
O Most mercifully loving Lord and Savior, the glory and brightness of thy
Father, who descendedst from all thy Joys, taking on thee humane frailetie, to
recall and recover the sinner, and those which were diseased with the incurable
plagues of sin and wickedness; vouchsafe, of thy infinite goodness, and
unspeakable love, to be aiding and assisting to me this day, and by thy might
and power, defend me from all temptations, which may overthrow my unsettled,
though well-directed, resolutions. Preserve me (O Lord) from all bodily
dangers, which, without thee, continually hang over me, threatening my ruin
and destruction. Make good (O Lord) to me my determinations and purposes, which
may be answerable to thy holy and blessed inspirations, and grant me patience
(O Lord) meekely and contentedly to suffer, whatsoever I shall fail or be
hindered in, referring my self with all humility and ardencie of desires, to
thy divine will and pleasure; which be done (O Lord) in Earth as it is in
Heaven. Take away all rancour and malicious imaginations, that I may neither by
reuiling defame my brother, or swell and torment my self with any disgracings
he shall lay upon me, but acknowledging my baseness and wickedness, as
worthy of all reproaches and dishonours, calling to mind, the Servant is not
above his Master, in the comfort of thy example, who above the meekness of a
Lamb, vnderwentest all kind of pains and reuilings; I may behold a timely
Evening, rejoicing my anger has not awaited the Suns setting; ever
endeavoring and laboring against my frail concupiscences and desires, even
for thy holy Names sake; Which whosoever ardently and continually calls on,
shall not fail to obtain unspeakable happiness and felicity world without
end. Amen.

AT NOONE.
14. A Prayer to our blessed Savior, asking him forgiveness for our sins
which crucified him.
O Bountiful Jesus, O sweet Jesus, O Jesus the Son of the living God; how dare
I, wretched and detestable sinner, approach before thy divine Majesty? How can
I, overcome with sin and shame, stay any longer in thy presence? Did ever the
murderer and slaughterer of his Lord and Master presume to offend him with his
sight, whilst yet the wounds were fresh and bleeding, whilst his body was
cruelly mangled and torn, and his head with an vn-vsed cruelty pained and
tormented? lest the smart and rage of his wounds, the shame and dishonor of
his usage, should take away all hope and pity of pardon, delivering him in his
fury to the Judge, and he to the Executioner, to carry him where is
continual weeping and gnashing of teeth. But consider (O my Soul) how this
merciful and meek Savior behaueth himself toward his bloody and tyrannous
persecutors: behold him dropping with blood, buffetted by the wicked ministers,
scorned of the people, forsaken of his Disciples, hoysted into the air,
cruelly nailed on the Cross, not cursing, not reuiling, but praying, not for
himself, but those that persecuted him. Amongst whom, running with the
foremost, may thou, in thy eternal Providence, O glorious Pattern of all
Sufferings, behold me, with more cruelty laying on thee with my sins, then
the stonie-hearted Jews with their weapons, tearing thee, if it were
possible, peece-meale with my horrible and blaspheming Oaths; my loose and
lascivious thoughts wounding thy fair Head with more spite and rigor, then
the sharpe-pointed Thorns; my Malice, Envy, Pride, Drunkenness,
Concupiscence, with innumerable other sins and transgressions, flaying thy
reverend Body. All this (O Lord) have I done, all this committed, knowing
thee, and confessing thee to be Jesus, the eternal Son of God, and only
Redeemer of the World. Pray for me, most gentle and mild Lord, speak for me to
thy eternal Father; without which, most abominable and wretched sinner, I
shall for ever be condemned. Forsake me not now, O Lord, go not away from me,
but renew in me a clean heart, and create a right spirit within me, that I may
plainly see the deformity of sin, and the ouglinesse of my misdeedes. Give
me grace earnestly to seek thee, and having found thee, ardently to love thee;
overcome with which, I may employ all my actions, endeavors, and labors,
wholly to serve thee: which if I faithfully and truly do, I shall at the end
of my years, having so indulgent and loving a Master, be made a Freeman of
Heaven; and those inconceivable Joys, which no eye has seen, ear has
heard, or tongue can tell, they only know them, that enjoy them: Which, O
benign and merciful Lord, grant all thy servants to inherit, for thy holy
Names sake, which shall be honored and praised world without end.

15. Evening Prayer.
Grant me (O Lord) after the many and wild distractions of this day, a holy
and inward recollection, that I may return into my self, with due care and
examination, how I have spent and employed my faculties of soul, and functions
of body, which thou have lent me, for thy use and service; and give unto me a
true compunction and sorrowful feeling for all the passed errors and
transgressions of this day, that I may heartily lament and bewail my sins
and wickednesses, with a full resolution and constant determination of my
amendment. And grant me (O Lord) this Night, I beseech thee, by thine
incomprehensible Divinity and Majesty, chastity of mind, cleanenesse of
heart, simplicity of spirit, and most sincere purity of soul and body, that
I may earnestly seek after thee, and in thee alone take my rest; since
whatsoever is without thee, is only vexation and trouble of mind: that having
enjoyed a comfortable and peaceable Repose both of soul and body, I may awake
with much alacrity and cheerfulness of spirit, to praise and honor thee in
all my works and labors, which the following day shall call me to; for his
only sake, in whom we are enabled to exercise whatsoever is good and
virtuous. Amen.

SATVRDAY.
16. Morning Prayer.
BE merciful unto me, O Lord, and let thy holy hand be over me: Let my first
Meditation be of thy goodness, and my Morning thoughts employed about thy
fatherly care and protection, which has from my infancy ouershadowed me,
preserving me from the vile and shameful fires of Lust and Riotousnesse,
recalling me still to a feeling and dislike of my passed sins and offenses.
Rectify (O Lord) my sinful will, and strengthen my frailetie, that with the
burning wings of filial piety and humble devotion for so many and those
unspeakable gifts and graces, I may fly, by prayers and thanksgiving, to the
Throne of thy Divinity, where fixing all my aims and intents, I may change my
pronenesse and inclination to ill and wickedness, with virtuous and fervent
desires of loving and honoring thee for thy self, who art only and all
goodness, without the respect of my dependence or being from thee; that
reuerencing thy greatness, and ravished with thy goodness, I may, with a love
full of awe and fear, eschew those ways which may displease thee; ever
carefuller of thy anger, then my own hurt or disadvantage: to which height of
Charity, grant me (O Lord) to attain, for the merits of thy only Son, who
alone is able to deserve so infinite a blessing for so infinite and vile a
sinner. Amen.

AT NOONE.
17. A Prayer against Drunkenness.
Give to me the water of Life, (O Lord) and I shall never thirst; but say the
word, and I shall be satisfied. Send down thy heavenly dew, to assuage and
cool my disordered and unlimited desires, whose burning heat and raging fire
runs me into sin and excess. In vain have I labored, without thee, to
stay my intemperance; in vain opposed my self against my wild and lawless
senses. Strengthen (O Lord) my weakness, and confirm me against the
temptations of the Devil; who finding a breach in me, has entered and made
prey, banishing all things good and virtuous, which thou have placed to keep
me, and has peopled me with strong and sinful thoughts, mortal and
well-armed Offenses, who dare justify their Rapine and Extortion,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, readily committing more sins, then I have names to
cloth them in. Hasten (O Lord) and help me, for I am weary of their
tyranny; cast them out of me, and plant thy grace, that they return not, and
multiply. Whole Days have I pleased my self in displeasing thee, and broken
many Nights to break thy Commandments; sore longing for their company,
whose feet run to Iniquity; abusing thy Creature, provided by thy care and
providence for the refreshing and sustentation of our natural bodies, to our
ruin, and without thy great mercy, utter damnation. Did not thy servant Lot
(O Lord) a just and righteous man, in his drink abuse his own Daughter? What
sin has Hell in store so horrid, that it dare not act, and glory of the
deed? O most mercifully loving Lord and Father, who desire not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should live and repent; I request thee, by the
bowels of thy Mercy, thy bitter precious Passion, thy glorious Resurrection
and Ascension, thou will take away from me this Monster and Hell-borne
wickedness, which has subtly persuaded me to offend thee, my Lord and
Maker, and stealingly surprised me, and given me up to all manner of sins and
transgressions, taking away all reason, blinding the senses, that being wholly
in his power, he might carry me headlong to all perdition. Preserve me (O
Lord) by thy might and power, from all occasions which may bring me to him, for
I am fearful of him, and dare not, without thy gracious assistance and
mercy, endure his slye and powerful persuasions. No age is warranted from
him, he adulterateth both sexes, he vnsanctifieth the most religious, and
creeps into the priuatest and most retired places, bewitching all sorts with
his cunning and alluring charms. Stand, O my Redeemer, at the gates of my
ears, and shut out all his faire-seeming treaties, which would conclude a
peace between my frailetie and the Devil. Clear (O Lord) my eyes, and take
away the mist from them, that I may plainly see and perceive his ouglinesse
and deformity, wallowing in beastliness and sensuality: mercifully touch my
heart with thy illumining Spirit, that I may hate and detest him, shun his
friends and companions, and fly from the place of his abode and
entertainment; within whose Circle, no soul is safe, no thought pure, no
sense perfect. Amen.

18. Evening Prayer.
LAy thy blessed hands upon me (O Lord) as thou did on thy servant Lot,
delaying his own safety, and conduct me out of this sinful and euerie-way
polluted Sodom, that I may quickly fly from it, lest unquenchable fire and
brimstone overtake me, whilst I protract and refuse thy heavenly inspirations.
Let no day pass me, without some progress in goodness and virtue: and every
hour, O merciful Father, grant I may determine a full amendment and
detestation of my former lewdness, and misse-spent behavior. Let me account
my self an unprofitable Scholar, when I have not learnt and aspired to some
higher measure of understanding thee; an unthrifty and riotous worldling, when
I have not gathered and laid up somewhat to maintain and defend me in the day
of trouble. Touch (O Lord) my heart with thy heavenly Spirit, that I may
esteem this life, in his full value, only a Pilgrimage and Thorowfare to
another Land, where I must truly live for ever; and accordingly despising all
the lets and hindrances, be neither tempted with the gawdie pleasures, nor
terrified with the rough passages of my Journey; but in thy holy fear making
way through them, I may at last arrive to thee, the promised Land, where
euer-continuing and flourishing content and happiness abides. Amen.

SUNDAY.
19. Morning Prayer.
O My most merciful Lord and Redeemer, how shall a guilty and sinful soul
appear in the presence of an innocent and unspotted Deity? or what hope of
Pity, or Pardon, when he shall be my Judge, who may only accuse me; bearing
about him wide and ghastly wounds, which my sins have given him; by which his
most glorious Passion, and admirable Resurrection, he as this day finished that
great and never to be forgotten benefit of the Redemption of Mankind; which I,
as much as in me lies, by my horrid and abominable lust and desire, have
sought to frustrate and annihilate? Who shall take me from his Justice, or
rescue me from his Omnipotency? I have sinned (O Lord) I have sinned, and am
no more worthy to be called thine: I have risen with the Sun to meditate on
vanities, and all the day long have I followed my own ways; at the going
down of the same, I have forgotten thy Blessings, and sat in darkness,
without remembering thee, the Light and Guide of those that go astray; I have
forgotten thy Laws, and thy Statutes have been far from me; my thoughts
have been busied in uncleanness, and my lips acquainted with leasings and
vain stories. O be merciful unto me, and enter not into Judgment with thy
servant: for how shall Dust and Ashes stand up before thee? or the work of thy
hands contend with his Creator? Have pity on me (O Lord) according to thy
great goodness, and in the multitude of thy mercies, blot out all my
Iniquities. Save me, and be near unto me in the day of trouble, that I may
magnify thy Name, and give all honor, power, and glory to thee, who art the
Father and Fountain of all comfort and consolation. Amen.

AT NOONE.
20. A Prayer concerning the benefit of Creation.
I Am amazed (O Lord) to consider of thy wonderful mercy: my soul is lost in
the depth of thy neuer-ceasing goodness; and like the wisest of Philosophers,
the more I learn, the less I may truly profess to know; so bottomless and
unsearchable is thy love and favor. When I was Nothing (O Lord) why thoughtst
thou of me, and calledst me to be Something? which, having any subsistence of
Beast, or Plant, is better then not to be at all: but thou have created me
according to thine own Image, giving me a reasonable soul, like the Angels,
endued with noble faculties and powers, enabling me to reach the height of thy
mystical Divinity and divine Mystery, and made me capable of everlasting and
infinite glory. O Lord, before thee, and in comparison of thy Majesty, I am
just Nothing; and how wast thou then mindful of me, to create me? Alas, my
soul, thou wast hidden in the Abyss of Nothing, and in this Abyss of Nothing
should thou have remained until this present, if God had not drawn thee
forth from thence: and what could thou have done within this Nothing? O my
great and good Creator, how infinitely am I indebted unto thee; for that thou
have taken me out of this Nothing, to make me, by thy mercy, that something
which I am? What shall I ever be able to do, worthily to bless and magnify
thy Name, and to render thanks to thine exceeding Bounty? But alas, my
Creator, in stead of uniting my self unto thee by pure love and loyal
service, I have always been rebellious, by unruly affections separating and
withdrawing my self from thee, to join and unite my self unto sin and
iniquity; doing no more to thy Goodness, then if thou had not been my
Creator. What wickedness has there been (O Lord) that I have not had a
thought ready to put in, a mind apt to contriue, and a hand willing to execute
it? Wherein have I testified my obedience, in following thy Laws and Precepts?
Wherein my truth and loyalty, in resisting thy vowed and known enemies? But,
O my soul, know that our Lord is thy God, it is he that has made thee, and
not thou thy self. O God, I am the work of thy hand; I will then no more
henceforth take pleasure in my self, since in my self, and of my self, I am
truly Nothing. Bless thy God, O my soul, and let all thy bowels praise his
holy Name; for his Bounty has drawn me forth of the Abyss of Nothing, and
his Mercy has created me. O my God, I offer unto thee, with all my heart, the
essence and being which thou of thy Bounty have bestowed upon me, and most
willingly do I dedicate and consecrate it to thee. O my God, strengthen me in
these affections and resolutions, and give me perseverance to the end.

21. Evening Prayer.
I Humbly confess and acknowledge, O merciful Lord and Savior, that I have
not employed and bestowed the blessed Time of this hallowed Day, so devoutly
and religiously as I ought and am commanded to do; I beseech thee, of thy
infinite mercy* to forgive and pardon so weak and frail a Creature, that
cannot entertain the least good thought one moment, without thee; and
vouchsafe, of thy accustomed goodness and clemency, continually to visit,
nay, my most blessed Savior, to inhabit and dwell with me, that so I may do
the things which please thee. Give unto me (O Lord) a kindly relenting, and
remorse for the sins I have this day committed against thy divine Majesty,
and against my Neighbor, by thought, word, and deed, and by omission of those
things thou have left me in charge to have done. Moderate (O Lord) my sleep,
and banish from me all vain and wandering fancies, unclean and idle
illusions, that I may awake in thee, and to thee offer my Morning thoughts, who
art only worthy of all; that only have created, redeemed, sanctified, and
preserved me; for which, be thou ever praised and honored world without end.
Amen.

22. A Prayer to our blessed Savior and Redeemer.
PRostrate thy self, O my soul, before the Lord of all Majesty and Glory,
sitting at the right hand of his Father, crowned with Mightiness and Power,
richly adorned with a garland of all Virtues, brightly shining, in the company
of his glorious Angels, holy Saints, and bloody Martyrs, honoring and serving
him without ceasing, or intermission, singing Hymns of his Goodness and
Mercy: and having thus beheld him in this great Pomp and Triumph, cast thine
eye upon this blessed Savior, poorly lying in the Manger, having scarce any
thing to cover his tender and delicate Body, or save it from the injury of
the Air: Consider well and seriously, how he which gives heat and motion to
the Sun, is here contented (as unable to help himself) to take warmth and
comfort from the breath of the Beasts, whom he there disdained not to be his
Chamber-fellowes. O wonderful example of all humility! How dare thou from
henceforth, contemned Dust and Ashes, swell in thy Vainglory; and decked
with a few gay Rags, forget thy Creator, who is clothed with Eternity?
Humble (O Lord) my high and proud thoughts, abase and bring down my lofty and
rebellious imaginations, make me abject in my own eyes, that walking with my
poor Brethren (who wander naked and hungry, lying upon the bare and cold
Earth) I may with them praise and glorify thy holy Name, who were the first
founder and beginner of this poor and contemned Order. Why shall we, from
henceforth, so highly esteem Honor and Riches, when thou, the Lord of both,
did so contemn it; voluntary, for our instruction, submitting thy self to
so great and miserable Poverty? Happy are we, if we be distressed, and
patiently suffer it; happy, if we be contemned and neglected for thy sake.
Teach me, O Lord, the way to despise all worldly preferment and promotions,
that having my thoughts only fixed upon thee, I may pass forth these
transitory and short miseries, to dwell in eternal rest and felicity in thy
Kingdom, which is promised to all those which serve thee; to whom be ascribed
all honor, power, and glory, world without end. Amen.

23. Another Prayer for assistance in dangers and troubles.
COmplaynest thou, discontented and ungrateful Creature, that thy enemies lie
in wait to take thy life from thee, and think thy self not well dealt with,
to be so persecuted and afflicted, when thou may behold the Creator of
Heaven and Earth having no piece of Earth to abide with safety in? Do thou
value thy self above thy Maker? and can wish a share in his Glories, but to
be no partner with him in his Troubles? O blessed Savior, is it not thy own
saying, that who will enjoy thee, must take up his Cross, and follow thee? How
strictly lived thy forerunner? how imprisoned? how died? how poorly, and
dangerously, thy followers glorifying thee in hunger, in stripes, in death?
Crown me (O Lord) in this life with Thorns, that I may hereafter receive a
Crown of Glory: Let me be here imprisoned, scourged, and reviled, so I may be
hereafter released, acknowledged, and received: And grant, most merciful and
loving Redeemer, that as thou did in thy Godhead show us the fraileties of
Man in thy Suffering, so thou would in our Manhood show us the power of thy
Godhead, manfully to resist and overcome all fear of Dangers, nay, Death it
self, which Satan and our weak flesh painteth out so horrible to us, that
cowardly flying the Combat, we may lose the promised Reward. Strengthen us (O
Lord) and be unto us a sure shield in the day of Battle: Let the Angels fight
for us, and show themselves mighty in the destruction of our enemies: Let them
be scattered as Chafe before the Wind, and not be able to stand in opposition
with thy servants, who put their trust in thee. Let them (O Lord) be ruined and
confounded, that wish evil to them that fear thee, and desire to be perfect
imitators of thy life and doctrine, that we remaining Conquerors, may praise
and glorify thee, the giver of all Victory. Amen.

24. A Prayer against Pride.
DId Almighty God, who is jealous of his Honor, throw down the Heavens for
their Presumption? and think thou, fond Man, he will exalt base Earth for
his Pride? Does he pull down the mighty and the lofty, and advance the
humble and meek, and dare thou yet rear up thy proud head in his presence?
Was not the great King Nabuchadonozor turned for his arrogancy into a Beast,
for that in the shape of a Man he lived like a Beast? And did not the Worms
feed upon Herod, vn-coffind, and alive, because he did proudly advance
himself of his natural gifts and graces? Who dare contend with the Almighty,
which darteth Lightning; and holds Thunder? Or what can thou boast of,
presumptuous flesh, that is thine own? Thy soul is heavenly, thy body
earthly, both from God; the one inspired, the other fashioned in the Womb,
lent thee for a season, and to be recalled at his pleasure. Why do thou
therefore lay up Honors and Preferments for many years? Why do thou pursue
and search for glorious Arms and Titles, forgetting thy Father Adam, because a
Gardener, and deriuing thy Pedigree from some great and Noble Conqueror; having
not certainly so much time here, as the Herald must necessarily require to
perfect thy gawdie Coat: For this Night may God say unto thee; O fool, thy
soul shall be taken from thee? Let me not therefore, O merciful Father, come
unprepared, like the foolish Virgins, and be shut out, having ouer-slept my
hour: Give me grace to repent, whilst there is time; for in Death, who
acknowledge thee? or who finds pardon in Hell? Grant, that I may seriously
ponder and consider thy manifold and manifest benefits, that I may with all
humility and thankfulness praise and glorify the giver. Lay before me the
haynousnesse and multitude of my offenses, that stricken down with shame and
sorrow, I may fall at thy feet, and with the abundance of my tears wash away
the stayne and guilt of my aspiring soul. Let the greediness of my Ambition
satisfy it self in serving of thee, being the highest Honor the Earth can
glory of: and when it evidently perceiues, how little of his own it is able
to bring, to discharge those offices which are necessarily required, my towering
thoughts will fall, and break their own neck. Endue me (O Lord) with
spiritual knowledge and understanding, to retire into my self, and take a
survey of my own soul, how she is garnished, how decked, with what virtues
adorned, with what heavenly gifts and graces apparrelled; and let me be
confounded and ashamed, to find her, the Mistress and Queen of this frail
and corrupted body, naked, or worse apparrelled, and to employ all my study
and endeavors to garnish and set out her servant. Let selfe-basenesse (O Lord)
attained by a certain knowledge of my weakness and unworthiness, banish
away all selfe-affection, vainly gotten by a false conceit of my own graces.
Health, vigor, strength, and lustiness of body thou give, and take away
at thy pleasure, by sickness, hunger, wants, and torments; Proportion, and
Beauty, but thy all-making Hand, who can to the life fashion; which are
spoiled and defaced by Age, the necessary servant of Time, and Decrepitnesse,
the diligent follower of Age? Be it therefore far from me to glory, but in
the Cross of my Savior Jesus Christ: Let me take pride in his Sufferings, and
boast of his Wounds, whose precious blood has conquered Hell and Sin,
leading Captivity captive, and redeeming the lost Sheep, reducing them again
to their loving and careful Shepherd; who will recall them wandering, uphold
them sliding, and save them eternally from the ravening Wolf, which goes
about roaring, to seek who he may devour.

25. A Prayer against the concupiscence of the flesh.
WHo shall enter into thy Tabernacle, O Lord? He that has undefiled hands,
and a pure heart, sanctified and unpolluted members, as worthy Vessels to
receive the holy Ghost: The house must be clean swept by Confession, purified
and perfumed by good purposes and prayers, before it can be made a fit
habitation for our Lord and Savior. Those be the sweet smelling sauors, which
laid upon the Altar of our heart, enflamed and set on fire by perfect Charity,
are acceptable Sacrifices unto him. Were not the people (O Lord) commanded by
thy Servant and Prophet Moses, to put off their shoes, because the ground
whereon they trod was holy? How shall they enter then before thee, whose feet
are swift to defile their neighbors Bed, whose hands have been employed in
rauishing young Virgins, and whose tongues have spent all their force and
Oratorie, to corrupt and betray honest thoughts to wicked and loose desires?
Did thou so severely rebuke and punish thy Servant David (a man, as the
Scripture testifies, according to thy own heart) for one Transgression, that
neither his Contrition, Penance, Fasting, Almes-deedes, could divert or turn
away thy Anger? And shall I, miserable and leprous sinner, who have all my life
worn my heart in my eyes, lusting after every object, hope to escape thy
fury? What Woman have I not coueted? What Complexion has not been the fuel
of my lewd thoughts? Pardon, O merciful Lord and Savior, an humble and
penitent sinner, who confesses and acknowledges his heinous sins and
offenses, and much sorroweth and lamenteth to have mis-imployed his time and
body in the lascivious acts and concupiscences of the flesh; infinitely
desiring thee, of thy grace and favor, to cleanse and sanctify my polluted
and unclean soul, knowing, that no Adulterers or Fornicators shall inherit
thy Kingdom. Give unto me (O Lord) spotless and innocent Chastity, being the
Lilly among all virtues, whose sparkling luster is seen a far off. Bridle
with thy holy hand, all wanton and loose desires, which run after their own
destruction. Let the delight of mine eyes be thy miraculous Resurrection: the
object of mine ears, the story of thy Passion: the subject of my thoughts, the
remembrance of the Cross: the food of my understanding, thy wonderful and
inconceivable Conception. Let me with St. Thomas thrust my fingers in thy
wounds; that all faculties and functions of body and soul, being busied and
employed, in and about thy works and wonders, I may be delivered, and bring
forth holy thoughts, reverent and gentle speeches, pure and immaculate
actions, worthy the honor and glory of so pure and innocent a Lord, borne of a
spotless and immaculate Virgin. Grant this, O sweet Jesus, the bestower of all
goodness, and virtue, that desiring to draw out this short and transitory life,
purely and honestly, we may, after we shall be warned to give it over, dwell
with thee in thy everlasting habitation, where abides all purity, sanctity,
cleanness and glory, world without end. Amen.

26. A Prayer against Sloth.
WHen thou calledst thy servants to account, (most merciful and gentle
Savior) what reward had he, that fearing thy hardness and his own weakness,
laid up thy talent and employed it not? was he not after conviction sentenced,
and delivered to the Sargeant? Are we not commanded by thy neuer-erring Word,
to work our salvation: to watch and pray continually, because we know not at
what hour our Lord and Master will call upon us? which are no effects of Sloth
and Idleness: For to banish sleep and due repose, does require a whole mind,
not a surfetted and lazy soul, buried in flesh and blood: and to offer up with
humble feruencie, and ardent devotion, pure and earnest prayers, asks due
consideration, much trouble, and a great conquest over the outward man, not to
be obtained without many assaults, and labor. The slothful man, says the
holy Ghost, shall not eat. Can we not then attain bodily food, without daily
care, much shift, and many times hard and extraordinary pains? and do thou
flatter thy self, O my soul, that either heaven will stoop to thee, or our
blessed Savior fetch thee, without moving or helping thy self thither?
Imitate the greedy Merchant, who with unheard of favors seeks unknown
countries, exposing himself to the certain dangers of the Sea; uncertain
sicknesses, to purchase and return laden with wealth, which he can neither
keep at his pleasure, nor will use at his pleasure. Quicken me, O Lord, with
thy holy Spirit, that mounted on the wings of Charity, I may fly to thee. I
will rise duly in the morning, says the holy King, and glorify God: I will
every night wash my couch with my tears. Give me, O Lord, the care and
respect of this holy Prophet his vigilancie, stoutnesse in labors,
perseverance in good purposes, and continuance to the end. This life, O my
soul, is a warfare wherein we must not stand idle, but take up our weapons,
and fight manfully. We must prevent the day with our diligence, and out-watch
the Sun with our carfulness, lest the enemy take us unawares and slaughter
us: We must have our Lamps still lighted, and be ever ready, that we may be
taken in, and made partakers for our short travels of eternal and everlasting
rest and repose.

27. A Prayer against Covetousness.
SInce it is easier, O Lord, for a Cammel to enter the eye of a needle, then
for a rich man to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Let me (O Lord) wander
naked, and hungry, clothed with sores and botches, rather then with Dives his
portion, to take possession of his punishment. For what avails it to gain
the whole world, and lose my own soul? Yet if it please thee, bountiful
Father, to leave and bequeath to me a plentiful estate, and great riches, give
me grace so to use and bestow them, that I come not behind hand with thee in
my account: Let me so dispose them, as thou have by express words appointed,
that my poor Brethren put not up a Bill against me. Set not my heart on them,
O Lord, but as things without me: when either thou please by fire, water, or
any other casualtie to call them from me, let me thankefully surrender them as
a Reeue, not an Owner; yielding thee immortal and unfeigned thanks that I have
had them so long, not inwardly grudging and repining that I have lost them so
soon. For who places al his content on them, can neither possess them long,
nor safely. Give me, O Lord, poverty of spirit, in the midst of all
abundance, that I may fast, having all plenty, taking the delicates from my
Table, and with my own hand serving the poor and needy, who are bought at as
dear a rate as the mightiest, and whose souls are as precious to thee as the
greatest. Let me ever remember that saying of the blessed Job: Naked came I out
of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again; Praised be the Lord for
all: Leaving to my children the prayers of the poor, not the curses of
ill-gotten riches; the praises of good men, not that heavy sentence of, Woe be
unto thee, at my departure: that at that great and terrible day, when all
accounts shall be examined and laid open, bringing in my Bills of clothing the
naked, feeding the hungry, and giving drink to the thirsty, I may receive that
soule-comforting discharge of, Come ye blessed, and seat you on my right hand,
for unto you belongs the Kingdom of Heaven.

28. A Prayer humbly acknowledging our sins, with promise of amendment.
I Wretched sinner, here personally appearing and standing in the presence of
God everlasting, and of all the Court of Heaven, having considered the exceeding
mercy of his divine goodness toward me, most unworthy and miserable caytife,
who^ he has created of nothing, preserved, sustained, and delivered from so
many dangers, and endowed with so many benefits: But above al, considering the
inco^prehensible sweetness, and clemency wherewith this most good God has so
bountifully tolerated me in my iniquities, and so lovingly inspired me,
inuiting me to amendment, and so patiently expected my repentance and
conversion, notwithstanding all my unthankfulness, disloyalty and infidelity,
whereby deferring my Conversion, and despising his graces, I have so impudently
offended him: having moreover considered, that at the day of my christening, I
was so happy and holily vowed, and dedicated unto my God to be his child, and
that contrary to the profession, which then was made in my name, I have so many
and sundry times, so execrably and detestably profaned and violated my soul,
employing it, and opposing it against his divine Majesty. At length recalling
my self, and prostrating my self in heart and mind, before the Throne of his
divine justice, I acknowledge, confess, and yield my self lawfully attached,
and convicted of high Treason against his divine Majesty, and guilty of the
death and Passion of Jesus Christ, by reason of the heinous sins which I have
committed, for which he dyed; and suffered the torment of the Cross: so that
consequently I am worthy to be cast away and damned for ever. But turning my
self toward the Throne of the infinite mercy of the selfsame eternal God;
having detested from the bottom of my heart, and with all my force, the
iniquities of my life fore-passed, I most humbly require and crave pardon,
grace and mercy, with entire absolution from my crime, through virtue of the
Passion, and death of the same Savior and Redeemer of my soul; upon whom
relying, as upon the only foundation of my hope, I confirm again, aduowe and
renew the sacred profession of loyal service and fidelity, made in my name
and behalf, unto my GOD at my baptizing; renouncing the Devil, the Flesh, and
the World; abhorring the execrable suggestions, vanities, and concupiscence,
for all the time of this present life, and for all eternity, and converting my
self unto my most gracious and merciful God: I desire, deliberate, purpose
and fully resolve irreuocably to honor him, serve him, and love him, now and
for ever: giving him for this end, and dedicating and consecrating my spirits
with all his faculties; my soul with all her functions; my heart with all his
affections; and my body with all his senses: protesting never more to abuse any
one part of my being or nature, against his divine will, and sovereign
Majesty: To whom I offer up, and sacrifice my self in spirit, to be to him a
loyal, obedient, and faithful creature for evermore. Amen.

29. A Prayer to be said in Afflictions and Troubles.
O Eternal and everliving God, the Father of all Consolation and Mercies, the
giver of all things good and virtuous, who art unto us as a Nurse unto a
child, a Shepherd unto a wandering Lamb, a Guide of our ways, a Guardian of
our persons, a Counselor in doubts, a Comforter in troubles, a Patron in our
needs, and an assured Friend in all afflictions; graciously assist us in all
our tribulations and adversities, being an assured trial of thy servants; For
whom thou love, thou chastisest. Suffer me to be tempted, O Lord, not
overcome; rebuked, not forsaken; bruised with thy rod, not broken; for my soul
is heavy within me, and my enemies have prevailed against me; yea, my Spirit
repineth, and my flesh grudgeth, that thy hand is so heavy on me: I go like
one that has lost his way, shooting my eyes into the earth, as desiring to be
buried in my misfortunes: All my friends have left me, and my company is my
own thoughts, which are displeasing unto me: My eyes are great with tears, my
tongue labors with my misfortunes, so that I seem to others a piece of
earth wrapped in woe and calamity. Comfort me, O Lord, and I shall be
comforted; shoot thy holy Spirit into me, and I shall be disburdened; lighten
the beams of thy mercy upon me and I shall shine in prosperity: for it is my
sins, O Lord, which have confounded me: it is the multitude of my
wickednesses, which have drowned the multitude of thy joys; it is my guilt
which banisheth thy goodness. Turn back, O Lord, and mercifully look upon
me, as thou did upon thy holy Apostle, and faithful servant S. Peter, that I
may not only weep, but bitterly lament my misdeeds and offenses, who have
denied my only Lord and Master all the days of my life, swearing as one that
knew him not, and blaspheming, as certainly neither believing, nor fearing the
punishments which have ouer-growne me. But if alas, through suggestion of mine
enemy, or through humane frailty, I chance any time to transgress in any thing
whatsoever, give me grace, O Lord, by the aid of the Holy Ghost, to arise
again so soon as I shall perceive my fall, and so to return anew to the
Divine Mercy, without any stay or delay whatsoever. Let it please thee, O my
eternal God, Almighty and all good Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to confirm
and strengthen me in this resolution of my amendment, and to accept this
Cordial, and inward Sacrifice in the odor of sweetness. O my God, thou art my
God, God of my heart, God of my soul, God of my spirit; and for such do I
reverently, thankfully, and lovingly acknowledge, honor and adore thee, now
and for ever.

30. Another Prayer for remission of sins.
O Benign Jesus, the only refuge of desolate and afflicted souls, the comfort
and succor of those that are laden and oppressed, mercifully hear, and
pitifully receive the prayers and supplications of one conceived and borne in
sin, who acknowledges and confesses, before the Throne of thy Divine
Majesty, that he is too base, and altogether unworthy to speak, nay, look,
and much less to be heard and regarded in this his extremity, who in time of
health has contemned and neglected his Physicion; in time of iollity and
prosperity, has neither thriftily provided, nor wisely prevented the days of
horror and desolation, who being cruelly accused by his own conscience, of
many high and detestable treason, against the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
his thoughts and senses bearing witness against him, has neither treasure to
ransom him, nor friend to plead for him, wealth prevails not with him, who
is infinite in Riches: Titles and Honors are momentany shadows in his
presence, who aduanceth and degradeth whom he pleases. Kindred and friends
dare not be seen before so pure and just a Judge, in so foul and unjust a
cause. What will thou then do, O my soul, in these straights and extremities?
Whither will thou fly for succor? Heaven is his dwelling place, the earth his
footstool, the Mountains he will remove, and his justice dives into the
bottom of the Sea: Fall then before him, and all prostrate, lift up thy voice,
implore his mercy, desire his pardon, sue unto him, kneel before him, lay hold
of him, and let him not depart, O my soul, till he has, at least, granted
thee a Reprieue for thy horrible and lewd transgressions: which obtained,
whilst his wrath is a little slackened, thy tears may mollify, and get
between thee and his definitive sentence. Consider duly what friends thou
can make, and due consideration will make contrition a special favorite of
our Saviors, plead heartily for thee, who in thy behalf, promising a
detestation of thy former offenses, with an assured purpose and resolution of
amendment, joined with a continuance and progress in good works and holy
exercises, may (for our Savior delights to hear him) purchase thee an
absolute pardon. Grant me therefore, most sweet and amiable Lord, to employ the
remnant of my life in studying to be acquainted with these thy holy friends and
favorites. Give, O Savior, a fountain of tears unto my eyes, that I may
continually lament and bewail my daily and heinous offenses; breed in me a
loathing, and horrid detestation of all my sins, that I may fly from them,
and shun the ways and occasions which lead unto them, being stricken with an
extraordinary sorrow and compunction for having dared to offend a Lord of such
height and glory, and overcome with shame and ingratitude, repent the injuries
offered to so loving and careful a Master, who has shed his Blood, to save so
unprofitable a servant; that being by fervent charity reconciled unto him, I
may in the day of terror lawfully claim part of him, and being shrouded under
his wings, escape the malice and fury of my accusers; even for thy blessed
names sake, which shall in that time of trouble, be a sure defense to all thy
Chosen.

31. A Prayer for Chastity.
O Almighty and blessed Lord and Savior, the glory of thy Father, the
brightness and spotless sincerity of Men, who delightest and visitest thy
clean and unpolluted members; sanctify, O Lord, and purify me that I may
not be a shame and reproach to so immaculary and chaste a Head; that I may
appear a son, some way worthy so holy and heavenly a Father. Mortify and
kill in me the loose and powerful desires of the flesh, which borne in me are
kindled and inflamed by the devil and my own frailty. Fix my eyes, O Lord,
upon thy immortal, glorious, and neuer-fading beauty, that I may contemn and
despise all earthly and transitory paintings: Strike me in love wlth the
excellency of virtue, that my heart strongly and wholly taken with so fair
and worthily beloved a perfection, there may be no room left for Folly and
Idleness, the wel-springs of wanton affection. Busy me, O Lord, about the
day of Judgment, and my Account; the torments of hell, and their
euerlastingnesse: that all my study and labor may be how to avoid them, and
bless thee that have not left me to the world, and corrupted tyranny of man,
but mercifully laid thy hand upon me, and conducted me to the means of my
salvation.

32. A Prayer in Iournying.
O Mercifully loving Lord, which gouernedst and defendedst thy people Israel
from all the unjust oppression and merciless fury of their enemies, guiding
them in all their ways and travails; and graciously visitedst thy servant
Jacob in his way, and powredst thy blessing on him: be near at this time to
thy unworthy and sinful servant, and bless me, I beseech thee, in this my
travel and journey, from any violence of sin, or outward Spoylers and
Robbers. Prosper, O Lord, and bring to good end, as it shall please thee, the
business I travel and wander about, and vouchsafe to direct me in it, that I
do that which shall be to thy glory, and my own behoof and profit, even for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

33. A Prayer to be used in any storm of Lightning and Thunder.
O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven and earth are full of the
Majesty of thy glory; the floods lift up their voice and speak thy wonders,
the Heavens fly before thy Anger, and the unnaturally moving Earth trembles
at thy Voice: All which ordained for the use of Man, upon thy word prove their
scourge and punishment: The fire from above, at the cry of the Prophet, eats
up his Scorners: the Sea rages and deuoureth the people and Chariots of the
Egyptians; yea, the earth gapeth, and buryeth men alive at thy command:
Preserve us, gentle and infinitely loving Father, from this violent and
dreadful storm, which raised for our sins, threatens our destruction. Put
out the lightning, O Lord, and dissolve the horrid and fearful stone, lest it
pash thy people to ashes, and we be seen no more. Cast thine eye upon the
Merits and Passion of our Savior, and let his Blood come between thy Justice
and our guilt, that we may rejoice, and lift up our voices with the holy
Prophet David, I will not fear, though the earth be moved and thrown into
the heart of the Sea; for the Almighty is our refuge and strength, and helps
us in all our trouble. Praised be the name of the Lord.

34. A Prayer or Meditation, concerning the benefits after Creation.
COnsider, O my soul, with reverence and thanksgiving, how Almighty God
placed thee here of his own bounty and nobleness, not for any need he had
of thy help or service, but to bestow upon thee his grace, and therefore has
he enriched thee with understanding to know him, remembrance to be mindful
of him, will to love him, imagination to represent his benefits unto thy
thoughts, eyes to behold the wonders of his works, and a tongue to praise him.
Wherefore being created and set in the world for this intention, reject and
cast away all actions which prove contrary to this end. For alas! what did I
busy my thoughts upon, O my God, when I placed them not upon thee? What was I
mindful of, when I forgot thee? What did I love, when I did not love thee?
Aye me, I should have fed my soul with the verity, and I have filled it with
vanity; and have served the world, which was not made but to serve me. I
defy you utterly, O vain cogitations and unprofitable fancies. I abhor and
abjure you, O detestable and frivolous Imaginations: I renounce you,
unfaithful and disloyal loves, miserable and lost services, ungrateful
gratifications, cumbersome and unpleasing pleasures. And thou, O my God, and my
Lord, thou shall be, for the time to come, the only object of my thoughts;
and I will never more apply my spirit to any cogitations which may be offensive
or disliking to thee. My memory all the days of my life, shall be filled with
consideration of thy excessive goodness, so lovingly declared in my behalf;
thou shall be the deliciousness of my heart, and the sweetness of my
affections: Hence therefore from my sight, for ever, all vain and idle
pastimes, whereunto I have vainly applied my mind; all gamesome and toying
exercises, in which I fondly spent my days; and all loose and idle affections,
which entangled my heart, shall henceforth be a horror unto my thoughts,
because thou have made me, O Lord, for thy self, to enjoy everlastingly the
immensitie of thy glory. O when shall it be, that I shall be worthy, and
when shall I praise thee according to thy desert, and my duty* I offer unto
thee, O my dear Creator, all these good affections and holy resolutions, with
all my heart and all my soul, and beseech thee, O God, to accept these my
desires and vows, and to give my soul thy holy blessing, that she may
faithfully accomplish them through the merits of the Blood of thy blessed
Son our Savior, shed for me upon the Cross.

35. A Prayer against vain Attire.
Does it beseem me, most merciful and blessed Redeemer, to be decked and
attired in rich and sumptuous Garments, when the scornful and disdainefull
Jews apparel thee in a coat of folly, to be laughed at and contemned of the
people? Do Jewels and Feathers become my head, when I inwardly behold thee
crowned with Thorns? And shall my wrists be guarded with precious Bracelets,
where thine were bound with cords? My fingers glistring with Diamonds, and
thine iewell'd with thine own Blood starting out, with the unmerciful usage
of thy persecuters? O my most sweet and gentle Savior, let my sorrowful and
woeful thoughts, for my deadly and horrible offenses, be to my head a torment,
like thy merciless Thorns; my vain and idle behavior, more despised then
that many-coloured coat; and the awe and reverence of thy justice (terrible to
offenders) chain my hands harder, and with more cruelty then the whipcord;
that I may in some measure have a feeling and understanding of those unheard
of, and new-inuented Tyrannies laid upon thee for my transgressions. Let the
memory of thy wounds pierce my heart with true compunction, so to have injured
a Lord of such greatness and Majesty, for my sake willingly, above the
meekness of a Lamb, undergoing those base and unworthy disgraces, the
forerunners of thy cruel death. Give me, O Lord, since we must be perfect
imitators of thee, obedience to yield and submit my self to thy divine Will
and Pleasure, in all sufferings and torments, a noble patience to bear them
manfully, and charity inflamed like thine, to bless my persecuters, praying
for their amendment and conversion, that suffering with thee obediently,
patiently and lovingly, I may enjoy with thee that happy reward, fore-promised
to all those that take up their Cross and follow thee; even for thy precious
and invaluable blood; which shed upon the Cross, is an undeniable Sacrifice
for all sins and offenses.

36. A Prayer for a Maid against Temptation.
Give unto God the first fruits, says the Prophet. And our Savior commands
us to offer him those things that are his. Thou have planted me here, O Lord,
and opened the gates of heaven to water me: Thou have made me flourish,
spreading like a fair Vine, and my lussious and swelling fruit have tempted
unholy hands to steal away what belongs to thee. Strengthen me, O Lord,
against their violence, and let their subtle persuasions come to nothing, the
Pit which they have dug for others, prove their own Sepulcher, and let their
nets be overthrown and broken, that glorifying thee, I may joyfully say, The
Lord has been my deliverer, I need not fear what men can do to me: he has
helped and saved his hand-maiden out of the hands of his enemies. Blessed be
the name of the Lord, now and for evermore. Amen.

37. Another Prayer for a Maid, to the same effect.
O Almighty GOD, Creator of heaven and earth, who glorifyest the Firmament
with Stars, the Sun with a great light; the God of all beauty, all
proportion, all order, holding in thy hand the motion and being of all things
created: I humbly offer up unto thy Divine Majesty, whatsoever is good and
virtuous in me, whatsoever beautiful or proportionable, entreating thee, of
thy infinite mercy, to take into thy custody an innocent and unexperienced
Maiden, to direct and govern me by thy neuer-erring wisdom, lest my youth,
betrayed by frailty and indiscretion, should traitorously yield me up to the
lewd suggestions and temptations of the devil, who apparelled in flesh and
blood, waits hourly for my destruction, leaving no means untried to
captiuate my weak soul: Suffer him not, O Lord, to have the vpper-hand; give
me not into his power, unless thou place a guard of Angels with me, holy and
irresistable thoughts within me, that in thy name, putting on my Savior Christ
for my Armor, advancing the glorious Cross for my Banner, I may put my
enemies to flight, and triumph in the Conquest which thou have gotten for me,
to my own, and all their eternal comfort which put their trust in thee. Amen.

38. A Meditation, or Prayer for a Maiden, not to be proud of her own
perfections.
DID not thy hand, O Lord, give those many excellent and indistinguisht colors
to the Rainbow? Did not thou, O Lord, give glory to the Sun, and apparel
the earth in all her beauties? And does not the Rainbow at the withdrawing
of the Sun, discolor it self, the Sun at the interposing of the Moon, hide
his glory, and the earth, in the absence of the Sun, lose all her gay and
flourishing Ornaments? O momentanie and fading painting, washed away with a
little sickness, and blown off by the rough breath of a violent wind! Shall
I for thee, abandon my Creator, and to keep thy friendship, fall out with
Almighty God? Will the worms forbear thy excellency and perfections, and
struck with reverence, fall off and retire into their Cabins? Is sickness
afraid of it, or dare not death venture upon it? No, no, my soul, they will
break through thy Coffin, and as a dainty dish, eagerly devour it: the
Leprosy will make a prey on it, and too well we know that death fears no
colors. If the^ thou be bewitched to this outward gloss and shining, seek
the ways to make it permanent; apply thy self to virtue, whose raritie and
luster strikes a far off, and all men will call thee beautiful* Let modesty
sit on thy cheeks, and thy blushes will out-last the Roses; Truth upon thy
lips, and they will exceed the Rubies; Mildness in thy eyes, and they will
outshine the Diamond; Innocence on thy breast, and thy witness will surpass
the Lillies; thou shall be beloved of men, at peace with thy self, and
acceptable to Almighty GOD. Away then all artificial and sophisticate drugs,
idle and besotting waters: never more will I meddle with you. O my sweet
Savior and Redeemer, let nothing seem beautiful but thy mercy; nothing
lovely but thy bounty: enamored on which, let me woo, entreat, sigh,
zealously protest, and use all means and industry to obtain them. For all
other exterior and formal beauties, the babies of flesh and blood, let me
only acknowledge them, as thy glorious workmanship; love them, as badges of
thy favor; admire and praise thee for them, from whose everlasting storehouse
they proceed, thy self being all beauty, all excellency, all perfection, and
more to be desired the^ much gold or precious stones, in whose company all
things are filled with perfection and glory world without end. Amen.

39. A Prayer for a Maid, to be directed in her Choice.
SInce thou, O Lord, in thy everlasting wisdom, have ordained Marriage
honorable amongst men, as the means for succession and propagation: Give me
(O Lord) an understanding heart, that I be not euilly seduced to my overthrow.
Grant that I may aim at no other end, but the fulfilling thy commandment, not
my own lusts and wilful desires: let me choose by the advice of my friends,
and the eyes of my Parents, lest blinded with affection, I fall into those
inconveniences, which I may too late feel, without means of remedying. Grant
(O Lord) a pure and unspotted love may be the cause of our joining, and a
peaceable and undivided amity the effect. Let the fear of displeasing thee,
make us please one another; the obedience to thee, teach us obedience in our
selves; that wholly submitting our selves to thy will, we may labor together
in this transitory life, to come to thee the life everlasting, with whom
dwells unspeakable love, and neuer-ending charity, world without end. Amen.

40. A Prayer for a Maid, to be obedient to her Parents.
O My most merciful Lord and Redeemer, subdue and bridle my headstrong and
untamed affections, who delighting in their own ways, repine at the direction
of my Superiors. Let me ever remember thy holy commandment: Honor thy
Father and Mother, that thy days may be long in the land of the living. Give
me grace to understand it truly, lest forgetting thy precept, I be banished
into that wild and barbarous Country, where to live is terribler then death,
and dying, the only comfort of the living. Let their reprehensions be the
cause of my amendment, not repining their just and lawful precepts, an
undeniable practice of all my actions. Let me reverence their age, lending them
my youth to help them; pray for their imperfections, and in them remember
humane weakness; that in my obedience, I may receive the virtue of their
blessing, which thou always grantest to them that endeavor to fulfill the
least of thy commandments.

41. A Prayer before a Journey.
O Almighty and everliving God, which by the hand of thy servant Moses
broughtst the people of Israel out of Egypt, and the cruelty of Pharaoh, and
made them walk over the Red Sea, keeping back with a mighty wind the raging
waters, who returning in their Fury, ouer-whelmed all that great Host, and
after went before them, and conducted them through the vast and wild Desert,
feeding them in their extreme Famine with Manna showred from Heaven: Be pleased
(O merciful Father) at this instant to accompany me in all my iourneyes and
travails, and with thy loving and mighty protection defend me from all
dangers of those that lie in awaite to murder and spoil thy Liege people. Be
unto me (O Lord) a guide in my going out, a safeguard and defense upon the
way, a shadow in heat, a shelter in rain and cold, a wagon in weariness, an
helper in time of extremity, a stay in slipperie passages, a Haven in
shipwreck, that under thy safe and sure conduct, we may march quietly and
peaceably to our iourneyes end, and under the cover of thy wings, joyfully and
prosperously return to our homes again; for his only sake, who was a
continual Pilgrim here upon earth, to make all our prayers acceptable unto
thee. Amen.

42. Another short Prayer for the same.
O Almighty God, which have made this our life, as it were a short Pilgrimage
to visit holy places, and do penance by thee appointed for man's first
transgression; giving us as in an Inn, a space to refresh our wearied bodies,
not to dwell and settle our selves: Grant mercifully, thy assistance, in these
my iourneys and remouings, and with thy holy Spirit bless and comfort me on
the way, that I be not left alone to the cruelty of those that would assail
me: but having thy Angel for my guide and defender, I may not fear the
oppression of the Wicked, but happily arrive at the desired Haven, where I
will magnify and praise thy holy name, for thy mighty aid and protection.

43. A Prayer in Afflictious.
WHy art thou sorrowful, my soul, and why do thou trouble me? Why do
thou hang sleep upon mine eyelids, and fasten heaviness on my footsteps?
Does not God regard the prayers of the afflicted? or does he not from his high
holy place look down to the earth, that he might hear the gronings of the
fettered, and those that are persecuted and afflicted? Can thy eye see into
heaven, or is thy understanding of counsel with God, to perceive how near his
holy hand is to deliver thee? Every instant is time enough for his Omnipotency:
and impossible occasions, easy to the infinitenes of his Deity: Put thy trust
in him, my soul, and thou shall not be confounded. Say with the Prophet David,
Though a thousand fall on my right hand, and ten thousand on my left, yet I
will not be afraid, because God has been my helper. Be comforted by the
merciful examples which he has showed to his people. Did not Almighty God
with a strong hand and punishments, enforce the Prophet Jonas to preach
destruction to the Ninevites, limiting them a short time, that within three
days their City should be destroyed? and yet upon their submission, humbling
themselves before him with prayers, and fasting: did he not most mercifully
remit their punishment, and take them into his grace and favor? Fall therefore
prostrate before him, and with perfect resignation of thy own will, yield thy
self into his hands, to do what it please him with thee: entreat him of his
love and favor, who never absenteth himself to those that seek him: rely
upon his mercy, who so much loved his people, that he sent his only begotten
Son, to dye for the Redemption of mankind: Ask him forgiveness of thy
sins and offenses, by reason of whose guilt, thou suffer these light and
temporary punishments, which have in justice deserved everlasting damnation,
and disburdened of which, the yoke will be easy, and the weight light: yea,
thy miseries will be pleasing like wounds honorably gotten in a glorious
conquest: and then may thou joyfully sing unto the Lord; Mine enemies that
troubled me, themselves are weakened and fallen. One thing yet I have asked of
our Lord; this will I seek for, that I may dwell in the house of our Lord, all the days of my life.

44. A Prayer to be said by a Merchant, for the safe return of his goods.
IN the time of my trouble who shall I fly unto? what power can fetch me from
the bottom of the Sea? or whose arm reaches to the end of the world? O most
merciful and gracious Lord, the Sea is thine, and thou made it, and thy hands
prepared the dry land: with thy Word thou calmest the raging waters, and with a
beck layest the fury of the wind. Grant, of thy accustomed clemency and
goodness, such seasonable and temperate weather, that they may safely arrive at
the appointed Port. Be unto them, O Lord, their Pylote, lest the hidden Rocks,
or unknown Sands devour them. Be their defense and safeguard, lest their
enemies make prey on them: that relying on thy favor, above the virtue of
their Lodestone, they may joyfully and merrily touch the desired Land,
acknowledging thy goodness and might, to whom alone that merciless element
obeys at thy command, yielding up all her treasure. Grant this, O my sweet
Lord and Savior, even for thy tender mercy, which refuses no Petitions, that
are offered with a pure and unfeigned zeal. Amen.

45. A Prayer before Study.
O Unspeakable Creator, which in the Treasure of thy Wisdom have ordained
learning, as a secondary means to raise our declined souls, wrapped by the fall
of Adam in sin and ignorance, to a perfected and surer apprehension of thy
divine goodness: Enlighten, O Lord, our understanding, and with the rays of thy
brightness, banish away all mists and darkness, by which we are dulled and
disabled. Thou (O Lord) which raisest thy glory out of the tongues of Infants,
power into our lips eloquence and utterance, that we may reveal thy will, and
sing praises of thy goodness. Quicken (O Lord) our understanding, strengthen our
memory, and rectify our will; that we may truly know, faithfully keep, and
obediently perform thy precepts and commandments. Give us (O Lord) grace in
our entrance, perseverance in our progress, and humility at our going forth,
that we may always acknowledge thee, the giver and bestower of what height so
ever we attain to, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

46. A Prayer for the fatherless.
O Almighty God, which art a Father to the Orphans, mercifully assist us poor
and comfortles children, left as a prey to them, who are left to dispose of us.
Behold (O Lord) how they contend for what we have, envying one another for a
share, wherein they can challenge no part. But thou (O Lord) shall plead our
cause. Thou shall be our Advocate and Helper: Thou shall take the prey out of
their mouths, and lay that shame upon them, which they have laid up for
others. For unto thee (O Lord) we commend our souls, our bodies, our
substance, desiring to be disposed by thee, and to receive from thee what thou
shall think in thy wisdom will be necessary for the attaining thy love and
favor, without which, in vain we do heap up for aftertimes; in vain do
we build and rise early, be sollicitous and take care, since who builds
without thee, pulls down; who sows without thee, scatters; and who
gathers without thee, heapeth woe upon himself.

47. A Prayer in Afflictions and troubles.
COmfort thy self (O my soul) in these Afflictions and troubles, praise and
glorify thy holy Name, that he has not given thee up to thy own affections
and desires, letting thee wildely run as a beast, to all sensuality: but
gently chastising thee as one of his children, has recalled thee into thy
self, to know thy own weakness and frailty, making thee one of the
honorable Order of the Cross, whose badge all his Saints and Servants wear
upon their breast; for it is better for thee that thy members here languish and
suffer, then thy whole body to be cast into everlasting fire: yield thy self
up to all torments for his sake, being heartily sorry, that thou art not able
to undergo more in his service, who in his own example has out-gone all
tyranny for thee. Triumph when thou art persecuted, and glory in the bonds of
our Savior. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall rejoice: Blessed are
they that are humbled with miseries and misfortunes, for they shall be exalted
and advanced. Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake, for
to them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, where thou shall eternally rejoice
and triumph with the glorious Saints, and Martyrs, who have been sharers with
thee in this vale of tears, and misery.

48. A Prayer of thanksgiving.
SIng unto the Lord a new song, because he has done marvelous things, with
his own right hand and his holy arm, has he gotten himself the victory.
Who is like unto our God? or who dare compare with his mightiness? He has
remembered himself of his promise to his servant, that he would not leave him
for ever: He has not suffered my enemies utterly to prevail against me, nor
left me in the hands of those that hate me. He has only showed me the Rod,
and taken it away again: early in the morning will I recount thy praises, and
meditate all the day long upon thy mercies, which have given me to taste of thy
blessings, and filled me with good things. I was naked, and thou have clothed
me: I was hungry, and thou have refreshed me: I was thirsty, and thou have
grasped the Cloud, and powered down thy heavenly deaw: I was weary, and thou
have eased me; I was laden, and thou have strengthened me: I was oppressed,
and thou have rescued me. O what tongue is able to story thy loving kindnesses!
or what understanding conceiueth thy wondrous works! I will show mercy (says
our Lord) unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments. But
how abundantly ought I to speak of thy gracious favor, who have rebelled
against thy motions, spurned at thy precepts and statutes; and have yet been
embraced, recalled home again, clothed richly, and set at thy own Table! I
have riotously consumed, and thou have lovingly restored: I have in lavish
cups, dis-honest and lascivious company, proudly, and vain-gloriously thrown
away my salvation: and thou have by stripes, buffetings, and most tormenting
and cruel death, redeemed it again. I have transgressed (O Lord) and thou art
punished: I being a low, and contemned vassaile, have offended and mis-done;
and thou the Son of the mighty King, art beaten. It is not so (O Lord) with the
sons of men, who afflict their subjects for their mis-demeanours, and make
them smart for the Princes offenses. Who is like unto our God, whose mercy
endures from generation, to generation: Praise our Lord, ye children: Praise
ye the name of our Lord. The name of our Lord be blessed, from henceforth, now
and for ever.

49. A Prayer in time of Pestilence.
FAmine, Plague, and War, are thy scourges (O Lord) and thou throwest them
upon the people for their offenses: We have repined, merciful Father, in the
abundance of health, and employed our strength in dishonoring thy holy Name.
Our members sanctified for thy use and service, have been the preyes of
Harlots, and officers of Satan. The very breath thou gave us to praise and
tell thy wonders, has mis-spoken, and blasphemed against thee; justly
therefore does thy consuming Pestilence snatch away our health, turn our
strength into nothing, rot all our members, killing us by the infection of the
air taken into our bodies, who have continually breathed out of our bodies all
blasphemy and corruption.

Yet stay (O merciful Father) and hold thy revenging hand, hear the cries of
thy servants, groaning under the tyranny of this murdering disease, and be
pitiful to us. Remember (O Lord) that we are conceived and borne in sin,
poor and unprofitable creatures, unable without thee to deserve the least drop
of thy favor: Mercifully assist us with thy grace, and enrich us with thy holy
and spiritual virtues, that our prayers may come up before thee, and be
acceptable, that having taken away this heavy persecution and plague, we may
for ever praise thy clemency, and enjoying thy loving mercy, fear again to
displease thee, who have had so great compassion on us; even for thy Sons
sake, who gave himself up to all torments, to keep us unpunished.

50. A Prayer in time of War.
O Lord God of Hosts, that fightest the battles for thy servants, girding thy
self with power and strength, to overcome and put to flight the enemies of
those that put their trust in thee.

Be present (O Lord) with the Armies, which are gone forth to oppose those who
labor our overthrow. Lead (O Lord) their Captain, and conduct him through
the midst of their enemies: Give him wisdom and discretion, warily to foresee
all disaduantages; invincible courage, to oppose all dangers; and truth and
loyalty, that he sell not the faith and blood of the people. Be at their
counsels (O Lord) and determine for them. Bless their stratagems, that
vnpreuented they may take effect, and so order all the state of this War,
that they may return with conquest and victory.

Give unto the soldiers (O Lord) ablenes of mind and body, to be willing and
strong to undergo al labors and assaults, concord and unanimity, that
obediently laboring for the weal of their Country, they may be made fit
instruments of the others overthrow.

Bless the Season of the year unto them; moderate the extremity of heat and
cold, that they be neither disabled by the one, nor distempered by the other.
Let the Sun and the Wind (O Lord) fight for them; the advantages and
inconueniency of place be on their side; that by thee, and through thee, being
made co^querors of their enemies, they may triumph in thy goodness, and boast of
thy loving kindnesses which endure from generation to generation. Amen.

51. A Prayer to be said by a Husbandman, for the fruits of the earth.
O All provident and careful Creator, which have given charge and influence to
the heavenly Powers, to apparel and adorn the earth with varified and many
colored beauties, for the ornament and glory of this great All: and have
likewise blessed her womb with a fit disposition to receive the Husbandmans
seed, comforting and cherishing it with her native virtue, and the generatiue
power of the Sun, till it re-deliuer it again with great increase and
profit, for the refreshing and sustentation of all mankind: Power down, we
beseech thee, with thy heavenly and timely showers, maturitie and fruitfulness
into her barren and sterrill womb. Give her (O Lord) a timely Conception, and
let the moderate falls of heat and water, deliver her of plenty and abundance,
that all nations may rejoice and be glad. Send far from us that monster
Famine, the abortiue issue of her untimely labor. Shut up the Lightning (O
Lord) and hold back the Thunder; graspe the Clouds, that she perish not with
excess of drought, and stay the waters in their fall, lest she miscarry by
drinking too much. Keep from her unwholesome airs, destroying Mil-dewes, and
the devouring Caterpillars, which carried on the wings of the vvinde, eat up
the fruits of our labor. Give us (O Lord) a timely Harvest, that we may with
joy and comfort carry into our Barnes what we have with much labor and
expense carefully sowed. Bless (O Lord) our store like the Widows, for that
giving out of our necessary provision to our poor Brethren, we may find thy
blessing left behind; that neither casual fire, malice of our neighbors, nor
the excess of immoderate showers destroy our Garners and Storehouses: but
holding our wealth as thy gift to be recalled at thy pleasure, we may receive
thy bounteous largess here, and full harvest hereafter to those promised, that
have been careful Stewards in thy Vineyard, even for Jesus, etc.

52. A Prayer for the Widows.
HOw often, O Lord, have thou invited me by thy holy Word to come unto thee?
How often have thou called, Come unto me, all ye that are laden and oppressed,
and I will ease you? Behold me here, O Lord, a poor and desolate Widow,
deprived of my Husband, under thee, given to be my only stay and comfort;
shut up in my house, unvisited, vncomforted, vncounselled, left in a sea of
troubles, and in a wilderness of business; unskillful how to begin, and
unexperienced which way to wade through them, my children hungry after my
goods, and my kindred gaping after their Legacies; my state uncertain and
litigious, called by contentious and evil, minded persons into question of
Titles and Trials, meaning by oppression and might to tear from me what
belongs not to them. In all these my troubles and afflictions, heaviness of
mind, sad and continual griefs, I neither expect nor desire comfort but from
thy holy Tabernacle: Look down from thy high and holy place, O Lord, upon thy
careful and comfortless servant, and instruct her which way to take, in so
many and confused miseries. Touch the heart, O Lord, of some honest and
religious man, one who has thy fear before his eyes, that he may help and
direct me in my uncertain and doubtful businesses: and if it be my right, O
Lord, that they would violently pluck from me, be near unto me, for thy
mercy sake, and raise up those that are skillful in the Law, to deal
faithfully with me: fasten the Judge, O Lord, unto me, and open his eyes that
he may see my right, and deal according unto equity.

Bless my children, and teach them obedience to thee, and duty toward me,
that I may be comforted in them; and give me grace, O Lord, to dedicate the
remainder of my days to thy use and service, strength to resist and overcome
all contrary motions and oppositions; that having faithfully obeyed thee in
taking my husband; since thou have pleased to take him from me, I may live
only to thee, so that death nor hell be able to divorce me from so bountiful,
so blessed, and all-pittying a Lord and Father. Amen.

53. A Prayer for a Wife.
O Lord God, most mighty, which have instituted and ordained Marriage for the
holy uniting and joining together of one soul in two bodies, which should
govern and direct all their actions to one end, mutually supplying each others
ear, jointly laboring through the cumbers and adversities of this transitory
world, together bearing all troubles and discomforts, together partaking of all
joys and solaces: Grant, I beseech thee, for the love which thou bear thy
holy Church, a type of which thou please to make us, that we may together
faithfully serve and obey thy commandments, love thee above our selves, and
fear thee above all things.

Bless, O Lord, I beseech thee, my husband in all his business and
undertakings, and give him grace to call upon thee for aid and counsel in all
his enterprises; accept his labors, O Lord, and prosper the works of his
hands, that endeavoring painefully, and honestly to earne our refreshings, we
may rely upon thee for the good success.

Grant us, O Lord, a competent estate to maintain our selves without
engagements to others, and to bring up our children in thy fear; sanctify us
with thy holy Spirit, that a virtuous and heavenly love may dwell betwixt us,
in all sorrows and misfortunes, whatsoever it shall please thee to lay upon
us, still comforting one another.

Forgive, O Lord, and remit all our sins, and give us both grace to attend
thy Divine Will and Pleasure for the perfecting and establishing of whatsoever
we shall desire, that being made one by thee, and living one in thee, we may
undivided enjoy thy eternal company, world without end. Amen.

54. A Prayer for Mariners.
I Have seen and beheld thy wonderful works, and am amazed: I have
considered, O Lord, and meditated on thy unheard of mercies, and am astonished:
Thou have given us a passage in the midst of the foming waters, the raging Seas
have encompassed us on every side, and thou have saved us: The Rocks have
hidden themselves, awaiting our destruction, and the Shelfes have provided a
grave for us; terrible and dreadful Tempests have snatched away our Mast from
us, the devouring Maine has eaten up our Anchor; Darkness has ouer-shadowed
the heavens, and taken the guide of the Stars from us, and the confusion and
imminent danger so amazed our Pilot, that he has forgotten the use of his
Loadstone: and yet, O merciful and all pitying Father, have thou safely
conducted and brought us to our desired Haven.

Thy mighty and outstretched Arm has supplied the defect of our Mast; thy
Mercy stands us in stead of our Anchor; thy euer-shining goodness made way
for us through the midst of all darkness; and thy eternal Providence, our
neuer-fayling Lodestone, mercifully directed us in the unknown ways of the
wild Ocean.

Praise the Lord, all ye waters, and let all the fishes of the Sea praise the
LORD, and all ye that have seen his wonders in the deep be confounded and
astonished.

For my part, O Lord, write them, I beseech thee, in the Table of my heart,
that I may continually remember them with fear and trembling, ever
acknowledging with praise and thanksgiving, that thou have taken me from the
mouth of the grave, and snatched me out of the jaws of death; for which I will
always sing, There is none like unto our God, who has saved his people in the
midst of destruction, hallowed be his name for evermore. Amen.

55. A Prayer for Children.
O Lord God, from whom the most aged receive their comfort, and the wisest
their instruction; guide, I humbly entreat thee, my parents in the way of
salvation; be a staff, O Lord, unto their weakness, and a guide unto their
steps; renew their minds in the decay of their bodies, and give them inward
eyes to behold what their dim and fading sight can never attain to, that they
may walk in truth and righteousness all the days of their life. And grant,
I earnestly beseech thee, loving and gentle Father, that I may be obedient to
their holy and just commandments, loving and careful in performing, to my
power, their precepts and instructions, requiting their former care of me, with
my duty and humbleness.

Bless me, O Lord, in my tender and unexperienced years, from all evil and
lewd company, which may accustom me to idle and unthrifty courses, invre my
mind to labor for the attaining learning and knowledge: and graciously, O
Lord, bestow upon me, as the groundworke of all other virtues, the gift of
humility, being fittest for my years, and most convenient for grace to build
upon, even for Jesus Christ his sake, who has commanded all little ones to
come to him. Amen.

56. A Prayer for Servants.
O Lord God, which have bought us all with thy precious Blood, ransoming at as
dear a price the Beggar that fe^deth on Alms, as Kings, that clothed in gold
and purple, fare deliciously: Give me grace, O Lord, to be contented with the
estate thou have placed me in, and let me not repine at the lowness of my
place, but keeping here my station, and carefully watching for the time of my
freedom, I may at last obtain eternal liberty.

Prosper, O Lord, of thy accustomed bounty and goodness, my Master and
Mistress: bless them with thy fear, and endue them with thy holy Spirit,
that they may truly obey and honor thee. Humble me, O Lord, before them, and
give me grace, faithfully to execute what they shall lawfully command: Let me
never entertain a thought to wrong them, but deal truly and uprightly in
whatsoever they shall commit to my charge, knowing that thou art a severe and
All-seeing Judge, who wilt one day call me to account for all my offenses: let
me be studious and diligent to dispatch what they shall appoint me to do, not
mis-imploying my time to their loss and prejudice.

Save me, O Lord, from the company of those who delight in wickedness, and
under whose tongues lies guile and deceit: Prevent me, O Lord, by thy
neuer-erring wisdom, and assist me with thy grace, that I may truly serve
thee, and them whom thou have appointed over me, that I may at length be
preferred to thee, in thy eternal Kingdom, who live and raignest, world
without end. Amen.

57. A Prayer for one that is sick.
WIth what face, O Lord, shall I approach before thee? How shall I dare to lift
up my voice unto thee? What can I say for my self, or what shall I offer?
Shall I entreat health of thee, who in the fullness of it have dedicated it to
thy enemy? Shall I proffer to serve thee, that am unable to help my self?
Shall I request thy love and favor, who have ever been thy professed enemy,
and now come only to beg it, when I am under thy wrath, ready to receive
damnation for my heinous and horrid transgressions? I confess, eternal and
everliving God, that I am not worthy that a thought of thy goodness should
enter into so polluted a mansion: I acknowledge my self to have deserved more
punishment then hell can lay upon me, who have daily, hourly, nay knowingly,
so grievously offended thy Divine Majesty, now only offering my self to thee
when sin can make no use of me: Yet, O merciful Father, consider I beseech
thee, what my substance is, how mighty my enemies, and how frail my own
condition: Forsake me not, I beseech thee, though I come ouer-late unto thee;
thy mercy I know, O Lord, is able to forgive more then I am able to commit: By
that bottomless welspring, I beseech thee, have pity on me, and comfort me,
lest I despair and dye: For my sins are terrible unto me, and appear before
me clad in their deformity: the devil, whom I have thus long served, now puts
me in mind, and represents the horror of hell unto me: O sweet Jesus,
hasten unto me; and since thou did vouchsafe to put on Humanity for our
Redemption, forsake me not now a miserable and afflicted creature, lying at the
feet of thy mercy, who determines never to rise, till thou say unto him, Thy
sins are forgiven thee. Lend me, O Lord, if it be thy holy pleasure, a
little more respit to call upon thy Name: Lengthen my days that I may repent
me, and win thy favor by seeking after thee: But if otherwise thou
determine, make me, O Lord, ready for thee, and let my humble confession,
hearty and true contrition, with the acknowledgement of thy infinite and
boundless Deity, as it did the Thief upon the Cross, save me from prepared
ruin and destruction, sweet Jesus. Amen.

58. A Prayer for Women's Deliverance.
Unsearchable, O Lord, are judgments, and wonderful the works of thy hand;
thou have made and fashioned a Lump of flesh in my womb, thou have given it
life to grow, to feed and be nourished; thou have adorned and beautified it
with limbs and senses; thou have, in thy mercy, inspired a living soul into
it, whereby it may hereafter be capable of thy love and everlasting felicity:
Now the period, O Lord, draws near, and the time appointed for the delivery
and giving up this burden; be near, O merciful Father, unto thy servant, and
strengthen me in this my sore labor and travel: comfort me, O Lord, in my
agony, that I faint not under the throws and dreadful pangs of the
approaching and neere-ensuing birth: let no vain fears affright me, or the
thoughts of what I must suffer, be terrible unto me; Let me be comforted, O
Lord, in thy promise, and the blessing that must proceed from my Ioynes;
hearten me, patiently to endure my torments: hasten, O Lord, my delivery, and
give the fruit of my womb an easy passage, that with the sight of a
well-formed child, I may be made a joyful mother: grant it, O Lord, right
shape, and keep the life which thou have given unto it, that it may be borne
anew of water and the holy Spirit, to be made partaker and heir of thy
everlasting Kingdom.

But if, O Lord, thou in thy eternal Wisdom, have otherwise provided for me,
appointing me in the neuer-againe dying birth, to be restored unto thee,
mercifully assist me in this my last passage, that confident in thy promises
made to all, I may joyfully give my self as a well-pleasing sacrifice,
awaiting thy divine Pleasure, and commending and committing my self into thy
hands, patiently expect the blessed hour to be delivered from the sinful
prison of this transitory world, into that everlasting Habitation, where
dwells infinite joy, world without end. Amen.

59. A Prayer to be said when you go into your bed.
Bless me, O Lord, preserve and keep me, from all the dangers of this night:
Save and deliver me from the ancient enemy, who through immoderate sloth and
negligence hops to betray me: Visit, O Lord, my soul, though far too
mean to entertain so royal a Guest; yet sending thine own provision before
thee, holy virtues, chaste and simple thoughts, thy lodging may be the better
prepared for thee. Settle and govern, O Lord, my fantasy, that it range and
form not wild and unlawful apparations; stay my memory, that it search not
after vain and idle pleasures; fill my understanding with thy goodness and
mercy, that being wholly and inwardly busied with thee, I may escape the snares
and nets of Satan, and wake to my own comfort, and thy glory, sweet JESUS.
Amen.

60. A Prayer against idle Talk.
SEt a watch, O Lord, before my lips, that I defile not my mouth with dishonest
and unseemly speeches, betraying the hearers, to sin and uncleanness: Keep
me from their company whose delight is in wicked talk, lest I perish with
them: Let my tongue deliver forth thy praises, and be the Trumpet of thy
neuer-ending mercies: grant me a single and unpolluted heart, that I may
reverently adore thy Mysteries, and be the honorer of thy Glory and Majesty:
Keep my eyes from wandering after the concupiscence of my desires, that I be
not overtaken and made prisoner to sin and death. Place my thoughts upon thy
bitter Passion, whose mournful acts may put away all idle delights and
pleasures, and fasten me upon thy Cross, to weep and lament my passed
offenses, for that sweet Name of JESUS, in whose merits all flesh must be
saved.

61. A Thanksgiving.
O God, most high, most mighty Creator of heaven and earth, which out of
Nothing, have made and formed this beautiful All, createdst the glorious
Firmament fretted with Stars; the euer-shining Sun to give light by day,
and firest the Moon to banish the nights darkness: giving life to the Fowls
of the Air, the Beasts feeding on the Earth, and the Fishes whose dwelling is
in the waters below, for the use and service of man, making him according to
thy own Image, ennobling him with Understanding, Will, and Memory, to
conceive and apprehend the glorious works of thy hand; Redeemed him with an
vnparalell'd example; preserved and kept him with an inimitable care and
providence: How shall he render thee condign and worthy praises, for these
thy unspeakable and undeserved benefits? How shall he tender to thy divine
Majesty, thanks equal and befitting such infinite and innumerable graces?
How many, O LORD, have dyed in the womb! How many never attained the blessed
regeneration of Baptism? How many reconciled, and entered into the state of
grace, have, through their own corruption, frailty, and the suggestion of the
devil, lost it, and fallen away from the faith of thy neuer-erring Word? How
often, O Lord, have I transgressed and sinned, spurned at thy secret Callings,
and refused to entertain them? and yet, O Lord, have thou patiently expected
my conversion, given me further time to repent me of my carelessness and
backsliding, sending thy holy grace to enable me to call upon thee for mercy
and forgiveness. Praise God, O my soul: for his loving kindness endures from
generation unto generation; he has not dealt so with every man, nor so
abundantly showred his favor to all his people. I will magnify him from the
rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, who has raised me from
death, and not suffered me to go down into the Pit; who has forgotten my
wickedness, and remembered himself of his goodness: glory be unto thee on
high, and praise upon earth, who has given charge to his Angels to keep us in
all our ways.

62. A Prayer for direction in all our affairs.
Give me grace (O mercifully and truly loving Lord, that I may with all
singleness of heart, ardency and earnestness of spirit, wisely and carefully
search after those things which may be pleasing unto thee. Order and so dispose
of me, that I may faithfully and truly perform those things, which thou
requirest of me, and give me knowledge (O Lord) to do it as it ought, and is
most expedient for my own soul. Grant (O Lord God) that I neither grow
presumptuous, seated in Prosperity, nor be cast down, despairing with the
frowns of Adversity. Let thy favor be my only delight, and my discontent
thy displeasure. Let me endeavor to please none, nor be afraid to displease any
but thy self. Let all transitory things be base in my sight, and what
belongs to thee, be only acceptable, and thou, O God, above all. Let the
pains (O Lord) which are for thee, be above any pleasure, and pleasure without
thee, seem tedious, and unwelcome. Grant me often to desire the accomplishment
of good things, and in my relapse, to spring up again, with full purpose of
amendment. Make me (O Lord God) obedient, without grudging; poor, without
quailing; chaste, without pollution; patient, without murmuring; humble,
without dissembling; merry, without dissolutenes; sad, without deiection;
grave, without austeritie; pleasant, without lightness; fearful, not
despairing; true, not doubling; doing good, without presumption; admonishing my
neighbor, without arrogancy; edifying him by word and example, without
dissimulation. Give unto me (Lord God) a watchful heart, that no curious
cogitation may draw me from thee: a noble one, that no unworthy affection may
triumph over it: a sincere one, that no evil intention may bend it from thee:
an invincible heart, that no persecution may glory in his overthrow: a generous
one, that no perverse and violent passion may challenge rule over it. Bestow on
me (O Lord) an understanding, knowing thee: a diligence, seeking thee: a
wisdom, finding thee: a conversation, pleasing to thee: a perseverance,
faithfully expecting thee: a confidence, finally embracing thee; to be pierced
with thy punishments through repentance; to use thy benefits in this way fare
by grace, and at length by glory to enjoy thy joys in thy country, who live
and raignest, etc.

63. A Prayer for great Personages.
O Most mighty, high and everliving God, King of all Kings, Lord of all Lords;
the only governor, Creator and aduancer of mankind, which have pleased to
call me to honor and promotion, making me a Ruler and directer of thy people:
Teach me (O Lord) the way to be humble in mine own eyes, that I may lovingly
and courteously entertain any poor brethren, as great and noble in thy sight,
and bought at as dear a rate as the mightiest. Give me (O Lord) singleness of
heart; cleanness of hands; truth of tongue; meekenes of Spirit; that I may in
all affairs and businesses of the general State, respect above all things thy
glory; next, the weal of the public; and lastly, my own peace and content,
which in the vprightnes of a good conscience, make O Lord, firm unto me. Take
from me, I earnestly beseech thee, the fire of Ambition, lest dallying with
unholy flames, I return to in-glorious Ashes. Quench in me (O mercifully
loving Father) the longing thirst of new Titles and Dignities, acknowledging it
a blessing above any desert of mine, to be thy Creature, and fearing the charge
and burden already imposed upon me, endeavor with all lowliness to render thee
a just account. Grant that my power may be a shelter, not oppression to the
weaker: and the nobleness of my birth, a continual remembrancer how to bring
forth virtues and actions, worthy and beseeming that height and superiority,
that in all things squaring the line of my life, and ordering all my thoughts,
actions and endeavors, by thy precepts and instructions, I may leave my example
as a holy practice to others, and die in thy favor, that I may live eternally
with thee, world without end.

64. A Thanksgiving for the recovery of our High and Mighty Sovereign, King
JAMES. April 1619.
I INcline thine ear unto us (O Lord) and mercifully hear our supplications
and prayers that we make before thee, for having speedily and happily delivered
our most gracious King, thy humble Servant; redeeming us, in preserving him
from the many troubles, and uncertain dangers, which any alteration may bring
upon us. Keep him (O Lord) to thee for us, from the bloody hand of homebred
Treason, which endeavors violently to spoil him, and save him by thy mighty
power, from the ambitious desire of Foreign invasion, which unlawfully
plotteth and goes about to gripe into their hands the rule and state of this
Kingdom, over which by thy ordinance and eternal providence he is made chief
Lord and Ruler. Defend him (O merciful and all-louing Father) from the Tyranny
of sickness, which seeks to destroy nature, and steal away life from him, and
what other infirmities the weakness of nature, want of digestion,
distemperatenesse of Air, or any other natural cause may bring upon him. Be
pleased (O Lord) to ease and cure him by thy all-restoring hand, who came
into the world to heal all manner of diseases, that we may perfectly enjoy him
in his virtuous government, with the blessed fruits and increase of it, to thy
eternal glory, his own salvation, and our comfort, peace and tranquillity,
even for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord, Mediator and Savior. Amen.

65. Another.
A A Wake us (O Lord) from sin and iniquity, that we deserve not thy Scourge
and Rod, in untimely depriving us of thy faithful Servant, our most gracious
King, whom thou have mercifully placed over us. Give us loyal and obedient
hearts, that we may truly and humbly under thee, love, honor and obey him:
constantly unite our selves to him, and vnperswadably become his followers and
liege Servants. Continue (O Lord) thy care and favor to him, that he may as
hitherto reciprocally tender and respect the good and weal of us his poor and
vnder-Subiects, esteeming us helping and necessary members of himself,
profitable to execute and undergo what he shall in thy fear and Religion
charge and command, that we striving and endeavoring to become perfect
Imitators, and Types of thee and thy Church in unanimity and tranquillity,
may with one consent labor the setting forth of thy honor and glory, with our
own well-doing and eternal happiness. Amen.

66. A Prayer against our Enemies.
M MAke us (O Lord) mighty and strong, armed in the confidence of thy
all-preseruing and powerful Arm. Stretch it forth (O Lord) and scatter our
enemies, who have conspired, and are combined against us. Behold (merciful
Father, the infinite and innumerable troops they have gathered and mustered
together, to spoil and ruin thy people, who have no hope nor trust, but in
thy mercies. Their Armies cover the face of the Land, and their Ships have not
Sea enough to weild their huge bodies: they glory in the desire and
assuredness of blood and slaughter, and meditate all the day long, on Rapine
and Cruelty. They have in their thoughts the murdering of Sucklings and
Infants, and the deflowring of Virgins is ever before their eyes: they joy in
representing to themselves the Ransacking the substance of poor men's labors,
and feeding their Ryots with the sweat of others brows, determining to leave
no barbarousnes unpracticed, or vn-attempted. Smite them (O Lord, in the height
of their pride, and bring their mightiness and strength to nothing. Let the
Sea (O Lord) which they have inhabited, overthrow their proud buildings, and
destroy them: The Sun and wind (O LORD) undo and put to flight their
Land-Souldiers, with tempests and heat; that we thy servants being delivered
from the fear of our enemies, may serve thee all the days of our life,
glorifying and magnifying thy holy name, who art the giver of all victory.
Amen.

67. Another Prayer for deliverance from our Enemies.
E EVermore will I cry unto thee, and all my life long meditate on thy mercies,
who wilt not suffer the scornful and proud to prevail against thy servants;
nor the mischieuously-minded to have the upper hand over them. The Enemies (O
Lord) presumptuous, and ouer-daring in the strength of men, and Chariots, have
provided whips and torments for thy people, not seeking which way to overcome;
but to torment, as assured to overcome. They come (O Lord) not to fight, but
overrun; not to give battle, but destruction unto thy servants. Prevent (O
Lord) their malice, and undo their subtle, and well-laboured Stratagems: Make
them acknowledge thee the bestower, and man with all his Engines, but thy
Minister, to be ordered as it pleases thee. Let them see (O Lord) their
Chariots ouer-turned with their own guiders, their Horses made a slaughter by
the ill direction of their own masters, and the Soldiers in the day of
Battle crushed with the weight of their own Armor, that they may not be able
to lift up their hands against those, who put their whole trust and hope of
victory in thee. Grant this (O Lord) for the precious blood of thy only Son;
in whose name we are assured to obtain all our just petitions. Amen.

68. A Thanksgiving for the overthrow of our Enemies.
S. SIng unto the Lord a new Song, for he has done marvelous things, with
his own right hand, and with his holy arm, has he gotten himself the
victory. This is the day wherein the Lord redeemed us, and has taken us from
the hands of our enemies: let us proclaim it to all generations, and let the
farthest Nations hear of his loving kindnesses. When our Soldiers were
amazed, our Lord comforted them, and in the multitude of their enemies was a
stay and Bulwark unto them: He guided their shot, and gave might and power
unto their arms, to beat and disperse the growing Host, which threatened in
their fury to ouerwhelme them: he discomfited them, and took their heart from
them, returning them with greater fear, then they marched on with assurednes.
When our Captains, confounded with the danger of the fight, and confused with
the tumult of their Soldiers, forgot their skill in leading, he conducted and
brought them on again, ordered them, giving life and spirit to the fainting
and fearful troops, that they fell upon their enemies as enraged Lions,
scattered them, and pursued them to a shameful retyring, and dis-honourable
yielding. This is thy work (O Lord) and it is wonderful in our eyes, and
shall express thy goodness in the confusion of those mis-beleeuing people that
do not acknowledge thee. But give unto us (O Lord) that have received this
blessing at thy hands, to us that have mightily seen thy euerlastingnesse and
power in our own unexpected safety, and unthought of ruin to our enemies,
humble and obedient hearts, fired and inflamed with this thy high and
undeserved bounty, that we may never forget the Day of our Deliverance, but
leave it holy to all ages, magnifying and extolling thee the giver of all
conquest. Let no security take from our eyes the dreadful and ouer-passed
danger; no lasting or confirmed peace, the memory of this fierce and cruel
battle fought by thee, and obtained by thee; but having it fresh and eminent
before us, continually praise and laud thee who have preserved us, even for thy
own honor and glory, which be everlasting, world without end. So be it. Amen.

69. A Prayer for present necessities.
O Gracious and euer-louing Lord, which out of thy bounty and infinite favor,
have promised to hear the Petitions of those that ask in thy Sons name, to
whom our necessities are known, and our wants manifest. Grant (we beseech
thee) most merciful Father, that we may by thy eternal providence, be
relieved and succored, miserably languishing and groaning under the weight of
our low and desperate extremities: put it into the hearts of some of thy
servants, to call us to them, and give us employment, that we may by the sweat
of our brows labor to maintain and keep our selves and children, and above
all, let us patiently endure and undergo what calamities shall ever fall upon
us, well knowing they are imposed for our sins, and far short of their
desert and due, still expecting thy merciful hand to redeem and deliver us
from them. Thou (O Lord) which take care of the Flowers of the field, and
enrobest the Lilly above the ornaments of Kings, wilt not I (know) leave thy
Children and Servants for ever; nor give them over to be an ignominy and
shame to their despisers, but that they shall at last rejoice and sing unto
thee; Our Lord has heard our prayers, and mercifully considered the Petitions,
and earnest requests of his servants: he has fulfilled his promise, and
graciously succored and sustained them: praised be the name of the Lord, now
and for ever. Amen.

70. Another Prayer entreating Remission of sins, and constancy in good
purposes.
Give me leave (O Lord) to speak unto thee, and in thy presence to unload
the grief and troubles of mind, which burden and disquiet me, taking away my
sleeps, and laying violent hands on the comfort and content I should enjoy in
thee. Why am I (O most merciful Father) forsaken, and given up to the wild
desires and concupiscences of my flesh? Why am I left a prey to Satan, and laid
open to his subtle and secret temptations? Why has the multitude of sins as
a Sea grown upon me, and the number and daily practice of my offenses taken
away almost hope of my safety and recovery. Am I (O Lord) marked for a vessel
of dis-honour, and shall thy Omnipotency be seen in my destruction? Though
these things are worthy the heinousness of my transgressions: yet are they not
beseeming thy exceeding and infinite love and mercy: and though it may well
accord with my rebellious and traitorous disposition, daring to break and
violate thy laws and commandments; yet can they no way suit and agree with
thy unbounded and unlimited Charity, which left'st Heaven, and mingledst
Humanity with thy Deity, to save and recall sinners and offenders. In the
bowels therefore of thy mercy, I beseech thee, by thy unspeakable and
inexpressible bounty, which gave thee up to death, even to the Death of the
Cross, and all those fore-running, spiteful and torturous agonies and abuses,
not to take away thy grace from me, nor leave me to my self, who am nothing
but pollution and uncleanness, uncertain what way to take, yet certain to
run into looseness and deformity, without thee, being, O Lord, taken as it
were with a deadness, or at least a forgetfulness of thee, rather carelessely
neglecting, then violently drawn away from thy holy inspirations, growing
insensible, and as it were, stupid in all things which belong to thy honor,
and my own salvation: which of all others and is the most terrible fearful
backsliding and Apostasy: For were I carried away with other delights, or
only bewitched with sensuality, I might well hope, when time, and sacietie
had sufficiently displaied their vanity, at last to retire and grow weary of
them: but from this stupidnes and cold numnes of my careless conscience.
Without thee (O Lord) who can revive me? from this heavy and death-like
sleepiness, but thy almighty voice, what can awake me? To thee (therefore) I
humbly submit my self, and penitently prostrate my self before thee; desiring
thee, for that eternal and all-comforting name of thy sweet Son Jesus, to give
me a feeling of my own desperate and dangerous estate, to take away the dead
and impostume vices, which have ouer-growne goodness and virtue, so that I may
perceive, what is wicked or sinful, made the same with me by a long custom.
Grant me (O bountiful and loving Lord) constancy and perseverance in the good
determinations, wherewith thou shall inspire, lest I fall into a relapse, and
perish vnsuccourably; even for thy own mercies sake, which from the beginning
of the world was intended to save sinners. Amen.

71. A Prayer in Sickness.
NOw I am weakest (O Lord) in estate, be thou strongest, and inlighten and
comfort my Soul in this darkness and torments of my Body. Satan has
encompassed me on every side, and as assured of victory, has laid aside all
his fair and eye-pleasing disguises, pulling off his beautiful visor, and in
his own horrible and dreadful deformity, tells me plainly I am his. There
is no sin (my most merciful and everlasting Redeemer) which he is not in
the vgliest and desperatest manner ready to lay before me, more careful now to
call them to my memory, then he was before, to banish them for ever. He tells
me it is thine own Doctrine, that the wages of sin is Death, and that
everlasting, world without end. But shall he (O just and righteous Judge) be
my accuser and witness against me? Shall he betray me to a sin, and be
rewarded for revealing it? I protest before the Throne of thy divine Majesty,
that he alone, joined with the world and the flesh, has wrought upon my
frailty, and subtly seduced me to all kind of sin, and enormitie: that
he alone has persuaded me to offend thee my Lord and Maker, laying thy heavy
displeasure, and terror of thy judgments before me; seeking either to draw me
to despair, or an unwillingness to enter into the due consideration of my
heinous mis-deeds. I do therefore wholly abjure and detest him, abandoning for
ever his friendship and service, and relying on thy powerful and auailable
Passion, in the preciousnesse and value of it, offer up my self unto thee,
beseeching thee for thy own merits and goodness, to accept a forlorn and
despayring sinner, who (without thy mercy) is ready to be swallowed up by the
eternal gulf of hell fire. Moderate, O Lord, my sickness and pains, that I
may the freelier have recourse unto thee; strengthen and confirm my fainting
and decaying voice, that I may the earnestlier cry unto thee: And above all, O
my most sweet and amiable Lord, comfort and aid my drooping and fearful
heart, that I may continually meditate on thee; that if it be thy will and
pleasure, I may escape the vengeance prepared for those that dye out of thy
favor; and if thou shall please to call me forth of this mortal life, I may
live with thee, and put on immortality, even for thy holy Names sake: to which
be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

72. A Prayer to be said, before any work we go about.
IN vain, O Lord, rise we early, and sit up late, eating the bread of
carfulness, turmoyling and tormenting our selves with great labor and
wearisomnesse unless thou, O Lord, give a blessing: In vain toyleth the
Husbandman, plowing and sowing, unless thou water it, and give the increase:
In vain endangereth himself the Merchant, furrowing and turning up the
waters, unless thou prosper and guide his Ship. Since thou fillest every thing
with blessing, be pleased at this time only, Lord and Savior, to look
mercifully and favorably on the industries and labors of thy servant, and
multiply them as thou did the old woman's Iar, who gave of it to the Prophet:
grant that we may prosper and have, giving of our abundance to those poor
brethren that want it, rather then to be driven to ask it: Yet in all, O
Lord, thy will be done, to the extremest poverty, nay, death it self. Give
me, O Lord, a true feeling of my self, that I may rather respect goodness,
then gain; and aim rather to live honestly, then richly; affecting a
mediocritie, not abundance, lest I be puffed up with the vain and gaudy show
of uncertain wealth: Grant, O blessed Lord and Savior, that I may in all my
courses and enterprises have before my eyes the end whereunto they should be
directed, which is, only in this warfare and pilgrimage, to provide me
necessaries for my voyage to that holy Land, wherein al thy children and
servants have before the beginning of the world, a portion and inheritance laid
out and reserved, that I may with that providence and care so furnish and store
my self, that I be neither forced with Esau, for want and indiscretion, to
sell my birthright for fading and transitory relief, nor with the proud and
mighty, exalted with the infiniteness of their treasure, despise and grow
careless of it; but in all things making my self obedient to thy will, be
found worthy to take possession of it. Grant this, O sweet Jesus. Amen.

73. A Prayer for Remission of sins.
I Humbly confess (O Almighty and everliving Lord) that I am unworthy the
bread thou in thy mercy bestowedst on me; unworthy to infect the air with my
breath, who spend it to thy dishonor, and my own defamation; most unworthy
the least of thy blessings which I have plentifully received of thee; and that
I tremble to come into thy presence, my sins striking horror and terror to
my heart, lest I be swallowed up for my offenses, and wickednesses daily
committed, and yet unrepented: But, O most merciful and all-louing Father,
take thy Eye, I beseech thee, from them, lest thou in thy justice bring me to
destruction, and fix it on the bitter Passion of thy dear Son; behold him,
O Lord, scourged, buffeted, reviled, spet upon, and despitefully crucified for
the heinousness of these my transgressions; and in the preciousnesse of this
satisfaction, be pleased, (O Lord) to give ear to the humble and sorrowing
lamentation of a despised and contemned sinner, who is heartily and truly
sorry for these his misdeeds and trespasses; desiring thee of thy infinite
bounty, to inspire him with thy grace, that he may for ever hate and detest
the guilt and monstrousness of them. Strike me (O Lord) with a true fear,
not only of thy mightiness and judgments, but of thy mercies and loving
kindness, that I may be utterly ashamed and confounded to offend so
favorable and indulgent a Father, who has not dis-inherited, nor cast off so
notorious and disobedient a son, but in his mercy reserved a portion for me:
which (O blessed and all-louing Lord) make me worthy of, that I may ever
praise, and glorify thy clemency, world without end.

74. A Prayer for Perseverance.
SInce, O Lord, not he that attempteth the course, but he that continues to
the end; not those Virgins who came late, but they that watched continually,
have the promised and expected reward; give me abundantly of thy blessing,
that I may not only endeavor well, purpose good things, and perhaps begin a
reformation and virtuous amendment, but continue (O Lord) and persevere all my
life long, that by the practice of a holy and religious life, I may be weaned
and with-drawne from the transitory and seducing pleasures which gawdinesse and
custom have made strong in me, and awaite the subversion and rooting out of
all things good and virtuous: settle firm in me (O Lord) an unwearied
determination of a daily progress and going forward in thy service, since to
stand still, is to expect the enemy: and bridle and take from me the feeds and
bloomings of vice, that I deceived with their seducing, yield not to them, but
perfectly and zealously laboring to follow the steps of so good and great a
Majesty, may at last receive the hire which thou have reserved for those that
diligently employ themselves in thy Vineyard.

75. A Prayer in Affliction.
MOST gracious Redeemer, which art always merciful, always a preserver,
whether thou send us joy or sadness; for great is thy mercy which by outward
afflictions, as by a sharp medicine, heatest the inward man; and by temporary
troubles preparest us for everlasting joy: even as thy self have opened the
way for us to true felicity, by thy own steps: Grant that I may drink this
cup patiently and obediently, as given of thee. But these troubles, O blessed
and meek Savior, fall heavy on me, my proud and envious disposition grudging
and repining at them: Give me (O Lord) in cure the happy and heart comforting
spectacle of thy precious Passion, that beholding thee ouer-flowed with blood
and sweat, cruelty having used several torments to let it forth, I may
account my self happy in so sweet a society, and my rancour and swollen
desires ambitiously puffed up with malicious and aspiring thoughts, may at this
sight fall low, and be assuaged, the venomous and poisoning sting of the
subtle serpent, be drawn and cast from me, by beholding thee the example of
all patience and gentleness. Endue me, O Lord, with an absolute contempt of all
these vain and gawdie shadows, whose pomp and outward glory are rated at so
high an estimation: Let me look inwardly only, and all my care be to be richly
and sumptuously attired within; Let me aim at no peace but that of a good
conscience, fearing only thy rebuke and displeasure, but for thy sake highly
esteem all the contempt the world can throw upon me, the scoffs, disdain and
base regard they can afflict me with, the reuilings, slanders, imputations,
which envy and ill tongues can lay upon me; since promotion and high respect
are no badges of thy servants commendation, and graceful language no titles of
thy followers, nor security and worldly felicity, any testimonies of thy love
and favor; to which only (O glorious example of all virtue) let me
ambitiously aspire, through the burning Furnaces, the Lions Den, the Axe,
Stones, or what new cruelty soever Tyrants, witty only in mischievous
inventions, can for the professing thee, inflict upon me; since to lose all
the world, and win thee, is a purchase invaluable, and unspeakable; which
grant, for thine own Names sake, I may happily attain, Amen.

76. A Prayer in extremity of sickness.
O Jesus Christ, the only hope of them that live, and eternal life of them
that die, I wretched sinner, submit my self wholly to thy Divine Will, whether
it pleases thee my soul shall longer remain in the prison of this my body
to serve thee, or depart out of this world, I am sure what is committed to thy
mercy, can never perish: I will lay down this my frail and miserable body, with
a willing mind, namely, in hope of resurrection, which renders it to me again
much more happy. Strengthen, O truely-mercifull and all-louing Savior, my
soul with thy grace, against all temptations, against all the assaults of
Satan. Inuiron me with the shield of thy mercy, by which in times past, thou
restoredst thy Martyrs unconquered, against grievous torments and cruel
deaths. I see nothing in my self which can be a help unto me: all my hope is
in thy inestimable goodness: I have no merits or good works to allege to
thee; but alas, I behold on every side, many wicked and sinful offenses, many
malicious and envious transgressions, many lewd and lascivious acts, which are
here ready to accuse and condemn, and as much as their exclamations can
further, desirous to throw me to everlasting hell, and perdition. What Advocate
so merciful as thy self? Who so powerful? And who more willing and ready?
Who can better deliver what must at this time prevail for me, being a story of
thy own love and mercy? Who can show the skars of those honorable wounds
which were gotten in the redemption of mankind, but thy Almighty self? Who
the print of those lashes which all over skarrified thy innocent flesh, for the
painting and artificial discoloring ours? Who with forty days Fasting,
expiated our riotous and superfluous Feasts, but thy most merciful self? Wash
away (O Lord) with thy precious Blood, the contagious spots of my heinous
offenses, and let thy neuer-failing Justice answer in judgment for my
presumptuous injustice; thy great and mighty merits be an acceptable
propitiatory for the multitude of my misdeeds: and grant (O loving and
all-gracious Lord) that thy grace may increase above my sickness: let not my
faith fail, my hope faint, my charity wax cold, nor humane infirmity, joined
with the fear of death, cast me into the bottomless gulf of despair, but
that when the eyes of my body are shut and closed up, the euer-waking eye of my
mind may look up and be comforted in thee; and that when the use of my
tongue shall be taken from me, my soul may then incessantly and continually
cry unto thee, O Lord, into thy hands I commend my spirit: to whom be honor
and glory, world without end.

77. A Prayer in the Spring time.
O Almighty and everliving God, the powerful Creator of heaven and earth,
ordaining them with their several Lights and Ornaments, for the necessary use
of mankind, appointing them in their distinguished seasons to yield food and
sustenance for the maintenance of thy People; We give thee humble and hearty
thanks for this moderate and timely Spring, refreshing the decayed earth, with
the kindly heat of the Sun, and temperate falls of rain and water, renewing
in us a comfortable expectation of our Resurrection, in beholding how thy
merciful and All-able hand has freshly apparelled the naked and barren
fields, beautifying them with several sorts of flowers; loading the Trees
disroabed and withering, with new buds and blossoms; the earth her self
shooting forth her seeds long time buried in her womb, with the hope of a
happy and plentiful increase, to the great joy and consolation of thy
servants: Grant, I beseech thee, that we being renewed and borne again by
holy Baptism, and having cast and thrown off the old man, may become new
creatures, never more to return to our old sins, but that by the sweet
assistance of thy holy Spirit, we may increase in continual innocence, and
day by day, more and more be adorned with the flowers of virtue, always
growing up in the knowledge of thy excellency, that we may receive a blessing
at thy hand to spread and flourish, bringing forth good fruits of a quiet
conscience, and sweet smelling savors of a pure zeal and charitable
devotion; even for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

78. A Prayer in Summer.
EVer-mouing time (O merciful Father) delivers according to thy behests, in
their due seasons, the four quarters of the year, and from thy bounty we
receive their timely fruits; the Spring has already discharged and unloaded
himself, bestowing with a full hand, the small store he has been entrusted
withal; leaving great hope of plenty and abundance: Prosper it (O Lord) and
bring it along to maturitie and ripeness; for now that blessed and great Light
which thou made to rule the day, sheadeth his influence and comfort to all
things moving upon the earth: The Hills leap and are joyful, the Floods clap
their hands, and all creatures grow buxome and lively, having a feeling and
sense of thy blessing: Grant unto us (O Father of all goodness) that we be
not more insensible then the beasts, but that we may give thee honor and
glory in the acknowledgement of thy innumerable and unmatchable benefits; for
whose only service the Earth is thus gayly apparelled, the Trees thus
plentifully enriched, and the womb of the earth great, with assured
expectation of a happy delivery. Let not (O Lord) the violent burning of the
Sun, joined with the locking up thy heavenly Conduits, parch it and dry it to
nothing profitable; nor the remissness or slackenesse, joined with an
ouer-flowe of waters, leave it raw, and unserviceable; but give every fruit (O
Lord) maturity and perfection, that we may joyfully receive the blessing of it,
and praise thee the bestower and giver. Amen.

79. A Prayer to be said in Autumn.
THou have showred (O Lord) fullness and perfection upon the fruits of the
earth, and every growing thing labors with a happy increase; the rank
grass boweth itself to the Mowers hand, the heavy laden Trees acknowledging
homage, offer themselves to be gathered, and the fullness of the Vine yields
his juice without the wine press, the ripe hanging ears listen for a Sithe;
and all the works of thy hand, which thou have planted here for the service of
man, acknowledge thy command, and are ready to be tasted: All these (O Lord)
obedient to thy will, in the course of nature, answer the ends of their
creation, only we miserable creatures following our senses, and the lusts of
the flesh, refuse thy holy inspirations, and seduced by Satan, oppose our
selves against thy revealed will: New mould us (O Lord) and break our
stubborn and stony hearts, that the seeds of thy Gospel may take deep root
in us, and bring forth the fruits of a lively faith, constant hope, and burning
charity, to thy Honor, and our own salvation. Amen.

80. A Prayer to be said in Winter.
THE year is waxen old as a garment, and all the fresh colors, which
beautified the face of the earth, are withered and decayed; the Sun
withholds his influence, the heavens their brightness, and the day his
comfort, taken from him, by the uncomfortable hand of desolate Night. The Trees
have lost their Ornament, the Fields their raiment, and all beasts and cattle
their vigor and liuelihood; Man himself is discomforted in the poorness and
barrenness: and the improvident man, who has not laid up, nor taken from the
fruitfulness of Summer, grows desperate, certain of nothing but perishing:
The Season affoording no work, nor the day any continuance, the lately
broad-leaued branches no shelter, nor the fields any sustenance. Grant us (O
merciful Father) warned by the example of his extreme and vnredeemable
miseries, to labor in the Harvest, and lay up of our well-gotten store against
the uncomfortable day of sickness, or latest Age, when weakness and natural
infirmities give us no time, or thought to get in new provision; and our
uncharitableness to our selves, take from us the charity of others, hardening
their hearts against us: Give us grace to watch and labor continually,
supplying our Lamps daily with holy Oil, lest at the dead of night we be
called on, and being unprovided, be left behind, or wander in the darkness
astray, and coming late, be shut out for ever and ever, from all happiness
and blessedness; confined to a place where there is nothing to be heard but
perpetual howling and gnashing of Teeth. Amen.

81. A Prayer in Adversity and Affliction.
LET not my enemies, (O Lord) triumph over me, nor the hand of the oppressor
prevail against me: Be near unto me in the day of trouble, and say unto my
soul, I am thy helper; thou which mercifully redeemedst Joseph from the hands
of his brethren (who causelessly sought his life) and turnedst their hate to his
glory and promotion, delivering him from the lust of his Masters wife, and her
wilye accusation; Thou which rescuedst thy people Israel by a mighty hand and
strong arm, from the tyranny of Pharaoh, and the unequal Taxes of the hard
Egyptians; Thou which gave Jacob grace in the sight of his brother Esau,
boiling against him, and threatening fire and destruction; planting a sure
shield before thy beloved servant David, to keep him safe from the invasion of
the terrible Goliath, and a wise guard to prevent the plots of subtle Saul;
proclaiming Susanna innocent, contagiously spotted by the poisonous breath of
the fore-sworne Elders; Thou which raisedst thy glory from the three Children,
condemned and thrown into the Furnace, whose fire and extreme heat came
forth, and eat up the Feeders, yet spared, and (against his nature) sindged
not the garments of thy servants, walking, and singing everlasting and glorious
Hymns of thy Deity in the midst of it: Thou which never forsakest any of thy
servants in their torments and persecutions, giving them either an unconquered
patience to suffer, or a glorious courage to overcome all the temptations which
hell can fasten: Be pleased, Almighty, everliving, and only powerful
Jehovah, to be near thy servant in these his afflictions and troubles, and to
stand by him in this day of his trial, lest he fall confounded, and sink under
the heavy burden of his tyrannous oppressions. Want (O Lord) in the lowest
degree, has encompassed me, Shame and Ignominy in the highest degree, have set
me round about; Slanders oppose themselves against me, and bear me down face
to face, and ill tongues in secret, at my back, oppress me; my friends are
fled, my acquaintance has forsaken me, and my kindred (deresting my poverty)
deny my Alliance. Where can I then plant my hope? Where should I else seek for
refuge and harbor, then of so merciful and all-louing a Father, and who, upon
sub-mission, disdaineth not his basest and most riotous son? who came into the
world to be a Father to the fatherless, an eye to the blind, a staff to the
lame, and a most heavenly and neuer-erring Physician to all that labor under
any disease. Come unto me (says our blessed Lord) all ye that are oppressed,
and I will ease you. O merciful and general comfort, as certain to be done
as it is spoken, I prostrate my self humbly before thee, and desire thee of
thy infinite mercy, if such be thy will and pleasure, to let this transitory
and bitter cup pass from me; yet not my will, but thy blessed will be done,
who alone know what is fittest to tame my stubborn and rebellious
affections, and to morrifie in me all vain and aspiring thoughts, that I may
wholly desire to be dissolved and live with thee, where eternal and
neuer-ending peace and piety have their habitation.

82. A Prayer to our blessed Savior.
MOST mercifully loving Lord, Redeemer and Savior of the world, I wretched and
detestable sinner, leprous all over, and more spotted with sin, then the
blessed Job with sores, which no Poole can ever cure, all humble prostrate my
self before thee, not desiring thee to lay thy blessed and happy-making hand
upon so vlcerous a creature, nor to cast thy pitying and favorable eye upon
so displeasing and hateful an object; but only (O Lord) if so poor and
unworthy a worm, may aspire to request of so high and great a Deity, one word
from thy heavenly lips, to make me whole: but say the word (O Lord) and I shall
pass the Snow in whiteness, and cast my sick and aged imperfections,
renewing my self like the strong Eagle: at thy command, whole Legions of
sins, which carry me headlong to ruin and perdition, shall pass from me,
and I remain praising and gloryfying thy holy name: the numnesse and deadness
of my uncharitable hand, upon thy Word, shall stretch it self forth, and be
exercised in deeds of love and mercy; upon thy Word, my wilful and natural
blindness shall be taken away, and I restored to a perfect and good sight,
gloriously beholding thee in thy revealed Will, and wonderfully in thy works;
upon thy Word, I shall easily hear and fully understand thy Divine and
heavenly Mysteries, and lay them up in my heart, for my comfort and
consolation. The Jews (O Lord) had ears and heard not, eyes and saw not,
hands and felt not thy apparent and astonishing miracles: they saw before their
eyes the blind receive their sight, the dead restored to life; they heard with
their ears, the dumb speak and glorify thy holy Name; they felt thy
natural and heavenly begotten Body, and yet believed not. Blessed are they
which have not seen, and have believed; But say the word (O Lord) and I shall
be made partaker of that heavenly benediction, acknowledging thee the Son of
the everliving God, borne of the blessed Virgin, crucified under Pontius
Pilate, giving over thy life, buried, and rising again on the third day, for
the redemption and salvation of mankind, I shall lay hold of thy precious
Passion, and bury all my misdeeds in thy life-giuing wounds, to be washed away
with thy invaluable blood; for ever will I kneel for this Word, for ever
remain a devout and humble Petitioner, that all these things may be done unto
me, and I become a new creature, spirited anew, with thy holy Spirit, for ever
praising and magnifying thy holy Name, loving it above my self, and adoring
it, to the end, all generations may approve thy power, in the conquest of
hell, death, and sin. Amen.

83. A Prayer in time of Lent.
O Benign and bountiful Savior, our only Aid, Comforter and Redeemer, the
preserver of all Mankind, the glory and hope of all mortality, who whilst
thou wandredst here amongst us, putting on perfect Humanity, sufferedst thy
self to be carried into the Wilderness, and tempted of the devil, gloriously
ouercomming him by prayer and fasting, to leave unto us the ordinary and ready
means to resist all his subtle suggestions, prescribing the same means to
thy Apostles for the dispossessing Satan, and have also left us many examples
in thy holy Prophets and blessed Forerunner, who lived in the Woods on Locusts
and wild Honey, giving us a lively and perfect Pattern, who did all for our
example, of thy own blessed abstinence and moderation; Grant (O merciful and
blessed Savior) that we may this blessed and holy time of Lent, attend more
especially the spiritual food of our souls, chastising and subduing the lusts
and heat of the flesh, by temperate and thrifty diet, lest of a servant he
become a Master, rebelling against the Spirit. Mortify in us (O Lord) all
wild and loose desires, ranging and disordered appetites, which sow
dissension betwixt me and thee, making me fearful to enter, and unworthy to
stand in thy presence; and plentifully enrich me with thy grace, that I may do
thy works, seriously meditate on thy Passion, and take it to heart, detesting
and abandoning my sins, the only cause so great a Lord was so meanly
entreated; so gentle a Savior, so ungently used; and so merciful and loving a
Redeemer, so unmercifully and hatefully tormented by his own subjects and
servants, in the recovery of their inheritance and freedom. And if the
children of men, after the decease of a loving father, express their grief to
the world, by putting on mourning garments, confining themselves to their
Chamber, and through anguish of heart, forbearing their necessary food; was
ever a worthier cause, or a sorrow better beseeming the sons of Adam, or a
time more convenient, then in the yearly observing and celebrating the days
of their Lord and Masters torments and funerals, who dyed, and was persecuted
for them? Grant us therefore (O Lord) we may fast and devoutly pray, bitterly
lamenting our sins and misdeeds, which gave thee up to the death of the Cross.

84. A Prayer against temptation.
Lead us not into temptation (O Lord) but deliver us from all evil: sin
lies in wait to betray us, and Satan baiteth us with opportunity: he knows
(O merciful Father) our affections, and by our actions, ghesseth at our
thoughts; our inclinations he is cunning in, and in subtilty who can surpass
him? He deceived our first parents, whom thou had endued with excellent and
Angell-like understanding, coloring his malice with careful pretenses: many
of thy choysest servants he has beguiled, and triumphed, neither is his
inueterate and cankred envy mitigated, his power abated, his knowledge decayed,
or his delight in wickedness, measured or lessened: He is mighty in
persuasions, mighty in the means, and most cunning in applying them; He has
conquered the world, that world our flesh, and our flesh us: Who can suspect so
great offers for dissimulation or mischief? And who so near and inseparable a
friend which tendreth them? Thus are the wisest (O blessed Lord and Savior) by
a seeming show of what is good, circumuented; thus the strongest with their
own confidence overthrown. Against so powerful an enemy, so powerfully
followed, but by thy neuer-yeelding grace, what hope of resistance? Stay him (O
Lord) in his swiftness, and bring him back, lest I fall and be confounded.
Suffer him not to draw me to the encounter; for how can mortality hold out? all
the glories of the earth are armed on his part, to bewitch ambitious spirits;
all the vanities in the world serve under his colors, to allure the lighter
fantasies. Am I a match for so infinite and puissant an Army? Lead me not
into temptation (O Lord) but deliver me from all evil. I humbly confess, and
heartily believe, one word of thine is able to discomfort all his Host,
scatter them and make them in their hasty flight ruin one another: he flies
from thy presence and trembles, amazedly asking, What have we to do with
thee, thou everliving Son of God? come thou before thy time to torment us?
But (O Father of all mercies) how can I deserve thy aid, or overtaken with
shame, request thy gracious assistance, having, from my cradle, been a
follower of his, if not contemning, yet neglecting thy often and loud
Callings? Can I hope, that have refused to walk with Almighty God in
security and safety, that he will daigne to find out me in danger and
ieopardy, and reskue me from the common enemy? Thy mercy (O Lord) is
infinite, and has been infinitely expressed to ungrateful humanity; thy
loving kindnesses innumerable, unable to be delivered or set down; There is no
end, I well know, of thy everlasting goodness: be pleased therefore (O
merciful Father) if so great a sinner may hope for favor, by the depth of all
these, either to take from me the violence and rage of all forcible temptation,
or else to give me grace and strength to resist and withstand them, lest I be
taken prisoner by them, and cast to the bottomless dungeon, whence nothing
resoundeth, but the continual acclamations and curses of damned and desperate
persons, even for that holy and virtuous name of Jesus, known mighty in the
salvation of thy people. Amen.

85. A Prayer for preparation against the day of Judgment.
IF the righteous (O eternal and just Judge) shall scarce be saved, what shall
become of sinners? And if the just shall tremble to behold the dreadful signs
which shall fore-run the day of Judgment, in what terror and amazement shall
the wicked be? How earnestly shall they cry out for the Hills to cover them, or
to be hidden in the bottom of the Sea, that they may not see the angry
countenance of the wrathful Judge! But alas, the Sea shall yield up all her
inhabitants, the graves their Tenants, and the Hills be laid plain and consumed
to nothing, all shall be laid open, and every secret revealed, the closest
crannie of the heart shall be searched into, and the priuatst deed be
proclaimed, the intent of the best actions examined, and the foulest and most
mischievous in the hearing of all that have been borne since the beginning of
the world, known and brought to trial. What a terror, what a horror, what a
confusion, shall the Murderer, Blasphemer, and lascivious person be in, at
that day? All this we have heard, nay and believe, and yet the most cunning and
subtle Serpent, having nothing to say against the truth of thy Word, with his
persuasions induces us to flatter our selves, that there is more eternity in
threescore years, the longest span of our short life, then in that Eternity
of eternities, which shall follow it. But thou (O merciful and gracious Lord)
which came into the world to save sinners from the vengeance prepared at this
day, desiring that we may repent and be accepted. Give unto us a lively
feeling of the danger of it, call it (I beseech thee) to our consideration, as
a thing certain, so present, no soul being assured of her abode one minute.
Give us grace so to provide our selves, that we may make our account here,
since after death no man returns to recall or alter whatsoever is left
amiss. Let us enter into judgment of our selves, that we be not judged, and
carefully weigh every word, that we be not found to have respected none. Give
us grace to begin here while there is help, lest we would help our selves
when there is no beginning: for from hell there is no returning, and after
death no repenting: repinings are there the fruits of an ill-led life, and
curses of our follies, all the consolations of our punishment: from which, let
thy mighty and all-redeeming Passion defend us, which whosoever faithfully
lays hold on, shall at that Day, with great joy and alacrity, behold thee,
showing thy self a severe Judge against those who would not believe, nor
entertain that Peace Offering.

Certain Eiaculations of the Spirit.
O My most gentle and sweet Savior, grant me (I beseech thee) pure thoughts,
undefiled actions, and a respect to thy glory in all my proceedings.

Let me always (O blessed Jesus) remember that thou art in presence, that I may
with fear and reverence take account of my speeches, settle my behavior and
all my actions, as it beseems a Lord of such height and Majesty.

Be thou (O eternal and most meek Lamb) the object of mine eyes, the
Music of mine ears, the food of my understanding, and the content and solace
of all my senses, that putting wholly on my Savior Jesus, I may be armed
against all temptations and assaults of the devil.

Jesus, Lord of my life, Patron of my substance, Reconciler of my friends,
Inspirer of my soul, Preserver of my renown, and Master of my liberty, I
commend them all to thy holy protection, dispose of them to thy honor and
glory.

What part of me (O Lord) can challenge, or show evidence for mine? My Soul is
Heavens, my Body Earths; both thy blessing: Take me (O Lord) as thy due,
nourish me as thy charge, and love me as thy child.

O God the giver of all victory, stand on my side in all temptations, power of
thine own Blood into my emptied veins; raise me, as thou did thy servant
Lazarus, to a new and better life, when I am dead to righteousness: turn not
away from me, if I fly, and let me not be confounded for ever, whose trust
has been always in thee.

Give me (O Lord) a noble sufferance in afflictions; lowliness of Spirit in
the height of honors; an unmoved resolution in all conflicts; and conquest
over all my spiritual adversaries.

Give me (merciful Father) a virtuous shamefastness, that I may blush, and
shun the company of wickedness; an unaffected carriage, slow and deliberate
speeches, uncorrupted thoughts, and holy endeavors.

Let thy Word (O Lord) be the light of mine eyes, the repast of my soul, the
repose of my senses, the apparel of my body, and my defense in all extremities.

Lay thy holy hands (O Lord) over mine eyes, that I behold not vanity: stand at
the gates of my ears, and turn aside all evil and unclean speeches: Set a
watch before my lips, lest I wander in unlawful discourses: touch with thy
holy hand all my senses, to stay them from riot and intemperance.

Let my will, O Lord, resign it self to thy pleasure, and be governed by thy
providence, accounting whatsoever thou please to lay upon me, as a portion
left for me by a careful and loving Father.

Jesus make me willing to do good to mine enemies, sorry to displease the
worst, mild in speeches, modest in my behavior, constant to my friends, and
charitable to all.

Give me (O Lord) a hearty and true sorrow for my sins, a firm resolution
of amendment, a constant intent to renew my good purposes, a perseverance to
continue them ever, and an ardent desire to begin afresh in thy service.

Grant me (O sweet Jesus) an unfeigned and humble repentance for my former
transgressions, a hearty and zealous thankfulness for thy present kindnesses,
a terror of thy justice, a doting on thy favors, and an euer-mindfulnesse of
thy glorious presence.

Bless (O Lord) with thy eternal providence, my going forth, and with thy
holy assistance guide my coming in, that I may walk in thy ways, and return
to thy honor and service.

Let us praise the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, who has not forgotten his
servants, but given them taste of good things, recalled them wandering, staid
them sliding, and with unspeakable love brought them to his everlasting
Kingdom.

A Short Meditation upon these words of PILATE, ECCE HOMO; Behold the Man.
Look up, O my soul, and if thine eye lids be not pressed down with the two
waights of shame and sorrow, Behold the Lord of all Majesty and glory, abased
with the disgracefullest behavior the scorn of the Jews could lay upon him:
Behold that reverent and beautiful countenance which the Angels adored, and
God himself was well pleased in, violently defaced with the unmerciful
strokes of his cruel persecutors; his modest Eyes in labor with the blood
which from the riuolets of his head, ouer-flowed all his face, joining with a
Sea of blood, which issued in every place from his tender and delicate body.
What unused torments were these (O my soul?) What new invented tyrannies? Was
ever Innocence so rewarded, Virtue so glorified, and Goodness so exalted? But
alas, as if they would out-goe themselves in tyranny, and study for unheard
off cruelty, they couple with these pains, the basest and vnmanliest shames
and disgraces, that ever stories have left unto us. Where is the sacred Balm
they apply to thy wounded Body? The precious ointment they provided wherewith
to anoint thy bruised face* Is that coat of folly and robe of ignominy, the
medicinable Seare-cloth they wrap thy torn flesh in? Is their irreuerent and
defiled spittle (which they contemptuously throw in thy face) the only remedy
they can afford it? With the hemme of thy garment, (O Lord) thou stayedst an
issue of blood; and with disroabing thee, they open a Floud-gate of thine. With
thy holy and wonder-working spittle, thou gave eyes to the blind; and they,
profane and unhallowed Rebels! with theirs, would take away thy sight. Was
ever King so entreated by his subjects? Was ever Master so abused by his
servants? Was ever Father so tormented by his own children? O wicked Subjects,
disobedient servants, and undutiful Children! What mercy can you expect? What
freedom require; what portion hope for? Come hither, all ye Kings and Princes
of the earth, which account the enlarging of your Dominions, the only
propagation of your glory; the fear and trembling of your subjects, the
testimony of your Greatness; and your uncontrolled and unlimited command, a
royalty only worthy the Majesty of a King: Look down from your stately and
gorgeous Thrones, and Behold the Man, borne a King, whose Power and Title so
amated Herod, enflamed with the ambition of government, that only to avoid
his right, he gave command for the cruel slaughter of many thousand Innocents:
To whom newly brought into the world, Kings came to offer and bow down; on
whom the Stars awaited, and the Angels of the great and high God attended,
like servants: Consider well what Crown inuironeth his sacred Head; what Robe
adorneth his Body, and what Scepter he bears in his royal Hand. Mark the
obedience of his Subjects, and survey the largeness of his Territories.

Whurry to this place, ye noble and honorable Personages; spare no treasure,
but purchase a standing, to Behold the Man. You that dwell upon such nice and
respective terms of honor, who rate a Lie at the price of a Life, and a
Stroke above the value of your Soul; carefullier to be accounted valiant, then
honest; and fashionable, then Religious; who purchase virtues only to sell
away your vices, rather forsaking God then your Mistress: Mark well, and
meditate on the behavior of this only honorable, and all noble Lord: See him
buffeted by slaves and vassall-ministers, spit on by the rascal company;
lasht, and scourged by inferior and Under-officers, patiently, and with all
humility, undergoing and submitting himself to all kind of scorns and
reproaches, and esteem not the servant of more worth then the Lord, who has
done all these things both for your redemption and example.

Thrust in among the Jews, ye common and vnder-people, here is a sight worth
gaping after, to follow, and Behold the Man; you that groan under the Tyranny
of Poverty, the exactions and cruel oppressions of biting Usurers, and hard
Landlords; you, who in the shade of your fortunes are left comfortless, and
whom the night of darkness and desolation has suddenly ouer-taken; Behold
the Son of the everliving God, displaying the beams of joy and consolation:
and if ever fellowship in misery assawage the rancour of it, or company be a
comfort; glory of so noble and unmatched a partner, who covered with sweat and
dust, disguised with blood and torments, clothed with shame and contempt, is
here made a laughing stock to the people: and since God himself so unworthily
submitted himself for man's offenses; Let us glory and be proud to become his
fellow, and bear a share with him in all troubles for righteousness sake.

O my Redeemer, was the wisdom of thy lips, which in thy infancy falling as
the melting honey from the Combs, astonishing all the great Doctors and
Rabbis, instructing them in the high and hidden Mysteries of heaven, now in
thy firmer age, thought folly, and vain eloquence? Was that modest and
beautiful countenance, striking fear and reverence in the beholders, one
look whereof raised sinners to be glorious Saints, now buffeted and spit upon?

Were thy innocent and spotless hands, whose mightiness and virtue loosed the
chains of hell, leading captivity captive, become prisoners to bondage, and
fettered with base and servile cords?

What part of thee was unfruitful, and yielded not comfort and blessings to
this ungrateful people? Flowed not from thy tongue, the rivers of peace and
everlasting happiness? Did not thy eye direct them in the way of salvation?
Were not thy hands continually held up, and in labor for their pardon and
penitencie? Who followed thy footsteps, could he ever go astray? Nay, walked
they not safe in the shadow of thy body, from infirmities? And did not thy
outward garments recover them of long and dangerous diseases?

Did not the Powers of heaven and earth acknowledge thee, and God himself by
crowning thee with the Holy Ghost, confirm thee for his Wel-beloued? Did not
the great Goddess Nature, go back and alter at thy command? Did not the water
turn into wine upon thy word? The wind bannish it self and appear no more,
and the fury and rage of the waves lie still and grumbled not? When thou wast
in presence, was not hell affrighted, and the devils themselves astonished,
crying out on thy Omnipotency, and desiring leave and sufferance? Was not the
frame of the world shaked, the Sun muffled in clouds, the Temple divided, the
graves of the dead, of themselves opened and yielded up their bodies, which in
diverse apparitions were seen wandering in the Streets, to Behold their Lord
and Master, their Creator and Moouer, thus in himself divided; by his
afflictions shaked, muffled with sorrow, and his heart opened, yielding all joy
and comfort; and yet miserable man unmoved, knowing and seeing; more stony
then the Temple, and senseless as the graves, understood not pittyed not, felt
not the pangs and torments which our Savior here suffered. Could not all thy
benefits (O dear and only favorable Lord) bind their savage hearts, nor all
thy miracles mollify their malice, nor thy well-ordered and innocent life save
thee from a shameful and inglorious Death* Consider (O my soul) that the
stones wept, whilst the Jews rejoiced; the Sun of heaven put out his eye,
whilst the sons of men constantly stared upon his dreadful massacre, and for
certainty acknowledge, that the mis-beliefe and persecution of sinners more
terrified this blessed Lord, then all his torments and unspeakable sufferings.
Art thou moved with pity, and taken with compassion at the story of a weak
and old father, undone by his riotous son, having his lands extended, his
goods seized on, himself thrown forth of doors, and exposed poor and
comfortless to the mercy of the Street, and favor of the open Air, having
no annuity left but the charity of well-deuoted people? And is not thy
understanding cracked, thy memory lost, thy will broken, overwhelmed with
desperate grief, and raging sorrow, to Behold this Man, the only begotten Son
of the everliving GOD, buffeted for thy wildenesse, spit upon for thy
blasphemies, reviled for thy barbarousnesse, abased for thy pride, laughed at
and contemned for thy folly, scourged for thy lasciviousness, rifled and
turned out of all, for thy riot and dissolution? not circumuented and drawn in
by subtlety, but carefully and most lovingly, not enduring the hard
imprisonment, cruel handling, and everlasting bondage of his beloved children,
came from his Palace enriched with all pleasures and plenty, left his honor,
and laid aside his glory, and offered himself up into the hands of his cruel
and unmerciful enemies, for the delivery and redemption of his altogether
unworthy, miserable, condemned, and forsaken people. O unspeakable charity,
and love without example, inimitable, unmatchable! Man unable to requite it,
unworthy to deserve it, and without his voluntary and free proffer, unequal
to have requested it.

Dare a low and contemned Vassal, for whoredom and perjury, run into the
contempt and censure of the Laws, approach the Majesty of his King,
entreating him to be branded and scourged for him? It were mercy unexpected
to pardon him: but if he should descend from his glittering Throne, disrobing
himself of all his royal and glorious ornaments, and in his own person
satisfy the rigor and justice of the Law, for his poor and miserable
subject; would not his goodness and bounty fly faster then the Sun? And
further, would not all men admire, and be enamored with his virtue, in love
with his compassion, and ravished with his great charity: but how would this
poor man be inflamed toward him? With what fire of devotion would he praise
him? With what longing desires would he serve him? With what humility and joy
would he obey him?

Behold the Man (O my soul) that has outdone this similitude, bettered the
example of this supposition, for thee dust and ashes, poor worm and slime of
the earth; who wast nothing but by him, art nothing without him, and should
be happy to return to nothing but for him.

And yet behold a sight of more wonder and astonishment, then to see the glory
of heaven thus abased, the purity of Angels thus defiled, vnpittying man taken
with a deadness all over of goodness, has no feeling of his own desperate
extremity, or his Lords infinite mercy and means, undertaken for his recovery.

The blessed Apostle and follower of our Lord, S. Peter, who first of all
confessed his Omnipotency and greatness, and first of all in his frailty, denied
to have known any such Man, hearing him speak of these things which should
happen to him, took him aside, and (as the Scripture says) rebuked him,
saying, Thou shall not suffer these things to be done unto thee.

If the report of the Tragedy were so terrible; how killing was the Spectacle?
And if the Story that he should suffer these torments, prevailed so with S.
Peter, overcome with an affectionate pity, that he rebuked his Lord; how
much ought the certain knowledge move us, that he has suffered these cruel
tyrannies for our redemption and the satisfaction of justice!

It is a symptom in Physic generally dislikt, when the sick party feels
not his own weakness; and a danger, almost unavoidable, when he finds not
that it is dangerous; a lightning little before death, or a nimblenesse and
agilitie of a woman great, the night before her travel; their estates being
indeed almost incurable, that maimed they have no need of curing: Sin easily
getting to a height when he is not perceived to grow.

The sly and subtle Serpent, letting words of cheerful love fall off his
tongue, when poison lies under it tempting love, gilded over his perswasiue
pill, with the apparencie of her own excellency and profit, forcing a belief
that she should be as God; and coming to Pilates wife in an apparition, the
night before the Lamb was sentenced and given up to slaughter, prevailed with
her to move her Husband to have nothing to do with that Just man.

Beware, O frail and foolish mortality, of this Hypocrite and deceiuer; who
laying beautiful colors over his mischievous intentions, persuades thee to
have nothing to do with the Just Man; and rather not to believe that such
things were suffered, then to have that horror in thy conscience, that they
were suffered for thy sins and offenses.

This infection was from him thrown on our first Parents, which killed all
their joy of life, degraded them from their excellency and understanding, and
banished them their earthly Paradise, and from thence hereditarie to us, taking
from us the purity and Innocence of our Birth, and so, that unless we be
regenerated and borne anew of water and the holy Ghost, we cannot enter into
the Kingdom of heaven.

Thus languishing, and laboring for eternal life, our most blessed and
mercifulliest Lord pitying our desperate and death-like estate, descended from
heaven to cure us, and whereas he might, if it had pleased him, have come in
all pomp and glory, making himself King of the earth, and finished our
Redemption with the word of his mouth; yet he to make it more available to us,
and tie us with a greater obligation, to lay hold of that which only for our
good was intended, submitted himself to all kind of torments, shames and
disgraces, in the purchasing of our Pardon, that we might then willinglier and
heartilier taken with the unbounded love of so excellent a Lord, in our humble
obedience make our selves partakers of it.

Behold this Man, O my Soul: his whole life being a continual Passion, the
stubbornness and rebellion of the stiff-necked People, more wounding his
noble heart, then the thought of his succeeding torments, which he
passionately expresses in his complaint over Jerusalem, Oh, Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you under my wings, as the Hen does
her Chickens, and ye would not! mildly admonishing the soft-hearted women, who
in the way toward his death, with tears lamented the ignobly barbarous usage,
the regardlesse and cruel Jews put upon him, wishing them to weep for
themselves, not for him; still testifying his sorrow for them, above his own
suffering.

Let this, O my soul, be thy continual meditation: this the object of thy
thoughts: this the subject of thy tongue. Let all thy aim and ambition be, to
purchase a little holy plot, near to this blessed place, which thou may sow
with penitent and heart-sorrowing thoughts, watering them abundantly, with
unfeigned and daily tears, in considering duly, how the Lord of all Majesty
and glory was here mangled and torn for the sins and transgression of them,
some of whom shall at the last day be found feasting and making merry, having
no thought of that precious and invaluable Blood was here mercifully shed for
them.

A Meditation upon the Resurrection.
IF the Angels rejoice more at the Conversion of one sinner, then in the holy
conversation of all the righteous, and the careful Shepherd, having charge of
many a flock, leaves them all, and with great diligence searches after one
that is strayed, returning home if he find him, bearing him on his back,
accounting himself less burdened through the lightness of his heart, then
when he went empty forth: What an universal joy? what a height and fullness
of comfort and consolation replenished Heaven and Earth, and all the Powers of
both, to behold their Lord and Creator lately so mangled, and cruelly torn? he
scarce retained the shape of Man, this day, rising in all brightness and glory
from the Grave, shining above Angels, bearing the Salvation of all the world on
his Immortal shoulders. If the Sun before withdrew himself, as ashamed to
be a beholder, when he could not be a remedier of so horrible a cruelty with
a mourning veil; muffling his moveable beauty, is it not to be believed, that
he rises early this day fresh as a Bridegroom, putting on all his light and
glory, to meet and rejoice with his Creator and Maker, from whom he borrows
his splendor and brightness. The day of his Passion, the Graves sent forth
their bodies, who met and frighted many in the holy City. The day of his
Resurrection, the heavens sent forth their Angels, who with tunes of joy and
holy acclamations gladded the hearts of all the earths Inhabitants. The time of
his Passion, Saint Peter for fear denied him to be his Lord. The time of his
Resurrection, his guard for fear confessed him to be their Lord Insensible
things at his Passion, witnessed against the hardness of the Jews, in
expressing their own sorrow; and at the time of his Resurrection, the same
things witnessed against the misbeliefe of the Jews, in confessing his
omnipotency. This day was God glorified: the Angels highly pleased: and Man
infinitely exalted. At thy Birth the earth enjoyed a secure peace in it self.
But at thy Resurrection, the earth enjoyed peace from Heaven; not man with man,
but God with man: not for a momentarie safety, but eternal happiness: not
only for saving us from hostility, but for infinite and innumerable benefits
certain, and lasting, on his behalf never to be broken, without our
faithlesnesse, and treason. In thy life time thou vndertookest for God, with
men, ratifying it under thine own hand, confirming it with many miracles, and
sealing it with thy blood. At thy death, thou vndertookest for man with God,
and at thy Resurrection gave thy self a Pledge for performance: what living
soul has so past the bounds of all modesty, not to be all ouer-fired with
blushes, in a thought of violating this holy league? what sad issue of Cain so
stony and barbarously minded has the Devil laid up for mischief, to be the
Actor of so horrid a Tragedy? The Serpentine and Crocodile-like act of Judas,
in betraying his Masters life, is not so high in wickedness, as their
backsliding, which break his eternal word, to be Master of which, he freely
laid down his life; yet Judas despaired, brought back the pieces, and hanged
himself. What calm and deathfull security, the forerunner of imminent
ruin, as Numnesse before a dying Palsy, has so possessed the bewitched
sons of Adam, not to think of their desperate estate? What enchanting Siren
has with her cunning division, set an everlasting discord in our uncertain
resolutions? What voluptuous Circe has transformed our hearts in the shapes of
men, making us carry the minds of Beasts, sensible of nothing but what
pleases the sense; following only Nature, yet most unnatural, for in her
lusts we bury all our disposition to goodness? Wherein do we employ that
admirable and excelling ornament of seeing, but in searching after vanities and
idle pleasures, returning it home laden with voluptuousnes and sin? wherein our
ears but in listening after novelties and leasings, stuffing them with wandering
stories and lascivious merriments? Wherein our taste, but in palliating
gluttony and drunkenness, surfeiting it with mis-called wines and meats, which
riot hastening the intention, has yet unnamed? Wherein our feeling, but in those
enormities and wickednesses, which take away all feeling of God and goodness,
leaving no touch of a Christian, hardly of a Man? When do we stay our selves,
unless gorged? and then employ all our study and care, to set a quick edge on
our dulled appetites, and procure fresh and new desires. In this circle we
wander and weary out our days. In this Labyrinth we entangle our selves,
careless of thy grace, which only can return us. This is our life, these our
actions. Thus we run contrary to the end of our Creation. Thus we lose the
inestimable benefit of our Redemption. Thus are Christ's torments become our
tormentors, and his Passion our persecution, whilst we not looking on it, die
for ever. For as he has mercifully proclaimed his Pardon, and sacrificed
himself for all those rebellious subjects that will come in, and take the
benefit of it, yielding homage and obedience to his heavenly Father: so those
obstinate and runnagate traitors, who confident in their strength, confirmed by
their multitude, or seduced by example, stand out in that wilful refusal of
offered grace, shall in the Day of Trial receive their justly deserved
Condemnation. Retire therefore into thy self, foolish mortality, and with
great and serious advice, take a suruay of thy own estate. Let neither self
love flatter thee, that things are not so bad as they appear, or childish
fear, in tre^bling at thy cure, make thee slight thy Disease, ever remembering
the sore must needs be mortal, wherein the remedy is so dangerous, in which a
little delay is eternal death. Search therefore suddenly, and thoroughly, lest
only pampering up proud flesh, thy malady fester and grow incurable, when
every dressing rebounds woe upon thy heart, and that thou feel an inward
compunction and pricking, it is an infallible Symptom of a likely amendment:
thou must forbear all inflaming drink, and high food, unquiet and
distempered thoughts, idle and much talk, using spare and thrifty diet, inward
and continual meditation, so to abate the strengthener and feeder of thy
sickness; that having by good and holy means made a perfect and lasting cure,
thou may rejoice in Spirit.

FINIS.

