THE CONTINVATION OF THE ACTIONS, Passages, and Occurrences, both Politic and
Polemicall, in the upper GERMANY.

HISTORICALLY BROVGHT down, from the Period of the last Relation, till April.

Together With a various and intermixed History, of what has been done in
Turkey, Italy, France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere.

Faithfully collected out of good and creditable originals and digested
Methodically, by the Times, Places, and Actions.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nathanael Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1637.

THE PRINCIPAL HEADS of the Things contained in this History.
CHAP. I.
1 THe States of Sweden resolve to continue the War. p. 1 2 The Saxons
preparation for War with the Swedes. p. 3 3 The Swedes counsel for managing
the War. p. 3 4 The Fort of Mansfeld besieged. p. 4 5 Dehne sent to relieve
it. p. 5 6 Three hundred Saxons slain, and taken prisoners. The Siege raised,
and the Fort relieved. p. 5 7 Two Imperial Regiments defeated and routed by
Banniere at Helmstat. p. 6 8 Banniere marches into Thuringen. p. 6 9 Banniere
sends to Ertford, for relief for his Army. The Magistrates answer. p. 8 10
The Swedish Army removes. p. 9 11 The Imperialists march toward Franconia.
p. 10 12 Four Imperial Regiments defeated. Goetz his flight. Hatzfeldt
plundereth the Country as he goes. p. 11 13 Mellerstat and Newstat, in
Franconia, taken by Stathanse. Paderborne and Wartzburg, in Westphalia, taken.
p. 12 14 The Landgrave of Darmstat molested. p. 13 15 Elfeld taken and the
Suburbs burned. p. 13 16 A Regiment of Crabats surprised, near Wormbs, and
their Colonel taken prisoner by Ramsey. p. 14 17 A Convoy of forty Tons of
Wine taken by be Hanawers. p. 15 18 A four months Truce concluded betwixt
Darmstat and Ramsey. p. 15 19 A new King of Romans elected. p. 16 20 The
Elector of Tryers, and Land-grave of Cassell disavow the election. p. 17 21 The
manner and Ceremonies of the Election. p. 18 22 The Syndick of Cologne
murdered at Regenspurgh. p. 20 23 The King of Romans Crowned. 21 24 The
Queens Coronation. 22 25 New Knights of the Empire made. 23 26 Strange
Prodigies. 24
CHAP. II.
27 The death of the Emperor Ferdinand the second. p. 25 28 Ertford summoned.
p. 27 29 Besieged by the Swedes. p. 29 30 Surrendered upon composition. p. 30 31
The Articles. p. 30 32 Four Imperial Regiments defeated by Stal^ans. p. 31 33
Seven hundred of them slain, and two Colonels taken prisoners. p. 32 34
Leipsick summoned. p. 32 35 The Governor resolved to defend it. p. 33 Colonel
Dehne routed. 34
CHAP. III.
36 Torgaw taken by Banniere. p. 35 37 The Saxon Garrison takes pay of the
Swedes. p. 35 38 The Colonel Dehne beheaded. p. 36 39 A Troop of Swedish
Horse surprised. p. 37 40 Leipsich victualled and fortified. p. 37 41 Leipsich
again summoned. p. 38 42 Besieged by the Swedes. p. 39 43 Holds out for the
Elector of Saxony. p. 40 44 The defense made by the Garrison, and the offense
done by the Swedes. p. 41 45 The siege raised. p. 43 46 Thanksgiving for the
Cities deliverance. p. 44 47 The Imperial Army reunited and reinforced,
marches toward Misnia. p. 45 48 A Conflict betwixt Stalhanse, and the
Imperialists at Sala, wherein four Imperial Regiments were ruinated. p. 45 49
The Crabats under Isolani oppress the Hassians. p. 46 50 Budiani raised, and
his Regiment routed by the Land-grave William. p. 49 51 Eleven hundred Pollacks
mutinying for pay, take service under Wrangle. p. 50 52 Truchses arrested, and
sent to Vienna, p. 50
CHAP. IV.
53 The death of Bodislaus Duke of Pomerania. p. 51 54 The Swedish Regiment
under Colonel Poye routed. p. 52 55 The Vauntguard of some Imperial Troops
defeated upon the Mulda. p. 53 56 Two Caesarian Regiments surprised near great
Hahn. p. 53 57 The Fort of Hermestein necessitated. p. 54 58 The Landgrave
attempteth to relieve it. p. 55 59 Ramsey relieveth it by a Stratageme. p. 55
60 Lemford taken by the Imperialists. p. 57 61 The Presidiaries of Minden and
Osnabrugge defeated at D^epshold. p. 58 62 Surprise Hagell, and put four
Companies of Caesareans to the sword. p. 58 63 The miserable condition of the
Dukedom of Saxony. p. 58 64 Kustrin beleaguered by the Swedes. p. 59 65 The
siege intermitted. p. 61 66 Berlin regained by the Marquess Elector. p. 62 67
Brandenburg taken from the Swedes. p. 62 68 Drussen blocked up by the Swedes,
and the siege relinquished. p. 62 69 Lantzberg surrendered to Wrangell. p. 63 70
Colonel Arnheim surprised by the Swedes and prisoner to Stetin. p. 63 71
Wrangell marches into Silesia. p. 63 72 A strange prodigy at Isenach. p. 64
73 Stralen burnt by the Swedes. p. 64 74 Two Imperial Regiments defeated at
Weurtzen by Colonel Slangh. p. 65 75 Two hundred Imperial Horse defeated by
Banniere at Pegaw. p. 65 76 Three Regiments of Imperial Horse routed by the
Swede. p. 66 77 The head Watch of the Imperial Army forced to a confused
flight. p. 66 78 The Emperors Funeral. p. 67 79 The Citizens of Liege
complain to the Pope against their Bishops. p. 68 80 The Count of Warfusee his
treason at Liege. p. 69 81 Ruelle the Burger-master murdered. p. 71 82 The
Abbot of Mousson and others strangely delivered. p. 73 83 The rage of the
Citizens, and the end of the Assassinates. p. 73 84 Warfusee his counterfeited
Letters. p. 75
The Table of the Title of Historia Varia.
1 The cause of the Turks invading Transylvania. p. 77 2 The King of France
his order for provision for his Soldiers, and ease of his subjects. p. 80 3
John de Werths flight. p. 81 4 Three hundred Wallon Horse defeated, and
surprised by Gassion, near Neuf-maison. p. 82 5 The Spanish and French
preparations for war. p. 101 6 Crequy sent to the King of France, by the Duke
of Savoye. p. 101 7 The French project discovered at Diettenhofen, and their
Forces defeated. p. 102 8 The Duke of Rohan his goods arrested by the Grisons.
p. 103 9 Comes to Capitulation. p. 103 10 The conditions agreed upon betwixt
the Grisons and the Duke of Rohan. p. 104 11 Switz besieged and taken by the
French. p. 104 12 Honorata recovered by the French* p. 105 13 Preparations for
War by the Cardinal Infant, and the United States. p. 105 14 A bloody fight
betwixt a Party of the Spanish and another of the States Soldiers. p. 106 15
The Statists get the victory. p. 106 16 The Prince of Orance his design
against Hulst prevented. p. 107 17 The Bassa in Morea rebelleth against the
Turk. p. 107 18 The Vezier Bassa employed lately against the Persian, flees
to the Sophie. p. 107
CHAP. I.
The History of the Actions and Passages in the upper Germany, since November.
1636. Continued and brought down to this present.

THE Parliamentarie Council of the Swedish States at Stockhohne, was not then
dissolved, when the tidings of their victory at Witstock, were confirmed by
two expresses, sent from the General Banniere to the Queen and Diet there
assembled. His Letters gave such life to their counsels, that they which
formerly tottered in their opinions (fear of the Emperors and the united
Princes Forces, and suspicion of their own weakness projecting many doubts of
ill success) took heart again, and resolved to have the War continued in
the Empire, but especially against the House of Austria. The state of the
German Protestant Princes, The States of Sweden resolve to continue the War.
which had forsaken the Crown of Sweden, and adhered to Caesar, rather moved
pity then anger; and the Rix-Chancellor, by the advice of the whole Senate,
concluded it fitter, to treat with them first as friends, then to fight against
them as enemies; hoping by arguments, to persuade them to break off their late
alliance with Caesar, and renew the offensive and defensive League, which they
had formerly made with the Crown of Sweden. The Duke of Mecklenburg (who since
the Treaty of Prague had labored, though vainly, with the Lunenburger, to
disclaim the Articles of Prague) was again desired to treat with the Elector
of Saxony to the same effect; and he, according to his instructions, first
putting the Elector in remembrance of the benefits he had received by the late
King, of his slight forsaking the Confederacy, which he made to his deceased
Majesty; of the happy success of the Crown of Sweden, in the late battle
against him; and the danger he exposed himself and his subjects unto, by
provoking his faithful friends to enmity; advised him to renew his alliance
with the Swedes, promising on their parts, an Amnestie of what was past, and
readiness to complie with him in all mutual offices of love. The Message was
delivered bluntly, without much Courtship, and answered in the same accent;
neither did the Duke expect a pleasing answer, neither could the Saxon (without
shame, and note of inconstancy) fall off from Caesar, and give one: as he
found it, so he returned it to the General Banniere, whose Commission was, to
proceed with the Elector accordingly.

Each unkind office done by a friend, wounds true affection; but the iterating
and reiterating of injuries, murthereth that amity, which had its life from
humane polity; and it is more easy to stop the stream of a quick Current,
then to restrain the irascible appetite, if it be thus provoked to wrath, and
armed (though but in opinion) with power to execute revenge. The Elector, who
till he had made his peace with his Imperial Majesty, had made good use of
the Swedes, for protecting of his Country; having now attained his own ends,
The Saxons preparation for War with the Swedes.
would feign be rid of them: and though his loss at Witstock had much weakened
his power, yet himself raised some fresh forces; employed all the Smiths and
Carpenters in his Dominions, to prepare a new Artillery, and their Carriages;
commanded his subjects to fortify his Towns, against invasion by the Swedes;
whilst the Imperial succors (rallyed by Hatzfield, and supplied with the
Regiments, under the command of the Field-Marshall Goetz) might come in, to
their relief; either by stopping the Swedes, in their victorious March; or, if
happily it might be, by an happy Victory to drive them quite out of Germany.

The Swedes again were become formidable to the Empire; and the fear of those
strangers, strengthened the new band of alliance betwixt Caesar and the native
Princes of that Territory. The Imperial Bands sent to the Saxon; under
Marazim and Hatzfield, before the late Victory, were but small, to what was
now intended for them. The Colonels, Wartenburg-Wahil, and Flanz, were designed
to continue the War in Hessen, whilst Goetz with the maine Body of the Army,
was deputed to join with Hatzfield; and the Baron of Dona, General Major for
the Elector of Saxony, to make head against Banniere and Lesle; and the Duke
of Lignitz, the Colonels, Truchses, and Knowbeldorfe, were appointed to raise
forces in Silesia, and consigne them over to the Generalate of Count Mansfeld,
to withstand Wrangell, The Swedes counsel for managing the War.
who threatened to Winter in Silesia. The Swedish Generals not ignorant of these
preparations, endeavored first, with some part of their forces, to hinder
these forces from meeting; Lesle undertaking Goetz, in Westphalia; Banniere,
Hatzfield, about Fulda; Wrangell, the Imperialists, about the Oder; and then,
with the other part, under the command of Stalhanse, to invade Misnia, the
upper Saxony, and the other Territories, which either then actually did, or
might afterward, conveniently accommodate or appertain to the Elector of
Saxony.

The meeting of the two Imperial Generals, was of as much difficulty as
consequence; neither of them, single, was able to stand before the Swedes;
which fleshed with their late Conquest, carried all before them; nor could they
come together, without danger; the one being to make his way with the Sword to
the other, through the Swedish Armies, and their forces yet every way inferior
to their adversaries. Hatzfield, which by flight from Pomerland saved himself
in Misnia, being pursued by Banniere, was constrained more Southward still; and
had not (in probability) been able to have re-enforced his Army at all, had
not the Swedish General stayed a while by the way, in the County of Mansfeld,
to subject it to the obedience of his Army, either by a willing submission, or
necessity. And yet, his stay there was not long; the timorous people being
ready to submit, and the Towns generally coming in, save only the strong
Fort of Mansfeld: The Fort of Mansfeld besieged.
which (not yielding to his first summons) the Garrison being confident, that
their own, and the Castles strength, was able to hold out, till they might
happily be relieved; he first blocked up, and then began to batter, though
vainly; his desire to reach Hatzfield (as soon as might be) prompting him on,
to depart thence with his maine Body, and to leave four Regiments only,
before the Fort: which, though they performed as much as so small a number
could, were forced to rise within few days, by Adolphus Dehne, the Saxon
Colonel; who knowing the weakness of the Camp, by order from the Elector,
marched thither-ward November. 4.14. with seven Regiments of Horse and Foot,
Dehne sent to relieve it.
to relieve the necessitated Garrison. The Saxons march was discovered to the
Camp the next day following; and the Army (not yet entrenched) to avoid the
danger of being compassed in, resolved to meet the Saxon upon the way, and to
give him battle betwixt Cracow and Seburg, about twenty English miles from
the Fort: Three hundred Saxons slain, and taken prisoners.
The Swedish Army fell upon the Saxons avantguard, consisting of three hundred
Horse, environed them round about, put the greater part to the sword, and took
the rest, both officers and common soldiers, prisoners.

This beginning was of a fair aspect, and promised a better issue, then
attended it: the undanted Saxon Commander (for this small defeat not dejecting
his courage, but raising it to a higher pitch,) went on with his Battalia, and
in a well ordered fight, The siege raised, and the Fort relieved.
charged upon the Swedish Army, which consisting merely of Horse, without any
Infanterie, being galled with the Musketeers, was compelled to retire to
Ascherleben, in the Bishopric of Halberstat, where Bannieres Forces were
lately inquartered for safety, leaving the Fort to be releeved by the Saxon
Commander; and he November. 11.21. furnished it with fresh Men. Victuals, and
Ammunition, according to the Electors direction.

Those accidents, which to the eye of reason, seem fortunate; do sometimes
prove unhappy beyond expectation: The departure of the Swedish General from
Mansfeld, gave liberty to the place, and plained the way for the Colonels
present honor, yet the success in fine, was pernicious to the Saxons, being
fatal to the Commanders person, and of dangerous consequence to the Electors
Territories. The General Banniere, mustering his Forces at Aschlerben and
Eglen, Two Imperial Regiments defeated and routed by Banniere, at Helmstat.
received avisoes of two Imperial Regiments inquartered at Helmstat, not far
from thence, made up to them, defeated and routed them totally, and pursuing
his conquest, marched with all speed into Thuringen, (where Hatzfield and the
Saxon Army appointed to meet,) to prevent their forming of a Real Army,
which being conjoined, might have some power to make head against him, and his
speedy removal, made those Saxon Troops, which the Elector had raised for the
safeguard of his Country, to leave the Elve, and repair toward Sala, to the
great affrightment of the Misnians, that Territory, being by this means,
destitute of defense, and open to the Swedish invading Armies.

But the storm which threatened Misnia, was for a time turned to Thuringen. The
Swede held it fitter as yet, to chase the Imperial Army under Hatzfield in
open field, which must either fly before him, or fight desperately, and upon
disadvantage; then to sit down before any fortified Towns; where a Winters
Siedge might consume him, and continuance there, give the Caesareans
opportunity to re-enforce their weak Army. Notice was given him, that the
General Gleene, Banniere marches into Thuringen.
had received commandment from Caesar (then at Regenspurgh) to muster up the
Imperial Troops, which then lay in the Dukedom of Wertemberg, and to carry
them through Franconia, to the general Rendezvous at North-ausen; that Goetz
had made his way as far as Osterode, in the Territory of Grubenhagen in
Brunswick-land, to the same intent, though he suffered much by Lesle, who
stopped his journey, and slew some of his men in continual skirmishes; that
the Lantgraviate of Thuringen, upon which (in regard of the late alliance,
betwixt it and the Crown of Sweden) he took much compassion, endured much
violence, by reason of the Imperial Army, which first exacted great
contributions of the Imperial Cities, North-ausen, and Mulhansen, and
afterward pillaged them, though yet they were of the same party, and burned the
villages as far as to Ertford, and as well to preserve the Country from
further spoil, as to prevent the Caesarians in their design of meeting, he
removed his Camp out of the Bishopric of Halberstat, sending before him the
General Major Stalhanse, with ten Regiments, and following himself with the
gross body of the Army. The presence of the Swedish Forces removed the
Imperial General from his quarter, but not out of that Country, his intention
was, to abide about the River of Werra, where the Field-Marshall Goetz had
order to meet him, and though pursued by the Swedes, flitted only from place
to place, fled not, being assured that Goetz, though danger threatened him in
the prosecution of his design, would leave no stone unmoved, that might hinder
his journey toward him. His first station was at Crewtzberg, a Town
appertaining to the Duke of Eisenack, where being reinforced, by some Saxon
Regiments, he fortified the passage, by which the Swedes must pass, if they
marched after him, resolving not to stir from thence, till his partner was
arrived with his Forces to assist him. And now began the time of action, Lesle
having much wasted Goetz his Army by sundry Skirmishes, still waited upon him,
expecting more opportunity to fight, the Imperial Commander still marching
warily, and not exposing his Army to any disadvantage; and now, like two
parallel lines, which always observing an equal distance, though near each
other, never meet, both made their way toward Thuringen, to join with their
several confederates.

The Swedish Army in all, thirty thousand strong, Horse and Foot, joined
together November. 5.15. in the Bayliwick of Ringleben, and the Town of Gebezen.
Banniere having his head Quarter at Werninhausen three English miles from
Gebezen, and six from Ertford, and the Imperial Army the ninth of the same
month at Trefort, nothing having passed betwixt them memorable, save only the
defeature of some Imperial Companies at Sommerda, a passage betwixt Gebezen,
and Werninghausen, since the first day of the Swedes arrival thither, and a
little scuffling betwixt some parties of both the Armies, which met together in
the Territory of Eischfeld, November. 8.18. being sent abroad by their
Commanders for Forage, and other Provisions.

Banniere sends to Ertford, for relief for his Army.
Banniere, in this time of his rest, sent a Trumpet to the City of Ertford,
(which hitherto stood as a neutrall, and had flatly denied the entertainment
of the Saxon Garrison, though the Elector had few days before sent thither an
agent to that purpose,) desiring food for his Army, and their best assistance
for his expedition, according to the Capitulation of the deceased King his
Master, and the Magistrate of that City in the year 1631. The Magistrate
desirous to continue the neutrality, The Magistrates answer.
and unwilling to provoke the Swede to do the City any act of hostility,
denied neither, but excused himself for not complying to his desire in both
requests, the last being expressly against the Treaty of Prague, which he
said, was not accepted by the City, without consent of the Rix-Chancellour,
who drew out the Swedish Garrison, which they had formerly entertained, and the
first such as might provoke the Caesareans, with whom they had yet good terms
and correspondence, to be their professed enemies. Nevertheless, that the
General might know, that their former alliance could not be forgotten, he
would give free ingresse and egresse for the Officers of his Army into the
City, for their refreshing: but against the common soldiers, whose rudeness
and multitude might oppress him, he would keep the Gates shut; not for any
ill affection toward them, but the preservation of the estates of the
Citizens. The Officers, for the present, were not displeased with his answer,
but used the liberty granted them: but the enraged common soldiers, without
the Generals knowledge, pillaged the bordering Villages; till complaint being
made by the Peasants to the General, he made a search, to find out the
Ringleaders in those disorders; and by a public Proclamation through the
Army, commanded his soldiers to do no more detriment to the Territory of
Ertford: of which, he professed that he was as careful, as of the Duchy of
Weymar, into which he had laid safe guards, for D. Bernhards sake; whose former
service, and present faithfulness to the Crown of Sweden, had deserved that
and many far greater favors.

November. 11.21. the Swedish Army was ordered by the General, to meet at
their common Randevous, in the Bayliwike of Ringleben: the safe guards, which
had been laid abroad the Country, The Swedish Army removes.
being summoned the day before to return to the gross Body of the Army at
Hensleben, a City upon the River of Vnstrut, about seven English miles
Westward from Gebezen: from whence, the Army that day marched forward, toward
the Imperial Campel the Cavallarie, by the way of Langen-salsa; and the Foot,
by Tonna, toward Creutzburg, upon the River of Werra: The design of the
Commander, being first to assault the then joined Imperialists, before any new
accreut could be brought unto them; and afterward, to invade the Electors
Territories.

His directions were obeyed punctually; and what he had advised discreetly,
was put in execution as speedily; and his fortune still attending him, the
counsel and action were seconded with a prosperous issue. Guntrad,
Field-Marshall to the Lantgrave of Cassell, had much impeached Goetz in his
march, before he came to Trefurt, as well as Lesle, and for his part, slain
and taken prisoners eight hundred of his men: and now the Generals as well
wanting men, as food for those they had, knowing themselves unable to
encounter the Swedes Brigades, being advertised by their Spies of Bannieres
design; marched speedily by the Abbyes of Fulda and Hirzfield, toward the
Bishopric of Wirtzburg, The Imperialist, march toward Franconia.
and Franconia, to join with Gleene, before they would adventure to put their
fortunes to the hazard of a Battle; being still followed by Banniere, who
hasted to overtake them. It might have staggered the Swedes design, could they
have reached thither; but there fell out a Rub by the way: The Count of
Eberstein, Lieutenant General to the Lantgrave William, lay then in Cassell:
and he hearing of the Imperials march, and the Swedes pursuit after them,
seconded by the Governor in the Fort of Zigenheim; made all the haste he
could, to stop their journey; but the Vant-guard, under Hatzfeld, was passed,
before he could reach them: Only the Rere-guard, commanded by Goetz, was
stayed by the Hessian Forces, near Rotemburg, upon the River of Fulda: where,
Four Imperial Regiments defeated.
being compassed in behind and before, by the Swedes and Hassians, four of
his Regiments were utterly defeated; three Pieces of Canon, thirteen Ensigns,
three hundred Horse, and two hundred Prisoners, being taken by the Swedes and
Hassians: all which were sent immediately to Cassell himself, Goetz his flight.
and the other part of his Army hardly escaping by flight, through the County
of Waldeck, into Westphalia.

The Earl of Hatzfeldt having escaped this Brush, still made on toward
Wirtzburg, Hatzfeldt plundereth the Country, as he goes.
but not without plundering the Countrey-Villages of the Lantgravate as he
went, ( Bannieres stay, to take order with his Army, giving him opportututie
to do violence to the unarmed Peasants) though not without endangering the
lives of many his friends, Prisoners at Zigenhaim, whom the enraged Governor
once resolved, (and was hardly dissuaded from that resolution) to deliver up
into the hands of the Boores, that by the loss of their lives, by those (then
furiously mad, and merciless men) they might give them some satisfaction for
their goods, and houses, which the Imperial Generals so hostilely had consumed.

The separation of the Imperial Armies, caused the Swedes also to divide
theirs: and Stalhanse was ordered, with six thousand Horse, and some Regiments
of Foot, to pursue Hatzfeldt into Franconia; Lesle, with four thousand foot,
and twelve hundred Hassian Horse, to follow Goetz: Banniere reserving the rest
of his Army, to prosecute his designs against the Electorate.

Stalhanse struck the Franconians into such a terror, that like distracted
men, distrustful of preserving their lives, and livelyhoods otherwise, they
conveyed their goods into Wirtzburg, and some other fortified Towns, and
retired themselves into the Woods, leaving the Territory to the mercy of the
Invaders: Mellerflat and Newflat in Franconia taken by Stalhanse.
who took and plundeted Mellerstat, and Newstat; and had done more there, had
they not been restrained, by order from the General, from engaging himself
too far; and had not the care of the Bishop of Wirtzburg, arming some
thousands of men speedily, with the Garrisons of Swinefurd, consisting of eight
hundred, and that of Kizinguen, of five hundred men, made some head against
them, Lesle, assisted with his Hassian Forces, not being able to reach Goetz,
who shifted from place to place, declining any encounter with his Enemy, in
respect of his much weakened Army; that he might not return to the General,
without some tokens of his actions, Paderborne and Wartzburg in Westphalia
taken.
first assaulted Paderborne, and took it by Onslat: then summoned Wartzburg (a
Town of note still in Westphalia, though something eclipsed of her first
splendor, as having been the head of a County, styled by that name, and now
a Minor City, in the Diocese of Paderborne, situate upon the Northern Bank
of Dimula) and took it in by composition; the Citizens prefering the safeguard
of their persons, and families, before a little Money; and so purchasing their
quiet, rather then hazarding all to the fortune of War. And now both these
Commanders, being ruled by Commission, returned to the gross of the Army, in
Thuringen; giving leave to the Imperial Generals to meet again in
Westphalia, and to reenforce their Armies, with the Troops belonging to the
Marquess of Darmstat, the General Wahle, the Major Fehle, and the Count of
Wartemburg: All which, we must leave a little time in the Bishopric of
Cologne, and about Dortmund: doing more damage to their friends, by lying
still, and consuming the Victuals of the Country, then to their Enemies, by
any Hostile action.

The beginning of December was the time when the Swedish Commanders were
repairing back toward Saxony, and then began that horrid confusion, which
happened upon the Elector and his Allies, in his own and Confederates adjacent
Territories. The Lant-gravate belonging to George of Darmstat, was not only
threatened with a storm, as bad as a West-Indian Hericano, but a skirt of the
cloud fell upon it; Giesen, where the Lantgrave himself was in person, The
Lant-gravate of Darmstat molested.
for his better security having sent his wife and children into East-Frizeland
was menaced. The Inhabitants of Marpurg (the Metropolis of Hassia, and an
University famoused by Hyperius the Divine, Eohanus Hessus the Poet, and
Johannes Oldendorpius the Civilian) both Students and, Oppidans, betook
themselves to flight; Smalkalden surprised and pillaged, the City of Elfeld
was taken by assault, and the Suburbs burnt down to the ground, Elfeld taken
and the Suburbs burned.
and this distress caused the Lant-grave to write a doleful Letter to the
Elector of Saxony his father-in-law, desiring him to take commiseration of his
Subjects, who was able to pity him only, but not for the present to releeve
him.

But the main tempest fell not in that Province, it steered more
North-easterly, into Misnia and Thuringen, where what spoil it made, shall be
related afterward. The Lant-grave-George thus distressed by the Swedes, of the
one side, and receiving diverse by-blowes by the Garrison of Hanaw, at the same
time hasted to treat with them of a Truce, and cessation of Arms for a time to
be prescribed and agreed upon, fearing that if the Swedes should thrive, and
come nearer the Weteraw, there would neither be time, nor place for any
Compromitters to mediate betwixt him, and our Noble Countrie-man, (as wise in
his directions, as nimble and valiant in the execution,) Ramsey Governor of
the Military men there.

A Regiment of Crabats surprised near Wormbs, and their Colonel taken
prisoner by Ramsey.
About the tenth of December, stilo vetere, some selected Troops being drawn
out of the Presidiarie Soldiers, to scour the Country thereabout, passed the
Rivers of Main, and the Rhine, and at Dirmsteim, a village near Wormbs,
lighted upon a Regiment of Crabats, and their Colonel Dishchlier with them.
The Crabats seeing how they were surprised, prepared at once, (according to
their custom, borrowed from the Parthians) both for fight and flight; but
being surrounded by the Hanawers, and forced to their Tackling, they fought
till the major part of them being slain, the Colonel and the rest, submitting
themselves as prisoners of War, they were carried thence to Hanaw, with five
Cornets, store of money, and other good booty. One Prize prepares the way for
another; upon their return homeward, intelligence was brought them, that forty
Tons of Wine were to be transported the next day from Franck-ford to Giessen,
A Convoy for forty tons of Wine, taken by the Hanawer.
for the use of the Lant-grave of Darmstat. The Commander was made acquainted
with the business, and he instantly arming four hundred men, sent out to
attend the Convoy, which they met withal fortunately, before they had passed a
quarter of the journey, and in a short conflict, having subdued the Waggoners
which drove it, and Soldiers which guarded it, brought it home to the
Garrison, with the Lieutenant which commanded it. This small loss incensed the
Lant-grave against the Frank-forders, (whom he accused as conspiring with the
Hanawers against him, though five of their men were slain in seeking to
preserve the charge committed to their trust, pressing them to make it good,
otherwise menacing to confiscate their goods which were in his Dominions) but
hastened the Treaty with Ramsey, A four months Truce concluded betwixt
Darmstat and Ramsay.
to prevent any further detriment, which he followed so closely, that by the
fourth of the month ensuing a Truce was concluded on, to endure till May, with
conditions of free trade and commerce betwixt both parties, and that the
Lant-grave should furnish the City with some thousands Malders of Corn, at
six Rixe-dollers the Malder, and if so much could not be obtained in the
public Markets, it should then be taken out of his private Granaries. And this
conclusion was joyfully received of all parties: however the premises were
displeasing, the Frank-forders, hoping by this means to enjoy the benefit of
those Musarum Nundinae, their Mart, the Hanawers a time of breathing, and the
Lant-grave more liberty to arm himself for the assistance of the Saxon and
Imperialists his Confederates.

The Electorall Diet convented and commenced at Regenspurgh the last Summer,
went on all this hurly-burly notwithstanding; Many and several days were
appointed for the Election of a King of the Romans, A new King of Romans
elected.
and at the last, the twelfth of December old style, was resolved for the time,
when without further delay the choice should be. The Circumstances required by
the Golden Bull of Charles the fourth were all observed, save only in the time
of consultation, the place of Election, and the persons of the Electors. The
time of consultation prescribed was bounded formerly with 30. days, and if in
that space the Electors could not agree, omnibus aliis detractis cibariis,
praeter panem, and aquam, nihil aliud illis detur, The Electors were to be fed
with bread, and water, and nothing else till their votes were given up; yet
here had been a consultation above four months space. The Election was
confined to Frank-ford, and there to the Church of Saint Bartholomew, this was
made at Ratisbone. The power of Election was given to three German Prelates,
Mentz the Arch-chancellour of Germany, Cologne Arch-chancellour of Italy,
Triers Arch-chancellour of France; and three temporal Princes; the Prince
Palatine of the Rhine Arch-sewer, the Duke of Saxony Sword Bearer, and the
Marquis of Brandenburgh High Chamberlane, these six being all to be summoned
by the Elector of Mentz, and not to lose their suffrages, unless by a
will-full default of absence; yet here the Elector of Triers was expressly
denied admittance, and the Elector Palatine never called, but another thrust
into his place, by the Title of the Elector of Bavaria; The Elector of Triers
and Lant-grave of Cassell.
to the just greevance of some German Princes, who questioned the Justice of
this Election, and not without some ground protested against it, not in respect
of the person elected by the Senate, being reported an hopeful Prince, of a
good nature, and promising condition, but the indirect means of that Election.
But disputes were vain, the Gowne-Law could not prove the Course illegal,
and whatever objection could be made to the contrary, the Electorall College
proceeded, according to their first determination. To this end the Magistrate
of Ratisbone attended with the Burgesses and the Governor, the Colonel
Nidrun, waited upon by the men of Arms assembled in the Towne-house, and by an
oath of Allegiance confirmed the assurance of their loyalty to the Electors.
The Bull required a privacie, that the Electors might confer together freely,
without interruption by the Ambassadors of Foreign Princes, or the Nobility
of the Empire, by whose solicitation in behalf of their particular friends,
their Consultation might be disturbed, and a work of this high consequence be
hindered. The same Evening therefore, diligent search was made throughout the
City for all strangers and such as had no dependence upon the Emperor or the
Electors, that they might be warned to depart the City, and not to return
thither, till the King of Romans was chosen, and this inquisition was done so
effectually, that the Spanish Ambassador, and his retinew retired the same
night to Straubinguen, to abide there, till he might without offense to their
proceedings return to Ratisbone. The day following the Duke of Bavaria and his
Lady, arrived at the City in great state, and the next day December 11.21.
about nine in the morning, the Electors having before that fathomed each other,
and designed the person privately whom they meant that day to proclaim
publicly, repaired first to the State-house, the place appointed for their
meeting, and thence marched magnificently toward the Cathedral Church, where
they were to give in their suffrages.

The process of all was thus: the present Electors and the Deputies of them
which were absent, having used the State-house as a Vestry for putting on their
Electorall Robes, went thence to the Thumb (or Cathedral Church) in this
order. They were divided into three ranks, which in State observing an equal
distance, each from other, were thus marshalled. First went the Electors of
Ments and Cologne; The manner and Ceremonies of the Election.
Mentz having the right hand File, and Cologne the left; The next to these were
the King of Bohemia on the right hand, and the Duke of Bavaria on the left, and
last Frederick of Metsch, representing the Duke of Saxony, who had on his
left hand the Count of Swartzemburg, as Deputy in the present Diet for the
Marquess of Brandenburg. Before them was carried a Sword in its scabberd, but
as soon as they came to the Cathedral, the Sword Bearer retired, the Church
doors were made fast, a Mass sung by the Elector of Cologne, and then, after
some few other Ceremonies, which lasted till about twelve of the clock,
FERDINAND the Third, King of Hungary, and Bohemia, eldest Son to Caesar, was
proclaimed the Elected King of the Romans.

These Ceremonies past, the Emperor adorned with his Imperial Habit was
brought in a chair to the Church, and Te Deum being sung, intermingled with
many great thunderclaps from the great Ordnance and Muskets, the Electors
took horse, twenty four Trumpets and a Kettle-drum sounding before them, the
Duke of Bavaria carrying the Ball of the Empire, Metsch and Swartzenburg the
Scepter, and the Marshall Pappenheim, a naked Sword immediately before Caesar,
who followed in a Chair of State, with the Imperial Crown upon his head
attended by the King of the Romans, both of them being under a starry Canopy,
guarded with the Elector of Mentz on the right hand, and the Elector of Cologne
on the left, and so passed upon a Gallerie addressed for that purpose to the
Emperors Palace, where they were entertained the next day with a sumptuous
Feast, the Confectioners showing all their Art to set forth a Banquet, and his
Imperial Majesty desiring to express his grateful heart for their
willingness to suffragate so unanimously for the Kings election.

Nothing was then wanting, which could be expected at a days preparation, but
the Coronation of the new King, December 19.29 was with much more solemnity
then his Election, and the Coronation of the Queen, though celebrated more
privately, was nothing inferior to the Kings in glory. The time betwixt his
Majesty's Election and Coronation, was spent in ordering of things required for
such a day, and administration of Civil Justice. The dignity of State
required the first, the safety which by impunity of offenders must needs be
endangered, prescribed the other. The Royal Vestiments which from the time of
Charle-Magne, were customarily used at such Solemnities, were then at
Noremberg, and thither a Currier was dispached to the Magistrate and Governor
for them, who upon sight of the Letters, attended with them personally to
Regenspurgh. Thus this order was observed faithfully; but the design for
execution of Justice fell not out so happily; V^schius a Doctor of Laws, The
Syndick of Cologne murdered at Regenspurgh.
and Advocate for the Elector of Cologne, was murdered in his own lodging by
some malitio^s assassinates, who either sought his life, or treasure, of which
though they were seized, yet fearing it seems to be discovered,

( Quinam hominum est, quem tu contentum videris uno Flagitio? One sin never
comes unattended) they deprived him also of the other, and remaining still
unknown, the Magistrate propounded great rewards to them, or him that could
reveal them, whether parties in the crime or not, and to the first a pardon
for their trespass, besides the pecuniary guerdon, upon condition only, to
descrie their, or his accomplices, but all was frivolous; the nigh-birds kept
still close together, and all they which once had so far exceeded the bounds
of honesty, were resolved to continue in their course and not reveal the
villainy.

Yet, though the course of Justice was thus impedited, the Pomp of State went
on: The prefixed day, for setting the Crown upon the Kings head, was observed;
and then the King, The King of Romans crowned.
to show his Magnificence scattered some Medalls of Gold and Silver amongst the
people, whereon his Arms, Name, the day and year of his Coronation, were
engraven. An Ox roasted whole, larded with Partridges, and stuffed with a
Calfe, and two Muttons, was exposed to the spoil of the common people: The
great Conduit ran White and Claret Wine. The Marshall of the Empire, having
brought a great heap of Oats into the open street, carried away a small
Measure, and left the rest, not to be shared amongst the people by measure, but
caught up and carried away by as many as would and could catch it; tore the
Cloth in pieces, with which the Bridge was covered that day, for the passage of
Caesar, and the Grand States of the Empire, and distributed it amongst the
common people. And thus the Magnificent Ceremonies, for that day, were
accomplished.

The Queen as yet remained uncrowned: for hough the King and she made but one
Body, and it might be supposed, that in him she had seizure of that Character
of Royal Dignity, yet her temples were to be impaled also with a material
Crown, according to the custom of the Empire; and December. 29. Jan. 7. was
designed, for that Rituall transaction. Three days before, were spent in
revelling; the Queen giving entertainment to the Empress, the Duchess of
Bavaria, and the Ladies of the Court, with Feasts, Music, Maskes, and
whatever else could be thought of, requisite for the Bien-venu of such great
Personages. This time thus expired, the solemn day for the Queens
inauguration was come: and then she in State being brought into the Church,
after a Masle chaunted by the Archbishop of Mentz, The Queens Coronation.
was carried in a Chair to the high Altar, close to the King her Husbands
side, and had the Crown put upon her head; which, though weighty, she wore
by the space of a quarter of an hour, and returned to his Imperial Majesty's
Palace.

It was a day of much joy to the Spaniards then at Ratisbone; and they, to
express the content received by this Solemnity, made the Night aemulate the
Day, shining as bright with Piles of artificial Fires, raised before their
Doors, as the Sun in his glory. But the Ambassador, as in dignity of place
alone, so in expense there, exceeded all the rest jointly; the night did not
terminate his actions. The next day, he invited the new King and Queen, and
the personages of quality in the Imperial Court, to his house, entertained
them with a stately Banquet; during the which, ten Hogges-heads of Wine being
brought, one after another, into a great Bay-Window, were rapped, and let run
into a Cisterne below, for the use of the people; who shared therein, and in
many pieces of Gold and Silver, half Pistolets, Ryals of eight, and lesser
Money, which he scrambled amongst the people, to be divided by fortune, not
his own arbitrament.

The former Magnificence, was in expense of Money; but another sort followed
it, by advancement of some persons of quality to some Titles of Honor. The
Kings coming to the Crown, was not in all points like the Suns appearing in
the Horizon, to eclipse the glory of the Minor Stars, and bury their
splendor in his own; his promotion to the height of Majesty, was the
exaltation of certain Peers to more Honor: Sixteen Noblemen were created
Knights of the Empire; namely, the Lord Maximilian Williband, New Knights of
the Empire made.
Earl of Wollfseck; the Earl Adam Budiani; John Jacob, Earl of Zyll; Peter,
Earl of Goetsen; John Anthony, Earl of Cratz; Henry Erneskerpen, Earl of
Toringe; Ladislaus Schechii; William Voight, Lord of Maxwein; John Rudolph, and
George Rudolph, of Haslang; the Baron William Dieterick, of Runen; John Jacob,
of Startzhausen; George, of Seibolsdorff; Stephen Esterhasi; John Philip
Gunter; and Henry Christopher, of Flaus: The Duke of Newburg attending upon the
King, in the quality of a Cup Bearer; and the Prince of Anhalt performing the
Office of his Carver, during the time of feasting at this Solemnity.

THE Astrologians benign Star, Jupiter, seemed now to smile upon the Court
at Ratisbone, with a sweet aspect, but Mars and Saturn reigned abroad;
Prodigies terrifying the hearts of the people, while the Princes and Peers
were in this jollitie; and War, with his grim attendants, Famine, Pest,
Fear, and Distraction, raging abroad in the Empire. What might happen, by the
fault of a careless or unskilful Mason, not well bedding or cementing the
Stones, Strange Prodigies.
at the building of a new Steeple at Vienna, was by the construction of the
vulgar sort counted ominous: The Spire of S. Shotten, lately built, fell down
suddenly, about the time of the Coronation, and demolished the Church, and that
was made portentous; the rather, being accompanied with another of the same
time at Rome; where, a great blazing Star, called by the Naturalists Cometa
Crinitus, appeared for a space, and then vanished away suddenly, over S. Paul's
Church, with a noise; And diverse Monuments, placed in the Church, fell down,
and were defaced utterly.

CHAPTER II.
The death of the Emperor Ferdinand the second: with the siege and taking of
Erford by the Swedes, and other things.

IT would relish of overmuch boldness to peep into the Arc of the divine
secrets, nor dare I, nor can I conclude any particular consequences to have
been portended by the accidentary fall of the Pyramid, yet doubtless the Comet
though caused by the meeting of secondary and natural causes, was the
significator of what ensued about that time, and not long after. Within the
space of a month a titular God of the world, and one that claimed a
superiority above the rest (though all absolute and undependant Princes, which
hold the Scepter by inheritance, not election, may justly vie with him for
eminency of place) Ferdinand the second, who had long been sickly at
Regenspurgh, and then removed to Vienna, The death of the Emperor Ferdinand the
second.
gave a testimony of his mortality, by subscribing to the laws of Nature,
and exhaling his last spirit, Feb. 2/15. betwixt 8. and 9. of the clock in the
morning, to the great grief of the Court and City, which had prepared
triumphs, and tournaments, and in much bravery determined to receive the new
King of Romans, but by this occasion laid aside their gallantrie, put on the
face and weeds of sorrow, and by their dejected looks and mourning apparel,
showed their anxietie for his loss, who so long had steered the ship of State,
to their content, and was then taken from them when the tottering Empire,
freshly assaulted and ransackt by strangers, required such a Nestor, as by sage
directions, grounded upon mature deliberations might preserve it from fear of
utter ruin. The same afternoon his body was embalmed, and two days after he
was laid in the Antecamera, to the sight of all that came in: and Feb. 8/18.
his corpse was carried into his own Chapel at the Palace, to be kept there
till the King of Hungary (who was then upon the Danubie, returning with his
Queen from Ratisbone by water) was come thither to give order and instructions
for the manner of his interrment.

About the same time, abroad, the Swedes grown every where Masters of the
field, began again to take in Towns, give Laws to the Citizens, swear the
Magistrates to allegiance to the Crown of Sweden, take Hostages for
performance of Conditions, plunder the Country, where they enquartered, to
furnish their Armies with necessaries, and force the Cities which stood in
fair terms of agreement with Caesar, the Elector of Saxony, and the other
Princes, which either sided with the Emperor, before the treaty of Prague, or
came in to him thereupon, to renounce their alliance, and take in their Swedish
Garrisons.

Leslie the Feeldmarshall, being come back from Westphalia, from pursuit of the
Caesarean General Goetz, was come back to the Lantgravate of Hesse^ Cassell
where meeting with the Swedish General, he received a new Commission, to
return toward the Weser, to have an eye upon the mperialists, and the League,
Bannier supposing that body of an Army which himself commanded, sufficient
for performance of his own designs in the upper Saxony, there yet appearing
no adverse Army which was able to stand against him.

Leslie conformed him to his Generals Command, and Bannier without further
stay marched with his forces toward Misnia. But Ertford, that goodly City of
Thuringen again presented it self to his fancy, as he was upon the way;
somewhat he resolved to do there, yet what or how he made a pause on; to leave
it behind him, he concluded to be no part of policy, the place being of great
receipt, and well fortified, both with a Moat, good walls, and the strong Castle
of Ziriacksburg, and so, if once furnished by his enemies but with fifteen
hundred presidiaries, might molest his Army; to attempt it by force, or a long
Siege, might waste his forces, and consume much time: These doubts stumbled
him, yet in fine he resolved to take it by a finenesse (if it might be) and if
that way thrived not, to work otherwise. And take it in the end he did, nor
was the design any remora to his further proceedings, being but a whet to
sharpen the courage of his Soldiers, no stop or let to his purposes. December.
1/1. Bannier took up his head-quarter at Deberstead, a village not far from
Ertford, and the same Evening, to lose no time, first presented part of his
Forces in a small Battalia before the Fort of Ziriacksburg, and then rode in
person to the gates of the City, demanding of the Governor, Ertford summoned.
whether he would declare himself a friend or enemy to the Crown of Sweden?
The former passage, and treaty before his pursuit of the confederate Imperial
Generals, made him confident, that the Governor would answer his demand
modestly, without any rude expression of hostility: and modestly he answered
indeed, that he had no order from the Magistrate to declare himself an enemy,
when the Swede catching the words from his mouth, before he could make an end,
replied mildly, Nor am I yours. The Governor intended to tell him, that he
would confer with the Magistrate, and follow the order which he should
prescribe, but Bannier unwilling to admit any demurre in the business, stayed
not to attend their conference, but instantly having before hand expressed
himself by writing, called for a Trumpetter and sent him into the City with
Letters, requiring the Magistrate to send his Deputies to the Camp, with whom
he would parlee for the benefit and preservation of that City. The Magistrate
regarding the safety of the Citizens, and conceiving that the Swede would
demand nothing but a supply of necessaries, as clothes and victuals for his
Army; sent some of the graver Burghesses the next day to deal according to
the directions, which himself by advise of the Senate the night before had
concluded on, and confined them to. Early in the morning the Swede road about
the City, viewed the fortificatio s, and before the Deputies came, was
returned to his tent. Yet at last they came, were entertained kindly, and with
many protestations of his affection to their State, which he desired, that they
would answer again with a Remonstrance of the like love to him, by renouncing
the treaty, and conclusions at Prague, by remaining constant to the Crown of
Sweden, as they had been formerly, by surrendering unto him the Fort of
Ziriacksburg, and accepting of a Swedish Garrison; which conditions if they
liked of, he promised to protect them, and would neither desire any supply of
money, or other necessaries from the Citizens.

The Burghesses perceived, that his Oration which at first was smoothed with
oily words, came off with a sharp twang, that a bitter pill was tendered
them, though covered with gold, and though they might have answered him without
pausing, being instructed by their Commission, yet desired leave to go back
to the Senate, promising faithfully to return an answer the next morning.
Their desire was granted by the Swede, and the promised answer was sent by a
Trumpeter according to the set time by them; but not suiting to the demand,
save only in flat denial, the Citizens having resolved to stand upon their
defense, and rather endure the inconveniences which attend a Siege, than
subscribe to those propositions.

The General was the same day invited to dinner by Duke William of Wymar, and
had appointed to meet him, that their alliance might be renewed, and by a good
correspondence, they might be assistant, each to other; and this occasion
hindered the Swede from planting his battery against the City that day,
conceiving that unless his eye was over the work, it would not be done to the
best advantage: only for that present, he gave order to some Troops of Horse,
to scour the tetritorie about the River of Saal; which was done, and at night
they returned to the Camp, Besieged by the Swedes.
bringing with them some Saxon Officers prisoners. The next morning very early
the General commanded his Canons to be planted upon an hill near Daberstead,
and then the Gunnes played their parts so well, that fifty great shot in a
small space were discharged against the City, and more were ready, but that a
Fireball cast into the Town, having fired two Barnes, and a dwelling house,
the General gave order to give off shooting, till he had again felt the pulse
of the Magistrate, by sending a Drum unto the City, to wish the Inhabitants
to treat with him fairly, and not hasten their own ruin, promising that
whatsoever was past notwithstanding, he would use them with all lenity, and
lay no unsupportable burdens upon them. The Senate gave audience to the
Messenger, and sent two selected men of quality, to confer again with the
General, yet first receiving Hostages for the safety of the Senators
(Colonel Goltz, and his Lieutenant) a cessation of Arms for twenty-foure
hours was the first proposition made by the Agents for the City, and that
obtained, they craved leave to depart, showing a contentedness in their
countenances, that they could so easily prevail for what they desired with
him, which not many hours before seemed an implacalbe Enemy. But the Camp
made better use of this time of forbearing offensive Arms, than the City did;
defenses were not prohibited, it was lawful for either party to do any thing
in that short time of truce, for their own defense and safety; though not to
the detriment of the other: and Bannier used not his men as Soldiers, but
pioners, their weapons that day were mattock and spade, and those proved as
serviceable for his purpose, as the thundering Ordnance. The Briarean hands of
the laboring men, not hindered by any adversary, made a quick dispatch of
much work; by the Evening, the approaches were brought to the very gates of
the City, and the Castle-walls, and then both the Commander of the Military
men, Surrendered upon compolition.
and the civil Magistrate, perceiving how the Swede had overreached them by a
finenesse, feared his force, and yielded themselves and the place upon these
ensuing Conditions.

First, That the sort of Ziriacksburg should receive for a Garrison, The
Articles
a hundred of the Swedish Soldiers, and a hundred of the City, all to be
commanded by a Swede, who should give an oath of loyalty, both to the Crown
of Sweden, and the City.

Secondly, The City shall not be charged with entertainment of any Soldiers,
but its own, and which shall be governed by a particular Commander, and both
the Soldiers and their Chieftaine shall swear as well to the Crown of
Sweden, as the City.

Thirdly, The Keys of the gates shall be kept by the Senate.

Fourthly, The Citizens shall abide true and faithful to the Crown of Sweden,
till a firm and constant peace be settled in the Empire, etc. that the City at
all times when necessity requires it, shall give free pass and repasse to
the Swedes, according to the occasion.

Fifthly, The City shall pay the Soldiers in the Army 36000. Rix-dollars,
whereof 10000. shall be paid immediately in ready money, and 16000. in wares,
and the rest within the space of six weeks.

Lastly, In this agreement shall be comprehended all the Nobility, Gentry, and
Saxon Officers, which are fled to the City for refuge and protection, with
their movables, and other goods.

These Articles were sealed on both sides December. 16/26. the gates of the City
set open for the Swedes entry, the Castle delivered, and a Swedish Commander
put into it.

Gleen according to the order received from Caesar, was then upon his march
toward Westphalia to unite his Wirtembergers to Goetz and Hatzfie dt; when
Bann^er thus thrived in Thuringen. The depth of winter could not stay his
journey, nor the cold of the season congeale the burning desire the Imperial
Commanders had generally, to enable themselves to meet and fight with the
Swedish Army: but succors came in slowly elsewhere, the Duke of Lunenburgh
stood a while as a newter, nor declaring himself till the Spring approached:
only Gleen the most forward for the present, proved most unfortunate. Four
complete Regiments by the assistance of the Land-grave of Darmstad he had
drawn together, 4. Imperial^ Regiments defeated by Stalhaus.
and knowing where the gross of Banniers Army was, thought to find a way from
Franconia to Westphalia by Hessen-land, or if any straggling Swedes should
happen by the way; able to encounter with them, and chase them, and so clear
the passage by his power. Some Swedish troops appeared in Franconia upon the
river of Sala, and they descrying the Caesarean Commander upon his march,
retired as afraid of him, into the Forest of Thuringen. It is the condition of
an ambitious man to think all others stand in awe of him, and he that
concludes of colors by a false glass, apprehends things otherwise then
they are; The Caesarean took their retirement, for a plain flight, and
thinking to overreach and surprise them, spurred up after them; when suddenly
himself was overtaken being encountered by Stalhause, (whom till then they had
nor discovered) unexpectedly. There were in that Army some men of quality, and
of a spirit transcending the condition they were then in; the Count of
Furstemburg, the Colonels Princk, Mantenfell, and Ramsdorff, all daring men,
and as able for service, as daring, though now they were unhappily
over-weighed. These great hearts saw the present danger, yet undaunted with it
they rather armed for battle, then either to run or yield, 700 of them slain,
and 2 Colonels taken prisoners
and fight they did valiantly, but not fortunately, and the Wirtemberger
Regiment encouraged by the example of their Leaders, followed on as resolutely,
holding out almost to the last man. The horse only played the jades, for the
Cavalliers seeing the Swedes come on impetuously and finding themselves a
little galled by the Swedish Musketeers, instead of fighting against them ran
unto them, leaving the foot to the mercy, or fury of their enemy, who slew
700. upon the place, took near as many prisoners, and amongst the rest, the
two last-named Colonells, gained three pieces of Ordnance marked with the arms
of Gleen, and pursued the rest almost to Wertzburg where Princk who had his
horse slain under him in the battle, and Gleen, and Furstemberg saved
themselves with much difficulty.

Bannier having ordered things at Ertford, marched thence with his Army
consisting of sixteen Regiments of horse, and two thousand foot December. 21.
old-stile, when taking up his head quarter at Eckersburg, and Schult-porten, he
first summoned Naumburg, the first City in Misnia, on the west side of Sala,
and the Commander there refusing to come in upon his summons, he planted a
battery, and without much expense of powder and shot, the Citizens careful to
preserve their own estates, dissenting from the Praesidiarie Soldiers, he
entertained the Burgesses friendly, but forced the men of Arms to come in upon
discretion; and the Saxon Lieutenant Colonel which commanded there, the Major
and two Captains he detained as prisoners of war, yet the common Soldiers,
150. in number, obtained their lives and liberties by taking service under him.
Thence he removed his Camp toward Moersburg, an Episcopal City upon the
same River, which submitting it self to the Swede upon the sighf of his Army,
Leipsich summoned.
he conducted his forces immediately toward Leipsich, where finding two
resolute Commanders the Earls of Transdorff, arming themselves and fortifying
the place against the fury of his ordnance, and danger by the grenades,
vessels of water being placed in the streets, the houses covered with wet
skins, and nothing omitted which the case of a besieged place required for
its conservation. Ian. 1. old style he summoned the City, and the Castle of
Pleisemburg adjoining to it, and receiving a joint answer of refusal to
surrender, from the brethren which commanded severally in the Fort and City,
he threatened to enforce it, yet for the present only blocked it up, and before
he had spent a shot against ir, or received one from it, marched thence with
the other part of his Army toward Eulenburg, whither he had sent Stalhause
before him, The Governor resolved to defend it.
with the greater part of his Cavallarie to discover the power and posture of
the General Major Dehne, whose purpose by intercepted letters directed to the
Governor of Leipsich, being to bring 2000. men which he had then at Eulenburg
in four Regiments for his assistance, was by this means prevented, and way
made for the Swedes further conquests. The Saxon Commander had notice of the
Swedes before hand, and half an hour before that Stalhause his Avantguard
could reach to his late quarter, was risen and rode upon the spur toward
Torgaw, the care of that City being committed to his trust by the Elector, who
himself being secure no where, went from Leipsich to Torgaw, upon the first
report of the Swedes being at Ertfort, and thence to Dresden, every where as
he passed giving a great charge to the Commanders and Governors, and taking
oaths of them, to stand to him faithfully, and not deliver up his towns,
unless by necessity into the hands of his enemies.

Yet the fate of the General Major depending upon that days service, though
he had gotten the advantage of way, and was upon the speed, could not preserve
the City, nor his forces. Stalhause seeing him gone made after a-maine, and
though he could nor overtake the Avantguard of the Saxons, wherein Dehne, and
Wilsdorffe, his aequall in military dignity was, he overtooke the Reere
conducted by the Colonel Shletonitz, Colonel Dehne rowted.
and after a small battle, wherein he had slain 200. of his men, took the
Colonel himself, and 200. others prisoners, deprived them of four Standards
and Ensigns, and pursued the General Major to the gates of the City, which
though it held out that night, was surrendered the next day to the General
Bannier, as soon as he appeared before it with his Army, the season favoring
his attempt, glazing up the Elve, and exposing the Fort before the Bridge, and
the Bridge too, to his obedience, upon conditions to spare the lives and
liberties of the Praesidiarie Soldiers, both Commanders and ordinary men,
they again condescending to depart without weapons, and to deliver the Swedes
the Ensigns, and 32. Standards which were then in the City.

CHAPTER III.
Torgaw taken from the Saxon, the Garrison turn to the Swedes, with the siege
of Leipsich, and the abandoning of it again by the Swedes, and other things.

THis Conquest was of no small consequence, the Saxons loss was greater in the
conclusion, Torgaw taken by Bannier.
then in the beginning, and the Swedes advantage much more. Besides 1200. foot
which were garrisond in the City, there were at the same present also 2500.
men belonging to several Regiments fled thither for their security, and these
upon the surrender of the place, thinking to have had liberty to depart, with
their Arms and baggage, as being none of the Garrison, were upon their march
in a fair aequipage, with 12. Ensigns, and 5. pieces of Canon, which the
Electour had saved from the Swedes at the battle of Witstocke. But upon them
too the Swede seized, and giving liberty to the Commanders to be gone but not
without a check, and some reproaches for their perfidious dealing with the
Crown of Sweden (to which they had once sworn fealty and sincere alliance)
and surprisall of their baggage, The Saxon Garrison takes pay of the Swedes.
he dismounted and disarmed the underofficers and common Soldiers, who
perceiving their nakedness of a sudden tendered him their service, and took
pay under him, hoping of better wages from him, then they could expect from the
Elector; Bannier having lately taken from him the most part of his treasury at
Leichtenburg, and now enriched with a new booty, valued at above one million,
16000. Rix-dollers whereof lately appertained to the General Major Dehne.

Some men have got wealth by their losses, like Pomponius Laetus in Sabellicus,
who having his house pillaged, received double so much as he lost by the
bounty of his friends. But the Saxon Generals case was otherwise, with the
City, The Colonel Dehne beheaded.
(to the Government whereof he was recommended by the Elector for his good
service in relieving the Fort of Mansfeldt) he lost his estate, and life, the
Swedes having got his treasure, and the Elector soon after cutting off his
head, for surrendering the City; and the Elector himself, with that particular
place, lost more, Meissen, the chief City of Misnia, Eulemburg, Grim, Borne,
Debitz, Bitterfeldt, Belgeren, and Hall, yielding instantly to the Conqueror,
having no hope of relief by any confederate Army; Only Dresden of all the
umbilicall Cities of Saxony held out still, yet not without fear of being
made the spoil of strangers, the Imperial Armies, being so far from their
succors, that their march and places of rest, were unknown to the Citizens.

But the loss of Torgaw, was no small means for the liberty and deliverance
of Leipsich; the vigilant Commander there, slipped no opportunity, which
presented it self unto him, and perceiving the Swedish Army, both horse and
foot discamping Ian. 4. old style, and upon their march toward Torgaw, the
same night sent forth three hundred Musketeers and two hundred horse, to search
for the straggling Swedes, which were lurking about the Villages near
Eulenburg, and were not gone with the maine body of the Army. The Saxon
Soldiers went on with as little noise as might be, and covering the design
with the darkness of the night, fell unexpectedly upon a small Troop of
Swedish horse, A Troop of Swedish horse surprised.
which had taken up their nights lodging in one of the Villages, and surprised
them. The Swedish Ritmaster, whose courage surmounted his present power, began
to make some resistance, yet oppressed with a far superior number of Saxons,
and dangerously wounded, was forced to yield, and himself and the most part of
that Cavallary, some few only saving themselves by flight with a Preacher to
the Swedish Army, were made prisoners, and carried to Leipsich.

This prosperous design, gave the Soldiers and Inhabitants a small assurance
of speedy deliverance; some concluded, that the Swedes had received notice of
the Imperial succors, which the Leipzickers expected daily; others, that
Mansfeild with his Silesian Army, had invaded the Marquisate of Brandenburg,
and was too strong for Wrangell, to whose care that Province was left, and that
Bannier was enforced to march back again to relieve him; others, (it is
common with men to believe what they desire) that Bannier and his Armies
discamping, Leipsich victualed and fortified.
was rather a flight for their own preservation, than a warlike March for
further execution, and with confidence fed with ayerie hopes, proclaimed their
own deliverie. But the provident, and valiant Commander, fore-casted what
might ensue, and as one not fearing any present danger, opened the Grimmer, or
South gate, yet as not secure, kept the rest locked up, and knowing, that
besides offensive and defensive Arms, Victuals, and other provisions
necessary for life, were required to hold out a Siege, in the absence of the
Swedes, which continued the space of seven days, sent into the Country, for
Cattle, Corn, Hay, Oats, and Wood, which he bestowed in the Zimmer house, and
Baarfuper Church, (necessity causing him to turn that consecrated ground to a
profane use) as in two Magasines: armed two thousand lusty young Prentices,
and Journeymen, to serve as Soldiers, strengthened the fortifications, and
omitted nothing which might seem needful to preserve the City, suspecting
the return of the Swedish Forces thither.

His conjecture was not misplaced, Ian. 12. old style, the avantguard of the
Swedes was discovered upon Godsaker, early in the morning, and were saluted
with some Volleyes of Canon-shot, from the Fort of Pleissenburg, and Saint
Peter's Bulwark, yet without any offense done, (the Ordnance not answerable to
the Commanders desire, Leipsich again summoned.
could not reach them) the whole Host, designed for that service, with their
Wagons and baggage were descryed, coming over Schoenfeldt, under their
General the Earl of Brandesteine. The Swedes observed the method of a fair
Enemy, sending word first by a Trumpeter to the City of their purpose,
intending to prepare for the blow, if the answer did not suite with their
demand: The instructions given the Messenger, were in round and peremptory
words, to tell the Commander, that his General desired to know, whether he
would surrender the City upon a fair Composition, or see it become a pillar
of fire, and smoke; and though delivered rudely, was answered as roundly: the
Commander replying, that he could not, nor would complie himself to his
desire; and that, whatsoever the Swede had promised to himself, it was not in
his own ability to perform; but must be referred to the fortune of war.

Words were bootlesse, the Swede prepared presently for the Siege, and the next
morning was strongly entrenched before the Grimmer gate, upon the stone way,
and planted himself in the New, and Back streets, and other houses near the
City. And the Earl of Transdorff, again, neglected not to make his defenses,
armed the Colleges, which were near the wall, namely, Saint Paul's College,
the Great, and New Colleges, and St Thomas his School, with Soldiers and
Artillery, making a vacation for the Students, by converting those Nurseries
of piety, and policy, into Blockhouses, Bulwarks, and Cittadels, replenished
with military men, and instruments of war; the present adversary being not to
be repelled with scientificall demonstrations, or probable arguments out of
Topics, but with fire and sword, shot and powder, from the throats of the
roaring Ordnance.

Besieged by the Swedes.
Now the confusion which attends upon war, began to appear attired in her
proper dress; houses flaming and set on fire, not by the enemy, but their
proper owners, that they might be no shelter for the adversaries. Churches,
Altars, and the dwelling places of the Muses battered by the Canon, endangered
by the fire Morterers, and Grenades; the Ports boared on the one side with
shot from the Camp; and stuffed again with wood and dung by the defendants,
to keep their own people from going forth, and excluding their foes; Sallies
made out desperately, Mines wrought with difficulty, and where force avayled
not, for the assaylants; threats and fiery menacing Letters sent to the
defendants, and by them answered as spightfully. It is almost beyond belief,
that in so small a space, as this Siege endured, which was but from the twelfth
of January till the seventh of February, such, and so many things should be
done. But thus I find them set down in a Journall by one which was engaged in
the action, and therefore to be credited.

January 13. Old style, from about eight in the morning till nine at night, the
Swedes played upon the City, with their Canon, fire-workes, and Grenades; and
the Garrison upon the Camp, with their great Ordnance, dublehaukes, and
Muskets, yet without much detriment to either side, the Commander within,
having well provided to prevent the mischief, which might be done by the
Grenades, and the Swedes without, being so strongly earthed, that they could
not easily receive damage.

Holds out for the Electour of Saxony.
They who stayed in their trenches, were secure, but some few others which
ranged abroad, to please their genius, became the spoil of the Garrison, which
sallying out in the Evening, found eight men of the Army in an house without
the Rhanish gate, which had formerly been a Tavern, and put them all to the
sword. Thus that day was spent in thunder, which was not again so violent,
till about seven days following, the Soldiers on both sides in the mean
time, being employed rather to strengthen their defenses, than otherwise. The
Commander within, first gave order, that from that day, till the Siege was
done, no clock should strike, no bell be tolld, thereby teaching the people,
that the business of the time was such, as required all their hands, men,
women, and children, and would not give leave to listen after what is a clock?
And the next day having received Letters from the Elector, to do his endeavor
for preservation of the place faithfully, and to persuade the Inhabitants to
constancy, employed as many as were serviceable in raising of Pallisadoes,
stuffing of packs with wool, and bringing them into the several streets near
the wall, to be in a readiness, to fill up such breaches as might be made in
the wall; and the General without, employed his Soldiers, in raising of
batteries, digging of Mines about the Grimmer-gate, and other fortifications,
not omitting sometimes to send a Salute by shot to the City, and seldom
failing of an answer: yet the adventure of some of the Garrison, Ian. 18/28. is
worth a remembrance, for seeing the Swedes intended to make use of a
Glasse-makers house for a battery, they sallyed forth, and after a sharp
Skirmish, which endured the space of an hour, burned the house to the ground,
and returned to the City; and the day following, perceiving the Swedes to
begin to plant many Canon-baskets, upon the foundation of the same house, which
was of stone, and so escaped the fire; cut off the Damme betwixt the
Pleissenburg, and the Town Moat, without Saint Thomas gate, and by that means
drowned the foundation under water, and prevented the design.

The defense made by the Garrison, and the offense done by the Swedes.
But the 20/30. of that month, and from thence forwards to the time of the
Swedes rising, were each remarkable days. A great piece of Ordnance called
the Lazy maid, and three Morterers placed on the Grimmer gate by the Garrison,
were then employed against the Camp, without any more intermission, than was
necessary to cool them, and make them serviceable again. Sallies were made
daily by the praesidiarie Soldiers, and to keep the Swedes from the Castle,
fired the Suburbs without St. Peter's gate, and the Water-arch, as far as to
the Sand-streete, thinking it better to demolish those ragged buildings, which
in time of peace had been of some use, for the meaner sort of people, no
ornament to the City, than to have them employed by the Swedes, for execution
of their hostile purposes. The Swedes, again employed all their diligence to
bring the City to obedience, battered and boared the Grimmer-gate with three
Demi-Canons, and other great Pieces, slung massy stones into the City, by
help of the Morterers, threw in fire bals and grenades, and Ian. 22. Old
style, sent a Drum again to require the Governor to surrender, threatening
that if it was taken by assault, no person of what condition or sex so ever,
should find mercy; and receiving a scornful answer by the Commander, who had
received new Letters from the Electour, with a promise of the Imperial
succors, very speedily betook themselves again to their tackling, blew up a
Mine near the Grimmer-gate, and having dressed themselves with plaited straw
about their hats and arms, the same cognizance by which they were
distinguished from the Saxons in their day near Witstocke, (thinking thereby
to dishearten the defendants) stood in battellaray, as if they intended a
present assault.

A threatening countenance may daunt a Coward, and the representing of those
Instruments to a degenerous spirit* which have been formidable unto him
formerly, may strike him into an amazement, though there be no cause for it:
They were but the Corinthian slaves, which having beat their Masters with
Martial weapons, yielded upon sight of the whip, the Commander was of another
mould, and answered them in their own terms, from the mouths of the tall
and Lazy Maids, two great Gunnes, and smaller Pieces, and that so enraged the
Swedes (who by this were supplied with some thousands of fresh men, from the
Camp near Torgaw, and twelve new Pieces from Ertford) that to work they fall
again, as not meaning to parlee any more, and followed the design so hard
till the beginning of February, that (although they could not conquer the
City, they did much deface, and ruin it, the windmill street being burned
to the earth, some Churches, especially that of Saint Nicholas, and that of St.
Paul (the first having his roof broke down, and the other the Steeple
battered with the Canon, and falling upon the roof, utterly demolishing it, to
the greaterrour of the people, who were more rerrified by another shot from a
Demi-canon, which smote the Altar, the Organs, and carried away one moytie of
the Apostles Statues) and the Colleges being much ruined by the violence of
those storms, attended with artificial thunder.

A smart resistance was made by the defendants, which sometimes visited the
Swedes in their trenches, yet that had ocene truitlesse, had not the succors
come in maturely; but they estate being grown almost desperate, news was
brought to them, and the Camp, of the coming of the Imperial Army. The
Camp was less disheartened by the report, than the City encouraged, and to
make it appear, that they played not in jest, but earnest, resolved to attempt
something again, before the Imperial Host could march unto them.

To this end, February the sixth Old style being Saint Dorotheas day, they
played afresh upon the City, with four Demi-canons, eight great field Pieces,
and some lesser Gunnes, and in the space of five hours, by force of the
Ordnance, which had vomited three hundred thirty and five times upon the wall,
and virtue of their Mines, made two breaches, one upon the East, another upon
the West*side of the Grimmer-gate, (like Sampson in the sacred Story* doing
the Saxons more mischief at the last conclusion, than in the whole time of
their continuance there) and stood in Battalia again, as if they meant to
assault it.

The Commander, a man never enough to be praised for his undaunted courage,
(virtue where ever it is found is amiable) drew out four Companies of selected
foot, armed them with short Pikes, two-handed-swords, Morning stars, (a
deadly weapon where it falls) and Muskets, and marched himself in the head of
them to the breach, to encounter the Swedes, if they adventured to enter by
those breaches forcibly; It was done carefully, but needlessly; an express was
brought to the Camp, that the untied Forces under Hatzfield, and Goetz, were
within a days march, and the Swedes thought it fitter to retire with their
unbroken Forces safely, than to expose them to a double hazard, The Siege
raised.
and go on desperately: and February the sixth, Old style, betwixt seven and
eight at night, while the Morterers cast great stones and Grenades into the
City, and the Garrison was busy to prevent the mischief which might ensue
thereby, the Canons were drawn from the batteries, the Army began to march
and the Swedish General took up his head Quarter at Stoteritz.

For the space of almost six weeks, since the first summons, Ian. the first,
New style, the City was thus troubled with an uncouth Fever, neither always
intermittent, nor continual; but the seventh of February the malice of the
disease appeared to be abated, though some grudgings thereof, like the
after-drops of a violent shower, were still remaining. The Arriere of the
Swedes, that day set the Superintendents Gaden-house on fire; and the day
ensuing, the Villages neighboring unto it, inferious ministering members to
that more worthy body, were sacrificed to Vulcan; fifteen several Hamlets
were seen from Leipsich, flaming at once, and at Grolzschoker, a Dorpe
exceeding any of the other in greatness, the fire appeared biggest.

The ninth day brought with it an happy crisis, the fag end of the Swedes, was
not to be discovered, the Auantguard of the Imperial succors appeared to the
view of the almost distracted Citizens; the clocks were permitted again to
give notice of the hour, the Bells were rung to congregate the people to
divine service; and the tenth day, the Rhanish gate being opened, the Country
people and Soldiers brought in greatstore of wood, straw, and hay, into the
City: in fine, upon the twelth day was a solemn assembly, Thankesgiving for
the Cities deliverance.
and the people were summoned together, in all the Parishes, to render thanks
to him, who had watched over the City, for its preservation and deliverance,
and to join in prayers, for a firm, honorable, and general peace.

Hazardous adventures are not surpassed vithout difficulty; yet industry and
diligence perfecteth any Herculian enterprise. Famine, and extreme danger
attended the Imperialls march, yet but a City in Thuringen, famoused of old
for excellent wine, the name being thence derived, as Stigelius probably
conjectures.

Quippe vocat Iaijn, solymae pius Incola terrae
Hoc, quod nos Latio dicimus ore merum.
The Imperial Army reunited, and re-enforced march toward Misnia.
And of late for their Theriacall Antidote, relieved the first; and their valor
overcame the later; 200000. pound of bread, was extorted by the Imperial
Generals, from the City, and the Army thus refreshed, intended to march,
with all possible speed, toward Leipsich, but was hindered in the speed by the
General Major Stalhause, who having passed the River before them, cut off the
bridges behind him, A Conflict betwixt Stalhause, and tho Imperialists at Saba,
wherein four Imperial regiments* were ruinated.
guarded the advemies with his Canon, and in three several skirmishes with
Hatzfieldt, wholed the Avantguard, consisting of ten Regiments, ruinated four
of them, without much loss of his own party; and then seeing Goetz was come
with the rest of the host, in an orderly Retreat, marched up to Bannier, and
the maine of the Swedish Army.

The Forces on both sides, like so many lines drawn from several points of
the Circumference, began to tend to one Center; and as if both parties had set
up their rest, and were concluded to venture all at once, summoned their
associates from their several stations, to the general Randevouz in Misnia.
The Crabats under Isolani, and Budiani, were called out of the Dukedom of
Burgundy, to assist Hatzfielde in his design against the Swedes in Saxony;
and were by the end of February advanced as far as Hessen Cassell, where
they not only pressed the Lantgraues Subjects which lived in undefenced
places, The Crabats under Isolani oppress the Hessians.
and oppressed them with mighty exactions for relief, but required
Contributions of the great City it self, as deeming it to be under their
Command, and threatened Ertford in Thuringen with a Siege and hostile Arms,
presuming that they were able to master it, with as much ease, as Bannier had
lately done. But the Swedish Colonel Goltz, who commanded in the City,
prepared to entertain them; and fortified the place, as much as might be; not
omitting the hill Daver, (the place of advantage, where the Swedish General
planted his Ordnance, when he had surrounded it) amongst his preparations for
defense; knowing that the prepossessing of that hill, was almost sufficient
alone, to secure the City from the Crabats violence. This his labor showed
his care, to maintain the place committed to his charge; no man can conclude
certainly of contingent futures; nor could he, but upon probabilities, have any
assurance of what success, these bands of Crabats, might have in Hessen-land;
or what forces they might bring against him. Otherwise, that labor might have
been spared, those forces being dispersed, the stings of those Serpents being
taken away, before they could reach the Thuringer forest, by the Lantgraue
William, who had formed a new Army of his own, consisting of ten Regiments,
and was then assisted with seven Swedish Regiments sent unto him from the
Camp by Bannier, under the Command of Colonel King, to that purpose. This
true professor of the Evangelicall faith, thought it unbeseeming his dignity,
to recede a jot from the promise of alliance, which he had made and confirmed
by oath, to the Crown of Sweden, and being at that time courted by the
Imperialists, to relinquish their party, coined some new Rix-dollars, with
these German words upon them;

Es is it besser land, vnd leut verlobren,
Den, eyu. en falchen eydt geshworen:
Which may be Enlished thus,

It Is better Life and Land forsake,
Then to a-null one Oath I make.
Not so much, to nippe the Saxon for his perfidiousnesse, as some have judged
it, as to testify his own integrity, and loyalty; and aided by the Swedes,
March 1/11. visited Budiani in his Quarter at Skenkanfeldt, Budiani raised, and
his Regiments routed by the Land^grave William.
where after a sharp conflict, in which the Crabat saw 300 of his Soldiers
put to the Sword, himself was forced to slight, and that too, so full of
horror and confusion, that to save his life, he was feign to cast away his
Coat, Saddle, Sable, and to leave his Horse and gaje^tie, for fear of being
discovered and exposed to danger personally, sheltring himself in the Woods to
preserve him from the rage of the Victor who by this action gained 300 Horse
and their furniture, carried with him to Cassel 26 Prisoners, all or most of
them men of note, and eminent Commanders in the Army, cleared his Country of
those Caterpillars and marched up toward the Weser and Westphalia, where he
doubted not to enlarge his Victory, there being then no Imperial Army to
oppose him. Isolani in the interim, taking his way through Voidlandt, to attain
to the Caesareans Camp, under whose protection, he promised himself more
security, as being joined with Confederates, and no longer building upon his
own power.

Wrangell, who at that time was marched 10 leagues up into Silesiae, to invade
that Province, and make head against the Forces under Maerazini, and the Count
of Mansfeldt, both which, with a new leavied Army there were putting forward
toward Pegaw, where Hatzfield, and Goetz expected their coming, received
instructions from Banniere to do his best endeavor, to cut them off in their
march, or otherwise to hasten thence to the Swedish Camp, and join with him
against the whole Caesarean united power. It was more then probable at the
first, that the Swedish Field-Marshall might have encountered them (at least)
upon equal terms, 10000 brave old Soldiers attended him when he first
passed the Oder at Franck-fordt. 1100. Polacks, 1100 Pollacks mutinying for
pay, take service under Wrangell.
which had mutinied for want of pay, and vowed to pillage Moravia, (a rich
Country annexed to the Crown of Bohemia, and abounding with Corn, being
generally so full of Tillage, that there was scarce any place of Pasture, and
hitherto, untouched in these present wars) to make up their stipend, seeing
the Imperialists threatened to pay them with Swords, and bullets, revolted, and
took service under him; The Imperialists Army was but on raising, Colonel
Truchses who had promised the deceased Emperor to supply him with many
thousands of able men out of that Province, failed of performance, and laying
strange impositions upon the people grew odious; only Gl^gawe, and some other
few places were left to withstand him; and who would not hence conclude a
doubtless happy issue? The change of Councels often turns the present state
of things; to see a supposed Favorite brought to disgrace, infatuates the
Common people, with a dotage of new affection to their Commanders. Truchses was
arrested as an abuser of the Caesarean grace and mercy, sent a Prisoner to
Vienna; Mansfeildt authorized to supply his charge, Truchses arrest^d and sent
to Vienna.
and he complying with the peoples humor, soon raised a sufficient strength
to deal with Wrangell, who grown weaker by this time then he was at his first
going to the Field, having left 4000 of his men in several Garrisons, and
scarce confident of the Polish Cossacks, (discrees Commanders will hardly give
credit to a revolting Fee. He which allows the act will not easily trust the
actor) retreated thence toward Misnia to join with his associate and fellow
in Arms Banniere, and with their united forces, to give battle to the Army of
the Caesareans.

CHAP. IV.
The Death of BODISLAUS, D. of Pomerania.

SOme remora's there were which hindered his expedition; one an act of
humanity, or rather piety, the other an effect of necessity; and though the
first might seem a Nullity, to the overcurious inquisitors into each man's
comportment, yet the last is beyond all exception, and requires no apology for
it, nor admits argument against it. What Plow-jogger will not forbear one day
in Harvest to bury his deceased Father; though the Corn be ripe and ready to
shake? what Merchant will not stay a little to give his friends the Foy, though
the wind fill his sails, and inviteth forth to sea? An occasion of more
consequence in Ethics then a common farewell, and of more importance in
humanity then the interrement of a private-man, though a parent, policy
attending and playing the handmaid to his piety, stayed him. The golden Bough
of Pomerania, was then cropped, and -- isthoc avulso deficit alter
Aureus et simili non frondet virga metallo.


Bodislaus the 14 aged 57 years, who had sat at the Helm of Pomerania by the
space of 17 years personally, whose ancestors had governed that Province for
700 years, March (...) deceased childlesse, and without issue; to the great
griese of his subjects and confederates, who were the more sensible of his
loss by their known assurance of his integrity: and this Prince his Funerals
together with a provident care, for preservation of the Dukedom, were one
cause of such a stay there, as might show his affection to the memory of that
good Prince, but not endanger his confederates.

But this was not all, his way was intercepted, and there was no passage
through the Imperial Army to his friends, unless the way was cut out with the
sword; The Caesarcans had blocked up his way, and unless he would fight
desperately, and upon extreme disadvantage, it was vain as yet to attempt it.
The adverse armies lay then encamped within one German league each of other,
both severally seeking to gain, neither willing to give occasion to the other.
The Caesareans, and Saxons surmounted the Swedes in number, the Swedes had the
odds of them in ammunition for war, and provisions of viands. Banniere
thinking to consume his adversaries by famine, lay still in his fastness
without striving, and the Imperialists supposing at the length to catch him
upon the hanck, observed the same order; nothing was done for many days to the
prejudice of the other: the Imperialists at the end impatient of idleness, and
releeved with Ordnance from Dresden, and victuals out of Bohemia, gave the
first onset upon the regiment under Colonel Poye, The Swedish regiment under
Colone^l Poye colected.
consisting of 400. horse, and rooted it, then fleshed with this petit victory,
fell foul upon the Earl of Hoditz, and came thence conquerours; and grown
more confident by that success, divided their army into two parts, whereof one
was to pass the river of Mulda near Dresden, and the other to abide in their
former statio^. The Swede whose watchful eye attended upon this division,
prepared some selected Troops to watch the Caesareans as they crossed the
water, The V^ntguard of some Imperial troops defeated upon the Mulda.
and they so faithfully performed their trust, that with a sudden volly of shot
discharged upon the enemies as they were passing over, they were so amazed,
that in a strange confusion, they crowded so thick upon the Bridge of Boats,
which was made for their transportation, that the Bridge sunk, and broke under
their weight, many men and horses were drowned in the water, the Standards of
those which were passed the River became a spoil to the undertakers, and the
rest of the Army was forced in a confused retreat to hasten backward to the
Camp, which resided about Stralen, Rissa, and Oshatz.

Two Caesarean Regiments surprised near great Hahin.
Two Caesarean Regiments, were quartered at the same time near great Hahin,
under the Commands of the Colonels Shierstets, and Barkersdorff, and under a
pretense to surprise them as it was after given out, Banniere who was strongly
entrenched about Torgaw, and had an Army of 12000 Horse, and 8 Brigads of
Foot, sent 8 Regiments, which fired the Suburbs of that small City, raised
the Imperialists from their lodging, routed them by a short but smart charge,
pursued them to the very gates of Dresden, and possessed themselves of their
baggage; the Caesareans prizing their lives above that pelf, willingly leaving
that Booty to the victors, to secure their persons by an expeditious flight.
But the design tended to a further scope: Marazines Forces lay in Lusatia to
keep the passages against Wrangell, who (as they supposed) intended to march
that way to his confederates in his Colleagues Army, and to guard him. Those
Forces were commanded abroad by the Swedish General, whose intent being
suspected by Hatzfield, the Sergeant Major General Bretta March 10/30. Was
sent out with 5000 Horse to oppose them.

Hitherto Bannier's Forces are upon the winning at least not on the loosing
hand, the Caesarcans saved a great stake at Leipsick, but drew very few, and
those of small value; but his Confederates were sometimes loosers, failing of
their own intendments, and sometimes vanquished, or overtaken by the
adversary. Nothing is sure under the Sun, the Moon has a blemish in the
middle of her glorious Orb, the Rivers which sometimes enlarge themselves into
Lakes, and seeming Oceans of fresh waters are again contracted into narrow
Channels, yet the Macula of the Moon, makes the glory of her illuminated body
more illustrious, the straightning of the current makes it more violent, and
the loss which his Allies and Friends received did not derogate from their
glory, nor brought any prejudice (certainly) to their enterprises. The Romans
Honor and Empire was not lost, though adventured desperately, upon the valor
of three noble Brethren against a like number of Enemies, when two of their
Champions were slain, the third by a politic stratagem, and his manhood
performing alone what they had all undertaken jointly; and so purchasing a name
to his family, and victory to his Nation; it may be paralleld by this modern
story.

Hermanstein a Fort of consequence upon the Rhine near Coblentz, The Fort of
Hermanstein necessitated.
which yet held out for the King of France, was straightly beleaguered by John
de Werth and reduced to extreme necessity; it was not to be undermiend being
seated on a Hill, nor to be forced otherwise then by Famine; the place being
so fortified by Nature and Art, that it was, and is not undeservedly esteemed
impregnable; the Imperial Commander lay before it, and hindered all supplies
of relief. The Landtgrave attempteth to releeve it, but is defeated twice.
The Lantgrave twice adventured to supply it ith necessaries, and was twice
beaten back by the asseegers with much loss. The neighboring Boores, thought
to steal thither with Hens, and such like viands through the hedges and
back ways, but were apprehended by the way, and hanged for their labor. The
Cittadell was so much distressed, that the Commander (a man of singular wisdom
and fortitude) was compelled to divide his provisions amongst the people by
weight, and the Baron of Werth knowing their necessity, and how improbable it
was that they should be releeved by and land auxiliaries (his army having
stopped that way) or by succors from the Rhine all the Forts upon the Stream,
being under the Austrians power) concluded, that the Fort must yield, and had
in a manner assured himself, to take it in upon what terms he himself
should be pleased to prescribe to the besieged: But the River yielded a
passage, though the earth denied one, for conveyance of victuals, and other
necessaries unto the Castle. The Story is thus related, by the Dutch from
Hamburg.

A Spanish Don being sent Ambassador from his Catholic Majesty to the King
of Hungary then at Ween, to condole with him for the deceased Emperor and
congratulate his accumulated dignities; Ramsey releeveth it by a stratagem.
having dispatched his legation; was ready for his journey toward Bruxcls to
visit the Cardinal Infant, intending to go by shipping from Mentz to Colin,
and thence to Brabandt. The desolation of the upper Palatinate and a great part
of Franconia, through which he was to pass from the Danubie to the Rhine,
moved him to send some of his Servants five or six days before to prepare his
lodgings, and necessaries for him, self, and the rest of his retinew. This was
revealed to Ramsey Governor of Hanaw, who as well to preserve that City from
the Siege, which John de Werth threatened it, as soon as Hermenstein should be
surrendered, as also for to show his good affection to his Confederates, had
long been plotting to releeve them: and now conceited, that if he could but
surprise the Spanish Harbengers the business was half done, sent out several
parties to watch the high ways, with instructions that if they chanced to meet
with those Spanish adventurers, they should do them no other violence, then to
bring them into the City. His order was observed, and it fell out in all things
according to his wish, the Soldiers met with the Gentlemen, brought them to
Hanaw, and presented them to the Commander, who entertained them with all
gentleness, and by kindness screwed out of them, the time and day of the
Ambassadors coming to the Rhine, the number of vessels designed to attend him,
their description by their colors, the number of his own attendants which
waited upon him, their habits, and the habit, and favor of the Ambassador
himself: And being thus acquainted with each particular circumstance, trimmed
up two ships of the like burden, and condition, selected some chosen men out
of the Garrison, to personate the Spanish Ambassadors followers, and one well
versed in his Sibboleth the Spanish tongue and garb to represent his person,
all which being attired in the Spanish dress, with their hair cut close
(according to the Catholic Kings late edict, of which they seemed strict
observers) and in long mourning clokes were brought to the Vessels, laden with
necessaries for the relief of the Castle, and appearing upon the Decks, sailed
down the Rhine in the face of the Imperial Garrisons, who taking, and
mistaking them for Spaniards, not only suffered them to Sail quietly, but
saluted them friendly with many Musquetadoes and Canonadoes from the Garrisons;
the new Amphitruo, not sparing to complement with them in a Spanish posture
from shipboord, till having reached to Hermenstein, the subtle Sosia's turned
in thither, to the vexation of the Spaniards allies, who were ready to bite
their fingers, to see themselves thus deluded.

It was a neat stratagem well carried, and of great consequence. Hanaw which
alone of all the Cities in the Weteraw, yet held out, had bin much endangered
otherwise. The Caesareans began to appear strong again in the Empire, and had
done much damage to the Swedes and their allies in the Bishopric of Munster,
the Mark of Brandenburg, and about the Weser, and had certainly resolved to
plunder the Weteraw, if the design at Hermenstein had succeeded fortunately.

Lemford in Westphalia, a Fort of a pretty strength out great consequence,
Lemford taken by the Imperialists.
as being one of the inlets of the Territory about it, was kept and possessed
by a company of Swedish Dragoons, which did much spoil in the Bishopric of
Munster, and were therefore complained of by the Country people, to the Baron
of Luttersheim who commanded in Dieps-hold, and he with a Regiment of men sat
down before it, and forced the Swedes in the Castle to yield upon discretion,
and to take Service under him. The Praesidiaries in Minden and Osnabrugge made
out six troops of Horse, and 4. Companies of Dragoons, to be revenged for
this loss, thinking to have taken Dieps-hold by O^slat, and surprised the
Baron and his Regiment which was lodged there. And to this purpose February
^4/4. marched thitherwards, covering their intention with the darkness and
silence of the night. But the Baron had received some intention of their
purpose, and having prepared for the^, The Praesidiaries of Minde^ and
Osnabrugge, d^feated at Dieps hold.
charged upon the avantgard, before they expected it, and had then surprised
it, had not the whole band come in suddenly to their rescue. But those old
Soldiers practiced in the handling and managing of their arms, needed no word
of direction from the mouth of their Commander, the present state of their
friends assaulted by the enemy, taught them both the what, and the how, in
their action. The battle grew hot, and the Swedes being compelled by darkness
to stick close together, and not to sever for fear of ambuscadoes sought
manfully, from 2. of the clock til 5. in the morning, and then perceiving that
Luttershem surmounted them in strength, and advantage, betook themselves to
plain fight, and were pursued to Osnabrugge, but without great loss, their
horses being good and speedy, and their flight well ordered, and not in
confusion. But this loss was soon after regained, both in point of honor and
benefit by the same Swedish garrisons; Feb: 10/2^ when they surprised suddenly
4. companies of Imperiall-souldiers, which lay in the the small City of Hagell,
Surprise Hagell and put 4 companies of Caesarea^s to the sword.
put them to the sword, and returned home with 150 horse, and other good
booty, and baggage of which they had spoiled the Imperialists.

These were the checks which were given to the Swedes associates, in those
parts of the Empire, which the General valued the less in respect of the
damage he had done to the Saxon, with whom, above any particular Prince of the
Empire the Crown of Sweden was most offended; which detriment is expressed
particularly by letters from Dresden, The miserable con^i^i^n of the Dukedom
of Saxony.
March 18/2^ wherein with words delivered with an acce^t of griefa the whole
Dukedom of Saxony is said to be totally ruinated, except the Cities of
Leipzick, Wittemberge, and Dresden, the Churches lying desolate, the woods
being out down, the earth untilled and lying waste, and the villages, and
lesser Cities, made pillars of fire and smoke, not only by the Swedes the
enemies, but also by the seeming friends the Caesarians, who spare not to burn
those places to the ground, where they find not as much provision as they
demand for their armies, as the Duke Frederick of Saxon Altenberg complained
to Hatzfieldt, desiring him to order his rude soldiers by a better discipline,
that such acts of inhumanity might be prohibited, and the offenders punished
accordingly.

Thus far we have followed Bannier, and Hatzfield, both yet abiding in their
fastness, expecting their advantageous opportunity to sight. And now we must
look back to the Elector of Brandenburgh, and Wrangell the Swedish
Field-marshall, whom our last discovery left in that Marquisate.

Berlin the Electors seat of residence, Brandenburgh the Metropolis of the
middle Mark, Tangermund, once the seat of Charles 4. Emperor, and most places
of note were brought by Wrangells army either to entertain Swedish garrisons,
or contribute to the maintenance of his forces; only the Forts of Spandaw and
Kustrin held out for the Elector, Kustrin beleaguered by the Swedes.
whom the Swedes courted with fair language sometimes, and sometimes summoned
in the language of a soldier, to surrender those places of strength to him as
a surety of his good affection and love to the crown of Sweden, or as a token
that he would stand as a neutrall, and not show himself an enemy. But both his
courtshippe and summons were frivolous; the El^^^^^ answered that those places
were Forts of the E^^^^^ that he could not deliver them up to a strange ^^owne
without prejudice to his honor and credit: and as for the Swedes menaces, that
perhaps it might be in their power to deal with his territories in what manner
they pleased, but they should never be able to force him from his first
resolution. His answer not only displeased, but enraged the Field-marshall,
who whereupon immediately (being then Master of the Field) plundered the
Country as far as Boeskah and Cotbutz, a town in the lower Lusatia, took
away six wagons laden with baggage belonging to the Electour, as they were
going to Kustrin, and sent them to Frankfort upon the Oder; blocked up Kustrin,
broke down one of the bridges, and conveyed the Oder two English miles from
the Fort, by a new artificial channel; the garrison all this time defending
themselves valiantly, and though failing of victuals, not fainting in their
courages.

The Electour who was gone from Berlin to Peitz, to raise such forces as might
be able to make head against the Swedes, sent private instructions to Cracht
the Commander in Kustrin to fortify himself as much as might be, promising
faithfully to relieve him, as speedily as might be. The Colonel careful to
perform his charge spared not cost; and seeing the suburbs about the Fort were
rather serviceable for the Enemy then himself, burned them down, so making
good use of this consuming element of fire for his safety; while the other
unmercifull destroyer water offered it self to his service: the Oder swelling
above the banks of the new channel, and breaking out violently, drowning some
Swedish Soldiers, and overflowing the low land, in which the Fort is
situated; and this accident caused them to consent with the Commander for a
cessation of arms for certain doves, the Commander again promising to
requite them with a competent sum of money, if they would give over the
seege. It was but a small part of the Swedes which were sat down before the
Cittadell, the maine body was then with the Field-marshall at Franck ford, one
part thereof was employed to fetch in victuals, and money from the tributary
towns to pay, and refresh the Army: another to plunder that part of the
Country which had not submitted, and granted to pay contribution. And these
last, ranging as far as to Peitz, lighted upon six wagons laden with
provision for the Electours household; seyzed upon them, and presented them to
Wrangell, who being himself ^ufficiently stored, and knowing the scarcity of
the sCountrey, and desirous rather to vanquish the Electour by courtesy, then
violence, sent them back by the Electours own wagoners, and convoy, neither
lightning the carriages, nor offering any injury to their persons. And now the
winter beginning to be in his strength, The siege intermitted.
having well refreshed his Army at Frankford, after he had utterly demolished
the bridge, and sent away all the Cities ammunition, and burnt down all the
bridges near about the fortress of Kustrin, save only one, which he could
not safely come to, it being within less then a musket shot of the Castle. He
divided his whole Army, which was then 3000. horse, and 7000. foot, and
appointed them to their winter quarters, the new Mark being appointed for the
Cavallary, and the Veker and middle marks for the Infantery, himself in the
mean time retiring to Stetin, to be present at the Diet then held by the
States of Pomerania.

The Marquis Electour made good use of the Swedes absence, the Count of
Mansfield had supplied him with some forces out of Silesia, Arnheim a Colonel
of his own, and kinsman to the late General, had raised up some others in
Lusatia, and the Marquisate; and armed with those forces one of his Colonels,
and the Swedes not expecting it, came first with his like Regiment (December
18/3^.) of 300 Horse to Berlin, forced open the Southeast or Copenicker Gate,
pressed in with drawn Swords and Pistols, Berlyn regained by the Marquess
Elector.
set a Watch upon the several Ports, (the Citizens being ready to receive
their natural Prince) and took Prisoners about 70 Swedish Soldiers, which
were Billited in the City, and some prime Officers.

In the Evening about 5 of the clock, the Elector himself attended with 600
Dragoons and light Horsemen, Branderburg taken from the Swedes.
came into the City; the three Regiments of Horse under the commands of young
Buckersdorf. Duke Francis Charles, and Shierstett, being lodged that night in
the Suburbs, whose apparition the next morning, made those few Swedes which
lodged at Bernaw, and were severed from their company, to retire toward
Newstadt, for their more security. A propitious star did then attend the
Brandenburgher, his happy Fortune was not thus bounded, part of his Army was
dispatched for Brandenburgh, and the Frost having then contracted the Elve into
a more solid body of Ice, those Soldiers took that City also by a sudden
Scalado and put the Garrison to the Sword.

News of the Brandenburgers Progress, was brought to the Field-Marshall at
Stetin, Drussen blocked up by the Swedes, and the siege relinquished.
who instantly gave order to the Commander of that City, to block up the Fort,
and passage of Drussen, which he did accordingly. At the expiration of 8. days
a rumor was spread in that small Swedish Camp, that the Imperial General
Marazini, with 6000 men, was coming out of Silesia to releeve that Garrison;
and then the Commander left that siege, and returned homeward, plundring the
inhabitants houses upon the way. The Field-Marshall himself began to muster up
his dispersed Regiments, which then lay about Shiffelbeane, Arenswald, Solden,
and Lantzberg, intending again to put into the Field, though the Winter Season
did in a manner prohibit him. With these Forces he first marched against
Lantzberg, a frontier City of the Marquisat, Lantzberg surrendered to Wrangell.
and forced that to yield upon composition, and thence unto the Vekermarck,
where the Vangard of the Army encountered with Colonel Arncheim a Kinsman of
the late General of the same name, Colonel Arnheim surprised by the Swedes
and sent Prisoner to Stetin.
whom after a short conflict, they took Prisoner with 400 Dragoons, and sent
to Stetin, from whence again, by the direction of the Lord Steno Biclke who in
the absence, and instead of the Rix-Chancellor is there residing for the
direction of affairs, he was transported to Stockholme in Swedland, to be used
according to the discretion of the States.

Drussen was still in the Field-Marshals eye, as being a convenient place for
the egresse and regresse of his Forces, and this again he intended to besiege,
and had provided much ammunition, and other provisions, to effect it, intending
to assault it by force, if he could not reduce it to a friendly composition;
but then the said Ambassador of the Crown of Sweden interposed; being sent to
treat of Peace betwixt the Elector of Brandenburg, and the Queen of Sweden
his Necce, the Elector himself giving a willing ear to a friendly treaty,
having appointed the Marquis Sigismund, with a pleni-potentiary Commission to
confer with the Swedish Ambassador, at the little City of Shwed, distant 7
leagues Southwards from Stetin, and this detained the Field-Marshall from that
siege.

Wrangell marches into Silesia.
There was now a kind of cessation of Arms betwixt the Elector and
Field-Marshall, in those Territories: and Wrangel having plundered the lands
and goods belonging to the Count of Swartzenburg, and taken Prisoners the
chiefest of his Officers, garrisoned the Towns in Pomerania and the Dukedom of
Mecklenburg, marched into Silesia, to oppose the Imperial Forces which were
raised there, and there he received instructions from Banniere, to come and
join with his Army, or otherwise to hinder Mansfield from coming to
Hatzfield, as it has been related formerly.

It was still a bloody time in the Electorate of Saxony, and a general fear
was conceived by the adjoining Provinces, that the Fury of war, would not be
confined there: the hearts of the people, were terrified by a strange Prodigy,
which though it admits no particular interpretation -- -- Deus omen in Hosts
Convertat; A strange Prodigy at Isenach.
was as terrible, as portentous. The Conduit at Isenach situated in the midst
of the Marketsted, suddenly instead of Water powered out Blood, and so continued
for the space of two hours, before it yielded again that Element, for which
that Aqueduct was ordained. A bloody time ensued it, betwixt the Imperial
Generals, and Banniers Forces, though they kept their Fastness near Targaw,
yet few days passed without blows. The Imperialists prepared two Ship-bridges
over the Elve for the transportation of their Forces, one at Dresden, by the
South-east or Pirner-gate, the other at Stralen. To the last of these places,
Stralen burnt by the Swedes.
the Swedes advanced with six full Regiments, burned down the City and the
Castle to the ground, planted their Horsemen on the other side of the River, to
hinder the Imperialists march over the Bridges; surprised one of the Caesarean
quarters near Wurtzen, carried away 300 Wagons laden with baggage, and made
havoc of the Country Villages, forcing the Imperial Safeguards, burning the
Towns to the ground: the Caesareans herein not being behind the Swedes,
Friends and Enemies (as it were) both conspiring, so to ruin that Country,
that March 11/21, 44 several fires within two Leagues compass, might have at
once been discovered to the eye. The defeat at Wurtzen was given by the
Colonel Slangh, 2. Imperial Regiments defeated at Wurtzen by Colonel Slangh.
whom Banniere had sent with 1500 Horse, toward the City Leisnick, Golditz and
Eylenburg; the Colonel returned March 23, April 2, giving this account of his
action: That at Wurtzen he had defeated two Imperial Regiments, carried away
their Baggage, slain 600 upon the place, taken many Prisoners, amongst which
were two Rit-masters, five Lieutenants, and many other Officers.

Banniere in the absence of the Colonel, purposely to bring a general terror
upon the Imperial Army, that by their distraction being assaulted in several
places, 200. Imperial Horse defeated by Baniev at Pegaw.
Slangh might be more secure, ranged about diverse of their Quarters, and first
at Pegaw, incountred with 2000 Imperial horse, whom he defeated, and routed
utterly. That victory incited him to proceed further, and appearing in
Battell-array before the Imperial Camp, provoked them to Battle, but they
unwilling to leave their holds, kept still in their Trenches, which made him
return to his own quarters. The Caesarean Army lay then betwixt Torgaw, and
Meisen, on the East side of the River Elve, and the greater part of the Swedish
horse and Dragoons, on the other side just against the Caesarean Camp, which
they kept waking with perpetual Alarums. April 2. new style, the Caesarean
Commanders had a design to transport some Regiments of Horse, from their
head-quarter at Riesa, to the West side of the River, that there being no
impediment which might stay their courses, they might sometimes break in upon
the Swedes, and gall them with sudden skirmishes. The Swedes who well
understood their purpose, 3. Regiments of Imperial Horse ^ou^ed by the Swedes.
suffered three Regiments to pass the River quietly, intending to requite
trick for trick, but then having armed themselves for the assault, charged them
so furiously, that they were forced to retreat in such a confusion, that above
200. of them were drowned in the Elve, and so many slain, that the Captives
whom they took in the Battle confessed, that those 3. Regiments were almost
totally ruined. The next day following, Bannier resolved to visit the
Caesarean Army in their quarters, and to that purpose selected two Companies
out of every Regiment, both of Horse and Foot; and attended with those expert
Soldiers, and the Watch-masters Regiment, he marched directly to the Imperial
head-watch, which consisted of 20. Companies of the best and ablest horse in
the Caesarean Camp, and were commanded by the Sergeant-Major Bretta. The
Head-Watch of the Imperial Arm^ fo^^d to a (...) ^^^ght.
The conflict betwixt them was short and sharp; the Swedes came on roundly and
charged home upon the Caesareans, which standing together in a close compacted
body, endured that shocke, and prepared to entertain the assailants again. But
then Bannier doubled the number of them that gave the charge, and over
burthening the Caesareans, with the weight of that heavy body, compelled them
to slight, in which, they being stayed by the inconvenience of a small River,
many of them (the number is uncertain) were cut off, and left dead upon the
place, and many taken Prisoners.

All these several Conflicts betwixt the two Armies, were not without the
effusion of much Christian blood, but the blood so shed was not taken away by
way of murder (War justly grounded, is continued lawfully; the Sword is often
a just decider of controversies, and though it be accounted one of the great
Plagues, sent by God, it is not attended with any injustice in the execution.)
Black murders and horrid treasons hatched in darkness, what ever the pretense
thereof may be, are not only unexcusable, but detestable also to God and man.

The Emperors Funerals.
The Court at Vienna, was about this time clothed in black, for the
solemnization of the late Emperors Funerals, which were solemnly celebrated
by the Nuntius Apostolicus, attended with 10. Prelates in their Miters. The
Hearse was black, but inlayd with silver, and garnished with many burning white
wax Tapers; the Imperial Eagles were blazoned about it, in the midst, stood
the Corpse; covered with a black cloth, intermingled with gold; over his head
lay the Imperial Hungarian and Bohemian Crowns. At his Feet the
Golden-fleece, and betwixt then both, the Imperial, Ball and Scepter; in the
midst whereof was placed a Crucifixe of silver; At his sides lay his Rapier,
Dagger, and Spurs. The Boots of the Hearse were adorned with the pictures of
Virtues, and upon the top, on a Pyramid, stood a Globe, and a Crown. The
Church being hung with black, and the solemnity ended, his heart and bowels
were lodged in three Cabinets, and convayed without any pomp, from Vienna to
Gratz by his late Privie-Counsellours, and other Officers of the Court, which
are since cashiered; the young King his Son instantly reforming, and by the
hand of the Earl of Medaw the Major domo upon his Fathers decease; having
reduced his Counsel to the number of 5. which were the Bishop of Vienna, the
Earl of Trautmansdolff, who is now the Major Palatii, and the Earls of
Slavata, Frankenberg, and Venda; the care of his Chanc^ry, being committed to
Doctor Prickmajor, under the name and title of Vice Chancellor.

The difference betwixt those two great Potentates the Christian and Catholic
Kings, drew several free Princes, and States to their parties, and caused such
a combustion in the City of Liege, that the City was divided against the
Bishop, and the Bishop against the Burghesses: He laboring to advance the
Caesarean and Spanish cause, and therefore ^^^ing great impositions and taxes
upon the Citizens, and they rather inclining to the French King, though at
first submitting themselves to the Bishops orders, with a kind of
unwillingnesse, paying their contributions, yet in the end flatly opposed him:
and in the beginning of the year, they sent a complaining petition to the
Bishop of Rome against him, the heads whereof were these. That as a child, by
instinct of Nature, in its sufferings, will have recourse to the Mother; so,
they did now humbly prostrate themselves at the feet of his Holiness, to
desire his assistance, and relief in their present necessities: That their
case was to be pityed, The Citizens on Liege compl^ine to the P^pe against
their Bishop.
in that notwithstanding their due obedience, which they had always exhibited
to S. Siege their proper Bishop, who reciprocally ought to protect them, he
yet oppressed them greevously, to the great prejudice and dishonor of the
Catholic Religion, the war raised by him, having already consumed and laid
waste 5000. dwelling houses in the Country, not without profanation of the
Sanctuaries, Churches, and holy Vessels, as Chalices, Bells, and other sacred
Vtensils and Ornaments, which were employed to other uses, then what they were
first ordained for; That the hallowed Host was trampled on by them who ought
to honor it: that the Churchmen designed for Divine Service, were chased from
their Parishes, where by that means the Liturgy was quite abolished in some
places, and in the Major part much intermitted: That the Religious women, and
others, both Wives and Virgins, were ravished before the eyes of their own
husbands, and Fathers. Their Herds of Cattle were driven away, their tillage
decayed, and to speak no more, that the sole inhabitants of Liege were
constrained to contribute above 60000. Florins to the Church to preserve the
City from the Siege, threatened by Charles Duke of Lorraine, the Bishop of
Verdun, Piccolomini, and John de Werth, upon his solicitation, who had incensed
one party of the Liegois, against the other; whose tyranny caused 5. principal
Burghesses of Tongres, to to be led as like slaves, before his tryumphant
Chariot, putting two of them (in the end) to the Sword, and bastinadoing the
other three, till they had promised a good ransom. Much more was added, and
every particular expressed with such passion, as might have moved a Scythian to
compassion; yet, their only prayer was, that his Holiness would excuse their
boldness, and send them some Cardinal for a Protector, by whose countenance,
they might be defended from such oppressions. But the effect of this Petition,
and what it avayled is not yet discovered, though it may be thought fruitless
(if we may guess upon consequents) by this ensuing History.

The Count of Warfusee's treason at Liege.
Natural respect must needs have moved tears. from the eyes of Caesar's Son,
at his Fathers funeral, But the consideration of his care in preservation, and
for enlarging the honor of the House of Austria, deserved a solemn mourning;
his decease ministered occasion to a bloody assasinate, to attempt a deed of
horror, which for his own credits-sake he meant to palliate with a cloak of
authority, forging letters to the Bishop of Cullen, and thereby expressing an
order and commission given him by the King of Hungary, intending (doubtless) to
mitigate his execrable action, under pretense of his commission, if he should
hap to fail and be discovered (no sincere interpreter, being able to conceive
that so heroical a spirit would consent to so foul a treason) and to
suppress them, if he had happily executed his design. The story (as some do
relate it) is thus? The Count Warfusee, who some years past had revolted from
the Catholick-King, stood in displeasure, during the life of the late Emperor,
both with his Imperiall-Majesty and the King of Spain, and now thinking to
win his Masters favor again, by the heads, lives, and states of those
which entertained him in his rebel^ion, plotted the death of la Ruelle, prime
Magistrate of Lieg, and some other principal members of that body-politique,
and put it thus in practice. The Count being lodged in St. Iohns-Cloyster, in
the house of a Prebend of that Church, accommodated with a backe-doore toward
the waterside; invited to dinner thither, the said Burger-master de la Ruelle,
the Abbot of Mousson, and diverse other principle men of the City, whom he
intended to murder traitorously. To that purpose he suborned the Burgundian
Count de Milis, and some choice Spanish-Souldiers drawn out of the Garrisons
of Narrigue, and Argentoy, to steal privately by the Posterne into his house,
and to lurk there secretly till the word being given, they might be prepared
for execution, which they ob^erved and performed accordingly. In the midst of
the ^east (as if his malice had not tended to the mine of their bodies, but
their Souls also) when their hearts were merry with wine, he began a health
to Lewis King of France surnamed the lust, which had no sooner passed round,
but the Assasinates armed with Swords and Pistolls, broke into the diningroome,
surprised the Burgermaister, and the Abbot, sent for a Priest, and as soon as
he was come, as if they would do them some favor at their death, Ruelle the
Burger-Master murdered.
bade them make their confession, for they must dye. The Priest who was sent
for to take his confession, was the Sub-Prior of the Covent, by name Antory
Evrard, a Dominican, who accompanied with his confrater William L^ncon (both
which have testified this relation under their hands) went, and at their
coming to Warfusee the Sub-prior hearing his demand to take Ruelles confession
and give him absolution, like a man amazed, stood aghast, inquiring the reason
of that proposition, and what his Lordship meant, by requiring him to that
service, which he might not do but with license from his Ordinary; except
only in some cases, in which upon the appearance of imminent death, it was
lawful for him so to do if the Priest deputed thereunto, by his Superior was
not to be found. To this the Count replied, that Ruelle must dye, and that
within the space of one quarter of an hour, and therefore commanded him to
dispatch immediately, as he would answer upon his Soul the Burger-maisters
salvation, being desperate if he should die unconfessed. The Friar seeing the
enraged countenance of the Count, and fearing his own life if he should
disobey, answered only that he would not do it till the Burger-maister called
him; there needed no further words. A servant that stood by apprehended what
his Lord meant, and going in, and coming suddenly again from the Chamber
where Ruelle lay bound, he tells the Friar that he desired him to come in. The
sight of the Magistrate bound like a malefactor put the Dominican into a
greater passion, and compassion for him; and with some language expressing
sorrow, wished him to prepare for death, the Count being resolved to murder
him; Ruelle much distracted with the consideration of his estate, one while
according to the superstition of the Romanists, commended himself to God and
the blessed Virgin preparing for death, and then again, hoping for life,
desired the Friar to be an advocate for him to Worfusee, as willing to be
condemned by him to any prison or galleys, if he had done him injury: all which
was related again by the Confessor to the Count who stopped his ears against
him and constrained the Good Man, to that unwellcome work of his office, which
was but the immediate Prodromus to the Burger-Maisters execution.

There was no remedy but patience; they saw the guides which must conduct them
to the black-chambers of death before them, made their confession, and prepared
to bid the world goodnight. Ruelle the Burger-Master mu^thered.
Ruelle was the first who had discarged his Soul of the burden of sins upon
it, and he was instantly delivered by Warfusee to the Count de Millis, who
took him into another chamber, thrust him through the body 7 times with a
rapier, and so murdered him. The Abbot of Mousson, a French-gentleman, named
Mounsier de Saison, and two servants of the Burger-maisters, surprised at the
same time with those two prime men, were advised, in the interim, by the
Traitor, to go to confession, and prepare for their dissolution. The Abbot a
well-spoken man, a good Orator, and now improved in that faculty, by the
goodness of his cause, began to plead for his own life, and his companions,
declaring their innocence, laying before the murderer the heinousness of his
offense. But words were vain, Millis returned suddenly from the former
execution, drew out of ^^s bosom a formal process, and sentence against
them, in the name of the new Emperor (as they styled him,) the Cardinal
Infant, and the Prince of Liege, as offenders against his Imperial Majesty,
The Abbot of Mousson, and others strangely delivered.
which they conceiting to be an act of of Court, and not to be reversed,
pleaded no more for life, but prepared for death. Familiarity of conversation,
does sometimes raise a strange affection, while the Abbot was under confession,
a Soldier of Nairaigne, who had formerly bin intimately acquained, with one of
the Burger-Masters-servants, moved with compassion, toward him, rounded him in
the ear, and showed him a way by which he might escape, and save his life. It
was needless to repeat that lesson again unto him. Extremity ministers
capacity, and the apprehension of an eminent danger, rouseth up a dull spirit to
seek means to avoid it. The way was open enough, but too praecipitious to be
attempted with security, Danger attended the counsel of escaping (yet that
perhaps might be avoided) but certain destruction waited upon his stay. A
chamber-window proffered a passage, and through that the young man escaped,
crying out, Treason, Ruelle is murdered, Treason, Ruelle is murdered in the
house of Count Warfusee, Treason, Treason, Treason. The noise was full of
horror, and the name of Ruelle much honored among the Citizens, who instantly
took up their arms, assaulted the house, which being strong, and built of
square stone, was by the space of two hours maintained against the Citizens,
by Warfusees Soldiers and servants, who being in all seventy strong, and more
careful of their own preservation, then the intended murder, left the Abbot,
The rage of the Citizens, and the end of the Assasinates.
the French-gentleman, and the other servant bound, to provide for their own
safety. But it was vain for the defendants, to contest against such a
multitude of assailants. The Citizens were ten thousand in number, and they in
the end broke open the doors, fell upon the murderers (who cried for quarter)
without pity, haled Warfusee into the open streets, where he no sooner
appeared, but was hewn perce-meale by the Citizens, the truncke of his body
drawn, and hanged upon a gibbet, which was raised suddenly for that purpose,
and bur^^^ (...) ^^tely. Milis the Burgundian had no bett^^ a fate, and the
common-souldiers employed in that mass^c^^, had as bad a fortune, being all
burned in and with the house, in which they were assembled for excention of
their villainy. The rage of the Citizens was not thus extinguished. The Iosuits,
who were supposed the plotters of this device, were the next day after inquired
into, and many fier-locks, carabines, and pistolls ready charged, being found
in their cells, two of ye old Padres, were put to the sword, and the rest
banished the city. A more strict watch the^ had bin kept formerly, was pointed
presently, and Ap. 8/8 when their beloved Governor was buried in the church of
St. La^bert, under the great crown with this remembrance engraven on his tomb.

Pour estre fidel a ma Patrie
P ay perdu mon sang and ma vie.
Which may be thus Englished.
My study for my Countries good,
Has cost my life and dearest blood.
While the 32. Companies of the City were met together, it was condescended
that the 20. penny of eve^^ man, lands and goods should be levied immediately,
to raise and maintain a fresh traine-Band of 1000. men, which at an hours
warning should attend the colors of Bartholus Rolandus the Cities General, to
serve the City in case of necessity.

This is the History. And now see how the crime would conceal its own shame
by the countenance of authority. This ensuing Letter, sealed with 3. seals,
was taken out of the Traitors bosom at his first apprehension; directed in
these words:

TO HIS MOST Illustrious Highness, my Lord Elector of Coln.
BY aid of the Soldiers, which I raised for the Service of his Imperial
Majesty, Warf^s^^^^ counterfeited Letter.
and by order and* Commission from his said Majesty, I have slain the
Burgermaster Ruelle, he having first confessed himself, and submitted to the
will of GOD and his Majesty. By his order also, have apprehended the Abbot
Mousson, Mouns. de Sesan, and some others, over whom I keep a strict guard.
Had I stayed but two hours longer before I put the project into execution, I
should furely have bin a dead man, to the disgrace of his Imp^riall Majesty and
your Highness, as I shall shorrly show your Highness more particularly, and
at large. It is much to be feared, that the French will now murder my only
Son: yet herein I rejoice, that I have offered him up for the advantage, of
your Highness, his said Imperial Mas. and my King. I am resolved to continue
their Servant, and will not omit to certify your Highness daily, of all that
shall happen here, and what I shall effect. And now, Time forbidding me to
write more largely, I humbly kiss your Highness hand, and shall remain as long
as I live,

Your Highness, most obedient, humble, and faithful Servant, R. Count of
WARFUSEE.
Liege, Ap. (...). 1637.

Historia Varia.
Hitherto we have brought down a continued History, the wheels of the work,
answering each other though far distant by place. Now by a various, and
incertexted relation, we shall discover the most remarkable passages, which
have happened, since the period of our last discourse.

The cause of the Turks invading Transylvania.
Transylvania, the Mediterranian part of Dacia, a rich Country, and noted by
Antiquity, for it is fruitfulness was terrified with Turkish Armies, the half
Moons being there displayed, in the behalf of Istuan Bethleem, against the
Prince Ragotsky, who then sat at the stern of that Province. The occasion was
this: Solimy David, one of the greatest Lords of Transylvania, Cousin to
Estienne, or Istuan Bethleem, who pretended himself, the lawful heir of that
Principality, then (as it was conceived) usurped by Ragotsky, moved with the
fame of the late deceased King of Sweden, sent to him in the year 1631. to
tender him his service, and unwilling to come alone, resolved secretly, to
raise 2000. men, whereof himself would be the Chiefetaine. His design could
not be carried so privately, from that stirring and warlike Nation, as to be
confined with so small a number. Upon the beating of his Drum, and report of
his intendment, instead of 2000 alone, such a number of Voluntieres came to
present themselves to the List; that Ragotskie, who before had carried a
jealous eye over him, now more suspecting some design against himself, then
formerly; mustred up his forces, and with them dispersed and disarmed Bethleems
new raised Army. This process so enraged Solymies friends (who had bin
assisted in this action by some other Lords of Transylvania) that they
conspired to murder Ragotskie, their purpose being palliated with a new form
of hunting, to the which they meant to invite him. For execution whereof, it
being thought that none could be more affectionated than Solimy David, who was
now compelled to break his word, with that renowned King, to whom he had
promised so great matters, drew him also into their conjuration.

But Solimy, more civilized, and not so inclined to cruelty, as others of that
Province (though at the first he seemed to consent) yet afterward, distasting
that course, the same day, when as the Plot should have bin put into execution;
posted to the Prince, discovered the Treason, and with prayers, and tears,
prevailed with him, to refrain from that days sport. Ragotskie made good use
of his tale, and carrying for the present, a face of love toward Solimy,
dismissed him friendly; but armed withal a Squadron of Horse, against the
Conspirators; who surprised them easily, (because unexpectedly) and tortured
them with diverse kinds of punishments to death; only the Prince Istuan, who
was the prime Projector, (disguised) lurked upon an adjoining Mountain, to see
the effect of the enterprise, and saw how his Friends were used, saving
himself by fright into the Grand Signiors Territory. A thought of treason, is
treason; and however, a Conspirator may think to merit his Princes favor, by
revealing it; yet if he defer the discovery to the last hour, and then, either
stung with the pricks of Conscience, or allured with the hope of reward,
reveal it; his Princes clemency may pardon his transgression, his merit
cannot be said to have deserved it; the execution of Justice, being due to him
that shall give consent to so horrid an action, though he may afterward seem
to repent. Solimy not looking back to that part of the Wallet, which was behind
him, or thinking of that speckled toad, which be had lodged in his heart, his
treason; with a kind of confidence, of merit from the Prince, went again to
the Court, pressed the service he had done to his Lord boldly, demanded
recompense, not thinking that he had been discovered, as a party in that
treason. But the Prince, who had already examined the matter thoroughly, and
found him to be a Conspirator, returned him extremity of Justice, in stead of
Mercy; bound him hand and foot; cast him into a stinking, loathsome, and
terrible Prison, made more horrid by its solitude; all people being forbid to
come thither (under pain of death) to give him so much as a visit, (those
only excepted) who were appointed to guard his person, and to give him the
strict allowance of bread, and water, to the amazement of Solimy, who by this
means, being brought to a frenzy, behaved himself so rudely, that the people
supposed him to have been possessed with a Devil. News of his strange
comportment, raised by reason of the rigor of his imprisonment, was brought
into the Empire, and Caesar, moved to compassion in respect of his sufferings,
wrote in his behalf to Ragotskie, to abate his punishing hand, to admit some
Jesuits to have recourse unto him, for his instruction; that he might not lose
his Soul together with his Body; Medicamentum pejus morbo; and to consider,
that the effect of the service he had done unto him, might at least, stand in
an equal poise, against the treason to which he had consented: To all which,
the Prince gave no other answer, but that if the Devil had got no new one,
Solimy might be his Secretary. Istuan, in the mean time ceased not to
intercede by Friends for his own reconciliation, but not prevailing, he
implored aid of the Grand Signior, who furnished him with an Army, and
promised to invest him in the Principality of Transylvania. Regotskie, to
oppose him, sent to the Emperor, and the Polonian for succors, of which
though he failed, neither of them being willing to provoke such an enemy,
with his own forces encountered the Bassaw in the Field; and by foiling the
Turks in their first onset, cleared his Country of those Mohammedan Invaders.

The Christian King, who had lately given order for the billetting his Army,
and supplying in with competent Provisions; seeing the inconvenience which
happened thereupon, by a continual access of men of Arms, Light Horse, and
Carabines, to the molestation and great charge of his Subjects, after the old
Companies were laid in Garrison; put forth another Decree, as the Rule of his
former Ordinance, the sum whereof was this: That the Contribution and
Provision should not be afterward delivered, The King of France his order for
Provision for his Soldiers, and case of the people.
but for 60 Masters of every Company of men of Arms; for fifty of each Company
of Carabines, comprehending therein their Chieftaines, and other Officers;
provided still, that there be that number in each Company effective; forbidding
expressly, all the Commanders of the said Companies, to exact, or compel the
Villages and places liable to those Contributions, to deliver more then as
prescribed, for such a number of men as is limited by this Ordinance, upon
pain of suffering as Extortioners. This Order both pleased the people, being
thereby secured from further oppression, and the enrolled Soldiers, such good
order being taken for their subsistence and maintenance.

This billeting of Soldiers in the Frontiers was not unnecessary. John de
Werth, and Pycolimini, who were gone toward the Frontiers of Luxenburg, were
upon the return to invade the Kings Dominions, December 8/1^^ they were come over
the Bridge of Gyvais, upon the Maase. The Marquess De la Force understanding
of the enterprise, made head against them, to the terror of the common
Soldiers under the Spanish Command, their General commanding the Bridge to
be broken down behind him, thinking thereby to cause his men to fight; the
common Soldiers opposed it, and fearing to be hemmed in betwixt the River and
the French Army, made more haste then good speed to return; and in a
tumultuous confusion, hasting back toward the River (the Bridge being pestered
with their own Carriages) they pressed so thick one upon another, that to the
number of four hundred men were thrust into the water and drowned, and many
Wagons overturned into the River. And this ill beginning, made the Spanish
General betake himself to the Forest of Liege, John de Wethe flight.
being pursued by the Count of Quinse, the Marqueste De la Force, and the
Collonell Gassion, who cut off many of the Reareguard, the General still
flying toward the Bishopric of Triers, where he was appointed to take up
his Winter-Quarter.

Gassion, being now free from any offensive Enemy, ran over the Country of
Henault, plundering it, and exacting of the Villages there, the same sums of
money and Contributions which Don Marcos de Lima the Spanish Governor in La
Capelie exacted from the French Villages in that Vicinage. The Cardinal
Infant, as well to retaliate the French Frontiers with the like Inrodes, as to
reinforce his Garrisons, sent into Irson, (a Town upon the River of Oise.
lately appertaining to the Duke of Guise; but taken by the Spaniards in the
late Invasion) the Regiments of Horse, under the Command of St Bath, and De la
Granges, making in all about six hundred, as a reinforcement to the
Presidiaries there, and then that Garrison being grown confident of their own
strength, began to plunder the Neightour Territories. December, 1^/26 Gassion had
Intelligence, that the next day at ten in the morning, the Garrison intended to
go a forraging ininto the Villages about Neufmaison. To lose no time he
presently commanded the Sergeant-Maior of his own Regiment, to take four
Companies out of his Regiment, which was then at Vervin, with instructions to
lie in ambush in a Wood, and to attend the issuing out of the Garrison;
Himself not being in case for that Service, because of an old would upon him,
which then began to bleed afresh. The Sergeant-Maior performed his Directions
so speedily, that within one hour after his Trumpets were sounded (the
Boute-selle being given immediately) the Horsemen were all ready, and were
instantly about their business, waiting in their Ambushment till the next day
at Noone, at which time the Enemies were discovered to be ready to sally forth
of the City. By the space of two and twenty hours, in which the French
Cavallery attended the Spaniards coming out of their Hold, ^oo Walloon Horse
defeated, and surprised by Gassion near Neufmaison.
no noise was heard in that small Camp, nor were they discovered by the
Garrison, though lodged within a quarter of an English mile from thence. An
high tree, which raised his lofty head above the rest of the Thicket, was
prepared by the Sergeant-Maior, as a Watch-tovver to discover the Spanish
preparations. Four Scouts were appointed by the Commander to that purpose; one
in the topp of that boughie Tree, who could casily look into the Castle, and
himself unseene, see every thing done therein, and observe especially the
ingresse, and egresse of them that came in, and went out thence. Another Scout
was placed in the middle of the Tree, a third at the foot, and a fourth
twenty paces thence, with fifteen French Horse, and the Body of the Army
fifteen paces thence, Warning was given in a trice of the Spaniards sally, the
second Sentinel receiving it from the first, the third from the second, the
fourth from him, and the Army from the last. The Cavallery thereupon kept
close in their Ambushment, while the Spanish forces about three hundred Horse,
having passed the River of Irson, and the Wood wherein they lay undiscovered,
took their March toward Neufmaison. The Spaniard surpassing the French in
number, and the advantage of the place, made the French Commander advise with
his Captains, whether it was fit at that time to encounter them. The fear of
supply, by the neighbour-Garrison, and the countenance of the Spaniards showing
a courageous Resolution, dis-hartened the Commander from attempting any thing:
but three Captains of that Band, Rauonelle, La Land, and Balthazar, sprightly
Gentlemen, and ashamed to return to the Collonell, without some tokens of
their Valor, resolved to take fifteen Horse out of each Company, which under
the command of Balthazar, should give the first charge upon the Spaniards,
whilst the other remainder of the Army, being divided into three Squadrons,
might come up conveniently to second them. The Spaniards stood then in a firm
Body, and having sent an hundred Horse into the Village of Neufmaison, the
other two hundred attended armed in three Squadrons to secure the pillagers
from the French Military men, if any should happen to march that way. And now
began the hurly burly: Balthazar came on bravely, and in his first Charge had
seven of his men wounded by the Spanish opponents. But that scratch dishartened
not the French Assaylants, who coming up to his succor, charged upon the
first Squadron with their Pistolets, and with the first volly of Shot, having
slain above twenty of the Enemies, routed the rest of the Squardron; whose
sudden flight caused the other two Squadrons to betake themselves to their
heels in a strange confusion; the French troops pursuing them eagerly, and in
the pursuit having slain seventy others, constrained the rest to take the
River, wherein forty three of them were found drowned immediately, and seventy
two begging Quarter, had it granted them. The storm was not yet spent, the
Pesants of Neufmaison, and the other Neighbor Villages, heard the report of
this defeat and sallied from the Woods, in which they had hid themselves for
fear of the Enemy, and encouraged by the Soldiers, fell upon the remnant of
the Spaniards, slew fifteen or sixteen of them, took the rest about ninety
in number Prisoners, whom they brought to Vervins, with two hundred Horse, upon
which the Spanish Soldiers were mounted; so gaining four fold, what they had
lost, by those Pillagers. In short, none escaped, save only nineteen
Soldiers, and their Captain B^sansano, and his Cornet, who in this confusion,
got over the River where it was wadeable, and saved themselves in that
Garrison. All the Prisoners took service under Gassion, six only excepted,
men of r^nk^ and quality, which having their wives and children in Irson,
durst not serve under his Colors, but proff^red a good ransom.

Picardy ^hus freed, in the end of the old year, of the Spanish bands, the
County of Burgundy, and the Province of Guien, only remained to be secured
from those invaders. Ionville, a City in the French County, upon the River of
Saone, was made a Magazine for Victuals, and other Provisions, and Ammunitions
for War, by Gallas, when he made his first inrode into the Duchy of
Burgundy. Duke Barnard in that time of Winter, resolved to besiege it, and to
that purpose, taking with him three small Pieces of Canon, began to batter it;
but those Guns, not able to bore the Wall, he sent for three greater, which
were brought unto his Army, not without much difficulty; the foul ways, and
deep waters being ready to sink them, unless they had been supported by
strength of men. This encumbrance, did somewhat slacken the execution of what
he intended. The Garrison was One thousand strong, the Enemies succors began
to appear in person, for their assistance, and Duke Barnard, too weak with
that handful of men he had designed for this occasion, sent to the Cardinal
De Valette for more help, who sent thither, the Vicount De Turenne with Two
thousand Foot, and the Collonell Tupadell with Ten Regiments of Horse: And they
coming in maturely, plied their Batteries close, and having made a reasonable
breach in the Wall, threatened to assault it. The Praesidiaries, though so many
in number, as might have defended the City, yet wanting courage (for they were
not all Soldiers that bore Arms, Five hundred Burgesses and Pesants being
employed in that service) or not truly affecting the Spaniard, for Four
hundred of the Soldiers were strangers, and none of his Subjects; hung out a
Flag of Truce immediately, and consented to deliver up the Town, only with
leave to depart, with their Arms and Baggage, which was granted, and the
Garrison dismissed, save only Habercourt the Commander, who was detained
Prisoner, and the Town surrendered to Duke Barnard. And thus the last years
Tumults were ended about the Duchy of Burgundy.

In Guien, the Spanish Forces were still busy, since the prize of St. John de
Luz (whence thirty Religious Reformadoes, The Fort of St. Barba taken by the
Count of Grammont.
rather desired to depart, and leave all they had, than to give the Oath of
Allegiance to their Enemies, which they ought unto their King) and the
Spaniards, seeing that the Holds which they possessed near St. John de Luz and
Cibouro, could yield them no advantage; to proceed further with their Forces (a
River running through the middle of the Valley, in which those Forts were
placed, whose current hindered their Progress) they devised in the month of
October, to raise a Fort near the Church dedicated to St. Barba, where there
is a very strong Tower, and such a one as might serve almost for their design.
Six weeks together, their Laborers and Pioners had been employed for that
work, and they followed it so earnestly, that by the ninth of December new
style, they had brought it to defense, and garrisoned it with two hundred of
their best men, and fortified it with two Pieces of Canon. The Count of
Grammont, Governor for the King in Bayon, considering how serviceable the Fort
was for the Enemies, who might not only from thence protect their spoiling
Bands, sent into France, but discover also the French troops, that should
march from Bayon, against them; resolved to defer it no longer, but instantly
to assault it. To this purpose, December 19. new style, he selected nine
hundred men out of the Garrison of Bayon, and first the day following, having
fallen upon fifty Perdues of the Spanish party, surprised them; and
encouraged by this beginning, ran furiously with his Army to the Fort, scaled
it at once in twenty several places, and though the Spaniards, fighting
bravely, kept the Combat doubtful by the space of half an hour, yet in the
end, became Master of the great Bastion, and slew all the Soldiers appointed
to guard it, save only fifteen which fled to the Church, preserved as a place
of Refuge, by 12 of their company, if the Fort should chance to be surprised
by that onslat. Valor, not number, is most prevalent in warlike actions. Those
twenty seven alone, which had made a Cittadell of the Sanctuary, did more hurt
to the French Assailants, than the whole company appointed for the defense of
the Baestion. They baricadoed the Church doors, and by the advantage of the
Tower, renewed a desperate fight, of two hours long against the besiegers. In
the end wearied, not vanquished, they began to slacken the Combare, and that
little intermission, giving time to the French, to expedite the work, a new
Scalao was made, and the French became Masters of the Tower. The Spaniards case
then grew desperate; yet as the Nation is more jealous of their Honor, than
careful of their lives, they resolved to fight it out, though
disadvantagiously, and not yield cowardly. The resistance they made, was rather
desperate, than grounded upon true fortitude. To preserve their lives by fight,
it was very improbable, and to escape by flight impossible: Yet fight they did,
almost to the last man, and all were slain, save three only, who complying
with necessity, yielded themselves, and were taken as Prisoners of war Time
would not permit the Count of Grammont, to advise what to do. Carry away the
two Pieces of Canon he could not, wanting such equipage, as was needful for
that work, and therefore he tumbled them into the Sea. To stand to garrison
the F^^t, he might not; during the Combare, the gross body of the Spanish
Army, which was then at Bordagaine, began to play with their Ordance upon him
and sent 200 Horse in 2 Squadrons against him, who appearing in the valley,
which separated the French from heir Enemies, the Count posted speedily to
assail them, and charged them so furiously, that he compelled them to fly to
St. John de Luz, where another gross body of their Army was inquartered, and
then returned to the fort, which he demolished and made unserviceable for the
Enemy, and thence marched home to Bayon, to raise up stronger Forces to oppose
the Invaders.

Priches, a frontier town of Picardy, plundered by the French Captain Rand.
One more Relation only, I find worth the recording for that last year. The
Marquis of Praslin, having sent One hundred Horse to the Froutiers of Picardy,
to inform him of the posture of the Spaniards, Rand the Captain of the
Company, perceived himself of a sudden, to be come so near the Town of
Priches; then possessed by the Spaniard, that he thought it impossible for him
to retire, before the Inhabitants of the place had raised the Country against
him; and therefore, resolved to prevent them, and assault the Town first. To
this end, having disburthened some of his Horses, of Twenty Musketeers, that
number of Horse, serving as Dragons in this Expedition, they charging,
discharging, and recharging nimbly, made his way against some few Defendants,
which had guarded the Advenues, and barricadoed them against all Invaders;
himself following, with the rest of his Forces, broke them up, and entered the
Town, otherwise undefenced, saving by a small Fort, plundered it, and burnt it
to the ground. Some Priseners he took, and carried to the Marquess, who
being informed by one of them, that the wife of Don Marcos de Lima, Governor
for the Catholic King in La Capella, was coming to visit her Husband, he
instantly took Two hundred Light Horse, and made an Ambuscado which them, in a
pace called Flamangre, near the City, where he was scarce arrived, before he
had Intelligence by a Corporal, that three Wallon Captains, Lorgue, Franquin,
and Anbrestrot, which served in that City, were coming abroad to forage; The
Companies of Wallons defeated, and rowted by the Marquess praslin.
presently took up his Sword and Pistol, wishing the rest of his men to be in
a readiness after his example; and himself went secretly to one side of the
Hill, whence he might discover the whole Plain, through which the Enemy was
to march, entreating the Earl of Quinsay, to repair to another place, where
he might observe their Posture. The Earl and his attendants had them first in
view, and went instantly to the Marquess of Praslin, to certify him of their
coming. The French no sooner heard the tidings thereof, but prepared to
Battle, scarce being able to contain themselves in their Ambuscado; yet the
indiscretion of a Spy, appointed by the Count of Quinsay, by certain
signalls, to notify the whole troop, of the neernesse, and distance of the
Enemy, had like to have prevented the enterprise. The often waving of his Cap
was perceived by the Wallons, who thereupon suspecti g a train laid for them,
were upon Retreat, and had esc^ped without blows; had not the Marquess of
Praslin, with a round gallop* made up to them, and charged them so ^agerly,
that of a sudden they were put to a precipitious flight, not being safe till
they had reached the Fort of Grand-Floyon, whither they were pursued by the
French Cavalarie, who slew forty of them in their flight, and took as many
Prisoners. And here the last years Observarions are terminated. We must now
look on to the new year, and the new Actions and Occurrances thereof.

Janus had scar^^ left off his Infant-smile, when the Cardinal Infant,
breathing out War against the united Provinces, sent out his Proclamation to
his Officers, to practice all hostility ag^^st the Friends, and Allies of the
States in the Netherlands. The words ran thus:

By the King. S.
TO our most dear and faithful Chancellor, and to our Council of Brabant,
greeting, etc. Whereas we are informed, That our enemies have lately presumed
to impose heavy burdens, A Proclamation set forth by the Cardinal Infant,
concerning Contributions.
and demand Contribution for their own advantage, upon the Vi^lages and Market
Towns near Thienen, intending to augment them, by exacting the like from
other places near that Jurisdiction, to the great damage of our good and loving
subjects, whom we desire to preserve in security, and ^o free from the like
Exactions. We therefore ordain and command by these Presents, That you shall
immediately and without delay make Proclamation in each place of the foresaid
Jurisdiction, where such Placaras are commonly proclaimed, That no man, upon
pain of our displeasure, and a severe and exemplary punishment, shall consent
to collect or pay any such Contributions, more or less, to the advantage of
our Enemies, but shall to the utmost of their power, hinder our enemies, those
Rebels, from levying such aids, injoyning withal, our Soldiers that now are
in Garrison, or hereafter may be; and commanding all and every one residing in
the Villages and Market-townes of the said Jurisdiction, which are able to
bear Arms, to arm immediately, upon the first report of our Enemies, or their
adherents invasion; to issault and slay them that shall be found in the same
dominion, neither admitting them as prisoners of war, nor permitting them
quarter, which we allow not in any of these parts wherein the Contribution is
prohibited. Furthermore we will and require, that a careful watch by night be
kept in every Village where it is needful, and that the same be performed by
a competent number of able Soldiers we^l armed, who a^ stone as they shall
descry any of the said Rebeils, shall strike upan Alarm, and purs^e after
them: That day and night there shall be placed in the Steeples of each Church,
Sentinells, and Watchman to give a warning peale by the sound of a Bell; upon
the hearing whereof, the Neighbouring-villages are enjoined to take Arms, and
to do their best endeavor to encounter and pursue after our aforesaid Enemies
and Rebels, and their adherents: Expressly withal forbidaing all and every one
(of what condition soever) not to connive or dissemble in the execution hereof,
upon pair of a rigourous, and their exemplary punishment. And for the better
encouragement of those, whose valor and forwardness herein shall tessifie
their Loyalty; We have granted, and do grant, that to each of them who
shall take Prisoner, or slay one of those Enemies, or Rebels, and bring him to
us, either alive or dead; they shall be paid in hand, and immediat^y* fi^^^ie
Gilders a time, by the Officers appointed for our Receipt, who shall need no
further discharge for their payment, then this our present Proclamation. And
for the better execition of what is here required; nee have prohibited all
Hos^s, Inne-keepers, Vintners, and Victuallers, which lodge strangers, either
within Cities, Markettownes, and Villages, or without, to receive any such, as
are known, or suspected to be in the service of our En mies, be they their
nearest Kinsmen or Friends, but command them to advise the Officer, Magistrate,
or Governor of the place thereof immediately, upon pain to forfeit his life,
in case of his knowledge, and in case of suspicion, five and twenty Gilders.
This is Our pleasure. Given in our City of Bruxells, Ianua. 17/17 1637.


The States replied again in words, and in the same Language set forth a
Placard, against the Subjects of the Catholic King; yet neither party came to
blows, preparations only for war being then undertaken, the time not
fitting the field, to which the prosecution was referred.

Italy, an hotter Climate, was more pregnant, and sooner showed the new
fruits of the Spring. Piacenza was still beleaguered with the Spanish Troops,
though Leganez, the General of the Army, and Governor of Milan, was retired
homeward for his own repose; the Armies still abode in the Field, which by
closing up the Poe, and intereepting the Land-passages, block't up the City,
and relu^ed it to such extremity, that the Sister of the Grand Duke, wife to
the Parmesan, was constrained, by the middle of January, to become a Supplya^t
to the Spanish Army for her departure, which was granted her, in regard of her
blood, and her Brothers confederacy with the Crown of Spain; the Duke
himself yet relying upon the French succors, still abiding in the City, The
Duke of Parma agree^^ with the King of Spain.
to preserve it against the Assailants: His constancy to the Christian King,
was admired through the Spanish Camp; which knowing his extremity, and seeing
his friends fail him, with fair words began to solicit him, to relinquish
the French party, and to renew his amity with the Catholic King; promising
as honorable Conditions, as could be demanded of them, or expected from them:
There was no great choice. The French succors were still at Asti; the Spaniards
grew stronger, and himself weaker: And though they had these advantages, they
stood not upon extremities, but propounded freely, That if the Duke would be
only a neutrall, and not side with the Christian King, against his Catholic
Majesty; they would remove all their Forces out of his Country, restore the
forts and towns they had taken from him, and esteem him as a Friend and
Confederate. The Conditions of his agreement with the King of Spain.
The Duke conformed himself to the time, and his own occasion; and willingly
consented to the Spanish Proposition, yet durst not acquaint the French
Praesidiaries with his purpose, for fear, that they in a sudden displeasure
should plunder the City, nor would he by force of Arms bring it to effect. At
last, he pretended a general Muster without the Gates, and thither drew all
the Soldiers, upon a promise of paying them their Moneys due for wages; but
being there, he calls forth the Colonels and Officers; declaring to them,
That the nonperformance of things promised him by the King of France, had
brought all this trouble, both upon himself, and his Territory: That,
enforcing necessity had compelled him to capitulate with the Crown of Spain;
and showed them withal, the Articles of the Treaty, subscribed by himself,
and the Count of Leganez, Governor of Millan, in behalf of the Catholic
King, rendered thanks to the Soldiers for their service, paid them their
stipends, which they accepted better than his words, and caused them to be
conducted to the Frontiers of Piemont, by 500 Spanish horsemen.

The Parmesan himself was thus quit of his troubles, entertained in State at
Millan, commerce of trade was granted betwixt his Subjects and the Millanoys;
but Fabio Scotti his Ambassador, to the Christian King; upon his return from
Paris, Fabio Scotti, the Pormesans Ambassador, sent Prisoner to Paris.
whence he came with Letters to the Confederate Generals, the Duke of Savoy,
and the Marshall Crequi, was sent back by them, as a Prisoner to the King of
France; the Duke conceiving (as he thought) a just displeasure against the
Prince of Parma for capitulating with the Spaniards, who threatened to invade
his Territories; and soon after, invaded Montferat, driving away 700 great
Cattle from the Territory of Asti, which caused him to fortify his
Frontiers, especially at Turino and other places bordering upon the Duchy of
Millan, and to give a sudden assault against the strong Fort of Frassionetta;
which he took by onslat, and garrisoned with 1000 men.

While these things were transacting in Italy, there passed some light
overtures of War in the Dukedom of Loraine, and the Franch County. Chavanes,
commonly called Chavagne, a strong Piece in the Franch County, placed betwixt
two Hills, upon the bank of the River of Suran, near the Frontier of France,
and the Territory of Bresse, garrisoned with 2 Spanish companies of Horse,
Chavanes taken by Thianges, Comman^et of Treffor^.
bad lately pillaged Simanere a Town in the Bressoys, burned down five or six
dwelling houses, slain the Inhabitants, even to women and children, and the
news thereof being brought to Thianges, Covernour of Trefford; he, with a
selected company of that Garrison; some Volunteers of the Country, 400 men of
the Train-bands of Bresse and Bugey, and 300 old Soldiers of the Regiments of
Anguien and Rebe, making in all 700 foot, and 50 horse, resolved, if it was
possible, to surprise it. The enterprise was put in practice about the middle
of January, but not carried so secretly, as to be concealed from the Garrison,
who acquainted the neighbor Forts therewith, defired them to have a vigilant
eye upon the French Commander, and they jointly blocked up the Passages,
attending the march of the French Army; but the number of the Defendants, was
too small to withstand the Assailants; they made their way with Sword and
Pistol, were at the Town unexpectedly, applied the Petards to the gates, and
those engines working effectually, they forced the Garrison to yield upon
discretion, with their lives saved, in the sight of five troops of
Light Horse, and three companies of Dragoons, which were sent from the
neighboring Garrisons for their succor; carried away Prisoners, the two
Captains of the Horse, with all their Officers and Cavaliers, whom they
carried to Burg, having enriched the Soldiers with their Horse and Baggage,
and the hopes of great Ransomes.

Ericourt besieged by part of Gallas his Army.
Ericourt, in the County of Monbeliard, was about the same time besieged by
part of Gallas his Army, battered with the Cannon, some of the out-workes
taken, and the Mill near the gate of the city surprised: by benefit whereof,
400 of the Imperial Army passed the water, 400 Caesarean^ slain, and taken
Prisoners before Ericourt.
and took up their Quarter betwixt the River and the City. The Baron of
Annevoux understanding how the place was endangered, with 300 Foot of his own,
and 40 Horse, attempted hereupon to relieve it; the Quarter betwixt the River
and the City, was the place he first assaulted; which being but weakly
guarded, and scarce brought to defense, the Soldiers therein in became a prey
to the Assay lants, who slew 300 of them upon the place, (amongst which was the
Lieutenant of the Marquess of Grana his Regiment) took the most part of the
rest orisoners, and amongst them the Lieutenant to Tieff^^bach, who afterward
dyed of his wounds. This beginning was but an introduction to his further
proceeding. The Baron, who commanded a Regiment of 14 French Companies in
Monbeliard for the King, was informed afterward, that Collonell Mercy, and
the Baron of Suitz, the Imperial Commanders there, since the last defeat, were
reinforced by a new accrewt of some troops appertaining to the General Gallas;
had continued the siege, and brought the Garrison to the point of surrendering
for want of succors: Hereupon, he had a design to relieve it; to bring his
(...) to effect, he assayed to do it many times in the night; but then they
having doubled their Guards, and himself failing of the Enterprise, he
resolved to accomplish that by daylight, which he could not bring to pass in
the dark; nor was his counsel crossed with an unhappy issue. The command of
his Infantery, being deputed to Tilloy, The Siege raised.
and Bailly; himself in the head of his Horse fell upon the Trenches of the
enemy, put to the sword a guard of Cavalliers, consisting of about 50 Masters,
10 only excepted, who were taken prisoners, compelled the Imperial Foot to
forsake a Fort which they had built upon the passage betwixt Monbeliard and
Ericourt; rowted some other Corpses du guard, and sent the Auxiliaries into the
City, under the command of his own Lieutenant Goliefer, who also carried
with him all manner of Ammunition for war, even to very Hand-mills, whereof
the besieged had much need; to the great encouragement of the Inhabitants, and
Praesidiaries; who thus inheartened, the next night, made out two sallies; in
one of which they nailed four pieces of Cannon, and slew diverse Caesareans;
and to the great dis-hartening of the Imperial common soldiers and Generals,
who seeing that place thus provided, both of military and alimentary
provisions, after they had lost above 1000 men before it, made 400 Cannon-shot
against it, cast in several Bombards, and Grenades to fire it, and broke
down some piece of the wall, Ian. 27. old style, raised the siege, marched the
same night to Granges, in the way to Burgundy, where the next day they divided
their Forces, the Baron of Suitz taking the way of Germany to join with Gallas
his Army, and Mercy the way of the Franch County, to Duke Charles, who yet
remained there.

Fortune smiled all this while upon the French; by Sea and Land the affairs of
that Kingdom went on, if not prosperously, yet not unhappily. Zarquemine, a
frontier town betwixt Alsatia and Loraine, in possession of the Caesareans and
Loranois, was as a prick in the sides of the Villages about Haguenau, and the
County of Bitche, in the alliance, and under the obedience of the French King;
but the Garrison there was forced, Zarque^^ine surprised by Brevill Commander
of Bitche.
and the Town yielded to obedience by the Arms of Brevill, Governor of the
County, Town, and Castle of Bitche (against which place, those of Zarquemine
had a design formerly; who assisted with 100 Soldiers, sent unto him from
Aiguebonne, Governor of Haguenau, about the middle of January, old style,
marched against it, came to the Fort, broke it open, and became Masters of the
place; burning down the house of the Provost, and Controller of the Town, the 2
Boutefeaues, and principal Authors of their hostilities, sparing the
Inhabitants (except one who was sent Prisoner to Haguenau, till he had paid
his Ransom) giving them this caution, That they should comport themselves
fairly, toward the Kings Subjects and the Crown of France: threatening
otherwise, That they would return thither, and deal with them, as they had
done with that Provost, and Controller, who had suffered exemplarily, to deter
the rest from giving ear hereafter to such wicked Counsels.

The same day, which was so fortunate to the French Commander in the
North-east, by land, was as prosperous in the North-west by Sea. The Ides of
January, ministered a fortunate adventure, and the first was seconded by some
others. The Pirates of Dunkerque, who often times had roved thrivingly upon the
Coast of Callis, were ranging about for more spoil. The Count of Charost,
Governor of the City, being advised thereof, dispatched to Sea a Frigate well
armed, Dunkerquer^ Rovers taken by the Seamen of Callis,
merely to discover the number of the Dunkerquers. A small boat of Dunkerque,
haling a rich Holland Ship, which the Fleet had taken 4 days before, appeared
singly, which being guarded only with 13 Wallons, the French Pinace subdued,
and brought into Callis with the Hollander; to the encouragement of the Seamen
in the Port, who presently rigged up a small Navy, put forth to Sea, resolving
not to return with empty hands; and the enterprise succeeded so well, that
the next day they brought into the harbor three other Prizes: one whereof, was a
Vessel laden with all sorts of Merchandise from Spain, and bound for the
Low Countries, in which bottom, and the two others, were found also many
Prisoners. This good event, rouzed up the courage of some other Adventurers to
attempt the like. The 3d of the Calends of February, Intelligence was given,
That some of the Dunkerquers were in the Channel near that Coast, with some
Ships which they had taken as prize from the Hollanders, and that occasion was
so powerfully persuasive, that the Mariners needed no other Orator, to
encourage them to put to Sea, and fight with them. Three French Frigates were
instantly lanched out of the Haven, and upon the first sight of the
Dunkerquers, the winds filling their Sails, made up to them without delay, let
fly their Ordnance, and the Dunkerquers, rather willing to save themselves,
than fight to preserve their Prize; left the Hollanders Ships to the French
Adventurers, who returned with them to Gallis, and thereby so hartened the
Seamen, that the Port which lately wanted Sailers, and could scarce afford one
good Commander, soon after abounded both with Captains and Mariners.

But these peteete Victories, though the news of them soon after arrived at
the Court of France, were not so pleasing to the Christian King, as the
reconcliation of the Monsiour his Brother, was to his Matie, for the Prince
having vanquished himself, and dispossessed his heart of those jealousies,
which made him depart as a Malecontent from the Court, returned again of his
own accord, in the beginning of February; and gave the King such a plenary
assurance of his loyalty, brotherly affection, The Christian King, and the
Monsieur reconciled.
and true zeal to the Crown and State of France, that the King by his own
Letters, made a kind of Proclamation through his whole Kingdom, of the reunion
of their fraternall affections, and assurance of his fidelity. Thus his
Letters ran:

The Kings letters to the Generals, etc.
TO all Generals of our Armies, and Governors of our Provinces, Greeting. My
good Cosins,
since that the departure of my brother the Duke of Orleance to Bloys, in the
Month of November last, without our permission, has given the world occasion
to suspect his good intentions; and I my self believed, that if he had
(accordingly as he ought) with attention examined the Motives of his Action,
(according to our Letters sent after him immediately, to give him as good
evidence (as be could desire) of our good will toward him; by that employment
which he had in the Command, and Conduct of the principal Forces of the
Realm) he might easily have known, that those Avisements, and Motives which
caused him to eloyne himself from us, were not only contrary to truth, but
also to his proper good; Yet this credulity never hindered me, from taking all
care to prevent those evil consequents, which might have followed this our
separation: But thanks be to God, whatever has ensued, has served to no other
end, then to make me know the fidelity of my Subjects; whose constancy I have
found unmoevable. My Brother, who has well concluded, that the union of
Hearts, in these times of danger, is as necessary as the forces of the
Kingdom, to oppose with the more puissance, the Enemies of the greatness of
this Crown, and its tranquillity: Of his own accord, has applied himself to
all which I could desire; and no sooner acknowledged his transgression, His
Majesty undertaketh, for his zeal to the State, etc.
then I was ready, with all my heart, to forget it, giving such credit to the
Assurances he has given me of his good affection, and zeal to the good of
this State, that I my self do undertake, and am a Surety for him to my
self. I am also resolved, upon the entreaty of my said Brother, to pardon my
Cousin the Count of Soissons, not only his fault for retyring to Sedan, without
my license, but also for his behavior there all the time since; though it has
bin otherwise then I expected. All which I do most willingly; provided, that
my said Gosin within the space of fifteen days after the publication of this
Declaration (which I make freely and of my own good grace) returue to his
obedience. All which I would have you understand by this Letter, to the end
that you may impart it to all my Servants and Subjects in the extents of your
commands: praying God (my good Cosins) that he would take you into his
protection.

Written at Orleance the 9 day of Febr. 1637. Signed Lovis.
And a little lower, Sublet.


Some discourse interceded at the same time of a general peace to be concluded
at Coln, and of a particular peace betwixt the Christian and Catholic Kings,
and the report was delivered so confidently, that the compromittors in that
negotiation, were named expressly; but whether the Spaniards prevailing in Italy
with the Duke of Parma, as the French would have it, or the French Agents
refusal, to go upon the safe pasport of Ferdinand the third (in whose name
that Instrument was sealed) as by an Imperial power, (the French not allowing
him the title of Caesar) the treaty held not, it is uncertain. This is sure,
that strong preparations for war, were suddenly made of either side. The
French set forth a Navy of 26. The Spanish and French preparations for warr^.
Galleys, to invade the Island of Sardignia, attended with 22. other vessels
which carried over 8000. land-men. The Spaniard on the other side, knowing that
moneys were not only the ligaments, but the very foundations of war, sent
first 1000. chests, containing two millions and a half of gold in Royalls of
Eight to Genoa, for payment of his Soldiers in Germany, and Italy; then
leavied in the Dukedom of Millan 8000. foot; and in the Kingdom of Sicilie, a
Regiment for 2500. foot, under the command of the Marquess di Spava-Forno, to
be employed in his Navy; and lastly, by the help of the Duke of Florence,
(who assisted him with ten Galleys) sent out a convenient Fleet to oppose
them. The French in their gallantrie rowed and sailed to the Island; and
coming on furiously, took the Port Orestano, near Cagliano, affrighted the
Inhabitants of that Country, who at first hid themselves in the woods, and
caves, and holes, for safeguard of their lives; yet of a sudden betook
themselves to Arms, beat out those who were landed, surprised their baggage,
and forced the Fleet to return, to Tolour, Crequi sent to the King of France
by the Duke of Savoy.
a harbor in Province. And now the war by land began to be renewed. The Duke
of Savoy, who till this, never felt the fire of war burning in his Dominions,
found that Basiliske ready to infect his Territories; and to prepare an
Antidote against this poison, sent for the Marshall Crequi, bestowed upon him a
Diamond worth 1000. Crowns, and his Duchess another esteemed worth 600; not
for service already done, but to be done hereafter, dispatched him by Post to
Paris, himself soon after faigning to go to Chambery, but (as it was
thought) intending to go to Lion to confer with the Christian King there,
for relief in that extremity.

About the same time, viz. about the beginning of March (as it is wrote from
Triers) a private conspiracy, being made in Diete hofen and Walderfangen by
some of the Inhabitants, to deliver those Towns and Forts into the hands of
the French Allies, (some of the Soldiers that lay in garrison in Dietenhofen,
The French project discovered at Dietenhofen, and their forces defeated.
being corrupted with money, to kill the Commander of that place, and nail the
Canons, that lay to guard the passage thither by the river of Mosel) and the
last of these performed really; the French being made acquainted therewith,
sailed down the river with scaling ladders, and other needful implements to
prosecute what was thus projected; but the plot was of too dishonorable a
birth to have a glorious issue. A French man, who being married in the Town,
was master of a small fortune, and father of some children, was made acquainted
by the conspirators of their intention, and he not knowing, what might fall to
his fortune in that confusion, discovered the treason to the Magistrate, who
doubled his watches, kept a strong Corpse du guard at each Port, manned the
walls, and armed the Citizens to oppose these unwelcomely expected guests; who
finding their purpose prevented by this care, marched from thence to
Walderfangen, where the Commander (having notice thereof from Dietenhofen the
night before) gave them so rude entertainment, that of 400 foot, and 100 horse,
which were designed for this bufinesse, scarce the one half returned; and
after their departure, made inquiry for the conspirators, proceeded against
them legally, condemned them, and as they had deserved, put them to a shame
full death.

In the Valtoline, the French expeditions began at the same time to flag. The
Grisons, an unconstant and uncertain people (as all Democraticall States are)
had often murmured against the Christian King, and his General there the Duke
Rohan; and oft-times been appeased with money from France, The Duke of Rohan
his goods arrested by the Grisons,
and the good order which was observed by the French Commander; but now, what
they had long praeconceived, of disburthening themselves of the French Forces,
was brought into action. A general Diet for the settling of that State was
appointed to be held at Chur, or Coire, at the same time, when the multitude
made head against the French, and to expel them by force out of the Country,
were gathered together to the number of 4 or 5000. men, and resolved to
surprise the Duke of Rohan in person, if it were possible. A superior
providence over-ruleth the wisest Counsels, and often infatuateth their
determinations, which would be accounted most prudent: The Duke was then abroad
on hunting, and so by accident prevented that misfortune. The Grisons
perceiving that course to fail, arrested his good^ which were at Chur, and by
that violence discovered an alienation of their affections from him. It was not
done so privately, as to be kept secret, the valley ecchoed with the same of
what was done in the City, the report was quickly brought to the French
Generals ears, who upon the tidings repaired to the Staig, astrong piece, and
hardly to be taken, while well manned, and defended. Thus secured, he stood
upon terms of Capitulation, as holding it too dishonorable for himself and
his Nation to leave the Province, which he had gained by his prudence, and
managed by his valor, upon the mutiny of the giddie multitude, which for
their own advantage, and hope of gain, might happily have complied with the
Christian Kings professed enemy, and the States of that Province, by mediation
of those of Zur^ch, giving ear to counsel, came to a fair parley, assured
him of the good respect they had of the amity of the Christian King; that,
they intended no combination, and confederacy with the enemies of the Crown
of France; but that (as hitherto they had been a free State, not overruled by
strangers) so now again, they only desired to be Masters of their own
Dominions, promising withal, with their own Arms, and at their proper costs,
to secure those passages, (which were then held by the French) against the
Spaniards; if he would freely restore them. The treaty was upon unequal
terms, the Duke was their prisoner, and might not stand to make his own
conditions; To gain his safety, and to be assured of the Grisons, he
condescended to seal mutually to these Articles. That the Staig, the County
of Bormeo, and Chiavenna, should be presently redelivered to the States of
those Provinces, and the money which was due unto them paid with all
expedition: And the Grisons, on the other side, condescended, to confirm their
amity with the King and Crown of France; The Conditions agreed upon, betwixt
the Grisons, and the Duke of Rohan.
and to maintain the passages against the Spaniard. All which, being sealed
unto by the Duke in behalf of the King his Master, and by the Colonel Gasper
Smith, in behalf of the Grisons, April 8. old style, and the places were
surrendered to the Grisons accordingly.

These were the counterbuffes and spots, with which the flourishing fortune and
splendor of the French glory was at that time checked and sullyed, which yet
was somewhat restored and revived by another happy adventure of the Christian
Kings Forces in Loraine about the same day when the Duke was almost surprised.
The Caesareans who had some months before taken the City of Switz, Switz
besieged and taken by the French
betwixt the Dukedom of Burgundy, and Switzerland, had thereby intercluded the
passage, and communion, betwixt France, and the Allies of that Crown in that
Territory. To regaine it the French Garrisons at Beffort, Bruntrant, and
Ericourt, mustered up 2000. men, armed them with necessary provisions for a
battery, sent them against that City and Castle, and then after two days
battery, with 8. Pieces of Ordnance, forced the Garrison to yield upon
composition, to depart with their low weapons only, and so opened the way for
commerce betwixt that State and the Kings Subjects. But, this gain, had been a
small requital to the former losses, had it come singly, and unattended
without any other. It was the concomitant of better fortunes to the French, who
under the Duke of Longueville, did much harm to the Spanish Garrisons in the
Dukedom of Burgundy, surprised the City of Amur under the conduct of the Lord
Thianges, Honorita and Margarita recovered by the French.
and cut in pieces the Caesareans there; and by their Fleet, March. 19. old
style, at night assaulted the Island Margarita, and landed some Forces under the
Count of Harcourt, took in the first Fort, and after beleaguered the Fort
Royal; where the Garrison, after a tedious Siege began to parley, and at last
agreed upon composition, and so marched out, leaving the whole Island again to
the French, who now go to assault and besiege the other Island named St.
Honorata.

The Spring began now to come on, and the united States of the Netherlands, and
the Cardinal Infant, Preparations for war by the Cardinal Infant. and the
united ^tates.
began to prepare for war. The States began with the castigation of some rude
Soldiers, cashiering at Mastricht 4. Companies of foot, and at Venlo, and
Roermond some others, who being out of pay, and knowing nothow to live
otherwise, than by war, promised to reform themselves, and were placed under
other more severe Commanders; and this done, dispatches were sent and
Proclamation published, that all Commanders should have their Companies ready
by the beginning of May. The Cardinal Infant, who was engaged elsewhere, and
not only against the States, made great preparation both by sea and land to
compass his designs. Great store of Biscuit was baked at Antwerp to supply the
Dunkerkers, who with two men of war and 16 Frigates, had already put to Sea.
Picolomini was furnished with money, and a full Commission, and sent into upper
Germany, to levy some thousands of men for the Infante's service, who had
prepared his wagons for carriage of the Baggage; and Prince Francis of
Loraine, who already had the Command of 4. Regiments, received order to raise
two new ones, and to join with the Earl Picolomins.

The time of action was not yet come, the harvest was still in the blade, and
the fields afforded no forage. No Armies could yet be brought into Campagnia,
only some private parties were employed abroad by the Garrisons, more for
spoil, and pillage, than in hope of victory. From Breda 100. valiant and
experienced Soldiers were sent out on plundering, who were surprised, and
rowted near Balen by another party of the States Garrison at the Bosh, which
though it surpassed the Brabantiers in number yet obtained not the victory by
mere valor and strength, but by a finenesse adjoined thereto; which
nevertheless was not so prevalent as to give them a clear victory, without
much loss of their own blood. A bloody ^ight betwixt apartie of the Spanish,
and another of the States Soldiers.
The States Soldiers, knowing of the enemies march, divided themselves into
two bands, the one consisting of 80. the other of 40. men. The minor Company,
appeared to the view of the Brabantiers, while the other and greater part
remained hidden and undiscovered. The eye of the Spanish Soldiers was no
sooner fixed upon the lesser band, but they made toward them with all have,
whilst they pretending a fearful flight, hasted to gain two strong farm
houses, near the place where their accomplices lay, as places of refuge in that
necessity. Their enemy pursued them with all eagerness, assaulted the houses
with all violence, whilst those within playing upon them with their small shot,
and the ambush rising from behind them, made them know, that the victory was
hardlier to be achieved, than they imagined. Neither the odds of twenty men in
number, nor the unexpected troop coming on so suddenly, did utterly
discourage these resolved men, but made them recollect their spirits, and
prepare to fight; droping, if not to obtain the conquest, yet to go off
without much loss. The fight was hot on both sides, the Musketeers were both
good markmen, and nimble fingerens of that deadly engine; and charged (...)
discharged so nimbly, that the ground was purpled with the blood of the
wounded, The Statists get the victory.
so many being slain on both sides, that after the combat was done, ten
wagons were laden with the dead corpses of those two petty Armies, yet in the
end, the victory fell to the Statists, the Spanish Soldiers being forced to
fly.

The Prince of Orange soon after, had a design against Hulst, a Town of
importance in the frontiers of Brabant, The Prince of Orarge his design
against Hulst prevented.
and the Key of the Country from Zealand to that Province, and the Earldom
of Flanders. He had made preparation to surprise it, and was about the
expedition when certain notice came unto him, that his project was discovered,
which made him forbear the attempt, deeming it less dishonor, not at all to
begin a work of that difficulty, which might put himself and his Army into
hazard, than to go on desperately, and be repulsed shamefully.

And thus, we have described the occurrences of these few months, omitting
nothing worth observation, which has happened in these Western parts of the
world. In the Eastern parts amongst the Turks, we hear of tumults, civil
dissentions, rebellions managed with a strong power, and such like barbarismes.
The Belgerbeg Basha in Morea, attended with twenty thousand Soldiers, made
head there against his Sovereign, not contenting himfelfe with that high
office, but aiming at a higher kind of dominion in that Peninsula, and to
effect his design, called in other twelve thousand Alboneses, to assist him;
and with those Forces, possessed himself of the City and Port de Santa Maura
in Morea. The Grand Signior, enraged with this affront summoned him to appear
at his Court at Constantinopl; and (he not coming in) confiscated his lands
and goods, and sent an Army against him to surprise his person, and disperse
the Rebels; The Basha in Morea rebelleth against the Turk.
but with what success, it is not yet known. The Vizier basha who had bin
employed against the Persian, was threatened also to be strangled (a miserable
case, when service (...) by the event) by a Capigie, who was sent p^^posely to
the Army, to deprive the Basha of his life, because he had not been fortunate
in his wars against the Sophy. The Vezier knowing the fury of the Mohammedan
Emperor, and jealous of what was intended against him, for safeguard of
himself, fell to the Persian, and left the Army without Commander, The Vezier
Basha, employed lately against the Persian, flees to the Sophy.
and so prevented the Capigie in the dispatch of his Commission. The Sultan
missing his design against the Vezier, proceeded in rage against the Capigie,
smote off his head, and sent Camacan, another of his Basha's, with the power
and title of the former, to command his Armies, whose proceedings we must
expect hereafter.

FINIS.

