ALCILIA.

Philoparthens loving Folly.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED Pigmalions Image.

WITH The Love of AMOS and LAVRA.

And also EPIGRAMMES BY Sir I. H. and others.

Never before imprinted.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Hawkins, dwelling in Chancery Lane, near
Sarjeants-Inne. 1613.

A LETTER, written by a Gentleman, to the Author his friend.
FRiend Philoparthens, in perusing your Louing-folly, and your declining from
it, I do behold Reason conquering Passion. The infirmity of loving argues
you are a man; the firmness thereof discovers a good wit, and the best
nature; and the falling from it, true virtue, Beauty was always of force to
mislead the wisest, and men of greatest perfection have had no power to resist
Love. The best are accompanied with Vices, to exercise their Virtues, whose
glory shines brightest in resisting motives of pleasure, and in subduing
affections. And though I cannot altogether excuse your Louing-folly; yet I do
the less blame you, in that you loved such a one as was more to be commended
for her virtue then beauty; albeit even for that too, she was so well
accomplished with the gifts of nature, as in mine own conceit (which, for good
cause, I must submit as inferior to yours) there was nothing wanting, either
in the one or the other, that might add more to her worth, except it were a
more due and better regard of your love, which ^hee requited not according to
your deserts, nor answerable to her self in her other parts of perfection: Yet
herein it appears you have made good use of reason, that being heretofore
lost in youthful vanity, have now by timely discretion found your self. Let
me entreat you to suffer these your passionate Sonnets to be published, which
may peradventure make others, possessed with the like humor of Loving, to
follow your example in leaving, and move other Alciliaes (if there be any) to
embrace deserving love while they may. Hereby also she shall know, and (it may
be) inwardly repent the loss of your love, and see how much her perfections
are blemished by ingratitude, which will make your happiness greater, by
adding to your reputation, then your contentment could have been in inioying
her love: At the least wise the wiser sort, howsoever in censuring them, they
may dislike of your errors; yet they cannot but commend and allow of your
reformation; and all others that shall with indifferency read them, may reap
thereby some benefit or contentment: Thus much I have written as a testimony of
the good will I bear you, with whom I do suffer or rejoice, according to the
quality of good hap, or misfortune, and so I take my leave, resting, as
always,

Yours most assured PHILARETES.

Author ipse Philopartheos ad Libellum suum.
PArue Liber Domini vanos dicture labores,
Insomnes noctes, sollicitosque dies,
Errores varios, sanguentis taedia vitae,
Moerores certos, gaudia certa minus,
Peruigi^es curas, suspiria, vota, querelas,
Et quaecunque pati dura coegit amor.
I precor intrepidus, duram comiterque salutans
Haec me eius causa sustinuisse refer.
Te grato excipiet vultu rubicundula, nomen
Cum titulo inscriptum viderit esse suum.
Forsitan and nostri miserebitur illa doloris,
Dicet, and ah quantum deseruisse dolet:
Seque nimis saeuam, crudelemabque; ipsa vocabit,
Cui non est fidei debita cura meae;
Quod siquidem eueniet, Domino solaminis illud,
Et t^bi surremi muneris instar erit.
Si quis (vt est aequum) f^tuos damnauerit ignes,
Pigritiae fructus ingnijque leuis:
Tu Dominum caecis tenchris errasse, sed ipsum
Err^ris tandem pae(...)uisse sui,
Me quoque re v^ra nec tot, nec tauta tulisse,
Se^ ficta ad placitum multa fuisse refer.
Ab quanto satius (nisi men's mihi vana) fuisset
Illa meo penitus delituisse sinu:
Quam leuia in lucem prodire, aut luce carentis
Insanam Domini prodere stultitiam.
Nil Amor est aliud, quam mentis morbus, and error.
Nil sapienter agit, nil been, quisquis amat.
Sed non cuique datur sapere, aut melioribus vti,
Forte erit alterius, qui meus error erat.
Cautior incedat, quinanquam labitur, atqui
Iam proprio cuadam cautior ipse malo.
Si cui dilicto granior mea poena videtur,
Illius in lauds officiosus eris.
Te si quis simili qui carpituri i^ ne videbit,
Ille suam sortem flebit, and ille meam.
ALCILIAE obsequium supplex praestare memento,
Non minima officij pars erit illa tui.
Te fortasse sua secura recondet in a^ca,
Et Solis posthaec luminis orbus eris.
Nil referet, fateor me non prudenter amasse;
Vltima deceptae sors erit illa spei.
Bis proprio Phoebus cursu lustrouer at orbem,
Conscius erroris, stultitiaeque meae,
A quo primus Amor coepit penetrare medullas,
Et falsa accensos nutrijt art focos.
Desino iam nugas amplecti, seria posthaec
(Vt Ratio monet) ac vtiliora sequar.
AMORIS PRAELVDIVM: VEL, Epistola ad Amicam.
TO thee Alcilia, solace of my youth,
These rude and scattered rimes I have addressed:
The certain witness of my love and truth,
That truly cannot be in words expressed;
Which if I shall perceive thou take in gree,
I will from henceforth write of none but thee.
Here may you find the wounds your self have made
The many sorrows I have long sustained:
Here may you see that Love must be obeyed;
How much I hoped, how little I have gained:
That as for you the pains have been endured,
Even so by you they may at length be cured.
I will not call for aid to any Muse,
It is for learned Poets so to do:
Affection must my want of Art excuse,
My works must have their patronage from you,
Whose sweet assistance if obtain I might,
I should be able both to speak and wright.
Mean while vouchsafe to read this, as assignde
To no man's censure, but to yours alone:
Pardon the faults, that you therein shall find,
And think the Writers heart was not his own.
Experience of examples daily prove
That no man can be well advised, and love.
And though the work it self deserve it not,
Such is your worth with my great wants compared:
Yet may my Love unfeigned, without spot
Challenge so much, (if more cannot be spared,)
Then (lovely Virgin) take this in good part,
The rest unseen is sealed up in the heart.
Judge not by this the depth of my Affection,
Which far exceedes the measure of my skill:
But rather note herein your own perfection,
So shall appear my want of Art, not Will.
Whereof, this now as part, in lieu of greater
I offer as an insufficient debtor.
Sic incipit stultorum Tragicomedia.
IT was my chance (unhappy chance to me)
As all alone I wandered on my way:
Void of distrust, from doubt of dangers free,
To pass a grove, where LOVE in Ambush lay.
Who aiming at me with his feathered Dart,
Conuey'd it by mine Eye unto my Heart.
Where (retchlesse Boy) he let the Arrow stick,
Where I, as one amazed, senseless stood:
The hurt was great, yet seemed but a prick,
The wound was deep, and yet appeared no blood,
" But inwardly it bleedes, Proof teaches this,
" When wounds do so the danger greater is.
Pausing a while, and grieved with my wound,
I looked about, expecting some relief:
Small hope of help, no ease of pain I found,
Like all at once to perish in my grief:
When hastily I plucked forth the Dart.
But left the head fast fixed in my Heart.
Fast fixed in my Heart I left the head;
From whence I doubt it will not be removed:
Ah what unlucky chance that way me lead?
O Love, thy force thou might elsewhere have proved,
And showed thy power, where thou art not obeyed;
" The Conquest's small, where no resist is made.
But naught (alas) auayles it to complain,
I rest resolved with Patience to endure:
The Fire being once dispersed through every vein,
It is too late to hope for present cure.
Now Philoparthen must new follyes prove,
And learn a little, what it is to love.
These Sonnets following, were written by the Author, (who gives himself this
fained name of Philoparthen, as his accidental attribute) at diverse times, and
upon diverse occasions, and therefore in the form and matter they differ, and
sometimes are quite contrary one to another, considering the nature and
quality of LOVE, which is a Passion full of variety, and contrariety in it
self.
I.
Unhappy Eyes that first my Heart betrayed,
Had you not seen, my grief had not bin such:
And yet how may I justly you vpbraid,
Since what I saw delighted me so much?
But hence, alas, proceeds all my smart,
Unhappy Eyes that first betrayed my Heart.
II.
To seek adventures, as Fate has assigned,
My slender Bark now flotes upon the Maine:
Each troubled thought an Oar, each sigh a wind,
Whose often puffes have rent my Sails in twain.
LOVE steeres the Boat, which, for that sight he lacks,
Is still in danger of ten thousand wracks.
III.
What sudden chance has changed my wonted
Which makes me other then I seem to be? (cheer,
My days of joy, that once were bright and clear,
Are turned to night, my mirth to misery.
Ah, well I ween that somewhat is amiss,
But sooth to say, I know not what it is.
IIII.
What, am I dead? Then could I feel no smart:
But still in me the sense of grief reuiueth.
Am I alive? Ah no, I have no heart;
For she that has it, me of life depriueth.
Oh that she would restore my heart again,
Or give me hers, to counteruayle my pain.
V.
If it be LOVE, to waste long hours in grief;
If it be LOVE, to wish, and not obtain;
If it be LOVE, to pine without relief;
If it be LOVE, to hope, and never gain:
Then may you think that he has truly loved,
Who for your sake, all this and more have proved.
VI.
If ought that in mine Eyes have done amiss,
Let them receive deserved punishment:
For so the perfect rule of Justice is,
Each for his own deeds should be praised or shent.
Then doubtless it is both against Law and sense
My Heart should suffer for mine Eyes offense.
VII.
I am not sick, and yet I am not sound;
I eat and sleep, and yet me thinks I thrive not:
I sport and laugh, and yet my griefs abound;
I am not dead, and yet me thinks I live not.
What uncouth cause has these strange passions bred,
To make at once, sick, sound, alive, and dead?
VIII.
Some thing I want, but what I cannot say;
O now I know, it is my self I want:
My Love with her has taken my Heart away.
Yea, Heart and all; and left me very scant.
Such power has LOVE, and naught but LOVE alone,
To make divided Creatures live in one.
IX.
Philo. Come gentle Death, and strike me with thy dart
Life is but loathsome to a man oppressed.
Death. How can I kill thee when thou have no heart?
That which thou had is in another breast.
Philo. Then must I live, and languish still in pain?
Death. Yea, till thy Love restore thy heart again.
X.
Were Love a fire, my tears might quench it lightly;
Or were it water, my hot heart might dry it;
If Air, then might it pass away more slightly,
Or were it Earth, the world would soon descry it.
If Fire, nor Water, Air nor Earth it be,
What then is it that thus tormenteth me?
XI.
To paint her outward shape and gifts of mind
It does exceed my wit and cunning far:
She has no fault, but that she is unkind.
All other parts in her so complete are
That who to view them thoughly would devise,
Must have his body nothing else but Eyes.
XII.
Fair is my Love, whose parts are so well framed
By Natures special order and direction:
That she her self is more then half ashamed,
In having made a work of such perfection.
And well may Nature blush at such a feature,
Seeing her self excelled in her creature.
XIII.
Her body is straight, slender, and upright;
Her visage comely, and her looks demure,
Mixed with a cheerful grace that yields delight;
Her eyes like stars, bright shining, clear, and pure,
Which I describing, Love bids stay my pen,
And says it is not a work for mortal men.
XIIII:
The ancient Poets write of Graces three,
Which meeting altogether in one Creature,
In all points perfect make the same to be,
For inward virtues, and for outward feature.
But smile Alcilia, and the world shall see,
That in thine eyes an hundred graces be.
XV.
As Love had drawn his Bow ready to shoot,
Aiming at me with resolute intent:
Straight Bow and Shaft he cast down at his foot,
And said, why needless should one Shaft be spent?
I Will spare it then, and now it shall suffice
In stead of Shafts to use Alciliaes eyes.
XVI.
Blush not my Love, for fear least Phoebus spy,
Which if he do, then doubtless he will say
Thou seek'st to dim his clearness with thine eye,
That clearness which from East brings gladsome day.
But most of all, least Jove should see I dread,
And take thee up to heaven like Ganymede.
XVII.
Philo. What is the cause Alcilia is displeased?
Lo. Because she wants that which should most content her
Phil. O did I know it, soon should she be eased.
Love. Perhaps thou do, and that does most torment her.
Phil. Yet let her ask what she desires to have.
Love. Guess by thy self; for maidens must not crave.
XVIII.
My Love by chance her tender finger pricked,
As in the dark I striued for a kiss:
Whose blood I seeing, offered to have licked,
But half in anger she refused this.
O that she knew the difference of the smart,
Twixt her pricked finger and my wounded heart.
XIX.
Philo. I pray the tell, what makes my heart to tremble
When on a sudden I Alcilia spy?
Love. Because thy heart cannot thy joy dissemble,
Thy life and death are both lodged in her eye.
Phil. Do thou not her with self-same passion strike?
Love. O no, her heart and thine are not alike.
XX.
Such are thy parts of body and of mind,
That if I should not love thee as I do;
I should too much degenerate from kind,
And think the world would blame my weakness to.
For he, whom such perfections cannot move,
Is either senseless, or not borne to love.
XXI.
Alcilia's eyes have set my heart on fire,
The pleasing object that my pain does feed:
Yet still to see those eyes I do desire,
As if my help should from my hurt proceed.
Happy were I, might there in her be found,
A will to heal, as there was power to wound.
XXII.
Unwise was he that painted Love a Boy,
Who for his strength a Giant should have been:
It Is strange a child should work so great annoy:
Yet howsoever strange, too truly seen.
" But what is he that dares at Love repine
" Whose works are wonders, and himself divine?
XXIII.
My fair Alcilia, gladly would I know it,
If ever loving passion pierced thy heart:
Oh no; for then thy kindness soon would show it,
And of my pains thy self would bear some part.
Full little knows he that has not proved,
What hell it is to love, and not be loved.
XXIIII.
Love, art thou blind? nay, thou can see too well;
And they are blind that so report of thee:
That thou do see, my self by proof can tell,
A hapless proof thereof is made by me:
For sure I am, had thou not had thy sight,
Thou never could have hit my heart so right.
XXV.
Long have I languish'd, and endured much smart,
Since hapless I the cruel fair did love,
And lodged her in the center of my heart,
Who there abiding, reason should her move,
Though of my pains she no compassion take,
Yet to respect me, for her own sweet sake.
XXVI.
In midst of VVinter season, as the Snow,
Whose milk-white mantle ouer-spreds the ground:
In part the color of my love is so,
Yet their effects I have contrary found.
For when the unneappeares, Snow melts anon,
But I melt always when my Sun is gone.
XXVII.
The sweet content at first I seemed to prove,
While yet Desire vnfledg'd could scarcely fly:
Did make me think there was no life to Love,
Till all too late Time taught the contrary.
For, like a Fly, I sported with the flame,
Till, like a Fool, I perished in the same.
XXVIII.
After dark night, the cheerful day appears;
After an ebb, the river flows again;
After a storm, the cloudy heaven clears:
All labors have their end, or ease of pain;
Each creature has relief and rest, save I,
Who only dying live, and living dye.
XXIX.
Sometimes I seek for company to sport,
Whereby I might my pensive thoughts beguile:
Sometimes again I hide me from resort,
And muse alone; but yet alas the while,
In changing place I cannot change my mind,
For where so ever I fly, my self I find.
XXX.
Feign would I speak, but straight my heart does tremble
And checkes my tongue that should my griefs reveal:
And so I strive my passion to dissemble,
Which all the Art I have cannot conceal:
Thus standing mute, my heart with longing sterueth
It grieves a man to ask what he deserves.
XXXI.
Since you desire the cause of me to know,
For which these diverse passions I have proved:
Look in your glass, which will not fail to show
The shadowed portrait of my best beloved.
If that suffice not, look into my heart,
Where it is engraven in a newfound Art.
XXXII.
The painful Plowman has his hearts delight,
Who through his daily toil his body tyreth:
Yet merrily comes whistling home at night,
And sweetly takes the ease his pain requires.
But neither days nor nights can yield me rest,
Borne to be wretched, and to live oppressed.
XXIII.
O well were it, if Nature would devise,
That men with men together might engender:
As Grafts from Trees, one from another rise,
Then naught of due to women should we render,
But vain conceit, that Nature should do this,
Since well we know, her self a woman is.
XXIIII.
Upon the Altar where Loves fire burned;
My sighs and tears for sacrifice I offered:
When Love in rage from me his countenance turned,
And did reject, what I so humbly proffered.
If he my heart expect, alas it is gone,
How can a man give that is not his own?
XXXV.
Alcilia said, she did not know my mind,
Because my words did not declare my love:
Thus where I merit most, least help I find,
And her unkindness all too late I prove.
Grant Love, that she of whom thou art neglected,
May one day love, and little be respected.
XXXVI.
The Cynicke being asked when he would love, Diogenes.

Made answer, when he nothing had to do:
For Love was sloth; but he did never prove
By his experience what belonged thereto.
For had he tasted but as much as I,
He would have soon reformed his heresy.
XXXVII.
O judge me not, sweet Love, by outward show,
Though sometimes strange I seem, and to neglect thee:
Yet did thou but my inward passions know,
Thou should perceive how highly I respect thee.
" When looks are fixed, the heart often times does tremble,
Little loves he that cannot much dissemble.
XXXVIII.
Parting from thee, even from my self I part,
Thou art the star by which my life is guided:
I have the body, but thou have the heart;
The better part is from it self divided.
Thus do I live, and this do I sustain,
Till gracious fortune make us meet again.
XXXIX.
Open the sluices of my feeble eyes,
And let my tears have passage from their fountain:
Fill all the earth with plaints, the air with cries,
Which may pierce rocks, and reach the highest mountain
That so Loves wrath by these extremes appeased,
My griefs may cease, and my poor heart be eased.
XL.
" After long sickness, health brings more delight;
" Seas seem more calm, by storms once ouerblowne;
" The day's more cheerful by the passed night;
" Each thing is by his contrary best known;
" Continual ease is pain; Change sometimes meeter;
" Discords in Music, make the Music sweeter.
XLI.
Fear to offend, forbids my tongue to speak,
And signs and sighs must tell my inward woe:
But (aye the while) my heart with grief does break,
And she by signs my sorrows will not know,
The stillest streams we see in deepest foords;
And love is greatest when it wants words.
XLII.
" No pain so great, but may be eased by Art,
" Though much we suffer, yet despair we should not
" In midst of griefs Hope always has some part,
" And Time may heal, what Art and Reason could not.
Oh what is then this passion I endure,
Which neither Reason, Art, nor Time can cure?
XLIII.
" Pale Jealousy, fiend of eternal night,
" Misshapen creature, borne before thy time,
" The Impe of horror, foe to sweet delight,
" Making each error seem a heinous crime:
" Ah too great pity (were there remedy,)
" That ever Love should keep thee company.
XLIIII.
The days are now come to their shortest date,
And must in time by course increase again:
But only I continue at one state,
Void of all hope of help, or ease of pain.
For days of joy must still be short with me,
And nights of sorrow must prolonged be.
XLV.
Sleep now my Muse, and henceforth take thy rest,
Which all too long thy self in vain have wasted:
Let it suffice I still must live oppressed,
And of my pain the fruit must never be tasted.
" Then sleep my Muse: Fate cannot be withstood,
" It Is better sleep then wake and do no good.
XLVI.
Why should I love, since she does prove ungrateful?
Since for reward I reap naught but disdain:
Love thus to be requited it is hateful,
And Reason would I should not love in vain.
Yet all in vain, when all is out of season,
For Love has no society with Reason.
XLVII.
Harts-ease and I have been at ods too long,
I follow fast, but still he Hyes from me:
I sue for grace, and yet sustain the wrong,
So gladly would I reconciled be.
Love make us one: so shall thou work a wonder,
Uniting them, that were so far asunder.
XLVIII.
Uncouth, vnkist, our ancient Chaucer
Poet said,
And he that hides his wants, when he has need:
May after have his want of wit bewraid,
And fail of his desire, when others speed.
Then boldly speak: the worst is at first entering;
" Much good success men miss for lack of ventring.
XLIX.
Declare thy griefs wherewith thou art oppressed,
And let the world be witness of thy woes:
Let not thy thoughts lie buried in thy breast,
But let thy tongue thy discontents disclose.
" For who conceales his pain when he is grieved,
" May well be pitied, but no way relieved.
L.
VVretched is he, that loving sets his heart
On her, whose love from pure affection swerued:
Who does permit each one to have a part
Of that which none but he alone deserves.
Give all or none: For once of this be sure,
Lordship and Love no partners may endure.
LI.
Who spends the weary day in pensive thought,
And night in dreams of horror, and affright:
Whose wealth is want, whose hope is come to naught;
Himself the mark for Love and Fortunes spite:
Let him appear, if any such there be,
His case and mine most fitly will agree.
LII.
Fair tree, but fruitless, sometimes full of sap,
Which now yields naught at all that may delight me:
Some cruel frost, or some untimely hap
Has made thee barren, only to despite me.
Such Trees in vain with hope do feed desire,
And serve for fuel to increase Loves fire.
LIII.
In company, while sad and mute I sit,
My thoughts elsewhere, then there I seem to be
Possessed with some deep Melancholy fit,
One of my friends observes the same in me,
And says in jest, (which I in earnest prove)
He looks like one, that had lost his first Love.
LIIII.
Twixt Hope and Fear in doubtful balance peazed,
My Fate, my Fortune, and my Love depends:
Sometime my Hope is raised, when Love is pleased.
Which fear weighs down, when ought his will offends
The heavens are sometimes clear, and sometimes lowre
" And he that loves, must taste both sweet and sour.
LV.
Retire my wandering thoughts unto your rest,
Do not henceforth consume your selves in vain:
No mortal man in all points can be blessed,
What now is mine, may be another pain.
The watery clouds are clear, when storms are past,
And things in their extremes long cannot last.
LVI.
The fire of Love is first bred in the eye,
And thence conuayes his heat unto the heart:
Where it lies hid, till Time his force descry:
The tongue thereto adds fuel for his part.
The touch of lips, which does succeed the same,
Kindles the rest, and so it proves a flame.
LVII.
The tender sprigs that sprowted in the field,
And promised hope of fruit to him that planted:
In stead of fruit does naught but blossoms yield,
Though care and pain to prune it never wanted,
Even so my hopes do naught but blossoms prove,
And yield no fruits to recompense my love.
LVIII.
Though little sign of love in show appear,
Yet think true love of colors has no need:
It Is not the glorious garments which men wear
That make them others then they are indeed.
" In meanest show the most affection dwells,
And richest pearls are found in simplest shells.
LIX.
Let not thy tongue thy inward thoughts disclose,
Or tell the sorrows that thy heart endures:
Let no man's ear be witness of thy woes,
Since pity neither help nor ease procures.
And only he is truly said to moan,
Whose griefs none knows but himself alone.
LX.
A thousand times I curse these idle rimes,
Which do their makers follies vain set forth:
Yet bless I them again as many times,
For that in them I blaze Alcilia's worth.
Mean while I fare as does the Torch by night,
Which wastes it self in giving others light.
LXI.
Enough of this: for all is naught regarded,
And she not once with my complaints is moved:
Dye hapless Love, since thou art not rewarded;
Yet ere thou dye, to witness that I loved,
Report my truth, and tell the fair unkind,
That she has lost, what none but she shall find.
LXII.
Lovers lament you that have truly loved;
For Philoparthen now has lost his love:
The greatest loss that ever Lover proved;
O let his hard hap some compassion move.
Who had not rued the loss of her so much,
But that he knows the world yields no more such.
LXIII.
Upon the Ocean of conceited error,
My weary spirit many storms have past,
Which now in harbor, free from wonted terror,
Joy the possession of their rest at last:
And henceforth safely they may lie at road;
And never roue for had-I-wist abroad.
Loves Accusation at the Iudgement-seate of Reason, wherein the Authors whole
success in his love is covertly described.
IN Reasons Court, my self being Plaintiff there,
Love was by process summoned to appear.
That so the wrong which he had done to me
Might be made known; and all the world might see,
And seeing, rue, what to my cost I proved,
While faithful, but unfortunate I loved.
After I had obtained audience,
I thus began to give in evidence.
The Authors Evidence against Love.
MOst sacred Queen, and Sovereign of man's heart,
Which of the mind do rule the better part:
First bred in Heaven, and from thence hither sent
To guide men's actions by thy regiment;
Vouchsafe a while to hear the sad complaint
Of him that Love has long kept in restraint:
And as to you it properly belongs,
Grant Justice of my undeserved wrongs.
I (...) two years (as I remember well)
Since first this wretch, sent from the nether hell,
To plague the world with newfound cruelties,
Under the shadow of two Crystal eyes,
Betrayed my sense; and as I slumbring lay,
Felloniously conuay'd my heart away,
Which most unjustly he detained from me,
And exercised thereon strange tyranny.
Sometime his manner was to sport and game;
With Bry'rs and Thorns to raze and prick the same;
Sometime with Nettles of desire to sting it;
Sometime with Pinsons of despair to wring it:
Sometime again, he would annoint the sore,
And heal the place that he had hurt before;
But hurtful helps, and ministered in vain,
Which served only to renew my pain:
For after that more wounds he added still,
Which pierced deep, but had no power to kill.
Unhappy medicine, which in stead of cure,
Gives strength to make the patient more endure!
But that which was most strange of all the rest,
My self b^ing thus twixt life and death distressed,
Often times when as my pain exceeded measure,
He would persuade me that the same was pleasure.
My solemn sadness, but contentment meet;
My travel, rest; and all my sower, sweet;
My wounds, but gentle strokes: whereat he smild,
And by these sleights my careless youth beguiled.
Thus did I fare, as one that living died;
(For greater pains I think has no man tried,)
Disquiet thoughts, like Furyes, in my breast
Nourished the poison that my spirits possessed.
Now grief, then joy, now war, then peace unstable:
Naught sure I had, but to be miserable.
I cannot utter all, (I must confess,)
Men may conceive more then they can express.
But to be short, (which cannot be excused,)
With vain illusions Love my hope abused,
Persuading me I stood upon firm ground,
When unawares my self on sands I found.
This is the point which most I do enforce,
That Love without all pity or remorse
Did suffer me to languish still in grief,
Void of contentment, succor, or relief:
And when I looked my pains should be rewarded,
I did perceive that they were naught regarded:
For why (alas) these hapless eyes did see,
Alcilia loved another more then me:
So in the end, when I expected most;
My Hope, my Love, and Fortune thus were crossed.
Proceeding further, Reason bad me stay;
For the defendant had something to say.
Then to the Judge, for Justice loud I cride,
And so I paused, and Love thus replide.
Loves Reply to the Author.
SInce Reason ought to lend indifferent ears
Unto both parts, and judge as truth appears:
Most gracious Lady, give me leave to speak,
And answer his complaint, that seeks to wreake
His spite and malice on me without cause,
In charging me to have transgressed thy Laws.
Of all his Follies he imputes the blame
To me poor Love, that naught deserves the same:
Himself it is that has abused me,
As by mine answer shall well proved be.
Fond youth, thou know what I for thee effected,
(Though now I find it little be respected)
I purged thy wit which was before but gross,
The metal pure I seuer'd from the dross:
And did inspire thee with my sweetest fire.
That kindled in thee courage and desire.
Not like unto those servile Passions
Which cumber men's imaginations
With avarice, ambition, or vainglory,
Desire of things fleeting and transitory.
No base conceit, but such as Powers above
Have known and felt, I mean th'instinct of Love:
Which making men all earthly things despise,
Transports them to a heavenly Paradise.
Where thou complain'st of sorrows in thy heart,
Who lives on earth but therein has his part?
Are these thy fruits? Are these the best rewards
For all the pleasing glances, slye regards,
The sweet stolen kisses, amorous conceits,
So many smiles, so many fair entreats,
Such kindness as Alcilia did bestow
All for my sake, as well thy self do know?
That Love should thus be used it is hateful,
But all is lost that is done for one ungrateful.
Where he alleges that he was abused,
In that he truly loving was refused:
That Is most untrue, and plainly may be tried:
Who never asked, could never be denide.
But he affected rather single life,
Then yoke in Marriage, matching with a wife.
And most men now make love to none but heirs:
Poor love (God wot) that poverty impaires:
Worldly respects Love little does regard;
Who loves, has only love for his reward.
He meriteth a Lovers name indeed
That casts no doubts, which vain suspicion breed,
But desperately at hazard threwes the Dice,
Neglecting due regard of friends advice;
That wrestles with his Fortune and his Fate,
Which had ordained to better his estate;
That has no care of wealth, no fear of Jack,
But venters forward, though he see his wrack;
That with Hopes wings, like Icarus, does fly,
Though for his rashness he like fortune try;
That to his fame the world of him may tell,
How, while he soared aloft, adowne he fell.
And so true Love awarded him this doom,
In scaling heaven, to have the Sea his Tomb:
That making shipwreck of his dearest fame,
Betrays himself to poverty and shame:
That has no sense of sorrow, or repent;
No dread of perils far, or imminent,
But does prefer before all pomp or pelf,
The sweet of Love, as dearer then himself:
Who were his passage stopped with sword or fire,
Would make way through to compass his desire.
For which he would (though heaven and earth forbad it,)
Hazard to lose a Kingdom, if he had it.
These be the things wherein I glory most,
Whereof this mine accuser cannot boast:
Who was indifferent in his loss or gain,
And better pleased to fail then to obtain.
All quallified Affection Love does hate,
And likes him best that is most intemperate.
But hence proceeds his malice and despite,
While he himself bars of his own delight:
For when as he Alcilia first affected,
Like one in show thou little love respected,
He masqu'd disguised, and entertained his thought,
With hope of that which he in secret sought:
And still forbear to utter his desire,
Till his delay received her worthy hire.
And well we know what Maids themselves would have.
Men must sue for, and by petitions crave.
But he regarding more his wealth then will,
Had little care his fancy to fulfill.
Yet when he saw Alcilia loved another,
The secret fire which in his breast did smother,
Began to smoke, and soon had proved a flame
If Temperance had not allayed the same:
Which afterward so quenched he did not find
But that some spark remained still behind.
Thus when time served he did refuse to crave it,
And yet enuy'd another man should have it:
As though fair Maids should wait at young men's pleasure,
While they, twixt sport and earnest, love at leisure.
Nay, at the first, when it is kindly proffered
Maids must accept, lest twice it be not offered:
Else though their beauty seem their good t'importune,
Yet may they lose the better of their fortune.
Thus as this fondling coldly went about it,
So in the end he clearly went without it:
For while he doubtful seemed to make a stay,
A Mungrell stole the Maidens heart away:
For which though he lamented much in show;
Yet was he inward glad it fell out so.
Now Reason, you may plainly judge by this,
Not I, but he the false dissembler is:
Who while fond love his lukewarm blood did feed,
Made sign of more then he sustained indeed:
And filled his Rimes with fables and with lies,
Which without passion he did often devise.
So to delude the ignorance of such
That pitied him, thinking he loved too much,
And with conceit rather to show his wit,
Then manifest his faithful love by it.
Much more then this could I lay to his charge,
But time would fail to open all at large.
Let this suffice to show his bad intent,
And prove that Love is clear and innocent.
Thus at the length, though late, he made an end,
And both of us did earnestly attend
The final judgment Reason should award,
When thus he began to speak: With due regard
The matter has been heard on either side,
For Judgment you must longer time abide:
The cause is weighty and of great import,
And so she smiling did adiorne the Court:
Little auail'd it then to argue more:
So I returned in worse case then before.
Love decyphered.
LOVE, and I, are now divided,
Conceit by Error was misguided:
Alcilia has my love despised,
" No man loves that is advised.
Time at length has Truth directed,
Love has missed what he expected:
Yet missing that which long he sought,
I have found that I little thought.
Errors in time may be redrest;
" The shortest follies are the best.
Love and Youth are now asunder,
Reasons glory, Natures wonder.
My thoughts long bound are now enlarged,
My follies penance is discharged.
Thus Time has altered my state,
Repentance never comes too late.
Ah well I find that Love is naught
But folly, and an idle thought:
The difference is twixt Love and me,
That Love is blind, and I can see.
Love is honey mixed with gall;
A thraldom free, a freedom thrall;
A bitter sweet, a pleasant sour,
Got in a year, lost in an hour;
A peaceful war, a warlike peace,
Whose wealth brings want, whose want increase;
Full long pursuit, and little gain;
Uncertain pleasure, certain pain;
Regard of neither right nor wrong;
For short delights, repentance long.
Love is a sickness of the thought,
Conceit of pleasure dearly bought;
A restless passion of the mind;
A Labyrinth of errors blind;
A sugared poison, fair deceit;
A bait for fools, a furious heat;
A chilling cold; a wondrous passion
Exceeding man's imagination:
Which none can tell in whole nor part,
But only he that feels the smart.
Love is sorrow mixed with gladness,
Fear with hope, and hope with madness.
Long did I love, but all in vain,
I loving was not loved again;
For which my heart sustained much woe,
It fits not Maids to use men so.
Just deserts are not regarded,
Never love so ill rewarded:
But all is lost that is not sought,
Often wit proves best that is dearest bought.
Women were made for men's relief,
To comfort, not to cause their grief.
Where most I merit, least I find,
No marvel, since that Love is blind.
Had she been kind as she was fair,
My case had been more strange and rare:
But women love not by desert,
Reason in them has weakest part.
Then henceforth let them love that list,
I will beware of had-I-wist,
These faults had better been concealed,
Then to my shame abroad revealed:
Yet though my youth did thus miscarry,
My harms may make others more wary.
Love is but a youthful fit;
And some men say it is sign of wit;
But he that loves as I have done,
To pass the day and see no Sun,
Must change his noate, and sing, Erraui,
Or else may chance to cry Peccaui.
The longest day must have his night,
Reason triumphs in Loves despite,
I follow now Discretions lore,
Henceforth to like, but love no more.
Then gently pardon what is past,
For Love draws onward to his last.
He walks (they say) with wary eye,
Whose foote-steps never tread awry.
My Muse a better work intends,
And here my Louing-folly ends.
After long storms and tempests past,
I see the Haven at the last,
Where I must rest my weary Bark,
And there unlade my care and carke:
My pains and travels long endured,
And all my wounds must there be cured:
Joys out of date shall be renewed,
To think of perils past eschew'd:
When I shall sit full blithe and jolly,
And talk of Lovers and their folly.
Then Love and Folly both adieu,
Long have I been misled by you:
Folly may new adventures try,
But Reason says that Love must dye:
Yea, dye indeed although it grieve him,
For my cold heart cannot relieve him:
Yet for her sake, whom I once loved,
(Though all in vain, as Time have proved)
I Will take the pains (if she consent)
To write his Will and Testament.
Loves last Will and Testament.
MY spirit I bequeath unto the air;
My body shall unto the earth repair;
My burning brond unto the Prince of hell,
To Increase men's pains that there in darkness dwell:
For well I ween, above nor underground,
A greater pain then that may not be found:
My sweet conceits of pleasure and delight
To Erebus, and to eternal night:
My sighs, my tears, my passions, and laments,
Distrust, despair, all these my hourly rents,
With other plagues that Lovers minds inthrall,
Unto Oblivion I bequeath them all.
My broken Bow and Shafts I give to Reason;
My cruelties, my sleights, and forged treason,
To women-kinde, and to their seed for aye,
To wreake their spite, and work poor men's decay;
Reserving only for Alcilia's part,
Small kindness, and less care of Lovers smart:
For she is from the vulgar sort excepted,
And had she Philoparthens love respected,
Requiting it with like affection,
She might have had the praise of all perfection.
This done; if I have any faith or troth
To Philoparthen I assign them both;
For unto him of right they do belong,
Who truly loving suffered too much wrong.
Time shall be sole Executor of my Will,
Who may these things in order due fulfill.
To warrant this my Testament for good,
I have subscribed it with my dying blood.
And so he died that all this bale had bred,
And yet my heart misdoubts he is not dead:
For sure I fear should I Alcilia spy,
She might eftsoons revive him with her eye.
Such power divine remains in her sight,
To make him live again in Deaths despite.
The Sonnets following were written by the Author, after he began to decline
from his passionate affection, and in them he seems to please himself, with
describing the vanity of LOVE, the frailty of Beauty, and the sower fruits
of Repentance.
I.
NOw have I spun the web of my own woes,
And labored long to purchase my own loss:
Too late I see, I was beguiled with shows,
And that which once seemed gold, now proves but dross.
Thus am I both of help and hope bereaved,
He never tried that never was deceived.
II.
Once did I love, but more then once repent,
When vintage came, my grapes were sower, or rotten
Long time in grief and pensive thoughts I spent,
And all for that which Time has made forgotten.
O strange effects of Time, which once being lost;
Makes men secure of that they loved most.
III.
Thus have I long in the air of error houer'd,
And run my ship upon Repentance shelfe:
Truth has the vale of Ignorance vncouer'd,
And made me see, and seeing, know my self.
Of former follies now I must repent,
And count this work part of my time ill spent.
IIII.
" What thing is Love? A Tyrant of the mind,
" Begot by heat of youth, brought forth by sloth;
" Nursed with vain thoughts, and changing as the wind
" A deep dissembler, void of faith and troth:
" Fraught with fond errors, doubts, despite, disdain,
" And all the plagues that earth and hell contain.
V.
Like to a man that wanders all the day
Through ways unknown, to seek a thing of worth
And at the night sees he has gone astray:
As near his end as when he first set forth,
Such is my case, whose hope untimely crossed,
After long errors, proves my labor lost.
VI.
Failed of that hap, whereto my hope aspired,
Deprived of that which might have bin mine own,
Another now must have that I desired,
And things too late by their events are known:
Thus do we vvish for that cannot be got,
And when it may, then we regard it not.
VII.
Ungrateful Love, since thou have played thy part,
Enthralling him, whom Time has since made free,
It rests for me to use both wit and Art,
That of my wrongs I may revenged be:
And in those eyes where first thou took'st thy fire,
Thy self shall perish through my cold desire.
VIII.
Grieve not thy self for that can not be had,
And things once curelesse, let them careless rest:
Blame not thy fortune, though thou deem it bad,
What Is past and gone, can never be redrest.
" The only help for that can not be gained,
" Is to forget it might have been obtained.
IX.
How happy once did I my self esteem,
While Love with hope my fond desire did cherish?
My state as blissful as a Kings did seem,
Had I been sure my joys should never perish.
The thoughts of men are fed with expectation,
" Pleasures themselves are but imagination.
X.
Why should we hope for that which is to come,
Where the event is doubtful and unknown?
Such fond presumptions soon receive their doom,
When things expected we count as our own.
Whose issue often times in the end proves naught
But hope, a shadow, and an idle thought.
XI.
In vain do we complain our life is short,
Which well disposed, great matters might effect:
While we our selves in toys and idle sport,
Consume the better part, without respect:
And careless, as though time should never end it,
Twixt sleep and waking prodigally spend it.
XII.
Youthful desire is like the Summer season,
That lasts not long, for winter must succeed:
And so our passions must give place to reason,
And riper years more ripe effects must breed.
Of all the seed youth sowed in vain desires,
I reaped naught but thistles, thorns, and briars.
XIII.
To err, and do amiss, is given to men by kind:
Who walks so sure, but sometimes treads awry?
But to continue still in errors blind,
A bad and beastiall nature does descry.
Who proves not, fails not, and brings naught to end;
Who proves and fails, may afterward amend.
XIIII.
There was but one, and doubtless she the best,
Whom I did more then all the world esteem:
She having failed, I disauow the rest:
For now I find things are not as they seem.
" Default of that wherein our will is crossed,
" Often times unto our good avails most.
XV.
I fare like him, who now his land-hope spent,
By unknown Seas sails to the Indian shore,
Returning thence no richer then he went,
Yet cannot much his fortune blame therefore,
Since who so venters forth upon the Main,
Makes a good Mart, if he return again.
XVI.
Lovers conceits are like a flattering Glass,
That makes the lookers fairer then they are:
Who pleased in their deceit, contented pass,
Such one was mine, who thought there was none fair,
None witty, modest, virtuous but she.
Yet now I find the Glass abused me.
XVII.
Adieu fond Love, the mother of all error,
Repleate with hope and fear, with joy and pain:
False fire of fancy, full of care and terror,
Shadow of pleasures fleeting, short and vain,
Dye loathed love, receive thy latest doom,
Night be thy grave, Oblivion be thy tomb.
XVIII.
Who so would be rapt up into the heavens,
To see a world of strange imaginations;
Who careless would leave all at six and seven,
To wander in a Labyrinth of passions;
Who would at once all kinds of folly prove:
When he has naught to do, then let him love.
XIX.
" What thing is Beauty? Natures dearest Minion,
" The snare of youth; like the inconstant Moon,
" VVaxing and wayning; error of opinion;
" A mornings flower, that withers ere noone;
" A swelling fruit, no sooner ripe then rotten,
" Which sickness makes forlorn, and time forgotten.
XX.
The Spring of youth which now is in his prime.
VVinter of age with hoary frosts shall nip:
Beauty shall then be made the prey of Time,
And sower remorse deceitful pleasures whip.
Then henceforth let Discretion rule Desire,
And Reason quench the flame of Cupids fire.
XXI.
O what a life was that sometime I led,
When Love with passions did my peace incumber
While like a man neither alive nor dead,
I was rapt from my self, as one in slumber?
Whose idle senses charmed with fond illusion,
Did nourish that which bred their own confusion
XXII.
The child for ever after dreads the fire
That once therewith by chance his finger burned:
Water of Time, distilled, does cool desire,
And far he ran (they say) that never turned.
After long storms I see the Port at last,
Folly farewell, for now my love is past.
XXIII.
Base servile thoughts of men too much dejected,
That seek, and crouch, and kneel for women's grace,
Of whom your pain and service is neglected,
Your selves despised: Riuals before your face:
The more you sue, the less you shall obtain,
The less you win, the more shall be your gain.
XXIIII.
In looking back unto my follies past,
While I the present with times past compare:
And think how many hours I then did wast,
Painting on clouds, and building in the air:
I sigh within my self, and say in sadness,
This thing, which fools call Love, is naught but madness.
XXV.
" The things we have, we most of all neglect;
" And that we have not greedily we crave;
" The things we may have little we respect;
" And still we covet that we cannot have:
" Yet howsoe'er in our conceit we prise them,
" No sooner gotten but we straight despise them.
XXVI.
Who seats his love upon a woman's will,
And thinks thereon to build an happy state:
Shall be deceived, when least he thinks of ill,
And rue his folly when it is too late.
He plowes on sand, and sowes upon the wind,
That hopes for constant love in women kind.
XXVII.
I will no longer spend my time in toys,
Seeing Love is error, folly, and offense:
An idle fit for fond and retchlesse boys,
Or else for men deprived of common sense,
Twixt Lunacy and Love these ods appear,
The One makes fools monthly, the other all the year.
XXVIII.
While season served to sow, my plough lay still;
My Grafts unset, when others Trees did bloome;
I spent the Spring in sloth, and slept my fill:
But never thought of Winters cold to come,
Till Spring was spent, and Summer well nigh gone,
Then I awaked, and saw my Harvest none.
XXIX.
Now Love sits all alone in black attire,
His broken Bow and Arrows lying by him;
His fire extinct, that whilome fed desire,
Himself the scorn of Lovers that pass by him:
Who this day freely may disport and play,
For it is Philoparthens Holy Day.
XXX.
Nay, think not Love, with all thy cunning slight,
To catch me once again: thou come too late:
Stern Industry puts Idleness to flight,
And Time has changed both my name and state:
Then seek else where for Mates that may befriend thee;
For I am busy, and cannot attend thee.
XXXI.
Loose Idleness, the nurse of fond Desire;
Root of all ils that do our youth betide,
That whilome did through Love my wrack conspire,
I banish thee, and rather wish to abide
All austere hardness, and continual pain,
Then to revoke thee, or to love again.
XXXII.
The time will come, when looking in a Glass,
Thy riueled face with sorrow thou shall see:
And sighing say, it is not as it was,
These cheeks were wont more fair and fresh to be:
But now what once made me so much admired,
Is least regarded, and of none desired.
XXXIII.
Though thou be fair, think Beauty is a blast,
A mornings dew, a shadow quickly gone,
A painted flower, whose color will not last:
Time steals away when least we think thereon;
Most precious Time, too vvastfully expended,
Of which alone the sparing is commended.
XXXIIII.
How vain is youth, that crossed in his desire,
Does fret and fume, and inwardly repine,
As though against heaven it self he would conspire,
And with his frailty against his Fate combine:
Who of it self continues constant still,
And does us good often times against our will.
XXXV.
In prime of youth when years and wit was ripe,
Unhappy Will to ruin led the way:
Wit daunc'd about, when Folly began to pipe,
And Will and he together went astray.
Naught then but pleasure was the good they sought
Which now Repentance proves too dearly bought.
XXXVI.
He that in matters of delight and pleasure
Can bridle his outrageous affection:
And temper it in some indifferent measure,
Does prove himself a man of good discretion.
In conquering Will true courage most is shown,
And sweet temptations make men's virtues known.
XXXVII.
Each natural thing by course of kind we see,
In his perfection long continues not:
Fruits once full ripe will then fall from the Tree,
Or in due time not gathered soon will rot.
It is decreed by doom of Powers divine,
Things at their height must thence again decline.
XXXVIII.
Thy large smooth forehead wrinckled shall appear
Vermilion hue, to pale and wan shall turn;
Time shall deface what Youth has held most dear;
Yea those clear eyes which once my heart did burn,
Shall in their hollow circles logde the night,
And yield more cause of terror then delight.
XXXIX.
Lo here the record of my follies past,
The fruits of wit unstaid, and hours misspent:
Full wise is he that perils can forecast,
And so by others harms his own prevent.
All worldly pleasure that delights the sense,
Is but a short sleep, and times vain expense.
XL.
The Sun has twice his annual course performed,
Since first unhappy I began to love:
Whose errors now by Reasons rule reformed,
Conceits of Love but smoke and errors prove.
Who of his folly seeks more praise to win,
Where I have made an end, let him begin.
I. C.

FINIS.
THE METAMORPHOSIS OF Pigmalions Image.



LONDON: Printed for Richard Hawkins, dwelling in Chancery Lane, near
Sarjeants-Inne. 1613.

THE ARGUMENT of the Poem.
PIgmalion whose chaste mind all the beauties in Cyprus could not ensnare, yet
at the length having carved in Iuory an excellent proportion of a beauteous
woman, was so deeply enamored on his own workmanship, that he would
oftentimes lay the Image in bed with him, and fondly use such petitions and
dallyance, as if it had been a breathing creature. But in the end, finding his
fond dotage, and yet perseuering in his ardent affection, made his devout
prayers to Venus, that she would vouchsafe to inspire life into his Love, and
then join them both together in marriage. Whereupon Venus graciously
condiscending to his earnest suit, the Maid (by the power of her Deity) was
metamorphosed into a living woman. And after, Pigmalion (being in Cyprus) begat
a Son of her, which was called Paphus* whe^eupon, that Island Cyprus, in
honor of Venus, was after, and is now, called by the Inhabitants, Paphos.

To his Mistress.
MY wanton Muse lasciuiously does sing
Of sportiue love, of lovely dallying.
O beauteous Angel, daine thou to infuse
A sprightly wit into my dulled Muse.
I invoke none other Saint but thee,
To grace the first bloomes of my Poesy.
Thy favors, like Promethean sacred fire,
In dead and dull conceit can life life inspire.
O^, like that rare and rich Elixar stone,
Can turn to Gold, Leaden invention:
Be gracious then, and daine to show in me
The mighty power of thy Deity.
And as thou read'st (Fair) take compassion,
Force me not envy my Pigmalion.
Then when thy kindness grants me such sweet bliss,
I Will gladly write thy Matamorphosis.
PIGMALION.
I.
PIgmalion, whose high Loue-hating mind,
Disdained to yield servile affection,
Or amorous suit to any woman-kinde,
Knowing their wants and men's perfection.
Yet Love at length forced him to know his Fate,
And love the shade, whose substance he did hate.
II.
For having wrought in purest Iuory
So fair an Image of a woman's feature,
That never yet proudest mortality
Could show so rare and beauteous a Creature,
(Unless my Mistress all-exceeding face,
which gives to beauty beauties only grace.)
III.
He was amazed at the wondrous rareness
Of his own workmanships perfection:
He thought that Nature never produced such fairenes
In which all beauties have their mansion.
And thus admiring was enamored
Of that fair Image himself portrayed.
IIII.
And naked as it stood before his eyes,
Imperious Love declares his Deity:
O what alluring beauties he descries
In each part of his fair imagerie!
Her nakedness each beauteous shape contains,
All beauty in her nakedness remains.
V.
He though he saw the blood run through the vein,
And leap, and swell with all alluring means:
Then fears he is deceived; and then again
He thinks he sees the brightness of the beams
Which shoot from out the fairness of her eye,
At which he stands as in an ecstasy.
VI.
Her Amber-coloured fair shining hair,
Makes him protest, the Sun has spread her head
With golden beams and made her far more fair:
But when her cheeks his amorous thoughts have fed
Then he exclaymes such red, and such pure white
Did never bless the eye of mortal sight.
VII.
Then viewed her lips, no lips did seem so fair
In his conceit, through which he thinks does fly
So sweet a breath, that does perfume the air.
Then next her dimpled chinne he does descry,
And viewes and wonders, and yet viewes her still:
" Loves eyes in viewing never have their fill.
VIII.
Her breasts like polished Iuory appear,
Whose modest mount, do bless admiring eye,
And makes him wish for such a Pillow bear.
Thus fond Pigmalion strives to descry
Each beauteous part, not letting ouer-slip
One parcel of his curious workmanship.
IX.
Until his eye descended so far down,
That it descryed Loves Pauillion;
Where Cupid does enjoy his only crown,
And Venus has her chiefest mansion:
There would he wink, and winking look again,
Both eyes and thoughts would gladly there remain.
X.
Who ever saw the subtle City Dame
In sacred Church, when her pure thoughts should pray,
Peire through her fingers, so to hide her shame,
When that her eye her mind would feign bewray.
So would he view and wink, and view again,
A chaster thought could not his eyes retain.
XI.
He wondered that she blushed not when his eye
Saluted those same parts of secrecy:
Conceiting not it was imagerie
That kindly yielded that large liberty.
Oh that my Mistress were an Image too,
That I might blameless her perfections view.
XII.
But when the fair proportion of her thigh
Began appear: O Ovid would he cry,
Did ere Corinna show such Iuorie,
When she appeared in Venus liuorie?
And thus enamored doates on his own Art,
Which he did work to work his pleasing smart.
XIII.
And fondly doting often he kissed her lip,
Often would he dally with her Iuory breasts:
No wanton Loue-tricke would he ouer-slip,
But still observed all amorous behests,
Whereby he thought he might procure the love
Of his dull Image, which no plaints could move.
XIIII.
Look how the peevish Papists crouch and kneel
To some dumb Idol, with their offering,
As if a senseless carved stone could feel
The ardor of his bootlesse chattering:
So fond he was, and earnest in his suit
To his remorcelesse Image, dumb, and mute.
XV.
He often does wish his soul might part asunder,
So that one half in her had residence:
Often he exclaimes, o beauties only wonder,
Sweet model of delight, fair excellence,
Be gracious unto him that formed thee,
Compassionate his true-loues ardencie!
XVI.
She with her silence seems to grant his suit,
Then he all iocund like a wanton Lover,
With amorous imbracements does salute
Her slender waste, presuming to discover
The vale of Love, where Cupid does delight
To sport, and dally all the sable night.
XVII.
His eyes, her eyes, kindly encountered,
His breast, her breast, often joined close unto,
His arms imbracements often she suffered:
Hands, arms, eyes, tongue, lips, and all parts did woo;
His thigh with hers, his knee played with her knee:
" A happy consort when all parts agree.
XVIII.
But when he saw poor soul he was deceived,
(Yet scarce he could believe his sense had failed,)
Yet when he found all hope from him bereaved,
And saw how fondly all his thoughts had erred,
Then did he like to poor Ixion seem,
That clipped a cloud in stead of heavens Queen.
XIX.
I often have smiled to see the foolerie,
Of some sweet Youths, who seriously protest
That Love respects not actual luxury:
But only joys to dally, sport, and jest,
Love is a child contented with a toy,
A Busk-point, or some favor stils the Boy
XX.
Mark my Pigmalion whose affections ardor
May be a mirror to posterity:
Yet viewing, touching, kissing, (common favor)
Could never satiate his loves ardencie.
And therefore (Ladies) think that they never love you
Who do not unto more then kissing move you.
XXI.
For my Pigmalion kissed, viewed, and embraced,
And yet exclaimes; Why were these women made
(O sacred Gods) and with such beauties graced?
Have they not power as well to cool and shade,
As for to heat men's hearts? Or is there none?
Or are they all, like mine, relentlesse stone?
XXII.
With that he takes her in his loving arms,
And down within a Downe-bed softly laid her:
Then on his knees he all his senses charms,
To invoke sweet Venus for to raise her
To wished life, and to infuse some breath,
To that which dead, yet gave a life to death.
XXIII.
Thou sacred Queen of sportiue dallying,
(Thus he begins) Loves only Empress,
Whose kingdom rests in wanton reuelling,
Let me beseech thee show thy powerfulness
In changing stone to flesh; make her relent,
And kindly yield to thy sweet blandishment.
XXIIII.
O gracious Gods, take compassion,
Instill into her some celestial fire,
That she may equalize affection,
And have a mutual love, and loves desire.
Thou know the force of Love, then pity me,
Compassionate my true loves ardencie.
XXV.
Thus having said, he rises from the floor,
As if his soul diuined him good fortune,
Hoping his prayers to pity moved some Power;
For all his thoughts did all good luck importune:
And therefore straight he strips him naked quite,
That in the bed he might have more delight.
XXVI.
Then thus, Sweet sheets, he says, which now do cover
The Idol of my soul, the fairest one
That ever loved, or had an amorous Lover,
Earths only model of perfection:
Sweet happy sheets daine for to take me in,
That I my hopes and longing thoughts may win.
XXVII.
With that his nimble limbs do kiss the sheets,
And now he bows him for to lay him down;
And now each part with her fair parts do meet,
Now does he hope for to enjoy Loves crown:
Now do they dally, kiss, embrace together,
Like Leda's Twins at sight of fairest weather.
XXVIII.
Yet all is conceit: but shadow of that bliss,
Which now my Muse strives sweetly to display
In this my wondrous Metamorphosis.
Daine to believe me, now I sadly say;
The stony substance of his Image feature,
Was straight transformed into a living Creature.
XXIX.
For when his hands her fair formed limbs had felt,
And that his arms her naked waist embraced,
Each part like Wax before the Sun did melt:
And now, oh now, he finds how he is graced
By his own work. Tut, women will relent
When as thy find such moving blandishment.
XXX.
Do but conceive a Mothers passing gladness,
(After that Death her only son has seized,
And ouerwhelm'd her soul with endless sadness)
When that she sees him gin for to be raised
From out his deadly sound to life again:
Such joy Pigmalion feels in every vein.
XXXI.
And yet he fears he does but dreaming find
So rich content, and such celestial bliss:
Yet when he proves, and finds her wondrous kind
Yielding soft touch for touch, sweet kiss for kiss,
He Is well assured no fair Imagerie
Could yield such pleasing loves felicity.
XXXII.
O wonder not to hear me thus relate,
And say to flesh transformed was a stone;
Had I my Love in such a wished state
As was afforded to Pigmalion,
Though flinty hard, of her you soon should see
As strange a transformation wrought by me.
XXXIII.
And now me thinks some wanton itching ear
With lustful thoughts and ill attention,
List's to my Muse, expecting for to hear
The amorous description of that action
Which Venus seeks, and ever does require,
When fitness grants a place to please desire.
XXXIIII.
Let him conceit but what himself would do
When that he had obtained such a favor
Of her to whom his thoughts were bound unto,
If she, in recompense of his loves labor
Would daine to let one pair of sheets contain
The willing bodies of those loving twain.
XXXV.
Could he, oh could he, when that each to either
Did yield kind kissing, and more kind embracing;
Could he when that they felt, and clipped together,
And might enjoy the life of dallying,
Could he abstain, midst such a wanton sporting,
From doing that which is not fit reporting?
XXXVI.
What would he do when that her softest skin
Saluted his with a delightful kiss?
When all things fit for loves sweet pleasuring,
Invited him to reap a Lovers bliss?
What he would do, the selfsame action
Was not neglected by Pigmalion.
XXXVII.
For when he found that life had took his seat
Within the breast of his kind beauteous Love,
When that he found that warmth and wished heat,
Which might a Saint and coldest spirit move,
Then arms, eyes, hands, tongue, lips, and wanton thigh,
Were willing agents in Loves luxury.
XXXVIII.
Who knows not what ensues? O pardon me
Ye gaping ears that swallow up my lines,
Expect no more. Peace idle Poesy:
Be not obsceane, though wanton in thy rimes.
And chaster thoughts, pardon if I do trip,
Or if some loose lines from my pen do slip.
XXXIX.
Let this suffice, that that same happy night
So gracious were the Gods of Marriage,
Midst all their pleasing and long wished delight,
Paphus was got: of whom in after age
Cyrus was Paphos called, and evermore
Those Ilanders do Venus name adore.
FINIS.
THE LOVE OF AMOS AND LAVRA.

Written by S. P.

VIRESCIT VULNERA VERITAS
TC

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed for Richard Hawkins, dwelling in Chancery Lane: near
Sarieants-Inne, 1613.

TO MY APPROVED AND MVCH RESPECTED FRIEND, (...): W*
TO thee thou more then thrice beloved friend,
I too unworthy of so great a bliss:
These harsh tuned lines I he^e to thee commend,
Thou being cause it is now as it is:
For had thou held thy tongue by silence might,
These had been buried in obliuions night.
If they were pleasing, I would call them thine,
And disavow my title to the verse:
But being bad, I needs must call them mine,
No ill thing can be clothed in thy verse.
Accept them then, and where I have offended,
Raze thou it out, and let it be amended.
S. P.

THE AVTHOR TO HIS BOOK.
GO little book into the largest world,
And blase the chastnes of thy maiden Muse:
Regardles of all envy on thee hurld,
By the unkindness that the readers use:
And those that envy thee by scruples letter,
Bid them take pen in hand and make a better.
THE LOVE OF Amos and Laura.
IN the large confines of renowned France
There lived a Lord, whom Fortune did advance,
Who had a Daughter, Laura called the fair;
So sweet, so proper, and so debonaire,
That strangers took her for to be none other,
Then Venus self, the God of Loves own Mother.
Not far from thence was situate a Town,
The Lord thereof a man of great renown;
Whom likewise Fortune blessed with a Son,
Amos by name, so modest, civil, young,
And yet in fight so wondrous and so bold,
As that therein he passed vncontroul'd:
So kind to strangers, and so meek to all;
Of comely grace, and stature somewhat tall.
As the wide world not two such Impes affords,
As were the offsprings of these happy Lords.
Hunting he loved, and therefore in a morn
He shakes off sleep (for case he laughes to scorn)
Before the sable Curtains of the East
Proclaimed the Suns approach unto the west;
Or Tytan, Lordly Ruler of the morn,
Had in his Chariot, left the night forlorn;
(...)he An(...)odes.
Or sounded sleep to them, with whom (men say)
It Is dark some night when we enjoy the day:
He braced his Hounds, and striding over his Steed,
Hope with a conquest did the youngster feed:
Which done, he hyes him to a mighty wood,
That joined where Laura's Fathers Palace stood.
Thither being come, a Bore he raised, whose pace
Did make our hunts-man loose his Hounds in chase:
Ranging the woods, he light into a Grove,
More pleasant far then that where Venus strove
To win Adonis to her hearts desire,
Moved by the burning zeal of sweet Loves fire.
In this sweet Grove God Pan did keep his Court,
And summoned all the petty Gods resort,
As Satyrs, Nymphs, and others, to the same,
Where all sing praises unto Laura's name.
Into this Grove (near to her chamber side)
(To take the Air) she comes forth; soon espide
Of the young Hunts-man, who made haste unto her,
And thus the Nouice there begins to woo her:
Parragon of beauty, divine, though earthly creature,
And yet Celestial in thy heavenly feature.
This sudden courting, and unwelcome sight,
Made her add wings to fear, and to that, flight:
He following after, caught her by the train,
That in a rage the Maid turned back again,
And did demand why he without remorse,
Durst cause her stay, against her will, by force.
Moved by the rosiate color of thy face,
(Wherein consists (quoth he) all heavenly grace)
I was too bold, I must confess indeed,
To touch the seluage of thy sacred weed:
For which my self I Will punish as thou will,
With any pain, for my deserved guilt.
Do but pronounce the sentence of my death,
These hands shall be the butchers of my breath:
But since the merit of my fault's no deeper,
Oh let me be thy Prisoner, thou my Keeper;
So shall thine eyes be witness of the woe,
Which for my bold offense I Will undergo.
Pronounce thy sentence then. VVherwith she spoke,
You are your Crafts-man Sir: and there she brake.
Yet turning back, quoth she, o would twere true,
Your love were firm to me, as mine to you!
And here she ceased: for when he came near her,
She was afraid that he would ouer-heare her.
And art thou so unwilling then, quoth he,
To doom the sentence which I ask of thee?
Persuade thy self it is thy purer mind
That will not let thy heart prove so unkind:
O would that mind were mine, to join thy heart
Either to end my life, or ease my smart.
Love is my suit. Nor hate is my reply,
Quoth she. Quoth he, I cannot court it I;
They which but view the error in my looks,
May find I never learned in Cupids books:
But like a stone rough hewn from the rocks,
And after polished by the Masons knockes,
The former shows but base then in compare,
So to my love my speech disgraces are:
For were my speech true pattern of my mind,
Not as it does, should't come, but far more kind.
Like as the Merchant hearing of a loss,
Is vvondrous sorry for so great a cross;
And after hears by a true report,
His goods are safely landed in the Fort,
Cannot express the joy he does conceive:
For why? it does his senses quite bereave;
And yet with sign of sorrow blames the event,
Although it seem most plain and evident.
Or like a Ship tossed by tempestuous weather,
Now here, then there; now back again, then thither
That whirle-windes meeting (roaring out aloud)
Make watery mountains show the ship each cloud:
Then with such fury they descend the deep,
From top of triple-Cedar-mountaines steep,
As of the Seas rich oriental show,
Against their wills they take a counterview.
So fares his mind, which tossed to and fro,
Sometimes does joy, and other times is woe:
Sometimes from depth ascends into the air,
And though he hope, he hides it with despair.
So long with fervent zeal he moved his suit,
Only for want of words his tongue was mute.
" Where true affection rules in hottest fires,
" Dumb signs and tokens then show men's desires*
For what he thought he showed, he could not utter,
Which made him often when he should speak to mutter.
She that was wounded with the selfsame dart,
Revealed with tongue that which she wished with heart
And framed her answer, so much't could not grieve him,
For 'twas a salve to wound and to relieve him.
Say I could love, quoth she, my milder mind,
(Unless you further move) cannot unkind,
Frame you an answer: for we are by nature
So much addicted to man's heavenly feature,
That though your faults are great by your abuse,
To blind the same it is our woman's use.
Then as thou found'st me, leave me, if thou will;
That shall be all I render for thy guilt:
Further I will not credit thy report:
Farewell; be gone, for I am mist in Court.
With that she flies, and in her flight she leaves
A well wrought Scarf, which straight the wind up heaues;
And proud of such a prise, they do infer
With their embassage unto Jupiter,
And there presented it: who, as 'twas right,
Did make the winds returne't with swiftest flight,
Unto the place where Amos stood amazed
At that which hapt, who like a madman gazed,
Wondering what she by this illusion meant,
When to allure him was her whole intent:
But led in admiration most of all,
At the rich Scarf which from the Maid did fall.
He viewes the work, where finding of Apollo
Chasing a Nymph, who swifter then a Swallow
Flies his arms, for fear did lend her wings
To fly from him which after her soon flings.
Himself a fool he calls, that wanting skill,
Being allured, he had not known her will.
Doubtful, he fears offense committed to her,
That he so rashly, gain'st her will, durst woo her.
To clear himself of which offense he flies,
Resolved to win the Maid, or lose the prize,
With prosperous have. Oh may thy have well speed,
Whose wondrous love did virtuously proceed:
Not from the flames of filthy lusts desire,
As was that Rome-borne Tarquins lustful fire:
But as vnspotlesse from that filthy thought,
From that most hell-deseruing thing of naught,
As ever heart lodged in a loyal breast,
Or tongue, untaught to lie, ever expressed.
But why do I digress the path I tread,
Cloying your ears with that your eyes do read?
Pardon my boldness, and give ear a while
To that, of him, which my inferior style
Shall now express: though it not with honor stands,
He thinks one pair of legs worth twice two hands.
The arrow swift sent from the sturdy bow,
May be accounted (to his flight) but slow:
At last he gained the Court, to which being come,
It showed like to the Palace of the Sun
Described in Ovid: for in length and fairness,
None might surpass the workmanship and rarenes.
Through which his way lies, and he needs must pass,
The pauement Marble was, the walls of Glass:
VVhereunder was so lively carved the Story
Of great Jove's love, his vvondrous works, and glory,
With many others love: which to rehearse
Would add a mighty volume to my Verse,
Besides mine own weak wit: for I do know it,
He was a better workman, then I Poet.
Yet could not this abate the Lovers pace:
For he still holds the lovely Maid in chase.
Passing the Court, he comes into a green,
Which was in midst of the Palace seen:
Thorough the midst there ran a pleasant Spring,
On each side with a wall of Brick hemmed in,
Only in midst, a Style; beyond, a Plancke,
Which for a Bridge did serve to either bancke.
Over this Style as Laura lightly skips,
In her rent garment happily it slips,
And held her there a while till he came to her,
Where once again the Nouice gins to vvoe her.
Fly not thy friend, our Maker wills so,
Things reasonlesse approve and vvish it to;
If without sense and reason all things then
Observe a better course then humane men,
How savage were we then offending so,
Committing that which we offense do know?
O were my tongue a second Orpheus Harp,
That to my love I might allure thy hearr!
Or were thy love but equal unto mine,
Then would thou seek his favor who seeks thine!
Me thinks unkindness cannot come from thence,
Where beauty reigns with such magnificence,
I mean from thee, whom nature has endowed
With more then Art would willingly allowed:
And though by nature you are borne most fair,
Yet Art would add a beauty to your share:
But it being spotless does disdain receipt
Of all vnpolish'd painting counterfeit.
Your beauty is a snare unto our ways,
Wherein once caught, we cannot brook delays;
Which makes us often through grief of mind grow sad,
Grief follows grief, then malecontent and mad.
Thus by denial do you cause our woe,
And then do triumph in our ouer-throw.
What is it to be fair? only a vanity,
A fading blossom of no perpetuity.
Consider this; for beauty is a flower,
Subject to ill occasions every hour;
It is a tenure holden as we lee
Durante Dei placito, not in fee.
Measure my Love then, prove it by a trial:
Let me not languish still by your denial.
If in my suite I err, as by mischance,
Blame not my Love but count it ignorance.
The tongue is but an instrument of naught,
And cannot speak the largeness of the thought:
For when the mind abounds, and almost breaks,
Then through abundance of the heart it speaks:
No man can speak but what he has in mind,
Then what I speak I think, be not unkind
Unto your servant, who obedience proffers,
And makes firm love the object of his offers.
I will not boast of Parentage, or Line,
For all are base, respecting thee divine:
Nor will I boast of wealth, or riches store,
For in thy face consists all wealth, and more.
Pure are my thoughts as skin between thy brows,
And eke as chaste my speech, my oaths, and vows.
Speak sweetest fair, but one kind word to me,
How can alas that be offense in thee?
There was a Dame a modern Poet sung,
Hero by name, like thee, both fair and young:
And both so fair, that you did others pass
As far as rarest Dyamonds common glass.
Whom young Leander courted on a green,
A Maid so fair (but thee) was never seen.
She granted love, which he (alas) to gain,
To reap those joys, did cross the brinish Maine.
My love to thee, I now compare to his;
Accounting danger, so requited, bliss.
There are no Seas to separate our joy,
No future danger can our Love annoy:
Then grant to me what she denide not him;
If good in her, in thee it is no sin.
The Sun has shined thus long, o let not now
The Sun be darkened by thine angry brow.
But rather let each look a Comet be
That may presage my happy destiny.
I could to you a short discourse impart,
That would relent the direst stony heart,
Were not offense. It Is no offense quoth she.
Then thus the same I Will briefly tell, quoth he:
A poor old man by chance did break his leg,
And he was told where he was wont to beg,
That such a Surgion (telling of his name,)
If that he pleased, could quickly cure the same.
Which when he heard, to him for help he goes,
And craves for Gods sake he would ease his woes.
The Surgion greedy to have coin therefore,
But finding none, he would not heal the sore:
Which caused the poor old man to keep his bed,
That he for want of help in time was dead.
Alas poor soul; (quoth she) and did he dye?
Would I were Judge, or he were such as I,
I so would use the Surgion, as that he
Should feel the grief which he before did see.
Thus you confess your wrong to me sweet Maid,
If you perform (quoth he) the words you said.
I am the man, who wounded, seek relief:
And you, the causer of my endless grief;
You are the Surgion, whom I urge the more
To cure the wound because you made the sore:
Be not obdurate then, since my disease
Is quickly cured, if the Surgion please.
And this I vow water shall turn to fire,
Huge massy mountains to the clouds aspire;
The Sun shall leave his course, the Moon her brightness,
Night turn to day, and day shall lose his lightness;
Fishes shall fly, birds swim; and Hare shall hunt
The Hound, which to pursue the Hare was wont:
Air, Earth, Fire, Water, all things which you view
Shall change their natures, ere I turn from you:
And longer then I breathe a loyal friend,
Let me (o heavens) endure a wicked end.
Silence (quoth she) and here let cease thy suit,
Cause of distrust in love did make me mute:
Ask why I yielded in so short a season,
Because I love, that is a woman's reason.
Yet Maids are fearful; for by men's abuse,
Courting is turned to a common use,
How is he held, that cannot in these days
Fash'on his words to each fantastic phrase?
Which makes us often with one word to debase
Him from our bosoms, whom our hearts embrace:
And, as you men do for a Proverb make it,
That which we love we often say nay and take it.
Delays breed danger, wherefore what I said,
And what agrees with Honor, and a Maid,
I yield to thee, but yet on this condition,
Thou shall not dare t'attempt the least fruition
Of my chaste thoughts, by drawing them aside,
Before in wedlock I am made thy Bride.
This said; she to the Court, he to his Hounds,
Where they had slain a Bore, whose blood abounds:
Glad of his prey, he hastneth home amain,
With short return he comes to her again,
And having joined themselves in Hymen's bands,
The sacred Priest unites heart and hands:
They reap those joys which elder lovers know,
And thus my Tale does end, thus ends their woe.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMMES.
Don Pedro's Debt.
DON Pedro's out of debt, be bold to say it;
For they are said to owe, that mean to pay it.
Sextus Wit.
TO have good wit is Sextus thought by many;
But sure he hides it all, he shows not any.
Of casting out Spirits by Prayer, without Fasting.
A Virtuous Dame, who for her state and quality,
Did ever love to keep great Hospitality;
Her name I must not name in plain reciting,
But thus, The chief Instrument of writing,
Was by Duke Humphrey's Guests so boldly hanted,
That her good mind therewith was sorely danted:
She sighing said, one day, to a careless lester,
These ill-bred guests my board and house so pester,
That I pray God often times with all my heart,
That they would leave their haunt, and hence depart.
He that by his own humor happily ghest,
What manner Sprite these smell-feasts had possessed;
Told her the surest way such Sprites out-casting,
Was to leave Prayer a while, and fall to Fasting.
Of wicked Prayers.
A Husband and a Wife often disagreeing,
And either weary of the others being,
In choler great either devoutly prays
To God, that he would shorten the others days:
But more devout then both their Son and Heir
Prays God that he would grant them both their prayer.
The Author, of his Fortune.
TAke Fortune as it falls, so one advises,
But Heywood bids me take it as it rises:
And while I think to do as both do teach,
It falls and rises quite besides my reach.
Of Misse-pointing.
DAmes are indu'd with virtues excellent:
What man is he can prove that? they offend
Daily, they serve the Lord with good intent
Seld, they displease their Husbands to the end
Always, to please them well they do intend
Never, in them one shall find shrewdness much,
Such are their humors, and their grace is such.
To his Wife.
MY Mall, the former Verses this does reach you,
That some deceive, some are deceived by shows:
For this that in your praise so firmly goes,
With one false point and stop will over reach you,
And turn the praise to scorn, the Verse to Prose,
By which you may be slandered, all as shrewes,
And some perhaps may speak, and say no treason,
The Verses had more time, the Prose more reason.
Of a Precise Tailor.
A Tailor thought a man of upright dealing,
(...) but for lying, honest but for stealing:
Di^ fall one day ext^eamely s^cke by chance,
And on the sudden, was i^ wondrous trance.
The fiends of hell mustring in fearful manner,
Of sundry colored ^^lkes displaid a banner
Which he had stol^e, and wished as they did tell,
That he might find it all one day in hell.
The man affrighted with this apparision,
Upon recovery gre^^ a great precision:
He bought a Bible of the best translation,
And in his life he shewde great reformation.
He walked mannerly, he talked meekely,
He heard three lectures, and two sermons weekly.
He vou'd to shun all company unruly,
And in his speech he used no oath but truly.
And zealously to keep the saboths rest,
His meat for that day on the eve was dressed.
And least the custom which he had to steal,
Might cause him sometime to forget his zeal,
He gives his Iournyman a special charge,
That if the stuff allowance being large,
He found his fingers were to filch inclind,
Bid him to have the banner in his mind.
This done, I scant can tell the rest for laughter,
A captain of a ship came three days after,
And brought three yardes of velvet, and three quarters,
To make venetians down below the garters.
He that precisely knew what was enough,
Soon slipped aside three quarters of the stuff.
His man espying it, said in derision,
Master remember how you saw the vision.
Peace knave quoth he, I did not see one ragge,
Of such a colored silk in all the flagge.
Of a Citizen and his Son
A Citizen that dwelt near Temple bar,
By hap one day fell with his son at jar:
Who for his evil life and lewd demerit,
He often affirmed he would quite disinherit.
And vowed his goods and lands all to the poor:
His son what with his play, what with his ()
Was so consumed at last, that he did lack,
Meat for his mouth, and clothing for his back.
O crafty poverty, his father now,
May give him all he has, yet keep his vow.
Mistaking a word.
AN English Lad long woed a less of Wales,
And entertained her with such pretty tales,
As though she understood not, yet to try him,
She gave consent at last to underly him.
Both having dallied to their full society,
The wench to show some womanly sobriety,
Told in her language she was well ypaide,
And Diggon, Diggon once or twice she said.
Dig on in welsh does signify enough,
Which he mistaking, answers thus in snuff:
Diggon that can (quoth he) for I so sore
Have diggde already, I can dig no more.
Of his Cook, named Cornish.
MY Cornish Cook in rage and fury great,
Did chase, and chide, and curse and swear, and sweat.
Because the turne-broach burned had the meat.
And with the basting ladle did him beat.
Was not my Cook a rash and angry Cullion,
When he should bast the meat, to bast the Scullion
Of his Writings.
MY Writings often displease you. What Is the matter?
You love not to hear truth, nor I to flatter.
Of a Ladies Cabinet.
A Virtuous Lady sitting in a muse,
As oftentimes fair virtuous Ladies use,
Did lean her elbow on her knee full hard,
The other distant from it half a yard.
Her Knight to taunt her with some privy token,
Said, Wife, awake, your Cabinet stands open.
She rose, and blushed, and smiled, and soft did say,
Then look it if you list, you keep the key.
Of Wives ruling.
COncerning Wives, hold this a certain rule,
That if at first, you let them have the rule,
Your self at last, with them shall have no rule,
Except you let them evermore to rule.
Of Gella's Periwig.
SEe you the goodly hair that Gella wears
It Is certain her own hair, one would have thought it.
She swears it is her own, and true she swears:
For hard by Temple-barre last day she bought it.
So fair an hair upon so foul a forehead,
Augments disgrace, and shows her grace was borrowed.
Of a Prater, out of Martial.
WHo so is hoarse, yet still to prate does press,
Proves he can neither speak, nor hold his Peace.
Of trusting to his Friend.
IF you will shroud your self from all mishaps,
And shun the cause of many after-claps;
Put not in any one too much belief,
Your joy will be the less, so will your grief.
Of Faustus, a stealer of Verses.
I Hear that Faustus oftentimes rehearses
To his chaste Mistress certain of my Verses:
In which, by use, so perfect he is grown;
That she, poor fool, does think they are his own.
I would esteem it (trust me) grace, not shame,
If Danyel, or if Dauies did the same.
Nor would I storm, or would I quarrels pick,
I when I list, to them could do the like.
But who can wish a man a fouler spite,
Then have a blind man take away his sight?
A begging thief is dangerous to my purse,
A beggage Poet to my Verse is worse.
An Epitaph by a man of his Father.
GOD works wonders now and than,
Here lies a Lawyer was an honest man.
An Epitaph of Aretine.
Here lies Aretine that poisonous Toade,
Whose spightfull tongue and Pen, all Saints beshrow him,
Did rail on Prince and Priest, and all but God,
And said for his excuse he did not know them.
FINIS.

