SERMONS UPON THE TEN FIRST VERSES OF THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE FIRST Epistle of
S. PETER.

Being the last that were preached by the late faithful and painful Minister
of Gods word, NICOLAS BYFIELD.

Wherein Method, Sense, Doctrine, and Use, is, with great variety of matter,
profitably handled; and sundry heads of Divinity largely discussed.

Published since the Authors death by WILLIAM GOUGE.

LONDON, Printed by H. Lownes for George Latham, at the brazen Serpent in
Paul's Churchyard. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR HORATIO VEERE, Knight, Lord Veere of Tilbery, and
General of the English Forces in the service of the high and mighty Lords,
the States General of the united Provinces in the Neatherlands: And to his
pious and virtuous Consort, the Lady Mary Veere, such increase of Grace as may
bring them to fullness of Glory.
RIGHT HONORABLE;
THe Almighties gracious acceptance of such Oblations as are brought to him,
encourages sons of men to offer their Sacrifices on the Altar of his Grace.
Like ground of encouragement have and, to lay this Oblation on the Altar of
your Honors patronage. Of your gracious acceptance thereof, these reasons
assure me. 1. This Impe now presented to your Honors, is a twinne to that
Posthumus, which was heretofore presented to, and accepted of your Honors. 2.
This, together with his other brothers, was by their own Father while he
lived, devoted to your Honors. To divert them otherways, would be plain
plagium. 3. Your Honors did many ways manifest a very good respect to the
forementioned Father of this Orphane. 4. This Impe it self is a goodly Impe,
and gives assured hope of doing much good to Gods Church. 5. Your Honors high
esteem of all good and faithful Ministers, of their function, of their
labors and works, is well known. 6. Your Honors mutual entire affection,
and sincere and sweet conversation and carriage one toward another, is a
lively representation, and evident demonstration of the truth of that doctrine,
concerning Husband and Wife, which is principally handled in this Treatise. 7.
Your Honor (my good Lord) has all your days been a valiant and faithful
Champion for the Church, maintaining her safety and liberty with the peril of
your own life; wherein (though Communis Mars, bellique casus sit incertus,
yet) success has often crowned your valor: instance, among other famous
victories, the incomparable conquest, by your Honors more than ordinary
courage obtained in New-port-field. Can now doubt be made of your Honors
favor, in countenancing this child of the Church? 8. Your Honor (my good
Lady) was a diligent frequenter of his Ministry who preached these Sermons,
and hearing the distinct points when they were first out of the Pulpet uttered,
so approved them, as often you desired the publishing of them: For they were
Cygnean songs, the last and sweetest of all. 9. As the sacred Scriptures, so
good Commentaries thereon, such as this is, area solace to your Honors, in
reading whereof you have manifested much delight. Finally, many and great are
the favors and kindnesses, which from time to time your Honors have done to
the Publisher of this work; which, as in duty he is bound, he willingly takes
this occasion in all humility, and with all thankfulness to acknowledge. The
premises considered, the said Publisher confidently rests upon your Honors
patronage; and boweth his knees before the Throne of Grace for a merciful
Remembrance, and bountiful Remuneration of that Goodness which your Honors
have done to the Church of God, to the poor Members and faithful Ministers
thereof, and in special to the Author of this Commentary, yea and to the
Publisher thereof

Your Honors much obliged, William Gouge.
Blackfriars London. 25. Ian. 1625.
AN EXPOSITION of part of the third Chapter of the first Epistle general of
PETER.
1. Pet. cap. 3. verse. 1.2.3.4. Likewise let the Wives be subject to their
Husbands, that even they which obey not the word, may without the word be won
by the conversation of the Wives, 2. While they behold your pure conversation,
which is with fear.

3. Whose apparelling let it not be outward, as with broyded hair, and gold
put about, or in putting on of apparel.

4. But let the hid man of the heart be incorrupt, with a meek and quiet
spirit, which is before God a thing much set by.


FRom the thirteenth verse of the former chapter, to the eight verse of this
chapter, the Apostle exhorts to such duties as concern particular Christians:
and so either in the Commonwealth, where he exhorts subjects, from verse 13.
to 18. or in the Family; where he exhorts either servants, verse 18. to the end
of the former chapter, or wives and husbands in the first seven verses of this
chapter.

General scope.
So that in these first seven verses, the Apostle entreats of the duties
between man and wife; and first sets down the wives duty, from verse. 1. to
7. and then the men's duty in the seventh verse.

In laying down the wives duty, he proceeds in this order: First, he briefly
propounds the substance of her duty, in the first words, Wives be subject.
Secondly, he expounds upon it, by showing diverse particular things she must
express in her conversation; as, Amiablenesse, verse. 1. Chastity and Fear,
verse. 2. Mecknesse, verse. 3.4. Then thirdly, he confirms all by two reasons;
both taken from example, first, of godly women in general, verse. 5. secondly,
of Sarah in particular, verse. 6.

Before I set upon the particular parts of the Text, diverse things would be
noted in general.

First, in that this Apostle and other Apostles, think it fit with such
effectual terms, when they write to the Churches, to give such special
charge to Husbands and Wives, it shows, That God does greatly desire, that
they should in a special manner, be careful to lead an orderly and
comfortable life together. Whatsoever in domestical matters is sometimes
omitted in the Text, yet seldom in any place that treats of family duties, is
the duty of Husbands and Wives left out. Note.
Here it is vehemently urged, and so in the Epistle to the Ephesians; which
should work in all that fear God, a care and conscience of these duties, and
of carrying themselves in the best manner they can one toward another. Now the
substance of an orderly life between man and wife, is, to love one another
with all constancy, tenderness and fidelity; to show one heart in all things,
helping one another to do the duties of the family, especially in the service
of God, and in carrying the crosses may light upon them in their callings;
encouraging and comforting one another, honoring one another before others, and
bearing one with another in respect of infirmities, and each of them striving
to do exactly the duty that belongs to each.

Now that men and women may be careful hereof, many motives may be alleged,
and ought to be thought upon.

1 Because this society between one man and one woman in marriage, 16. motives
for man and wife to live quietly and comfortably together.
was instituted of God himself, and was the first society that he brought into
the world, and had the honor to be ordained in the blessedest place in this
visible world, even Paradise, and was made between two persons that were like
God himself; and therefore God does expect, that men and women should walk
very carefully in this estate, Genes 2.

2 Because man and wife had so near an original and dependence one upon
another. The woman was made of the ribbe of man: which Adam perceiving by a
spirit of prophecy, said, she was bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh;
that is, another self, or himself in another shape or sex: and therefore
whosoever disagreed, they should agree; it being most unnatural for a man to
hate or disagree with himself, Genesis 2. Ephesians. 5. and ever the more miraculous
the forming of the woman was, the more extraordinary should the affection
between man and wife be.

3 Because they are but two of them: they would hardly please many, that cannot
please one.

4 Because they are appointed necessarily to be companions in life, without
parting or dissolution: and therefore since they live always together, they
should resolve to dispose of themselves so, as their lives might be comfortable.

5 Because from man and wife is the original of all mankind; of Church and
Commonwealth, and all other societies: now those Husbands and Wives that live
disorderly, dishonor the whole kind. What would they have the streams to be,
when the fountains are so troubled and impure?

6 Because marriage is honorable in Gods account, and ought to be so amongst
men: therefore it being a great dignity to which they are called, it is as
shameful a fault to live disorderly in that estate, as in the estate of a
Magistrate, or Minister, or the like, Heb. 13.

7 Note, that the fifth Commandment that concerns family duties and the order
should be in our dwellings, stands between the Commandments of the first
Table, and the rest of the Commandments of the second Table: to signify, that
from the careful performance of domestical duties, men are fitter to serve
God in the first Table, or converse with men in the world, in the second Table:
yea, all we get from God in the first Table, or from men in the second, we
bring it home to our houses, or to the place of well employing it. Note the
last words of verse. 7. of this chapter.

8 Because man and wife resemble Christ and the Church, by way of type or
image; and will men or women dare say, that Christ and the Church carry
themselves so unlovingly, or disorderly one to another, as they do one to
another? Do you not think it had been a hateful thing, for any man that was
to be a type of Christ, to have expressed the type by false or wicked ways? Even
so is it for man and wife, to carry themselves one to another, so as Christ and
the Church do not one to another, Ephesians. 5.

9 The end of marriage is Gods glory: now if God may not have glory, by the
loving and orderly carriage of man and wife one to another, he will win
himself glory to his Justice, in revenging the quarrel of the Covenant which
they have broken.

10 Because usually the carriage of man and wife, is the original cause of
good or evil order in the family: partly, because thereby they are the more
enabled or disabled, for their carriage toward others in the family; and
besides, their courses are exemplary, and withal, they thereby lay the ground
of their own honor or dishonor in the hearts of children and servants.

11 Because Gods commandment, injoyning them their duties one to another,
binds the conscience as hard as any of the other Commandments; so as God is
as well provoked by these disorders between man and wife, as by swearing, or
cursing, or Idolatry, or murder, or whoredom, or drunkenness, or the like:
yea, they that live in the customary breach of these duties, are unjust and
dishonest, as well as if they broke any other Commandments.

12 The Apostles were the more earnest, in pressing husbands and wives to a
loving and orderly behavior one toward another, because of the scandal or
honor came to Religion by it. It did greatly adorn and become the Gospel, if
they lived amiably together, it made men like of their Religion the better, and
contrariwise, it was a foul scandal, and caused the Religion to be less
esteemed, or else hated, when they lived so ungodly and unquietly together.

13 Because if they live lovingly together, they are like to have a quiet
conscience, and a clean heart: whereas if they jangle and live in
coffeehouse, it is a thousand to one the conscience will be very froward,
and their hearts filled with foul lusts after others, Pro. 5. And that the
conscience should be froward, how can it be otherwise, when they live in the
direct breach of Gods commandment, which (as was showed before) binds as
strongly in this as in another duty.

14 Because this commandment is the first commandment with promise. To the
faithful discharge of these domestical duties, is promised a long and happy
life in the land God has planted men in.

15 Because men and women may greatly further their salvation, by living
according to Gods will in this estate; as is intimated 1. Tim. 2.15.

16 Lastly, let husbands and wives remember their accounts at the last day.
Will it not be a woeful misery for a rebellious and froward wife, to be
thrown to hell, and see her quiet and religious husband go to heaven? and so
on the other side.

The use may be, Vsc.
for complaint of the general and grievous neglect of these things, in the
most men and women. Where may a man observe, in any family almost, that amiable
carriage between man and wife, that ought to be?

Quest. What are the causes of this general disorder, and unquietness
between men and their wives?

Answ.

1. It may be God revengeth some sin in the manner of the marriage, Five
special causes of disorder between man and wife.
or going about it, of which the parties have not soundly repented; as,
precontracts, or marriage for carnal ends, without respect of Religion, or
Gods glory, as for wealth, or the like: or some secret wickedness between
the parties before marriage.

2 In the most, it is the want of the true fear of God: they are carnal, and
so their Natures being not regenerate, are full of all evil fruits. Two
carnal persons can no more agree together, than two wild beasts: and what
will not men and women allow themselves in, when they do not from their hearts
fear Gods displeasure?

3 In many it is ignorance of their mutual duties: men and women do not
study, with care and conscience, the particular duties which in this estate
God requires of them.

4 In such as know their duties, it is either unskilfulnesse to bear with
infirmities, or neglect of daily prayer to God, to fashion their hearts to obey
his will in those things, as well as in other points of his service and worship.

5 In some it is strange and strong lusts, and inordinate desires; which being
not resisted and subdued, the inward cause of all that absurd and perverse
carriage shows it self openly.

Quest. 2. But what should men and women do, that they might attain to this
orderly and amiable conversation?

Answ. 1. They should heartily in secret bewail their former disorders, Helps
for man and wife to attain an orderly and quiet life.
and seek pardon of God, and then reconcile themselves one to another, by
confessing their faults and follies. These things will never be mended, till
they be repented of.

2 They should seriously attend to the doctrine of their duties, and hear it
with all conscience and desire to obey; and take notice of Gods preceptorie
commandment, in requiring these things; and by all means take heed of
prejudice in hearing, but make conscience to hear this part of the word of God
as the word of God, as well as any other. Think not this doctrine too base or
mean to be heard or studied, nor imagine that it is but the severitie of the
Teacher, to tell of so many things to be done by men and women; especially
take heed of that profane jesting, to put off the sound practice of this
doctrine with jesting one at another. Remember one thing by the way, that it is
a great testimony of true uprightness of heart, when men and women make
conscience of it, to be good at home as well as abroad. Thus of the first
general doctrine.

Doct. 2. Secondly, we may hence in general note, That the word of God, and
the instructions of the ministry of the word, belong to women as well as men:
and therefore the Apostles call to the women to hear the word of the Lord.
This point is to be noted the rather, because many give out that the knowledge
of religion, and hearing of Sermons, and studying the Scriptures, is not fit
for women; God does not require it of them. Now, that this dotage may be the
more evidently consuted, consider that which is here intimated. There are a
multitude of arguments may be brought: as,

First, Reasons to prove that women ought to be taught their duties as well as
men.
the image of God by creation, was stamped upon the female as well as the male,
Genesis 1.27.

2 The profession of godliness, good works, faith, charity, and holiness is
required of women as well as men, 1. Tim. 2.10.15. and therefore all means of
grace is necessary for them as well as men.

3 It is required of them to be teachers of good things: though they are not
allowed to teach publicly, 1. Cor. 14. yet they must teach their children, and
the elder women must teach the younger women, Tit. 2.3.

4 They are commanded expressly to learn the doctrine is publicly taught, 1.
Tim. 2.11.

5 The Scripture is full of instances. Of the good woman in the Proverbes it is
said, that she was not only a good house-wife, but the law of grace was in her
lips, Pro. 31.26. King Lemuel was taught prophecies by his mother, Pro. 31.1.
and women followed our Savior, to hear his Sermons: some followed him (I say)
from place to place, Luke 8.3. and Mary was commended by our Savior for
choosing the best part, when she set her heart about religious duties, and to
sit at the feet of Christ to hear his word, Luke 11. Our Savior instructs a
woman of Samaria in the great mysteries of conversion and salvation, John 4. At
Philippi Paul's hearers at the first were only women, Acts 16.13. and honorable
narration is made of many christian women converted, Act. 17.4.12. ult. and we
read of Priscilla, that she was a means to instruct Apollos, an eloquent and
learned man, and to make him more perfectly to understand the way of God, Acts
18.26. and so we read of women that labored with Paul in the Gospel, Philip.
4.3.

6 If women must suffer for their Religion, it is reason they have all the
knowledge and helps in Religion: but women are in danger to suffer for
Religion, as well as men, Acts 8.3. and 9.2. and 22.4.

7 Finally, the way to be saved is the same for women as well as men: and
therefore all means of salvation belong to them, and are to be used by them,
as well as men.

Which, as it may encourage all women that are religious, to study the things
that belong to the kingdom of God; so it should teach them to make conscience
of what they hear, and learn of the Virgin Mary, to lay up the good Word of
God in their hearts, and keep it, and to look to their ways in all things,
that they may please God: for, as God is no respecter of persons, but loves
godliness in women as well as in men; so he does require sound obedience, and
reformation, and holiness of life, of women as well as men. For, with God there
is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor female, but all are one in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.27.28.

Thirdly, before I yet come to open the particular parts of the text, it may be
asked, why the Apostle is so large in speaking to wives, as spending so many
verses upon them? I answer, it is not simply because wives are more faulty than
husbands, though many times it proves to be so in many wives; but,

Why the Apostle is so large in setting down wives duties.
1 Because it is more against nature, to obey than to rule.

2 Because women have many hindrances or letts, both in receiving the
doctrine, and in practicing it: sometimes they rest in the general, That they
must obey, and so never study particulars; and therefore had need to have it
beaten out in particulars for them. Besides, they are in danger to be infected
with temptations, evil counsel, evil example, etc.

3 Because the inferior must mend first: and therefore the Apostle begins with
the wives, and would feign have them in order, before they require respect from
their husbands.

4 Because if the women be gained to religion, they may be great means to
work good upon their husbands: for, as they are pernicious instruments of the
devil to do their husbands hurt, if they be wickedly bent; so may they be
great means to do them good, if they be soundly reformed themselves, as the
Apostle imports in the first verse of this chapter. Besides, if the mother be
godly and careful, though the father should not be so, yet the children may
be by her instructed and well brought up: and the advantage from her for the
childrens good is the greater, because she is most with the children, and
usually they more affect her than the father.

5 Because many times their provocations from absurd husbands are so great, as
if God did not speak very much to them, they could never endure it with
subjection.

To conclude, when things are much urged or repeated in Scripture, usually
thereby three things are imported, about the matter so urged: What things are
imported by often repeating of them.
the one is difficulty, the other necessity, and the third excellency. all
three may be well thought on here. The Lord is very long in giving the charge
to wives, and it is, both because it is a very hard task to learn to be a
good wife, and because it is a thing wonderful necessary, and because a good
wife is a creature much set by of God. The Lord accounts it a great work and
excellent, when he can inform and instruct women so far, as to make them
good wives. which should be a great encouragement to wives: though God set them
long lessons to learn, yet it imports, he will ^ake great account of them, if
they be teacheable scholars. Again, we may hence gather the vanity of all
earthly felicities. Before marriage, men and women promise themselves much
happiness in their married estates, and think they could live together with
all delight: but yet after they are married, they see they are deceived, and
therefore need to go to school, to learn how to behave themselves one to
another. Further, husbands may hence learn of God, how to deal with their
wives, to make them such as might please them: they must treat with them by
good arguments, and not by fretting, or reviling, or complaining of them. Thus
in general.

The first part of the charge given to wives, is the proposition, in these
words, Likewise ye wives be subject to your own husbands. In which words four
things may be noted:

1 The term of connection, Likewise.

2 The parties charged, Ye wives.

3 The duty required (viz.) Be in subjection.

4 The parties to whom the duty must be performed (viz.) To your own husbands.

Likewise.] This term leads us to the duty of servants, entreated of before,
or else to the work of conversion to Christ, mentioned in the last verses of
the former chapter. If it lead us (as is most likely) to the duty of servants,
in the whole latter part of the former chapter; then the Apostle would thereby
tell wives, That God is no respecter of persons. He that requires servants
should obey them, requires also that wives should obey their husbands, and will
indifferently punish the faults of both: yea, if they would have their servants
obey them, they must make conscience to obey their husbands; else it is just
with God they should be vexed by their servants, that care not to be a
vexation to their husbands. And if it be referred to the work of returning to
Christ, then it teaches, That women must so think of the conversion of their
souls, as that they make not religion a pretense for negligence or
disobedience: they must so seek the Lord Jesus, as withal they remember to
be subject to their husbands, and to look to their callings in the family.

Ye wives.] Note here, first, that in speaking to the women, he gives them
such a title, as imports only their relation to their husbands: they have now
lost their own names, and their fathers names, and are now styled by the term
that binds them only to their husbands. Note again, that the charge of
subjection is to all wives indifferently: no difference of age, state, nation,
degree, or the like, can make any difference in the charge. God requires
subjection of all wives, whether poor, rich, noble, wise, yongue, or old, or
of what state or quality soever. A Queen has no more privilege, than the
poorest Cottagers wife, Hester 1. Psalm. 45.10. Tit. 2.5. and so contrariwise,
Note.
poor men's wives must reverence and obey their husbands, as well as those that
are more curiously brought up: which should be a comfort to such wives, because
no more is required of them, than what is required of all.

Note thirdly, that the Apostle speaks to women, as if he would single them
out by name, Ye wives; which should teach them, to hear their duties, as if
God did speak particularly to them.

Be subject.] Concerning the subjection of the wives, many things may be
considered.

1 The proofs, that it is indispensably required, Genesis 3. 19. Ephesians. 5.24. Col.
3.18. Tit. 3.5.

2 The reasons why they must be subject: and so, many reasons may be assigned.

1 Because it is Gods express will; 8. reasons why wives ought to be subject.
he will have it to be so. It is not arbitrary, but necessary in respect of
Gods commandment: and they that will not be subject, must think what accounts
to give to God, for the breach of his commandment.

2 It is afterward urged for example: all godly women, mentioned in Scripture,
have obeyed their husbands.

3 Because it is equal and meet: for if God give the wife power over all in
the family, but one; it is great reason she should be subject to him. God
deals fairly with the wife, in that he makes her subject but to one, and lets
her rule many.

4 Because her husband is her head, and the body is governed by the head, 1.
Cor. 11.3.

5 Because the man was not of the woman, but the woman of the man, 1. Con.
11.8. neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man,
verse. 9.

6 Because the Angels of Heaven do look for this in all wives, 1. Cor. 11.10.

7 Because it is comely, Colos. 3.18. A wife never carries her self with
better grace, reputation or honor, than when she shows most obedience and
subjection to her husband. It is a wicked and senseless pride in many women,
that they think it is baseness and dishonor, to be at their husbands bands
appointment, and to be made to do what he listes. But these are utterly
deceived: for their disobedience can commend them to none, but such as have an
unclean devil in them. What more comely in a child, than to obey his
parents? so is it in wives. Were it comely for the body to stand above the
head, and to rule it? Does not experience show, that such wives as are so
monstrous, as to profess they will not be subject, or do in practice cross
their husbands, or rule them; do we not see (I say) that such creatures are
hateful to God and man? do not all sorts of people detest them in their
discourse? The wife is the image and glory of the man, 1. Cor. 11. is it not an
ill favored sight to see a scurvie picture, that resembles the substance after
a vile fashion? As man by obedience is Gods image, so is the woman by obedience
man's image.

8 Wives must be obedient to their husbands, that the Gospel be not evil
spoken of, especially the younger wives, Tit. 2.5.

To conclude this point; it is to be noted that he says, Ye wives be subject,
that is, ye Christian wives that profess religion: as if he would say,
religion should make you, not only better women, but better wives. The husband
should feel the benefit of the wives religion, even in her carriage toward
him: she should make it appear that the more she heard sermons, or read the
Scripture, or prayed to God, the better she would become to her husband.

Why the Apostle charge wives only with subjection.
Thirdly, it may be asked, why the Apostle charge wives only with subjection,
seeing many other things are required of them? The answer may be, first,
because this of all other things is most essentially requisite, as that which
characteristically differenceth the duty of the wife: She must love her
husband; but that is so required of her, as it is required of the husband also,
and the like may be said of other things. But subjection is a thing God so
stands upon, as if they had other praises, as that they were wise, provident,
chaste, rich, fair, yea religious; yet if he may not prevail with them in
this point, he is not pleased with the rest. Secondly, because this duty,
soundly performed, does imply the rest, and in the practice of it, causes the
practice of other duties. Thirdly, in that the Apostle does reduce all their
duties into one word, he does it, thereby to cut off all excuse: for if they
cannot remember one word, they can remember nothing; and if they will not obey
in one commandment, it shows that they are governed by a very spirit of
prophannesse, as being persons, that resolve to live as they list.

Fourthly, it would be considered in what things they must be subject; and so,
wives must be subject to the husbands commandments, to do in all things what
he appoints, or desires to be done. They must show a mind desirous to please
their husbands, In what things they are to be subject.
in obeying the directions he gives; in matters of the family, or any other
things may concern his profit or contentment. As the Church is ruled by the
word of Christ, so must the wife be ruled by the word of her husband. His will
must be her law to live by: so likewise, she must be subject to his reproves;
to amend what he dislikes, and to avoyde what is displeasing to him: so
likewise, she must be subject to his restraints, and to the order he gives;
about her labor, diet, apparel, company, or the like: striving in all things
to please her husband, 1. Cor. 7.34. Ephesians. 5.23. and this subjection extends
also to that due benevolence the Apostle requires, 1. Cor. 7.3.4.5.

Fifthly, we must consider in what manner wives must be subject; and so, diverse
things are required of them: for their subjection must have in it, care, honor,
and sincerity. First, they must be subject with care and study, The manner how
they must submit.
to do and dispose of all things so, as the husband may not be displeased or
disquieted. A wise woman is said to build her house, Prove. 14.2. which notes,
that she studies in every business how to set every thing in order; as the
Carpenter does study how to set every part of the frame in jointe. Oh, that
this word Study, could be carved upon the hearts of women, that they might
never forget it: what a world of unquietness and inconveniences might be
prevented, if care and study did enter into their hearts? Secondly, they must
be subject with honor to their husbands: now, wives honor their husbands, and
show it diverse ways; as, by giving them reverent titles, as Sarah called her
husband Lord; and by modest and shamefast behavior in her husbands presence:
her husband should be the covering of her eyes; and by striving to imitate
what is excellent in her husband, so she should be his image and his glory,
as man is the image and glory of Christ; and by avoiding all company, that is
suspected or disliked by the husband, and by concealing and hiding his
infirmities as much as she can. Thirdly, the sincerity of her subjection must
appear many ways; as first, by being subject to him: not in some things, but
in all things, as the Church is subject to Christ. Secondly, by being subject
at all times, and in all places; at home as well as abroad, and always, as well
as for the first quarter of the year. Thirdly, by practicing this subjection,
not in outward show only, but in her very spirit, Mal. 2.15. and that not for
fear or shame; but for conscience sake, and willingly, out of the love and
honor she bears to her husband: performing this subjection to her husband, as
it were to the Lord himself, Ephesians. 5.12. Finally, she must make conscience to
obey and be subject, though the husband did not find fault, or much require
it, even because God does require it.

Sixthly, it would be considered negatively, in what cases or respects the wife
is not subject to the will of the husband: and so, In wht cases the wife ought
to subject her self.
her subjection is qualified, and lymited, or lightened diverse ways. First, in
the quality of her subjection: she is not to be subject with a servile
subjection, as a servant or vassal is subject to his Lord; but in a sweet and
familiar kind of subjection, as the body is subject to the head, and as one
that is partner with him in many privileges both temporal and eternal: they
remain still companions and yoake-fellowes. Secondly, in the matter of
subjection: she is not subject to his will, in matters of her soul and
religion, when his will is contrary to Gods will. Wives must be subject, but
it must be in the Lord, Colos. 3.15. The unbeleeving husband must not compel
the believing wife, to change her religion, or to neglect the means of her
salvation: and again, she is not so subject, but she may admonish or advise
her husband, with certain cautions; as, if she be sure the thing she speaks
against, be sinful and hurtful: and withal, that she speak without
passion or contempt, with reverence, and without frowardness or
imperiousness. Thus Abraham is bidden to hear his wife, Genesis 21.12. Again,
her subjection does not bind her to consent to, or conceal his whoredoms,
wherein he breaks the Covenant betwixt them, and defiles the marriage bed:
nor is she bound to obey him in any thing, she knows to be a sin: nor am I
of their mind, that think she is subject to her husbands blows and stripes;
for that does import a servile subjection, and not a free subjection. I mean,
that I do not think it any part of the husbands power over his wife, to
correct her by blows: her vices that cannot be corrected by words, must be
committed either to the Magistrate, or to the Church censures to reform.
Likewise, I conceive, that she is not bound to deliver her body to her husband,
when she is apart for her disease, Lev. 18.19. Ezech. 18.6.

Seventhly, the sins by which wives transgress against this subjection to
their husbands, be many, (viz.)

Usurping authority over the man, Particular sins of the Wife against
subjection.
by teaching him in matters of religion, 1. Tim. 2.12. or by busying her self,
in directing or finding fault with him, in matters belong to his calling, and
are out of her reach. Impatience, and frowardness, passion, brawling, chiding,
crying, etc. Idleness, and slothfulness, especially, when they disappoint
usually the trust or desires of the husbands, in things wherein they might and
ought to be helpefull in their labors, or in the oversight of the works of
their servants.

Vile estimation of their husbands, though but in the heart; but much more,
when it is showed by unreverent terms, or nicknames, or words of reproach, or
by complaining of the infirmities of their husbands, and finding fault with
them before others.

Suspicious and base interpretations of the actions of their husbands; as when
Michol so censured David for his dancing before the Arc.

Wastefulnesse, either by improvidence, or vain expenses, Prove. 14.1.
especially, when they are so impudently monstrous, as to profess, they will
not be ruled by their husbands, but will be masters. And thus of the duty
charged upon the Wives.

The parties to whom they owe this duty, follows; and they are their own
Husbands.

To your own Husbands.] Two things may be noted.

1 That all husbands have the same right and authority over their wives. Wives
must be subject, though their husbands be poor; yea, though they be froward
and perverse; yea, as the Coherence shows here, though they be carnal and
wicked persons: and so, though they be ignorant, and not able to dwell with
them as men of knowledge, though they be diseased and in great affliction, as
Job was.

2 That wives are to be subject only to their husbands, not to their children
or servants; much less to a strange woman, if the wicked husband should bring
any into the family: and she must be subject to her own husband, to be
directed and ordered by him, not by the husband of another woman.

Thus of the proposition. the explication of it follows: where the Apostle
requires three things of the wife.

1 Amiablenesse in her carriage, that she might win her husband, if it were
possible, verse. 1.

2 A chaste conversation with fear, verse. 2.

3 Meekness and a quiet spirit, verse. 3.4.

For the first part, we are to note two things about the amiablenesse of her
behavior. First, the fruit to be hoped for by it (viz.) the winning of the
husband. Secondly, the means how it should be done (viz.) by conversation.

Might be won.] What kind of winning does he here mean? I answer, first,
an obedient careful wife, may win her husband to be a good husband, that was
before a froward, unruly, unkind, violent, or injurious husband. But I think,
(...) is not that which is here meant, or not all the Apostle m^anes: for he
means it, of winning of the carnal husband to religion.

Quest. But can any man be made a religious man without the Word? can a man be
saved, and find the way to Heaven, without the preaching of the Gospel?

Answ. I take it, the Apostle does mean only of a winning by way of
preparation in general: as, the good conversation of the wife may win the
husband, not to think so ill of the religion she professes as he did, and may
win him to be contented to go to the means to hear the Word; by which
means, he may be effectually called and sanctified.

For the better understanding of this point, Diverse ways of winnnig men.
you must understand, that men are said to be won in Scriptures by diverse
means: as, some have been won to believe, for the miracles they saw, and
yet Christ did not trust many of them, John 2. Some have been won by private
admonition; but that is to be understood, of persuading them to some good
duty, or to receive some truth, or to forsake some sin or error, James 5.
ult. Some have been won by judgementes and afflictions; as the Israelites
many times came crying to God for mercy, when the hand of God was upon them,
and yet fell away again afterward. Some have been won by the fair
conversation of others, as here: but the only ordinanary means to win a
soul effectually to God, is the Word of God preached, Romans 10.14 17.

But one thing we may note here, Note.
That a man may be won, and yet not effectually. A man may convert, and
change, and suffer much alteration, and yet not be a new creature: yea, other
Scriptures show, that a man may be won by the Word it self, so as in his
own judgment, and the hope of others, it seems his soul is indeed won,
and yet it will come to nothing in the end. Wicked men have sometimes great
remorses, much touched, promise reformation, consent, for the time, to enter
into the profession of religion, like of the way of God in the general,
resolve to hear the Word constantly, etc. and yet all this comes to nothing,
but vanishent, and they return to their old courses.

The causes of their revolting, Causes of revolting in many, are diverse.
are in diverse men or times, diverse. Some fly off again, because of reproach.
Some for want of means, to nourish what is begun. Some are driven back,
because they had not cast up their accounts, what it would cost them to build
the Tower of godliness, or what would be necessary to overcome so many
enemies. Some are choked with worldly cares, and lusts: but in all, the reason
is, because they were not soundly converted. The old heart would never hold
out, to do the task of godliness.

Quest. But being won so far as to like of religion, to feel remorse, to
resolve to become religious, etc. what did they want of sound conversion?

Answ. In those that are won only to a temporary kind of grace, or general
preparation, diverse things appear to be wanting: as, either they had no sound
sorrows for their sins, or never soundly turned from the love of the world,
or could not forsake particular beloved sins, or were never thoroughly
persuaded to forsake carnal dependancies, or did not think of hyring
themselves to do the work of godliness for ever, or had no hearty love to
such as fear God, or the like.

The consideration hereof should awaken all sorts, especially, such as newly
entered into the profession of religion, to look to themselves, and try their
estates soundly, whether they be won effectually or no.

Quest. But how may I know, that I am won effectually? now at this time of
remorse, or now, that I resolve to take a new course?

Answ. Thou art right and effectually converted, if these things following be
true of thee.

9 signs to know whether w^ be won effectually.
1 If thou be inwardly abased and humbled, in the sight of thine ow^e vi^e^esse:
if in thine own eyes, thou discern thy self to be a fool and unapt for Gods
kingdom; and if thy sins be a sensible load and burden unto thee, of which
thou art weary, Mat. 5.3. and 11.29. 1. Cor. 3.18. and thy pride and
conceitednesse be subdued.

2 If thou have overcome the world, 1. John 5.4.5. and 2.15. and can show it,
by forsaking the fellowship of ungodly persons, 2. Cor. 6.17. and can deny
the carnal counsel of carnal kindred, Mat. 10. and can hold on this
course, notwithstanding the reproaches will be cast upon thee, and others,
Esa. 8. and 59.15. 1. Pet. 4.5. and do find that thy taste in earthly things
is marred, so as thou do not find that favor in them thou wast wont to do,
Romans 8.5.

3 If nothing can heal thee of those remorses thou feel, but the Word and
Ordinances of God, Hosea 6.1.2. If merry company, carnal, counsel, or time,
will heal thee without spiritual medicine, thou art not right.

4 If thou have attained to an estimation of Jesus Christ above all things,
accounting him only precious; and find, that thy heart striveth to settle it
self in the trust upon him and his merits, Phil. 3.8. Gal. 6.14. 1 Pet. 2.6.

5 If thou have a spirit without guile, Psalm. 32 2. and that will appear,

1 By thy desire to be godly and religious, more than to seem so, Romans 2.26.

2 By thy desire to be rid of all sin, and to be turned from all thy
transgressions, Ezech. 18.30. setting thy self against thine own iniquity, 2.
Sam. 22.24. If thou feel a combat within thee; the spirit striving against the
flesh, as well about inward sins, as outward: against the very evil that
cleaves to thy best works, and against those sins that thou have most loved,
or have been most gainefull or pleasing to thee, Gal. 5.17.

3 This will be clearer, if thou desire to forsake thy sins in thy youth, or
prosperity, while thou could yet securely commit them.

4 If thou keep thy goodness in all companies; as well when thou art absent
far, as when thou art present with such as are religious, Phil. 2.12. doing
righteousness at all times, Psalm. 106.2.

6 If thou love the house of God, above all the places in the world; and that
thy thirst after the means continue and last, and be renewed after the food
of thy soul, as thy stomach is after thy bodily food, Psalm. 26.8. and. 84.
Job 23.12. Psalm. 119.20.

7 If thou honor them that fear the Lord, and are religious, above all the
people in the world; discerning between the righteous and the wicked;
contemning vile persons, and joining thy self to the godly, as the people thou will live and dye with, and as the best companions of thy life, Psalm. 15. Mal.
3.17. Psalm. 16.3. 1. John 3.14.

8 If the veil be taken off thy heart, so as thou can hear as the learned,
and understand spiritual doctrine, that before was harsh and foolishness to
thee, 1. Cor. 2.14. 2. Cor. 3.15.16.18. Esa. 51.6.

9 If thou find that thou can not sin. Mark it; the Apostle John says,
he that is borne of God cannot sin: he means, he cannot sin as he was
wont to do; for either God crosses him still, and hinders him, or he finds
that he cannot affect his sin so heartily, or commit it with his full
consent, or with his whole heart, as he was wont to do, 1. John. 3.9. the
power of sinning is marred and dissolved in him.

Now, that this work may prosper; if you find your selves any way effectually
won, be advised then to look to these rules following.

1 Take heed of smothering of doubts: ask the way to Heaven, and seek
resolution in things of so high importance, as your Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, and Salvation are, Ier. 50.4.

2 Look to it, what teachers, and what doctrine you hear: choose that food
for your souls, that is most wholesome; be not carried away with the enticing
words of man's wisdom.

3 Be careful to humble your souls in secret, judging your selves for your
sins before the Lord. Be not sleighthie in this great work: though you have
repented, yet repent still, till your hearts be fully settled, and the power of
your corruptions broken: rest not upon common hopes, or probabilities, or the
good opinion others have of you, but lay a sure foundation for your own faith
and hope, Ier. 31.20.

4 Come constantly to the light, that it may be manifest, that your works are
wrought in God; and let the Word of God be the light to your feet, and
lantern to your paths, John 21.22. Psalm. 50. and Gal. 6.16.

What remains uow, but that I should beseech you, to turn unto God withal
your hearts? Give your selves to God, he will keep that which you commit to
him, till the day of Christ. Let not our words be as water spilt upon the
ground. Oh that the Lord would bow the Heavens, and come down amongst you, and
take possession for himself, and perfect the work he has begun in some of
your hearts. Remember the covenant you have made with God in the Sacrament;
made it (I say) over the dead body of your Savior. Now is the axe laid to the
root of the tree, now or never bear fruit. This is the day of salvation: say
you, This is the day the Lord has made for our conversion. God is gracious, if
you turn to him with all your hearts; and just, if you prove false in his
covenant. Though grace in you be but as the smoking flax, yet it shall not be
quenched: the Lord establish his work. If you hold out to the end you shall be
saved.

That they which obey not the Word.] The persons that may be won, are
described by these words, as a Periphrasis of carnal persons, men that are
not in Christ: and so, may note either such husbands as were Gentiles, or such
husbands as were carnal Christians.

If by those Husbands, be meant unbeleeving Gentiles, a question may be asked
(viz.) how the Gentiles are said to disobey the Word of Cod, seeing it was
never given unto them? For answer, we must understand, that at this time the
Word was brought among the Gentiles by the Apostles, and other Ministers of the
Gospel: and therefore, now they are bound to obey it, as well as any others. and
this was the condemnation of a world of them, that light was come amongst them,
and they loved darkness rather than light. Otherwise, considering the Gentiles
without the Law brought to them, they shall be judged, not by the Law written
(which they had not); but by the Law of nature, which they had in their hearts,
Romans 2.15.16.

Now, if by these words be meant carnal Christians, that had turned from
Gentilisme, and received the profession of Christian religion, but yet followed
their carnal courses; we may then note, That the bare change from a false
religion, to the profession of the true, is not sufficient to salvation. A man
that has professed a false religion, had need of two conversions: the one is,
from his false religion to the true, and the other, from profaneness to
sincerity in that religion. The corn must be fetched from the field into the
barn; but that is not enough, for so is the chafe: but it must then be taken
from the barn into the garner. To leave Popery, and turn Protestant, is not
in it self sufficient, unless a man turn from the profaneness that is in
the multitude in true Churches, to embrace the sincere profession of the
Gospel. And there is reason for it: for in changing from a false religion to a
true, a man does but change his profession, or his mind at best; but he that
will be changed effectually, must change his heart, and whole conversation,
and become a new creature.

So that then these words describe a carnal man (viz.) that he is such a one,
as does not obey the Word of God. By the word, he means here the doctrine
published by the Prophets and Apostles, and now contained in the Scriptures.
Many doctrines may be hence observed.

1 The Scripture is God's Word: because God thereby does express the sense of
his mind, as men do by their words. The Scripture is not the word which God
the father begat; but is the word which God the father uttered, and is the
word which God uttered to us bodily creatures. God, though he be a spirit, yet
does speak both to spirits and bodies: to spirits, by a way unknowen to us: to
bodies he has spoken many ways, as by signs, dreams, visions, and the like:
so by printing the sense of his mind, in the minds of creatures that could
speak, and by them, uttered in word or writing what he would have known.
Thus he spoke by the Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles. They that
deny that God has any words, either deny that God is, as Psalm. 14.1. or else,
conceive him to be like stuckes, or stones, or beasts, as Romans 1.23. or else,
think he can speak, but will not, because he takes no care of humane things,
as Job 22 23. These are Atheists.

2 The Scripture is called the Word, by an excellency, because it is the only
word we should delight in. God since the fall, did never speak unto man more
exactly than by the Scriptures, and we were better hear God talk to us out of
the Scriptures, than hear any man on earth, yea, or Angel in heaven: yea, it
imports, that we should be so devoted to the study of the Scriptures, as if we
desired to hear no other sound in our ears but that: as if all the use of our
ears, were to hear this Word. Let him that has ears to hear, hear.

3 This Word of God, now in the time of the new Testament, belongs to all men,
in the right application of the true meaning of it. Once it was the portion of
Jacob, and God did not deal so with other Nations, to give them his Word: but
now that the partition wall is broken down, the Gospel is sent to every
creature. That is here imported, in that unbeleeving Husbands are blamed, for
not obeying the Word: which should teach all sorts of men to search these
Scriptures, and to hear the Word devoutly; and withal know, that the
comforts, terrors, and precepts contained in it, will take hold upon all sorts
of men respectively.

4 The Word of God ought to rule all sorts of men. That is employed here, in
that fault is found with these unbeleevers, that they obeyed it not. It was
given of God to that end, to instruct, reprove, and direct men in all their
ways, 2 Timothy 3.16.17. It is the Canon or rule of men^ actions, Gal. 6.16. It
is the light and lantern God has given to men: it has divine authority. If
we will show any respect of God, we must be ruled by the Scripture, which is
his Word.

5 Unregenerate men have no mind to obey the Word: and the reason is, because
they are guided by other rules, which are false; as their own reason, the
customs of the world, the suggestions of the devil, and the likes and because
too, the Word is contrary to their carnal desires ^^nd therefore they yield
themselves to be guided by such rules, as are most pleasing to their corrupt
natures: and besides too, the light of the Word is too glorious for his eyes.
He cannot see into the mysteries contained in it, because they are spiritually
to be discerned; and the natural man therefore cannot perceive the things of
God.

6 It is a dangerous thing, not to obey the Word of God: they are accounted for
lost and forlorn men here, that do not obey the Word. Men be deceived if
they think, it is a course may be safe for to disobey God's Word: for God's
Word will take hold of them, and destroy them, and it will judge them at the
last day, Zacha. 1.4.5. 2. These. 1.8. They are but lost men, cast-awaies, that
care not for God's Word.

7 Nothing is to be reckoned a sin, which is not disobedience to the Word.
That which is not contrary to some Scripture, is no transgression: and
therefore men should take heed of burthening themselves with the vain fear of
sinning, when they break no commandment of God, but only unwarranted
traditions, either on the left hand or the right.

8 The constant omission of religious duties and good works, proves a man to
be a carnal person, as well as the committing of manifest injuries, or gross
offenses. Here the Periphrasis of a carnal person is, That he did not do what
the Word required.

9 Men that obey not the Word may be won: which should be a great comfort to
penitent sinners. It is true, that disobedience, clothed with some
circumstances or adjuncts, is very dangerous: as, when men have the means, and
love darkness rather than light, John. 3.20. and when men are smitten with
remorse, and have blessing and cursing set before them, and see their sins,
and feel the axe of God's Word, and yet will on in transgression, Deuteronomy. 11.28.
Mat. 3.10. or when men are called at the third, or sixth, or ninth hour, and
will put off and delay, upon pretense of repenting at the eleventh how^e. Mat.
20. or when men are powerfully convinced, and will rail and blaspheme, and
contradict the Word, Acts 13.45.46. and 18. 6. and when God pursues men with
his judgments, and they refuse to return, Ier. 5.2.3. or lastly, when men
despite the spirit of God, and sin of malice against the truth, Heb.
10.26.27.28.29.30.

10 The chief doctrine is, That sound obedience to the Word of God, is the
character of a true Christian; a mark to distinguish the true Christian from
the false, and from him that is no Christian at all: God makes his count by
righteousness, Romans 10. To profess the true religion, to understand the Word,
to believe it with historical or temporal faith, to talk of the Word, to
receive Baptism, and the signs of the Covenants, or the like, makes not an
essential difference. It is obeying the Word, proves us to be true Christians:
Not the hearers, but the doers of the Word are acknowledged for just persons,
Mat. 7.26.27. James 1.22.23.24.

But that we be not deceived in our obedience, we must know, that unto sound
obedience, diverse things are required: as,

1 That his obedience be from the heart, 6. things required to sound obedience.
Romans 6.17.

2 That his obedience arises from the love of God, and the hatred of sin, as
it is sin; and not from carnal and corrupt ends, Deuteronomy. 30.20. Joshua 22.5.
Mat. 4.19.

3 That his obedience be in all things, with respect to all God's
commandments; though it be against his profit, ease, credit, or the like,
Hebr. 11.8. Genes. 22.12. Psalm. 119.6. Exodus 15.26.

4 That he does righteousness at all times: that he continue in his obedience,
and obey at all times, that is, constantly, and not for a fit, Psalm. 106.2.
Hos. 6.5. Gal. 5.7. 2. Kings 18.6. Iam. 1.23.

5 That he make conscience of obeying the least commandment, as well as the
greatest, Mat 5.^9

6 That obeyes the commandments of the Gospel, about believing in God and
Jesus Christ, as well as of the Law: that practices obedience of faith, and
lives by faith, 2. These. 1.8. Romans 1.5. Mat. 16.16.

11 It is to be noted, that the Apostle uses f^ire language, when he
speaks even of carnal men. He gives not these carnal husbands reproachful
words, but only faith, They obey not the Word: and the reason may be, because
the conscience of a man, is no^ won by the terror of words, but by the
evidence of the matter. And besides, the Apostle did not think it fit, that
wives should be humoured in the violent dispraises of their husbands. It is
not profitable for inferiors, to conceive much of the hatefulness of the
sins of superiors.

12 Religion does not bind wives, to account carnal husbands to be
religious. They may know that they are carnal, and yet not sin against their
husbands in such judgment, so as they judge by infallible grounds: for though
the wife must love her husband, with matrimonial love, above all other men,
yet she is not bound to believe, that he is the best man in the world.

Lastly, it is a great affliction to a Christian wife, to have a carnal
husband. Till she have won him, she is but in a distressed estate; for,
other wicked men she might shun, and so avoid the discomfort arises from
seeing and hearing their wickedness: but an evil husband she cannot, nor ought
not to depart from him, though she must avoid his sin, 1. Cor. 7. and from
such a husband, she cannot have the helps she should have from a husband,
that could dwell with her as a man of knowledge. Besides, the many ways in
which such a husband may, or will hinder her in the course of golinesse:
besides, it cannot but be a great grief to her, to think of their parting
out of this world, that the one of them must go to hell, and that the
companion of her life, when he dies (if he repent not) must be an eternal
companion of devils.

13 Good wives may have ill husbands. such wives as are truly religious and
obedient, may have husbands that will not obey the Word of God: and that
arises sometimes from the improvidence, or ill providing of parents. Many
parents that have children that obey them, and will be ruled by them, do
dispose of them for carnal ends, to carnal or ill disposed husbands.
Sometimes, from the hypocrisy of such men as fear God, but prove not so, when
their wives enjoy them. Sometimes, from an unruly affection in good women, who,
though they know the men they choose to be carnal, yet they will have them
though it prove to their own continual woe and affliction. Sometimes, from a
special corruption of nature in some husbands; who either are loving husbands,
and yet but carnal men, or are good men, but bad husbands. Sometimes, it
arises from the special grace of God to the wife; who, though she was carnal
when she married the carnal husband, yet afterward is converted and
effectually called: and this was the case of such women, as the Apostle seems
here to write to. Sometimes it falls out, by a special and unavoideable
providence of God; though all means have been used, to try or prevent this
evil in the husband: for, marriage being to be reckoned amongst outward
things, God, for reasons known to himself, and always just, will give ill
husbands to good wives. And contrariwise, it may be God knows, that if some
good wives had better husbands, they would prove worse wives, or both husband
and wife, would be more unapt to the kingdom of God.

14 Unequal matches ought to be avoided as much as may be: and that may be
gathered from the manner of the Apostles speaking; in that he says, If any
obey not the Word: If any; as if he would import, that it is a case he desired,
might be very rarely found amongst Christians.

They also may be won.] We read in Scripture of diverse kinds of winnings:
there is a spiritual winning or gaining, and there is a wordly winning. Diverse
kinds of winning.
About the spiritual winning, we read of the winning of Christ, Phil. 3.8.
which is the work of a particular believer, laboring and wrestling with God,
in the use of his ordinances; to obtain, by the gift of his free grace* Jesus
Christ for his justification, and sanctification, and final salvation.
Likewise, we read of the winning of grace and spiritual gifts, and so,
godliness is called gain; and the good servants are said to win, or gain
more Talents to the Talents they had: And this gain is gotten by a spiritual
trading, in the diligent imploiment of the gifts the godly have, to get them
increased. We read likewise, of the winning of other men's souls in many
places; and that is done, either by the Preachers of the Gospel, conquering the
hearts of their hearers, to the obedience of the Word of Christ, and unto
sound conversion; or else, it is done by private persons, that by their
examples and good carriage, or by their admonitions or counsels, do persuade
and incline others, to a liking of a new life, or to humiliation, and
reformation of some particular faults. We read likewise, of worldly gain
and winning; when men by their sports strive for prizes, or in their trades
labor for lucre and gain. Now, this latter kind of gain differs greatly
from the former; both in the matter of the gain, and in the manner of seeking
it: for there is no comparison between the gain of grace and godliness, and
the gain of riches and honor: the one is transitory, the other eternal: the
one is true riches and gain, and serves for the best uses; the other is but in
show, and serves for the meaner uses of a corporal and temporal life: the one
does always do us good, the other does often do men hurt; and therefore, is
called filthy lucre. And in the manner of getting or holding these gains,
there is difference: we may covet the best gifts, and long after them, and love
them, and joy in them; but we are forbidden the coveting, or loving of worldly
things. But in this place, the Apostle speaks of the winning of souls; about
which, the Etymology affoordeth matter of profitable consideration. The
original word (...), signifies gain, and withal, the joy and delight of the
heart in gaining: this gain being called (...), because (...), that is, it
pleases and delights the heart. And it signifies craft or policy: and
therefore in that language, a Fox is called (...). He has his name from this
word; which may teach three things:

1 To win a soul is a great gain. which must needs be so, because to win
a soul, is more than to gain the whole world: Note.
for what shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and loose his own
soul* says our Savior?

2 It is a marveilous joy to the heart of man, to win souls to God: no man
that understands the worth of the gain, can be pleased with any thing more
than with that. The people never comforts the hearts of their godly Teachers
more, than when they they are won by them, to sound obedience to the Word of
Christ: nor can grieve them more, than by their wilful resisting of the means.

3 It requires a great deal of spiritual policy and skill to win souls: a
Minister that would do it, must sometimes be like a Fox. It is written of the
Fox, that when he is very hungry after prey, and can find none, he lies
down and feineth himself to be a dead carcass; and so the Fowls fall upon
him, and then he catches them. Even so a Minister, What a Minister must do to
win souls.
that hungreth after the winning of his hearers, must sometimes be driven to
make a very carcass of himself; by denying himself, and turning himself
into all forms, that his hearers may be enticed to flock to his doctrine.
Paul is feign to deny his maintenance, and to become all things to all men;
even to be a servant unto all, that he might win some, 1. Cor.
9.19.20.21.22. Yea, sometimes a man, to entice his people, must deny his own
profit, and make himself like a dead carcass in respect of profits; that so
he may the better allure them, to fall upon him in his minstery. Some people
will never be caught, if the Minister be bussling amongst them, for the utmost
of his Rights: but if a man will endure to be stripped of his Rights sometimes,
they will go to hear such a man, and so may be catched.

And thus from the Etymology of the Word. The matter it self, imports diverse
things done upon the person so gained: as also, it notes some thing in the
disposition of the party that is to win, and withal, something in the estate
to which he is won.

For the first; when a man is said to be won, it imports, first, To be won,
what it imports.
that he is brought to see that he is lost in his former estate. Secondly,
that he is brought to confess his misery and sin; and withal, to yield
himself with humility of mind, to be disposed of by the supreme Conquerours
and withal, that he gives over all opposing of the way of godliness. Which
may serve for trial to all such, as account themselves gained to godliness:
for such as oppose sincerity, or see not they are lost, or yield not themselves
to be disposed of by Jesus Christ, are not indeed won, whatsoever they
profess.

For the second, it notes, That such as are truly godly, show their affection
to such, as they are linked to in the bonds of nature; by their earnest desire,
after the salvation of the souls of such as they are tied to in those bonds.
Thus Paul desired the salvation of the very Nation he was of: thus parents show
their love to their children, by bringing them up in the nurture and
instruction of the Lord; and thus here godly wives show their love to their
husbands, in endeavoring to win them to godliness, and the obedience to the
Word. Which serves also, to try the affections men profess they bear to
their kindred, or neighbors, or any they are linked to in nature or affinity.
Parents love not their children, that endeavor not to get grace for them as well
as riches; and so neighbors should show their love, by admonishing,
instructing, and edifying one another, 1. These. 5.14.

For the third, in that he says indefinitely, Won, not mentioning to what,
it imports, That such as are won to true godliness, are likewise won to
all happiness; even to Gods kingdom, in respect of their right to it,
especially if they be effectually converted. He is won to glory, that is
won to grace* which also may serve for trial: for if thou can find that
thy heart is won to sound sanctification, thou may from thence assure thy
self of thy salvation, as certainly to be had, as it is certain thou have
sanctification.

They also.] This Also imports two things.

First, that the Word of God never winnes so many, but there are still more to
be won: Note.
though thousands were converted among the Gentiles, yet still there was hope
of winning more. In the spiritual husbandry, all times are not times of
harvest; and in the harvest, all the spiritual grain is not ripe at once. The
Jews were first to be gotten in, and then the Gentiles were ripe for the
harvest, John 4. and when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, by that time
the Jews will be ripe again. and so it is in particular countries, cities,
parishes, families. And as in winnowing, though it be done with never so good
a wind or skill, yet some grain will still be in the chafe: so it is in
places where the most good has been done by the means. And herein, God is
better than the natural husbandman; for the natural husbandman, will never
winnowe the chafe over again for a few grains of corn, nor will he thresh
over his straw again, if but a few corns of wheat or barley be in the
straw: but God will winnowe a great heap, if it were but at length to find
one grain of spiritual corn. It may be often observed, that in some places
God sets his servants to thresh or winnowe in great assemblies of chafe, and
yet after diverse years labor, it may be they get but one grain of corn,
that is, convert, after much toil, perhaps but one or two souls.

Now if any ask, why all that belong to God are not converted all at once; I
answer, that it were sufficient to satisfy us, if we knew no more, but that it
pleased God to have it so: Why all are not converted at once.
it is his will it should be so. But yet, that it is a wise providence of God
so to order it, may appear in diverse things: for, by continuing the means to
call his own Elect thus by degrees, the wicked are left without excuse.
Besides, the godly while they look for the daily discovery of new converts,
are thereby put to the exercise of many graces and duties; as, diligence,
compassion, charity, a winning conversation, meekness, prayer, exhortation,
and the like. And besides, the outward peace of the Church is thereby
preserved: for if it were known once, that all the Elect in any place were
called; there would follow such violent opposition from the greater and worser
sort, as there would be no place of rest for the Church in the world. They
would all be of Caines mind, if God had declared his testimony on both sides
from Heaven. And therefore at the day of judgment, ^ssoone as he has parted
the Elect and Reprobate, and sentenced them, he disposes so of them, as they
shall never live together again. And further, if all the Elect were gathered
at once, the world would be at an end: for then Christ would deliver up the
kingdom to his father, 1. Cor. 15.24. and therefore Ministers should continue
painful in their labors, as remembering that they are set to work for the
edification of the Church, till Christ come again, Ephesians. 4 12. And though the
most of their present hearers have refused the Word of God, and are hardened,
yet they may see cause of constancy; because God still supplies their
Auditories with new generations, that rise up by degrees in the room of those
hardened ones. And withal, they must think, that all the year is not harvest:
they are Gods husbandmen, and must not think much to labor and toil many
days and weeks, before they see the fruit of their labors; as hoping, that
in the end God may grant them a comfortable harvest: and if Israel should not
be gathered, yet their reward is with God. Thus of the first point, imported in
this word, Also.

Secondly, we may hence gather further, That the Apostle would have us to
account all, that are won to religion* to be safe. He implies so much, in
that he treats about winning of more to them; as if he accounted them safe,
that were won already. And it is true, of such as are won to the outward
profession of religion; that in charity, we are bound to hope the best of each
one particularly: but for such as are won to sound sanctification (the signs
whereof were noted before) it is certain of them, they can never be lost.
which is clear by these proofs, 1. Cor. 1.8.9. Phil. 1.6. Romans 8. ult. 1.
Pet. 1.5. John 6. and 10.29.30. And it must needs be so: for God will not cast
off the people whom he has chosen, Psalm. 94.14. Romans 11. And besides, Christ
lives in the hearts of those that are truly sanctified, Gal. 2.20. and Christ
can dye no more, Romans 6.10. He may as well dye at the right hand of his Father,
as dye in the heart of a Christian. And further, God has given us his spirit*
as the earnest of our eternal salvation; sealing to us thereby, all the
promises he has made us, Ephesians. 1.14.15. and it is a known principle, that whom
God loves, he loves to the end; and finally, Gods decree is unalterable, 2.
Tim. 2.29.

Object. This may be true of the most; but alas! how know I, that God will
look so carefully to me in particular? I may be lost.

Sol. Gods promise is universal: Not one of them, says the Prophet, shall be
lacking, Ier. 23.4. and God has charged Christ, to see to the keeping of the
bodies and souls of every true believer, John 6.39.40.

Object. It is true, God will never depart from us: but we may depart from him,
and so perish.

Sol. The Lords covenant is, that neither he will depart from us, nor we shall
depart from him: for he will put his fear within us to that end, Ier. 32.41.

Object. But I feel my self so weak and ignorant, I cannot hold out.

Sol. The smoking flax shall not be quenched, nor the bruised reed broken,
Esa. 42.

Object. But we are in such coutinuall danger, by reason of temptations within,
and infections of all sorts from without.

Sol. God is faithful, and will keep you from evil for all that, 2. These.
3.3. and Christ has made intercession to his Father for that very thing, that
you may be kept from those evils, John 17. and God has put his Spirit within
you of purpose, to make you keep his statutes, and to hold on your way, Ezech.
36.27.

Object. But the Apostle John seems to say, that we may lose what we have
wrought, 2. John 8.

Sol. The words of the Apostle John are these: Look^ to your selves, that we
lose not those things which we^ wrought; but that we receive a full reward.
Which words may be understood as spoken to such as were hypocrites, and had
but temporary grace, and not sound sanct^fication; for he says in the next
words, He that transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has
not God. They never had God then, that lose what they have wrought: and so this
touches not such as are sure now they have God, in that they have saving
grace. Again, it is true that the godly may lose what they have wrought, when
they fall into scandales, or by weakness fall from the profession of the
truth. I say, they may lose what they have wrought, in those sins: first, in
respect of the praise of men, all their former honor may be laid in the dust.
secondly, in respect of the inward sense, and comfort of what good they have
done; and thirdly, in respect of the fullness of the reward in heaven: for their
glory may be much lessened by their falls, but it does not therefore follow,
that they may fall finally away from God; for they will recover again.

Object. But we see that Christians of greater gifts than we, have fallen
away, and never recover again, but dye in their Apostacy, as Hymeneus and
Philetus did in the Apostles times.

Sol. The Apostle in that place answers, that Gods foundation remains sure,
and has this seal, he knows who are his; which evedently imports, that
God did never know them to be his, what shows soever they made amongst men:
and therefore, their fall need not discourage such as are sure, by the former
marks, that they are Gods.

Object. But we see that the godly themselves do fall, as David and Peter did.

Sol. First, they did recover again, and so were not lost.

Secondly, though they fall, they shall not be utterly cast down: for God
slaies them from falling wholly away, though^ they fall away in some particular
act, Psalm. 37.23.

Thirdly, in the worst falls of the Saints, there is ever still an holy seed of
grace, and faith, and knowledge, that abides in all that are borne of God;
though in respect of outward fruits, and the power, or joy of inward gifts,
they may be said to lose, 1 John 3.9.

Diverse ways from God to further our salvation.
Without the Word.] God has diverse means to further the salvation of men, and
he is pleased sometimes to work by one means, and sometimes by another;
sometimes by the Word preached, sometimes by the Word read, sometimes by
Prayer, sometimes by the Sacraments, sometimes by the example of his Servants.
So that God does work our good sometime by one ordinance, and not by another,
in the same thing, and at the same time: sometimes he will cure a man of a
particular trespass, by the admonition of some private Christian, Mat. 18.15.
Iam. 5. ult. sometimes he will bring a man to feel legal terrors, by the
doctrine of the Law, and sometime he will work it by afflictions: sometimes
he will prepare a man to receive the grace of Christ by prayer, as he did
Cornelius: sometimes he winnes him to it, by the example of his servants, as
here. And the reason is, partly because God would show the virtue that is in
each ordinance, and partly, to teach us not to despise or neglect any of the
means, and partly, to show his own power, that works freely by what means
he will, as being not tied to any. And therefore they deal very corruptly and
perversely, that under pretense of commending one ordinance of God, labor to
abase the respect of another; as they do, that say the house of God is a house
of prayer, and therefore there needs not so much preaching: not considering that
our Savior Christ himself, that alleged that place out of the Prophet, to
condemn buying and selling in the Temple, yet did spend his greatest pains in
preaching in the Temple, and out of it; thereby showing, the prime ordinance of
God, for the conversion of the souls of men, was the preaching of the Gospel
to them.

By the conversation of the Wives. Doct. ^.
] Great heed ought to be taken by such as profess Religion, in looking
carefully to their conversation, especially toward such as are without, Col.
4.5. Ephesians. 5.15. 1. Pet. 2.12. It is not enough to do good duties, but we
must do them as becomes godliness, Tit. 2. and so as may allure and win the
very ungodly: and therefore it is required, that our works should shine,
Matthew. 5.16. for by our practice we resemble God himself, and by our works
profess to show, not only what Gods Word is, but what Gods Nature is. Our
life must have the image of God printed upon it: and therefore they do
fearfully, that profess Religion amongst wicked men, and by their works
order themselves so foolishly, deceitfully, conceitedly, wickedly, that they
cause the name of God to be blasphemed.

Quest. But what should we do to our practice, that by our conversation we
might allure and win wicked men to a love of the truth?

By what means we may win wicked men in our conversation.
Answ. 1. First, we must avoid such things in our conversation, as may
irritate them: as scandalous behavior in any particular offense; as deceit,
lying, filthiness, drunkenness, pride, covetousness, passion, or the like.
and withal, take heed of mis-spending our zeal, about such things whereof
demonstration cannot be made to the conscience. And besides, in the good things
we do, we must take heed of conceitednesse, and ostentation; but in meekness
of wisdom have our conversations amongst men, Iam. 3.13. and further, we
must take heed of judging and censuring of others, even of those that be
without, Iam. 3.17.

2 Mortification does shine effectually into the consciences of wicked men: it
does move them much, if they see we be such as do heartily judge our selves
for the faults that hang upon us, and do not allow our selves in any sin,
Isa. 61.3.

3 A sound contempt of this world, and the things thereof, does much affect the
very natural consciences of men; if they see, that not in words but in deed,
the love of this world, and the glory thereof, be not in us: and contrariwise,
it much vexes them, that we should profess the hope of heaven, and contempt
of the world, and yet be as full of cares, fears, covetousness, and such like
ill affections, as the very men of the world.

4 Meekness and softness of nature, expressed in our behavior, is very
amiable; as the coherence in this Text shows, and Tit. 3.1.2.

5 Mercy to the poor, especially if we do abound in it, and be ready and
cheerful to it; does justify us much before men, Iam. 1.26.

Doct. 2. A good example, even in inferiors, may win men to Religion. True
Religion, expressed in practice, is amiable in all sorts of Christians; women
as well as men, inferiors as well as superiors, servants as well as Masters,
children as well as parents, Tit. 2.3.9.10. Luke 1. and the reason is, because
the true grace that is expressed by any Christian, has the likeness of God
printed upon it; and so is amiable for his sake, whom they by their works
resemble. And this may be a great encouragement to inferiors, and should
breed in them a great care of well-doing. But the maine thing intended in this
Text, is, That religious wives ought to strive to win their husbands, if they
have such as are not religious, or not in such soundness as they ought.

Quest. But what should a wife do, to win her husband?

Answ. She must in general resolve to do it, not by her words, but by her
conversation; as this Text shows. It is not her talking to her husband will
do it; no not her talking of religion to him, that in it self is like to
prevail. It concerns women very much, to remember this point of the Apostle,
to seek the reformation of their husbands, by their conversation, not by their
words.

Object. But Abraham was willed to hear his wife, Genesis 16.

Sol. What then? has every wife such an husband, as will hear her, as Abraham
did his wife? Besides; the question is not what husbands should do, but what
the wives should do, when the husbands are not such as they should be.

Ob. But how shall a woman know, when to speak to her husband, and when not?

Sol. She must not speak to him, no not of religion, 1. when in the matter she
would speak of, she is not furnished to speak as becomes the oracles of God; 2.
when by experience she has found, that her husband is irritated and provoked
by ^her words; 3* when she is not her self free from some fa^lt, as apparent
in other things as that is she mislikes in her husband.

Quest. But what things must she look to in her conversation, that she may by
her works win her husband?

Answ. The first thing is, that she be, in all sound subjection, obedient to
her husband in all things; or else God may win him, but she must have no part
of the praise of it. And this is strongly imported in the very scope of this
place. What things a wife must especially practice, to win her husband.
In general, she must strive to be to him (even for conscience sake, that he
may see it comes from the force of religion in her) a good wife, discreet,
provident, careful to please, meek, such a one, as his heart may trust in
her, and delight in her. Wives that be foolish, wastfull, idle, froward, or
busybodies, if they had never so much show of religion, yet they are not fit
for this work to win any body, much less their husbands.

Secondly, she must look to her conversation in things of her religion; that
therein she behaveth her self as becomes religion, Tit. 2.3. and so she must
take heed of conceitednesse and contempt of others, or neglect of her calling,
upon pretense of duties of her religion; and look to it, that she be not
her self guilty of any known fault unreformed: and withal, must strive to
show the power of her godliness in good fruits, laboring to abound in good
works, 1. Tim. 2.10. both at home and abroad; being pitiful, merciful,
ready to help them that are in misery, according to her power, and in the
things she has liberty to dispose of. Other things follow in the three next
verses.

Verse 2. While they behold your chaste conversation, coupled with fear.
IN these words is contained the second thing, the Apostle charge upon them
wives in his exposition, (viz) A chaste conversation with fear; so ordered, as
their husbands may daily behold it, and observe it in them. Where the Apostle
implies what the husbands will do, (viz.) they will observe the conversation
of the wives; and expresses what the wives ought to do, (viz.) in
conversation to show chastity, coupled with fear* First then, we are to
consider of that which is implied, (viz.) what the husband will do: and this
is imported in the word (...), While they behold.

While they behold.] The original word signifies, to observe and prye into a
thing, to find out the secrets of it: and so it notes, That carnal men (such
as these husbands were) do watch and mark the conversations of such as be
religious, to observe all they can in them that profess true religion. Thus
they watched David, and Christ, and Daniel, and so do they all the godly: and
thus they employ themselves in spying and marking the ways of the godly;
sometimes out of the naughtiness of their hearts, supposing godly men to be
like unto themselves, and therefore hope to find out wickedness in their
practice: sometimes out of malice, lying in wait to find out any fault in
their carriage, of which they may accuse them, and vilify them in the world;
Note.
and sometimes they do thus, as compelled by the force of their natural
conscience, which gives glory to the graces of God, in the conversation of true
Christians, while they observe in them that holiness, which they find not in
themselves, or other carnal men. And therefore the use should be, Use.
to teach all that profess religion, to look carefully to their ways, and
walk circumspectly, that they give not occasion of offense: but rather carry
themselves so, as to make proof of their sincerity and good conversation, by
their works.

Secondly, from hence we may gather also, That a Christian must look to his
justification before men, as well as to his justification before God: for as God
beholds his ways, so do men; and he is bound to seek his justification from
men, as well as his justification from God. And therefore, as the Apostle Paul
had taught the justification of a sinner before God, so the Apostle James*
urges the justification of the godly man before men: which this Apostle
imports in this place, when he requires such a conversation, as may compel
carnal men to say, they are justmen. So our Savior, Mat. 5.16.

Quest. What can carnal men see in the conversation of the godly, to make them
give glory to God, or the truth?

Answ. By the good conversation of true Christians, they gather the goodness
of the law or religion, which they profess. And besides, they thence gather,
that they are not hypocrites, but are religious indeed: whence they see, what
power their religion has over them in all their ways. And further, the
scandal of reproaches, cast upon the godly, is often, by the observation of
their conversation, utterly removed in the hearts of such carnal men, as set
themselves thoroughly to observe and mark the course of the godly.

Your chaste conversation.] The word here translated Chaste. in all other places
of the new Testament, is translated Pure; and so shows, that it ought to be
accepted here in a larger sense, than the word chaste does import; yet so, as
chastity is a part of the purity of a Christian.

Doct. A pure conversation is required in all true Christians; yea, even in
women as well as men. That purity is required, is manifest by diverse Scriptures;
yea, to be examples in purity, 1. Tim. 4.2. It is the chief fruit of the
wisdom is from above, James 3.17. A pure heart required, 1. Tim. 1.5. and a
pure conscience, 1. Tim. 3.9. and pure hands, 1. Tim. 2.8. And that it may be
had, is apparent: for our Savior says, Ye are all pure, John 15.3.

Quest. How can a man in this world be pure? can any man be without sin?

Answ. No, there is no man that sins not. In many things we sin all,
James 3.2. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, and am pure from my sin?
Pro. 20.9. And if any man say, he has no sin, he is a liar, and the truth
is not in him, 1. John 1.10. And yet, though in that sense no man is pure, yet
in other senses the godly man may be called pure, and is bound, even by the
Gospel, to purity: as,

1 In respect of some particular offense. A godly man may be so pure, as to
abide the trial of God himself; as David wills God to judge him according to
his righteousness, and the innocence of his hands: meaning, in that point of
false or treacherous dealing against Saul, which was charged upon him, Psalm.
3.4.5. and 18.15.

In what respects godly men are said to be pure.
2 In respect of imputation, every believer is perfectly pure: All his sins
are as if they had never been, and Christ's righteousness is his; and in that
righteousness of faith, he is perfectly pure before God himself, Rev. 19.8.14.

3 In respect of men, he may be pure, in conversation, though not in respect of
God; and so he is pure, when he is unrebukeable and unblameable amongst men:
And this ought to be found in the conversation of every Christian, to live
without offense and without rebuke, Phil. 2.15.16.

4 There is a pure conversation, in respect of God: not that we can converse
without sin, but God is pleased, for Christ his sake, to account our
conversation pure, when it has diverse prints and marks of his true grace in
us. And so Christian purity has in it many things:

1 Separation from impure men, Psalm. 1.1. 2. Cor. 6.17.

2 The desire of purity, in the perfection of it: God accounts his servants
pure, because they desire to be as pure as he would have them to be.

3 Sound mortification and judging of our selves, for what impurity we find
cleave to our works: it is Christian perfection, to judge our selves for our
imperfections, 1. John 3.3.

4 Freedom from the gross impurities, and vices, and vanities of the time:
God accounts us pure, when our spot is not as the spots of the wicked, and when
we are not infected with the corruptions which are usually in the world, 1.
Tim. 5.22. 2. Pet. 1.4.

5 Freedom from the reign of hypocrisy in the heart, and from hypocritical
courses in the life. Thus Saint James accounts the heart to be pure, when men
are not double minded, James 4.8. And in conversation he is a pure man, that
is (like Jacob) a plain man, without fraud, tricks, or dissimulation.

6 Preciseness, circumspection, or exactness of conversation; when a man
shows respect to all Gods commandments, and makes conscience to avoid
lesser sins, as well as greater, Ephesians 5.15. Mat. 5.19.

7 Devoutnesse and zeal in matters of religion, and Gods worship and glory;
and so, a pure conversation is a religious conversation, that expresses zeal
and conscience in the things of Gods service in a special manner, seeking Gods
kingdom first, and above all other things, 2. Tim. 2.22. Tit. 2.14.

8 Chastity, in keeping the heart and life clean from the impurities condemned
in the seventh commandment, is one great part of Christian purity. But before
I come to entreat of chastity in particular, I would apply this doctrine of
purity in general; first to the Text, and then to the times.

As for the Text, a pure conversation is here considered only so far, as it
may fall into the observation of carnal men: and so it comprehends, of the
former senses, chiefly, Inoffensivenesse, separation from impure men, freedom
from gross impurities, and dissimulation, a Christian and wise strictness of
life, and devoutnesse and well ordered zeal in matters of religion.

Use.
Now for the use of it: If these be applied to these times, it shows, first,
how wicked and profane those sorts of people are, who reproach godly men for
the care and practice of these things; as if to be a Puritan, even in these
senses, were to be some vile man, not worthy to live amongst men. Secondly, it
shows that worlds of people that bear the name of Christians, are not true
Christians; because their conversations are not pure: for their swearing, or
drunkenness, or whoredoms, or sins of deceit, or dissimulation, or
fashioning themselves to this world, or the liberty they take to live as they
list, testifies against them, to their faces, that their works are not pure;
and therefore unless they repent, they will all perish, Rev. 3.1.2. and the
rather, because they cause by their evil lives, not only the hearts of the
good to be grieved, but the mouths of the enemies of religion to be opened to
blaspheme. Thirdly, godly men that find these cares in them, should comfort
themselves much in the testimonies of their own consciences, and the gracious
acceptance of God, who will show himself pure with them that are pure, 2.
Cor. 1.12. Psalm. 18.

Thus of Purity in general. Now of Chastity, as a part of a pure conversation;
and it may well be that, which is chiefly here intended.

Chastity is either of the mind, or of the body: and it is a most certain
truth, that God requires a chaste mind as well as a chaste body; and does forbid
unchaste thoughts and desires, as well as unchaste words or deeds. For unchaste
thoughts and desires are, first, foolish and noi^ome, 1. Tim. 6.9. secondly,
they hinder the power of religion, and true knowledge, and grace, 2. Tim. 3.4.
thirdly, they fight against the soul, 1. Pet. 2.11. A man were as good have
his body wounded with weapons, as his soul wounded with lusts: fourthly, they
cause many times, many and monstrous sins in the life; which arise at first
from the nourishing of foul desires and thoughts in the heart. The wickedness
that was in the lives of the Gentiles, did many of them spring from the lusts
which they harbored in their hearts, Romans 1. lastly, if men repent not of them
in time, they will drown men in perdition, 1. Tim. 1.9. But it is the
chastity of the body which is especially here intended; and our Savior Christ
divides those chaste persons into three sorts: some are termed Eunuchs from
their mothers womb, and so are disabled for bodily fornication: some are made
so by other men, who by violence, for their own service, made some men
Eunuchs. Now the third sort are they, that made themselves Eunuchs for the
kingdom of Heavens sake. Of this third sort, are all chaste persons, who by a
godly care and watchfulness, keep themselves from the sins of filthiness,
as well as natural Eunuchs do, Mat. 19.12. Now these persons that are made
chaste for the kingdom of Heavens sake, are either single persons, or married
persons: of chastity in single persons, other Scriptures entreat, as 1. Cor. 7.
of chastity in married persons, this place entreats. Now this virtue of
chastity, is of purpose imposed upon godly Christians by the Apostle, because
the sins of fornication were so rise and common among the Gentiles; who
oftentimes defended their filthiness to be either no sin, or a very small
sin. But before I come to speak of chastity in particular, some doctrines
would be in general observed: as first.

Doct. 1. A godly Christian must show the proof of his religion, especially in
keeping himself free from the sins that are most common and rise in the
world; and even the more sin abounds in the world, the more strict they
should be in resisting sin: as here even the more filthy the lives of
others were, the more chaste should the conversation of godly Christians be.
Because their love to God, should constrain them the more to be zealous for
his glory, by how much the more God is dishonored by other men: and because,
they are flatly forbidden to follow a multitude to sin: and because, God has
chosen them out of all other sorts of men, to bear his Name, and to hold forth
the light of the Word, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation: and
because, thereby the conscience of wicked men, may be the more effectually
convinced, and prepared to repentance. Thus Lot is righteous in Sodom; and
Joshua and his house will serve the Lord, though all the Nation serve Idols.
This point, as it should inflame the zeal of the godly, to contend for the
truth more earnestly, and to resist all the vices of the time; so it shows,
that they can hardly have any truth of grace in them* that are so easily borne
down with the stream of evil example, and are so apt to follow the fashion of
the world.

Doct. 2. Chastity may be in married persons, as well as in single persons: as
here wives are said to be chaste in conversation, though they withhold not due
benevolence from their husbands. God himself has freed the coming together of
man and wife* from the aspersion of impurity, in that he has said, that
marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled. And this shows the wonderful
indulgence of God, that for the respect he bears to his own institution of
marriage, and for the necessity of marriage, for the propagation of mankind,
and prevention of fornication, is pleased to bear with, and cover, and not
impute the many frailties, follies, vanites, and wickednesses are found
between man and wife. And withal, we may hence see reason to condemn their
doctrine, as a doctrine of devils, that forbid marriage as an impure thing,
and such as hinders holiness: and the blemish will never be wiped away from
some of the Ancients, who, to establish their own Idol of I know not what
virginity, have written most wickedly, and most basely against marriage.

Quest. But what then? does God allow any kind of coming together, so it be
between man and wife?

Answ. No, he forbids coming together, in the time of the woman's separation
for her courses, Ezech. 18.6. Nor does he allow of brutish sensuality, Note.
though it pass between man and wife: for though God bear with many things,
yet the chastity he imposes, does not only restrain foreign beds, but
moderateth even the excesses of concupiscence in married persons; so as in
those things, their conversation ought to be a conversation with fear.

Doct. 3. The practice of the duties of the second Table, adorn religion,
as well as the duties of piety in the first Table.

Doct. 4. Some observe, That a chaste conversation is especially charged upon
the woman: which must be warily understood; for God hates who^edome in men,
as well as women. But yet it is true, that some sins, as they are abominable
in any, so they are much more in women; as we see in swearing and
drunkenness. so it is true of filthiness in the woman: and therefore the
whorish woman is called a strange woman, in the Proverbs. But I think, it is
not safe to restrain the sense of this place, or other the like places so: but
I take the meaning of the Apostle to be, so to commend chastity in the wife, as
that which is necessary in all, both men and women. And so I come to consider
of Chastity; and so would show, first, the motives to it: secondly, the means
to preserve it, and thirdly, the way how Chastity may be manifested and made
known to others.

For the first; many things should persuade with a Christian to preserve
chastity, and to avoid whoredom, and bodily lusts. Motives to chastity.
First, it is the special will of God, and a special part of their
sanctification, to avoid fornication, 1. These 4.3. Secondly, the promises of
God, all of them should allure men to perfect their holiness, and to avoid
all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1. Thirdly, the
hatefulness of the nature of the sin of fornication and whoredom, should
deter Christians from the committing of it. This is an heinous crime, an
iniquity to be punished by the Judges, Job 31.11. These lusts are lusts of the
Gentiles, 1. Pet. 4.3. A sin not so much as to be named amongst Christians,
Ephesians. 5.3. A sin that utterly corrupts natural honesty, Pro. 6.27.29. It is a
sin, not only against the soul, but against the body of a man: even that
body that was bought with the blood of Jesus Christ, and was made for God, and
is the Temple of the holy Ghost, and is a member of Christ's mystical body, 1.
Cor. 6.15. to the end. Fourthly, the consideration of the cause of this sin,
should abash men: it is a work of the flesh, even a fruit of a corrupted and
filthy nature, Gal. 5.22. Fifthly, the effects of whoredom are very fearful:
for it is a sin that defiles a man, Mat. 15. and it makes a man unfit for the
company of any Christian, 1. Cor. 5.9. It brings dishonor, and a wound, can
never be blotted out, Prro. 6.33. and it causes the fearful curse of God
upon men, Heb. 13.4. and that both upon their states and souls in this life.
By means of a whorish woman, a man may be brought to a morsel of bread, Pro.
6.26. It is a sin will root out all a man's increase, Job. 31.11.12. And upon
the soul, it brings a fearful senselessenesse, and disability to make use of
the means of salvation: Whoredom and wine take away the heart, Hosea 4.11.
and God casts them many times into a reprobate sense, Romans 1. so as they are
past feeling, Ephesians. 4.18. so as the adulterous person goes about like a Fool
^o ^he slocks, or like an Ox to the slaughter, Pro. 7.22. In a word, the
adulterous person destroieth his own soul, Pro. 6.32. yea, which is worst of
all, it deprives men of the kingdom of Heaven, 1. Cor. 6.9. and casts both
body and soul into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Pro. 9. ult.
Rev. 2^.8. and 22.15.

Preservatives of chastity.
For the second, the means to preserve chastity in married persons, are these.
First, they must labor to excite and nourish matrimonial love one to another,
Pro. 5.18.19. Secondly, they must do as Job did, make a covenant with their
eyes, and not carelessly give liberty to their senses, to wander about after
vain objects, Job. 31.1. Thirdly, they must store their heads and hearts with
Gods words; especially such words of God, as do give reasons and motives to
dissuade from this sin, Pro. 2.1.3.4.11.12.16.17. Psalm. 119.9. Fourthly, they
must continually meditate of their mortality, and that they are but strangers
and pilgrims here, and must come to judgment, 1. Pet. 2.11. Eccles. 11.9.
Fifthly, they must, by confession, and godly sorrow, and prayer, crucify these
first risings of inward lusts; and so by repentance for the lust of the heart,
prevent the filthiness of the flesh, Gal. 5.24. Sixthly, they must walk in
love, that is, exercise themselves in a Christian and profitable society, with
such as fear God, Ephesians. 5.1.3.4. Lastly, they must with all care and
conscience, avoid all the occasions of this sin: such as are,

1 Idleness, that sin of Sodom, Exech. 46.49.

2 Fullness of bread and drunkenness; as is noted in the same place. They must
beat down their own bodies, 1. Cor. 9.27.

3 The desire to be rich: for the love of money breeds noisome lusts, 1. Tim.
6.9.

4 Ignorance of God and his truth, Ephesians. 4.17.18.

5 Evil company, especially the society of such as are filthy.

6 Lascivious attire, and filthy dressing; such as are strange colors, and
naked breasts. This is whoredom between the breasts, Hos. 2.

7 Lascivious pictures, and profane representations of filthy practices; such
as are expressed by those wicked Stage-Plaiers, against which the very light of
nature pleads.

8 Chambering and wantonness, and all provocations to lusts, Romans 13.13.

For the third point; How a chaste wife may be discerned.
if you ask, how those hu^bands could behold the chaste conversation of the
wives? I answer, they might know that they were chaste, both by their modesty in
secret in the use of the marriage bed, and by their strict care to behave
themselves modestly and soberly abroad, in the family or in other places; by
their great conscience to avoid all occasions of evil, when they discerned
that they did abhor the society and presence of light and vain persons, and
detested all the provocations to lust, of what kind soever. The next verse
shows one way, how they may know they were chaste, even by their care to avoid
pride and vanity in attire. Such men as have wives that are proud, and follow
the fashion of the world in attire, or delight in vain company, and haunt
stage-plaies, are fools if they be overconfident of their wives chastity;
unless it be in case of necessity, where they want either beauty, or
temptation, or opportunity. And it is a probable argument of a chaste mind in
the wife, when she keeps house, and is diligent, and careful, and painful
in the business of the family; and desires to please her husband in all
things, and willing to be subject to his will.

Thus of a chaste conversation. A conversation with fear, follows.

Some refer this fear to the carnal husbands, and make the sense thus: While
they with fear behold your chaste conversation. It is true, that wicked men
feel a great deal of fear many times in themselves, when they look upon the
godly; and get the fear, as the fruit of their watching, and prying, and
observing. That wicked men are smitten many times with fear, many Scriptures
show, as Deuteronomy. 28.10. 1. Sam. 18.15. Psalm. 102.15. The reasons why they are
afraid, are diverse:

Reasons why wicked men are smitten with a servile fear.
1 Natural conscience does homage to the image of God, stamped upon the natures
and works of the godly; when they see in them, that which is above the
ordinary nature of men, or their expectation, they are afraid of the Name of
God, which is called upon by them, Deuteronomy. 28 9.10.

2 They fear, when they see that they behave themselves wisely and
religiously, and that God is with them, and they prosper, notwithstanding all
the oppositions are made against them, 1. Sam. 18.12.15.19. Nehe. 6.16. Psalm.
48.4. Zach. 9.5.

3 They fear, because the good conversation of the godly, does rebuke their
ill conversation: the chaste conversation of the Wives amazeth the hearts of
the Husbands, when they think of their own unchaste conversation: so the
piety, patience, mercy, and goodness expressed by godly men, makes the hearts of
wicked men ache within them.

4 They fear extremely, because the goodness of the conversations of the
godly, is to them a very token of their own perdition, if they continue in the
state they are in, Phil. 1.28.

Quest. But what do wicked men do, when they feel these fears?

Answ. Either they strive to drive them out, and forget them; or else, they
strive to imagine scandalous and vile things, to oppose their wicked surmises,
or false accusations, against the glory of the godly life of such as are good,
as the Pharisees did against Christ, and the wicked Courtiers against David: or
else, they use all means, to remove the godly further off from them, as
Amaziah did to Amos, and Saul to David, in the place quoted before: or else,
they increase in hatred and malice, as their observation of the good hand of
God upon his servants, does increase, 1. Sam. 18.15.29. or else, as men
conquered by the truth, they give glory to God, and confess the wickedness of
their own estate, and be won, as the Husbands here, by the conversation of
the Wives. The use should be, to stir up godly Christians to look to their
own salvation the more; and to hold on, and do good still, and walk wisely
toward them that are without, and keep their way: for hereby they shall not
only convince and confute carnal persons, but so daunt them, as their good
lives will often make their very hearts to ache within them. and the rather,
because this effect may follow the conversation of women as well as men, and
servants as well as masters, inferiors as well as superiors. Thus of fear, as
it is referred to the Husbands. But the most Divines do refer this fear to
the Wives, as they were Christians: and so thereby is ^oted a second thing in
their conversations, which did much affect their unbeleeving husbands, and that
was their holy fear which they expressed in their lives.

Fear two ways considered.
Now this conversation with fear, may two ways be considered; the one, as it
was common to these women with other Christians, and so, it belongs to other
Christians as well as to them; and the other was, as it was particularly
required in them as wives.

For the first, a conversation with fear is required in all the godly: so
says Solomon, Blessed is the man that fears always, and Paul says, Work
out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. and again, Be not high
minded, but fear, Romans 12.3. This conversatton with fear, was in Paul, 1. Cor.
2.3. It is required, that the mighty men of the earth should serve the Lord in
trembling, Psalm. 2.12. this is a fruit of godly sorrow, 2. Cor. 7.11. Now in
our conversations, we are to express both the fear of men, and the fear of
God. There is a fear of men to be showed by other Christians, as well as
wives, in their conversations: as, children must fear their parents, Levit.
19.3. and subjects must converse with fear, and show it in their carriage
toward their rulers; and so all inferiors must express a conversation with
fear toward their superiors. Hence the Apostle says, Give fear to whom
fear belongs, Romans 13.7. so such as have lesser gifts, must submit
themselves to such as have greater gifts, in fear, Ephesians. 5.21.

But the special fear we should show in our conversation, should be the
fear of God; and so a conversation with fear, does import, more than barely
to fear God: for it imports, that it must be by such a fear, as does appear to
the view of others, and such a fear as is continual. We read of a Spirit of
the fear of God, Esa. 11.3. and there be other phrases of Scripture, that
express this conversation with fear: as where we are charged, to be in the
fear of God all the day long, Pro. 23.17. and the godly are said, to walk in
the fear of God, Acts 11.31. God was said to be the fear of the Patriarchs,
Genesis 31.42.53. so also, Eccles. 8. 10. Mal. 2.5.

Quest. But what cause have Christians to show so much fear in their
conversations?

Answ. They have reason to fear always.

1 Because of their own insufficiency, Reasons why we ought to express this
fear of God in our conversation.
to perform those holy duties are required of them, in such a holy manner as
they desire, or ought to do: this made Paul so fearful, 1. Cor. 2.3.

2 Because of the danger that the godly themselves are in, if this fear be not
in them; as we see by the miserable instance of the Apostle Peter, who fell
shamefully, when he shook off this fear, and grew bold and confident of his
own strength: and therefore they that stand, are charged to fear lest they
fall, Romans 11.

3 Because of the many and fearful adversaries, our souls and religion have
in this world. We be to wrestle with principalities, and powers, and
spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians. 6.10. 2. Cor. 11.3. and our task is, to overcome
the world, and the flesh: which has many difficulties in it, considering the
multitudes of evil examples, and scandals are in the world, and the great
treachery of our own flesh.

4 Because of the lamentable reproach of the Heathen, and such as are without
God and Christ, of all sorts and all places; which would be powered out, if we
should miss it in our conversation, if our foot should but slip, Neh. 5.9.

5 Because of the dreadful relation in which we stand unto God, who has
authority over us, and is our Master and Father, Mal. 1.6. and is able to kill
both body and soul, Mat. 10.28. and is the Lord God Almighty, and the King of
Saints; and he is only holy, and of most pure eyes, and has power over all
Nations, Revel. 15.3.4. and does wondrous things. He has placed the sand for
the bounds of the sea, by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: though
the waves thereof toss themselves and roar, yet they cannot prevail, Ier.
5.22. He is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King: at
his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide
his indignation, Ier. 10.7.10. so Job 31.23. David said his flesh trembled for
fear of God, Psalm 119. verse. 120.

6 Because of the fearful falling away, and rejecting of many Churches, and
particular persons, that yet have before flourished for a time, in the
professing of true religion, Ier. 3.8. Romans 11.20.21.

7 Because of the many precious things, and spiritual treasures may be lost
indeed, or in show, if we do not attend diligently, and with great care and
fear, Heb. 2.1. and 4.1.

Quest. But how must we show this fear in our conversation?

Answ. It must be showed many ways, both in the ordering of our lives toward
God, and in the desposing of our conversation toward men.

Toward God, we express this fear,

By what ways we must show this fear of God.
1 By the sobriety of our minds, resting in his revealed will, and not daring
to meddle with his secrets, Romans 12.3.

2 By receiving his messengers with fear and trembling, 2. Cor. 7.15. not
daring to contest with them, or stand upon our private conceits and opinions;
but rather to make have to beseech God, and to repent, when they reprove us or
threaten us, Ier. 29.19. Exodus 14.31. Ezra. 9.4. and 10. 1.2.3. at the best,
mistrusting our selves, and our own wisdom, and conceits, and showing our
selves careful to come to the light, that it may be manifest our deeds are
wrought in God, Job 37. ult. Pro. 3.7.

3 By showing all awefull care and devotion, in Gods service and worship,
expressing all reverence, Psalm. 2.11. and 5.7. and striving to make glorious
conceptions of God in our hearts, Revel. 15.4. and 14.7. not daring to omit any
time or opportunity of serving God. Acts 10.2. and avoiding all rashness, and
vain behavior, in words, or vows, or carriage, Eccles. 5.2. to the eighth
verse: not mentioning the very names or titles of God, without great reverence,
Deuteronomy. 28.58. and remembering Gods presence, especially at the times and in the
places of his worship, Mal. 2.5. Eccles. 8.12.13.

4 By showing respect to all Gods commandments; endeavoring to keep not one,
or some few, but all the statutes of our God, Deuteronomy. 6.2 and 31.12. When our
consciences are afraid, even for the respect we bear to God, to bawke one of
the least commandments, or to be corrupted with any filthiness, either in
flesh or spirit, or to come short of any goodness is required of us, 2. Cor.
^.1. being afraid to commit those sins are committed without fear, either
by person^ near to us, or by the most men of all sorts, Ezech. 18.14. Mal.
3.16. And for the manner of our obedience to Gods will, this fear expresses
it self notably in two things: first, that it does not only make us avoid or
leave evil, (which in some cases wicked men may do) but it makes us loath and
hate evil, Pro. 8.13. and 16.6. causing us to eschew it, as we would any
thing we account poisonfull or deadly, Psalm. 34. Secondly, it makes us not
only do good duties, but it makes us work hard at them; afraid to omit any
thing injoined us, or to have our task undone, when God should call us to a
reckoning, Acts. 10.35. Phil. 2.12.

Toward men, we express this fear of God also diverse ways: as,

1 By a continual care of innocence; By what ways we are to express this
fear of God toward men.
avoiding all courses of injury, though they might be committed with any
color of right: as oppression, Lev. 25.17. usury, Lev. 25.36.

2 By pity and mercy to Gods creatures in distress: so Cornelius is said to
be a man fearing God, because he gave much alms, Acts 10.12. Job 6.14.

3 By reverence to God^ image in his creatures, even in the lowest kind: as by
rising up before the hoare head, and honoring the face of the old man, Levy.
10.32. not daring to curse the deaf, or put a stumbling block before the
blind, Lev. 19.14.

4 By all possible care, of the faithful discharge of the particular callings
they are set in, for the good of other^; as is required in servant^, Col. 3.^2.
especially, Ephesians. 6.5. and Magistrates, 2. Sam. 23.3.2. Chr. 19.6.7.

5 By a tender and compassionate care, to recover such as are spiritually
fallen, and to preserve such as are in danger to fall, from the simplicity that
is in Christ Jesus, 2. Cor. 11.3. Jude 23.

6 By an awefull endeavor to give no offense, neither to them that are without,
nor to any of the godly, 1. Cor. 10.3. avoiding all ways of provocation or
contention, even in civil life, Psalm. 34.12.

Now it must be remembered, that of all those ways, by which fear should be
showed in our conversation, in this Text those only can be intended, which are
subject to the observation of others.

The uses may be, first, to show how miserably the lives of all sorts of men
are faulty, in the want of this fear: for heerby it is apparent, that those
sorts of men following, have not this fear of God in their conversations: as,

What sorts of men have not Gods fear.
1 Such as be masters of opinions, and dare boldly and securely obtrude their
erroneous conceits, and new opinions upon the Church of God; straining their
wits, for applause, to go beyond Gods revealed will, Romans 12.3.

2 Such as are usually well pleased with themselves, and their doings, and are
not troubled at their own insufficiency, and infirmities: God cannot abide such
as are wise in their own eyes, Job 37. ult.

3 Such as live securely in known sins, and bless themselves in their
hearts, when their iniquity is found worthy to be hated, Psalm. 36.1. Ier.
44.10. Mal. 3.5.

4 Such as go on in vicious courses, in the abuse of their liberty in things
indifferent, notwithstanding the frequent admonitions of godly and grave
Divines; and seem rather willing to forsake their own mercies, than leave
their foolish vanities, Exodus 14.31. Job 28.28. Pro. 13.13. and 14.16. and
1.29.30.

5 Such as take no notice of Gods great judgments which are in the world, and
will not declare his works, Psalm. 64.9.

6 Such as are careless of prayer, and see not need to seek unto God, but
restrain prayer, Job 15.4. And so it is of the constant and wilful omission
of all the service of God.

7 By not pitying the afflicted, Job 6.14.

I omit to reckon up more particulars; because, by the contrary conversation to
that which is required in the former rules, men may see, that they are far
out of the way. Yet it is the more lamentable, that this conversation with
fear, is not so usually found even amongst the godly themselves, neither in
their awefull reverence of behavior and continuance in Gods service, nor by
their humble, and careful, and mortified behavior toward men.

Again, by the serious consideration of the former explication, we may gather,
That there are diverse fears ought not to be found in our conversations: as the
fear of crosses in our callings, or of the reproaches and oppositions of men
for well doing, or a superstitious fear of transgressing, where there is no Law
but merely the wills of men: and such as that fear, which through unbeleife is
conceived in the hearts of many weak Christians, and does much oppress them,
and that is the fear of Gods acceptance of their best works; so judging
themselves, as they withal judge of God unrighteously, while they remember not
his promises made to his servants, concerning his acceptance of their desires
and endeavors.

Lastly, such as have attained to this conversation with fear, should much
rejoice, and labor to preserve it with all care; because it is a thing, which
is not only lovely in the sight of God, but is very amiable, and of a winning
quality amongst men, as this Text imports.

And thus of this conversation with fear, as it concerns those women as they
were Christians. Now there is another kind of fear, which is required of them
as they are wives: for so it is expressly charged upon all wives, that they
should fear their husbands, Ephesians. 5. ult. And this fear they must show,

1 By giving reverent term and titles, Wherein wives show their fear of their
husbands.
as Sarah did to Abraham.

2 By avoiding all things by wisdom she can guess, or by experience she can
find, to be cross to the nature or desire of her husband: even striving to
avoid what might provoke his very infirmities; giving soft answers when he is
angry, and forbearing passion and unquietness, even with others, if he be
present.

3 By a care to show all faithfulness, diligence, care, and tender respect of
him, and his good, in all things in their power and charge. And so it appears
in the negative, what wives do not fear their husbands; viz. such us care not
to be daily guilty of such faults as cross, or grieve, or vex their husbands:
such as give them unseemly titles, out of the rudeness of their familiarity,
or the distemper of their passions: such whose feet will not keep their own
house, to attend their callings: such as blaze abroad their husbands
infirmities, whereas they should have been the glory of the man: such as are
apt to make the worst constructions of the doubtful actions of their husbands,
and such as are inquisitive, and still desirous to have accounts given them, of
all their husbands do.

Verse 3. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel: Verse 4. But let
it be the hidden man of the heart, that which is not corruptible, even the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price.
THese words contain the third thing charged upon wives, by the Apostle in his
exposition; and that is, their comely dressing of themselves: which he sets
down negatively, showing how they must not be dressed, ver. 3. and
affirmatively, showing what does most adorn them, ver. 4.

In the negative, observe what is expressly prohibited, and then what is
impliedly allowed. That which he expressly forbids, he referres to three
heads. The first, concerns the natural abuse of the ornaments* that by nature
are upon the body; and instanceth in the hair, which God has given to women
for a covering. And the abuse ^eth in the plaiting of the hair: by which he
means, not the tying up of the hair, after a decent manner; but the
artificial laying of it out in plaits, or curles, or locks, or the like.
Their devises about their hair are so many, as we cannot reckon them by the
names they give them.

The second, concerns the excess of cost about their dressing,
Synecdochinally express by the putting about of gold, and pearls, and such
like rich jewels.

The third, concerns the vanity of fashions in attire, in the last words, of
putting on of apparel.

Now for the meaning of the Apostle, in this negative prohibition, I find
three opinions: The one is, of such as think the Apostle did absolutely forbid
the things named; but yet, that it was but a temporary prohibition, intended to
bind them of that time, not to bind us that live now. The other is, of such
as think, that he does not simply forbid these things, but only
comparatively; meaning, that in comparison of the inward dressing, we should
not have so much care of these outward ornaments: or about dressing, our care
should not be so much for the outward dressing, as for the inward. The third
is, of such as conceive that the Apostle does simply, and for ever, forbid
these things named, and all of like sort, and that for ever. The opinion of the
first sort of men, is rejected by all sorts of Divines, as very foolish and
erroneous. The second opinion, has Cajetan a Papist, for the author of it; but
is rejected by Divines of his own sect, for this reason, Because if that were
the Apostles meaning, his prohibition would teach the most sober and modest
women in their apparel, as well as the most licentious: for ever the most
modest, are tied to respect the inward dressing above the outward; which cannot
be the Apostles meaning. The third opinion, is the opinion almost of all the
Ancient, and modern Writers. But because I will not take power to bind your
consciences, only by the opinions of men, therefore afterward I will show
you, by express Scripture, when apparel or dressing becomes vicious: but
first, I would consider of the doctrine in general.

Doct. It seems to be a clear truth. That Christian women should, in the
dressing of themselves, take heed of ostentation, costlinesse, and vain
fashions, and that curious desire after the adorning of their bodies: And
though the Text mentions only wives, yet it must needs also be true of
unmarried women much more. For wives many times lay the fault of their vice
upon their husbands, that they did either by their command, or to please them:
but that vain excuse is wholly taken away from the unmarried, because they have
none, upon whom to lay their faults that ways. And therefore the practice of
the yonguer women, is the more abominable in our times, when we see that
usually they are more vile, and excessive in cost and vain fashions, than the
elder women. And the pretense, that it is to get them husbands, is devilish:
for if their natural comeliness will not set them out, they are wicked
deceivers, that make themselves to be that in dressing, which they are not in
nature. And those men are excessively foolish, that judge of the fitness of
women, to make wives of, only by their clothes, and not by the persons, or
gifts. And further, it is out of doubt, that if these things in apparel are
ill in wives, they are as ill in husbands, or rather worse. What can be more
abominable to the view, than the observation of the most monstrous
effeminateness, that is found in many of our Gentry, that daily betake
themselves to most womanish tricks in their dressing of themselves? These are
unclean devils in the flesh, and no Christians.

Now there are many reasons, why Christian women and so men also, should not
pride themselves, or be any way vain and fantastical in their dressing or
apparel: and why they should not be curious about their clothes, or the
comeliness comes from them.

11. Reasons against vain attire in women.
1 Because our clothes are a continual remembrance of our shame. A Thief may
as well be proud of his halter, as woe of our garments; for it was sin brought
in raiment. If Adam had never sinned, he had never needed raiment.

2 Because curiosity and cost, is against the first institution of apparel.
God himself made the first garments were made, and left a pattern to follow.
Now he clothed our parents with the skins of beasts; shunning of purpose,
either cost or superfluous ornaments, and I suppose ye will grant, they were
as great, and as good, as any of us. God attired them in a habit became sorrow,
and the estate of banished men.

3 Because God has forbidden this curiosity of dressing in women, at all
times, and in all places of his worship: for when the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2. had
commanded to men to pray in all places, and given them in charge diverse things
they must look to at the time of Gods worship, he then turns to women, and
charge them, to look to the clothes they wear, when they worship God;
expressly prohibiting rich and vain apparel, ver. 9.10. And good reason, for
such as either publicly or privately come to worship God, should come to him
in the habit of suppliants and petitioners; seeing they come, or should come,
to beseech God to forgive them their sins: which they should ask with tears
and groans, as such as know no happiness if God be not reconciled to them.
Would any man regard a Beggar, if he came to ask alms in rich clothes? and
can any man be so over-growne with dotage, as to think God does not care, in
what colors or fashions we worship or entreat him? Besides, we come not into
the house of God, to show our selves to men; but unto God amongst men. Yea, in
private, how dare fantastical women stand before God to pray, when they carry
upon their backe^ such Ensigns of pride and vanity? And hereby we may
discern the horrible wickedness of these times, which are just Apostle to
Paul's direction: for, we see men and women cloth themselves with the greatest
cost and vanity, when they are disappeare before God in his house: what says a
Father to such creatures as these; What (...) into this place? this is the
house of God (...) come only to show your selves to men? this is no dancing
school, nor wedding house, nor yet any playhouse, that you should come hither
in these histrionicall and strumpet-like attire. Crhisostome upon this second
chapter of the first of Timothy.

4 Because our bodies, we are so curious about, are but houses of clay, and
were made of the dust or mire of the earth, and will be shortly dissolved: and
therefore we should not so sin against our precious souls, as to mispend
our cares, cost, and affections upon that which in it self is so vile; and the
apparel we put on the body, will last but awhile, whereas the dressing of the
soul will last for ever.

5 Because of the absence of the Bridgrome, our Lord Jesus Christ. Is the
Husband so far from home, and can a chaste Spouse be taken up with such
affectation of curious and vain dressing? What more evident sign of a
strumpet, than for to dress her self curiously, and for the show to men, when
her husband is far from home? Shall we so sin against the Lord Jesus, now
absent from us in the body, and to mind earthly things, and set our affections
upon the vanities of the world, as if we had no sense of his absence, and did
not care for him now he is gone?

6 Because these vanities in apparel, are so grievously threatened by the Lord.
He will visit them that wear strange apparel, Zepha. 1.8. and what woman can
read the third of Esaias, and not tremble at the wrath of the Lord, if she be
guilty of any such vanities? and the Prophet was but a Novice, in discribing
vain fashions, if that description were to be applied to our times: for those
vanities are now become the dressing of such as are more sober. Oh what a world
of wicked devises are there now beyond that Catalogue! Those were wicked women;
but now they exceed the wickedness of the wicked. Let these creatures take
heed of vain interpretations of that place. They may deceive themselves; but
they shall find, that God will not be mocked: they dawbe with untempered
mortar, that tell them, that those things condemned were not sinful, or that
God was not displeased with them.

7 Because the excess and vanity in apparel, has been condemned by the
greatest lights in the Christian world; and that with great bitterness of
censure. I will give instance in some of their censures: Cyprian said, They
that put on vain and gorgeous apparel, cannot put on Christ. Gregory said,
Let no man think, that in the study of precious apparel, sin can be
wanting. Ambrose says, That proud attire obtaines nothing of God, and causes
that men never think well of the party using it: for, says he, what wise
man does not abhor a woman proudly dressed? and therefore much more God, their
Creator, cannot abide to see that body which he made free, to be chained to
metals. He means gold, and pearls, and such like: and adds, The more they
are liked of some men, the more they are hated of God. Tertullian and Cyprian
have written whole Treatises against the apparel of women. Yea, Cyprian and
Augustine say, That superfluous apparel is worse than whoredom, and they give
this reason; because whoredom only corrupts chastity, but this corrupts
nature. What Jerome thinks of it, you shall hear afterward. What should I
reckon more testimonies, seeing, in all ages of the Christian Church, these
things in the apparel of women have been bitterly condemned? yea, the very
Popish Writers do bitterly inveigh against vain and superfluous apparel; yea,
the very Heathen men did so also.

8 It should the more dissuade women from following foolish vanities, in
adorning themselves; because usually where these things are noted, by way of
description in Scripture, the parties of whom it is written, were notorious
wicked persons, and usually Whores: as it is noted of Thamar and Iezabell, and
the Whore in the Revelation, Rev. 17.3. and for notable wickedness; as the
woman, Esaias the third, and Dives, Luke 16.

9 This care about the adorning of the body, does not agree to the simplicity
that is in Christ Jesus. Godly Christians, have their beauty within: they are
not such as will contend wi^^ the men of the world, about finenesse, or
greatness, or worldly praises, or any outward ornaments. Nor do they walk
with a right foot to the Gospel, that are conformable to the men of this world:
there is great dissimulation to profess so strict a life as the Gospel does
require, and yet take such liberty in the things of this world.

10 About the abuse of apparel, many sins meet together; as vanity, pride,
evil concupiscence, contempt of others, immodesty, and the like.

11 There are many evil effects of vanity, and excess in apparel; both in
respect of God, and themselves, and others: in respect of God and his service,
vain and proud apparel breeds carelessenesse, and abatement of that holy
fear and zeal, should be showed in Gods service, and it causes the Name of
God to be blasphemed, and the good way of God to be evil spoken of. And for
themselves, by following foolish vanities, they bring Gods visiting hand in
judgment upon them, Zeph. 1.8. and withal, they forsake their own mercies,
Ionab 2.8. And for the effects upon others, they are diverse. For first, by
their example they do much hurt, both in provoking others to the imitation of
their vanity, and by inflaming evil concupiscence, and filthy desires: and
which is the more grievous, parents many times by their examples, infect the
minds of their own children, and corrupt their posterity; yea, we see many
daughters made worse than their mothers. Again, excess in apparel causes in
many, the oppression of their Tennants, and fraudulent courses, that they may
maintain themselves, in that wicked excess and vanity. Besides, it destroies
in diverse, all respect of the poor and hospitality. Lastly, do we not see
many families destroyed, and overthrown by these courses, so as their
posterity is utterly defeated of their means and inheritances, by the riot of
their parents in their apparel?

Now it remains that I should show, out of the Scriptures, when apparel, or
dressing, or putting on of apparel, becomes vicious. And that will a^^eare to
be many ways.

1 The dressing of the hair of the head is judged to be vicious, out of this
Text, when it is plaited: which is by Interpreters conceived, 14. Ways by
which apparel, or dressing our selves, becomes vicious.
to mean all that artificial dressing of the head, that implies the hair
beyond the natural use of it, only for vain show. The natural use of the
hair, is to be a covering: now when the hair is with curiosity, and by vain
inventions, turned into vain forms by plaiting, curling, or other ways which
we cannot name, or to fall into dandling-lockes, like to the hair of Russians;
the dressing is then vicious. For Basil says in general of all apparel and
dressing, that whatsoever in these things, is not for profit or necessity, is
vain and superfluous. And Jerome expressly condemns the hanging of the hair
below the forehead. Plutarch records, that the Romans, when a woman was to be
dressed at a wedding, they used to separate and plaite the hair of her head,
with the point of a Spear: to show how much they hated curiosity in dressing.
Now if the plaiting of the hair be so ill, how abominable is the use of
strange hair, that is, hair that is not their own? This is generally
condemned; and Nazianzen, amongst the Ancients, sharply reproves it.

2 All apparel is vicious, if it be strange, Zeph. 1.8. Now strange apparel
is not new apparel, but such apparel as is not used in the Churches where we
live, and has not an apparent comelinese and utility in it: some apparel,
though newly invented, has a manifest comeliness and commodiousnesse stamped
upon it; so as it is approved of all, both good and bad. this is not strange,
though it be new. Again, we may observe, that other apparel, when it first
comes in, it comes in like a monster; the natural conscience in all men
detesting it. this is, out of question, sinful; as for the reason here
alleged, so, because it adornes not. Such is yellow starch.

3 All apparel and dressing is vicious, when it is against shamefastness and
modesty, and has in it manifest provocation to lust, 1. Tim. 2.9, 10. such as
is the leaving of the breasts naked in whole or in part, and the short wearing
of their clothes in women. The Prophet Hosea complains of the adultery
between the breasts, Hos. 2. Also against shamefastness is it, when women
leave the dressing proper to their sex, and go attyred like men, Deuteronomy. 22.5.
A Father says, that they which dress themselves, with an intention and desire
to please men, or to provoke any, they offer up their own souls to the
Devil. And Hierome says, that if a man or a woman adorn themselves so, as
they provoke men to look after them; though no evil follow upon it, yet the
party shall suffer eternal damnation: because they offered poison to others,
though none would drink of it. Oh how many souls may be poisoned with lust by
thee, whose sins thou art therefore guilty of!

4 All apparel, that exceeds in cost the state or degree of the person that
wears it, is vicious: and that the Apostle in this Text condemns, under the
prohibition of Gold.

5 All apparel, that is taken up from the fashion and example of the world,
and is not judged useful by the most religious and sober minded, Romans 12.2.
And though some that profess Religion, out of weakness, or special
corruption, or because they are hypocrites, do follow such fashions; yet that
allows them, so long as they are the proper characters of the men of this
world.

6 When apparel is not of good report, Phil. 4.8. 1. Cor. 10.38. when it
either causes wicked men to speak evil, or reproach; or godly men are
grieved, or offended; or Religion it self is reviled, for their sakes.

7 When it provokes the party to pride and haughtines, or contempt of others;
or has the appearance of such evil, in the judgment of others, Isa. 3. 1.
These. 5.

8 When it becomes not good works, or hinders them, 1. Tim. 2.9 as when
men restrain mercy to the poor, or oppress their Tenants, or defraude other
men, only to maintain themselves, or theirs, in outward pomp and
gallantnesse of apparel. This is the horrible sin of the Gentry in many
places of this kingdom.

9 When it is condemned and reproved by godly Ministers, that are both wise and
learned: for their testimony ought to be received, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. and it is a
vile sin, to vex them and grieve them by our obstinacy; yea, though they
were not able to make so full demonstration, yet when they reprove such things,
out of a spiritual jealousy, and fear they corrupt their hearers, they ought
to be heard, Hebr. 13.18. 1. Cor. 11.2.3.

10 When the time that might be profitably spent, is consumed by the tedious
curiosity of dressing, Ephesians. 5.16. as it is with those that have not time for
Gods worship in private, or cannot come time enough to the Church, or neglect
their calling, by being so long in dressing.

11 When it dishonours the body of a man, Col. 2. ult. as when it is slovenly
or sluttish, or is taken up of mere singularity, and affectation of the
praise of mortification, and tends to restrain Christian liberty in others.
For no pretense may uncomely apparel be used: for, 1. Tim. 2.9. it is
required, that the apparel of women be comely; for so the original word
signifies. But especially uncomely apparel is then most vile, when it is worn
with a purpose to deceive; as the Prophet complained of such as wear a rough
garment to deceive.

12 The purity of a Christian life, should avoid all dressings or fashions,
which had their original from infamous persons; such as are the fashions of
Whores, or debauched creatures: and such a beginning, it is said commonly,
Yellow had. What fellowship between light and darkness, righteousness and
unrighteousness, Christ and Beliall? If we would have God to love us, we must
separate and come out from amongst them, and touch no unclean thing.

13 When such apparel is worn, as is contrary to the wholesome laws of men:
for we are bound to submit our selves to every ordinance of man, for Gods
sake, 1. Pet. 2.13.

14 Lastly, when the party that uses such apparel or dressing, is condemned
in himself, and has his own conscience accusing or disliking it, or is not
fully assured that he does not sin. Whatsoever is not of Faith in those
things, is sin, Romans 14.

Verse. 4. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, etc.
HItherto of that adorning they should not be curious or costly in. Now in this
verse he shows, in the affirmative, what apparel or dressing they should be
careful of; and that is the adorning of their souls, and the apparelling of
the inward man. In the words, three things may be noted.

1 What must be apparelled, viz. the hidden man of the heart.

2 With what it must be adorned. Which he shows both in general, and in
particular: in general, it must be with incorruptible things: in particular,
it must be with a meek and quiet spirit.

3 The reason, viz. because such apparel is very rich in Gods account.

The first thing then is, what must be apparelled, viz. the man of the heart:
The man of the heart. This is a kind of speaking, not used in any place of
Scripture, but this only: this Apostle only uses this kind of expressing
himself.

Now concerning the man of the Heart, I would consider of six things.

1 What he is.

2 Whence he is, or his original.

3 In what he excells the outward man.

4 What condition he is in by nature.

5 How he may be mended, or made better.

6 How we may know, when the man of the heart is right.

What the man of the heart is.
For the first: by the man of the Heart, he means the same the Apostle Paul
does by the inward man, 2. Cor. 4.16. and the inward man, is the soul or heart
of man. Thus he speaks of a Jew that is outward, and a Jew that is inward,
Romans 2.28.29. Now the Heart is, and may well be called the man, for diverse
reasons.

1 In respect of definition. For the definition of a man agrees to the heart of
man, though there were no body: for God was the God of Abraham; and Abraham
was, and was a living man, many hundred years after his body was in the
grave, Matthew. 22. And hence it is, that unto the soul or heart of man in
Scriptures, is attributed all things that the outward man can do: as life,
Psalm. 22.27. language, Eccles. 9.1. Psalm. 14. 1. and 36.1. praying to God,
Psalm. 37.4. receiving messages from God; as when the Prophet is bidden to
speak to the heart of Jerusalem, Isa. 40. serving of God, etc.

2 In respect of dominion. The Heart is the man, because it disposes the way
of man, Prove. 16.9. and rules the outward man: for out of the abundance of
the Heart, the mouth speaks. And therefore Solomon says, that from the Heart
comes life, Pro. 4.23.

3 In respect of acceptance. The Heart is that which God especially respects
in man: it is the Heart he looks upon, 1. Sam. 17.7. He tryes the heart, and,
as Solomon says, be weighes the hearts of the children of men, Prover. 21.2.
and he will be served with our hearts, Joshua. 24.14. and in all holy duties,
it is with us in Gods account, according as he sees the heart, 1 Kings 8.39.
so he requires the Heart, in repenting, 1. Sam. 7.3, in praying, 2. Tim. 2.22.
Hos 7.14. in hearing the Word, Luke 8. and so in every good duty. Thus of the
first point.

For the second: His original.
The man of the heart has his original from God himself. He is the Father of
Spirits, Heb. 12. 8. and it was his especial glory, to form and fashion the
heart in man; as diverse Scriptures show, Zach. 12.1. Psalm. 33.15. and is
therefore called the God of the heart, Psalm. 37.

For the third: Wherein be excells the outward man.
The man of the heart excells the outward man exceedingly; and that both in
substance, and in privileges. As for substance, in the outward man we agree
with beasts, but in the inward man we agree with Angels; inasmuch as the man
of the heart consists of a spiritual and immateriall essence, as well as the
Angels. And as in substance, so in properties, there is great difference: for
first, the man of the heart is hidden; it can be and do all his work, and
yet be invisible. God himself has variety of conversation with the man of the
heart, that no creature else knows.

Secondly, he is free, and subject only to the God of his heart properly. No
man can come at, or govern, or command the heart of man.

Thirdly, he is properly the seat of Gods image. We are not properly like God
in our bodies, (because God has no body) but in our spirits; though it be
true, that the glory of Gods image shines through the body of man (as the light
does through the lantern,) in respect whereof, the outward man is said to be
made after Gods image: but else, properly, only the man of the Heart is capable
of that preferment, to be made like God.

For the fourth point; The man of the Heart by nature is in a most woeful
condition, though in those general things before mentioned, His natural
condition very miserable many ways;
he excels the outward. His misery will appear, if we thoroughly consider,
either what he is in his qualities, or what he does in his work, or what he
suffers in that estate. If you inquire after his qualities by nature: first, he
is vain, Ephesians. 4.18. yea so vain, as the outward man dares not act what the
man of the heart entertaines. Secondly, he is foul; as Solomon says, Who can
say I have made my heart clean? yea he is so foul, that it is as hard a work
to make the heart of one man clean, as to create a world anew. Hence David
said, O Lord create in me a clean heart, Psalm. 51. Thirdly, he is
uncircumcised, and altogether indisposed to matters of Religion: he is slow,
and hard to believe, incapable and unteachable, and makes not use of the very
first business in the entrance into Religion, Ier. 9.26. 1. Cor. 2.14.
Fourthly, he is deceitful, above all things; he can be trusted in nothing,
Ier. 17.9. Fifthly, he is very unquiet, and never enjoyes any sound peace, nor
is pleased with any condition: and oftentimes he is like the raging Sea, Isa.
57. These are his qualities, some of them. His works he does, are most
abominable: for,

1 He is always imagining mischief; the whole frame of his thoughts is only
evil continually, Especially in his works, which are abominable.
Genesis 6. There is a world of wickedness in him every day.

2 That he may be wicked the more securely, he imprisons the truth, and lays
hold upon all the principles in his head, that might any way disturb his
course in sin, and locks them up in restraint, Romans 1.18.

3 He resists the spirit, and proclaims enmity to God, and gets out of the
way, that so the heart may be far from God: and further, the more to provoke
God, he chooses strange gods, which he daily entertaines, and gives unto them
what is due unto God. These are they, are called by the Prophet the Idols of
the heart, Ezech. 14.

And finally, he is the author of all the mischiefs are done by the outward
man: for it is he that gives wicked laws to the members, and makes the outward
man do all the villainies we see are done in the world, Matthew. 15. Romans 7.

And as he is most wretched in what he is, and does; so is he in what he
suffers: for first, he is smitten with a most woeful Lethargy; always given
to sleeping, and in danger to go to Hell in any of these sleeps. And besides,
he lives in the dark: it is always night with him, he never sees day, Romans
13.11. and besides, the Devil possesses him, and has raised strong Holds,
and fortified himself within him, 2. Cor. 10.4. and lastly, he is an
abomination to the Lord. As nothing is more esteemed of God than the man of the
heart, if he be right: so nothing is more loathsome to God, if he be wicked,
Prove. 11.20.

Now for the fifth point: If any ask What must be done, that the man of the
heart may be mended and made right? I answer.

1 The heart must be prepared: By what means the man of the heart may be
mended.
prepared, I say, to return to God, 1. Sam. 7.3. Now the heart is prepared two
ways: first, by a sound confession of the sins of the heart, when a man
acknowledges the plague of his evil heart before God, 1. Kings 8.38.
secondly, by earnest prayer to God, to direct the heart, and set it in order,
and bow it, and incline it to goodness, 2. These. 3.5. Now it is certain, that
even these works of preparation are not neglected of God; for he hears the
preparations of the heart, Psalm. 10.17.

2 It must be stored with sacred notions, and knowledges out of the Word of
God. The Law must be written in the heart: the Word of God, in the sound
knowledge of it, must be hidden there, Psalm. 119.11. Ier. 31.33. Esaias 51.7. for
these sacred notions, have a power to master and order the heart.

3 It must be washed and purified. It must be soundly rinsed in the tears of
true repentance, and then it will become very acceptable to God, through the
merits of Christ and his mediation, James 4.8. Ier. 4.14. God greatly delights
in the heart, when it is broken and contrite, Psalm 34.19. and 147.3. and
51.17.

Now for the last point: The man of the heart is then right, when.

How we may know when the man of the heart is right.
1 It is true, Heb. 10.22. that is, when it is without the guile of fraud and
dissimulation; when it is as it seems to be in religion; when it had rather
be good than seem so.

2 It is clean: for blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5. Psalm. 51.12. and 24
4. It is a ^igne the man of the heart is right, when it is freed from the
liking and residence of natural filthiness it was given to, and when that
continual frame of vile thoughts and lusts is dissolved; especially, when it
strives after inward purity, as well as outward.

3 When it is sound in Gods Statutes, Psalm. 119.80 and so it is, first, when it
is careful to get warrant for every action from the Word, and seeks doctrine
and instruction; and to that end comes to the light, Pro. 15.14. and 18.15.
Secondly, when it submits it self to the form of doctrine, into which it
is delivered. The heart is sound in the Word, when a man does from his heart
consent to obey, and striveth to follow, the directions daily given out of the
Word, Romans 6.17. especially when it is perfect with God: and so it is, when it
is a willing heart, and has respect to all Gods commandments, and desires to
live in no sin, 1. Chron. 28 9.

4 When the full purpose of the heart is to cleave to God for ever, Acts 11.23.

And thus of the man of the heart, or what is to be apparelled and adorned.
With what it must be adorned follows: and in general, it must be adorned
with that which is incorruptible.

In that which is not corruptible.] Four things may be noted in these words;
two of them are implied, two of them more express.

Doct. 1. That the things belonging to the outward man, are corruptible. All
things that concern him are so: for first, his substance is corruptible; All
flesh is grass, 1. Pet. 1. 24. so Job 14.1.2. and besides, all his glory is as
the flower of the field. His riches, pleasures, honor, strength, beauty,
health, and all he any way accounts his glory, it all will corrupt: for either
vanity will consume it, or violence will take it away, 1. Pet. 1.24. 1. John
2.17. Mat. 6.19.20. All earthly things are vanity and vexation of spirit, as
Solomon shows in the whole book of Ecclesiastes.

Now if worldly things be corruptible things, then in general, we should all
learn diverse lessons: first, not to set our affections upon these things here
below. we should not set our hearts upon that which we cannot keep long. All
we have, though it be not yet corrupted, yet it is all corruptible: why should
we then make such have to be rich? especially, why should we trust upon
uncertain riches? Secondly, seeing we shall have these things but awhile, we
should use them as such things, as we cannot enjoy long: and so we should take
our part of them, in a sober and Christian freedom, while we have them, Psalm.
49. 18. Eccles. 9.7.10. and especially, we should employ them to the best uses
we can. Note.
And the best use to put worldly things to, is either to make friends with
them, by liberality to the poor, Luke 16. or to buy wisdom with them, by
spending freely for the procuring of the means of salvation, for our selves or
others, Prove. 17.16. and in general, the chief use of them, is, by them to
make our selves rich in good works, 1. Tim. 6.19.20. Thirdly, seeing earthly
things are corruptible, we should not envy the prosperity of wicked men, that
abound not in any thing will tarry long with them. All their portion is in
these things, that will away, Psalm. 37.1, 2. and 49 15, 16. 18. Lastly, we
should all therefore be of Moses mind, rather to suffer affliction with Gods
people, that shall possess eternal things, than with the wicked, to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.26. And in particular, both poor and
rich may be instructed hereby: for rich men should not glory in their riches,
but rather rejoice if God have made them low by true grace, which will last for
ever, James 1.9.10. 1. Tim. 6.17.20. and poor men that have a portion in
spiritual things, should not be troubled for want of these earthly things,
seeing if they had them, they would last but awhile, James 1.9. and therefore
having food and raiment, they should be content. Thus of the first doctrine.

Doct. 2. Earthly things do not adorn a man. As they are corruptible, so they
do not make a man any whit the more comely: which is true in these four
senses following; First, they do not adorn a man in the sight of God. He
respects it not, whether a man be poor or rich, bond or free, clothed or
naked, in robes or in rags, Gal. 3.28. Secondly, they adorn not the inward
man: they add nothing to the mind or heart of man. Thirdly, they adorn not
with true ornament, but only with a show: for if the glory of the world be
like a withering flower, what true ornament can it be, to wear such withered
things? Fourthly, they adorn not for continuance. All apparel for the body of
a man, and all ornaments for his house or state any way, they are the worse for
wearing, and will wear clean out in the end. And therefore for the use:
first, How vain a thing is the pride of life! and secondly, we should
therefore know no man after the flesh; but to reckon of man's worth, by better
things than worldly things.

Doct. 3. A third doctrine is evidently to be observed out of these words; and
that is very comfortable for godly Christians, such as the Apostle supposed
these to be, to whom he writes: and that is, That godly Christians have right
to all incorruptible things. That which is not corruptible, if they seek, they
may possess. It is their own: God would have them put it on, as they put on
their apparel. He has adorned his children with the gift of all incorruptible
things: heavenly treasures are theirs; and they may lay hold on them, and lay
them up, as their certain riches and portion, Mat. 6.20. He grants eternal
life to them, that seek glory, and honor, and incorruptible things; that is,
he grants them an eternal possession of spiritual things, Romans 2.7.

Now that this doctrine may be more evident, and full of comfort, it is
profitable to inquire distinctly, what is incorruptible, and will last always:
and so we shall find, by the testimonies of the Scriptures, that seven things
are incorruptible.

1 God is incorruptible, 7. Things are incorruptible.
Romans 1. and God is their God by covenant: and, as David says, he is the
strength of their heart, and their portion for ever, Psalm. ^7.26. Psalm. 119.57.
and God his mercy, and his love, and his power is everlasting. His mercy
endures for ever, Psalm. 136. and his loving kindness shall never be taken from
him, Psalm. 89. 33. and with everlasting compassion he has received them to
favor, Esaias. 54. and with everlasting love has he loved them, Ier. 31.3. and
in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, for the protection and
preservation of his people; and therefore they may trust upon him for ever,
Esaias 26.4. and therefore, if all people will walk, every one in the name of
his God, godly men ought much more to walk in the Name of the Lord their God
for ever and ever, Mich. 4.6.

2 The Word of God is incorruptible, and lasts beyond all end, 1. Pet. 1.24.
Psalm. 119.89. And this is the heritage of the godly, Psalm. 119.111.127. the
truth shall be with us for ever, 2. John. 2.

3 The righteousness of Christ is everlasting, Dan. 9. 24. and this
righteousness is theirs, so as they may put it on as a garment; and it makes
them righteous before God, Romans 13. ult. 1. Cor. 1.30, 1. Cor. 5.21.

4 Gods covenant is incorruptible and everlasting, Esaias 55.4 and it cannot be
abrogated; but the godly shall have the benefit of it for ever.

5 The gifts of saving grace are incorruptible; and their hearts can never be
drawn dry, but the spring of grace will be in some measure on them. And
through the^^ graces the godly have everlasting conversation^ for Gods gifts
and (...) i^ without repentance, (...) 4.14. ^. These. ^.10. Romans 11. This love
is incorruptible, 2. Cor. 13. and everlasting joy (...) upon their heads, Esaias.
61. so the (...) of saving knowledge will abide in the godly for ever, 1. John
3. and their meekness, and a quiet spirit, is reckoned an ornament that is not
corruptible. But of this afterward.

6 Good works are incorruptible: so the righteousness of the just will last
for ever, 2. Cor. 9.9. and though he dye, yet his works will follow him to
Heaven, Rev. 14.13. so Psalm. 139.24.

Lastly, Heaven and the glory of it, is everlasting: Gods kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, 1. Tim. 6.11. and that glory is an eternal weight of
glory, 2. Cor. 4.14. We have an house that is eternal in the Heavens, 2. Cor.
5.1. our inheritance there is immortal, and undefiled, and withers not away,
1. Pet. 1.3.

The uses may be diverse.

Use 1. For first, it should teach us to strive to be such, as may have our
portion in incorruptible things: and so we must first take off our affections
from all things, that may offend; as resolved if our right eye offend us, to
pluck it out; and if our right hand offend us, to cut it off; that is, to deny
all sinful things, though they were as dear to us as our right hand, or right
eye, Mat. 9.45. Secondly, we must be such, as yield our selves to obey the
voice of Christ, and to be ruled by him. He gives eternal life to his sheep:
we must be sheep then, for hearing his voice, and tractablenesse, John
10.29. Thirdly, we must give glory to God, and rely upon his promise of grace
in Jesus Christ: we must be believers, John 3.16. Fourthly we must, by patient
continuing in well-doing, still seek immortality, Romans 2.7. Thus of the first
use.

Use 2. Secondly, seeing the portion of the godly lies in incorruptible things,
we should not be much troubled for any wants or losses in corruptible things.
We have so large an inheritance in things that will last for ever, that it
should be no grievance to us, though we should want those transitory things
of the world.

Use 3. Thirdly, for this reason, such as abound in earthly things, should be
the more willing to distribute them, and give them for good uses, seeing those
things are not their portion; and therefore they need not be overcarefull for
the keeping of such things.

Use 4. Fourthly, hence we may gather infallibly, That the godly can never fall
from grace: for Gods mercies cannot corrupt, or fall away; and his gifts are
without repentance. If they could be lost, then they were corruptable, as well
as earthly things. But this is a comfort, that must not be taken away, that
God will establish Sion for ever, Psalm. 48.8. and though the world pass away,
and the lusts thereof, yet he that does the will of God, abides for ever, 1.
John. 2.17. and though the servant may be cast out of the house, yet the son
abides for ever, John 8.35.

Lastly, we should the less fear death, seeing hence we learn, that we
have many things that will last with us, even after our bodies be rotten in the
grave. Thus of the third doctrine.

Doct. 4. Now a fourth point is also clear, and that is, That incorruptible
things do wonderfully adorn, and make men comely. This is the maine scope and
drift of the Text. and therefore we should the more seek after these things:
for if we could see the beauty of the inward man, as it is adorned with grace,
we would be wonderfully ennamoured and in love with it. No comeliness of the
body can so allure, as would this inward beauty of the man of the heart: and
therefore again, we should hence learn to make the more account of poor
Christians. There are no persons in the world so comely as they, if we knew
the worth and ornament of true grace. And so in general, we should love the
godly above all people; because they are the fairest, Note.
and best adorned of all the men and women in earth: and in particular, those
husbands that have gracious wives, should learn so much religion, as to love
them entirely, even for the beauty of the man of the Heart; though they wanted
the outward ornaments of riches, or extraordinary comeliness of the outward
man. Women also should especially hence learn, to get grace, and knowledge,
and holiness into their hearts: for their best handsomnesse, is in their
qualities and gifts. It Is not their clothes, but their manners and
disposition, that becomes them or disgraces them: A fair body does commend
little, if the heart be foul. It is a small praise to have a good face, and
an ill nature: Some women are like Helen without, and like Hecuba within.

Thus of the adorning of the man of the Heart in general. Now follows the
particular ornament, which the Apostle commends by name; and that is, a meek
and quiet spirit.

Of a meek and quiet spirit.] Quietness is added to Meekness, lest by
mistaking the definition of Meekness, they should not understand the Apostles
meaning.

Now the doctrine hence to be gathered, is, That amongst all the particular
virtues required in Christians, meekness and quietness of nature and spirit,
is a special virtue, and carefully to be sought: and in particular, by
Christian wives; as this and other Scriptures show, Ephesians. 4. 2. Mat. 11.28.
Zeph. 2.3. Col. 3.12.

Before I make use of this point, I must consider what is comprehended in those
terms, of a meek and quiet spirit: and first, we must know before hand, what
it does not comprehend. It does not require, that women or men should be so
quiet, as not to be troubled for their sins; or not to humble their souls
for sin; or that they should be careless of their callings, either general
or particular; or that they should not admonish or reprove sin in others,
when they have a calling and fitness.

But unto the constituting of true meekness and quietness of spirit, is
requisite.

What things are requisite to meekness.
1 Freedom from the evils, that disquiet and molest the spirits of men: such
as are, first, anger, frowardness, fretting, and peevishness: secondly,
worldly sorrow, crying, and aptness to take unkindnesse, and fullennesse:
thirdly, distrustful cares of life, arising from covetuousnesse, 1. Tim.
6.10.11. fourthly, rash zeal and fierceness, or inordinate striving, and
wilfulness; as may be gathered in the case of a Minister, 2. Tim. 2.24. 25.
26. fifthly, contention and evil speaking, or ill language, as may be gathered
from Tit. 3.2. and stirring up contention or brawles: sixthly, all inordinate
desires, and reigning heart-sinnes, whether sins of ambition, lust, malice,
or the like, Iam. 1.21. seventhly, unconstancy, and levity of mind. Especially
it crosses those evils, which are noted to be most usual in women: such as
are fretting, crying, taking unkindnesses, unconstancy, wilfulness,
complaining on the husbands, or the like.

2 A kind of peaceful contentment; when Christians are habitually well pleased
with their condition.

3 A gentle behavior, in case of wrongs or faults from or in others: so as to
be first, able to bear them: secondly, not to render evil for evil; but
rather to overcome evil with goodness: thirdly, ready to forgive: fourthly,
not provoked to anger.

4 A harmless and innocent behavior, Zeph. 2.3.

5 The fixing of the heart, by trusting upon God, and living without care, like
a little child, that believes his father will provide for him, Mat. 18.

6 Lowliness of mind; thinking no great thoughts of our selves; and esteeming
the gifts of God in others, and accounting others better than our selves: and
therefore, is Lowliness so often added to the word Meekness, to explane it.

7 Silence from many words, from vain and rash speeches, especially provoking
terms.

8 Retiredness, when a Christian is no busie-body in other men's matters, and
his feet will be kept out of his neighbors house, and refuses to have to
do with the strife that belongs not to him.

9 Tractablenesse, and easiness to be directed, or appointed, and governed:
as in relation to God, it is meekness to take his zeal upon us, Mat. 11.28.
and so in a wife, it is a property of a meek and quiet spirit, to be easy to
be directed, and advised, and governed.

Obhect. But is it not lawful to be angry?

Sol. Yes, it is at some times, for some persons, upon some causes, and in some
manner. Anger is a tender virtue, and such a one, as by reason of our
unskilfulnesse may be easily corrupted and made dangerous.

Object. But we must reprove or correct.

Sol. You may do so: but that you must reprove with passion or unquietly, I
read not; but rather you must reprove with the spirit of meekness. And
besides, many rules are requisite to the right use of reproof and correction.

Object. But can all this be attained?

Sol. It may, or else it would not be required in the new Covenant, so often
and so vehemently urged; and the Church of God is not without instance of such
as have attained it: and though in many things we may sin all, yet this
virtue may be had, though not in the perfection of it.

Object. But I have desired and endevovred to attain to it, and cannot.

Sol. 1. Use the means to attain it yet still: it may be had at length, though
not presently. Secondly, it may be doubted of many that pretend this, that
they have not such desire, nor use not such endeavor in sincerity: they are not
watchful and careful, to look to the opportunities of this virtue, or the
occasions of the contrary vices.

Object. But may not one have comfort of this virtue, if he be at any time
angry?

Sol. Moses the meekest man on earth, was once angry, and Christ himself we
read was angry: but where this virtue of anger is not habitually, it reigns
not; and where it is, it is bridled and ordered: Or else I may answer, that the
act of meekness may be interrupted, and yet the habit preserved.

Object. But we are so provoked, and have such wrongs, as are very great and
absurd, etc.

Sol. Else it were no great praise to be quiet: a Mastive, a Bare, a Lion, it
may be, can be quiet sometimes, if they be not stirred or provoked. There is
nothing from without us can make us vicious, without the working of a vile
nature in our souls.

The use should be, first, for instruction. I may say of meekness and
quietness as Christ said of humility, If you bear these things, blessed are
you if you do them, John 13. Now there are many reasons, should move us to be
very careful, to express a meek and quiet spirit in our behavior, at home
and abroad: Motives to meekness.
as first, Gods commandment. He requires this at our hands earnestly; as
appears by the places before quoted, and other Scriptures, Prove. 4.24.
Secondly, we have an excellent example for it in Christ: and he charge us,
of all the things which be immitable in him, to learn meekness and lowliness
of him, Mat. 11.29. Thirdly, it will be a sign of our election, and true
sanctification, and that God loves us, Col. 3.12. Psalm. 147.6. and that we
have attained the wisdom that is from above, James 3.17. Fourthly, it is a
great ornament to a man, as this Text imports; and that both in the sight of
God and man. A meek behavior, is very lovely and comely, Pro. 19.11.

5 Hereby we shall bring much rest to our souls, Mat. 11.29. Our hearts and
consciences will be at great peace: whereas there are many occasions of
trouble to our consciences, which flow from passion, and an unquiet and
contentious course of life.

6 Meekness is uncorruptible: It will last for ever, both in the habit of it,
and in the comfort and fruit of it; and besides, it will keep the spirit from
such putrefaction and corruption, as passion and unquietness uses to breed in
the spirits of other men.

7 Meekness makes the heart very capable of grace, and of the Word of God: The
heart is fit to have the Word graffed upon it, when it is meek and quiet, James
1.21. and the Lord teaches the humble his way, Psalm. 25. Pro. 3.32. and he
will give more grace to the humble, Iam. 4.7.

8 God will be the protection of the meek; he will relieve them, and make them
glorious by deliverance, Psalm. 76.8.9. and 147.5.6. and 149.4. Zeph. 2.3. Yea,
a meek spirit is a great advantage to a man's outward estate: for the meek
shall inherit the earth. God loves no Tenants better than such, nor grants
longer leases to any than to them, Mat. 5.6.

Secondly, this discourse of a meek and quiet spirit, should greatly humble
such Christians as are froward, and passionate, and unquiet; and in particular,
such wives as are guilty of these or the like faults. Now, that this use may
be more profitable to these Christians, I would add two things: first,
reason: to dissuade them from frowardness, and unquietness; secondly, I would
show them remedies how to help themselves against these faults.

There be many things observed in Scripture, and which they may feel in
themselves, which should move them to hearty repentance, for this unquietness
and frowardness: as to consider,

Odiousness of frowardness from the causes and effects of it.
1 The causes of frowardness and unquietness: which are in general, their ill
nature; and in particular, Pride, idleness, want of love to those with whom
they converse, ignorance, and love of earthly things. From these, or some of
these roots, proceeds this vice.

2 That the Scripture makes this fault, to be a sign of a wicked and naughty
person, Pro. 6.12.14. and 21.24. especially, where one is guilty of it in the
power and custom of it: and besides, reckons it among the faults, of which
there is little hope of cure, Pro. 29.20.

3 It causes many and vile effects: for,

1 It is a great affliction and vexation to such as converse with them that are
guilty of it, as these places show, Pro. 17.1. and 21.9.19. and 27.3.15.

2 It is very hurtful to the party that is guilty: for it makes him run into
many sins, as these places show, Pro. 17.19. and 22.8. and 29.22. Psalm. 37.8.
and besides, it brings upon him great misery: for it makes a breach in his
spirit within, Prove. 15.4. and brings much mischief upon him without, Pro.
17.20. and further, it makes him abominable in the sight of God, Pro. 3.32. and
8 13. and 11.20. and shames him almost incurably amongst men, Pro. 12.8. and
25.9. 10. and further, no body that is wise will make any friendship with them;
but every body will avoid them, as much as they can, Prove. 22.24. Wives that be
so froward, and peevish, and hard to please, and unquiet, should much think of
these things. And yet besides, it interrupts prayer, 1 Pet. 3.7. and is a great
hinderance to the power of the Word, James 1.19. 20. 21. lastly, if it be not
repented of, it will bring damnation of body and soul, Mat. 5 22.

3 It grieves the spirit of God, Ephesians 4.30.

Now Christian men or women, that desire to mend this fault of frowardness and
unquietness, may attain unto reformation, if they will carefully observe
these rules following.

1 They must study to be quiet, 1 These. 4.12. They must not trust their own
conceits of things; Helps for the attaining of quietness and meekness.
but with good conscience study how to prevent occasions of unquietness, and
how to carry themselves discreetly, and with meekness: It does require much
study to live quietly.

2 They must be sure they meddle with their own business; as it is further
added in the same place. They must be sure to place their greatest care, in
learning how to discharge their own duties to others; and not allow
themselves liberty to suspect, or censure the ways of others with whom they
converse. Such wives as are so diligent to study their husbands duties, and to
find fault with them in their callings, seldom or never live quietly with
their husbands: whereas the Apostle here, would have such wives as have ill
husbands, to lay the ground of a quiet life, in the care of sound discharge of
their own duties to their husbands.

3 They must heartily repent for their faults, of unquietness and frowardness
past, and not only humble their souls in secret before God for such sins;
but also show their repentance to those with whom they coverse, by an humble
acknowledgement of their vile nature, and froward behavior, even in the
particulars of it. Repentance for known trespasses can never be sound, if it
be secret, and not made known to the parties grieved.

4 It will wonderfully help them, if they pray constantly to the Lord Jesus,
that left such a pattern of meekness; and to entreat him, by influence of his
grace, to quiet and sweeten their natures. Beseech the Lord Jesus, even by his
meekness to make us meek, and able to express his virtue in a quiet
conversation.

5 They must not give place to wrath: but if they perceive their hearts rising,
and inclined to passion, and provoking and censorious words, they must
presently lay necessity of silence upon themselves, till they be able to speak
quietly and without frowardness. This one rule constantly, for awhile,
observed, would breed a great alteration in their dispositions quickly, and in
time, wear out the force of the disease: Unquietness is much enlarged, by the
words are uttered after the offense is taken.

And thus of a meek and quiet spirit: only we may note from the indefinite
requiring of meekness, That Christians, and in particular, Christian wives,
must exercise meekness and quietness toward all persons, and at all times,
and in all places. In all places, I say, and so both at home and abroad:
toward all persons, and so they must carry themselves quietly, not only
toward their husbands, but toward their servants, and their neighbors,
whether they be poor or rich: And at all times. They must not be yongue
Saints, and old deville, as the proverb is; that is, of a soft and gen^le
behavior at first, and then grow froward afterward. Age and infirmitie^, are
not sufficient excuses for vicious anger and unquietness. Besides, in that the
Apostle resembles meekness to apparel, it imports, That by nature we are
borne without it; our souls being as naked in respect of meekness, as our
bodies be in respect of clothes: and withal, that it should be our
every-daies care, to put on meekness, and fit our selves for quietness, as
we would put on our clothes. And further, as it is not enough to put on our
clothes, but we must tie them, and fit them handsomely; so must we use
discretion, in the putting on of meekness and quietness, sitting the virtue
to the reasons and occasions of the day.

Thus of the second part of this verse. The third and last is the reason why
women should be so careful of this kind of dressing and apparel, and that
is, Because it is a thing of great price in the sight of God.

Which in the sight of God is of great price.] Diverse things may be hence
observed.

1 That God does highly esteem of the virtues, and true grace, and good
behavior of his servants: and therefore in this place, their virtues are said
to be very rich in Gods sight; and in the Scriptures, he gives the term of
riches to their gifts, 1. Cor. 1.5. and grace is called glory, Esaias 4.5. and
God is described, as if he were in love with his people, when they carry
themselves graciously, John 14.21. And this serves greatly to exalt the praise
of Gods good nature, and tender affection to man: and the more, because all
good things in us are his own gift, James 1.17. and because our best gifts
have many imperfections in them, and our best works are defiled with sin,
Esaias 64. and besides, because he greatly esteems them, even the least
beginnings of goodness in his servants: as, their desires to be good, and
their very preparations of their hearts to goodness, Esaias 55.1.2. Psalm. 10.17.

2 Christians are bound, in all their behavior, to carry themselves so, as
that God may accept of them, and esteem what they do: and this is required of
them in every state of life. They are tied to this, not only in what they do
in Gods house, but in what they do in their own house: This all are charged,
Heb. 12.28. and so wives here, and so servants, Ephesians. 6.5. 6. 7. The praise and
acceptance of God should be ever before their eyes: the reasons are, Because
the forms and rules of all behavior are given by God: his Word is the light
to our feet, and the lanthorn to our paths, Psalm. 119. and is only able to
make the man of God perfect in every good word and work, 2. Tim. 3. ult. and
besides, if we do well, we are sure never to fail of the praise of God:
whereas if we seek the praise of men, we may be deceived. For either they may
praise us for that which is abominable in the sight of God, Luke 16.15. or they
may dispraise us when we do well, or at best, their praise is mutable. And
further, it is God that must reward our good conversation, Ep^. ^.^. and
therefore reason^ that he be looked after in what we do. Lastly, this i^ a
sign of difference between the godly and the wicked in doing good duties: a
godly man is known by this sign, that his praise is of God and not of men,
Romans 2.29. Mat. 6.

The use should be, to teach us therefore in all our ways to labor to please
God, and above all things to seek his acceptance. Now, if we would have God
pleased with what we do, we must look to diverse rules.

Rules for our practice, so as God may be pleased with us.
1 We must be sure, that we are not in the flesh: for they that are in the
flesh, cannot please God, Romans 8.8. We must be sure we are new creatures, Gal.
6.15.

2 We must set God always before us, and remember his holy presence, Genesis
17.2. Psalm. 16.8. God cannot abide to be forgotten.

3 We must come to the light, that it may be manifest that our works are
wrought in God, John 3.22. We must walk by rule, Gal. 6.16. and do all in
faith, Heb. 11.6.

4 We must serve God in our spirits, as well as in our outward man: not as
men-pleasers. or with eye-service, or with outward worship; but from the heart,
and with the spirit, Romans 2.28.29. Ephesians 6.5.6.7.

5 We must make conscience of the least sins, to avoid them; and of the
least commandments, to obey them, if we would be great in Heaven, Matthew. 5.19.
Diverse of these are expressed in one sentence, Mich. 6.8. He has showed thee, O
man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee; surely to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God.

6 We must avoid those sins that God especially hates: such as are Swearing,
Commandment 3. Deuteronomy. 28.58. lukewarmnesse in religion, Rev. 3.15.16.
persecuting such as fear God, 1. These. 2.15 16. wilful fashioning our selves
after this world, Romans 12.1.2. to bless our selves in our hearts against Gods
curses, Deuteronomy. 29.19. through impatience or unbelief, to withdraw our selves in
adversity, Heb. 10. 38. and in general, all gross sins, Rev. 22.15.

Doct. 3. The best riches a Christian has, are his virtues and gifts of his
mind: and therefore he says here, they are rich in Gods sight. Now they are
his best riches in diverse respects.

1 Because they are riches in Gods sight: whereas all worldly treasures commend
not any man to God, Gal. 3. 28. He gives us naked into the world, and takes us
himself naked again.

2 Because they furnish the best part of man, viz. his mind: whereas worldly
riches do only furnish men's houses, or bodies.

3 Because no violence can take these treasures away. A man may be virtuous,
spite of the hearts of all the devils in hell, or devilish men on earth:
whereas worldly treasures may be many ways lost.

4 Because those things do make a man rich to immortality: whereas worldly
riches can serve at best, but for a mortal life. And therefore this point
shows, that godly men that seek virtue and grace, have chosen the better
part; and that we should all covet spiritual gifts with more earnest
affections, than worldlings do outward riches. And it shows the happy estate
of poor Christians: they may be very rich for all their poverty outward,
Revel. 2.8. neither may hypocrites please themselves, with saying they are
rich, Rev. 3.17. for God will discover their counterfeit wares. And in
general, we may hence gather, that the richest men in the Parish are virtuous
men.

Doct. 4. It is evident from hence, that God sees the spirits of men: our
hearts are all open and manifest before him, Ier. 17.9. 1. Kings 8.39. 1. Sam.
17.7. Heb. 4.^. And this must needs be so, because God is omniscient: (...)
^ye, and sees all things. The Sun may cease shining, but God cannot cease
seeing: secondly, because God formed the hearts of all men, and therefore must
nees know them, Psalm. 33.15. thirdly, because God, by his providence, does
specially watch over the world of spirits, and daily visits men's hearts, Job
7.18. Psalm. 17.3. and receives presentiments of all abuses. He daily tryes the
hearts and reins, and weighs the heart of man, Pro. 21.2.

And therefore the use should be diverse: first, to teach men to labor for
inward and secret goodness, as well as outward and in open conformity; and to
be afraid of sin in secret: for no darkness can hide from God; the day and
night are all one to him. and though no eye of man see thee, yet art thou
always before the eye of God. We should therefore keep our hearts with all
diligence, Pro. 4. 23. And it may be a great comfort to the godly, against all
the scorns and censures of the world, that traduceth them as hypocrites: for
God sees their hearts; yea, it may comfort them against the imperfections of
their works: for God sees the preparations and desires of their hearts, and
that they would feign do better. But especially, this is terrible to wicked
men: for, if God see the hearts of men, in what case are they that have such
evil hearts?

Ob. Why, will some one say, what fault can God find with our hearts?

Note.
Sol. God sees the deadness and dullness that is in thy heart in his service.
He sees thy distractions, and how far off thy heart is from him, when thou
drawest near to him with thy lips: he sees thy hypocrisy and security, and
thy double and divided heart: he sees thy carnal cavils, and the boiling
risings of thy heart, against him and his truth: he sees thy fearfulness and
unbeleefe, and the uncircumcision of thy heart; thy unteachablenesse and
forgetfulness: he sees all the vanities and errors of thy imaginations, all
thy lusts, and passions, and wicked desires, and all that frame of thy
imaginations that are only evil continually: he sees thy filthy nakedness,
and all the Idols thou entertainest in thy heart. and therefore if thou will not
perish in the eternal abomination of God, make have to wash thine heart from
wickedness, and seriously to repent of the sins of thy spirit.

Lastly, the scope of this place teaches us distinctly, That God makes a great
reckoning of such men and women as have me^ke and quiet spirits. There is
reason for it, Because a quiet mind is like to Gods mind, which is never
stirred, nor moved from everlasting to everlasting, but is always the same:
and because, where the spirit i^ meek and quiet, there all sin is mortified,
and every good gift and grace does prosper. And this should be a great
encouragement to all such Christians; and in particular, to christian Wives
that are meek, and live quietly with their husbands: for though their husbands
should not love them the more, or esteem of this grace, hence they may see,
that God will like them much the better for it; and they are very comely, and
richly clothed in Gods sight.

Verse. 5. For even after this manner in time past did the holy women, which
trusted in God, tyer themselves, and were subject to their husbands. Verse. 6.
As Sarah obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord: whose daughters ye are, whiles,
ye do well, not being afraid of any terror.
IN these two verses is contained the confirmation of the Proposition,
exhorting wives to be subject to their own husbands, verse. 1. And this is made
good by two reasons, both taken from example: the one in general, from the
practice of holy women of ancient times, that did so carry themselves toward
their husbands, verse. 5. the other in particular, from the practice of Sarah,
the mother of faithful women, verse. 6.

The example generally considered, verse. 5. is described and commended six
ways: First, for the manner of it; It was in this manner, that is, just
according to the precept now given by the Apostle.

Secondly, for the antiquity of it: It was so in old time.

Thirdly, for the subject persons in whom it was found, viz. not only women
that did so, but the holiest women.

Fourthly, for the cause of it, viz. their trust in God.

Fifthly, for the effect of it; It adorned them.

Sixthly, for the matter of it, viz. They were obedient to their own husbands.

Th^s of the order of the words. Before I enter upon the particulars, diverse
things may be noted in general, about examples of goodness in others.

First, we may hence evidently gather, That it is not enough for us to do good
but we should strive so to do it, that we might be examples to others, Tim.
4.11. Matt. 5.16. Phil. 2. 15. and that for diverse reasons. For first, God is
interessed in us and our works; and there is a glory due to God, which must be
collected from our works done before men, Matt. 5. 16. Secondly, we must so
act our parts in godliness upon the Stage of this world, that we may thereby
silence and convince wicked men, that out of their hatred to the truth, and
frowardness of hearts, would else take all occasions to speak evil of us,
and the good way of God, Phil. 2.15. Thirdly, our Teachers have a part in our
works; and we should hold forth the patterns of sound practice, that they
might be comforted in our learning from them, and graced in their Ministry,
Phil. 2.16. Fourthly, by this means we may do much good, in helping forwards
weak Christians. For as the wicked take fire from evil examples, so do the
godly from good examples, both in Piety, 1. These. 4.7 and Mercy, 2. Cor. 8.1.6
etc. Which should work an effectual care in all godly Christians, to strive
to express such conscience and power of godliness, as may be profitable to
others: and so chiefly in such things as may most grace the profession of
Religion, or profit others; as Wisdom, mercy, meekness, just dealing,
contempt of the world, affectionatenesse in Gods service, patience,
undauntednesse, or the like: especially, those that be Parents, Masters,
Magistrates, Ministers, that have charge of others. And this greatly reproves
such Christians, as undo the souls of those that belong to them (as much as
lies in them) by their wicked examples: as Ministers, that are examples to
their people of drunkenness, usury, covetousness, pride, or the like: and
Masters of families, or Parents, that give such wretched examples to their
children, and servants, in swearing, vanity of apparel, filthiness of life,
passion, or the like.

Secondly, we may hence note two singular virtues in a good example: ^^o
singular ^ertues in a ^ood example.
the first is, That it may pro^te a world of people, 1 Thessalonians. 1.7. Romans 16. It
is like the fire: you may light many candles at it, and yet it is neither the
worse nor the less. Many that we know not of, may receive good from our good
conversation, and example in well-doing: as was true in the case of those holy
women. And the reas^n is, because Men are more apt to understand things when
they are practiced, than when they are taught. And besides, good examples are
so rare, that they shine as a Beacon on fire in a dark night, Phil. 2.15. and
therefore one use should be, to teach Christians, by an ^umble acknowledgement
of the praises of others, to spread ^broad the light of good examples as far
as they can, 1. These. 1.7, 8. And withal, it shows the horrible sin of
those ^retches, that strive to blemish the good conversation of the ^odly, and
so rob the world of the profit of their examples.

The second virtue in a good example, is the lasting of it. It may do good for
a long time after, yea, in some cases, to the worlds end. The sweet savor of
it may be freshly sented many ^ears after: which was never true of any perfume in
the world. It is a light that will not out of a long time: as here the example
of these holy women, and Sarah in particular, have a fresh power to do good
many hundred years after it was given; and will have still to the worlds end.
The memorial of the Just is blessed. They that are to live hereafter, may
praise God for the good they receive from the examples of those that are long
since dead in their graves. Their works live long after they are dead: which
should be a wonderful consolation to eminent Christians, that excel in gifts
and good works, and have held forth a good profession before many witnesses.
And inasmuch as God, by his providence, keeps burning so long the light of the
good examples of his children, it will make the more to increase the
condemnation of such persons, as will not learn goodness from such examples.
Especially their case is fearful, that have had this light in such as have
been near to them: as in Parents, Masters, Ministers, special acquaintance,
kindred, or the like; and yet make no good use of it.

Thirdly, we may hence gather, That a good example ought to be given, and may
be taken from women as well as men. Pro. 31.28.29. Matthew. 26.13. Tit. 2.3, 4.
And the reason is, Because God is no respecter of persons, but gives his gifts
and graces to women as well as men; as Scripture and experience shows. And
besides, as their ill example may make the word of God to be blasphemed, Tit.
2.5. so why should not their good example become godliness, and profit
others? And this point should teach women, if they will profess Religion, to
look to their ways, and strive to give good example, especially aged women,
Tit. 2.3. And withal, it may be a comfort to that Sex, that God should use
their service to do his work, and many times to teach men by their ways and
works, 1. Tim. 1.5. God has raised up the glory and light of many worthy
women, and they have been as eminent for holiness and good works, as men
have been. Thus in general.

In this manner.] The first thing in the description, is the manner of the
pattern: about which, we may note three things.

1 That the patterns of well-doings, or the rules of life, have been the same
in all ages. There is no more required of Christians now, than was required of
Gods servants in former time: which should make us the more willing to bear
Gods yoke, and to do the task that God sets us.

^hen an exam^^e binds.
2 That an example is then of power to bind, when it agrees to some precept: as
here the example of holy women is urged, because it did agree to the doctrine
of the exhortation before named. This rule is of great use, in ordering of
conclusions, taken from examples in Scripture: examples have but the power of
illustration of what was before in the precept. And again, it should teach us,
not to esteem of any men above what is written; but to follow them as they
follow Christ, or as their actions are warranted by the Word of God.

3 God did ever stand upon subjection, and an amiable and meek behavior in
women, in all ages. Which should much prevail with Christian women, to teach
them to make more conscience of their carriage toward their husbands, seeing
God has ever required such a behavior in all holy women of former ages.

In old time.] The example is, in the second place, commended for the
antiquity of it. Where we learn, That a respect may be had to old time; yea,
respect is due to the times of old. Antiquity is an argument of praise;
therefore are we bidden to ask after the old way, Ier. 6.16 to ask of the
days that are past, Deuteronomy. 4.32. to remember the days of old, and to consider
the years of many generations, Deuteronomy. 32.7. And Ministers in public teaching,
must be like the good Scribe, that brings out of his treasury things both old
and new, Matt. 13. 52. and Fathers must talk of the things of old time to
their children, Psalm. 44.1.

Now because the argument from Antiquity, or the old time, has been much
abused, and such reasoning is taxed in many Scriptures; therefore that the
point may be more clear, I will distinctly consider, first, in what cases the
old times and antiquity may not be pleaded; and then, in what cases
antiquity may be pleaded, and good use may be made of it.

For the first; Antiquity is ill pleaded in the cases following: as,

1 When Antiquity is counterfeit: In what things Antiquity is ill pleaded.
when that is called the old time, which in comparison was but yesterday; As
the Papists lead us to the ages not long since past, and will not permit us to
look higher to the times of the Prophets and Apostles, which is the true
Antiquity.

2 When Antiquity is pleaded to confirm error in doctrine. And so the doctrine
was never a whit the better, that taught that the law of God did only bind the
outward man, and not the heart; and the outward man too, but in some higher
cases. And therefore our Savior rejects the errors of the Pharisees, though
they would confirm them by the sayings of old time, Matthew. 5. Job 15.10.

3 In the case of sin; Sin is not the better for the oldnesse of it, but
the worse: therefore the old man must be mortified, and all old things must be
put away, 2. Cor. 5.17. As an old Leprosy is worse than a new, Levit. 13.11.
so their hatred was the worse, because it was old, Ezech. 25.15. And the godly
pray, Remember not against us our old iniquities. Psalm. 79.8. and the wicked
are condemned for not purging out their old sins, 2. Pet. 1.9. and all men
should purge out the old leaven, 1. Cor. 5. And as in the sins of life
between man and man, so about Gods service, old courses are hateful, if they
be Idolatrous and superstitious: and therefore they were condemned for doing
after the old manner, 2. Reg. 17.34. and they are reproved by the Prophet
Jeremy, that so commended the old times of Idolatry, Ierem. 44.

4 When God abolisheth the old things, and brings in new: and so the old
Covenant is not better than the new, nor the old Testament better than the new.
Heb. 8.6, 7, 13. 2. Cor. 5.17.

5 In the case of the discovery of such mysteries, as for the time of
revealing them, depend upon the good pleasure of God only; so things hidden for
ages and generations, are revealed in the Gospel, and yet must not be
rejected. Col. 1.16.

6 When old times are pleaded, of purpose to lessen the glory or profit of the
present works of Gods power and mercy. Esa. 43.18. And this way the Pharisees
offended, that to avoid subjection to Christ and his doctrine, would magnify
Moses and the Prophets of old time. And so do those people offend, that
commend the old Teachers more that are dead or absent, and will not profit by
those they have, Mat. 23.

7 When it is used in defense of public disorders, and offenses, and
grievances in Church or Commonwealth. The pretense of Innovation, must not
hinder the reformation of known diseases in public States. Such things as
have been wastes of old, must be built, though it were not done of long time:
They shall build the old wastes, says the Prophet. Isa. 61.4.

8 When particular Christians do misapply it, to confirm them in their
unbeleefe or doubting; as if God did not regard or accept as in former times:
whereas if we serve him in uprightness of heart, he will accept our offerings
as in the days of old. Mal. 3.4. And if we get David's affections to God and
goodness, and will attend upon Gods mercy in the means, we shall have the
sure mercies of David. Isa. 55.1, 4.

Thus of the ways how old things, and the pleading of them, may be misapplyed
and done in our own wrong.

Now follows to show in what cases respect must be had to Antiquity, and old
times. And so Antiquity commends,

In what cases respect is to be bad unto old times.
1 The works of Gods power and mercy, Deuter. 32.7. 2. Kings 19.25. Psalm.
44.2. and God is well pleased to be urged with arguments taken from his old
dealing with his people: Arise as in the days of old, Isa. 51.9. so in Mich.
7.14, 20. and has left the memory of them upon record, that we might thence
confirm our weak faith.

2 The particular experiences we have had of Gods goodness toward us. Thus
David remembers days of old, Psalm. 77.6. and 143.5.

3 The profitable determinations of right in judicial things, between man and
man: and so, the old bounds are to be greatly respected, Pro. 22.28.

4 The public orders of the Churches, about the circumstances of Gods worship;
as the orders of the Jews, to have the preaching of Moses in every City on
the Sabbath day, Acts 15.21. This order is the more observeable, as for other
reasons, so because it was so in old times.

5 Gods commandments: It is an argument of weight to persuade to obedience,
when it can be showed that that commandment is an old commandment. 1. John
2.7.

6 In things that are doubtful or difficult, such respect is to be given to
Antiquity, as men should not rashly oppose their own or other men's new
conceits; so as a due respect be had to equal comparison in the nature of the
things questioned. Job 32.6.

7 In the examples and patterns of well-doing, that have had due conformity
to Gods will revealed in his precepts: and so the examples of holy practices in
old time, should much move the consciences of the godly nowadaies, as the
Apostle shows in this verse. And thus of the two points in the description.

Holy women.] The persons from whom this pattern is taken, are holy women:
where observe,

1 That holiness in the first Table, is required of women as well as men: and
they are bound to the duties of Gods worship, and to be religious women, as well
as to the duties of the second Table; to be chaste, merciful, faithful,
diligent in the affairs of the family, or obedient to their husbands. Which
serves to confute those men, that say women need not be studious in matters of
Religion; it is enough for them to be good house-wives, and obey their
husbands. And withal, it may comfort women in the practice of the duties of
Religion; for by the commendation given of holy women in this Text, it appears
that God accepts holiness in them as well as in men.

2 That all holy women did make conscience of subjection to their husbands: and
therefore the Apostle speaks indefinitely of all holy women. And this is the
more evident, because amongst all the infirmities noted in any godly woman in
the Scriptures, yet there is no example of a godly woman that did customarily
live in the sin of frowardness or rebellion against her husband: the
instance of Zipporah is but of one only fact, and the error seems to be as
much in her judgment as in her affections. And this doctrine should light
very heavy upon many wives, that profess Religion in these times, and
compel them to reform their hearts and behaviors in their carriage toward
their husbands: for this Text does import, that they want holiness that are
not subject to their husbands, and live in customarie frowardness and
unquietness.

3 That christian women ought to study the example of holy women in old times:
and therefore they should do well to get a catalogue, of the praises of godly
women in Scripture, to lay before them for their imitation; and so they should
learn of Sarah reverence to their husbands; and of Rahab and the Midwives of
Egypt, to show mercy to Gods servants in distress; and of Ruth, obedience to
their parents, and constant love to religion; and of the Shunamitish woman, 2.
Reg. 4.8. etc. and of Lidia, Acts 16.14. and of Phebe, Romans 16. 2. to be
entertainers of Gods servants, and to succor them; and of Hanna, to be humble,
and patient, and devout in prayer; and of the good woman in the Proverbes,
chap. 31. and of Priscilla, and Salomons mother, Pro. 30.1, 2. and Timothies
mother and grandmother, 2. Tim. 14 to get the law of grace into their lips,
to instruct others; and of that woman in the Proverbs, to be painful in
labor, and to be wise in oversight of the labors of their servants and
children; and of Hester, to keep religious Fasts to God, with their maids and
children, Hest. 4.16 and of the Virgin Mary, to lay up the words of Christ in
their hearts; and with Mary Magdalen, to love Christ with all tenderness, and
to bewail their sins with sorrow, and to sit at Christ's feet to hear his
words; and of Elizabeth, to live without offense, Luke 1. and of Dorcas, to be
merciful to the poor; and of the holy women, mentioned Heb. 17.3. to be
constant professors of the truth in the times of persecution.

That trusted in God.] The fourth thing is the cause of their subjection; and
that is their trust in God: about which, four things are to be observed.

1 That Trust in God is such a grace as is found in all the godly: even women,
that were holy, had attained to trust in God. All holy women trusted in God;
and therefore if women that are the weaker sex, cannot get holiness but
withal they trust in God, it is implyedly clear, That all the godly do trust
in God. The house of Israel and the house of Aaron, Priests and people, even
all that fear the Lord must trust in the Lord, Psalm. 115.9, 10, 11. and all
the Gentiles must trust in the Lord, Romans 15.12. It is the Periphrasis of God,
to be the confidence of all the ends of the earth, Psalm. 65.5. And the reasons
why the godly must and do all of them trust in God, are, first, Gods
commandment, that requires it of all; which the former places shows:
secondly, Gods promise that he will be the hope of his people, even of all his
people, Joel 3.16. and they have a sure word of the Prophets to warrant their
trust, 2. Pet. 1.19. Thirdly, without faith and trust it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11.6. Fourthly, because they have nothing else to trust in. Of
all people, the godly are most miserable, if their trust were to be placed in
other things than God: for as all earthly things are vain and transitory, so
can they make least shift for themselves, and are most opposed in these things.
And therefore the use should be, to teach us to try our hearts soundly, whether
we be such as trust in God, seeing in this thing lies one great part of our
evidence about true grace. If all the godly trust in God, then we are not
godly, nor holy men and women, if we do not trust in God. The question then
is, By what signs do godly men prove that they do trust in God? and the
answer is.

1 By making God their refuge in all their distresses, Signs of such as trust
in God.
and by pouring out their hearts before him in prayer and supplication. 2. Sam.
22.3, 4. Psalm. 62.8.

2 By their fear in any thing to displease God, and their care to keep his
commandments, and to cleave to God, 2. Reg. 18.4, 5, 6. doing his work,
whatsoever come of it.

3 By relying upon God in times of distress, without using any ill means or
courses, that they know or fear to be unlawful. Esaias 28.16. with 1. Chron.
10.13, 14. but still wait upon God till he help them. Psalm. 33.20.

4 By accounting God to be their portion, and sufficient heritage. Psalm. 16.1,
5, 6.

5 By setting the Lord always before them. Psalm. 16.1, 18. for if we put all
our trust in God, then our hearts do continually think of God, and are lifted
up to God.

6 By committing all their ways to God, and leaving the success of things to
his disposing. Psalm. 37.5.

7 By their patience in the case of wrongs and indignities, having their hearts
free from desires of revenge, and their tongues from words of reproach or
reproof: they are as deaf or dumb men. Psalm. 38.13, 14, 15.1. Tim. 4.10.

8 By contemning the glory of the world, and not regarding or seeking
dependancies upon proud and sinful persons. Psalm. 40.4.

9 By the joy and contentment they take in the house of God; their hearts
flourishing like a green Olive tree, when they hear of the doctrine of Gods
goodness, and feel the refreshing of his Name. Psalm. 52.8, 9.

10 By their thankfulness, and great desires to praise God, when they find
the experiences of Gods providence, in grace and bounty toward them. Psalm.
13.5, 6. and 52.8, 9.

Yet by the way we must know, that godly persons that do truly trust in God,
may be burdened with cares, but yet they cast their burdens upon God when
they feel them. Psalm. 55.22. They may be afraid, and yet trust in God. Psalm.
56.3. They may cry and make great moan, and that a long time. Psalm. 69.3 They
may seem to want strength, and yet renew their strength. Isa. 40. ult.

2 From hence we may gather, That it is a great praise and an excellent gift in
any to trust in God, to have and exercise this trust in God: and therefore of
all parts of holiness and sanctification, in this place, trust in God is
mentioned. And therefore in diverse Scriptures they are pronounced to be very
blessed that can do it, Psalm. 84 12. and 34.8. and it is reckoned as a great
ornament and glory in great Princes, as 2. Reg. 18.5. Psalm. 21.8. and the
chief praise of the Fathers and Patriarchs of the Church, Psalm. 22.5. And the
reasons are diverse.

1 Because it is a supernatural power in any man or woman, Reasons proving the
excellency of this trusting in God.
because it is grounded upon things not seen, Romans 8.24.

2 Because the Lord takes special pleasure in this grace, and takes notice
of such as can exercise it, above all others: It is a thing God specially
observes in his people, Psalm. 147.11 and 33.18. c^h. his eye is upon them, he
cannot look off them. so also Nah. 1.7. And contrariwise, he is as much vexed
with unbeleefe, and not trusting upon him, as with any other sin. We read
that fire kindled against Jacob for not believing in God, and not trusting in
his salvation, Psalm. 78.22.

3 Because the trust in other things, will prove the shame and confusion of a
man, Esaias 30.2. and therefore better to trust in the Lord than in Princes, etc.
Psalm. 118.8, 9.

4 Because it is a grace that produces admirable effects: for,

1 It establishes a man's heart, Admirable effects of this trusting in God.
and makes it fixed and immovable, Psalm. 112.7, 8. and 31.24. so as he can
endure things that are almost beyond belief, if it be rightly exercised. Isa.
14.32. coh. Psalm. 27.3.

2 It procures from God all things a man's heart can desire, or his condition
any way need. 2. Sam. 22.2, 3. psa. 5.11, 12. It gets a man mavelous loving
kindness from God. ps. 17.7 so great experience of Gods goodness, as cannot
be uttered. Psalm. 31.19. Mercy shall compass them about, when many sorrows
shall be to the wicked, Psalm. 32.10. His mercy will be upon us, according as
we have hope in him, Psalm. 33.22. and 55.22. and 91.1. etc. It is the best way,
either to preserve us from trouble, or to deliver us out of trouble, of what
kind soever, Psalm. 130.7. Esaias 25.4 and 26.3, 4. 2. Chron. ^3.18.

3 It opens for us a most comfortable intertainment in Gods house: our hearts
that can trust in Gods mercy, drink out of the rivers of his pleasures, when
we come into his house, and are satisfied with his goodness, Psalm. 36.7, 8.

The use of this point may be diverse.

1 Such as find want of this grace, should use all means to attain it. And
that we may be able to put all our trust upon God, we must look to these
rules following.

Helps to attain this grace of trusting in God.
1 We must hate them that regard lying vanities. Psalm. 31.6. and 40.4.

2 We must know Gods Name, Psalm. 9.10. we must get knowledge of Gods
goodness; and so, the warrant of our trust in the word of God. We must thence
learn both what to do, and upon what grounds to trust upon God. To this end
did God give his word to his people, Psalm. 78.5, 7. Romans 15.4. Pro. 30.5. Psalm.
56.3, 4.

3 We must labor to get assurance of Gods love to us in Jesus Christ, to know
that God is our God, and we are the children of God. Psalm. 31.14. and 36.7.
for the confidence of an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken
tooth, or a foot out of joint. Pro. 25.19. and the ground of our trust must be
in the merits of Jesus Christ. Ephe. 1.12.

4 When we know God to be our God, we must strive to get our hearts to it, to
make God our portion; and to rest satisfied with Gods goodness and love to us,
whatsoever else we want. Lament. 3.24.

5 We must be sure that we be upright in heart, and that we have warrant for
our actions, and do not live in any sin that might provoke God against us.
Psalm. 64.10. And to this end we should pray God to cause us to know the way we
should walk in, and to let us hear of his loving kindness in the morning, to
encourage us in all good courses. Psalm. 14^.8.

6 We must be sure we do not draw upon our selves needless troubles, Prove.
28.25. and when we are in a good way, we should not give way to our own vain
fears. Proverb. 29.25.

7 When we find troubles to arise, and fear and care to surprise us, we must
make our refuge, to get one selves under the shadow of Gods wings, till the
calamity be overpast. Psalm. 57.1. and 91.1. Now Gods wings are his Ordinances,
especially Prayer and his Word. Thus of the first use.

Secondly, seeing to trust in God is such an excellent grace, such as do
endeavor to practice this trust in God, must look to diverse rules in the
exercise of it, which are necessary to a right trusting in God: as,

1 They must trust him with their hearts: Rules to be observed in our right
trusting in God.
their souls must trust in God. Psalm. 57.1. and 28.8.

2 They must put all their trust in God: God will have no partners. All my
trust is in thee, says David.

3 They must trust in God at all times, continually, and with praise for what
they have felt of Gods goodness. Psalm. 62.8. and 71.14. Esa. 26.4.

4 If God do defer to answer our help, they must wait for the Lord: their
souls must wait. Psalm. 130.5, 6.

5 They must make the most High their habitation: they must dwell with God, by
setting the Lord always before them, and attending upon all means of
communion with God. They must not be strangers from God, to go days or weeks
without directing their hearts after him. Psalm. 91.9.

6 They must handle their matters wisely, and not upon pretense of trust in
God, carry themselves indiscreetly, or neglect the use of any lawful means.
Pro. 16.20.

7 Their trust in God, must be joined with an awful fear of God, and sense of
their own unworthiness: they must not be conceited persons, or despise the
care of their ways. Psalm. 147.11.

8 They must declare all Gods works, that is, they must labor to glorify
God, by telling others of the experiences they have had of Gods goodness.
Psalm. 73. ult.

9 When they have committed their ways to God, they must be quieted as a
weaned child, and contented with whatsoever the Lord shall lay upon them.
Psalm. 131.2, 3. Lam. 3.26.

10 They must believe above hope, and under hope: they must rest upon Gods
promise, how unlikely soever the performance seem to be. Romans 4.18. Thus of
the second use.

Thirdly, we may from the reasons of this doctrine, gather evidently, That all
Gods servants, that trust in God, are in a wondrous safe condition; as David
shows of himself, Psalm. 18.2, 3. Neither may they say, that they cannot look
that God should be to them as he was to David; for God has given his word for
it, that he will be good to all that put their trust in him, 2. Sam. 22 31.
Psalm. 34.22. and therefore all true Christians that find themselves prone to
fear or discontent, should speak to their souls, and chide their own hearts
as David did, Psalm. 42.5. See Esa. 30.2.

Fourthly, wicked men have little cause then to deride and scoff at the people
of God, for trusting in God, and refusing to use such evil courses as they
do: for by the doctrine and reasons before, it appears plainly, that they
do both holily and happily by committing all to God. Psalm. 14.4, 7. and 22.9.
Thus of the second doctrine.

Doct. 3. It is a special praise in women, to trust in God: and the more
praise, because it is so rare in women, who use to rely upon either their
parents or their husbands, to provide for them, and seldom look up to God. And
besides, it produces excellent effects: for it makes them subject to their
husbands, and that with all quietness, and meekness, and fear to displease
their husbands; as is employed here. And besides, women that trust in God, will
be a great help and comfort to their husbands in their crosses: Vid. 1. Tim.
5.5 Ier. 49.11.
they will encourage them to rely upon God, in whom they put their trust;
which very help is worth great riches. The use should be therefore, to
persuade wives to be the more careful of their faith and trust in God, and to
look to it that it be a true faith, and a right trust in God: for such wives
as are a vexation to their husbands by their carelessness, and frowardness,
and unquietnes, and such as are so far from comforting their husbands in
distress, that they rather add affliction to their afflictions, by censuring
them and crossing them; they may justly fear that their trust in God is not
right. Yea, it may be observed, that some wives that profess Religion, Note.
and are unquiet and live frowardly and stubbornly toward their husbands, they
are unquiet in their consciences too, and when crosses come upon them, call
their faith into question, and cannot be established in their trust in God. And
it is just with God it should be so, that such women as dare live in known
transgressions against their husbands, should not know their portion in the
consolation of God: God will not be loved, when their husbands are not loved.

Thus of the fourth point: the fifth point is the effect, and that is, they
adorned themselves.

Adorned themselves. Doct.
] In all ages the comeliness and ornament of a wife as a wife, was to obey her
husband, with meekness and fear: and those were the comeliest and best
apparelled women, in the sight of God, their husbands and good men, that were
most quiet and easy to be governed, and willingest to please their husbands.
And so on the contrary, a wife were a very unhandsome woman, and not fit to
please any wise man, that were of a froward and unquiet disposition, either
through anger, or crying, or the like; yea though she had otherwise never so
great an estate, or never so excellent gifts of nature, of mind or body; yea,
if she could be imagined to have true holiness and grace, yet she were but a
loathsome creature. And this doctrine, as it should move all wives, so
especially such as have not other things to commend them, but want either
portion, or beauty, or skill, or have but weak gifts in Religion; these
should be the more careful to recompense their husbands, and strive to please
them in this way of adorning themselves.

The matter of the example, is Subjection to their husbands: and of that I have
entreated in the exhortation it self.

The special argument is taken from the particular example of Sarah, verse. 6.
Where we are to observe,

1 What she did, viz. she obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord.

2 What fruit will follow to Christian wives, if they follow her example, viz.
they shall become her daughters.

3 Upon what condition they shall obtain that honor, viz. if they do well,
and be not afraid of any amazement.

Sarah.] The names here mentioned, are Sarah and Abraham: and both their names
are kept in the Christian Church, not as they were at first, but as they were
changed of God out of his love and respect to their faith and obedience. The
woman was first called Sarai, which signified, My Lady, or My Mistress; but
after was changed into Sarah, to signify that she should be a Mistress to many,
or a Mistress indefinitely, meaning that she should have a great posterity: as
the man's name was changed into Abraham, and signified a father of many nations.
From the giving of the names, we may gather,

1 Such as glorify God, by believing and keeping his covenant, and patient
bearing of adversity, shall be blessed of God; and in particular, shall have
this blessing of a happy posterity. A godly life brings God to us and our
families, and an ungodly life drives him away.

2 That God is no accepter of persons, but godly wives shall have their part in
the blessing of godly husbands. This christian wives may look for, if they be
as Sarah, holy women, and such as obey their husbands, and are a comfort and
help to them in all the travailes of their lives, and no way hinder godliness
in them.

Obeyed Abraham.] Diverse things may be noted hence.

1 That obedience is the chief thing required in the subjection of wives:
showing how Sarah was subject, he says, she obeyed him. The maine thing
required of wives, is to be ruled by their husbands. Those wives transgress,
that are not careful to see that done which their husbands require, and with
reason require: and those that cross their husbands, and vex them, by
opposing or censuring; especially those that will not be quiet unless they may
do what they list, and rule their husbands.

2 That as much is due to every husband, as was due from Sarah to Abraham;
else this argument of the Apostle had not been good. They might have said that
Abraham was a great man, and holy, and wise, and loving, etc. but the Apostle
requires, that what women would do, for the substance of obedience, if they
had Abraham to their husband, that must they do to him that is now their
husband. And the reason is clear, Because Gods commandment in the moral Law
prescribes the same honor to be given to all husbands: and in the new
Testament obedience is required of all wives to all husbands. And this was the
more observeable in Sarah, because in obeying Abraham, she was feign to leave
her own country, and be exposed to a world of pains, and danger, and wants.

3 That the discharge of domestical duties is a good work, and shall be had
in everlasting remembrance. Though all good wives have not the honor to be
written in Gods book of Scripture, and praised therein, yet they have the
honor to be written in Gods book of Remembrance, which shall be opened at the
last day: and so contrariwise.

Calling him Lord.] That she did so call him, the Apostle found written, Genesis
18.12. Hence we may observe.

1 That godly wives ought to acknowledge their husbands to have power over
them, as if they had been servants bought with their money; not that their
subjection is no better than the subjection of servants, but that the husbands
have as well power over them, as they have over their servants. Sarah does not
in judgment only acknowledge it as due, but with wonderful affection, does
easily and with great love give that title to Abraham.

2 That it is one part of the subjection of wives, to carry themselves
reverently toward their husbands; and to give them such titles, as may show
that they do heartily honor them.

3 We may here observe the wonderful goodness of God toward his servants,
that in a great heap of sin, can see and accept of a little spark of true
grace. The whole sentence of Sarah was vile and profane, only that word was
good: God praises her for that was good, and passes by the great fault she
committed. Yea we may note, that God is so well pleased with her loving
subjection to her husband, that he is content to forgive her great sin of
unbelief against him. Yea it is probable, that her great respect of her
husband, made her the more willingly to believe Gods promise afterward: for,
Heb. 11.11. she is commended judging God to be faithful, who had promised her
a child, though at first she laughed at it.

Whose daughters ye are.] Godly women may be said to be the daughters of Sarah
three ways. Godly women daughters of Sarah three ways.


1 If Sarah be taken mystically for the new Jerusalem; as Gal. 4.

2 In respect of inheriting the love and blessing of God which Sarah had, they
shall be her daughters, that is, they shall have the same portion from God, as
if they had come in Sarahs room; as in the case of Abraham is said, Romans 4.11,
16.

3 In respect of spiritual kindred and alliance: Christian women are as near
a kin to Sarah, as if they were her own daughters.

So that the maine doctrine from hence, is, That there is a spiritual kindred
and consanguinitie between the godly: About which, from this place we may
observe diverse positions.

1 That all the godly are a kin: and the reason is, Because they are all the
children of one father, that is, God; and all borne of the immortal seed of
the Word.

2 That they are near a kin: as near as mothers and daughters, or as
brothers and sisters; as Christ said of his kindred, Matthew. 12.49, 50. Here are
no cousins removed.

3 That this kindred does confer a real honor upon every Christian: so as
the Christian wives are as truly great, as if they were immediately descended
out of Sarahs womb.

4 That God himself does seriously acknowledge this kindred; and looks upon
the meanest Christian, as truly allied to the greatest Worthies have ever been
in the world.

5 That this neerenesse of consanguinitie is not a jot altered by the distance
of hundred of years; as in the Apostles time the glory of alliance with Sarah
did shine in Christian women: the reason is, Because the root of this
consanguinitie is ever alive, which is Christ.

6 That Christians are not borne to this kindred, but made so. Godly women were
not borne daughters of Sarah, but became so after their new birth.

7 That that which breeds this spiritual kindred, is not being Gossips at the
Font, nor no carnal propagation, Romans 9.8. but Faith, Romans 4.16. and
well-doing; as this Apostle says in this Text.

The use may be, first, to comfort godly Christians against the want and loss
of carnal kindred; and to teach us all to honor such as are truly godly, for
they are the only excellent ones, and have the greatest and best kindred in
the world. Yea, we should prefer our godly kindred before our carnal, in the
dearness of our love: and the godly should show all duties of love one to
another, as they that are mothers and daughters, brothers and sisters in the
Lord, and so should stand one for another, as men would do for their carnal
kindred.

A second doctrine may be noted from hence, That all Christians are not alike
in gifts: some are mothers, some are daughters. As it is in the body of a man,
all the members are not of like honor or use, though all serve for the good of
the body, 1. Cor. 12. Which should teach those of greater gifts, not to
despise those of lesser gifts; and those of lesser gifts, to honor those of
greater gifts; and both sorts, to praise God for the gifts they have; having
nothing but what they have received, and to be a daughter of Sarah being
sufficient to get the blessing that Sarah had her self.

So long as you do well.] Observe hence,

1 That Christians obtain not the proper privileges of communion of Saints,
unless they do well. None but Christians that lead a holy life, have the
honor of true spiritual kindred with Christ and the Saints. Matt. 12.49, 50.
Wicked Christians are a kin to the Devil.

2 That we are bound only to imitate that which is good in the Saints, not
their sins. They must follow Sarah in her well-doing: they must not imitate
her in her frowardness, Genesis 16.5. nor in her bold a^venturing of her
chastity, though it were upon pretense of saving her husbands life, Genesis
12.11, 12. And this condemns those women, that so wilfully allege the
examples of others, to uphold them in such behavior as their own consciences
tell is naught.

3 It is imported here, that some women may do well for a time, and yet prove
very naught afterward. Some begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh. Some
women are at first quiet, sober, loving to their husbands, good house-wives,
etc. and yet after a time they grow froward, excessive in apparel, diet, and
the like, imperious, such as slight their husbands, idle and wastfull, and
careless of the duties they should do in the family. They are condemned of
themselves, and shall rise in judgment against themselves, their first works
condemn their last.

4 In general we may here note, That it is not enough to do good, but we must
see to it, that what we do be well done.

Quest. What can come to a good action, to make it ill?

What things mar a good action.
Answ. Impenitencie in any sin, will stain any action, though it be in it
self never so good. Esa. 1.13, 16.

2 An ill end will defile a good action; to do it of purpose to be seen of
men, Matthew. 6. or as men-pleasers, in the case of wives, or servants, or
subjects, etc.

3 Unbelief makes all actions ill, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: when
we either know not the warrant of it, or believe not Gods acceptance.

4 Rashness and indiscretion marres good actions, Prove. 19.2. when men have
not respect to the circumstances of well doing, or the provision should go to
it: when good duties are done rudely, and without respect of due time and
place, etc. We should be wise to do good. Romans 16.19.

5 Unwillingness defiles a good action: when it seems evil to us to serve
God, Josh. 24.14. when our works are dead works. Heb. 9.14. Deuteronomy. 28.47.

6 When the fruit men bear is not their own fruit: as if a King will offer
sacrifice, or women preach, or the like. And so when wives do not the duties
of wives, though they did never so much good other ways, yet they have not the
praise of well doing, unless they do their duties to their husbands: the like
may be said of Magistrates, Ministers, Husbands, Parents, Servants, etc.

7 Confidence in the flesh marres good duties; when men trust to their own
wits, reason, skill, or any gifts, and do not all they do in the name of
Jesus Christ. Col. 3.17. Phil. 3.3. and in particular, conceitednesse, and to
be wise in themselves, and proud, will mar any action. All should be done in
meekness of wisdom.

8 Inconstancy shames any action; when we are weary of well doing, or
wavering, or decline and go backwards: their righteousness being as the
morning dew.

Quest. Can any thing we do be well done, seeing all our righteousness is as
a menstruous cloth? Esa. 64.6.

Answ. Our works in themselves are none well done, but by Gods indulgence
assured unto us in the new Covenant: Where h.

1 Accepts the Will for the Deed. How we are said to do well.
It is well done, when our desire and endeavor is to do it as well as we can.

2 He beholds the work in Christ, and for his intercession passes by the
evil that cleaves to our best works.

3 He regards it as proceeding from his own Spirit in us, who causes us to
do good, and works our works for us; as in the instance of prayer, Romans
8.26. Thus of the fourth observation.

Doct. 5. From the manner of the term in the original, which has a
continual respect to the present time, and imports a continual well doing; I
note, That a Christian should strive to be always doing good: he should let no
time pass without well doing. 2. Tim. 2.21. 2. Cor. 9.8. Psalm. 106.2. Col.
3.10. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15. 1. Tim. 5.10. And that for many reasons.

1 Because he has so little a time left to work in. Reasons why we ought
always to be doing well.
He should walk in the light while he has the light; the night will come,
when no man can work: and the rather, since he has lost so much time in
doing works of darkness, he should now redeem the time. Ephesians. 5.15. 1.
Pet. 4.2, 3.

2 Because he is Gods servant, and therefore should be always working, Romans 6.
yea, he is Gods Sacrifice, therefore should he be wholly devoted to the doing
of good. Romans 12.1.

3 Because we have our task set us, and ever the more work we do, the
sooner we shall fulfill the measure prescribed us.

4 Because hereby we shall much glorify God, Matt. 5.16. and silence wicked
men. 1. Pet. 2.12, 15.

5 Because God is faithful, and will not forget our works and labor; we shall
be rewarded accordingly. If we sow sparingly, we shall reap sparingly. 2.
Cor. 9. Heb. 6.11. Gal. 6.9. God gives us richly to enjoy all things in this
world. 1. Tim. 6.17. and our continuance in well doing will be marvellously
rewarded in heaven. Romans 2.7.

Now, that we may do much good, we must pray God to stablish us in every
good word and work. 2 Thessalonians. 2.17. and withal, we must furnish our selves
with directions out of the Scriptures, and study the rules of life there
prescribed. 2. Tim. 3.16, 17. Iam. 3.17. and then we must be sure to make use
of all the opportunities of well doing.

And be not afraid with any amazement.] These words may be diversely referred,
and so diversely expounded.

If they be referred to the exhortation, to subjection to their husbands in the
manner before showed, then the sense may be, that they should not fear that
they should be misused if they were subject: or else it limits the manner of
subjection, that they should not be subject only for fear, or out of
baseness of mind; fear should not be the ground of their obedience, but
conscience of Gods commandments, and love to their husbands.

If they be referred to the example of Sara, they may be taken either as a
promise, or as a condition: as a promise, thus; If they imitate Sarah in well
doing, they need not be afraid of the troubles of a married estate; for by
this course those troubles will be prevented, or the tribulation they shall
have in the flesh, will not be great. Or they may be the second, as a condition
of their filiation: If they will be Sarahs daughters, then they must learn of
Sarah, to bear the troubles and afflions may befall them and their husbands,
without disquietnes and amazement. Sarah could leave her own country, and was
a comfort to her husband; and we never read that she any way discouraged her
husband, or complained of misery, though she was feign to live in many
strange places, and had not at any time any certain abode any where.

But I think the words may be interpreted in general, as containing a
prohibition of excessive fears and consternation of mind, which is often
found in women, to the great offense and disquieting of their husbands. The
word translated Amazement, notes such a perplexity of mind, in which one is
almost at ^is wits end: and therefore the Verb of which this Noune is
derived, is used in the New Testament only in these cases; as in the cases of
rumors of wars or seditions, ready to seize upon a people, Luke 21.9. or in
the case of a conceit that one sees a ghost or spirit, Luke 24.37, And such as
either of these, do women sometimes fall into: and this the Apostle forbids.

He does not forbid all fear; for they must fear their husbands, Ephesians. 5
ult. and they must fear God, 2. Cor. 7.11. Nor does he severely tax that
natural fearfulness in women, which follows their sex; but only such
desperate vexations or passions, as suffer them not to make use of their trust
in God, or love to their husbands.

Quest. What causes can there be imagined, why these Christian wives should be
in danger of any such consternation of mind?

Answ. The Apostle might well imagine diverse causes of this frailty.

1 They had husbands that were Infidels, Causes of amazement in wives.
which might be a great grievance to them: and besides, those husbands might
perhaps absolutely forbid them, or labor to restrain them from the exercises
of Christian Religion; which might put them into a great strait.

2 Their profession of Christian Religion, might bring upon them many
tribulations, and persecutions, which women are not so able to bear.

3 It may be the Apostle had observed, that women were apt to fall into these
desperate fitts of passion and grieving, when they were crossed by their
husbands, or servants, or children. Sure it is, that many women nowadayes, if
their husbands do but cross them in reasonable things, they will cry and
grieve, as if they would die in the vexation of their hearts.

These strange humors, and perplexities, and desperate fitts, the Apostle
absolutely forbids: he would not have any of them found in a Christian wife.

Verse. 7. Likewise ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving
honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, as being heirs together of
the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.
HItherto of the duties of Wives: the Husbands duty follows in the words of
this Verse. Where three things are to be observed.

1 The proposition of their duty; Husbands dwell with them.

2 The exposition, showing how they must do it, viz. as men of knowledge, and
such as honor them.

3 The Reasons; which are three.

1 Because they are the weaker vessel, and therefore need to be carefully and
continually well used.

2 Because they are both alike heirs of Gods grace.

3 Because else their prayers and Gods service, will be much interrupted and
hindered.

In the Proposition may be observed, first, the word of connection, Likewise.
Secondly, the term of application, Ye. Thirdly, the persons charged,
Husbands. Fourthly, the duty imposed, viz. Dwell with them.

Likewise.] This term binds these words to the former, and shows, That God
does charge husbands to look to their duties, as well as wives. Now if God
charge the husband, it evidently imports, that evil husbands must give account
to God of all the evil they do: though no law of man punish them, yet God
will, that gave them this law. And withal, it may comfort such husbands as are
censured without cause: God that has given them their charge, knows their
integrity, whatsoever foolish wives object, or a vain world imputes to them.
And in general, God will accept and reward the careful behavior of good
husbands.

But before I proceed, two questions may be asked.

Quest. 1. Why are husbands charged in the last place?

Answ. There may be two reasons given of it: first, to show the respect that
God gives to husbands. He first by his precept informs his wife before his
face, and shows him a pattern how he shall walk toward him; Why Husbands
duties are noted in the last place.
and therefore now may the more willingly attend to his own duty. Secondly,
because things last spoken, have usually the greatest and longest impression
upon the heart: and this is a matter of great consequence, that the husband be
soundly careful of the discharge of his duty. The well-being of the family,
and the well-doing of both man and wife, depends much upon the husbands right
behavior. If the head be out of order, how can the body be well? and the wife
being the image of the husband, what shall she learn of him if he give an ill
pattern? If the eye be dark, how can the body be light? If the Pilot of the
Ship be ignorant and careless, what safety can the Ship be in? Besides, what
a world of hurt will the ill example of the husband do in the family, either
in children or servants?

Quest. 2. But why are husbands charged with so few words?

Ans. Because it is to be supposed, that they have a larger knowledge of Gods
will. And besides, in that tender age of the Christian world, the Apostles in
discretion said less to superiors, to avoid provocation of irreligious
husbands, and the better to allure them to the Christian faith, when they
should see their wives so largely instructed in their behavior toward them.
And further, ever the shorter their lesson is, the more shame for them not to
learn it, and show themselves exact both in the understanding and in the
practice of it.

Ye Husbands.] God speaks to them in the second persons, to import, that they
should hear these words, as if God were present to speak to them in his own
person; and withal, to teach them, that the right hearing of this doctrine, is
for every man to hear it as spoken directly to himself. God does single them
out to hear their charge, and speaks to them as if he named them in
particular.

Husbands.] The persons charged are Husbands: and the word is a term that
imports that special relation, in which God binds one man to one woman;
investing the man in prerogatives of a superior in that union.

Before I come to the duty charged upon Husbands, it will not be unprofitable,
by way of Preface, to use some motives to such husbands as will make conscience
of their ways, to persuade them to be very careful of their charge. The
reasons used in the Text afterward, I will not now meddle withal, but only
put them in mind of some few things which ought to be effectual to persuade
them. The motives may be drawn from four fountains.

Motives to persuade Husbands to be careful of their duties.
1 From commandment: and there let them consider, who commands them, and how.
Who commands them; and so let them mark, first, that God himself has given
them their law of walking. They are not tied by man's laws, but by Gods own
law. Secondly, God speaks to them by the Ministry of great Apostles: it was
one part of the Commission of those high Ambassadors (sent into the Christian
world) to give husbands their charge. Thirdly, it should somewhat the more move
them, that S. Peter was himself a married man, and therefore did practice what
he taught them, and did know by experience, that a husband might with comfort
undertake this task. And then it should much move them, to observe how God
has given his commandment to them: he first charge their wives, before he
charge them. And besides, he has given a long charge to the wives, and but a
short charge to them.

2 From their relation to their wives. They are their wives heads, and
therefore should be careful how they order themselves. They are the life of
their lives, as it were: God has made the wife to depend upon them for
comfort, and direction, and preservation.

3 From their prerogatives: God has given them great power, more than the
wives. They are heads to their wives: and besides, they are images of Jesus
Christ: they show in the family what Christ is in the Church: they do as it
were act Christ's part, and resemble him in his relation to the Church; and
therefore they had need to think of it, how they carry themselves. They are
types of Jesus Christ, and will they shame him by acting folly, passion, pride,
and dissoluteness? Did Christ do so to the Church? Besides, it should much
move him, that God has, in the most things, left the husband free from the
laws of men. He has no man to control him in his office; and has not God
made him both King and Priest in his family? His household is a little kingdom
or a little Church, where he is of sovereign power, and has great supremacy;
and if the world acknowledge not the glory of his place, yet it is acknowledged
in heaven.

4 From the manner of his coming into this relation: he was not borne a
husband but made so, and made so by the gift of God: for God gave him his wife,
as he did Eve to Adam: yea, let him consider, that God gave him the wife that
was of his own choosing, and whom with so much desire he longed after, and it
may be, prayed for. But especially let him consider, that God has bound him to
his wife by covenant; yea, that he has bound himself to God by covenant for
this thing: yea, that the oath of God is upon him; he has sworn before the
Lord to do his duty. Thus of the general motives.

Further, in that he said, Husbands indefinitely, he shows thereby, That all
husbands are bound to observe this charge, and all alike. God charge rich,
learned, wise, godly husbands as much, and as well as poor, unlearned, and ill
disposed men. Two uses may be made of this point: for first, hereby we may
see clearly, that outward things make no difference before God: when God gives
a law, he gives it to all men, as if they were but one man. Civil difference
of blood, nations, calling, condition, or common gifts, makes no exception from
any, when God gives his law. Secondly, such husbands as find an outward
difference from other husbands, either in their gifts, or greatness of means,
or highness of office or calling, should lay aside all thought of such things,
and show as much respect to their wives, as any other men that have no such
things to boast of. And yet one thing more I may add to such hearers as hear
this doctrine; seeing God charge all, they should take heed of that common
fault of thinking of other husbands, and how the doctrine will fit them, and so
neglect application to themselves.

Dwell with them.] The duty charged upon husbands, is contained briefly in
these words; and under this phrase of dwelling with them, is comprehended in
effect, all essential matrimonial duties: For it imports,

What things cohabitation does import.
1 Not only cohabitation, but also,

2 Separation from all the world, to a special fellowship with that woman.

3 Communion of goods: They that must be partners of Gods treasures in Heaven,
must be partners in all outward blessings. All things should be common: so as
the husband must provide maintenance for his wife, and that not only while he
lives with her, but he ought, as he is able, to provide for her maintenance
after he is dead.

4 Mutual benevolence, or the mutual use of each others bodies, 1. Cor. 7.

5 Delight in her company, so as to be loath to be absent from her: it is not
enough to be with her, but he must dwell with her, Pro. 5.19.

6 Serving of God together, as the last reason in the end of the verse shows.

Now diverse reasons may be given of this, why husbands should dwell with their
wives.

1 From the institution of marriage, diverse things may be noted: as, that God
said, he would provide a helper for man to be before him, Reasons why husbands
ought thus to dwell with their wives.
Genesis 2.18. and besides, Adam confessed, she was bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh, which the Apostle urges, Ephesians. 5. And further it is said, For this
cause, shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife, and they
shall be one flesh. All which imports a necessity of living together.

2 From the example of Christ: Husbands should love their wives, as Christ
loved the Church. Now, how Christ desires to be with the Church, may be seen
in the Canticles; and he has promised he will be with his Church to the end
of the world, Mat. ^8.

3 From the unnaturalness of the offense of living asunder: did ever any man
hate his own flesh? says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. or can the arm or head in
the natural body, live well from the other parts of the body? no more either
comely or convenient is it for husbands to live from their wives.

The use is therefore, for great reproof of many husbands, that have so little
desire or delight to converse in this holy and loving manner with their wives,
but study all occasions to draw them from home: yea, some men had rather live
abroad with their dogs or hawks, than at home with their wives. But
especially, those beasts are abominable, that leave the society of their wives,
to follow strange women, that is, Whores.

Secondly, here is somewhat for wives too: If they would have their husbands to
keep home, and delight in their company, they must labor to be amiable, and
pleasing, and study to be quiet and obedient, that their husbands may be
encouraged with delight to live with them.

Again, the indefinite propounding of the duty, shows, that they must dwell
with them at all times; not for the first quarter after they are married, but
for ever, and that for conscience sake, not only to avoid shame, or the
displeasure of the wives friends, or only while her portion lasts, or for such
like carnal respects.

But before I leave this point, something would be said of four cases of
absence, which may be put: as first, the case of absence in respect of Calling:
secondly, the case of separation from bed and board: thirdly, the case of
Nullities: fourthly, the case of Divorce.

For the first; In what cases it is lawful for the husband to be absent.
when God gives a man a just calling to live from his wife, or to go into
foreign parts, it is lawful to forbear cohabitation for the time. As in the
case of Soldiers, or Merchants, or Ministers, that are called to exercise
their Ministeries in remote places: In these cases, when the wives cannot or
will not go with them, they may lawfully live absent; yea, though their wives
consent not to it: Because all relations to man, must give place to our
relation to God. Now, when God calls any man to any imploiment, no man can
disanull that calling: and therefore, such in the Ministry as have lawful
callings to exercise their Ministeries in other countries, and have not sit
imploiment at home, do very sinfully when they refuse to preach the Gospel in
such places, upon that silly pretense, that they cannot get their wives to
consent.

For the second, viz. the case of Separation from bed and board, it is for the
most part very wicked and abominable; Whether separation from bed and board be
lawful.
because we have not either commandment, or permission, or example of any such
in the Word of God. And besides, experience shows it breeds a world of
scandalous inconveniences: Though I doubt not, but in some special cases the
Magistrate or Church, may cause such a separation for a time; but as it is
ordinarily practiced by diverse husbands and wives, it is very vile.

For the third, viz. the case of Nullities, we must understand, in diverse
cases, though the man have bound himself by the contract, or consummation of
marriage, to the woman, yet he must not dwell with her, because such contracts
and marriages are mere Nullities in the sight of God, and of no force.

Cases of Nullitie.
1 If he marry her that is divorced for any other cause than fornication.
Matthew. 19.9.

2 If the marriage be incestious, that is, within any of the degrees prohibited
in the law of God. see Levit. 18. Which laws were not ceremonial or
political, but moral and natural: which may appear, as by other reasons, so
by this one; God says he did destroy the Nations for such incestious Matches,
Levit. 18.24. Now God could not punish the Nations for breaking a law was never
given them. The ceremonial and political laws were given to the Jews, and
not to the Gentiles: thus it was not lawful for Herod to have his brothers
wife; nor must the Corinthian that married his fathers wife, be suffered to
dwell with her. 1. Cor. 5.

3 Divines generally agree, that if there be a precontract with another person
in verbis de presenti, in the words of the present time, made with consent of
parents, etc. then the marriage after with another is a mere Nullitie, and such
dwelling together is whoredom. Zanchius brings reasons for this from the law
of God, and Nature, and civil and common laws.

4 If a marriage be made without the free consent of the parties, or in cases
where they are not able to give a free consent: as in the marriage with
children under age, or with mad men, or persons that are drunk when they give
consent, and do disclaim it when they are sober. These are Nullities in the
common opinion of Divines of all sorts: and the reason is, Because the consent
of parties is essentially requisite to such a bond.

5 If there be error personae, an error of the person, that is, if a man mean
to contract marriage with one person, and another person is given him: as when
Leah was given in stead of Rachel to Jacob; Divines agree, that Jacob might
have rejected Leah, and that his own consent afterward did only bind him to
dwell with her. But yet error about the condition or state of the person, is no
Nullitie: If a man contract himself to a woman he thinks to be a free woman,
and she proves a bond woman; or he thinks he marries with a rich woman, and
she proves a poor woman: these errors do not cause a Nullitie; he must dwell
with her for all this.

6 If marriage be contracted with such as are utterly and incurably unapt for
marriage, this marriage is a Nullitie: as in the case of Eunuchs, some kinds
of incurable palsies, or the like. And about this, I find no difference
amongst Divines.

Zanchius and some other Divines go further, and pronounce Nullities in the
cases following: as,

If marriage be contracted, yea, and celebrated without the Moses, and from the
Law of Moses, from the Testimony of the Apostle Paul, and from the laws of
Nations, and from the Fathers.

If marriage be contracted or celebrated with such, as have Eliphantiasis, or
worse kind of leprosy, or the like: because this will prove a mischief to the
party clear, and to his children, and to the Commonwealth; and God ordained
not marriage to be a mischief, but a help.

If marriage be celebrated with a woman that is found to

Yea, he enclines to those that think the marriage of a

But for my part, I dare not venture so far, especially to be peremptory in
it: much less have I attained to the learning of those Divines, that think
Veneficium versus hanc, Witchcraft disabling a man toward that woman only, to
be a sufficient cause of a Nullitie in the marriage. Thus of the case of
Nullities.

Concerning Divorce, what rule is to be observed.
For the case of Divorce, I think that rule of our Savior binds peremptorily,
that no man may put away his wife, but only in the case of fornication, Matthew.
19.9. In that case a man (making a lawful divorce) is not bound to
cohabitation, but freed from it, and must not dwell with her any more. If it be
objected, that in the case of disertion, when an Infidel forsakes a Believer,
the Apostle says the Believer is free. I answer, that this is not a case of
Divorce: The Believer does not for the business of religion put away the
Unbeliever, yea, the Apostle shows he ought not, 1. Cor. 7. only if the
unbeleever will depart, let her depart. And so by the wilful departure of the
Infidel, the Christian is freed from the bond of marriage, as Divines
conceive; which is a kind of Nullity, but not a Divorce. But then a great
respect must be had to the kind of Unbeliever: not every wicked man or woman,
nor every person that professes a false religion, but such an Unbeliever as is
a professed enemy to the Name of Christ, is the Unbeliever the Apostle speaks of.

Yet one thing more I must add about the case of Disertion: When the Disertion
is for other causes than religion, if it be wilful or inevitable, then the
party diserted, is freed from this charge of cohabitation; freed, I say, for a
time, till the diserted return: and if he never return, the party forsaken is
for ever free. Thus of the Proposition of their duties: the Exposition of it
follows.

According to knowledge.] By knowledge, I take it here meant that Christian
knowledge of Religion and the Word of God, which godly husbands had attained by
the Gospel: for, in the end of the verse, he speaks of husbands, as heirs of
the grace of life. And so before I come to show what special things, in the
manner of cohabitation this knowledge does charge upon husbands, I would
consider of some doctrines in general, employed by the words: as,

Doct. 1. That the knowledge of Gods Word, is a gift of God to be much
accounted of: and therefore the Apostle here for honour-sake to the man,
mentions this grace rather than any other. And, that knowledge is a precious
thing, or a great treasure, may appear diverse ways. First, by the seat and
use of knowledge: Excellency of divine knowledge in many respects.
it is a gift, that adornes the mind of man, making him by his inward
understanding to see excellent things. It is a great benefit, to have senses
to discern things without us: but this divine light that God puts into the
understanding of man, gives to the understanding power to see admirable things.
Especially, when it is spiritual light, it shows a man the differences
between good and evil, and reveals such glorious things, as no senses can
reach to. Secondly, by the author of it. God is the father of light, and
dwells in light, Iam. 1.17. and it is the special glory of Christ's divinity,
to lighten every man that comes into the world, John 1. and the ^oly Ghost
claims a part in this glory, to give illumination to the mind, 2. Cor. 3.
Thirdly, by the testimony God gives of the worth of knowledge, especially. when
it is spiritual and religious knowledge. It is called riches, 1. Cor. 1.5. and
preferred before all outward things in the world, Ier. 9.23. and Christ
accounts it a great sign of special friendship, to communicate knowledge to
his Disciples, Job. 15.15. and God gave Jacob a greater portion when he gave
his word to him, than he did give to all the world besides. He did not so with
other Nations, Psalm. 1. Fourthly, by the accounts Christ gives unto his Father
of the discharge of his office: He is careful to prove that he has given
knowledge to the men God gave him, to prepare them for eternal life, John
17.6, 7, 8, 26. Fifthly, by the relation it has to God himself: It is a part
of the image of God in the new man, Col. 3.10. Sixthly, by the contrary: It is
accounted a great sin and a curse, to want knowledge, Hosea 4.11. and other
gifts or services are rejected as vain, if this grace be not had; as Zeal,
Romans 10.2. Sacrifice, Hosea 6.6. and therefore such as want knowledge, should
shake off profane sluggishnesse and vain objections, and seek to be rich in
knowledge, as the men in the world do to abound in wealth, Prove. 4.7. and 2.4.
And such as have knowledge, should strive to increase in it, and be thankful
to God for his great mercy, in giving them knowledge and the means of it.

Doct. 2. Knowledge is required of all sorts of men. Not of Ministers only, but
of private men: of all husbands, yea, and of all men before they be husbands;
because so soon as they have wives, they are charged to show their knowledge,
John 1.9.1. Cor. 8.1.1. Tim. 2.4. This condemns the Sacrilegious humor of
those persons, that are like the wicked Lawyers our Savior speaks of, Luke
11.52. which take away the key of knowledge from private men, either by their
opinions hindering others from seeking knowledge, with their errors mudding the
clear fountain of Gods Word; or by their power, restraining the means of
knowledge from the people: and withal, this should stir up all sorts of men
to seek knowledge, and use all means to attain it, as they will give their
account unto God of the use of their their time at the last day.

Doct. 3. Knowledge is given us for use and practice, not for idle speculation:
It is given as other gifts of the Spirit, to profit withal: It is a light to
lighten our paths. Our knowledge should be after godliness, Tit. 1.1. It
should someway help forwards the work of godliness: that we get by hearing,
should be showed by practice, James 1.22, 23, 24. They that have knowledge, and
will not use it, shall have that knowledge taken from them, Matthew. 13.11. Nor
is the use of knowledge only for discourse, but for conversation. The words of
knowledge, or utterance, is given to some Christistians only, 1. Cor. 12.8.
And such as cannot talk much, may yet have comfort, if they have knowledge to
stay their hearts in faith, and that they can show their knowledge by a good
conversation.

Doct. 4. The knowledge seated in our minds, should have a commanding power of
our actions: all should be according as a man's knowledge says. Those parcels
of Divine truth put into our minds, should rule us and dispose of us, and make
us ordered according to them. Those laws in our minds, should make us master
all that rebels against them, and make the members be subject to them to obey
them. Our knowledge should be lively, and endued with Sovereign power: This
is the honor we should give to the light that is in our minds, to let it
rule us in all things. And this point may much humble all sorts of Christians
for want of stirring up their knowledge, or for want of obeying it. Most
Christians have their knowledge so feeble, that the devil or the world may
lead them aside to all sorts of temptations, and yet their knowledge makes not
opposition, and does not take arms, to subdue what exalts it self against the
light of it, as it should do, 1. Cor. 10.4. Now, if men would hearten, and
give life and power to those notions of knowledge are in their minds, and
would have their knowledge to have full power, they must observe these rules.

1 They must daily wound, Means to give power to our knowledge.
and mortify, and resist the law of the members, that is, such humors in them
as are wont to be incorrigible. Most persons have some faults in their natures
that they are guilty of, with a kind of wilfulness; such faults as must be
allowed; such as if they be crossed in, there will be no peace, but open
rebellion; such faults as stick so fast to them, as if God and man must let
them alone in them, these members must obey them as a law. Now these men must
find out, and be sure they resist them, or else the laws of the mind will be
but feeble, and sacred notions infused will starve and wither, and never
appear in their life and power.

2 Men must be sure they study profitable things, and avoid such knowledges as
are fruitless, as belong not to them, 1. Tim. 6.20. 2. Tim. 2.23. Tit. 3.9.
There is knowledge that will puff up, 1. Cor. 8.1. But men must be wise for
themselves, and strive to understand their own way, Prove. 9.12.

3 They must pray God to put a spirit and life into their knowledge, and give
them grace to show all good conscience in their obedience; and withal, they
must pray hard for their Teachers, that their word may be a word of power, to
give fire to the sparkles of light are already in their minds.

Finally, let all men that profess the knowledge of Gods word, remember that
their knowledge should make them differ from all other men. Their lives should
excel others, according to the knowledge in which they differ from them. A man
must hold forth the life and light of the knowledge he has, Phil. 2.15. They
have a great task to do, that have received much knowledge; much is required
of them: If they do ill, their example may do much mischief. 1. Cor. 8.10.11.

Doct. 5. True knowledge makes an impression upon every part of a man's life: it
makes him better in all his ways, both toward God and man; as here, true
knowledge makes a man a better husband. He must carry himself as a husband,
according to his knowledge he has of Gods word. True knowledge enricheth a man
in every thing, 1. Cor. 1.5. The favor of our knowledge, should be manifest
in every place, 2. Cor. 2.14. The knowledge that will not do thus, is falsely
so called, 1. Tim. 6.20. There is use of knowledge in the most ordinary things
of the life of man; as meats, marriage, and the things of our calling, 1. Tim.
4.3. and therefore this should stir up all godly Christians, to show this
proof of their knowledge, and to pray that they may abound in knowledge, and
all judgment, Phil. 1.9. Col. 1.9. and gives cause to Christians of ill
behavior, in their callings or private carriage, to mistrust that their
knowledge is not right: and in particular, wives should pray God to give their
husbands knowledge of his Word, and to bless all means to that end; for that
will make them the better husbands.

Doct. 6. It is an ill thing for men to transgress against their knowledges,
when they do things that are not according to their knowledge, or leave undone
things they know they should do. The servant that knows his Masters will, and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. See Romans 1. ult. Heb. 10.26. 2.
Pet. 2.21. Husbands and wives should in a special manner remember this: for
there is a great deal of need that they should take notice of this point. Oh
it is a grievous thing for a Christian to be wilfully corrupt, to do or leave
undone things against his knowledge.

Doct. 7. One thing here is comfortable, that God requires no more of his
servants, but to do according to the knowledge they have. Ignorances, by the
benefit of the new Covenant in Christ, he will pass by, so as they be
careful to get knowledge according to the means they have of knowledge. This
is a great comfort.

Doct. 8. In knowledge men should excel women: therefore is knowledge here
specially mentioned, in giving the charge to men. They are the heads of their
wives, and therefore in them should be the especial seat of spiritual senses
and understanding: and their wives are charged, if they doubt of any thing, to
ask their husbands at home. It is a great dishonor to many men in this age in
many places, that women excel them in knowledge, both for the measure of it,
and power of it, and care to use the means to get it. Thus of the general
Doctrines.

These words, as they in particular order the duties of Husbands, show diverse
things they are to look to in their carriage, in dwelling with their Wives. To
dwell with them according to knowledge, imports,

1 Matter of edification; What this dwelling with knowledge imports.
and so three ways; for first, they must set up Religion, and the worship of
God in their dwellings. Josh. 24.15. They must keep off the curse of God from
them, and their wives and children, by daily praying to God, Ier. 10. ult. They
must diligently (in their kind) instruct the family in the plain things of
Gods Law, talking and discoursing of the Word of God upon all occasions, Deuteronomy.
6.7. Genesis 18.19. They must see that Gods Sabbaths be kept and sanctified in
their dwellings; and therefore must not only restrain labor, but bring his
household to the exercises of Religion, and privately help them, by examination
or repetition, Command 4. Exodus 20.4. yea, and by sanctifying them to Gods
worship. Job 1.5. which is done by exhorting them to holiness and preparation,
and by humbling himself in prayer before God for himself and them: and he
must sanctify the creatures they use, by prayer. 1. Tim. 4.5. Secondly, in
special toward their wives, they must use their knowledge in instructing
them, or resolving their doubts as there shall be occasion. 1. Cor. 14.35.
Thirdly, they must teach their wives reformation, and right order of behavior
by their own example: giving full proof of their piety, discretion,
providence, painfulnesse and meekness; not daring to commit the faults
themselves they reprove in their wives, and to live so, as not to be liable to
any just exception. There is a question is often asked about the first branch
of this answer, and that is, whether a woman may perform the duties of
religion in the family, in case of the absence or insufficiency of the husband?
Now for answer thereunto, it is hard to give any peremptory rule, because in
this thing we have no commandment from the Lord: but yet, seeing some of the
duties of Religion may be done by the Wife; as, instructing of children and
servants, for the Law of grace should be in her lips, Prove. 31. and both
Parents are charged with instructing the children, Ephesians. 6. therefore I think
by Anallogy it will follow, that the wife may do other duties, as pray, and
repeat Sermons: But yet it is most likely, that this power extends not further
than her children and her maids, which was the power Hester used, Hest. 4.16.
or if it go further, it must be in some special cases, and with observation
of diverse circumstances, in which, their safest way is to get direction and
resolution from their learned Pastors.

2 Matter of toleration; and that in respect of the infirmities of his wife: if
her infirmities be bodily, it must be the praise of his knowledge, not to loath
her for that, because God lays them on her, and she cannot help them. And
for her faults, they are either mere frailties arising from ignorance, or
insufficiency she cannot help; and those he must pass by altogether, when
he discerns that she is not willing to offend in them, Prove. 19 10. Or else,
they are faults she commits of knowledge; and so, they are either curable
or incurable. Curable, are such faults of negligence or waiwardnesse, that
prove grievous to him or others: for these his rule is, he must not be bitter
to her, Col. 3.19. but show himself to be gentle and easy to be entreated,
James 3.17. He must use all good means of counsel, and forewarning of her,
and entreating, and such reproves as may be seasonable, and secret as much as
may be. He must avoid raging and furious passion, and reproaches. If her faults
be incurable, that is, such as he cannot mend by such courses, then I suppose
he may fly to the general remedy of all Christians in the case of
trespasses; and that is, to take one or two with him and admonish her, and
then, if she mend not, he may fly to his Pastor, and such as have charge of
souls with him, and get them to admonish her. But if none of these courses
will serve, I think the Pastor, or others employed in the business, may give
notice, as they have occasion, to other Christians of her incurablenesse, and
they may thereupon forsake her company, and reject her as a Pagan or a
Publicane: but for the husband, he must cohabite still, and with patience bear
the cross God has laid upon him, waiting, if at any time God will give her
repentance, or otherwise restrain her wickedness.

3 Matter of circumspection. To dwell according to knowledge, is to dwell with
circumspection; and that he must show in matter of his own right. He must
take heed that by no indulgence or remissness he lose his own right. He
must keep his authority, and rule as head; and not suffer things to be done, or
disposed ordinarily against his will. And for the good ordering of necessary
directions, if his wife will not obey, he must then provide to have things done
as well as he can, by his children or servants. This I speak of things
essentially expedient to the peace or well-being of the family: he must not be
his wives underling, contrary to the order of nature, and ordinance of God,
Genesis 3.16. 1. Cor. 11.3, 7, 8, 9. Ephesians. 5.23. 1. Tim. 2.12, 13, 14. Secondly,
he must show it in the care of his estate, restraining her wastfulnesse if she
be given to disorder, or wretchlesnesse in that kind, Prove. 14.1. Thirdly, in
case of sin against God: he must take heed that he nourish not sin in her
by connivence, or neglect of counsel or reproof, Job 2.9, 10. Fourthly, in
case of difference between her and her servants; so preserving his authority,
as he judge not partially, but with equal judgment showing the fault
whersoever he find it, else he may extremely harden his servants against them
both.

Giving them honor.] This is the second thing required in the Exposition. They
must honor their wives: And this the Husband does,

How many ways husbands honor their wives.
1 When he uses her with signs of his estimation of her, according to her
rank in the family, and her relation to him; intertayning her as his
companion, and not as his servant or slave. To honor her, is to carry
himself with such respect toward her, that all may see that he makes a great
account of her, as the companion God has given to him for his life, to be a
helper to him.

2 When he is careful to protect her from wrongs, and dangers, and
indignities. 1. Sam. 30.5.

3 When he provides for her maintenance, both in his life time, and after his
death as well as he may; allowing her such apparel and other things as may
show manifestly how great account he makes of her, and doing all with
cheerfulness, and not like churlish Nabal: and the rather, because for the
most part they are not able to make shift, and provide for themselves.

4 By the special delight he takes in her above others, cherishing her as his
own flesh, and making as much of her, as he can do of himself. Pro. 5.19.
Ephesians. 5.28.

5 By suffering himself to be entreated, and in some cases advised and
admonished by her. Genesis 21.12.

6 By giving her such employment as her gifts are fit for, leaving to her trust
such things in the family and his estate, as she is fit to dispose of. It is
dishonor to the wife, when the trust of businesses is committed to servants or
others, when she is able and willing to undertake it. Pro. 31.11.

7 By yielding a free and just testimony of her praises upon all fit
occasions, both to her self and others. Prover. 31.28, 29.

8 By covering her infirmities, passing by mere frailties, and not speaking to
her, to provoke her, when she is way ward, or else giving soft answers, and
forbearing as much as may be, to speak to her disgrace before others.

9 When he gives her leave to dispose of some things at her pleasure, not
exacting account of her; allowing her, as a reward of her care or diligence,
some such overplus as his estate will bear, that she may be free to give for
pious or charitable uses, what may be for her credit or encouragement.

Object. But my wife was of mean birth, condition, or portion, when I married.

Sol. So and much worse was the Church before Christ married her, and yet
Christ loves the Church.

Object. But since marriage she is idle, and froward, and wastefull, etc.

Sol. If she be so, thou have cause to pray for and admonish her; but for all
that, thou must love her, and yield her due honor. The Church sins after
calling, and yet Christ honors the Church, both by praying for her in Heaven,
and by laboring to cleanse her by his Spirit and Word in Earth, Ephesians. 5.

Object. But she is profane and carnal, a wicked woman, a scorner of
religion, or perhaps of a contrary religion.

Sol. Thou must love and honor her, not because she deserves it, but because
God requires it.

Thus of the Exposition. The reasons follow; and the first is, Because they are
the weaker vessel.

As the weaker vessel.] The word translated Vessel, is diversely accepted in
Scripture; sometimes properly, sometime Metaphorically. As it is taken
properly, it is sometime taken for goods or any household stuff, Mat. 12.29.
Luke 17.31. Sometimes again it signifies any instrument, used in the house or
without the house: so the instruments used in the Temple about any part of Gods
service, were called Vessels of the Ministry, Heb. 9.21. So a Bushel is
called a Vessel, Luke 8.16. So that which held the foure-footed beasts and
fowls, etc. in the vision, Acts 10.11, 16. is called a Vessel, yet like a
sheet: so is a sail of a ship called by this term, Acts 27.17. Now in a
Metaphorical sense, this term signifies, either the parts or members of the
body of man or woman that serve for generation, 1. These. 4.4. or else it
signifies any person, that God has set apart for some special service or
ministration. Thus Paul was a Vessel of election, or a chosen Vessel to bear
Gods Name among the Gentiles, and Kings, and the people of Israel, Acts 9.15.
Or else such persons, upon whom God will declare either his mercy or Justice.
Thus Vessels of honor and mercy, and Vessels of dishonor, Romans 9.21, 23. and
in general, any man or woman that God appoints to do any work, or his
instruments either publicly or privately. Thus all men, in respect of the
work God requires of them, are Vessels, 2. Tim. 2.20, 21. and so women are
Vessels here, because they are instruments God makes use of for the help of
man.

Now for the word Weaker: It signifies the frailties and defects in the Sex of
women; in respect of which, they are inferior to men: not so much their
sinful defects, as their natural defects; defects of negation rather than
defects of privation.

So then the sense is, That in as much as women whom God has given unto man,
instruments of his blessing and their help, are by nature frail, and have
many weaknesses and defects; men should be the more tender and careful in
their carriage toward them: and so here are three points of doctrine may be
observed.

Doct. 1. In that men and women are called Vessels, in respect of the service
God does cause them to perform, we may learn, That in works of grace or
matters of holiness, we are rather Patients than Agents. Not but that by Gods
assistance, men and women do work that which is good; but because thereby God
would have us to ascribe all to his grace: And therefore he compares us not to
active instruments, as tools are in the hands of the workman; but to passive
instruments, such as Dishes are, that bear and carry Treasure, or meat, or
such like. Hence it is the Apostles call themselves earthen Vessels, 2. Cor.
4.7. and Paul in converting the Gentiles, did but bear Gods Name, Acts 9.21.
And therefore we should all acknowledge our insufficiency, and fly to the
blood of Jesus Christ to sanctify us: for all the Vessels of the Ministry in
the Temple were sprinkled with blood, Heb. 9.21. And further, such as are
unprofitable should repent and amend: for they are but as the vessel in the
hands of the Potter, and God will break them in pieces with his rod of iron,
Rev. 2.27.

Doct. 2. Women are weak and frail, called here the weaker vessel; and I
take it, this weakness is attributed to them, not in respect of sin so much,
as in natural defects: so as he means not personal faults, but such
weaknesses, as are found in all women, or the most. But yet I would not be
understood, to free women altogether from sin in these frailties, because
since the fall the natural defects are tainted, and there is in them a
special kind of defectivenesse, or infirmity which cleaves to their Sex,
which is not so usually in men, or not accompanying the nature of men.

Quest. What are the things wherein women are more usually frail, or
defective, or infirm than men?

1 In capacity and judgment. In what things women are more frail than men.
They are not capable of so large a measure of knowledge as men (in equal
comparison) nor so able to reach the depths and mysteries of knowledge.

2 In respect of their insufficiency for the greatest imploiments of life; as
that Sex is not ordinarily capable of the great services of God in Church and
Commonwealth: the works cannot be done by women.

3 They are apter to be seduced than men, as the Apostle implies in the case of
all women as well as Eve, 1. Tim. 2.14.

4 In respect of dependancies. They cannot make shift for themselves, their
desire is naturally subject to men, in respect of depending upon them for
provision and protection, Genesis 3. This weakness is stamped upon the whole Sex.

5 In respect of their aptness to fears and amazement, and other
perturbations, more unconstant, and not so stable in heart as man.

6 In respect of the discovery of their hearts and natures, whether in good or
evil. It is harder to find out thoroughly the perfect disposition of a woman
in good or evil, than of men. Solomon could find out the temper of one man
among a thousand men, but not the heart of one woman among so many; and that I
take it to be the true sense of that place, Eccles. 7.28, 29. compared with
verse 25.27.

7 In respect of their pronenesse to vanity, and pride in apparel; which I
gather from this, that all the express directions about apparel that I
remember in Scripture, are given rather to women than to men, especially in the
new Testament, as 1. Tim. 2.9. 1. Pet. 3.3.

The use may be, first, to give us occasion to magnify the power and mercy of
God. His mercy, that dispiseth not his weak creatures, but bestows the grace
of life upon them. His power, in that he keeps them in life, and preserves
his own work of grace unto the possession of eternal life. Secondly, it
should stir up women so much the more to use all the Ordinances of God, and
all helps, to make themselves strong in the power of the gifts of grace;
especially, they should get a strong faith in God, that they may trust in the
power of God, that gives strength to the weak, Esaias 40. 29, 31. 1. Pet. 3.5.
It will be their greater glory, if they can overcome their natural
weaknesses, especially, if they can excel men in the things of the kingdom of
God, as many times it comes to pass. Thirdly, all Christians should have those
women in great estimation, that have overcomne their frailties, and do excel
in knowledge, and piety, and mercy, and trust in God. Fourthly, all women
should be therefore the more humble, and apt to fear and judge themselves,
and more willing to be taught, or admonished, and more frequent in prayer to
God, to help them and keep them; and in particular, they should be the more
willing to be ruled by their husbands, as knowing it is a mercy of God,
considering their weakness, to give them husbands to support them, and provide
for them and finally, they should be the more faithful and diligent, to do
all the good they can in domestical affairs, seeing by nature, they are not
fit to manage the greater and more public services of God.

The third doctrine concerns Husbands, and so they are taught from hence to
give the more honor to their wives, because of their natural weakness: For,
as it is in the natural body, those members of the body which we think less
honorable, upon them we bestow the more abundant honor, 1. Cor. 12.23, 24.
so it should be in the Economical body: for the wife is unto the husband bone
of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; and this honor he should give her, and
show it, both by taking the more care to provide for her, and by cherishing and
encouraging her the more, and by hiding and covering her frailties as much as
he may, and by not exacting more from her than she is able to perform, and by
helping her all he can, by instruction or otherwise. Only we must note, that he
is not bound to honor her the more for sinful infirmities, but for natural
defects. How he must carry himself toward her in respect of sinful
infirmities, or personal faults, has been showed before in the manner of his
carriage toward her as a man of knowledge. And thus of the first reason.

As being heirs together of the grace of life.] In these words is contained
the second reason, taken from the general dignity of Christians; which also
extends to Christian wives. And concerning the dignity of Christians, five
things may be noted out of these words.

1 The title of their dignity, They are Heirs.

2 What they inherit; Life.

3 What the cause of this dignity is, viz. Grace.

4 In what manner they possess it, viz. Together.

5 The persons capable of it; Women as well as men.

From the coherence we may note, That if women will have their husbands to
honor them, they must be religious women, and true Christians, that have grace
as well as worldly portion. God requires religion and grace in all wives: And
the rather should they be careful to get grace, and become truly religious,
because it was long of their sex that sin came into the world: and as by one
woman's bearing of a child, salvation was brought again into the world; so
should they every one in particular, strive to recover their honor, by
expressing the sound power of a religious life in all faith, and charity, and
holiness, and sobriety, 1. Tim. 2.14, 15. And besides, what shall it profit
wives to get them jointures on earth, and husbands to provide for them while
they live here, if their souls and bodies perish when they dye, and lose the
inheritance in heaven? and perish they will, if they get not true grace. And
further, if they be gracious women, if their husbands be so profane as not to
make much of them, yet they shall be greatly set by of God; as was showed,
verse. 4. But on the other side, if they be ignorant and irreligious women, it
is just with God, to deprive them of the comfort of this life, and to let their
husbands neglect them or abuse them. For, though their husbands sin in so
doing, yet God is just in permitting such a thing for their punishment.

Secondly, another doctrine may be noted from the coherence, and that is, That
in heaven there shall be no difference between husbands and wives, but they
shall be all one in Christ, alike heirs of eternal life: Which is to be
noted, the more to persuade them to submit themselves, and endure to be under
the rule and authority of their husbands in this world, for that estate of
inferiority shall not last ever, for in heaven God shall be all in all, they
shall be ruled by God and the Lamb.. Thus from the Coherence.

The first thing to be observed about the dignity of Christians in general is,
That they are heirs.

Heires] The doctrine is, That all true Christians are heirs.

Now, for the opening of this doctrine, two things must be considered.

1. How they come to be heirs.

2. What their glory is in being so.

How godly men come to be heirs.
For the first; Christians are not borne Heirs: I mean, not heirs to God, as
is intended in this place, but have it by the grace of adoption. God has but
one Heir by generation, and that is Christ: all his other heirs are by
adoption, such as he chooses of his mere Grace, and makes them his heirs.
Now, the mystery of our adoption must be considered of in this manner: A
Christian by the Gospel is made a Believer: Now faith, after an unspeakable
manner, engrafts him into the body of Jesus Christ: Now being engrafted into
Jesus Christ, who is Gods Son, he thereby comes to the power to be the son
of God, and to be an heir, with Christ. Christ is Gods Heir, and so is all
that is grafted upon Christ, Ioh. 1.12. Now there is a double Adoption: the one
imperfect in this life, the other perfect, which we shall have after the
Resurrection of the dead: By the one we have the promise of inheritance, and by
the other we shall have full possession. Of the first is mention made, Romans
8.15. and of the other, Romans 8.23. the first adoption is meant here.

For the second, Adoption is called a glory, by an excellence, because there is
no glory like to it; even the adoption to be heirs as it is in this life, is
the greatest glory in the world. Now the glory of our Adoption, may appear to
be very great, if we consider,

1. By whom we are adopted ( viz.) God. Wherein the greatness and glory of our
Adoption appears.
If it be such a glory to be Heir to any great Prince in the world, what a
surpassing glory is it, to be the son and heir of God? Romans 8.17. and that
if we respect either the excellence of God, who is the King of all the earth,
and above all kings; or his eternity: he is such a Father as lives ever, Hos.
1.10. An everlasting Father, Esaias 9.6. Other Fathers that adopt, may dye before
they pass the estate, or at the best, it is a kind of infelicity to enjoy the
inheritance, without the presence and love of the father. But not so here.

2. The great price was laid down, to make us capable of this honor to be
Gods Heirs ( viz.) the blood of Christ. There was never so much paid for all
the inheritances in the world besides, Gal. 4.4, 5. Heb. 9.14, 15.

3. The great things we are heirs to, which I will but briefly touch here; We
are heirs not only to all our eyes can see, but to all things our hearts can
think of. We shall inherit the earth, Mat. 5.5. We shall be heirs of the
world, Romans 4. God will give us all the world: yea, we shall inherit eternal
life, as is to be showed afterward: yea, we are coheires with Christ, Romans
8.17. And what would we ask more?

4. The great privileges which Gods adopted children do enjoy even in this
life: as,

1 They have within them the spirit of Christ in their hearts, therefore
called, The spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6. The spirit of Christ,
I say, to drive away legal terrors, and to testify to their spirits that they
are the sons of God, and that he has adopted them to heaven, and to make them
able to treat with God as a Father, by affectionate prayer^ and, as other
Scriptures show, to lead them into all truth, and to be the guide of their
lives, to tell them when they go out, either on the right hand, or on the
left; And lastly, to be their continual comforter, John 16. Esaias 30.

2. By the right of their Adoption in Christ, both their persons and their
works are accepted before God, so as they stand always high in Gods favor,
howsoever they are entertained in the world, Ephesians. 1.6.

3. They have a name, and honor, shall never be taken from them; an
everlasting name: no preferment so high as theirs, Esaias 56.4, 5. And this is
the greater privilege, because no meannesse or contemptiblenesse of condition
on earth can bar them from the enjoying of this prerogative, as the coherence
of that place shows.

4. They have the Angels of heaven to attend them: God shows by that, that
he will have them looked unto as his sons and heirs, Heb. 1. ult.

5. They may ask whatsoever they will of God, and are sure to have it: They
may get any suit of God; and he is so far from not granting, that he rather
complains that they will not ask him often enough, Ioh. 16.23.

6. If at any time they fall into distress, they have such interest in Gods
special providence, that a hair of their heads shall not fall to the ground
without the providence of their heavenly Father. And besides, God will make
himself mavelous in their deliverance, if all worldly helps fail, Esaias
43.18, 19, 20, 21.

5. If we consider the wonderful manner of their communion with Christ, and
that four ways. For first, we have communion of nature with him, and that by
his Incarnation, for he took our nature, and so became our Brother. And this
does nothing at all belong to Reprobates, because Christ took not nature
polluted with sin, Heb. 2.14. Yea, we have communion with him in his divine
nature, as that nature does dwell graciously in us, and we are made like unto
it, 2. Pet. 1.4. Secondly, they have communion of state with him; which the
Scripture acknowledges as a great mystery: for so they are said to live with
him, to suffer with him, to dye with him, to be buried with him; yea, to rise
with him, to ascend to heaven with him, and to sit together with him, Ephesians. 2.
yea, to judge the world with him: only preserving the difference between the
head and the members in all this. Thirdly, they have communion of offices with
him, for he has made them Kings and Priests with him: The oil that was powered
on his head, has run down upon his members, Revel. 1.5.6. so that Gods heirs
are all Kings and Priests. A royal nation, and a kingdom of Priests, 1. Pet.
2.10. Fourthly, they have communion in benefits with him; for, God as a Father
has blessed them in him with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, Ephesians.
1.3. Communion they have with him in Grace in this life, and in Glory in the
life to come.

Lastly, if we consider the assurance that Christians have given them for
their right of Adoption: for first, they have an Act for it in Gods eternal
Council, Ephesians. 1.5. Men that have an Act of Parliament for the holding of their
lands, they think they have a sure tenure; and yet many Acts of Parliament may
be repealed, but the Acts of Gods Council are like himself, immutable. The
godly they are predestinate to Adoption. Secondly, they have not only Gods
promise for their inheritance, but Gods oath, that by two immutable things, the
heirs of promise might have abundant consolation, as the Apostle shows, Heb.
6.17, 18. Thirdly, to make all sure, God has put his spirit within them, as
the seal and earnest of their inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

The use may be,

1 For Information; and so first, to show the great goodness of God to man,
that not only requires and gives holiness, but adds also blessedness to his
servants. In Justification and Sanctification, he gives to men those good
things they call bona virtutos, the good things of virtue: and in Adoption, he
gives those good things they call, bona conditionis, the good things of
condition, even blessedness and true happiness: whom God makes holy, he will
make happy also. Secondly, it manifestly shows, that we hold all our
happiness, not by Merit, but by Grace. For, adopted children cannot plead
merit, but must acknowledge all of gift, as will more appear when we come to
speak of the cause of Inheriting, viz. Grace.

2 For Instruction; and so

The first impression this Doctrine should work upon us, should be a desire to
be such as may obtain the right of Adoption of sons, for flesh and blood
cannot inherit, 1. Cor. 15.50. So long as we are carnal and unregenerate
men, we neither are, nor are to be called the heirs of God. The unrighteous,
that is, such as live in gross sin, and do the works of the flesh, are
expressly and peremptorily excluded from the benefit of Adoption, 1. Cor. 6.9,
10. Gal. 5.21. None but such as are effectually called, What kind of persons
we must be to attain this Adoption.
and borne of God, are capable of this Grace, Heb. 9.16. Ioh. 1.13. And in
particular, we must have a true justifying faith, Ioh. 1.12. For, as was
showed before, we come to the right of Sons, only as we are ingrafted into
Christ, upon whom, all the inheritance is originally and fundamentally
conferred. and into Christ we cannot get but by faith. And further, we must
look to the sound mortification of the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. and
know, that none can inherit but such as overcome the power of their
corruptions, and are not in bondage to any sin, Rev. 21.7. And more specially
God requires in all such as will be his sons, that they be such as are not
in bondage to the passions and perturbations of the heart (...) for he has
promised that the meek shall inherit; Mat. 5.5. Thirdly, we must forsake all
needless society and familiarity with the wicked of the world, if we will be
Gods sons and daughters, and resolutely refuse to be corrupted with the
sins of the times; as the Apostle shows at large, 2. Cor. 6.17, 18.
Fourthly, we must be such as are described, Esaias 56.4, 5, 6. We must make
conscience to keep Gods Sabbaths, and choose the thing will please God; being
more desirous to please God in all things, than natural children are to please
their earthly parents; and take hold of Gods Covenant, as resting upon this
preferment, and the promises of it, as our sufficient happiness.

And that we may be the more established in the knowledge of our Adoption, it
will be good for us to try our selves by the signs of such as are Gods
adopted children.

Marks of Gods heirs and adopted children.
1 Such as are Gods children by Adoption, have this mark, They are made like
unto God their Father, in holiness, in some truth of resemblance, 1. Pet. 1.25.
And this they show two ways: first, by purifying themselves, and sound
humbling of their souls for their sins, that deface the Image of God in
them: as Saint John says; Every one that has this hope, purifyeth himself,
as he is pure, 1. Ioh. 3.2, 3. Secondly, by employing himself constantly in
doing righteousness; for hereby the children of God are known from the
children of the Devil, 1. Ioh. 3.10.

2 In the last recited place, you may discern another sign of a son and
heir to God, and that is the love of the godly, as his brethren and fellow
heirs: He that loves not the brethren, is of the Devil, not of God, 1. Ioh
3.10.

3 The gift of prayer is a sign of Adoption, and that we have received the
spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15, 16. By the gift of prayer, I mean, not the
skill to utter words to God in a good form of words, and variously; but the
gift to speak to God in prayer, both with confidence in God, as in a father,
and with the affections of prayer, which the phrase of crying Abba Father,
imports.

4 A Child of God discovers his Adoption by the manner of doing good duties:
he does serve God, not with servile respect, but with filial affection; he
loves to be Gods servant, as may be gathered, Esaias 56.6.

5 To love them that hate us, and bless them that curse us, and do good to
them that persecute us, is a sign that we are children to God as our heavenly
father, Luke 6.35. Mat. 5.

The second impression that this glory of Adoption should make upon our hearts,
should be to stir up us to carry our selves in this world, as becomes the
children and heirs to such a father as God is. And so in general, it should
wonderfully fire us to all possible care, to be holy as he is holy; and to
express more to the life, the Image of Gods grace and holiness, 1. Pet. 1.
14, 15. And that in all manner of conversation, striving to carry our selves as
the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of this froward and wicked
world; all sorts of the men of the world being so ready to reproach such as are
Gods people, that if they will speak evil, it may be only for our good
conversation in Christ, Phil. 2.15, 16. And in particular, we are charged in
Scripture with certain special and choice things that do greatly adorn and
grace the life of a child of God that is an heir of heaven, if we be Gods
heirs, and he be our father.

How Gods heirs must carry themsel^es.
1 We should be Peacemakers, for our father is the God of peace, and this will
force men to call us the sons of God, Mat. 5.10.

2 We must not render reviling for reviling, but rather bless, seeing we are
heirs of blessing, as the Apostle urges it, ver. 9.

3 We should live without care, as knowing that we have a heavenly father
that cares for us, Mat. 6.32. And seeing we are heirs of a better world, we
should not love this world, nor set our hearts upon such mean things as this
world can afford, 1. Ioh. 2.15.

4 If we be Gods sons, we should be willing to submit our selves to his
correction. If we yield that power to the fathers of our bodies, how much more
to the Father of our spirits? Heb. 12.9. But especially take heed, that we
provoke not God by carelessness and boldness, in favoring any corruption,
Deuteronomy. 32.18, 19.

Thirdly, our Adoption should be a singular consolation to us against all the
miseries of this life. It matters not though our life be hid, and though it
do not appear to the world what we are, and though we have many crosses,
and losses, and persecutions, yet the thought of our inheritance with God
should swallow up all; Whatsoever we are now, yet when Christ appears, we
shall appear in glory: and there can be no comparison between the suffering
of this life, and the glory to be revealed upon us, Romans 8.17. Mat. 19.29. Col.
3.2, 4. 1 Ioh. 3.2. And that we may be the more comforted, we should often
pray to God to show us by degrees, and to make us know the riches of our
inheritance, both in what we possess in this world, and what we look for in
heaven. And thus of the title of our dignities; We are heirs.

Of life] Now follows to consider what we inherit; and that is Life; We are
heirs of life. It is somewhat a strange speech; but yet if we consider of it,
Life is a most sweet thing, there can be no happiness without it. A living Dog
is better than a dead Lion. But as life is to be taken here, it is a Treasure
above all treasures in the world. But the inquiry into it is very difficult:
it is wonderful hard to find out what life is; especially to describe or
define the life here mentioned, as the glory of Gods adopted ones.

Life, in Scripture is either natural or spiritual: as for natural life
(especially since the fall) that is so poor a thing, as to be an heir to, it
is no great preferment. By natural life, I mean that life that men live while
they are unregenerate: I say, that life is a very poor thing; Which will
appear, if we consider the quality of it, Natural life but a mean thing in
diverse respects.
or the means of preserving it, or the short continuance of it, or the subject
of it, or the things with which it is oppressed, or the whole nature of it.

1 For the quality of it; What is life? It is but a wind, or breath: God
breathed into man the breath of life, as if his life were but his breath, Genesis
2.7. and so it is said; Every thing that had the breath of life, Genesis 6.17. and
7.15.22. My life is a wind, says Ioh, Ioh 7.7. What is your life (says S.
James)? it is even a vapor that appears for a little while, and then
vanishes away, Iam. 4.14.

2 If we consider the short continuance of it. It will vanish away of it self
after a while, as we see in that place. It is compared to a Weavers Shuttle;
or at the best, every hour of our life, or every action, adds secretly a
thread till the web be woven, and then we are cut off. So Hezekiah compares
himself to a Weaver in that respect, Esaias 38.12. Our life is scarce a span
long: for to live is but to dye; to begin to live, is to begin to dye; for
death takes away time past, and every moment we yield something to death.

3 If we consider the poor means of preserving life: It is such a weak
thing, that if we do not daily give it food, it will fail us; and if it be
not kept with raiment, it will be extinguished. And for the means we use, how
silly are they? Our life is called the life of our hands, Esaias 57.10. because
it will not last, unless we make hard shift with our hands to preserve it.

4 If we consider the subject of it; It is but our bodies: for our souls in
our natural condition, according to the sense of Scripture, are dead in
trespasses and sins. They have as it were a being, but not a life. Our
souls, inrespect of the substance of them, are excellent things, because
invisible and spiritual existences; but yet are destitute of that life is
proper to them: They are things indeed will last long, but are void of that
life which is spiritual.

5 If we consider the miseries with which this life is infested, both by
sin, and the punishments of it. As for sin, it is leprous from the womb,
and charged with Adams fault, and erres so often as cannot be numbered; the
faults of it are more than the hairs of our heads. As for punishment, how has
God ave^ged himself upon thy wretched life, to thrust thee out of Paradise,
and would not let thee enjoy life in any place that was not accursed? The
Devils also compass about thy life to destroy it, 2. Cor. 10.5. What
deformities and infirmities are found in all the Vessels of life, even in all
the parts of thy body in which it dwells? And without thee, in the objects of
life, how is it frighted with cares, plagues, or vexed with particular crosses?
How does God pass by thee, in many blessings he gives before thy face to
others, and will not to thee? And what thou have to comfort thy life, is it not
cursed to thee, so as thou feel vanity and vexation in the use of it? But
above, how is thy life frighted with the danger of eternal death?

6 Lastly, if we consider the whole nature of life; The Apostle here thinks it
is not worth the naming by the name of life, when he says only of the godly,
that they are heirs of life: as if there were no living men but they; and as
if they had bin dead all the time they were, till they were adopted.

But it is not Natural life is here meant, but Spiritual life, called in
Scripture, New life, and the Life of God, and eternal Life. The words of the
Apostle Paul, Tit. 3.7. when he says, We are heirs according to the hope of
eternal life, serve to expound these words of the Apostle Peter.

Now concerning this life, it is above the reach of all mortal creatures to
describe it as it is, especially in the perfection of it in heaven; for Saint
Paul says, of what he saw in heaven, that he saw things that could not be
uttered, 2. Cor. 12. and Saint John says; It does not appear what we shall
be, 1. Ioh. 3.2. And in the 1. Cor. 2.9. it is said; that eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive of, what
God has prepared for them that love him: Yea, Christ himself does seem to
grant; that, as Man, he did not fully see the glory of this eternal life, in
his mortal condition, where speaking of his estate after death, he said; Thou will show me the paths of life, Act. 2.

And for so much as is revealed concerning this spiritual and eternal life,
two things must be remembered; the one, That the doctrine of this life lies hid
from ages and generations, in extreme darkness; and when the Gospel treats
of it, it brings it as it were out of a dark dungeon, into the light, 2. Tim.
1.10. The other is; That when it is brought to light, none can reach to it, but
such as God endewes with special wisdom: for Solomon long since had observed;
that Life is above to the wise only, Prove. 15.24.

The things I would consider of about this life, are these.

1 The Degrees of it.

2 The Original of it.

3 A guess at the Nature of it.

4 The things that nourish it.

5 The differences between this life on earth, and as it is in heaven.

6 The Means to attain it, or what we must do if we would enter into life.

7 The Signs to know whether it be in us.

8 The Properties of it.

Lastly, the Uses of it.

1 For the first, we must understand, that this life has three degrees,
Degrees of spiritual life.
into which we enter in at three gates as it were. The first degree of
eternal life, begins at the first spiritual acquaintance with God in this
life, when his favor is made known to us in Jesus Christ, by the Gospel, so
as we are truly justified and sanctified, being reconciled unto God, having
all our sins forgiven us, and our natures made new: and into this degree we
enter by the gate of Regeneration. Thus our Savior says; This is eternal
life, to know God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17.3. Thus he that
hears Christ's words and believes, is passed from death to life, Ioh. 5.24.
The second degree begins at our death, and continues the life that the
soul, separated from the body, enjoyes till the resurrection at the last day.
And concerning the estate of the soul in this degree of life, we have no
absolute revelation; but yet are taught in Scripture, that it returns to God
that gave it to the body at first, Eccles. 12.7. and that it is with Christ,
Phil. 1.23. that it is in the hands of God, and in Paradise, Luke 23.43. and
lives in unspeakable joy, Luke 16. 25. and is freed from all miseries of this
life, and enjoyes the honor of all good works, Rev. 14.13. the body resting
in the grave from all pain and labor, as in a bed of rest till the
resurrection, Esa. 57.2. And into this degree of life eternal, we enter in by
the gate of death. The thirddegree of life eternal, begins at the
resurrection of our bodies at the last day, and is enjoyed by body and soul
for ever, comprehending all possible consummation of felicity and glory in the
heavens; And into this we enter by the gate of resurrection, which is a kind
of new begetting of us, and therefore is called the resurrection of life, Ioh.
11.25. and so the blessed in heaven are called the children of the
resurrection; and by that way the children of God, Luke 20.36. In the first
degree life is imperfect, in the second it is perfect, in the third it is
consummate.

And the use of this first point should be, to warn men to look to it, that
they enter into the first degree of eternal life, while they are in this
world, or else they shall never get to heaven when they dye; and therefore
should strive for saving knowledge, and to become new creatures, or else it is
in vain to hope for heaven.

The original of this life.
2 For the second, which is the original of life, it is greatly for the praise
of it, that it flows from that life which is in God himself; which is an
unspeakable glory to the creatures that enjoy it. With thee is the fountain of
life, says David, Psalm. 36.9. So he calls him the God of his life, Psalm. 42.8.
Natural life is but a sparkle, that flows from the life of our parents; but
spiritual and eternal life, is kindled from that infinite light and life in
God; But yet not as Christ received we this life: for he had it by natural
generation, we have it by a way unspeakeable from God, but yet by Jesus
Christ: In him was life, as the life was the light of men, John 14. He that
has the Son has life, John 5.12. and he it is that is eternal life, viz. to
us, verse. 20. As there is no light in the visible world, but from the Sun in
the sirmament; so there is no life in the spiritual world, but from God in
Heaven, which has caused it to shine in our hearts by the Son of
righteousness, Christ Jesus. Thus our life is called the life of God, Ephesians.
4.18, and Christ is said to live in us, Gal. 2 20. Which should teach us
greatly to admire and adore the excellency of Gods goodness, and make us to
rest our selves for ever under the shadow of his wings, Psalm. 36.7, 8, 9. But
that this point may be more clearly understood, we must consider of the
original of this life from God three ways. It has its original from God
three ways.
First, in respect of Ordination, and so it flows from Gods decree; He has
ordained us unto life, Acts 13.48. and our names are written in the book of
life, Phil. 4.3. Secondly, in respect of Merit; it was bought of God by the
death of the flesh of Christ. I give my flesh for the life of the world, John
6.51. This life will not be had without his death: that we might live in
eternal life, he must dye a temporal death. And shall not this greatly
inflame our hearts to love the Lord Jesus, that gave himself for us, that we
should not perish, but have everlasting life? Thirdly, in respect of operation
or inchoation; and so the fountain of life is either without us, or within us:
without us is the Word of Christ, that is the immortal seed by which we are
begotten unto life, 1. Pet. 1.24. and so is called the Word of life, Phil.
2.15. And the word is so, as it is the word of Christ that is Gospel; My words
(says he) are spirit and life, John 6.63. And that word, considered as it is
preached to the dead souls of men; the dead shall Hear the voice of Christ,
and live. Shall hear it: note that. John 5.25. which should make us greatly to
esteem the preaching of the Gospel. Within us, the fountain of life is the
Spirit of Christ, which is called the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.2. Now the Spirit of Christ, that we may live, does two things, viz. it
quickens the seed of the Word, and unites us unto Christ, as members of the
mystical body: and then look how the soul of man does give life to every
member of the body; so does the Spirit of Christ to every soul, as a several
member of the mystical body.

3 For the third; We shall not exactly know what the nature of eternal life
is, till it be perfected us, or consummate; yet by diverse words God has let
fall in Scripture, we may guess at the nature of this life: The nature of it,
consists in a saving knowledge or celestial light.
and in general, I think it is a kind of celestial light falling into the
soul, that does to it, that which natural life does to the body. This S.
John, showing how Christ was the life of men, says, he was the light of men,
John 1.4. And David having said, With thee is the fountain of life, adds; And
in thy light we shall see light, Psalm. 36.8. And so the promise to the
penitent sinner was, that his life should see the light, Job 33.28. So Christ
says, he that follows him, shall have the light of life. Mark it; the Light
of life, John 8.12. So that the life of our minds is knowledge in general; and
in particular, it is the saving knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, as our
Savior says expressly, John 17.3. This is eternal life to know God, and
whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. And the reason why this knowledge does most
inlive and quicken our hearts, is, because God in Christ is the most glorious
subject of contemplation: as being that highest good, a very Ocean of
goodness, only able to fill and ravish the heart of man: and besides, because
God as our chief good, can alone make the ravishment of the heart perpetual,
and so last for ever, which nothing else can do.

But because every knowledge of God has not this effect, to breed everlasting
life in the heart of a man; therefore I will distinctly set down what kind of
knowledge it is that has this effect, and what is required that it may be
right.

Which knowledge, must have these properties and effects in it.
1 It must be such a knowledge, as discernes God to be the only true God: and
this rule excludes the Pagans from eternal life, who though by the light of
nature they might discern the invisible things of God, by the works of the
creation; yet they so shut up those principles of natural truth in
unrighteousness, that they set up creatures as God, and gave the glory of the
true God to them. Romans 1.

2 It must be such a knowledge as ascribes into the Nature of God such an
excellency, as can be expressed by no likeness of any creature in heaven above,
or earth beneath, or the waters under the earth. God must not be conceived of
by any Images: Images in the Church shut out the Papists from eternal life,
and Images in the heart to conceive of God by, excludes the ignorant and
carnal Protestants. In the right conceiving of Gods Nature, we must adore him
that is like nothing in heaven or earth.

3 It must be such a knowledge or vision of God, as discernes him to be the
chief good, and only happiness to be desired: and so all those persons that
behold any thing in this life, to be sought after as the chief felicity of
their lives, are excluded from eternal life. And the things so esteemed, the
Scripture calls their gods; so some make their bellies their gods, some their
riches, some honor and the favor of men.

4 It must be such a knowledge of God, as conceives of him in Jesus Christ
(that is) that sees the way how Gods infinite justice, provoked by many sins,
is pacified by the atonement made by Jesus Christ, as the Mediator between
God and man, Ioh. 17.3. else the knowledge of God, in respect of the
contemplation of his justice, will be so far from inliving our hearts, that it
would kill them if they had life. and this rule excludes all such from eternal
life, as live in despair of Gods mercy, as Cain and Judas. These knowledges
are such, as without which life cannot be had, but yet in themselves do not
quicken the Soul, and inspire it with life.

5 It must be such a knowledge, as does nor only discern aright the doctrine
of the Nature of God, and of the person and offices of Christ; but does
discern that God is ours (in particular) in Jesus Christ; and fully reconciled
to us, and our portion for ever. To know God to be our God in Christ, is the
very life of our souls: Now, because we discern this in God two ways, viz.
by the light of faith, believing the promises of the Word, though we see him
not; and by the light of vision, when we shall see him in his goodness face to
face: therefore is the former light called the light of faith, and belongs to
this life; and the later light belongs to another world. Hence our
justification which is by faith, is called, The justification of life, Romans
5.18. This is a point, which should be of unspeakable comfort to the weak
Christians, that have attained to this knowledge; for certainly this is
eternal life in them, as true as if they had the glory of heaven already. But
now, that true Christians may be the more infallibly settled in the knowledge of
their interest in eternal life, as it lies in the right knowledge of God, to
be ours in Jesus Christ, I will add certain effects of this knowledge, which
show, not only that it is right, but also, that it is very eternal or
spiritual life: for, if it be a right knowledge,

1 It raises in the dead heart of man spiritual senses, that were never there
before: It makes the soul of a man able to hear Gods word, that could never
do it before: It gives sight in spiritual things, and sense, and feeling, and
spiritual tastes of Gods goodness, and a favoring of spiritual things, more
than earthly, 2. Cor. 2.15. Romans 8 5. Psalm. 36.8. Phil. 1.9.

2 It is a knowledge with admiration: it sets a man's heart upon a constant
wondering at the glory of the things revealed. He that has this knowledge,
sees in a Mirror; he sees, and wonders: Nothing more ravisheth the heart, than
does the word, when it shew^ him the glory of Gods grace to him, 2. Cor. 3.18.
Wicked men see, but they see not in a Mirror.

3 It is a knowledge that works transformation: it changes a man into the
likeness of that it sees, even from gl^ry to glory, by the power of the spirit
of Christ. The light comes into wicked men, but leaves them the same men it
found them, for disposition and conversation: but this light humbles the heart
of a man for his sins, and purifieth him from his most secret sins, Act.
15.9. and besides, prints upon him the Image of God, and stirs him up to all
the motives of life in doing good works, 2. Cor. 3.18. Col. 3.10. 1. Ioh. 2,
3. and 3.24.

4 It is such a light as is indelible, and will abide the trial, of manifold
afflictions, and gives life and joy still to the soul: It does not only
comfort in Gods house, but will support us when we are gone home, under the
miseries of this present life, 1 Pet. 1.7

The use should be, to teach us all to bless God for the Gospel that brings
life to light, and shows us the love of God to us in Christ; and for all the
means by which the Gospel is preached to us in the life of it. Oh, how should
we be beholding to them that help us to eternal life, by leading us unto
God, this Ocean of goodness? And withal, we should be wonderfully thankful
to God, and for ever comforted, if we can find that we have attained to the
assurance of Gods love to us in Christ. Though our knowledge here be but small
and weak, yet it is so rich as the tongue of man cannot utter, if it be in any
measure true and sincere. Besides, how should this fire our desires after
wisdom, and spiritual understanding in the word of Christ? seeing it is our
life, and in the same degree we increase in eternal life, that we increase in
acquaintance with God in Christ, and therefore above all gettings, we should be
getting understanding. And finally, it shows the woeful estate of ignorant
persons, that are careless of the study of the word of God, and of hearing of
the Gospel preached: This is their death, and will be their eternal death, if
they prevent it not by repentance, and sound redeeming of the time, for the
service of the soul, about this sacred knowledge.

4 Now for the fourth point, the things that nourish life are greatly to be
heeded, both to show us what we should apply our selves to, and with what
thankfulness to receive the means of our good herein.

1 We must know, Diverse things nourish this life
that the principal cause of the nourishment and increase of spiritual life,
is the influence of virtue from Christ our mystical head, by the secret and
unutterable working of the spirit of Christ; which is therefore called, the
Spirit of life, because it both frees us by degrees from the fears of death,
and from the power and blots of sin, Romans 8.2. and withal, it quickens and
increases life in us, for the better exercise of righteousness, Romans 8.10.

2 The contemplation of Gods favor and presence does wonderfully extend and
inflame life in us. To mark God any where, or by any experience to find
effectually his love, and to taste of the sweetness of his goodness; this is
life from the dead, better than all things in natural life: It does a godly
man's heart more good, than all things in the world can do, as these places
show, Psalm. 30.5. and 63.7, 8. and 36.3. and 16. ult. with coherence.

3 The entertainment God gives his people in his house, is one special cause
of increase of this life in us, as it increases both knowledge, and joy, and
all goodness, and satisfies the heart of man; especially amongst all the
things that are without us, the Word of God, as it is powerfully preached in
Gods house, is the food of this life; called the savor of life unto life, 2.
Cor. 2.16. Christ's words are the words of eternal life, Ioh. 6. see Psalm.
36.8. Ioh 12.50. Prove. 4.22.

4 Fellowship with the godly, is singular to quicken and excite the life of
grace, and joy, and knowledge in us: therefore it is an amiable thing for
brethren to dwell together in unity, because there God has commanded the
blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. ult. Prove. 2.20. The mouth of the
righteous is a vein of life Pro. 10.11. Yea, the very reproves of instruction
are the way of life, Pro. 6.23. And therefore weak Christians should be
instructed from hence, with faith to rest upon the God of their lives, who by
the spirit of Christ can enable them to eternal life; and with thankfulness
to embrace all signs of Gods favor and presence; and above all things in
life, to provide for themselves powerful means in public, and good society
in private; and not to be turned off from either of these, by slight either
objections or difficulties; and to resolve to labor more for these, than
carnal persons would do, to have their natural lives, if they were in
distress or danger. It is also excellent counsel which Saint Jude gives in
this point concerning eternal life: he would have us look to four things:
The first is, to edify our selves in our most holy faith, striving to get in
more store of Gods promises, and divine knowledges, and to strive to establish
our hearts in our assurance of our right to them. The second is, to pray in the
holy Ghost; for he knew that powerful prayer does greatly further eternal
life in us. The third is, to keep our selves in the love of God, avoiding all
things might displease him; choosing rather to live under the hatred of all the
world, than to anger God by working iniquity. The fourth is, to look as often
and as earnestly as we can, after that highest degree of mercy and glory we
shall have in the coming of Christ, Iud. 1.19, 20.

I will conclude this point with that one counsel of Solomon; Keep thy heart
with all diligence, for there out come the issues of life. Christians that
would prosper in spiritual life, should be very careful of the first
beginnings of sin in their thoughts and desires, and be very diligent in
nourishing all good motions of the holy Ghost, preserving their peace and joy,
in believing with all good consciences, Pro. 4.23. Thus of the fourth point.

5 Now for the differences of life in these degrees, especially the first and
last degree, they are very great: for though eternal life in the first degree,
be a treasure of singular value, yet the glory of this life does greatly
excel, as it is to be held in another world.

I entend not to compare life in heaven with natural life here (for that is
not worthy to be mentioned in the balance with that eternal life of glory) but
with eternal life it self, as it is held by the godly only in this world.
And so the difference is very great.

1 In respect of the place where the godly lives in each degree. This life
differs from eternal life many ways


2 In respect of the means of preservation of life in each degree.

3 In respect of the company with who^ we live in each degree.

4 In respect of the quality of life itself.

5 In respect of the effects of life eternal in each degree.

For the first, there is great difference between the life of grace, 1 In
respect of place.
and the life of glory, in the very place of living: Here we live in an earthly
Tabernacle, in houses of clay; there we shall live in eternal Mansions,
buildings that God has made without hands, 2. Cor. 5.1. Here we live on earth;
there in heaven. Here we are strangers and pilgrims, far from home, Heb. 11.
there we shall live in our Fathers house. Here we are in Egypt; there we
shall live in Canaan. Here we live where death, sorrow, and sin, and Devils
dwell; there we shall live in a place, where God, and immortality, and all
holiness dwells, 2. Pet. 3.13. Here we are but banished men, there we stall
live in the celestial Paradise; Here we have no abiding City, but there we
shall abide in the new Jerusalem that is above: The glory of the whole earth
can but shadow out by similitude, the very walls and gates of that City, Rev.
21. Here we can but enter into the holy place, there we shall enter into the
most holy place, Heb. 10.19. To conclude, there we shall enter into the heaven
of heavens, which for lightness, largeness, pureness, delightfulness, and
all praises, almost infinitely excells the heavens we enjoy in this visible
world.

2 In respect of the means that preserve this life.
For the second; in this life, unto the preservation of life, we have need of
many things: as first, we need meat, drink, raiment, sleep, marriage,
physic, the light of the Sun by day, and the Moon by night: Yea, the life
of Grace, though it consist not in these things, yet in a remote consideration,
has need of these, that we may be the better able to serve. God in body and
soul. But in heaven we shall need none of these, we shall be as the
Angels of heaven, and God himself shall there be all in all, and shall fill
us with his goodness, 1. Cor. 15.28. Our life shall subsist in God himself,
who shall satisfy us out of the plenty of his own glory. In that City there
will be no need of the Sun to shine by day, or of the Moon to give light by
night, for the glory of the Lord does lighten it, and the Lamb shall be the
light thereof, and there shall be no night there, Rev. 21.23. and 22.5. Esaias
2.60.19. Secondly, in this world we need the help of superiors, as Kings,
Rulers, Parents, Husbands, Teachers, etc. But in that world inferiority and
subjection shall cease, when we shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
in the Kingdom of God, Mat. 8.11. and so all the first things shall then be
done away, Rev. 21.4. Thirdly, in this world we need spiritual means for our
souls, and the help of diverse gifts in the Spirit, which serve for our
furtherance in the way to eternal life; Our souls cannot live without a Temple
on earth, without the Word, and Prayer, and Sacraments; but in that new
Jerusalem, S. John saw no Temple in it, there is no preaching nor praying;
there we shall not need any, nor have cause to mourn for the want of it, as
many times we do now: for the Lord God almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple
thereof; from God we shall have an infinite supply, in stead of all these
things, Rev. 21.22. Here we treat with God by means at a great distance,
there we shall enjoy him immediately: yea, those gifts of the Spirit, that
suppose imperfection in us, or misery in others, shall there be done away. The
gifts that suppose imperfection in us, are faith, and hope, and repentance; we
shall not need promises to imply either faith or hope, because all shall then
be performed, and we shall have actual possession, 1. Cor. 13. ult. Nor
shall we need sorrow for our sins, because all our iniquities shall then be
done away. The gifts that suppose misery or sin in others, are such as these;
holy fear, anger, jealousy, care, hatred, grief, pity, or such like; now
all these shall then be put off for ever, because in that kingdom shall be
nothing that is either unclean, or wretched, or in danger to fall away. Yet
notwithstanding this hinders not, but that God may delight the souls of his
people, by ways unknown to us, after a most glorious manner; which seems to
be shadowed out, by eating of the tree of life, which bears so often fruit,
and by drinking of the water of life, which runs like a river, pure as
crystal, and proceeds from the Throne of God, Revel. 21.6. and 22.1.

For the third, 3 In respect of the company.
there is great difference between the company with whom we live here, and
those with whom we shall live there; and that in seven things. As first, in
the sorts of peoples: Here our life is made grievous by the evil ones, that
either molest us with their oppositions, or grieve us with their wickedness,
or infect us with their evil examples: but there shall be no wicked ones, no
Devils to tempt us, no divellish men to slander us, or persecute us, no
abominable persons, either to grieve or pollute us: All these enemies shall be
cast into the Lake of fire, Revel. 21.8. and 20.4. and 22.14. we shall never
be troubled with them more; and the people there are all righteous, Esaias 60.23.
Secondly, in the dignity of the friends we shall find in heaven. They are
usually but mean persons we must sort withal here, but there they are such
as exceed all the glory of this world; our friends and companions shall be
glorious Angels, and blessed Patriarchs, and Kings, and Prophets, and
Apostles, and the Martyrs of Jesus; and in general, all wear Crowns of
glory. Thirdly, in respect of the number of our friends: Here we have scarce
one friend we have reason much to admire, or can safely rely upon, there we
shall have an innumerable company of Angels, of the spirits of just men, a huge
congregation of the first borne, even the general assembly of all Gods elect,
Heb. 12. 22, 23. Fourthly, in respect of disposition, both theirs and our own:
Here our life with our friends is made often grievous, by reason of envy,
suspicion, offense, passion, pride, forgetfulness, and private discords; or
our own indisposition at sometimes to take delight in the presence of our
friends: but in heaven, the spirits of just men are made perfect, Heb. 12.23.
and charity will be inflamed on all hands, to perform exactly all those
properties mentioned, 1. Cor. 13. Fifthly, in respect of constancy: Our friends
here are not only mortal, and must leave us, but mutable, and may forsake us;
but there all the company is immortal, and being perfectly sanctified, are as
God himself, immutable; and so their love is not only perfect, but
everlasting: Charity there will abide for ever, 1. Cor. 13. ult. Sixthly, in
power to content us, and satisfy us. Alas, here on earth, many things befall
us, wherein our friends, though they would, yet they cannot help us: but in
heaven, there is all sufficiency of power, to solace and content one another to
all eternity. Lastly, in their relation to us: On earth we lose daily such as
are near and dear to us; in heaven we shall have them all, and it is very
probable, we shall know them all, and one by one. Adam in his innocence knew
his Wife, and could call her by her name, without any body to tell him. And
Peter and John in the Transfiguration on the Mount, knew Moses and Elias, and
yet had never seen them. how much more in heaven shall our knowledge be
perfected, to know and to be known particularly, and as it were by name?

For the fourth; 4 In respect of the quality of the life it self.
Our knowledge (which is our life) differs greatly now from that it shall be,
both in respect of the ground of it, and in respect of the manner of it and in
respect of the measure of it. The ground of it is our union with God, by which
we partake of his light, Psalm. 36.8. Now in heaven we shall be made one with
God, after an unspeakable manner, in such a nearenesse as we cannot conceive
of now. This is that which our Savior prays so earnestly for, Ioh. 17. 20.21.
Secondly, in respect of the manner of it; Now God treates with us by means, as
by the Word and Sacraments, etc. but then without means, immediately: Now we
see by the help of a glass, or as an old man does by Spectacles; but then we
shall see God by direct vision. Moses, that saw as much of God as a mortal man
then could, saw but his back parts; he saw God, as we see a man going from
us, but then we shall see him face to face, as he is coming to us; yea, as
he is possessed by us. We shall not need help to show God to us, as we do
now, for God himself shall be our everlasting light, as was showed before.

There is a fourfold vision of God; the one is natural, as when we see him
in the crertures: the other is speculous, or Symbolicall, when we see God in
certain signs of his presence, as in the burning fire in the Bush, or in the
Cloud, or Pillar of fire at the Tabernacle. The third is, the vision of Faith,
when we know how good God is, by the promises of his word to us in Christ. The
last is, the vision of Glory, which differs from all the former, in a way of
seeing unknown to us. Thirdly, our knowledge will differ in the measure: now
we know but in part; there are many things we know not, and what we do know,
we know but obscurely, and darkely; then we shall know perfectly, even as we
are now known perfectly of God, 1. Cor. 13.10, 11. etc. and so we shall know
both God, and the Creatures. There is a world of most delightful and rare
knowledge of the Creatures, which we attain not to in this life: but the
chief glory of our knowledge then, shall be in the perfect vision of God, and
those unspeakeable beauties of his Nature, when we shall behold perfectly the
glory of every property or attribute in God, which will be sufficient to
breed everlasting wonder and delight. In a word; the knowledge of the meanest
Christian in heaven, shall be above the knowledge of Prophets or Apostles on
earth.

5. In respect of the effects of life in each degree: as to instance.
The fifth difference is in the effects of our Knowledge: for, from our
knowledge, and this celestial light, flows righteousness, peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost; which the Apostle Paul makes to be the parts of the kingdom
of God, and so both in this life, and in heaven, Romans 14.17. And unto these
three heads may be referred all things that concern the glory of eternal
life: and all these are held with, great difference in each degree of eternal
life. For though we have righteousness, and peace, and joy now in the truth
of them; yet we have them not as we shall have them in heaven; as will
appear, if we consider of them distinctly.

1. For righteousness.
First for righteousness. Here it is the greatest burden of life unto the
godly, that they are not able to serve God as they desire; the imperfections of
their gifts, the corruption of their natures, the daily infirmities that
discover themselves in their conversations, make life many times more bitter
than death would be to them: as appears by Saint Paul, Romans 7. But there, all
that is imperfect shall be done away; there shall be no danger of displeasing
God, for we shall be made perfect in all parts and degrees of holiness: our
nature shall be perfect, like the nature of God; our members shall never more
be servants unto unrighteousness, and our souls shall exactly resemble God in
all perfection of goodness and gifts Here the glory of man's inheritance lies
in the goodness of things without them; there it shall consist principally in
an everlasting goodness, confirmed upon themselves: We shall be without spot
and wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. We shall be as he is in holiness, 1. Ioh. 3.2. Here
is our grief, that our hearts cannot be so filled with the love of God, and
the godly, as they should be; there our hearts shall burn with an eternal
inflammation of affections toward God, and the blessed ones, without any
interruption or decay: we shall never more be troubled with hardness of
heart, discouragement, fear, distractions, inordinate desires, and
perturbations. Yea, our holiness shall be better than Adams in Paradise: for he
had a power not to sin, but we shall have no power at all to sin. Yea, in
relation to Christ, it shall be better with us then, than it is now: for now we
are reckoned just men only by the benefit of Christ's righteousness imputed to
us; but then we shall be made so perfectly holy by inherent righteousness,
that we shall stand everlasting righteous before God, by the righteousness
that is in us. Imputation shall there cease for ever, when Christ has
delivered up the kingdom to God the Father, and when Faith shall be done
away. Lastly, the difference in this point may further appear in the freedom
of our will. In this life many times our wills are not free to desire to do
the good we should do, and most an end want power to execute what we desire:
but there shall be all liberty, so as we shall never want either desire or
power, to accomplish what may be for Gods everlasting glory, or our own
felicity.

Secondly for peace, 2. for peace.
there is great difference: for first, in this life we have but little peace in
respect of the miseries of life. Sometimes we have but little inward peace; our
hearts being unquiet with fear, or grief, or discouragement, or passions; or
else our consciences are unquiet, either because God fights against us, to try
us or to humble us, or we fight against our selves, through ignorance and
unbeleef, or distress for sin. Sometimes when our spirits are quiet, and there
is a truce from inward war, we then want outward peace; either men are
unreasonable, and molest us without cause, in our estates or names; or else God
afflicts us in body, with pain and weakness; or in estate, sometime with
easy crosses like small rain, sometimes with greater crosses, like some
fierce storms. Now in heaven there shall be an eternal cessation of all
misery; there shall be no curse, and affliction shall be cast into the Sea,
Rev. 22.3. Secondly, our Sabbath or days of rest, which God has consecrated
and blessed to us as the chief joy of our lives, proves many times days of
sorrow and affliction, because either our bodies are molested with pain, or
our souls distressed for want of powerful means, or for want of ability to
keep a Sabbath unto God, or for want of joy in our souls. But in heaven we
shall have an eternal Sabbath; not one day in seven, but all our days; rest
without labor, and solace of heart, without any difficulty in our selves, or
interruption without us: God and the Lamb will be an eternal Temple to make
our rest for ever glorious. We shall be freed from all the labors of life, and
from all pain and difficulty in serving God, and our works shall be all
easy, and full of delight, even the praising of God for ever. Rev. 14.12. Heb.
4.9.

3. for joy.
Thirdly, for Joy; there is great difference both in the causes, and in the
measure, and in the continuance of it. The causes of our Joy, shall be the
highest can befall a creature. Here, while we are present with the body, and
the blessings of life, we are absent from the Lord, the infinite life of our
lives: but there we shall enjoy him as fully as our hearts can desire. 2. Cor.
5.8. Here we want our crown, whatsoever else we enjoy: but there our honor,
and glory, and majesty shall be so great, as if all the Kings of the earth did
bring their glory to one man, it would not equal what every one shall have
there. 2. Tim. 4.8. Revel. 2.24. and 3.21. we shall reign in life. Romans 5.
And this Crown is the more glorious, because it shall not consist of some
precious thing without us, but of royal excellency, with which our souls and
bodies shall shine as the Sun in the firmament; our very bodies in quality
being altered to such an expression of majesty, and beauty, and angelical
excellency as now exceeds all mortal language, being rather like spirits than
earthly bodies. And for the measure, now we have but little tastes of joy; and
if these tastes be unspeakeable and glorious, what are those rivers of joy at
Gods right hand? Psalm. 16. ult. And for continuance; they are for evermore, as
the Psalmist there speaks: whereas now they are gone from us, like lightning,
in an instant, and our lives are afterward assaulted almost continually, with
causes or occasion of sorrow; so as the world in the best place, is but like a
vale of tears: but there shall be no sorrow, no death, no crying nor pain,
but God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes for ever. Revel. 21.4.

6 Thus of the differences of life on earth, and life in heaven. What men must
do that they may enter into life, What men must do to attain this life.
follows: And about this point our Savior tells us two things beforehand.
First, that the way to life is a narrow way, and the gate is exceeding strait:
men may be misled by a thousand by-waies, and the work to be done is a very
hard work. Secondly, that there are but few that find the right way; yea, but
few amongst those that seek it, and seem desirous to know what they should
do: for, either they understand not the directions when they are given; or by
taking time to think of them, they forget them; or else when they have the
answer, they go their ways, (like the yongue man in the Gospel) and are
sorry the conditions be so hard; and so give over all further care, and rest in
the estate they were in before. And therefore we had need to attend the more
carefully, and resolve to do whatsoever God requires of us, whatsoever it cost
us, and not be troubled at the difficulty of the work, considering the
excellency of eternal life, and the many helps we may have to further the
work: Of which afterward. This then is the question, What should a man or
woman do that he might be sure to enter into life?

Ans. 1 Thou must lay the foundation of all in Jesus Christ; Thou must
disclaim all trust in any thing in heaven or earth, in thy self, or thy own
works, or any other creature, and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, as
the only means of pacifying Gods anger, or procuring eternal life, Act.
4.12. Ioh. 3.16. and thou must inwardly lay up Christ in thy heart, so as
spiritually ever to eat his flesh and drink his blood, by applying all he
has done or suffered for thee in particular. Ioh. 6.53. 1. Ioh 5.12.

2 Thou must pray hard to the God of life, Psalm. 42.8. and with great
importunity beseech him to give thee the spirit of life, that is, Jesus Christ;
and with the more encouragement, because he has promised to give even his holy
Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.13.

3 There will be no life in the soul, if thou do not repent thee of thy
sins, Act. 11.18. And this is the harder work, because first to confess thy
sins will not serve turn, unless thou forsake them, and overcome them,
Revel. 2.7. so as the power of them be mastered, and thou do from thy heart
desire and resolve to leave them. If thy lusts, passions, disorders of life in
drunkenness, swearing, sins of deceit, or the like, be not mended, thou
can not live this life, 1. Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.22.23. At the best, without an
apparent victory, there will be little comfort in life. Secondly, in turning,
thou must turn from all thy transgressions, so as thou be sure thou leave no
sin thou know, but thou will endeavor to judge thy self for it, and
strive to forsake it. Thy heart must be turned from it, Ezech. 18.21.18. Yea,
if some of thy sins, for profit or pleasure, be to thee like thy right eye,
or right hand, thou must cut them off, or pull them out, or else thou can
never enter into life, Mat. 18.8, 9. As in the case of rich men, the way of
life is compared to the eye of a Needle, and their hearts to a great Cable: now
there is no way for thee to enter into life, but by untwisting the great Cable,
till it be made like small threeds; which is done by great humiliation, Iam.
1.10. And withal, thy heart must continue afraid in the least thing to offend
God. This fear of the Lord is required to the very beginning of this life,
Pro. 14.27.

4 Thou must deny thy self extremely in outward things: thou must look for
persecution; yea, and perhaps be put to it, to forsake father and mother, house
and lands, wife and children, yea, and life it self, so as to hate and lose
this natural life, in comparison of the gaining of eternal life, Mark 10. 30.
Ioh. 12.25.

5 Thou must be tied to walk in a strict course of life all thy days,
resolving to walk in the way of righteousness, and let the word of God be the
rule of all thy actions, and by patient continuance in well-doing, to seek
increase of happiness and holiness; for life is only in the way of
righteousness, Prove. 12.28. Romans 2.7, 8. Ezech. 33.15, 16.

A Christian has many helps to attain it.
Now, though this work be very hard, yet thou have many helps, if thy heart be
right and willing to obey: for,

1 God will give thee his holy Spirit, to work all thy work for thee, and to
cause thee to walk in his statutes, and keep his judgments, and do them;
and will mortify the deeds of the flesh, and teach thee in all truth, and
comfort and support thee, and make thy works acceptable to God, as has been
showed before.

2 Thou have the help of spiritual Armor, that is mighty through God, to
cast down strong holds, 2. Cor. 10.3, 4. thou will find a strong supply from
every ordinance of God; the Word, and Prayer, and Sacraments, all serve to
help against the difficulty of this work, and so will the Society with the
godly, as was showed before.

3 Thou will have the benefit of Christ's prayers and intercession for thee in
heaven, Ioh. 17.17.15. which is of unspeakable force and power to help thee.

4 The greatness of the reward should pluck up thy heart against all the
hardship of godliness; for,

1 God will grant thee pardon of all thy sins, Act. 2 39.

2 Thou shall have fellowship with God himself; and he will show thee so much
when thou seek to him in his ordinances, 1. Ioh. 1.7.

3 Thou have most precious promises, recorded every where in the sacred Volume
of Gods book, 2. Pet. 1.4.

4 Who would not be stirred up with the contemplation of that glorious
inheritance is reserved for us in heaven? that incorruptible crown should make
any body willing to abstain from all things, and to run with all violence in
the race set before us, 1. Pet. 1.3. 1. Cor. 9.24, 25, 26, 27.

Only let me conclude this point with an earnest exhortation to all
Christians, that would have comfort of life, to apply themselves to get all
possible knowledge they can in the Scriptures; for that knowledge is a tree of
life, Prove. 3.18. and 16.22. and those sacred knowledges they must not let go,
but take fast hold on them, Prove. 4.13. They must attend, incline their ears,
and not let them depart from between their eyes, and be sure to keep them in
the midst of their hearts, Prove. 4.22.21.20. Mark every one of those words
to do it; and consider, that it is not the having of the Bibles, or Sermons,
or the reading, or hearing, but the knowledge we get into our hearts: nor is
it any knowledge, but wisdom, or the wise knowledge of the Scriptures: and our
knowledge is then wise, when it is an understanding of our own ways; and we
are wise for our selves, when we study profitable things, and when we sow
those seeds of truth in daily practice, and when we practice with discretion,
looking to the circumstances of every duty, not to draw upon our selves
incombrances by our own rashness or indiscretion. And lastly, when with all
knowledge we join lowliness of mind, and meekness; that meekness that is
called meekness of wisdom, by Saint James.

Thus of the means to attain life: The signs follow.

There are diverse ways to try our selves, whether eternal life be begun in
us: as,

Signs of this life are six.
1 By the savouring of those things that are immortal. Our mortal life
relisheth nothing but what is transitory: and eternal life finds happiness
in nothing but what is eternal, or tends to it. Thus a man that is endued with
this life, esteems with sense, grace above riches, spiritual treasures above
all earthly. In particular, the desire after the Word of God, is a sign that
we are at least newborn babes in Gods kingdom if so be we desire it with a
kind of natural affection, as the child does the breast; and constantly, and
as the word is sincere; and with an unfeigned desire to grow in grace and
goodness, by the power of the Word, Romans 8.5. 1. Pet. 2. John 6.27.

2 By our knowledge of God in Christ, as has been showed before, when it is
such a knowledge as works not only admiration, but also sound transformation
of our hearts and lives.

3 There is a kind of sorrow, that the Apostle says is to salvation, 2. Cor.
10.7. and that is, such a sorrow as is voluntary and secret; for our sins,
and for all sorts of sins, Romans 7. Esa. 6.5. Esa. 1.16. and as they are
sins, and not for other respects; and such a sorrow as quieteth the heart,
and leaves a vehement desire of reformation, and is most stirred by the sense
of Gods goodness, Hos. 3.5. Esa. 1.16. and is found in prosperity as well as
adversity.

4 By our love to God; for if the light of life be in us, and that we are
truly acquainted with God, as our God in Christ, the heart has seen that,
that will make it in love with God for ever; and show it by his estimation of
Gods loving kindness, and all the signs of it, above all things in life,
Psalm. 63.2, 11. and by longing after the coming of Christ, 2. Tim. 4.8. and by
grieving for Gods absence, Cant. 3.1. and by his fear to offend God in any
thing, Jude 20. and by his willingness to suffer any thing for God and the
Gospel. 1. These. 1.2.

5 By our love of the brethren. The Alpostle John with great confidence of
words, makes this a sign, that we are translated from death to life, 1. Ioh.
3.14. and it is infallible, if we so love them as we account them the only
excellent ones, Psalm. 16.3. and desire them as the only companions of our
lives, and if it be for the grace and goodness is in them, 1. Ioh. 5.1. 2.
Ioh. 1.2. and if it be, notwithstanding their infirmities, or adversities; and
if we love all the brethren, without respect of persons.

6 To conclude this point generally: If eternal life be begun in us, we are
new creatures, borne again; the Image of God is restored in us in some degree,
Ioh. 3.5. Tit. 3.7, 5. Colos. 3.10. and we are such as are fully resolved to
spend our days in the way of righteousness, and a holy course of life, Prove.
12.28.

8 The properties of this life follow, Properties of this life are five.
and they are five: for,

1 It is unspeakable; eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can the heart of
man conceive, what God has prepared in life for them that love him, 1. Cor.
2.9.

2 It is free, it is not given by merit, but is the free gift of God, Romans 6.
ult.

3 It is certain; for there is an Act for it in Gods council. Men be ordained
to life, and their names written in the book of life, Act. 13.48. Phil. 4.4.
and God has bound himself, by many promises in his Word, to the believer; and
besides, has confirmed it with an oath, Heb. 6.17. and Christ is gone into
heaven, to make the place ready for all the heirs of life, Ioh. 14.3. and
further, we have it already begun, even eternal life begun, Ioh. 17.3.

4 It is a life by assimilation, that is, such a life as is fashioned in
likeness to the life of another, even Jesus Christ, according to whose Image
we are created, Col. 3.10. And who shall change our vile bodies, and make them
like his glorious body, Phil. 3.21.

5 It is eternal: A life that will last as long as God lives; it will never
have an end. Divines express the et^rnitie of it, in part, by this similitude:
Suppose a little Bird came to the Sea once in a thousand years, and took up
only one drop of water, and so should continue to take every thousand years
only one drop, what an unspeakable space of time would it be, before the Sea
would be drunk up? and yet eternity is a lasting beyond that unmeasurably.
Thus of the explication of the doctrine concerning life.

The uses follow: and,

Use 1. First, what a strong impression should this doctrine have upon the
hearts of all unregenerate men? How should life and heaven suffer violence? How
should this force open their eyes, that they might awake from that fearful
lethargy, and stand up from the dead, that Christ might give them this light
of life? How should they unchangeably resolve to seek Gods kingdom first
above all things; and above all gettings, strive to get understanding? What
shall it profit them to win the whole world, and lose their own souls?

But especially the doctrine of life should melt the hearts of all the godly,
and imprint upon them the care of many duties; as,

What duties this doctrine should compel godly men to practice.
1 They have cause to wonder at the exceeding riches of Gods kindness to them
in Jesus Christ, in providing such an inheritance for them, Ephesians. 2.7.

2 They should pray earnestly to God to open their eyes more and more, to see
the glory of this life; and effectually to take notice of the high dignity of
their calling, and riches of their inheritance in life, Ephesians. 1.19.

3 This should marvellously weane their hearts from the cares of this present
life, and from the love of earthly things, seeing their inheritance lies in
spiritual and eternal life, 1. Cor. 7.31. Heb. 13.4, 5. and 11.13. Col. 3.1,
2. Phil. 3.20.

4 Since they have found this precious life by the Gospel, they should
therefore take heed they be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrine,
nor trouble themselves with doubtful disputations, or unprofitable questions.
They have found the words of eternal life, and whither else will they go?
Tit. 3.7, 9. Heb. 13.9.

5 This should make them love one another, as such as shall be companions in
life for ever. Yea, they should receive one another, as Christ received them to
glory, Ioh. 13.34. Ephesians. 4.2. and 5.1. Romans 15.7. And in particular, husbands
should make much of their wives, and masters of such servants as are heirs
with them of the grace of life, as this Text shows, and Col. 3.24.

6 They should strive to show the power of this life, and how much it excells
natural life: and therefore the fruit of the Spirit should be in them in all
goodness, righteousness, and truth, Ephesians. 5.9. and they should so hold forth
the Word of life, that they should think on whatsoever things are true,
honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report; and if there be any virtue, or
any praise, they should strive to act that, being careful in all things to
maintain good works, Phil. 4.8. Tit. 3.7.8. Oh, what manner of persons should
they be in all manner of good conversation!

7 They should lift up their heads with joy, and be always comfortable,
considering the assurance they have of eternal life; they have the Spirit of
glory resting upon them. One would think they should be always singing, and
making melody in their hearts: though they have crosses and wants in this life,
yet, is not God their portion? and is it not enough they are provided for in
respect of eternity? and is there any comparison between the afflictions in
this world, and the glory to be revealed?

Grace.] Thus of the matter of their inheritance. The cause follows, and that
is Grace.

Grace is either a gift in us, Grace manifold
or an attribute in God. Sometimes by Grace is meant the gifts God bestows
upon men: and if Grace were so taken, then would be employed this doctrine,
That dead men may have the Grace of God. There may be grace in men without
life: yea, men may have excellent gifts, and yet be not alive spiritually: As
gifts of government from the Spirit of God, as Saul had; and gifts for
edification in the Church: A man may be an excellent Preacher, as Judas was,
and may have the gifts of prophesying and working miracles, as the Reprobates
mentioned, Mat. 7.21. a man may have the gift of knowledge of the Scriptures,
as S. Paul imports, 1. Cor. 8.2. Heb. 6.4. a man may confess his sins, as
Pharaoh and Saul did: a man may be much grieved, and sorrow, and humbled for
his sins, as Abab and Cain; and may repent too as Judas did, and may make a
great profession of true religion, and be very forward, as Demas, and Him^neus,
and Philetus did: a man may be veryzealous for the truth, as John and the
Galathians were: a man may pray and cry hard and often to God, and be heard of
God as the Israelites were in their distresses many times: a man may be of an
unrebukeable conversation amongst men, as Paul was before his conversion; and
such as have sinned may reform their lives in many things, as Herod did:
finally, a man may have faith to believe Gods word, as the Devils do, and to
believe Gods promises, as they that have a temporary faith do after a sort,
and may joy much in the comfort of them, as they concern the godly: and yet in
all these gifts there was no life.

Another point in that sense, is this; That there are gifts of Gods grace
bestowed on the Elect, which are ever accompanied with life, so as their grace
is the grace of life. And both these points should wonderfully awaken all sorts
of Christians, to look about and try their estates: and weak Christians
should diligently study their book of signs of true grace, and mark how the
Scripture proves all those saving graces to be such, as can be found in no
reprobate. But because I think Grace in this place, cannot be taken for the
gifts of grace in men, What is meant here by grace.
I pass from these points. By Grace then here is meant, the glorious attribute
of goodness that is in God, by which he freely shows his love and mercy to
his creature. And that it must be taken in this sense, I gather from the third
of Titus v. 7. where the sentence being like, grace is called there, His Grace;
We are justified by his grace, and made heirs of eternal life.

Now this grace of God, Two ways considered.
as it is in God, I consider of two ways: first, as it is in relation to this
spiritual and eternal life of Gods heirs; and then secondly, as it is in it
self generally considered. In relation to spiritual life, I consider of it,
both in what it excludes, and what it includes.

Grace excludes both Nature and the works of the Law. What is excludes.
It excludes Nature from this life, in three respects: First, in respect of
propagation. This life cannot be propagated by Natural generation: we are not
borne heirs of life, and so the sons of God: we are borne only the sons of
Adam, not of God. They that are borne after the flesh, are not the seed, Romans
9.8. Secondly, in respect of privilege: By nature we are the children of
wrath, and therefore cannot be the children of promise, Ephesians. 2.3. Thirdly, in
respect of the works of Nature: for by Nature we do such works as proclaims
us to be children of disobedience, and children of the Devil; and therefore
cannot be heirs of life, by any works done by Nature since the fall. And as
it excludes Nature, so it excludes the works of the Law; not in respect of the
obedience to the Law, but in respect of the merit of life: so as the
inheritance cannot be had by the work es of the Law. Romans 4.4. and 11.6. nor
can our best works after calling, deserve life and salvation. Tit. 3.7.4, 5.

And on the otherside, What it includes.
the Grace of God includes all things in life, as wholly caused by Gods free
favor to us in Christ. For first, our election to life, is from the mere
grace of God, Ephesians. 1.46. Secondly, the meritorious cause of life is by grace,
Gal. 4.4, 5. Thirdly, the promise of life is by grace, Romans 4.14. Gal. 3.18.
Fourthly, the inchoation of life is from grace, whether we respect Vocation,
Gal. 1.15. or Justification, Tit. 3. 7. Gal. 2. ult. Lastly, in respect of the
consummation of it in the perfection of glory in heaven. Romans 6. ult.

Thus of Grace in relation to Life. In it self, Grace is a most amiable
attribute in God, extending his goodness unto the creature, without respect of
deserts. And that we may the more admire the glorious grace of God, it will be
profitable to give a touch of the fruits of it unto man, upon whom he sets his
favor: for look what men have interest in the grace of God, these things flow
upon them from the beams of that grace.

What privileges follow on such as enjoy Gods grace.
1 God knows them by name. Exodus 33.12.

2 When God is angry with all the world, and about to declare his wrath by
terrible judgments, yet still they find favor in his sight. Genesis 6.8. and
19.19.

3 When they offend, and are sorry for their offenses, and seek for mercy; he
pardons iniquity, and takes them for his inheritance, and repents him of the
evil. Exodus 34.9. Joel 2. 12, 13.

4 He will withhold no good thing from them. Psalm. 84.12. and bestows of his
best gifts upon them liberally, in all sorts of gifts. 1. Cor. 1.4, 5.

5 He will give them any thing they ask of him, without hitting them in the
teeth. Iam. 1.5.

Lastly, we see by this Text, he gives them the inheritance of eternal life,
and all things that belong to life and godliness. 2. Pet. 1.4.

The use should be to teach us many things: as,

1 To celebrate the praise of this graciousnesse of God: seeing God does all
things so freely, he stands upon it greatly to have this glory in his Nature
acknowledged. Psalm. 111.1. and 149.3, 4. Ephesians. 1.6.

2 To acknowledge that all good things we enjoy, either in temporal or
spiritual things, we receive it from his free grace. Psalm. 44.4. Ephesians. 2.8.
for, by the grace of God we are that we are. 1. Cor. 15.10.

3 When we would wish the best good to others, either in public to the
Churches of Christ, or in private at home, or abroad to any that are dear to
us, our cry should be Grace, Grace to them. Zach. 4 7.

4 We should especially be moved to seek this grace of God to our selves, as
the sufficient and the only happiness in the world. Col. 1.6. Now that this
point may the more effectually be understood, I will show you how this grace of
God comes to men; and then what we should strive to be, that we may be sure to
receive the comfort of it, that God is gracious to us. For the first, we must
know, that all grace from God is given to Jesus Christ, and comes by him, John
1.17. and therefore called the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the blessing
at the end of the Epistles. Without Christ, no grace can come to sinful men.
Further we must again know, that the grace of God is extended unto us from
Christ, by the Gospel, that brings the doctrine of it to us: therefore is the
word called the word of his grace, and the Gospel the Gospel of the grace of
God. And yet further we must know, that there must be wrought in us that
supernatural gift of faith, by which only we can be capable to receive this
grace of God: we have our access only by faith, Romans 5.2. Now for the second
point, there are many things God stands upon to find in the persons, that
should receive the comfort of his grace; not for the merit of them, but for the
honor of his own grace, that it be not abused: As first, we see by that
which went before, we must have faith to believe and apply to our selves the
doctrine of Gods grace. Secondly, we must be good men: not such as are men of
wicked devises, or such as make a mock of sin; but such as are careful in
all their ways to avoid what may displease so gracious a God, Prove. 12.2. and
14.9. Tit. 2.11, 12. Thirdly, we must be lowly and humble persons, that
attribute nothing to our selves, but all to Gods goodness, Prove. 3.34. Iam.
4.6. 1. Pet. 5. And therefore it concerns all Christians to take heed, that
they rest not in the hearing of the doctrine of Gods grace, but must labor
truly and effectually to know Gods grace to themselves, Col. 1.6.

5 This doctrine of Gods grace may wonderfully comfort the godly, and establish
their hearts in the assured expectation of Heaven when they die: for nothing
can hinder their comfort and hope herein, but only their unworthiness; and
that is removed by this doctrine of Gods grace: Thus the Apostle says, We
have good hope through grace, 2. These. 2. 16. and again, We have acccesse
unto this grace, by which we stand and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God,
Romans 5.2.

6 It may wonderfully embolden us, in our suites and requests to go to Gods
Throne, seeing it is a Throne of grace, where petitions are granted freely, and
great suits as easily as lesser, Heb. 4.16.

7 Men should be warned to take heed that they do not transgress against this
doctrine of the grace of God. And men sin against the grace of God
fearfully, four ways. First, Men transgress against the grace of God many
ways.
when they frustrate it in the doctrine of it: which they do, partly when they
receive the doctrine of it in vain, and fail of the right knowledge of it, 2.
Cor. 6.1. Hebr. 12. 15. partly when they trust upon the merits of their own
works, Gal. 2. ult. Secondly, when they fall away from grace, either by
relapsing to the world, by entertaining the corruptions they had forsaken, or
by removing the sincere doctrine of Gods grace, Gal. 5.4. Thirdly, when men
turn the grace of God into wantonness, and draw wicked and licentious
conclusions from the pure doctrine of Gods grace, making it a cloak for their
sinful liberties, Iud. 1.4. Romans 6.1. Fourthly, when men despite the Spirit of
grace, that shows it self, either in the power of Gods ordinances, or in the
practice of true Christians, Heb. 10.29.

8 It should be a wonderful comfort to a Christian, against his own
frailties, and daily infirmities; according to that of the Apostle, We are not
under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14, 15.

Lastly, even the more gracious God is, the more careful we should be to
walk worthy of his grace; for, as the Apostle says, The grace of God that
brings salvation unto all men, teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, and to live righteously, and soberly, and religiously in this present
world, Tit. 2.11, 12.

Thus of the third point, viz. the Cause of inheriting. The manner follows,
viz. They inherit together.

Together.] The godly are heirs together: their inheritance lies all together.
Which may appear by reckoning up the particular privileges of the godly, in
which they all meet, and are joint heirs, and fellow heirs, as the Apostle
calls them, Romans 8.17. Ephesians. 3.6. Christians hold their inheritance in
Gavelkinde; I think that is the term the Lawyers give for that tenure, where
all the brethren have the same inheritance divided amongst them, and all alike
heirs. And as they are so in the matter they inherit, so in the manner of
coming to their right: for they are all the children of God, and children by
Adoption, and not by natural generation; so Christ only is Gods heir.

Now that it may distinctly appear, that they are heirs together, I will
number some particulars: as,

1 They have all the same father, Godly men and women are heirs together many
ways.
Ephesians. 4.6. who is in them all.

2 They are all of the same body, viz. members of the mystical body of Christ,
Ephesians. 3.6.

3 They have all one spirit, Ephesians. 4.3.4.

4 They wear all the same apparel, being clothed with the same
righteousness of Christ, Gal, 3.27, 28.

5 They wear all the same livery, and badge of distinction; they have all one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4.6.

6 They are all fed with the same commons at the Lords Table; the bread is the
communion of the body of Christ, and so the wine of his blood: I say communion,
because all partake of it, 1. Cor. 10.16, 17.

7 They have all the same gifts: for though in outward administrations and
callings there be difference, and in natural endowments, and in common graces:
yet in the gifts of saving grace they have all a part of all gifts, and differ
only in the measure; as they have but one faith, and one hope: And so in all
other saving graces, Ephesians. 4.5, 4. 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5. 7. Romans ^.2.

8 They have all the same promises, Ephesians. 3.6.

9 They have all the same or the like attendants, viz. the Angels of heaven,
Heb. 1.13.

10 They are governed by the same laws; have all one Lord, Ephesians. 4.5. and have
all the same way to heaven, which is by Christ* and have all interest in the
Teachers of the Word of Christ their Lord, 1. Cor. 3.22.

11 They shall have all the same glory after this life; for the inheritance of
them all is immortal, and undefiled, and without end, 1. Pet. 1.4.

12 They shall hold their glory in the same place, after this life, viz. in
heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4.

The use of this should be greatly for the comfort of weak and poor
Christians; for, though they differ from other men in outward calling, or the
measure of gifts, yet they are, in the substance of the inheritance, provided
for, as well as the greatest Kings, or Prophets, or Apostles. And besides, it
should teach the brethren of higher degree, to carry themselves with all
humility toward their poor brethren: and it should teach all Christians to
love as brethren; to be courteous and tender hearted one toward another: as
follows in the next Verse of this Chapter. Thus of the fourth point.

5 The fifth point is concerning the persons that do inherit, and so the
coherence shows, That both sex are capable of inheriting; women as well as
men, wives as well as husbands. God is no respecter of persons, but in all
conditions of people, such as fear him, and believe in Christ, and work
righteousness, are accepted and adopted of him, as these places show, Act.
10.35. Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11. And this should teach all Christians, not to have
the glorious faith of Christ in respect of persons, Iam. 2.1, 2. And in
particular, such husbands as have religious wives, should make the more account
of them: though God has made them inferior to them in outward condition, yet
he has made them equal in the inheritance of life.

Lest prayer be interrupted.] Hitherto of the second reason to persuade
husbands to make conscience of their duty toward their wives. The third
reason is taken from the ill effect, if it be not done, and that is, that Gods
service (and in particular, prayer) will be hindered; and that diverse ways:
First, if he dwell not with her, prayer in the family is like to be omitted, it
being his work, as the head of the family, to perform that duty, and to see
that his household serve God with him, Josh. 24.14. And if he carry not
himself as a man of knowledge, there may arise such dis^ord amongst them, that
they will have no mind either to pray together, or one for another, at least,
their passions will tempt them many times to omit prayer: and if he give not
honor, but despise her, he will have no heart to pray for her whom he
contemnes.

There are many observations may be gathered out of these words: as,

Doct. 1. Prayer is a part of Gods service, that is necessarily required, and
not left arbitrary for men to do, or not to do it, Psalm. 105.1. 1. These.
5.17. Mat. 7.7. Romans 12.12. Ephesians. 6.18. Col..4 2.

Doct. 2. The exercise of prayer is not only a part of Gods service, The
excellency of prayer appears in many respects.
but it is an excellent part, a chief part, that which much excells. Which may
appear: First, by the nature of it: It is an exercise, in which a mortal
creature talks with the immortal Creator. Secondly, by the antiquity of it:
It is an exercise that godly men have be taken themselves to with great
devotion, from the first times of the world, Genesis 4 26. and 21, 33. Thirdly, by
the efficient cause of it: God poures out his own Spirit upon his people, of
purpose to make them able to pray; and therefore is called, The Spirit of
prayer, Zach. 12.11. Joel 2.28. Romans 8.26. Fourthly, because they are things so
precious, as Christ takes them, and presents them to God, covering our
imperfections, and making them acceptable, Rev. 8.3. Fifthly, by the great
privileges this exercise enjoyes. For fir st, God is greatly delighted in it,
Pro. 15.8. and therefore one of his titles is, that he is a God that hears
prayer, Psalm. 65.1. and hears with great attention: his ears are open, Psalm.
34.15. and will not despise prayer, for the infirmities of his servants, Psalm.
102.17. nor reproach them, Iam. 1.5. Secondly, any man of any condition, that
has an honest heart, may be regarded with God in prayer, Mar. 7.7. Luke
11.10. Thirdly, whatsoever is asked, is obtained; which is an unspeakeable
benefit, Mark. 11.24. Psalm. 85.5. Lastly, God has promised salvation to all
them that call upon his name, Joel 2. ult. And this point should be a great
encouragement to all true Christians, to be much in prayer, and to resist all
dullness in themselves, or temptations and objections against the exercise of
prayer.

Doct. 3 Prayer is a duty required of private Christians, as well as of
learned men, or Ministers. Husbands and wives are supposed to practice this
duty of prayer. Hence it is, that where we read of any commandment to pray in
Scripture, usually it is as large as any of the ten Commandments, even such as
binds all persons to the performance of it: which should serve greatly to
show the profaneness of most families that have no prayer. A family without
prayer, and the exercises of religion in it, is a very den of wild beasts,
and a cage of impure birds: and the wrath of God hangs over those families that
have not prayer used in them; as these places show. Psalm. 79.6. Zeph. 3.1, 2.
Dan. 9.13. Ezech. 22.30.

Doct. 4. Yea, in that he takes for granted, that christian husbands and wives
did pray; only admonishes, that they look to it that their prayer be not
interrupted, it shows, That every godly Christian can pray, and does make
conscience of it to do it, Psalm. 32.6. for every Christian, that is a true
Christian, has the spirit of Adoption, by which he cries, Abba, Father, Romans
8.16. And it is made a sign of a wicked man, not to call upon the name of the
Lord, Psalm. 14.4.

Doct. 5 In that prayer may not be interrupted or hindered, it shows plainly,
That this is an exercise for every day constantly, while we live in this world;
which these places confirm, 1. These. 5.17. Col. 4.2. Romans 12.12. Psalm. 105.4.
praying by fits will not serve turn.

Doct. 6. Wives and husbands, though they had never so many praises otherways,
or for their carriage one toward another; yet if they be not religious
persons, and in particular, such as serve God by daily and devoute prayer, they
are not true Christians, nor accepted of God. The Apostle takes it for granted,
that all christian men and women, do make conscience of daily prayer to God.
Which serves notably to confute the vain trust in civil honesty, and the
fairness of domestical conversation, which bewitcheth many persons in the
world.

Doct. 7. When the heart is not right toward man, it is not right toward God:
as here domestical disorders hinders the exercises of Religion toward God.
That husband that loves not his wife, has no great mind to pray. Wives that
make no conscience to live quietly and obediently with their husbands, suffer a
like alienation from God, both in their ability to serve him, and in his
acceptance of it.

Doct. 8. In that he says your Prayers, it shows, That every Christian must
make prayers of his own. As the just man lives by his own faith, so must the
true Christian think of getting his living under God, by his own prayers.
It Is not enough that he partake of other men's prayers in public, or that he
can get others to pray for him in private; God looks for prayers from himself.

Doct. 9. In that he says prayers, it imports, That there be diverse kinds
of prayer, and that private Christians must make not only a prayer, but prayers
to God. Ephesians. 6.18. Phil. 4. 6. Col. 4.2. The sorts of prayer, and
differences, arise,

1 From the instrument by which it is formed: From whence the sorts and
difference of Prayer does arise.
for there is the prayer of the heart only; such was Hannah her prayer, 1 Samuel
1. There is a prayer of the mouth only; such is the prayer of Hypocrites, Esa.
29.13. There is the prayer both of heart and mouth; and such is the prayer
ordinarily of all the godly.

2 From the place of prayer: some prayers are public, some private; and a
Christian must use both: Some are alone, some with others.

3 From the form; and so we have the prayer of Christ, as the pattern and rule
for all prayers, and the prayers of Christians agreeable to that pattern. We
must not rest upon saying over the words of the Lords prayer, and neglect all
other prayers. Again, some prayer is conceived, some is in a set form used. A
set form is fittest for the public, and for such weak Christians as are not
yet able to express their own desire to God in their own words: nor are
conceived forms unfit or unlawful for such as are able and desirous to
perform prayer according to the rules of prayer; as is apparent by the
examples of all sorts of prayers in both Testaments.

4 From the object of prayer; and so some prayers are made daily at set times:
and thence it was that the Church of the Jews had their hours of prayer, Act.
3.1. and some are uttered suddenly, according to some special occasion. And of
this sort are ejaculations, short petitions put up to God expressing the
present motion in the heart.

Doct. 10. It is a great loss or inconvenience to have our prayers
interrupted. This is plain from the Text. And there may be many reasons
assigned of it; I will instance but one or two: first, because for that time a
man is thrust out of the presence of the King of heaven: To pray, is to stand
before his face. Secondly, because while prayer stands still, our spiritual
trade stands still: while we pray not, we thrive not. Thirdly, if it were
nothing else but the respect of others, it must needs be a great inconvenience
to omit prayer; because thereby we withdraw our aids from the Church: and that
is as bad as in evil times of war, to withdraw our succors from the house
of Israel.

Quest. But how many ways can prayer be interrupted?

Answ. Prayer may be interrupted either in heaven, or in earth; either in the
hearing of it, or in the making of it.

Prayer is interrupted in the hearing of it, or God will not hear prayer,
Prayer may be hindered seven ways in the bearing of it.


1 If the person making it lie in any sin, without repentance, Prove 15.8.
Isa. 59.2. Lam. 3.44. Psalm. 66.18. 2. Tim. 2.19. 1. John 3.22.

2 If it be not made in faith, that is, if we believe not that we shall have
what we ask. Matthew. 11.24. Iam. 1.6.

3 If not made in the name of Christ. John 16.23.

4 If it be made carelessly and coldly; if a man's head be full of distractions,
so as he regards uot what he prays, he is not likely to be heard: for how
shall God hear him, when he hears not himself? and how shall God heed what
he says, when he heeds not what he says himself?

5 If a man ask amiss, that is, ask for carnal and corrupt ends. Iam. 4.3.

6 If a man be not in charity with his neighbor, and will not forgive him his
trespass. Matt. 6 14.

7 If a man be unmercifull, and will not hear the cries of the poor. Esa.
58.7. Prove. 21.13.

How it is interrupted in the making of it.
Thus prayer is interrupted in the hearing of it.

Prayer is interrupted in the making of it, when men are indisposed to prayer,
and so omit the performance: and thus prayer is interrupted;

Sometimes by the violence of worldly cares, and business; the heart of man
being overcharged with these cares of life.

Sometimes by domestical discords, and private passions; which it seems the
Apostle especially means in this place.

Sometimes by the love and lust after some particular sin: for while men's
hearts run after sin, they have no mind to pray.

The use may be, to reprove two sorts of men in special, besides those
mentioned before.

1 Such as pray not at all. Is it such an evil to omit prayer for a time? what
is it then not to pray at all?

2 Diverse weak Christians are to be warned about fainting or discouragement
in praying: they interrupt themselves with their own fears, and objections:
as for instance.

Ob. I find so much hardness of heart and insensiblenesse, and therefore I
dare not pray.

Sol. David himself in the beginning of many of his Psalms, expresses a kind
of want of feeling, and yet before he has done he is full of life. Besides,
hardness of heart felt and mourned for, is no hinderance to the success of
prayer. And further, for this reason thou have more need to pray: for prayer is
like a fire to melt the leaden heart of man.

Ob. I want words, I know not what to say when I come to pray.

Sol. Pray for that very thing; that God that commands thee to take unto thee
words, Hos. 14.2. would himself give them to thee. Secondly, the Spirit helps
our infirmities, when we know not what to pray as we ought, Romans 8.16. Thirdly,
we serve such a God as will hear us, if like little children we can but name
the name of our heavenly Father. Romans 8.15. 2. Tim. 2.19.

Ob. But I am afraid God will not regard what I say to him.

Ans. Consider first the nature of God; he loves to hear prayer, Psalm. 95.1.
then think of the commandment of God, who in so many Scriptures, does so
peremptorily enjoyne us to pray to him: and thirdly, think of the many
promises he has made unto such as do call upon his name, and then thou have
no reason to doubt of audience, if thou bring lawful petitions, and an honest
heart.

Ob. But I have prayed, and I find no success.

Sol. God sometimes seems not to hear, of purpose to make us the more
importunate, Luke 18.1. etc. Again, God may hear us, and not grant what we
ask, but something that is better for us: as he heard Christ, Heb. 5. and
Paul, 2. Cor. 12.8, 9.

Verse. 8. Finally, be ye all of one mind: one suffer with another: love as
brethren: be pitiful: be courteous.
HItherto of the general exhortation to all Christians, and the special
exhortation to subjects, servants, wives, and husbands. Now follows the third
part of my division, which I made when I entreated of Verse. 3. of Chapter the
first, viz. matter of dehortation. For I conceive, that the Apostle in the rest
of this Chapter does secretly entend to dehort Christians from impaciency,
under the troubles may befall them in this life.

Where he proceeds in this order: First, he strives to show them the best
course to avoid trouble, as much as in them lies, from Verse. 8. to 14.
Secondly, he shows them how to avoid impatiency, if trouble do come, from
Verse 14. to the end of the Chapter.

About the avoiding of troubles, he gives both Rules and Reasons: Rules Verse
8, 9. Reasons Verse 9. to 14.

The Rules show us how we must carry our selves, both toward the good, Verse
8. and toward the bad, Verse 9. And to strengthen those Rules, especially the
latter of them, he gives three strong reasons: one taken from the state and
condition of the true Christian, Verse 9. the other taken from a prophetical
testimony: where he shows what the Prophet David's opinion was long since,
Verse. 10, 11, 12. the third taken from the profitable effect, or event of such
a course, Verse. 13. About avoiding of impatiency if trouble do come, he,
proceeds in the like order: For first, he gives Rules, Verse. 14, 15, 16. then
Reasons, Verse. 17. to the end of the Chapter. In giving Rules, he shows them
what to think on, Verse. 14. and what to do, both toward themselves, Verse.
14. and toward God, Verse. 15. and toward other men, Ver. 16. In general, if
we mark the whole frame, and the Apostles order, we may observe diverse
things: as,

1 That troubles are not to be desired: for the Apostle shows how to avoid
them. Which is to be noted, to confute those weak Christians, that long for
that which they call persecution.

2 That a man may be a good Christian, and yet not be much opposed outwardly:
which blames those that dislike t^eir own estate, or censure the estate of
others, because they are not afflicted or persecuted as other men.

3 Yea, it is the duty of every Christian, to look carefully to his
conversation; and to strive by the use of all good means, to avoid
unquietness and trouble in the world. Romans 12.19. Amos 5.12. 1. Tim. 2.2, 3.

4 That some Christians may carry themselves with great discretion, humility,
piety, and inoffensivenesse, and yet cannot avoid trouble, but shall suffer
from the world.

5 That impatiency and disquietnesse in the time of trouble, is a very
dishonorable vice in a Christian, and with great care, and all possible
endeavor to be avoided.

6 That it is possible for a Christian to attain to that degree of goodness,
as to be able to express great patience, and unmoveablenesse, though many and
great troubles befall them; if they will use the medicines prescribed in Gods
word, and follow such directions as the Apostle here gives. Thus of the
general doctrines.

In this eight Verse the Apostle gives rules, that show a way how to avoid
trouble; and they are rules that concern our conversation with godly
Christians, and so he shows, that there are five things that are of singular
use, to preserve a man from unquietness and trouble if it may be: Five things
of singular use to* keep us quiet in trouble.
as,

1 To agree in opinion, to be all of one mind; for many discords and much
unquietness, and sometimes public troubles arise from singularity and
diversity in opinions.

2 To be compassionate and like affected, when other men are in trouble: for,
as this is amiable amongst men, so many times it mooyes the Lord to keep us
from trouble, because we are tenderly affected toward other men in their
troubles.

3 To love our brethren: for that both shows us to the world to be the true
Disciples of Christ, Ioh. 13. and besides, by the quality of brotherly love, a
world of discord and trouble is prevented.

4 To be pitiful, or as it is in the original, to be well bowelled, in
respect of mercy, to have right bowels of mercy, in comforting and relieving
such as are in distress; for to the merciful God will show mercy, and if it
be good for them, even this mercy of living a quiet life.

5 To be courteous: for a courteous and loving behavior, prevents suspicion,
and quenches much fire of discord, that otherways would break out, and winnes
much affection both in good and bad.

Be ye all of one mind.] Diverse things may be here observed.

The first is general to the whole Verse, and that is, That in this World, in
the best estate of the Church, there are many defects and disagreements, and
faults in the carriage or judgments of Christians in their living together.

The earnestness of the Apostle, in heaping up these directions, imports, that
he discerned many things amiss: which was not only true of the Churches of
Corinth and Galatia, and Thessalonica, but even of the Church of Philippi,
which S. Paul most commends. And the like we may find in the estate of the
seven churches of Asia, if we mark what is said to them by S. John in his
Revelation. Yea, there was not perfect agreement at all times amongst the
Pillars of the first Christian Churches; Paul and Barnabas were at variance,
Act. 15. 39. and Paul and Peter did openly disagree, Gal. 2. The reason is,
because in this life we know but in part, and are sanctified but in part, 1.
Cor. 13. The use should be, First, to teach us not to be offended or
scandalized at the differences of opinion, that break out in all the Churches
of Christ every where in our times. We must pray the God of peace, to give us
peace, and know, that it hath' always been so; and therefore it should not
hinder us from embracing the known truth. Secondly, this should the more
inflame our desires after heaven, and make us the more willing to die, because
there will never be perfect holiness and agreement till we come to heaven;
then we shall be holy as God is holy, and know as we are known; and charity
will be perfect for ever. And besides, this should teach us with the more
patience to instruct and wait for the amendment of such as are contrary
minded; and not strive over violently, or passionately with them, 2. Tim. 2.25.
Lastly, if Christians can agree no better, and have such defects, then we
should never wonder overmuch at the monstrous abominations in opinion or life,
that are found amongst the wicked of the world, and in false Churches.

A second Doctrine I observe from hence, is, That we ought to be rightly
ordered in our minds, as well as any other part of our souls or lives. Yea,
the mind is to be looked to in the first place: Hence it is, that in our
regeneration, our minds are especially renewed, Romans 12.2. and God requires to
be served with our minds, Mat. 22.37. Yea, as God is an eternal mind, so
the service of the mind is most proper for God. And besides, our minds give
laws to our lives; and therefore if the mind be not good, the life must needs
be evil. The happiness of the whole man depends upon the mind; Note.
and therefore the Apostle reckons the impurity of the mind and conscience, to
be the worst impurity can befall a man, Tit. 1.15. and the same Apostle makes
it a sign of a man whose end is damnation, to have his mind taken up, and
wholly bent to earthly things, Phil. 3.19. This point may serve, first, to show
the woeful estate of such persons, as have ill and unsound minds. And the
mind is unsound, when it is corrupt or putrified with ill opinions concerning
either faith or manners, 2. Tim. 3.8. 1. Cor. 11.3. and when it is blinded with
ignorance, 2. Cor. 4.4, ^. for without knowledge the mind cannot be good,
Prove. 19.2. and it is a divellish mischief to have darkness in our minds,
as that place in the Corinth. shows. The mind is also unfound, and in woeful
taking, when it is taken up with vile thoughts and contemplative wickedness,
Romans 1.21. Ephesians. 4.17. and when men have double minds, Iam. 4.7. or wavering
minds, Iam. 1.7. And therefore one of the highest curses God inflicts upon men
with whom he is angry, is to plague them in their minds, either with a
reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. or with a desperate mind. Secondly, this Doctrine
shows, what harmefull creatures deceivers of minds are: they do more
mischief, than such as deceive men in their estates, or poison men's bodies,
Tit. 1.10. Thirdly, this should teach all careful Christians, to gird up the
loins of their minds, 1. Pet. 1.13. and to labor to get a sound mind, 2.
Tim. 1.7. and in particular, to get the unity of mind which the Apostle here
requires. And so I come to the third point.

The third Doctrine then, which I observe out of these words, is, That all true
Christians are bound in a special manner, to strive to be all of one mind;
which in this place is meant of unity and agreement in judgment, and matter of
belief in the points of Religion. This is urged in diverse Scriptures, as 1.
Cor. 1.10. 2. Cor. 13.11. Phil. 2.2. Romans 15. 5. and this was the great glory
of the first christian Church, that all the multitude were of one heart and one
soul, Act. 4. 32. There are many reasons to persuade us hereunto.

For what reason we ought to be all of one mind.
1 From the nature of this agreement; It is as it were one of the bonds of the
mystical union: for though it be not the principal one, for that is the
Spirit of Christ, yet it is a special one; it is like the veins and sinews
which tie the body together: to break this unity, is to cut asunder the very
veins and sinews of the mystical body of Christ, 1. Cor. 1.10.

2 From the equity and comeliness of it. We have but one God, one Father, one
Baptism, one Spirit, one Hope, and therefore should have but one Faith, Ephesians.
4.4.3.5.

3 From the good effects of this unity: for first, it will make us the fitter
to praise God, and do him service with the greater encouragement and comfort,
as we may see, Romans 15.5. Secondly, it will make us ever eat our meat with
more gladness, and singleness, and quietness of heart, Act. 2.46. Thirdly,
it will win us the more favor and honor amongst the people, as we read in
the example of those first Christians, Act. 2.47. yea in the end of that verse
we may gather, that it is a great advantage for the conversion of others, when
they see us agree so well together: and further, it will be a singular joy to
our Teachers, to see us agree and to be all of one mind, and to serve God with
one shoulder, as the Prophet Zephany speaks. Phil. 2.2. yea, it will be a
sign to us that we are true Christians, and have found true comfort in Christ,
and in brotherly love, and that we have fellowship by the Spirit in the body of
Christ, and that we have right bowels and mercy unto others. Phil. 2.1, 2.

4 From the ill effects of dissenting. Two of them may be gathered from the
coherence in this place: for first, it is employed, That if Christians agree not
in opinions, they will hardly practice the four other virtues here named,
toward the persons with whom they dissent: they will not love them as brethren
heartily, nor be so pitiful to them in distress, nor so merciful to help
them if they be in need, nor so courteous and kind to them. Secondly, if this
first rule be transgressed, it is very probable they will bring trouble upon
themselves: and that either in their consciences, or in their estates. It may
be observed, that all the while a man is in contention about his diverse or
strange opinions, in which he dissents, he is not so quiet in himself, nor
enjoyes not firm rest and peace in his own heart and conscience. And
experience shows, that many both Ministers and private Christians, have
brought a great deal of trouble upon their estates by dissenting. Now, out of
other Scriptures we may observe diverse other ill effects of diversities in
opinions: as first, it breeds confusion in the Church; as the Apostle shows,
^. Cor. 14.32, 33. Secondly, it breeds division and schism, 1. Cor. 1.10.
When men begin to broach new opinions, Schisms begins in the root of it,
though it may be a long time before it come to the full growth. Thirdly, it
much disquieteth the hearts and heads of many weak Christians; in which
respect Paul wished they were cut off that troubled the Galathians, chap. 5.
Fourthly, it not only troubles Christians, but many times works still in them,
as it proves the subverting of their souls; as the Apostles show in the case
of difference about the ceremonial Law, Act. 15.24. Ehes. 4.14. 2. Tim. 2.14,
16, 17. Fifthly, it drives men many times into diverse acts of hypocrisy, or
passion, or pride, or such vices as are contrary to singleness of heart. Acts
2.46. Sixthly, it breeds many times strange censuring; the authors of new
opinions censuring of others, as if because they received not their doctrine,
they were not spiritual enough, but too carnally minded, and that they were
far behind them in knowledge, as we may gather, 1. Cor. 14.36, 37. Thus the
false Teachers vilified Saint Paul and the Apostles.

Thus of the motives to unity in judgment. Before I come to the use, I must
put you in mind of a limitation that concerns this doctrine. We must be of
one mind, but then it must be according to Christ Jesus, Romans 15.5. that is,
this consent in judgment must be in the truth, and in such truth especially as
may further the edification of the mystical body of Christ: else agreement in
judgment, is a conspiracy rather than unity.

The use may be both for instruction and reproof: for instruction, and so we
should all be affected with a great estimation of unity in judgment, and
strive by all means to attain to it, and keep our selves so all of us, that
we do live in unity with the Church of God. Now that we may do thus,

Helps unto unity of mind.
1 We should beseech the God of patience and consolation, to give us to be like
minded, even to work in us the unity he requires of us. Romans 15 5.

2 Pet. 1. ult.
2 We must take heed of private interpretations: Men should with much fear and
jelousie, hear or read of such opinions or interpretations of Stripture, as
have no authors but some one or few men. Of such authors of doctrines. we
should say with the Apostle, What, came the word of God out from you? or came
it unto you only? 2. Cor. 14.36. Especially, men must take heed of receiving
opinions from mere private persons, that are not Ministers of Gospel: for I
suppose it cannot be showed from any place of Scripture, that ever any truth
was revealed to or by a private man, that was unknown to all the Teachers of
the Church: yea, if the authors of diverse and strange doctrines be Ministers,
yet that rule of the Apostle should hold, that the spirits of the Prophets
should be subject to the Prophets. Such doctrines as may not be approved by the
grave and godly learned that are eminent in the Church, must not be broached.
1. Cor. 14.32. And this rule has one thing more in it, viz. that men should
not express difference of opinion, without open and manifest Scripture: Avoid
doubtful disputations, Romans 14.1. Esa. 8.

3 A great respect must be had to the Churches peace; so as such doctrines as
are likely to breed either scandal or division in the Church, are either not
to be received, or not uttered, except in some special case. Yea, moderate
Christians that make conscience of unity, should hold themselves in conscience
bound to be afraid to depart from the judgment of the Church in which they
live, unless it be when doctrine is brought in with great demonstration to
the Conscience: To preserve the unity of the spirit, we must have great respect
to the bond of peace, Romans 14.19. 1. Cor. 14.33. Ephesians. 4.3. We must greatly
reverence the form of doctrine in the Church where we live, Romans 6.17.

4 That we may be of one mind, every Christian must be sure to know the truth
which is given to the Churches, and to make himself fully persuaded in his
mind, about such truths as are fundamentally necessary to salvation, 2. Tim.
1.13.

5 Private Christians in receiving opinions, should have great respect unto
such Teachers as have been their fathers in Christ; God has bound them to a
special reverence toward them: which they should show by reverencing their
judgments more than any other men, in meet comparison, 1. Cor. 4.15.16. and
11.1.2.4.5. Phil. 3.15.17.

6 To preserve a further unity, it should be the care of such as have gifts of
knowledge and utterance, to help forwards such as are weak in judgment, and
to comfort the feeble minded, left they being neglected, become a prey to
deceivers of minds, 1. These. 5.14. and to warn such as are not of the same
mind, Philip. chap. 4.

Lastly, we should mark such as cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which we have learned, and avoid them, Romans 16.17, 18.

The second use may be for the reproof of multitudes of Christians in all
places, that offend greatly against this Doctrine, by their dissenting in
opinions, without due respect of the former rules. There is almost no
Congregation in the kingdom, but is disquieted with this sin: yea, many
times the glory of such as profess religion, is greatly obscured by this
sin, and the sincerity of religion much exposed to contempt, and the profane
reproach of the wicked. And this sin is the greater,

Aggravations against discord in opinion.
1 When men not only bring in new opinions, but also bring them in with an
opinion that they are more holy, and more spiritual than such as receive them
not, or resist them, 1. Cor. 14.37.

2 When the opinions are merely new, and unheard of before in the Christian
world.

3 When they are brought in by private persons, that go from house to house,
to infer upon others the singularity of their conceits.

4 When themselves are doubtful inwardly of the truth of what they affirm,
and are not fully persuaded, but doubt both ways, and yet take to that side
that differs from the general judgment of the Churches, Romans 14.5. 1. Tim.
1.6.7.

5 When men urge their dissenting so violently, that a Schism is made in the
Church, or Christians are divided from the exercise of brotherly love, and
mutual fellowship, 1. Cor. 1.10.11.

6 When men are vain talkers, and will have all the words, and by their good
wills will talk of nothing else, and so hinder edification in profitable
doctrine, and such as is out of question, Tit. 1.10, 11. and when men lust to
be contentious, and are like Salamanders that live always in the fire, and
know no zeal without contention, 1. Cor. 11.16.

7 When men differ in judgment, in the very points of foundation; and err
against such truths as must be believed to salvation.

8 If men be so light headed, and variable, that they are tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine; sometimes of one opinion, and
shortly after of another: especially when men are so new fangled, as in every
place to receive almost any doctrine that is new and diverse, Ephesians. 4.14.

9 When men quarrel so earnestly about things of less moment, contrary to the
custom of the Churches; as about praying, or prophesying bare or covered; or
about eating the Sacrament full or fasting, 1. Cor. 11. or about such
indifferent things as may be used or not used, with Christian liberty, Romans 14.
or about Genealogies, 1. Tim. 1.4. and such like. And that this reproof may
enter the more deeply upon the hearts of some Christians, it will be
profitable to consider of the ill causes of dissenting: which are these, and
such like.

1 Ignorance of the Scripture: Many are the ill causes of dissenting.
if they had more true knowledge they would not disagree: And this ignorance,
(yea, sometimes palpable ignorance) may be found in some that think themselves
to have more knowledge, and to be more spiritual than a multitude of those
from whom they disagree, Mat. 22.1. Tim. 1.7, 6. 1. Cor. 14.37, 38.

2 Want of love to those sound truths that more concern sanctification,
causes God in his justice sometimes to give men up to delusions, and to
believe lies, 2. These. 2.

3 Vain glory: the very desire to be somebody, and to excel others, makes
some Christians gladly to receive, or bring in different opinions, 1. Cor. 4.8.
Phil. 2.3. Gal. 5.26.

4 Over much trust upon the judgments of some men they esteem, when they
respect some Ministers so much as to be of their opinion, though their
consciences be not informed of any sound reason from the word of God for it.
This estimation of men above that is written, has deceived many, 1. Cor. 3.21.
and 4.6.

5 Respect of earthly things. Some men teach and profess to hold opinions of
dissenting, sometimes merely for advantage to their estates, either to get
maintenance or preferment in the world by it, Tit. 1.10.11. Romans 16.19, 20.

6 Prejudice is the root of dissenting many times: as the Gentiles would not
abide yielding to ceremonies, out of very dislike of the Jews; and the Jews
would not understand the needlesnesse of their ceremonies, out of very contempt
of the Gentiles: and so the strength of faction on both sides kept them from
agreeing.

7 Heaping up of Teachers disorderly: when Christians are so diseased with
humor, and so hard to be pleased with sound doctrine, that they hunt up and
down to hear all sorts of men; it many times prooves hurtful in this
respect, that they get infection from the different humors of the many
Teachers they hear. Disordered hearing in this respect, breeds as a surfeit of
the inward regard of sound doctrine, so a great aptness to receive diverse and
strange doctrines, 2. Tim. 4.3, 4.

8 The contempt of their godly Teachers, and want of sound affection to them:
To them I say, that have a charge over their souls, whom they ought to obey.
And this is the more vile, as some Christians order the matter, because of
their hypocrisy, in magnifying the judgment or gifts of Teachers that are
absent, and have not the charge of their souls, and abusing the due respect of
their own Teachers: which is yet more vile, if this injury be done to such as
were their fathers in Christ. Thus of the use for reproof.

By the limitation given before from other express Scriptures, we learn so
to understand this doctrine of unity, as it excludes all unity of opinion or
practice with such Churches, or particular persons, as hold doctrines against
the foundation of Christian religion; so as we must never agree with them. As
for instance; We may not, without the damnation of our souls, be of one mind
with the Church of Rome: for there are many things which they believe and
practice, which we must in no case join with them in; and it is impossible to
reconcile us to them, unless they change their minds. I will instance indivers
things, wherein we cannot, without losing Christ, be of one mind: as,

1 In opinion of merit of works: for thereby we make the Gospel or Doctrine
of Gods grace of none effect, In what things we may not be of one mind with
the Church of Rome.
and the promise of God void; which is to deny the very grounds of Christian
Religion. Gal. 5.3. Romans 4.14. and 11.6.

2 In the opinion of worshipping Saints and Angels: for the Apostle says
expressly, that they that do so, hold not the head, and so cannot be true
members of Christ. Col. 2.18, 19.

3 In their Polatry, in making and worshipping of Images, and almost infinite
superstitions, contrary to the second Commandment expressly; and so as we
are commanded to get out of this spiritual Babel, in respect of her spiritual
fornications.

4 In their doctrine of Traditions: for they teach, that Traditions that are
not agreeable to Scripture, yet are to be received, if they be delivered by the
Church, in equal authority with the Scriptures. If we be of one mind with
them herein, we cannot escape Gods eternal curse; as these Scriptures show.
Gal 1.8. Rev. 22 18.

5 In their doctrine of perfection: for they teach, a man may perfectly keep
the Law of God. No, this is so dangerous an error, that the Apostle says
there is no truth in the man that holds it. 1. John 1.8, 10.

I omit the rehearsal of other differences. Thus of the first virtue.

The second virtue charge upon Christians, is compassion one toward another.

Have compassion one of another.] The word signifies such a fellow-feeling or
sympathy, that makes us like affected, as if we were in their case.

The doctrine then is clear, That we ought to have a sympathy one toward
another; this is a singular virtue. In handling of which point, I will observe
these things.

1 The Proofs of it from other Scripture.

2 The Explication of the sense, showing in what things we should be like
affected.

3 The Reasons of it.

4 The Uses.

1 The Proofs are very pregnant, and full in these other Scriptures, Romans
12.4, 15. Heb. 13.3.

2 For the Explication, this sympathy is to be expressed, both in the case of the
evils of others, and in the case of the good of others. Wherein we express
our compassion.
In the case of the evils of others, we ought to be tenderly affected toward
them; both in respect of their sufferings, troubles, griefs, and crosses. Heb.
13.3. and 10.34. Ioh 30.25. whether they be inward or outward: as also in
respect of their falling by infirmities, when it proves a grief and affliction
to them, Gal. 6.1, Jude 22.2. Cor. 11.29. So likewise in the case of the
prosperity of others: we ought to rejoice with them that rejoice, and be
affected as if the blessing had been ours. Romans 12.15.

The motives or reasons to persuade us to it.
3 The Reasons are manifest. First, because hereby we prove our selves to be
fellow members in the mystical body of Christ; which is to be doubted, if this
sympathy be not in us in some measure, 1. Cor. 12.12, 25, 26. Secondly, because
hereby we show our selves conformable and like to Christ our Head, who
excelled in this virtue, Heb. 4.15. Mat. 25.40. Thirdly, because that which is
the case of others now, may be our case hereafter; as the Apostle shows in
the case of temptation, Gal. 6 1. Fourthly, a reason may be drawn from the
excellency of the grace; It excells alms and outward works of mercy: for when
a man gives an alms, he gives somewhat without himself; but when we show
compassion, we relieve another by somewhat that is within our selves, and from
our selves. And lastly, the coherence shows, that this may be a means to
keep us from trouble our selves.

The use may be, first, to import the misery of living in this world. This
life must needs be a vale of tears, when we have not only occasion of sorrow
many ways for our own estates, but also such variety of occasions of sorrow,
from the condition of others dear unto us. Neither is our case the better, but
the worse, if we do not sorrow with others.

Secondly, this may greatly humble all sorts of men for their Apathie, or want
of care, or feeling, or sympathy in the distresses of others: and the rather
now, when whole Churches are in great distress, Amos 6.6.

Thirdly, this should greatly move true Christians to strive after this virtue,
and to express it lively, and show it forth in all the fruits of it: as first,
by declaring our affection to the afflicted, with all tenderness of heart, and
words of comfort: secondly, by using all our means and power to relieve them,
and help them out of distress: thirdly, by pouring out our souls before God
for them.

Love as brethren.] This is the third duty charged upon them, viz. the
exercise of brotherly love. This is vehemently urged in many Scriptures. Romans
12.10. Heb. 13.1. Ioh. 13.34. 1. Ioh. 2.7. and 4.21. Now for the explication of
this doctrine, four things would be distinctly considered of, viz.

1 Who are brethren.

2 What privilege they have by the brotherhood, or by being brethren.

3 For what reasons we should so love them.

4 With what kind of love we should love them.

For the first; Men become brethren one to another many ways: Who are
brethren.
as first by propagation, when they are borne of the same blood, and so the
children of the same parents are brethren: and in a remoter sense, kinsmen of
the same blood are brethren, Luke 8.19.

Secondly, by Nation: when men are countrymen, they are called brethren,
especially when they descend originally from the fountain of the same ancient
families; and so the people of the twelve Tribes were brethren, Exodus 2.11.

Thirdly, by profession; especially the profession of Religion makes all
professors brethren, Act. 11.1. and 1.16. And this was one of the first titles
of love and relation in the Christian world.

Fourthly, communion with Christ; and so we become brethren either by his
incarnation, Heb. 2.16, 17. or in respect of our mystical union with him in his
mystical body, Col. 1.2. Matthew. 25.40. And so we are brethren with the
Angels, as they also are joined under this head Christ Jesus, Rev. 19.10. and
22. So then if any ask who are the brethren here meant, that we must so love?
I answer, they are such as are professors with us of the same religion, and
fellow members of the body of Christ. But that we may more plainly see, who are
meant by brethren in the Scriptures it will be profitable to observe, that
they are described by their holiness. The brethren we must love, are such as
are partakers of the holy calling, Heb. 3.1. such as are begotten of God, 1
Ioh. 5.1. such as will do the will of God by sound practice, Mat. 12.47, 49.
They are the holy brethren we are here charged to love, 1. These. 5.27.

For the second; our relation to the Godly as brethren ought not to be
despised: for, as we are brethren by religion, we enjoy many excellent
prerogatives; for thereby we partake of a heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1. we
stand all in relation to God, as his own children by adoption, Ephesians. 4.6. and
so peace, and the blessing of God as a father, is upon us all, Ephesians. 6.23. Gal.
6.16. and we are greatly beloved of God, Romans 1.7. and brought up in the same
family, Ephesians. 3.17. fed with the same diet and entertainment in Gods house, and
estated into an inheritance, better than all the kingdoms of the world, Romans
9.17. And hereby also we enjoy the fruit of the love of all the godly in the
world, even those that know us not in the face.

Reasons to persuade us to love as brethren
For the third: There are many reasons why we should love the godly, as our
brethren, above all the people in the world: For first, if to be all the
children of one father, have such a power over the natural affections of men,
then should it not be without power in religion. Secondly, this is charged
upon us, above many other things: yea, above all things we should put on love,
Col. 3.14. and yet he had reckoned many excellent virtues before. This was the
special, and one of the last commandments of our blessed Savior, which he
gave in charge when he was going to his death, 1. Ioh. 3.23. Ioh. 13. 34.
Thirdly, because this love comes of God, and is a sign that God is in us, and
dwells in us, and that we do indeed love God himself, 1. John 4.7, 8, 12,
16, 20, 21. Fourthly, we have the example of God himself, and Christ his
Son, that love them as their peculiar treasure above all the world; and he
showed them love by unspeakable benefits, 1. Ioh. 4. 11, 10. Fifthly, because
our souls will thrive and be edified, as brotherly love is continued, and
increased in us, Ephesians. 4.16. Sixthly, because the Godly they must be our
everlasting companions in heaven, 1. Pet. 4.8. 1. Cor. 13.8. and if we cannot
see so much, it is because we are purblinde, 2. Pet. 1.

For the fourth point; if any ask with what kind of love we should love
them? I answer, that our love must have many properties in it.

1 It must be a natural love, With what kind of love we are to love the
brethren.
that is, such a love as is not by constraint, but arises out of our
dispositions and inclinations, as we are made new Creatures in Jesus Christ,
2. Cor. 8.8.

2 It must be a sincere love, a love without dissimulation. Romans 12.10. not in
word but in deed, 1. Ioh. 3.18.

3 It must be a fervent love: we must love them earnestly, and with great
affection, above all other people, 1. Pet 4.8. brotherly kind love, 2. Pet. 1.7.

4 It must be a pure love, that comes from a pure heart, 1. Tim. 1.5. and
projects not any iniquity, 1. Cor. 13.6. and therefore must be a love in the
Spirit, Col. 1.8.

5 It must be a diligent love, that will express it by the daily fruits of it
upon all occasions; a laboring and working love, 1. These. 1.3. Heb. 6.10.

6 It must be a speedy love, that will not put off or delay; a love that will
not say, Go, and come again tomorrow, Prove. 3.28.

7 It must be an humble love; a love that would ever serve the brethren, not
do them good only, Gal. 5.13. And that is further showed, by not respecting
persons, but loving all the Saints, even those that are poor, or sick, or in
temptations, or fallen by weakness, Ephesians. 1.15. Prove. 19.7. Iam. 2. and that is
also showed by carrying our selves with all lowliness, and meekness of
mind, in all long suffering, and forbearing one another, Ephesians. 4.2.

8 It must be a constant love: we must love always, as well as earnestly,
Gal. 4.18.

9 It must be a growing love, that will still increase and abound, Phil. 1.9.
1. These. 4.10.

The use may be diverse: for,

Use 1. First, carnal Christians are by this doctrine, sharply to be reprooved
for their want of love to the brethren, and for all the courses by which they
show their dislike or hatred of godly Christians. This very sin is grievous
in the sight of God; for, for this sins sake, when they hate a godly
Christian, because his works are better than theirs, God reckons of them but
as Cainites, the seed of Cain; yea, as the children of the Devil, 1. Ioh. 3.10.
yea, God will reckon with them as if they were guilty of murder. To hate a
godly man is murder in the sight of God, and deprives a man of eternal life,
1. Ioh. 3.14 15. and prooves him that is guilty of it, to be a person that
abides in death. And it is in vain to plead that they love God: for if a man
say he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he that loves
not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? And it is Gods peremptory commandment, that he that loves God, love
his brother also, ^. Ioh. 4.20, 21.

Yea, this Doctrine affords matter of reproof to diverse that go for true
Christians: and so for many faults. As first, it reprooveth those that have the
faith of Christ in respect of persons, Iam. 2.1, etc. This is a fault in the
richer sort, and such as stand upon their worldly greatness: they rest in
their show of respect and love to some Ministers, or to some great persons that
answer to their own rank, but wholly neglect the acquaintance, and
entertainment, and fellowship of poor Christians; and thereby not only
displease God, but much darken their own evidence in this sign of the love of
the brethren, because they show not their love to all the Saints, as they might
and ought. Secondly, it reprooveth intemperate Christians, that sin against
brotherly love, by rash censuring and condemning of their brethren; especially
when they become divulgers of censure, and stand out as accusers of their
brethren. This is a divellish sin; for it is the devils special sin to be
an adversary, and an accuser of the brethren, Rev. 12.10. so that he is a
devil incarnate that uses this course, Romans 14.3, 10, 13. Iam. 4.11, 12. and
5, 9. Thirdly, it reprooveth the great worldliness that is discerned in diverse
Christians, that are so hardly drawn to show compassion and mercy to poor
Christians when they are in distress. They have this worldly goods, and yet
shut up the bowels of their compassion from their brethren, though they see
they have need, and therefore how dwells the love of God in them? 1. John
3.17. Fourthly, it reprooves the great aptness to contention, that appears in
many, that easily fall into discord, and from thence into suites of Law,
against their brethren: which is clearly condemned in these Scriptures both by
example and prohibition, Genesis 13.8. Act. 7.26. 1. Cor. 1.10. and 6.5. Fifthly,
it greatly reprooveth such as by their opinions or practice offend and grieve
weak Christians, and cause them to stagger, or stumble, or be unsettled in the
good way of God; and so endanger not only their present consolation, but (as
much as in them lies) their salvation also, Mat. 18.6.1. Cor. 8, 11, 12, 13.
Thus of the use for reproof.

Use 2. Secondly, this Doctrine may serve for instruction, and so it should
prevail with us, to desire and endeavor to express and preserve amongst us
brotherly love, that it may be, and continue, and increase amongst all such as
fear God, Heb. 13.1. And to this end diverse rules are to be observed: for,
that brotherly love may continue,

1 We must not fashion our selves according to this world, but avoid all
needelesse conversation with wicked men, Rules to be observed that brotherly
love may continue. Either such things we are to avoid.
Romans 12.1, 2.

2 We must take heed of, and avoid such as sow difcord, or cause divisions
amongst men: whether they be such as go about to seduce men in opinions, Romans
16.19. Gal. 5. 12, 2. Pet. 3.16, or such as make contention in practice. A
little leaven of dissenting or discord may leaven the whole lump.

3 We must take heed that we be not ensnared or entangled with vain glorious
desires after worldly greatness, whether in Church or Common wealth: Therefore
Christ charge his Disciples not to be called Rabbi, because they and all the
godly were brethren, Mat. 23.8. Gal. 5. ult.

4 If we would preserve brotherly love, we must take heed of conceitednesse
and wilfulness of judgment; we must not be wise in our selves, but rather
in lowliness of mind, esteem another man's gifts and judgment better than
our own; and show it by making our selves equal to them of the lower sort.
Phil. 2.3. Romans 12.10.16, Prove. 12.15.

5 We must take heed of worldliness and self-love, and the minding of our
own things, and studying of our ends in conversing, 1. Cor. 13, 5. Phil. 2.4.

6 We must take heed of overmuch retyrednesse, and neglecting of comfortable
and profitable fellowship with our brethren, Heb. 10.25. Phil. 1.6. Psalm. 133.1.

These are things we must avoid. There are diverse things likewise to be done,
that we may preserve brotherly love: as,

Or such things we are to pra^lise.
1 We must provoke one another to love, by all words and carriages that may be
without flattery or dissimulation, Heb. 10.24.

2 We should strive, without complement, to show the sound proof of our love
in all our actions; and by the fruits of it, in all well-doing, strive to
approve our selves to God, and before men in this thing, 2. Cor. 8.24.

3 In all things we do to, or for the brethren, we should strive to do them
after a loving and respective manner. Let all your things be done in love,
faith the Apostle, 1. Cor. 16.14.

4 We must strive to be rightly ordered toward our brethren, in case of sin
against God, or trespass against us: And that we shall be, if we soundly
practice these four Rules.

How to order ourselves toward our brethren, in case of sin against God, or
trespass against us.
1 If we know any fault by our brother, and feel that it does tempt us to
alienation, we must then remember the charge given, Levit. 19.17. which is,
not to suffer our hearts to hate him, but give a vent unto our hearts by a
plain and discreet reproof.

2 We should be soundly settled in judgment, that there are infirmities in the
best, though we know them not; and so to look for it, as when they do break
out, we should show our selves ready to bear their infirmities, and forbear
them, if they be mere frailties, choosing rather to cross our selves than to
irritate or provoke them in their weakness, Romans 15.1, 2.

3 If any brother trespass against us, we should show our s^lves easy to be
entreated, and willing to practice the rule given by our Savior, even to
forgive him if he offend unto seventy times seven times, when he says it
repents him, Mat. 18.21.

4 If we have done any wrong, we should make have to be reconciled, and seek
it with willing acknowledgement, and readiness to make satisfaction, Mat.
5.23, 24.

Only we must remember about this doctrine of the love of the brethren, that
there are three caveats to be looked to.

1 That we misplace not our affections upon false brethren: Three caveats to
be looked unto in our loving of them.
for there are false brethren that will creep in privily many times for
corrupt ends, Gal. 2.4. 2. These. 3.13.

2 That if any brother be scandalous, or walk inordinately, or will not be
subject to the form of doctrine, and the public ministry, then such a one
is to be avoided; only he must be admonished as a brother, 2. These. 3.6, 15.

3 Servants are charged to look to it, that they be obedient and subject,
notwithstanding this doctrine, that their Masters are brethren, 1. Tim. 6.1.

Pitiful.] The word rendered Pitiful, in the Original signifies, rightly
bowelled, or such as have true or right bowels: and so it is to be referred to
mercy; and is more than other Scriptures express, when they require bowels of
mercy: for here it is required that these bowels be right.

In Mat. 25. men are sentenced to condemnation for not showing mercy. In other
Scriptures it is showed, that though they do show mercy, yet if some things be
not looked to, it will not be accepted, as Mith. 6.8. there is required not
only mercy, but the love of mercy: and Mat. 6. the Pharisees did works of
mercy, and yet our Savior finds fault with them, because they were done to be
seen of men: and in 1. Cor. 13.2. the Apostle says, If a man give all that he
has to the poor, and want love, it is nothing: So here the Apostle requires,
not mercy only, but that their bowels be right in mercy: and about this rule
therefore two things are to be explicated.

1 What bowels of mercy means.

2 What right bowels imports.

For the first. Bowels of mercy imports;

What things bowels of compassion or mercy import.
1 Truth in showing mercy, that it be not in ceremony, or word only, but in
deed: that the heart show mercy as well as the tongue.

2 Love: That our mercy proceed from hearty and christian affection to the
party, 1. Cor. 13.2. not of constraint, nor with wicked thoughts, or grief of
heart, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. to 12.

3 Tenderness of affection: That we be affected as if our selves were in
want, Romans 12.16.

4 Cheerfulness: in expressing our mercy to such as are in misery, who are
sometimes as much refreshed with the respect we show to their persons, as with
the supply we bring to their estates. Men in misery should be comforted as
well as relieved.

5 The practice of secret mercy as well as open; even to think of them, and
provide for them, and to provoke others to mercy, and to pray for them when
they know not of it; even when we are gone from them, still to show them mercy.

For the second: our Bowels are right in showing merc.

When our bowels of mercy are right.
1 If we be prepared unto such good works, and so both our ears should be
prepared, that they may be open to the cry of the poor, Prove. 21.13. and the
matter of mercy should be made ready. And to this purpose, it were an excellent
course if Christians would lay up weekly a part of their gettings, which they
would consecrate to God, that it might be ready when there were need, 1. Cor.
16.1, 2. and further, if we be (as God is) mindful of mercy, and do
exercise it speedily without delay, Prove. 3.27, 28.

2 If we look not for too much beholdingness from them that are relieved.
The rich must not rule over the poor, nor the borrower become a servant to the
lender, Prove. 22.7.

3 If we have a good eye, Prove. 22.9. and show it by dispensing of our mercy
to such as have most need, and to such as are best affected in religion, if
there be choice.

4 If we do works of mercy, out of goods well gotten, else God hates
robbery, though it were for burnt offerings, Esaias 61.8.

5 If it be for right ends, as not for merit, or the praise of men, Matthew. 6.2.
Cor. 9.19.

6 If we be full of mercy, rich in mercy, much in mercy, abundant in mercy,
not only to our power, but sometimes and in some cases beyond our power. We
must open our hands wide, Deuteronomy. 15.8. 1. Tim. 6.18. 2. Cor. 8.2, 9. good
measure, and pressed down, Luke 6.8. if we give not sparingly.

7 If we be discreet, so to ease others as we burden not our selves, 2. Cor.
9.14, 15.

8 If we exercise our selves in every kind of mercy, both spiritual and
corporal, in giving, lending, visiting, clothing, feeding, instructing,
admonishing, comforting, etc.

9 If we be constant, and not grow weary of well-doing, Gal. 6.

The use may be, first, for reproof and confutation of diverse sorts of men.

1 Of the Papists, that brag of their good works in this kind: to whom it may
be granted, that they show works of mercy; and perhaps have bowels of mercy:
but they are not right bowels; both because with the Pharisees, they do their
works to be seen of men, and with opinion of justification and salvation by
the merit of their works: and beside, though they show compassion to the
bodies of men, yet are they without all true compassion to the souls of men.

2 Of the house keeping of many Protestants, that brag of their great
hospitality, and good house keeping, when their entertainment is either spent
upon the rich, or else in the profane abuse of the good creatures of God by
drunkenness, or else in the entertainment of disordered and lewd persons.

3 Of the great neglect of mercy in the most men, that either show not mercy at
all, or not bowels of mercy, or not according to the rules given before,
especially such as hide themselves from the poor, Esaias 58.7. and use shifts
and excuses to avoid such supplies, as are necessary for the furtherance of
the relief for the poor in such places as they live, Prove. 24.11, 12. But
judgment merciless shall be to them that show no mercy, Iam. 2.13.

4 Diverse of the better sort are to be rebuked about this point: many
Christians spend a great deal of zeal about lesser matters, and in the mean
time neglect the greater things of the Law, such as are judgment and mercy;
for few Christians are sufficiently instructed, or inflamed in the estimation
of the worth of the works of mercy, or the necessity of them to the
glorifying of God, and the profession of Religion. Matthew. 23.23.

Secondly, for instruction; and so this doctrine should work in us a great
impression of desire to show forth the fruits of mercy with all tenderness
and sincerity: and to this end we should show, that we desire in practice to
obey this doctrine as near as we can; I say, we should show it, by accepting
the exhortations of others that move us for any works of this kind. 2. Cor.
8.17. especially we should strive to answer the expectation of our Teachers
herein, and willingly give our selves first to the Lord, and then to them;
suffering them to direct our works herein with all readiness, Motives to be
pitiful.
2. Cor. 8.5.24. and to this end we should use all good means to stir up our
selves to good works of this kind all our days: and therefore we should plow
up the fallow ground of our hearts, by prayer and confession of our natural
barrenness herein, and indisposition, Hosea 10.12. and withal, think much of
all the motives might stir us up hereunto: And so we should think of the
matchless pattern of Gods mercy, and in particular of his mercy to us, Mat.
5. Luke 6. as also of the worth of mercy; it is bettter than sacrifice, Mat.
9.13. and of the original of it; God is the father of mercies, 2. Cor. 1.3.
and of the use of it; it prooves us to be the true brethren, and true
neighbors, Luke 10.37. and of the great profit of it; for they that are
merciful shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5.7. and to give to the poor is but to
lend to the Lord: and so there is no usury can be so gainful, as this of laying
out of our estates for the relief of the poor. Thus of the right bowels of
mercy.

Be courteous.] Courtesy is the fifth thing required in our conversation one
toward another. This is exacted in other Scriptures, as Ephesians. 4. ult. Tit. 3.2.
Col. 3.12, this is called by the title of comitie and kindness. Now that we
may know distinctly, what is meant by courtesy, I will show both what it
comprehends, and what it has not in it. It comprehends diverse things: as,

1 A willing saluting of those Christians we meet.

2 A conversation void of harshnesse, What things are comprehended under
courtesy.
sullenness; intractablenesse, scornefulnesse, clownishnesse, churlishness,
desperateness, or hardness to please.

3 In matters of offense, it makes the fairest interpretations, and forgives
heartily and cheerfully, Ephesians. 4.32.

4 In entertainment, it is free, and hearty, and loving, Act. 28.7.

5 In hearing others speak, it is patient and willing, Act. 24.4.

6 In giving honor, it prefers others almost of all sorts.

7 In moderating authority over inferiors so, as to be better toward them
than they can require. Thus of the courtesy of the Master to his Servants, 1.
Pet. 2.18.

But yet we must know, that under pretense of courtesy, we must not hold
needless conversation with the wicked, nor any way countenance or honor open
and notorious offenders, nor use a promiscuous respect of good and bad all
alike, nor unadvisedly contract any special familiarity or friendship with
persons unequal or unmeet, nor rashly discover secret things to all we meet
withal.

The use should be, to teach all Christians to make conscience of this virtue,
seeing God requires courtesy as well as piety: and the contrary causes the
good way of God to be evil spoken of. And besides, the Apostle imports here,
that a courteous conversation may preserve us from many troubles. But yet let
men be again warned, not to rest in mere complements, and outward
formalities, but practice such a courtesy as is joined with the right bowels
of mercy, and good works; which may be observed from the coherence.
Especially, let all true Christians abhor that dissimulation, that men should
salute willingly, and speak fair, and use men with great kindness, and yet
plot malice and mischief in their hearts; and speak evil behind men's
backs, and secretly labor to subvert other men, who are deceived by their
complement, and mistrust not their envy or malice; and withal, men should
avoid complementing with others, when it is for the compassing of their own
ends, especially when they are sinful, as was the practice of Absolon, when he
aspired to the kingdom.

And thus of the directions the Apostle gives for the avoiding of trouble, as
they concern our conversation toward the godly.

Verse. 9. Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but
contrariwise, blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should
inherit a blessing.
REnder not evil for evil.] Now follows the directions for our carriages to
wicked, or unreasonable, and injurious men: and so if we would live in peace
and out of trouble, we must take heed that we be not provoked by them to
revenge or reviling. Where observe.

1 That wicked men are naturally bent to do evil, and to be injurious, and to
revile others, especially the godly, Psalm. 36.3.4. Destruction and misery are
in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known: and their throat is
an open Sepulcher, their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness, Romans 3.13,
14, 16, 17. The poison of Aspes is under their lips. The use should be
therefore to teach godly men to provide for it; wheresoever they live in this
world, they must look for it, to be abused and reproached: they may think to
live safely in a wilderness, as well as to live without receiving injury from
carnal and profane men. God can restrain the very Lions that they should not
fall upon Daniel, and he can cast a fear upon the wicked, that they shall not
attempt injury against the godly: but though God do thus at sometimes, yet he
will not be bound always to do it. Secondly, this should teach such as
desire to live in safety, to avoid all needelesse conversation with the
wicked: for, though at the first thou might think they were of fair
carriage, and would do no wrong, yet after a time they will show their nature;
especially if they see they cannot draw thee to run with them into the same
excess of sinning. And thirdly, as any desire to have evidence to their own
souls, that they are become new creatures, and have new natures, so they
should show the proof of it hereby, viz. by avoiding all injurious courses,
and reproachful and bitter words.

2 All private revenge is forbidden; or it is unlawful to render evil for
evil. 2. These. 5.15. the Apostle says, See that no man recompense unto any
man evil for evil. Note there three things: first, that he gives this as a
special charge, as a thing most hateful or ill-beseeming a Christian.
Secondly, what he says, No man must do it: Great men have no more liberty by
private quarrels to revenge their dishonor or hurt, than mean men. Thirdly,
that he says, To no man: we must not render evil to any man, of any religion,
condition, or estate, whatsoever the injury be. So, Romans 12.17. the like
charge is given, and two excellent reasons against private revenge: One,
because vengeance belongs to God only: It is his office. And it is best God
should revenge, because he gives recompense to every transgression: and
besides, he gives a just recompense, Heb. 2.2. whereas men that will perform
their own revenge, give or seek many times an unequal revenge; as when our
Gallants will have blood for a reproach: this is not equal, that a man's life
should be taken for a supposed wrong to their reputation: And further, God has
never failed to execute vengeance, whereas men many times fail, and cannot
perform the revenge they seek; but rather the contrary; Gods vengeance falls
upon them for taking his office out of his hands, as many of those that seek
the blood of others in revenge, lose their own, Heb. 10.30. Also it is worth
the noting, that in that place to the Romans, the Apostle adds another reason
against private revenge, which greatly crosses the proud and passionate
spirits of our times; and that is couched in these words, Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with goodness: which words imports, that he is
overcomne, and has lost his honor, that will revenge: and contrariwise, he
does overcome, that will render good for evil. If this point were seriously
considered, it would mightily subdue that unruly pride and passion that
discovers it self in the most men: and it does directly prove, that Duells or
single combats are simply unlawful and intolerable in any well governed Common
wealth, and should warn all Christians to take heed of allowing themselves in
the desires or projects of revenge. Nor is their sin the less that seek
revenge, but it is closely, and much dissembled, while they watch for an
opportunity to be even with them that have wronged them.

Nor reviling for reviling.] Observe,

1 That people that are ungodly are very prone to reviling. This we may see in
the conversation they have among their neighbors; what brawling and scoulding
from day to day? and also in the case of Religion, how do they continually
reproach and slander the true Christians? so in family affairs, with what
disgraceful and hateful terms are all the businesses (almost) of the
household dispatched? But of this I spoke before.

2 That reviling and railing is a very hateful sin: It is here accounted a
great suffering, to suffer reviling. Our Savior reckons it murder in his
exposition of the sixth Commandment, Mat. 5. and if godly men be reviled, it is
termed blasphemy in diverse places of Scripture in the Original. It proceeds
from vile and base natures, Heb. 12.14, 15. Iam. 1.21. and 3.9. Gods Spirit is
a Spirit of meekness, and evil words corrupt good manners, 1. Cor. 15 16.

The use is therefore for great reproof and shame to all those that are guilty
of this sin, especially such as have their mouths full of cursing and
bitterness, Romans 3.14. and such as revile men for this very reason, because
they follow goodness, calling good evil, Esaias 5.20.21. Pet. 4.5. and such as
revile those that are near unto them in the strong bonds of nature, or
covenant; as when wives revile their husbands, or children their parents.

3 That though we^ be reviled, yet we must not revile again, because reviling
is a sin, and God has flatly forbidden it in this and other Scriptures: and
besides, we have an excellent example of our Savior himself, that suffered
all forts of reproaches, and yet was so far from reviling, that he threatened
not, 1. Pet. 2. and all sorts of godly men have endured reviling, that were
many degrees better than thou. And further, what know thou but God may
bless thee for their cursing, as David said? And therefore all that are true
Christians should be effectually warned from hence, to resolve against bitter
words and reviling, though they be never so much provoked.

Thus of the rules the Apostle gives for avoiding of trouble. Now follows the
arguments for the confirmation of those rules, especially of the latter: and
the first is taken from the estate or condition of a Christian in this Verse.
the second from the testimony of the Prophet David, Verse. 10.11, 12. And the
third from the probable event or effect of such a course, Verse. 13.

In the rest of this Verse, he inferres from their calling to Gods blessing,
That they shall be so far from cursing or reviling, that they should use no
other language than blessing even to the wicked, and their adversaries.

But contrariwise.] This very term imports, That the life and discourse of a
true Christian, should be not only different from the life and language of
wicked men, but in many things contrary. And it must needs be so, because the
godly and wicked arise from a contrary fountain; the one borne after the
flesh, the other after the Spirit, Gal. 4. and their words and actions flow
from contrary principles; for the one is led by the old man, the other by the
new man: and they have from without contrary leaders; the one led by the
Devil, Ephesians. 2. the other by the Spirit of God, Romans 8. and further, they trade
about contrary commodities; the one for earthly things only, the other for
heavenly: the one for things of this world, the other for things of another
world: and lastly, they go contrary ways; the one to hell, the other to
heaven: and therefore there can be no agreement between them, no more than
between light and darkness, Christ and Behal. This point serves for great
reproof of some weak Christians, for coming so near to the ways of carnal
men, as they can hardly be distinguished from them, that look so like them.
Such were those Corinthians Saint Paul reproves, 1. Cor. 3.1, 2, 3.

Bless.] It is required of all true Christians that they should bless: their
conversation should express blessing continually. Now for the understanding of
this point, we must know, that man is said in Scripture, to bless either God
or man. He blesses God when he praises his mercy, and acknowledges his
blessings: he adds nothing to Gods blessedness, but only acknowledges Gods
blessed Nature, and dealing toward man. This exercise of blessing God, began
betimes in the world, as Genesis 14.20. and was constantly continued in all ages
among the godly. But in this place the Apostle means it of blessing man: And
to bless man, is either a vice or a virtue. There is a vicious blessing of
men, which must be separated from the doctrine of this Text. Diverse kinds of
blessing.
Now it is vicious, first, when a man blesses himself in his own heart, even
then when God threatens him, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Secondly, when a man blesses wicked
men, and praises them, notwithstanding their vile courses, Ps. 10.3. Thirdly,
when a man uses blessing with his mouth, and yet curses inwardly, Ps. 62.4.
Fourthly, when a man blesses his friend by way of flattery, Prove. 27.14.
Fifthly, when a man blesses Idols, by worshipping them, and by setting his
affections upon them, Esaias 66.3. Thus of blessing as it is a vice.

As blessing is a virtue, it is performed diverse ways: as first, from
Superiors to their Inferiors; so parents bless their children, Genesis 27.
Ministers bless the people, Number. 6.23.1. Cor. 14.16. Secondly, Inferiors
bless their Superiors; as the Subject the King, 2. Sam. 14.22. the Child his
Parents, Pro. 30.11. the People their Teachers, Mat. 23.39.

In this place I take it, blessing is considered of, as it is required of all
sorts of men toward all sorts of men; and in particular, toward their
enemies, or such as wrong them or revile them: and so a true Christian should
bless both in deeds and words.

When we bless in deed.
He blesses in deeds, when either he is a means to keep others from evil, 1.
Sam. 25.33. or by doing good, or showing mercy to others; and so a man blesses
his enemy, when he relieveth him in his misery, and overcommeth his evil with
goodness, Rom 12.20.21. Yea, a man may be said to bless, when he causes
others to bless either God or himself, for his well doing Thus Job blessed,
when he caused the poor to bless him, Job 31.20.

It is required also that we bless one another in words; and in particular,
it is required that we bless them that curse us, Mat. 5 44 Romans 12.14. 1.
Cor. 4 12. And this we do,

1 By gracious communication in general, Wherein particularly.
when we use such words, as may not only express to the life the power and
truth of the gifts of grace in us; but also may minister grace to the hearers,
if it be not their own fault.

2 By acknowledging the just praises of others.

3 By praying for them, Mat. 5.44. Psalm. 109.4.

4 By giving soft answers, Pro. 15.23. and entreating them to avoid strife,
Genesis 13.8.9.

5 By a discreet reproof of their sin: for as he that flattereth, curses;
so he that wisely reprooveth, blesses, Pro. 27.14. Psalm. 141.5.

The use should be, to stir up all true Christians to practice true virtue of
blessing, and to carry themselves so, as all their words and actions may be
blessed, and a blessing to them that converse with them; and may appear to be
so, even to their enemies. It is a hard lesson, but yet if we seek constantly
to God for this help, it may be attained in some acceptable manner.

Knowing that ye are thereunto called.] Many things may be here observed.

Doct. 1. That a Christian should be vehemently affected with the consideration
of his calling: and that for diverse reasons.

1 Because of the cause of it; For what reasons a Christian should be much
affected with the consideration of his calling
which was Gods purpose, election, and free grace in Jesus Christ: We were
sinners, and we were not called for any works of ours, Romans 8.28. and 9.11 2.
Tim. 1.9. The wind blows where it lists; we are taken, and others
refused. And this is the more to be thought on, because this grace was given us
in Jesus Christ before the world began, 2. Tim. 1 9. It could not be had but by
a Mediator, and it was granted from all eternity.

2 If we consider from what we were called: from gross darkness, 2. Pet.
1.9. from this present evil world, Gal. 1. from the lump of forlorn
mankind, from innumerable sins and curses, from the danger of eternal
damnation of body and soul for ever.

3 If we consider the wonder of the means of our calling; which is by the
Gospel, which is the voice of Christ, raising us out of the graves of sin:
even that voice that shall make men's dead bodies rise at the last day, does now
raise the dead souls of men in this world. One resurrection in this life,
another at the day of judgment. Ephesians. 2.1. 2. These. 2.14.

4 If we consider that it is a high calling, the most honorable and most holy
of any calling in the world. No greater dignity than to be the called of Jesus
Christ: greater in it self than to be an Apostle. Phil. 3.14.

5 If we consider to what we are called, viz. to be partners and companions
with Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 1.7. and to great and precious promises, Acts 2.3 9.
and to obtain the glory of the Lord Jesus, and a kingdom with him for ever.
Phil. 3.14. 1. Tim. 1.6. The called are vessels of Gods mercy, and upon them
he will make known the riches of his glory, Romans 9.24.

6 Because the gifts and calling of God is without repentance, Romans 1 1.29.
This, a link in that chain, can never be broken: this takes hold before the
world, of election, and after the world, of glorification, Romans 8.30.

7 Because the great, wise, noble, and mighty men of the world are not called,
and God has looked upon such poor and weak creatures. 1. Cor. 1.26.

The use should be, to teach us with all possible affections to magnify Gods
grace in our calling, and to strive to walk worthy of our calling, Ephesians. 4.1.
and to pray hard unto God to fulfill the work of his grace in our calling,
that we may live to his glory, and abound in all faith and well-doing, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11, 12.

The second use may be for great reproof of men's wickedness, in neglecting
the voice of Christ in the Gospel, and in intertayning so many excuses, and
delays, hardening themselves in their evil ways, and suffering the Devil to
keep them without this high preferment. Matthew. 22.

Doct. 2. From the coherence it is plain, That all Gods servants are called to
holiness of life, as well as to happiness. Their calling is a holy calling;
and they are called to be Saints, Romans 1.7. so also 2. These. 2.14, 13. 1. Pet.
1.15.1. These. 4.7. The use is, to discover false Christians from true; by their
fruits you shall know them. Such as make not conscience of their ways, to
serve God all the days of their lives in holiness and fear, are not right
Christians. And therefore as men desire to have comfort in their calling, they
must take heed that they abuse not their liberty to licentiousness, Gal. 5.13.

Doct. 3 The calling of a Christian is a hard calling to flesh and blood: he is
called to hard work. As in the coherence here, to be so humble, and
unmovable, and holy disposed, as when he is grossly abused and wronged in
words and deeds, yet not only to be patient, but to bless. So it is in other
parts of their work; as when a man must deny himself, and take up his cross
daily and follow Christ: For a man to forsake every thing his heart naturally
desires, and to be daily crossed, is a hard task. The use should be, to
raise up the hearts of Christians to a care to live above the course of this
world, and to press forward toward the mark, not caring for the difficulty
of the race, but looking to the price of his calling. Phil. 3.14.

Doct. 4. A true Christian may know his calling: Know it, I say, that is, he
may be infallibly assured of it. And this is true in two respects: first, he
may know that he is truly called, and converted, and elected of God: secondly,
he may know his calling in respect of the warrant of all his particular
actions: as here, he may know what is required of him in his carriage toward
his enemies.

Now, that every true Christian may be sure of his calling and election, and
may know his conversion, is most apparent by these Scriptures, 2. Cor 13.5. 1.
Cor. 3.16. 2. Tim. 1.12. Heb. 8.11. 1. John 2.3. and 3.14. and 4.16. and
5.13.19.

And that every Christian is bound to seek this assurance and knowledge, is
apparent by many reasons. As first, from Gods commandment: He requires it of
us, that we should with all diligence seek to make our calling and election
sure, 2. Pet. 1.10. Secondly, many reasons may be gathered from the effects and
benefits, such knowledge and assurance will bring to us. Assurance is
profitable for many things. In general, it is our best riches on earth, Col.
2.2. and in particular,

Reasons pro^ng the necessity of knowing our calling and assurance.
1 It estates us in all the promises of God: when we know we are truly called,
then we know our right to all the promises of Gods word.

2 It purifyeth the heart and life of man, Act. 15.9. for when we know we are
the children of God, we are thereby stirred up to the greater care to please
God, and walk in his ways.

3 It greatly stays and supports the heart of man: in the evil day, when
temptations or afflictions befall us, yet the comfort of our assurance
sustaines us, and refreshes us greatly. For help in the evil day, the
Apostle says we should above all things put on the shield of faith. which, if
it remove not the cross, yet it quenches the fiery temptations of Satan,
with which we may be assaulted, Ephesians. 6.16. and it greatly helps us against the
fear and terror of death, Heb. 10.19, 20, 22. In a word, it overcomes the
world, 1. John 5.4, 5.

4 The faith of a Christian is all his living: he lives by faith in all the
occasions of life, as his faith helps him when all other means fails him, and
makes all other means more successful when he uses them. The just man lives
by faith. The people in captivity, that were Gods children, raised a living for
themselves in a strange land by their faith, Hab. 2.5.

5 It puts life into all the duties of religion or righteousness; it works
by love, it sets all our affections on work toward God, and his people, and
creatures, Gal. 5.6.

6 It opens a spring of grace in the heart of a Christian: every good gift from
above, is excited and made to flow from within him, by the benefit of his
certain knowledge, and assurance of faith, Job. 7.38.

Now if any ask, how a Christian comes to know his calling? I answer.

By what means a christian comes to know his calling.
1 By his sensible feeling of his sins to be a heavy burden to him, of which
he is truly weary, so as he desires more to be rid of them, than of any
burdensome cross whatsoever, Mat. 11.2^. and 9.13.

2 By his manner of receiving the voice of Christ, and the preaching of the
Gospel, not in word but in power: The voice of Christ has a mavelous power
over him, above all things in the world; which appears by the effects of it:
For he feels, in hearing the word, first, such an estimation of it, as he
acknowledges nothing like it, for power and wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.23, 24.
Secondly, he finds, at sometimes especially, such an assurance of the truth of
his religion, and the doctrine he hears, that he is fully established, and
^^eed from his natural uncertainties about the true religion. Thirdly, the
Word works in him spiritual senses, and very life from the dead, which he
feels in all parts of his conversation, making conscience of his ways in all
things, bewailing his frailties, and striving to be such as God would have him
to be. Fourthly, it makes him to separate himself from the world, avoiding all
needless society with the wicked, and exciting in him constant desires to use
the world as if he used it not. Fifthly, much spiritual joy before the Lord,
even then when in respect of outward things he is in much affliction. The most
of these effects are noted, 1. These. 1.4, 5.

3 By the Image of the virtues of Christ in his heart, by new gifts in some
measure: for when God calls a man, he reveals his Son in him, Gal. 1.15, 16.
There is begotten in him a likeness of Christ; his very disposition is changed
into the similitude of the virtues of Christ: God gives him a new heart, with
the Image of Christ stamped upon it; and he is like Christ in respect of
lowliness of mind, and meekness, and contempt of the world, and love of God
and the godly, mercy, wisdom, patience, love of his very enemies, and desire
to live without offense; and praying to God as to his father.

Quest. But if Christians may know their calling, what should be the reason
that so many Christians are so unsettled, and are not assured of their calling?

Ans. Distinguish of Christians; Divert sorts of Christians.
some are Christians in name and outward profession, but not in deed, being
not at all converted, though they have the means of conversion: and this is
the estate of the most men and women in all places. Now some are indeed
converted, but are weak Christians, as it were infants that lie but in the
cradle of religion.

Carnal Christians know not their calling, and why.
Now for the first sort, the answer is easy: They know not their calling,
because they are not called; yea, they are so far from knowing it, that they
generally are offended at it, that we should teach, that any body can know his
own calling certainly. Carnal Christians then know it not, because they have
it not: and in particular, the causes why these Christians attain not
assurance, is, because they rest upon common hope of mercy in God: which house
is but like the house of a Spider, and will give up the ghost when the evil
day comes upon them. And besides, they live in known sins, which they love
and prefer before all things can be offered to them by the Gospel. Now it
is impossible to have true assurance, and to lie at the same time in known
gross sins without repentance. And further, many Christians, by their
wilful unteachablenesse, and incurablenesse in sinning, do so provoke God,
that all means notwithstanding, yet those things that concern their peace are
hidden from their eyes, Luke 19.42.

Causes why many weak Christians know not their calling.
Now for the weak Christian, the causes of his want of assurance are such as
these: Sometimes ill opinions about assurance; either that it may not be had,
contrary to the charge given, 2. Pet. 1.10. or if it be had, it will not be
profitable, contrary to the reasons given before.

Sometimes it is their ignorance: they are so unexpert in the Scriptures, that,
not discerning the frame of godliness in general, they can never tell when
they fully know this, or any other doctrine in particular: And this let is the
stronger, when they smother their doubts, and will not ask the way, or seek
resolution in things they understand not, especially in cases of their own
consciences.

In some Christians, this want of assurance arises from meare slothfulness:
though they be often called upon, and convinced, yet they return to their
former carelessness, and will not be at the pains to use the directions given
them for the settling of their hearts.

In some Christians it is a violent pronenesse in their natures, to take
offense at such infirmities, or mistakings, as they observe in such as have
professed religion before them: yea, sometimes they take offense at the liberty
of those that are truly godly, though they abuse not their liberty. And this
offense is sometimes so deadly, that they give way to the projects of
renouncing of all religion, because they have observed such things in those
that profess religion: As in the primitive church, many Christians took
grievous offense at other Christians, for the use of their liberty in things
indifferent, so as the Apostle was afraid they would fall away and perish in
their scandalls.

Lastly, some Christians are not settled, because when the evil day comes upon
them, they cast away their confidence, and strive to think, that because God
afflicts them, therefore they are not his; being, for the present, incapable
of all those promises of Scripture, that make it clear, that God may afflict
them, and not be displeased with them, and they may be his dear servants and
children. They will not know, that whom God loves he chastens, and that he is
used to try his gold in the fire, and that whom God gives the greatest
comforts, he usually sends great trials immediately after; as when Christ was
honored with a voice from heaven at his baptism, and a visible descending of
the holy Ghost upon him, he was by and by led into the wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil, And Paul, after his revelation, was cast down almost
into hell with temptations.

Thus of the knowledge of conversion and calling in general. Now in this Text
is further imported, That a Christian may know the warrant of all his
particular actions: for the true Christian goes to the light, that it may be
manifest that his works are wrought in God, John 3.22, and he walks by rule,
Gal. 6. and he makes the Word a light to his feet, and a Lantern to his
paths, Psalm. 119. And this point greatly reproves the carelessness of the
most Christians, that are unresolved in the most actions of their lives, and
live by false rules; as the example of others, or the conceits of their own
heads, or their profit, or the like: They do not know their calling in seeing
the warrant of all their courses; and therefore it is, that they live in
strange offenses and see not the danger. These walk in darkness, and know
not whither they go. Now if any ask, how they may attain to the knowledge of
the rules for all their actions? I answer, shortly, they must redeem the time,
and study the Scriptures: for there only shall they find the right rules of
all good conversation, John 5.39. 2. Tim. 3.15. Ephesians. 5.15. and withal, men
must ask the way to Sion, Ier. 50.4, 5. They must make conscience to seek
resolution and counsel of their Teachers especially: and in all this be sure
they bring an humble heart, and a lowly mind; for God has promised to teach
the meek and the humble his ways.

To inherit Blessing.] The end of their calling is to inherit Blessing. What
things are contained in these words, will appear by certain general
observations, and by the particular unfolding of them.

In general, we may hence gather,

1 That Gods people, or true Christians, are a blessed people, such as have a
mavelous excellent estate above all men; none like them. Deuteronomy. 23.29. Let the
righteous man dwell where he will, he is better than his neighbor: they are
the only noble and excellent ones, Psalm. 16.3. As God said of Job, so is it
true of all them, none are as they, Job 2. They do not inherit that which is
blessed only, but they inherit blessing. Every leaf of the Bible says they
are blessed; and the word in the old Testament so translated, signifies
blessedness: all blessings are theirs. This would be a great comfort to true
Christians that know their calling: nothing should dismay them: they should
chide their souls, if they be discouraged, as David did, Psalm. 42. And the
wicked men of this world should be ashamed of their sottish blindness, that
account godly men in a miserable case, or do any way vilify them: And weak
Christians should pray earnestly to God, to show them the hope of their
calling, Ephe. 1.9. that they may be from their hearts persuaded of their
happiness.

2 That Gods elect by Nature are not in a blessed estate. They are called to
it, not borne to it: it is a preferment they are advanced to, by means of
their receiving of the Gospel, and the sincerity of true Religion. Their
religion, not their parents or their own endeavors, helps them to it: by
nature they are in a miserable case, both in respect of unholinesse and
unhappiness, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, 1 2. Tit. 3.3. And this is fit for them to
know, that they may be the more stirred up to magnify the free grace of God,
and to love the Gospel, and that they may be the more humble in themselves,
and strive to walk worthy of so excellent a calling, and use all means that
God has appointed, to increase more and more in blessing: And unregenerate men
must likewise hence take notice, that they can never inherit blessing, unless
they repent: for calling is the door of blessing,

3 That true Christians inherit nothing but blessing: there is no curse
mingled withal. It will presently rise in men's minds, that many afflictions
of all sorts befall them as well as others. But I answer, first, that all the
malediction deserved by their sins, was charged upon Christ, and he has
borne all the curse for them, Gal. 3. Isa. 53. and so Gods justice is
satisfied, and their debt paid. Secondly, I may take advantage of the word
Inherit, and that two ways: first, that though afflictions (which are properly
rodds for the wicked) may break in upon the lot of the righteous, yet they
shall not rest there, Psalm. 125.3. It is but for a little while that God can be
angry with them, but he loves them with an everlasting love, Isa. 54. Note.
They inherit not afflictions, though they have afflictions, Secondly, they
are called to inherit blessing: which imports further, That though during
their minority in this world, they may endure some hardship, yet when these
heirs come to perfect age in heaven, then all affliction shall be cast into
the Sea, and there shall be no curse, Revelat. 22. Thirdly, I answer, that
even their crosses are blessings: for as God can curse the very blessings of
the wicked, so can he, and does bless the seeming curses of the godly. All
shall work together for the best to them that love God, Romans 2.28. All things
are to be measured for good or ill, according to the use of them to us. That
which does us hurt, cannot be a blessing; and that which does us good, cannot
be a curse.

Now for the particular unfoulding of this blessing they inherit, we must
know, that godly Christians inherit blessing diverse ways.

Godly men do inherit blessings many ways: 1. From men.
1 From other men; and so the poor bless them for their charity. The blessing
of him that is ready to perish, many times comes upon them, Job 29.13. Their
very loins bless them, Job 31.20. and their neighbors bless them for peace
making, Mat. 5.8. and the godly bless them for their gifts of grace, and pray
for Gods blessings upon them, Psalm. 134.3. and if they have any public
employments for God, in Church or Commonwealth, the ear that hears them,
blesses them, Job 29.11. And at sometimes God does so guide and prosper the
ways of his servants, that all sorts of men do acknowledge them for the seed
which the Lord has blessed, Esaias 61.8.

2. From their own consciences.
2 From their own consciences: if the world at any time testify against him, or
revile him, yea, if Devils and men set against him, yet he inherits this
blessing, that his own conscience will witness for him to his singular joy,
2. Cor. 1.12. The daily encouragements of a good conscience are like a
continual feast within.

3. From God, and that diverse ways.
3 From God, and so they have Gods blessing certain: and this is a great
inheritance, and has so much happiness in it, as it should swallow up all the
grievance of afflictions, and the contempts and scorns of the world: It is
enough if we have Gods blessing. Now that this point may be distinctly beaten
out, we must understand, that true Christians may be said to inherit Gods
blessing, first, in a more restrained sense, and then in a more large sense: In
a restrained sense, blessing may here be taken for Gods comfortable speaking;
for, (...), properly signifies blessing by words, and so it answers to the
coherence; If they will use good words to men, God will speak good words to
them. And in this sense we may hence gather, That Gods natural language to the
called of Jesus Christ, is blessing, or comfortable words. God will speak to
his people peace, Psalm. 84.5. and therefore he gives a charge to his Ministers
to speak comfortably to Jerusalem, Esaias 40.1, 2. Secondly, that Gods elect
never find this till they have their calling. Thirdly, that it is a great
inheritance in this life, to have God to speak well to us. Fourthly, that if
the fault be not in us, we shall never have God speak otherwise. It is our
inheritance, to comfort us against all the miseries of life. And therefore
Ministers that are the mouth of God, should study comfort much: and those
Christians that desire to have the fruit of their inheritance in this thing,
should provide to live in such places where God speaks to men. And those
Ministers have a great account to make, that set themselves to speak
disgracefully, and terribly to such as fear God, striving to discourage their
hearts, and to strengthen the hands of the wicked. Thus of the restrained
sense: only note by the way, That God speaks good words, both for his people
behind their backs, and to his people before their faces. They inherit Gods
good word for them in their absence: Thus God speaks excellently in the praise
of Job to the Devil, before the Angels, Job 1. and 2. and thus he can speak
in the consciences of the greatest on earth in praise of his people, as Esaias
41.9.

Now in the general sense, In this life godly men have Gods blessing three
ways.
Gods people enjoy this blessing many ways: and that both in this life, and in
the life to come. In this life they have his blessin.

1 In temporal things of all sorts: he makes the earth bless them, and the
heavens, and the waters, Genesis 49.25. he blesses them in the City, and in the
field, in the fruit of their bodies, and of the ground, and of their cattle,
in their Basket and in their store, when they come in, and when they go out,
yea, God will command the blessing upon them in their storehouses, and upon all
they set their hands to, and he will open his good treasures unto them, and
bless all the work of their hands, Deuteronomy. 28.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 12. And if they
enjoy not so much in quality of these things as some wicked men, yet they have
a fair portion, and a good blessing, because, that they have is blessed; both
in the original of it, and in the nature of it, and in the use of it, and in
their right to it.

2 In the means of grace and salvation: and so they enjoy the blessing of God
in his housekeeping; and great is th^^^ blessing, where with God blesses his
people in his house, on his holy hill, and round about. The Lord has long
since promised to make all the places about his holy hill, blessings. Yea,
there Gods people do receive showers of blessing: every powerful Sermon is as
a shower of blessing; every doctrine being as a blessed drop of instruction or
comfort, Ezech. 34.26. Exodus 20.24. Psalm. 132.15.

3 In the gifts of grace: and so he has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things, A poor Christian carries about with him in his
heart, more treasure than all the Monarchs of the world (being not true
Christians) can any way possess or command, Ephesians. 1.3.

Thus of Gods blessing in this life. After this life, who can recount the glory
of their inheritance, in the blessing they shall have then from God? Oh that
our hearts could be enlarged to think of the power of these words of Christ at
the last day, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you before the foundation of the world!

The use should be, for great comfort to all true Christians. They have great
cause to rejoice in their fathers blessing all their days: and the rather, if
they consider that Gods blessing, as a Father, is better than the blessing of
any earthly father: For an earthly fathers blessing is most an end but verbal,
in words; Gods blessing is real, in deeds. A father on earth cannot derive
blessing to his child from himself, but from God; whereas Gods blessing is
from himself. Besides, if an earthly father would bless his child, yet he
wants power to give him what he desires; but God our Father is almighty, able
to give as much as he wishes, Genesis 28.3. Finally, an earthly fathers blessing
may be lost, as Chams was; but Gods blessing cannot be lost; he will bless
with everlasting mercy.

Secondly, such as yet enjoy not the privilege of Gods called ones, should be
greatly stirred up with desire to get this blessing, even to have Gods
blessing. Let no man be profane like Esa^, to contemn Gods blessing, but
seek it while it may be had, Heb. 12.17.

Que. But what should we do, to get Gods blessing?

What we must do to get Gods blessing.
Ans. First, you must diligently resort to Gods house; for there God has
commanded the blessing, Psalm. 133.3. and be careful and attentive hearers of
Gods Word: for the ground that drinks in the rain, receives a blessing from
God, Heb. 6.7. the rain of instruction must soake into your hearts.

2 You must turn you every one from all your transgressions if you will have
Gods blessing in his Son Jesus, Act. 3.26. without sound repentance Gods
blessing will not be had. Men must not think to get Gods blessing, and do
after the things they do now a days every one that, is right in his own eyes
Deuteronomy. 12.7, 8.

Finally, we must be all such as fear God truly, Psalm. 115.13. and such as
will not lift up their souls to follow vanity, but get clean hands and a pure
heart; for such only shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and
righteousness from the God of their salvation, Psalm. 24.4.5. and to this end
we must carefully hearken to Gods voice, and observe to do all that he
commands us, Deuteronomy. 15.4.5.6.

Lastly, Gods own children, that have felt the comfort of Gods blessing, must
be admonished to carry themselves so, as they may grow in the comforts of it
more and more: And to this end,

1 They must daily ask God blessing, How godly men may grow in the comforts of
Gods blessing.
and by their daily prayers let the Lord know, that they make more account of
his blessing, than any children of earthly parents can do of their fathers
blessings.

2 Since they have such showers of blessing in Gods house daily, they
especially should be like good ground, so to drink in the spiritual rain,
that the fruits of it may appear in their lives, in all piety, and mercy, and
righteousness, Heb. 6.7.

3 Since they know the worth of Gods blessing, they should learn of Abraham to
command their servants, and their children, and their households to fear God
and to live righteously, that so they may be a means to help them also to
this great happiness of inheriting Gods blessing, Genesis 18.18.19.

4 If they be put to it, to deny themselves in things most dear to them, for
the glory of God, they shall approove themselves, as Abraham did in offering up
Isaac, to be such indeed as do fear God, and esteem his favor above all
things, Genesis 22.17, 18.

Verse. 10. For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain
his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile. Verse. 11. Let
him eschew evil, and do good, etc.
THus of the first reason, taken from the condition of Gods servants, as they
are heirs of blessing. In these words is contained the second reason, taken
from Prophetical testimony: David long since taught the same doctrine Saint
Peter now does, and gave the same advice in effect: for he had showed, That if
a man would live a quiet and contented life, free from troubles and mischief,
he must then take heed of all reviling and evil speaking, and avoid all
things might offend, either the godly or the wicked: All things, I say, that
are evil; and must labor after all courses of peace, and mercy, and
well-doing: and then God would be a protector of such godly and careful men,
and he would recompense upon the wicked, all the wrongs they do to his
servants. This is the sum of the meaning of these words.

In the words (for the order of them) observe three things.

1. The persons advised or charged by the Prophet David, vi^. such as would
needs lovelife, and to see good and quiet days.

2. The duties charged upon them, as the means to attain what they desired:
and so he shows what they must avoid, and what they must do. They must avoid,
in particular, an evil tongue; and in general, an evil and injurious life.
And contrariwise, for what they must do; in general, they must do good; and
in particular, seek peace, Verse. 10, 11.

3. The reason of his advcie; and that is taken from the Nature of God, and his
disposition, both toward the godly, and amongst the wicked, Verse. 12.

From the general consideration of all the words, we may gather, That a great
part of the miseries of life might be avoided, if men would be advised and
ruled. Most men and women may thank themselves for the unquietness and
distress they live in: And this will appear, if we consider of either their
crosses, or their temptations, or their corruptions, which are the things only
that can distress life.

As for the crosses, Note.
it is manifest by experience, that the most people suffer for their own
folly, and such things as might have been avoided. Their discontentments
arise, either from their rash matches in the estate of life they are in, or
from vain jangling in idle opinions, or from their rash and perverse words, or
from their wilful neglect of easy rules of good behavior in the family, or
the like. Take but the directions here given: If men did refrain their tongues
from evil speaking, by censure, or reproaches, or slander, or fraudulent
words, and that men did avoid injurious courses, or gross crimes: and
withal, if men did strive to do all the good they could to all sorts of men;
and finally, if men would use all lawful means to preserve peace, and to
avoid contumely, how quiet might the lives of the most people be? Again, let a
Christian consider of his corruptions, Note.
which at sometimes so trouble himself and others: does not his own
conscience know, that if he would constantly pray against them, and be sure to
be circumspect in his carriage, how certainly, and how soon might he be
delivered from the power of any sin? And for his infirmities, with how little
labor might he store his head with comfortable places of Scripture, that
might support him against the sense of his daily frailties? And for temptations
of Satan, that so extremely molest some few Christians, how might they have
been either avoided, or borne with more quiet? Some Christians tempt the
Devil to tempt them, by their solitariness, or idleness, or security, or
wilful nourishing of pride and vanity in themselves, or by a careless living
without assurance of faith. And when the temptations are upon them, and they
are truly humbled under them, how do some Christians wilfuliy refuse
consolation, and limit God, so as never to be quiet till the temptation be
remooved, though the Lord himself answer them, that his grace shall be
sufficient for them? The use should be therefore to warn all men that would
live quietly and comfortably, to awaken to the care of their duty, and to
study the rules given them out of the word of God: for, let them be assured,
till they make conscience of living by rule, it will never be better with them.

Again, in that Saint Peter, and the Prophet David agree so right in judgment,
concerning the practice of true Christians, it shows, That the rules of holy
life have been the same in all ages of the world; before the Law, and under
the Law, and now under the Gospel. We may see by the carriage of holy men
before the Law, that they walked by such rules as these: and the reason is,
Because the rules of a religious and virtuous life were in the mind of God
from all eternity, and so given to men from the beginning; and cannot change,
in as much as God is unchangeable in the forms of things. And this point may
show us how hard the world is to learn, in that these lessons have been
taught from the beginning, and yet the most men have not learned them. And
besides, godly Christians should be encouraged to live by rule, and to walk
circumspectly, seeing this is no harder a task required of them, than what has
been required in all ages.

Thirdly, it is worth the observing, who the persons are that give this
counsel, to strive as well as we can to live out of trouble, and to lead a
quiet life. They were two great Champions, that had endured a world of troubles
themselves; Peter, I mean, and David, and yet we see they press other men to
seek to live as quietly as is possible: and thus did Paul do also, 1. Tim.
2.2 1. These. 4.11. Heb. 12.11. Now one maine reason why they do so, is,
because they themselves did feel by experience, how unable they were to bear
crosses, when they fell upon them. It was this Peter that denied his Master,
upon the very sight (as it were) of adversaries: and it was this David, that
gave this advice, after himself had changed his behavior before Abimelech; as
you may see by the title of the Psalm. Which should teach us to be thankful
for that public or private quietness any of us do enjoy: and besides, it
should warn those unruly froward Christians, that live not in quiet, either at
home or abroad, to repent and amend their words and works. They cannot imagine
what singular comfort and contentment they withhold from their own lives, and
the lives of others: If they did but know how much God abhors a froward
Christian, they would be more afraid than they are.

Thus of the general observations: The first part concerns the persons that
are exhorted; and they are described by two forms of speech, the one, Such as
will love life: the other, Such as would see good days.

If any man will love life.] From this form of speech, three things may be
observed.

Doct. 1. That men by nature are prone to the love of life; and so prone, that
the most men will break all bounds, and will love life, whatsoever be said to
them, or done to them. This is a point so sensibly felt, by the experience of
the most that hear it, that it needs no proof. If any man ask what the
reason should be, why there is such an inordinate love of life in the most?
many things may be answered. The first cause of it, is the general corruption
of nature in the most men, which came in by sin: To love it self is nature,
but to love life so pertinaciously, is from degeneration, and the great
abasement of the nature of man, that cannot now move it self, toward the
perfection of it self: for unto the godly the change of life, is an alteration
that brings perfection. Secondly, ignorance and unbelief is the cause of it.
If men did know and believe those glorious things God speaks of a better life,
they would loath this present life, and long to be in heaven. Thirdly, the
cause in many is, that their hearts are ^ngaged upon such perplexed and
intricate projects, about profit, or pleasure, or greatness in the world, that
they are not at leisure to examine the reasons of the love of life: the heart
of man is usually oppressed with some one or other of these projects. Fourthly,
in all sorts of people there is such an incurable inconsideration, that no
warning from the Word or works of God, no experience of their own or other
men's, can force them to a serious and constant meditation of the things
concern their true happiness. Fifthly, the love of life arises in the most
from the Idols of their hearts. There is one thing or other that they have set
their hearts upon in a vicious manner: and this unreasonable love of their
particular sins, does hold them down in bondage to this present life, and so
cannot be cured of the disease, till they repent of their beloved sins; And
the guiltiness of their consciences makes them afraid of death and judgment,
and to embrace this present life upon any conditions. And in godly people, this
inordinate love of life arises from the defect of particular repentance for
it. Thus of the first point.

Doct. 2. Men have cause to take off their affections, and not to be so
desperately bent to the love of this present life. This is a point very
profitable to be urged, and most men and women have need of it: and therefore I
will show more largely the reasons why we should not love life, or not so
inordinately as to be unwilling to leave it upon any terms.

For what reasons men ought to take off their affections from the love of this
life.
The first reason may be taken from the commandment of Christ, who gives this
in charge to all that will be his Disciples, that they must not love life. As
they must deny themselves in other things, so in this particular. And he so
gives this in charge, as he seems to threaten them with the loss of life if
they love it, so Luke 17.33. Job. 12.25.

The second reason may be taken from the example of the godly, that have not
loved life. Job detested life, Job 3. Solomon tells of a multitude of occasions
that he had to hate life, in his book of Eccles. and a multitude of godly men
have showed the proof of it, in laying down their lives willingly, when they
have been called to it. Act. 20.24. Phil. 2.20. Heb. 11.35, 37.

The third reason may be taken from the consideration of life in it self,
both in the nature of it, and in the end of it: for the nature of it, it is but
a wind or a vapor, Iam. 4. so mean a thing, that no man can well tell how to
describe it perfectly; which is the greater wonder, that it should get the love
of all the world, and yet no body knows what it is he loves: And for the end
of it, it is not in the power of man to number his own days, God has set an
appointed time for every man's death: and though they love life never so much,
they cannot hold it beyond that time, Job 7.1. And besides, our times are so
hid, that a man cannot be sure of a month, a week, a day, an hour, and
shall our hearts be so bewitched with that which we know not how long we
shall enjoy? Job 24.1. and the rather, because there are so many ways for life
to go out at, though but one way to come in. And further, we can find no means
that has sufficient power to make a man live: God has so reserved the power
of life in his own hands, that none of the means we use to preserve life can
do it, to make it hold out for a moment, if God do not from above give
special assistance: Man lives not by bread. Mat. 4. and if a man had
abundance of all worldly things, yet a man's life consists not in that, Luke
12.15. etc.

The fourth reason may be taken from the profession of a Christian, or his
state, or relative calling, or condition in this life. First, we are Christ's
spiritual soldiers; Now men that go to war, entangle not ahemselves with the
things of this life, that they may please them that have chosen them to be
soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.4. Secondly, we are pilgrims and strangers in this life,
and therefore nothing should be more easy to us, than to be weary of the
present condition, and to long to be at home: Thus did the Patriarchs, Heb.
11.13. Thirdly, in this life we are but poor cottagers, that dwell in poor
houses of clay; and shall we love to be here rather than in those eternal
mansions? 2. Cor. 5.1. Job. 14.2.

The fifth reason may be taken from the sins of life. Even sin is a disease,
and a loathsome contagious one. Now then see what life is; thou thy self have
innumerable sins, and there is no man alive that sins not in the whole
world* now if every man have innumerable contagious diseases, what a loathsome
pesthouse is this world to live in? The thoughts of a man can reach to the
depth and length of this argument, but inconsideration buries all wholesome
counsel and motives. But besides this respect of sin, a Christian finds
from his own sins, if there were none else in the world, great cause to be
weary of life, first, because sin argues the imperfection of his nature, both
in soul and body; and so long as he is in this sinful life, he can never have
a perfect nature: now a a man that loves himself, for this reason would never
love life, Romans 7.23. Secondly, because sin is an offense to God: now a child
of God should therefore loath life, because by sinning he does injury to God
his merciful father: and in the most holy Christians, this argument has
extraordinary force.

The sixth reason may be taken from the crosses of life. Has not every day his
grief? Is there any estate or degree of men free from them? Are not those whom
God loves, corrected, yea, and perhaps more than other men? Seriously think of
what thou do suffer in thy particular: What diseases or infirmities are in
thy body? What unquietness and vexation do thou suffer in the house where
thou live? What crosses do follow or fear thee in thy calling? Yea, does
not thy religion breed thee trouble? If the reproaches and oppositions be
considered of, which godly men sometimes suffer, we might say with the Apostle,
Of all men they are most miserable, 1. Cor. 15.19. Paul says, he was a man
crucified while he lived, Gal. 2.20. and did always in his body carry about
the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2. Cor. 4.10. Besides, consider of the danger of
what may come upon thee in life: What if war come, or the pestilence, or sudden
poverty that cannot be cured? or fearful diseases that will fill thee with
horrible pain? Nay, what if thou should fall into some shameful fault? Oh,
what were the misery would follow upon it?

The seventh reason may be taken from the extreme vanity of those things
that seem to be felicities in life: all the things in life, that with any
color of reason can be made objects of thy love, are either the people of the
world, or the commodtties of the world.

Now for the first of these, thou have no reason to be in love with life, for
the people of the world with whom thou live: for,

In what respects the vanity of earthly things appear.
1 Amongst all the thousands of men and women thou see in the world, it may
be there is scarce one that loves thee entirely; scarce one from whom thou
may enjoy delight or comfort. They are poor things thou can have from the
rest, whether they be neighbors or strangers. More then thou give, thou
shall not receive, unless it be in poor complements, of salutations and
ceremonies of life.

2 If thou did excel in the privilege of being loved by friends, kindred,
wife, or children, yet reckon how small a portion of thy life is refreshed from
them: there is sometimes more delight in one poor dream, than will be had
this way in a long time.

3 Think of it, what changes and losses thou do or may suffer, if there
were any thing worthy thy love in friendship or acquaintance: thy friends may
be daily lost, either by the change of their minds from thee, or by distance
in habitation, or by death; and the pleasure is had by thy acquaintance, is
made not worth the having, either by interruption, or by discord, and taking of
offense, or want of power or will to help when thou have most need.

4 Who would not hate life for this very reason which I now give? Let a man
consider by experience in all others, how little the world cares for him. If
thou were to dye, what would the world care, or almost any in the world? let it
be thy wife, children, neighbors, hearers, dearest friends; yea, thy
religious friends, what would any of these care for thy death? Look not at
their words, but note it in their deeds. How few will be sorry for thee? or for
how short a time? and how soon will thou be clean forgotten? or how poor a
thing is the greatest memory any man has when he is dead? Do thou live to
hear this, and yet wilt be so mad as to love life, for the love thou bear
to any other?

5 The evil thou suffer from the world, is greater than the good thou can
get by it: think of the reproaches, injuries, oppositions, contempts,
persecutions, infections thou may find from unreasonable men. How many
thousand would triumph over thy poor fame, if thy feet do but slip?

Lastly the company thou shall have of Angels, and spirits of just men in
another world, should make thee loath all these things in this life; whether
thou respect number, or power, or dearnesse in friends, even in such as must be
companions of thy life. and therefore for the company that is in the world,
thou have no reason to love life.

The commodities of the world are lands, houses, money, honor, credit, beauty,
pleasure, and the like: now men have no cause to be so in love with these, if
they consider,

Men have no reason to be in love with earthly commodities, and that for
diverse causes.
1 How small a portion they have of these. If a man had won the whole world, and
the glory of it, yet it were not worth the having if he must lose his own
soul: Nay, if it were all had upon the best conditions, yet it would not make
a man truly happy; and therefore much less these silly parcells of the world
we can attain to, Eccles. 1.3.

2 These are all common things; and that in two respects: first, there is
nothing new now to be had, which has not been had heretofore ordinarily. What
is now, has been before, and will be afterward. Thou can enjoy no felicity
of life, that can be proper to thy self, Eccles. 1.9, 10. and 3.15. And then
further, all these things a fool may enjoy as well as a wise man, and a wicked
man as well as a godly man. A man shall never know love or hatred by these
things; for they fall alike to all sorts of men, Eccles. 2.14.

3 All things are full of labor, who can utter it? If men do reckon the
pains, and care, and unquietness, and weariness they are put to about the
getting, or keeping, or using of these things, they would find little cause to
love them; especially, considering that unto the use of the most of these is
required a daily labor with toil, that men that possess these things, cannot
possess themselves, they are so overburthened with the cares and labors of
life, Eccles. 1.8.

4 If a man had never so much of these things, yet they cannot satisfy him;
his soul will not be filled with good. The eye is not satisfied with seeing,
nor the ear with hearing. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with
silver. Man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain, Eccles
1.9. and 5.10. Psalm. 39. A shadow is something in appearance, but nothing in
substance, if a man would seek to claspe it, or receive it to himself.

5 All these things are transitory, and uncertain, and mutable. which may be
considered of three ways: First, if thou love these things, thou art not sure
thou can keep them; they may be lost suddenly and fearfully: for either
they may wear out of themselves, or they may be taken from thee; they are
liable to vanity in themselves, or to violence from others, Matthew. 6.19.20. 1.
Pet. 1.24. Secondly, if thou be sure to enjoy them, yet they will be suddenly
lost to thee, because thou can not make thy heart to take delight in the same
things still; for, not only the world passes away, but the lusts thereof also,
1. Job. 2.15. Eccles. 6.1, 7. and 9.3. Thirdly, if neither of these befall
thee, yet thou art mortal, thou must be taken from them, and thy life is short
like a dream, and passes away like the wind; and thou art but a stranger and
pilgrim here; and thou must carry nothing out of the world; but in all points,
as thou came into the world, so must thou go hence, Psalm. 90. Job 7.7.
Eccles. 5.13, 14, 15. All flesh is grass, Esaias 40.6.

6 That a man may receive much hurt from them: they may steal away our hearts
from God. The amity of the world, is the enmity with God, Iam. 4. They are
like pitch to defile: there is a snare and temptation in all of them: they fill
men's hearts with foolish and noisome lusts, and a man may damn his soul for
too much loving of them, 1. Tim. 6.9. Phi. 3:18. and they may serve to witness
against a man at the day of judgment, Iam. 5.1.

Lastly, consider that there is no comparison between the commodities of this
life, and the commodities of the life to come; There are rivers of pleasures
for evermore, Psalm. 16. ult. There are Crowns of honor and glory, such as
will neither be held with envy, nor lost with infamy; there shall men
possess enduring substance, Heb. 11. treasures not liable either to vanity or
violence, Matthew. 6.20. an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that
withers not, and lies in heaven, 1. Pet. 1.3.4. Thus of the second doctrine.

A third Doctrine may be gathered out of these words, In what cases it may be
lawful for some persons to be in love with this life.
and that is, That in some cases there is a permission of the love of life: In
that he gives rules to such as will love life, it imports, that God is
contented to suffer or tolerate that humor in men. Now this toleration may be
considered of, as it is granted to some men, or as it extends in some sort to
all sorts of men. Some men that are in high place, and have public
employments, and are about some special service for the glory of God, and good
of the Church or Commonwealth; in these men the desire to live longer, in it
self, is not sinful: This was the case of David, and Hezekiah. Now further,
unto all sorts of men the Lord does allow a certain kind of liking of life;
so as they observe such cautions and rules as he appoints: as namely, that the
cares of this life hinder not the preparation for death, or the provision for a
better life; and withal, that they limit not God for the time of life, but be
willing to dye when God calls for their lives.

Now for a conclusion to this point, I would advise those that have such a
mind to live here, to look to certain rules, which will prevail with God to
grant them long life, if any thing will prevail: What such must do to prolong
their life.
as first, they must be exhorted to take heed of overmuch desire of life, they
must moderate their desires after life: If they could once attain to it, to
be content to die when God will, it may be they should find life prolonged;
according to that of our Savior, He that will lose his life, shall find it.
Secondly, such as have parents in nature or religion, must be very careful to
give them due honor, for to such God has promised long life in the fifth
Commandment. Thirdly, godliness has the promises of this present life, as
well as of the life to come; and therefore ever the more godly we are in all
manner of conversation, the longer we may be likely to live: and contrariwise,
a profane man has no assurance to live out half his days. Thus of the first
form of speech.

The second form of speech, by which the persons he advises, are described,
are such as will see good days.

And see good days.] Before I come to the observations, here is work of large
enquiry and consideration about the sense: for these words import, That in the
life of man there be some good days, and some evil days. Physicians tell us
in their profession, of some days in the year that be good days, and some
that be evil days, for their directions: and superstitious and idle people in
the world, tell us that there are some good days to begin businesses in, and
some evil. It seems here the Prophet David, in Theological contemplation,
finds, that in the life of man some days be good, and some be evil. This
would be enquired into. And that we may find out which be good days, we
must first enquire, which be evil days, and that by Scripture account: And
that we may distinctly understand this, we must enquire which be evil days,

1 For wicked men.

2 For godly men.

The days of wicked men must be considered more generally, or more specially:
generally, all the days of the wicked are evil; both because he is a
transgressour every day, and because the curse of God is upon him all his
days, even then when he lives longest, and enjoyes most prosperous times,
Esaias 65.20. Every day the wrath of God hangs over his head, and every day God
judges him, Psalm. 7. either in soul, or body, or name, or estate; either by
withholding his blessings, or by mingling the curse with the good things he
enjoys, Psalm. 78.33. as the Israelites under censure of death from God,

More specially, the days of the wicked man are evil, eiin this life, What
days are evil in respect of wicked men.
or after this life. In this life his days are evil in two special senses;
either in respect of the shortning of them, or in respect of the afflicting of
them. It is a special evil to some wicked men, that their days on earth are
shortened. Some men live not out half their days, and dye in the midst of
their days, Psalm. 55.24. Ier. 17.11. and so it is a curse that his days are
few, Psalm. 109.8. Eccles. 8.13. Again, the days of wicked men are said to be
evil, in respect of some special judgments of God, to be powered out upon
them for their sins. These days are called the days of Gods wrath and
anger: and days of Gods visitation, Isa. 10.3. the day of vengeance, Esaias
61.2. which God proclaims against all wicked men; and by an excellency, The
evil day, Amos 6.3. And these days are in special called the days of wicked
men: and they are theirs, because properly no day is theirs till it be evil,
Ier. 50.31. After this life comes that most special evil days, even that day
of eternal misery in hell: of which Solomon said, God made the wicked for the
day of evil, Prove. 16.4.

This doctrine of their evil days, should much affright wicked men, not only
with the consideration of what they suffer now, but of what they are liable to
in the days to come. Little do they dream of the misery may befall them:
such days may come, as will burst their hearts with exquisite grief, their
hearts shall not be able to endure, Ezech. 22.14. and therefore they should
take heed of putting far from them the evil day, Amos 6.3. and in time
repent, and reconcile themselves to God in Jesus Christ, that they may prevent
the evil days may yet fall upon them, and know that their uncircumcised heart
is the cause of all the evil brought, or to be brought upon them, Ier. 9.
ult. Thus of evil days in the life of the wicked.

Wherein godly men's days are evil.
The godly man's days are evil diverse ways.

1 The days of spiritual famine are evil days: when a man cannot enjoy the
means of Salvation in the life and power of them. In this case David said, his
tears were his meat day and night, Psalm. 42.2.

2 The days in which God is displeased with them, or hides himself, so as he
will not hear their prayers, or not let them discern it. These are bitter
days to the godly, Psalm. 102.2, 3. and 90.9.

3 Days of temptation, in which they are to wrestle with principalities and
powers, are evil days, Ephesians. 6.

4 All days of trouble are in some respect evil days, Psalm. 49.5. and 50.14.
and. 41.1, 2. especially those days are evil, when the Lord turns wicked men
loose upon the godly, and leaves them as it were in their hands to be
reproached and oppressed all the day, especially when himself will not appear
to help them, Psalm. 102.8.10.11. Esaias 37.3. and most of all, when the just man
seems to perish in his righteousness, Eccles. 7.15. Great difference
between the evil days of wicked and godly men.


But yet here is a great deal of difference between the evil days of godly
men, and the evil days of wicked men: because God sanctifies the evil of his
days to the godly man, so as he is blessed when God chasteneth him, for he
thereby teaches him his law, Psalm. 94.12. Heb. 12. Secondly, God will deliver
him out of evil, if he call upon him. Psalm. 50.15. yea, though his troubles
seem desperate, Ier. 30.7. Thirdly, though God may seem to delay for a time,
yet he will make have to perform his deliverance, After two days he will
return, and the third day he will revive them, Hos. 6.3. Fourthly, God will
make them glad, according to the days he has afflicted them; he will make
them amends for all their evil days, Psalm. 90.15.

To conclude this point, Evil days common to wicked and godly men.
there be days that are called evil, which are common both to good and bad;
and such are the days of old age, Eccles. 12.1. when the Sun, Moon, and
Stars are darkened, that is, all sense of prosperity is removed, and the
infirmities of old age come thick one upon another, like clouds after rain,
Verse. 2. when the arms, which are the keepers of the house, shake; and the
thighs and legs, which were like strong men, now bow and bend under them; and
their teeth, which were the grinders or chewers of their meat, now cease
working, because they are few; and the eyes, which are the windows of the
body, grow dark, Verse. 3. when the doors shall be shut in the streets, that
is, when upon the loss of his appetite he shall have no delight in any thing
at home, nor mind to go abroad, but his own house shall be his prison; and
when he shall be so unable to rest in his bed, that he shall rise with the
first voice of the bird, and be waked with the least noise that is; and that
have no delight in music of any kind, as Barzillai said, 2. Sam. 19.36. when
they shall be afraid of every straw in their way, they shall go so weakly,
and their Almond tree shall flourish, that is, their heads shall be white as
the blossoms of the Almond; and they shall be so fore, that a very Grasshopper
shall be a burden to them; to touch them shall be grievous, and all the things
they were wont to love, they cannot now find any comfort in: and thus they are
passing to their long-home, which is the grave; and they are so near, as if
their very mourners were ready in the streets to carry them to their graves,
Verse. 4, 5. yea, they will not continue long, but the silver cord will be
loosened, that is, the marrow of their backs be consumed; and their golden
Ewer, which is the brain-pan, be broake; and so will the pitcher at the Well,
that is, the veins at the liver; and so will the wheel at the Cisterne be
broken, that is, the head which draws the powers of life from the heart, Ver.
6. and the dust returns unto the earth as it was, and the spirit to God that
gave it, Verse. 7.

Thus of the days that be evil days. Now it remains that we enquire which
be good days; and so we shall find, that there bedaies that be good, in the
judgment of the inward man, and sometimes days that be good, in the judgment
of the outward man: only thus much we must know, that in the first sense,
none enjoy good days but good men. Now good days in the sense of the
Scripture, must be considered, either in general, or in particular.

What are good days in general.
In general; and so first, all the days of Christ, after he is revealed in a
Christian, are good days: and so all the days of a true christian, from his
conversion to his death, are good days. Which appears thus: Saint Paul says,
that Christ is our Passover; amd the Passover is a feast which we must keep,
1. Cor. 5.8. and such high festival days are good days, especially the first
and last days of the Passover were good days, in a special solemnity, that
is, the day of thy conversion to spiritual life, and the day of thy death,
which is the beginning of the day of eternal life. Secondly, all the days in
which Christians enjoy the preaching of the Gospel in the power of it, and
other ordinances of Christ in their glory, all these days be good days; for
they are days in which God makes rich feasts unto all Nations, as is
effectually described in the Allegory, Esaias 25.8. Thus David says, One day in
Gods courts is better than a thousand any where else, Psalm. 84.10. The
righteous flourish when Christ comes down upon their souls, as rain upon the
mowen grass, Psalm. 72.6, 7. Thirdly, those be good days in which we see the
Church of God in general to prosper, Psalm. 128.5, 6. when God keeps his Church
as his Vineyard, and waters it every moment, and watches it night and day, and
destroys every thing that might annoy it, Esaias 27.2, 3.

In particular, In particular, there are diverse sorts of good days to the
godly.
a Christian finds diverse sorts of good days; as first, the Sabbath days well
sanctified, are good days, above all other days of the week, when his body
enjoyes rest, and his soul is blessed, according to Gods promise, with
spiritual rest and grace in Jesus Christ. Secondly, the days in which the
soul of a Christian after sin, and the judgment of God for it, is humbled
soundly, and anew admitted into Gods presence, and reconciled to God: those
days, when God entertaines the repenting sinner that prays unto him,
especially at the first reconciliation, are wonderful good days, Job 33.25,
26. with the coherence. and 36.11. Psalm. 90.14. Luke 4.21. with Esaias 61.1.2.10.

Thirdly, all the days in which a Christian thrives and prospers in the
knowledge of Gods word, and grows in the spiritual understanding in the
mysteries of Gods kingdom, are all good days; for this knowledge is that
wisdom Solomon speaks of, which makes a man so happy, Pro. 3.18.2.16.

Thus of the good days that are so in the judgment of the inward man. God is
pleased also to grant such good days, as are, or ought to be so accounted, in
the judgment of the outward man: and so,

First, the days of youth, in which a man has strength of body, and vigor of
mind, to fit him not only for the comforts of life, but for the service of
his creator, are good days, Eccles. 12.1. it being a blessed thing to bear
Gods yoke in a man's youth.

Secondly, the days of special prosperity in the world, which sometime God
grants unto his people, are also good days: when God gives his people
abundance of blessings in their families and estates, and withal, public
honor and respect withal sorts, even the great ones of the world; as was in
the case of Job, which he describes in the whole 29 Chapter of his book: but
then it must have this indeed, that in this prosperity the godly man be
employed in all well doing, and get himself honor by the flourishing of his
gifts and good works, as is showed in that Chapter by Job.

Thirdly, such days in which a man enjoyes a quiet estate, free from all
trouble, or vexation, or contumely, at home or abroad, being free from Gods
aflicting hand, or man's injurious dealing, are good days; and such as perhaps
are specially meant in this place.

Thus of the sense of the words. Diverse doctrines may be observed from hence.

1 That the days of men usually are evil; which is true, not only of the
wicked, but of the godly also. This Jacob said long ago, his days were few
and evil, Genesis 47.9. but of this point before: Only this may serve for great
reproof of those that so little mind a better life, and so wilfully love this
life, that though they live in much misery, are loath to think of dying, and
take no course to provide for a better life.

Man's life is short.
2 It is evident from hence, that the life of man is but short: whether he live
happily or miserably, yet his life is reckoned by days, not by longer
measures, of purpose to signify the shortness of our lives. This is expressly
affirmed in other Scriptures, Job 10.20. Job says, his days were few, and of
all men that are borne of women, that they have but a short time to live, Job
7.1. And this is resembled by diverse similitudes: so our life is compared to a
Weavers shuttle, Job 7.6. to a Post for swift running out, Job 9.25. to the
grass of the field, Job. 7.12. Esaias 40.6. to an hand breadth, so as he says,
his age is as nothing, Ps. 39.5. to a watch in the night, Psalm. 90.4. to a
sleep, verse. 5. to a tale that is told, verse. 9.

In what respect it is short.
Thus the life of man is said to be short, either as he is in Gods sight, with
whom a thousand years are but as yesterday, when it is past, Psalm. 90 4. or in
his own account, if he measure time to come, as he measures time past: and in
plain reckoning, let the life of man be improved according to man's utmost
strength, ordinarily a man's years are threescore and ten, and if he live to
fourscore, it is but labor and sorrow to him, Psalm. 90.

Quest. But what should be the cause that men's lives are so short?

Causes why most men's lives are so short.
Ans. If there were no other cause but the will of him that has the disposing
of the times and seasons in his own power, yet that might satisfy us; but we
may guess at other causes, as* both the mercy and justice of God. This world
is so bad to the godly, that it is Gods mercy to take them quickly out of it:
and contrariwise, it is so good to the wicked (considering their deserts) that
it is justice in God to take them hence, and send them to their own place,
which is hell. Besides, many men bring speedy death upon themselves by their
own il courses, or by sinning against their own bodies by lewd courses, and by
eating up their own hearts with worldly cares and sorrows; or by living in
any gross sin, to provoke God to cut them off; or by falling into such
disorder, as the Magistrate cuts them off; or by laying of violent hands upon
themselves; or by getting their goods unlawfully, to bring upon themselves that
curse, Ier. 17.11. Finally, in this last age of the world, there may be this
reason assigned, that the Lord makes have to have the number of his elect
fulfilled, and therefore he dispatcheth away the generations one after another,
and so shortneth the days of man for his elect sake.

Now for the uses: Are our lives so short? then it should teach us diverse
lessons.

1 To pray God to make us able to think so, Uses.
and so to number our days, that we may not make any reckoning of any long
continuance here, Psalm. 39.3. and 90.12.

2 To make have and dispatch our repentance, and all the businesses that
concern our sound reconciliation, and so to walk while we have the light,
and to use all good means while we enjoy them.

3 To redeem the time, and save as much of it as we can, for the uses of a
better life. Ephs. 5. and to work the harder, to fulfill thy measure and
dispatch that task God has set thee to do.

4 To lay fast hold upon eternal life, 1. Tim. 6. and to make that sure.

5 Every day to provide for our departure; even all the days of our appointed
time to wait when our changing shall come, Job 14.14.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index of the most Principal things handled throughout the
whole Book.
A
ADoption: the glory of it. 133 How it is attained. 136 Marks thereof. 136
Amazement in wives. 109 Causes thereof. 109 Antiquity: when ill pleaded. 91
Apparel: See Attire. Attire: reasons against the vanity of it. 58 Attire
vicious 14 ways. 63
B
Blessing: kinds thereof. 204 Blessings: how inherited. 214 How they may be
gotten. 216 How grow in comforts of them. 217 Brethren: who are so. 189 Motives
to love as Brethren. 190 Brethren, how to be loved. 191 Rules for brotherly
love. 193 Brethren, how to be respected in case of sin. 194
C
Calling to Christianity. 205 Necessity of knowing it. 208 Chastity in married
persons. 44 Motives thereto. 45 Preservatives of Chastity. 46 How a Chaste wife
may be discerned. 47 Christians: diverse sorts of them. 209 Church of Rome not
to be agreed unto. 187 Cohabitation of husbands and wives. 114 Compassion. 188
What bowels of Compassion import. 196 How Compassion rightly ordered. 196
Conversion: why all not at once converted. 31 Corruptible things. 71 Courtesy.
199
D
Days, evil in what respect. 229 Days good, in what respect. 232 Discords in
opinions. 184 Causes thereof. 185 Divorce. 118 Doing well. 107 Motives thereto.
107
E
Earthly things vain. 224 Why they are not to be loved. 226 Example. Two
virtues of good example. 88 How example bindos. 90
F
Fear of God, how showed. 52 Motives to Fear. 51 Fear: how discerned, 50
Fear: servile of wicked. 48 Who are without Fear. 54 Frowardness: the causes
and effects thereof. 80
G
Good actions, how marred. 106 Grace manifold. 163 What Grace excludes and
includes. 165 Graces previledge. 166 Who sin against Grace. 168 Guile. Signs
of spirit without Guile. 19
H
Heart. See Man of the heart. Heirs to Gods Saints. 132 Marks of Heirs. 136
How to carry themselves. 138 Men and women, all Heirs. 169 Husbands to live
quietly with wives. 2 Sixteen motives thereto. 3 Helps thereto. 6 Causes of
disorder betwixt them. 5 Husbands duties, why in the last place. 111 Motives
for Husbands to do their duty. 112 Husbands to dwell with their wives. 114
Cases for absence. 115 Separation unlawful. 116 Husbands must dwell with
knowledge. 123 Husbands must honor their wives. 126
I
Incorruptible things. 73 Joy spiritual. 156
K
Knowledge divine excellent. 119 Means of making Knowledge powerful. 121 How
man dwells with Knowledge. 123 Properties and effects of Knowledge. 144
L
Life natural, 224 A mean thing. 139 Life spiritual. 141 Degrees of it. 141
Original of it. 144 Nature of it. 144 Nourishers of it. 147 Difference betwixt
spiritual and eternal life. 149 How spiritual life is attained. 157 Helps
thereto. 158 Signs thereof. 160 Properties thereof. 161 Duties required by
virtue of spiritual life. 162 Life of man short. 234 Love of Life. 223 How
life to be prolonged. 228 Love: See Brethren.
M
Man of the heart. 66 Wherein he excells the outward Man. 67 His natural
condition. 68 How he ma be mended. 69 How known to be right. 70 Meckenesse:
what requisite thereto. 76 Helps to attain it. 81 Mind. All of one mind.
180 Helps thereto. 182 Miseries of life, how avoided. 219
N
Nullities of Marriage. 116
O
Obedience: six things required thereto. 25 Old times: what respect to be had
thereto. 92
P
Peace. 155 Pity: Motives thereto. 168 See Compassion. Pleasing God: rules
for it. 84 Prayers excellency 171 Sorts of Prayers. 173 How prayer is hindered
or interrupted. 174 Pure: how Saints are so styled. 40
Q
Quietness. See Meekness. How kept quiet in trouble. 177
R
Repetition of the same things, what imported thereby. 9 Revenge. 201
Revolting: causes thereof. 17 Righteousness. 154
S
Salvation: how furthered. 34 Sarah's Daughters, 103 Scripture Gods Word. 22
See Word. Separation betwixt man and wife. 116 Spiritual life. See Life.
Subjection of Wives. 1^ See Wives.
T
Trust in God: Signs thereof. 95 Excellency of it. 97 Effects of it. 97 Rules
about it. 99
V
Unity of mind. See Mind.
W
Winning men. 29 Diverse ways thereof. 17 Signs of being won. 18 Diverse
kinds of Winning. 27 How Ministers win Souls. 29 How wicked won by our
conversation 36 How Wives may win their Husbands. 37 WIVES. See Husbands. See
Women. Why Wives duties largely set down. 8 Why Wives ought to be subject 12
In What Wives are subject. 13 How Wives must be subject. 14 Sons of Wives
against subjection. 15 Wives, how they may win their husbands. 37 Wives
Chastity, how seens. 47 Wives fear of husbands. 55 Wives amazement, how
caused. 109 Women. See Wives. Women ought first to be taught their duty. 7
Women's frailties. 129 Word of God to be obeyed. 23 See Scripture.
FINIS.

