SAINT MARIE MAGDALENS CONVERSION.

IHS

Printed with License.

THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
This small poem (Gentle Reader) was composed for the pleasure of some private
friends, and intended to have bin presented for a Newe-yeres gift the first of
this mounth: But interuention of other affairs, delaied the finishing thereof,
until the last. I made choice of this subject, as most fitting this time of
death, the style being correspondant, plain and passionate, much like a
morning garment, fitting both the time and the matter. Grave enough for sobrest
wits, and not se harshe, but may content the nicest ears. The reading
whereof (I doubt not) will prove both pleasant, and profitable, which is as
much as I can wish or thou desire. Farewell this last of January. 1603.

Thine I. C.

TO THE DEVOVT. AND VIRTUOUS MISTRESS F. B. I. C. PRESENTS THIS HIS WORTHELES
LABOUR for a Newe-yeares gift.
THis day (the eight'h from his Nativity)
The glorious Son of the Omnipotent
Was Circumcis'de, bearinge man's frailetie,
To Appease the wrath of the Magnificent;
This day, the Son of blessed MARY shed
His first dear blood, to make us live b'inge dead.
In memory whereof this custom takes,
That on the first day of the newe-borne year,
Each friend, unto his friend some present makes;
Lover to Lover, husband to his pheare:
But I; poor I, that have no gift to bring,
Out of my homebred Muse these verses singe.
SAINT MARY MAGDALENS CONVERSION.
OF Romes great conquest in the elder age,
When she the world made subject to her thrall,
Of lovers giddy fancies, and the rage,
Wherewith that passion is possessed withal,
When jealousy with love does share apart,
And breeds a civil war within the heart.
Of Helens rape, and Troyes beseiged Town,
Of Troylus faith, and Cressids falsitie,
Of Rychards stratagems for the english crown,
Of Tarquins lust, and lucrece chastity,
Of these, of none of these my muse now treates,
Of greater conquests, wars, and loves she speaks,
A woman's conquest of her one affects,
A woman's war with her selfe-appetite,
A woman's love, breeding such effects,
As the age before nor since nere brought to light,
Of these; and such as these, my muse is pressed,
To spend the idle hours of her rest.
Thou blessed Saint, whose life does teach to live,
Entreat that loving and best loved Lord of thine,
That he vouchsafe such lively grace to give
Unto these dull, and liueles rimes of mine,
That such as read this good, (though ill told) story,
May be (like thee) for their offenses sorry.
When first the worlds Creator our dread Lord,
Did with his presence bless Iudeae land,
And to all sorts of people did afforde,
His gracious favor and all helping hand,
Restoring by his power Omnipotent,
The lazar, deaf, blind, lame, and impotent.
Amongst the daughters of the sons of men,
She that did most his gracious mercy prove,
Was ( Mary Marthas sister) Magdalen,
Who loved most, and had most cause to love,
Her wounded soul he cur'de with sins oppressed,
Natures deffects in others he redrest.
She needed not the rich man's golden ring,
That all desires, seldom well got, good,
She needed not the Herauldes deif'ing,
To make her gentle of ungentle blood,
She needed not the painters white and red,
Nature those colors in her face had shed.
Her eyes unto their Mistres yielded light,
All though her self, within herself, were blind,
She was nor lame, nor deaf, nor lazar-like,
Perfecc'ous store to each lime was asin'de,
With natures gifts she plent'iously was graced,
But sin those ornaments had all defaced.
Sin made her want, in midst of her store,
Sin made her servile in her liberty,
Of all good graces sin did make her poor,
And rich in nothing but in misery,
Her soul was subject to a thousand euilles,
Her body combred with as many Diuilles.
But her dear Lord through his life-giuing grace,
This many-headed Monster drove away,
And those foul fendes who did his works deface,
His blessed presence from her did affray,
He thought not meet, that such unseemly gest,
Should in so fair an Arbor build their nest.
After her foes were thus dispersed and gone.
Her captive soul b'inge franchis'de from their thrall,
And she transformed by that mighty one,
From her life best' all to celestial,
Her Lord affirmed that her love was such,
That she deserved to be pardoned much.
Her Lawles lusts she chaing'de to lawful love,
Her many pleasures to one chief delighte,
All other joys she did from her remove,
And only ioyed in his blessed sight,
Who best deserved to be loved most,
Sauinge her soul from death, by sin b'inge lost.
She hates now, what she had lou'de before,
She loves him, to whom all love was due,
Her former misspent life she does deplore,
And now endeavors for to live anewe,
Herself, unto herself did hateful grow,
When thus enlight'ned she her-selfe did know.
This Holy hatred did true love increase;
She lou'de the more in that she hated so,
This Holy hatred did her false loves cease,
And how to love arighte to her did show,
O Hatred thou are only good in this,
In all things else thou do work amiss.
Like to a monster to her self she seem'ed,
And of her self, her self was now afraid,
She saw 'twas otherwise then she had deem'ed,
And loth'de to see how fondly she had straied,
She now perceaues the errors of her life,
Which makes her with her self to be in strife
O how have I deceived been (quoth she)
With the false show of counterfeyt delight?
Were these the pleasures? this the vanities,
Which now so much my gilty soul affright?
Have I incurred the loss of life and fame,
To purchase sorrow and repentant shame?
Did I for this, my fathers house forsake,
Leaving my careful sister sisterles?
Did I for this, of friends me frendles make,
Shaming my kindred through my sinnefullnes?
Did I for this, leave sister, friends and all,
And from the service of my maker fall?
O sin, thou art a serpent full of fleyght,
Thy face seem'de not so foul as now I see,
Thou do bewitch us with a strong deceipte,
Of seeming good though full of miserye,
Our souls thou woundest with thy poysonus dart,
And we (as senceles) never feel the smart.
Thou art the loss of heaven, and hels best friend;
How many (like a Siren) here thee sing?
How many by in chantment do thou send,
To Plutoes Kingdom, ere they feel thy sting,
But why do I exclaim against thee so,
When I was partner in my over throw?
I gave consent that thou shoul'dst work my fall,
I pleased was with what thou did suggest,
I was attendant to each seruill call,
And basely subject to thy foul be-hest,
I grew a cunning Artist in thy trade,
And with thy Charms have many souls insnar'de.
O sin of sins and the worst of evils,
To poison others with thy stinking breath,
No marvel though I was a lodge for Deuilles,
And worthily became a hell on earth;
Wast not enoughe that thou thy self did sin,
But that thou others to the same must win?
O my lost soul, how foul will thou appear,
How full of fear, in that last dreadful day,
When thou shall bitter exclamations hear,
Of such, whom thou did guilefully betray,
What can thou say? What color can thou bring,
TO excuse thy self of this infecting sin?
O none at all; for sinnes-selfe I am grown;
There is no sin but what in me remains,
To be a public sinner I am known,
The note of shame, which all my kindred stains,
The blott, which I would wash of with my blood,
To purchase to my self the name of good:
But I have bin so long sins seruingman,
That men will think I cannot from him part,
They will object, I am a publican,
And by long custom grounded in the art;
From custom we another nature take,
In good or ill she does us perfect make.
If to my sister home-againe I take me,
She will reject me, least I spott her fame,
If to my kinsfolks, they will all forsake me;
Through my misdeedes I have incur'de such blame,
I dare not to a strainger show my face
H' will wound my soul with words of foul disgrace.
Like to Mineruas bird, when she appears
And shows her hated self unto the light,
Each fath'red foul against her Clamors reares,
And makes her all ashamed take her flight,
They all pursuing her with ^ill and winge,
And she as fast away does from them flinge:
So does it far with me distressed one,
When in the peopled streets. I chance to walk,
There man nor woman does respect my moan,
But all of my loss life do seem to talk,
All seem to wonder at me a I go,
And Monster-like me to their children show.
Me thinks I see some from their windows look,
And with their fingers pointing out my shame,
And some (who cannot) my foul presence brook,
With lavish tounges to publish my defame,
All hands and tounges conspiring my disgrace,
Whilst I a lothed Creature veyle my face.
For though it be a common act to fall,
And sin it self is too well Cherished:
Yet is the sinner hattefull unto all;
Compass'on now amongst men is perished,
The plea of mercy will not hold in law,
Each Pettyfogger in it finds a flawe.
The beggar always for offenses bleedes,
And feels the hand of grim Severity,
The rich man's gold can cancel out misdeedes,
And blind the sight of bleare-eyed briberie:
But I am rich in nothing, but in sin,
That would I all forgo some grace to win.
If in my life I had but once misdone,
Then had I not such urgent cause to mourn,
Or to offend if I had new begun,
Then were there some small hope of backe-returne:
But long vs'^e sins from all this hope bereaues,
And of their good conceptes me hopeles leaves.
Much like a crasie weather-beaten boat,
Who having all his sails and tacklinges lost,
Amid the surges of the seas does floate,
And too and fro with every guste is toste:
So waves my anxious soul midst stormy fears
No harbor can she find no calm appears.
But since of freindes my sins has me bereft,
I will return unto that Nazarite,
Who of his pity has good tokens left
In me for lorne wretched Israelite,
He is for all afflicted and distressed
A harbor, haven, and a port of rest.
A God-like man (if I may term him so)
Or rather God; for dowbtles so he is,
More then a man to be, his deeds do show,
Each eye his acc'ons more then humane fees:
But how shall I be grateful to the best
When I a sinner do my self detest?
For being good (as he no other seems)
As chiefest good, he hates all that is ill,
Like Traitors to his crown he sinners deemes,
Who still oppose themselves against his will;
Nothing in God but sin can hatred breed;
How then shall I the worst of sinners speed.
Through his all-seing wisdom he does know
The passed faults of my transgressing life;
How great the wounds have bin the Scarres will show:
As yet my sinful soars are bleeding rife;
More then all others, I did him offend,
Less cause there is that he should succor lend.
What (he will say) now all men thee reject,
Can thou suppose that I will thee receive?
Me most deserving thou did least respect,
And for a shadow, did the substance leave,
All that thou have, I gave; yet thou unjust
Did most offend him who did give thee most.
I did Create thee of a different state
From other Creatures of a less respect,
I might have made thee, like in form and shape,
Unto the Monsters, of a feirce aspect:
But I did give thee natures ornament
Beauty, which thou have lauishlie misspent.
I gave thee will, for to desire the best,
And understanding to discern the same,
Thou wast not ignorant of my behest:
For all thy Nation invoke my name;
If thou had been a Gentile, thy abuse
Might have put on some color of excuse:
But thou did know what did to me belong,
And what thy self in duty should have done,
Yet thou did never cease to work me wrong,
Persistinge always in thine ill begun,
I sparinge thy deserved punishment,
Expectinge still thy sins relinquishment.
He that his Creditor has long delay'de
With dilatory hopes, of payements due,
Having made breach of promise grows dismai'de,
Least irefull rigor will his fault ensue,
His Creditors fear'de presence he forsakes,
Till due repayement some atonement makes:
But thou art far engaged in my debt;
For what have thou which I did not bestow?
Hou can thou then new credit now expect,
Who never pai'st but ever seek'st to owe?
For now thou come no old debtes to defray:
But mercies new disbursementes for to pray.
Can thou imagine I my self forgette?
Or that calm mercy reuengefull Justice stays?
Although (it is true) I sit on mercies seat,
Yet my right hand the sword of Justice swaies;
Mercy and Justice are at my dispense,
To pardon or to punish each offense.
Thou have already tasted mercies store,
In that I did so long thy life sustain,
Now Justice does require, thou should restore,
Thy borrowed talent, with an earned gain,
But banckrout-like, thou have misspent the stock,
And now ashamed at mercies gate do knock.
I know this Lord; I know I have offended,
And am in debted more then I can pay,
I humbly crave that mercy be extended,
And I no more will run so fare astray,
Tears spent her speech (for now she wept amine)
And after tears she thus began again.
If thou (O Lord) wilt cancel my old debt,
And once again restore me to thy grace,
If thou will all my former wrongs forgett,
And smoothe the wrinckels of thy angery face,
The remnant of my purchased life I vow,
In thy true service wholly to bestow.
Here silent grief suppressed her further moan,
And stopped the current of her flowing tears,
She could not speak, nor weep, her soul alone,
The heavy weight of sorrows burden bears,
When outward senses once have spent their store,
Then inward passions do offlicte the more.
Her soul within her holds a parliament,
And summons all her powers to appear,
And they (as ready for to give content)
Unto their Lady lend awilling ear,
Within themselves they seriously debate,
How to redress their mistres troubled state.
First memory (the minds best Register)
Tells her of many (Like her self) distressed,
Who were reliued by this comforter,
And had their former euilles all redrest,
How that the proud he uses to reject,
But mercies-beggars always does erect,
Here Hope conceaueth (from examples past)
A good conceit that like may now ensue,
She does suggest, how that his mercies last,
And are bestow'de on them that humbly sue,
Hope does persuade her sad Contrition,
Will for offenses beg Remission.
Now strong opinion does posses her breast,
And her ensureth of a good success,
And freeborn will (as handmaide to the rest)
Is now behind to entertain such guess:
Only distrust and euer-douting fear,
Her springing hapes do cross with dead despair.
They bid her look aright on her misdeedes,
And she should find 'twas not as she suppo'de,
Which chookes in her the growth of hopefulll seed,
And makes her doubt what erst had been propos'de;
As often as Hope her fainting soul imbouldes:
Distrust and fear the same as often controwles.
Like to a Trau'ler in an unknown way
Who having sundry paths to pass along,
Is careful which to take, fearing to stray,
And still he doubts, that which he takes is wrong,
So her sad soul with doudtfull fears oppressed,
Knows not which course to take but wills the best
Now Hope his wonted pirtie dote relate,
And then Distrust bids her his Justice eye;
Yet fearful Hope at length does animate,
Her Consious soul, his mercies doom to try,
She now resolves (all fear b'eing lade aside)
Under his mercies wings her self to hide.
And least the vice hateful to God and man,
Ingratitude; that ill repaying sin,
Should in her breast erect his mansion,
From forth her store sweet ointment she does bring,
Which she intends upon him to bestow,
That out-ward act her inward love might show.
She was not like those ill-deseruinge Jews,
In cleansed bodies haching leprous souls,
Their healthes-restorer nine of them refuse:
But she his love within her breast infoldes,
And gratefully her precious oil does shed,
On his divine and far more precious head.
This act of hers her Lord does so regard,
That he comaundes it should for aye be known,
And where his lifs true story should be heard,
This deed of hers should like-wise there be shown,
This act of hers her Lord so much regarded,
That he the same with double pay rewarded.
O what are we (o Lord) that thou should way,
Our dutious service at so high a rate,
All that we borrow, Justice binds to pay,
We owe thee all; from the we all did take,
How comes it then that thou so well accep'sts,
If we discharge the tent'he of our due debtes?
What did she give thee; but a cruse of oil,
Which now she had no further cause to use?
She will no more her well form'de visage soil,
And Natures workmanship by art abuse,
But thou did weigh the love wherewith she gave it,
Which made thee graciously vouchsafe to have it.
Now she proceeds; and from his head descendes,
Unto his feet, where prostrate she does lie;
For former Pride she feign would make amends,
With this devout vnfain'de Humility,
She loulie setts her at his blessed feet,
Mean while her eyes rivers of tears do weep.
Tears of true sorrow for offenses done,
Her watrie eyes like prodigalles do spend,
Wherewith the feet of great Iehouans Son,
For to imbalme, she humbly does intend,
Those feet of his, these tears of hers, make fair,
And being wett she dries them with her hair.
O well spent tears; you did but cleanse the spots,
Which weary iornies, and foul ways had maid:
But you did wash of many thousand blottes,
Wherewith foul sin her gilty soul had smear'de,
O happy tears; and happily bestowed,
You did defray what ere your mistres owed.
After this work of Charity was past,
Her love was such, she would not from him part,
No earthly storms her heavenly love could blast,
It was so deeply rooted in her heart,
With modest silence tempering her loves heat,
Her silent love by silence growing great.
O silence; Companion of the wise,
Thou surest note of spotles Chastity,
All our frail passions thou do temporise,
And kindlest Holy thoughts in secrecy;
Thou art a virtue rarely found on earth,
Of virtues store there is so great a dearth.
In Princes Coortes thou can no harbor find,
Thy service there is but of sleighte regard,
Thou can not flatter; thou art not the wind,
Wherewith ambitious toylinge gestes are rear'de,
Thou can not fill the sails of Enuies boat,
Nor set the ship of longe-tong'de Fame a floate.
Thou art no tradseman for the Cities use;
Thou can not harbor many tounges in one;
The Countriemen with thee have broken truce,
And entered league with fell dissension,
The woods the babbling Ecco entertain,
Which each word iterates and makes one twain.
Both Coort and City, Country and the woods
Are unto Silence straingers, now unknown,
And she has left them to their brain-sicke moodes,
And to the heavens (from whence she came) is flowne,
She seldom now does visit this our coaste:
Far if she comes she knows not where to hoaste.
This virtue first possessed Mary's breast,
And did dispose her unto higher grace:
For where garrulitie does build her nest,
There modest virtues have no biding place,
By this her new-reformed life was known,
By this hereafter constancy was shown.
For when the Lord of life our Ransom pai'de,
And by his death, gave life unto the dead,
When his Disciples fearfully dismai'de,
From persecutions angry presence fled,
She constantly attendes him to his passion,
And fears no threats of her life-killing Nation.
Even at the foot of that fruit-baring tree,
Which cur'de the wound by former tree received,
She humbly settes her down, greiuing to see:
His blessed presence, from her thus bereaved;
In stead of feet, she powers her liberal tears
On that dead truncke, which now his body bears.
This she imbraceth in her twisted arms,
Mixing her salt tears with his lukewarm blood,
Which from his wounds distil'de (to salve our harms)
Like forced streams proceading from some flude,
Which when she sees it makes her sad soul bleed,
In strong compassion of so foul a deed.
O thou my Lord, my Love, my Souls delighte,
Thy sight was erst (quoth she) my chiefest joy,
To see thee thus, it does my soul affrighte,
And turns all former pleasure to annoye,
To see thee thus, how can I chose but weep
When for my tears thy blood does wash thy feet.
How can I chose but weep, to see thy head
Inuiron'de with a crown of sharpest thorn,
To see thy lovely countenance palle and dead,
Which once with beauty did the heavens adorn,
To see the brightest lamps which light the skies
Obscur'de by blood and death; thy blessed eyes,
To see those euer-working hands of thine,
So sauadglie affixed to this wood,
Which with a touch, gave light to blindest eyne,
And always were imploi'de in doing good;
To see that heart, where Charity does dwell
Peirced with Enuies spear, the dart of Hell.
To see those worn but neuer-wear'ed feet,
Who many long and toil some journeys made
To seek us lost, and euer-wandringe sheep,
In the vaste desert of black sin insnar'de,
Now nether going, standing, nor at rest,
But to a piece of wood with nails addressed;
To see that body which the purest womb
Of an unspotted Virgin, once contain'de,
Now to be fitter for some gastlie tomb,
By cruel stripes and wounds deform'de and stain'de,
Thy self despised, naked, and for lorne,
Bereft of freindes, and to thy foes a scorn.
How can I chose (o Lord) but weep and moan,
In sad remembrance of these dire aspectes,
How can I chose but sigh, to hear the groan,
Under the heuie load of our defects,
Was there no other means to pay our loss,
But thou must needs be naled to this Cross?
O wounderfull effects, of wondrous love,
He that of late gave life unto the dead.
And from possessed bodies did remove,
Legions of Diuelles that his presence fled,
For them that kills him, does his life bestow,
And paies the debt, which they themselves did owe.
O you ungrateful bloudy-mynded Jews,
Allwaies imbr'de in spilling righteous blood;
How can you thus this innocent abuse,
Who never in the way of sinners stood?
What has he done that you should use him thus?
Was he not ever merciful and just?
Did he not feed the hongrie of the land,
And cure the sick through his health-giuinge might?
Did he not make the lame to go and stand,
And to the blind restore desired sight?
Did not both poor, and sick, both lame, and blind
Through his mild pity health and comfort find?
O you are more in humane beast-like men,
Then sauadge beasts in wildest deserts bred;
They for a good deed still have grateful ben,
And such as did releive them, they have fed:
But you do pay the hire of ill desert
To him, that did all good to you impart.
This maks the heavens (who erst were bright and clear)
To chainge their purple weeds to saddest black,
No signs of joy in heaven or earth appear,
Because the Lord of joy and bliss they lack;
The Son himself does hide his glorious face,
Lothing to see his makers foul disgrace.
The earth does tremble at this horred deed,
Frighting the ghostes of the infernal deep,
Her womb bringes forth straing and untimely seed,
The dead arise which in her bosom sleep,
The adamantine rocks do cleave a sunder;
Their stony hearts do rent to see this wonder:
But you whose hearts are harder then the rocks,
You bloody actors of this tragic scene;
You that repay sweet Charity with mockes,
And seek his loss who does your welfare mean;
You neither earth below, nor heaven above,
With their unwonted prodigies can move.
O thou sad mother of a sadder Son,
Thou art spectator too of this great loss
Thy joys are past, thy sorrows newe-begunne,
Whom once the Cribe receau'de, now bears the Cross,
Unto his Birth the one did harbor tend,
Upon the other he his Life does spend.
My grieved soul is wounded with remorce,
To see thy swollen eyes; to hear thy groans,
The very sight would flinty hearts enforce,
To take compassion of thy bitter moanes,
Thou art more like the dead, or deaths palle wife,
Then to the mother of the Lord of life
Shall you and I (dear Lady) plight our troth,
And wed our selves to sorrows restles bed;
Our love and joy is taken from us both,
And we are left for to bewale the dead,
We both lament the loss of him that is gonne,
I, a most loving Lord, thou, a blessed Son.
Sall we be take us to a Heremitage,
In some wild desert unto men unknown,
And there wear out the remnant of our age,
Filling the wide woods with our ceaseles moan,
Let me take part of this thy heavy cheer,
And for each figh of thine i will spend a tear?
Fellows in misery lessens sorrows weight:
But I unworthy am to be thy mate,
I have a spotted soul with sins full freight:
But thou a Virgin art Immaculate;
Thou art assin'de unto a Virgins keeping,
I will alone betake my self to weeping.
By that time this her sad complaint was done,
He that gives life had vanquish'de death by dying,
And Joseph comes t'interr this Holy one,
Which in this weeper breeds new cause of crying;
Before she wept, to see him so tormented,
Because she sees him not, she now lamented:
For Joseph had new taken him from the Cross,
And lai'de him in a Sepulcher of stone;
Not his spent life, but his dead bodies loss,
Is now the cause of this her second moan,
She sees the tree of life of fruit bereft:
But her loue-wounded soul uncured left.
Which makes her thus to speak; O sacred tree,
His precious blood has left thee sanctified,
Thou were ordain'de an Altar for to be,
Whereon this offering should be sacrified,
Since he is gone, who was thy ornament
To thee my sad complaints shall all be bent.
I Will set thee for an object fore mine eyes;
In seeing thee, I shall not him forget,
Who did vouchsafe on thee to sacrifice,
His own dear life, to pay our sinful debt:
Though for my Saviors shame they did thee make
Yet I will honor thee for his sweet sake.
With these and such like plaintes the day was spent
And duskie night had darkened all the sckye,
Which when she saw unto her home she went,
And there absentes her from all company,
Like to a Turtle having lost her mate:
So she without her Lord is desolate.
This restles night and Saboathes rest b'eing past,
(A day of sorrow and unrest to her)
Unto the Monument early she did have,
Where they his Precious Body did intier,
She does present the rising of the sun,
And takes her Journey ere the day begun,
Noe wonted dangers of the fearful night,
Could make her from her enterprise to stay,
When Ghostes and Sprites night-walkers use to fright,
When Wolves and rauonous Beasts do wach their pray,
When none but murderrers and thieves did wake:
Then all-alone this Pilgrimage she takes.
She might have fear'de the Soldiers cruel guard,
Who did about that Holy place attend,
And night and day his toumbe did watch and ward,
And from all Visitores the same defend,
But her stout heart these perilles could not touch
Her love was more, although her danger much.
Love made her strong, although herself were weak,
Love gave swifte wings unto her quick desire,
Love added fire to her former heat;
Of doubts nor dangers Love does not enquire,
O powerful love, thou do no perilles cast,
The bitt'rest pills seem pleasant to thy taste.
By this time love had brought her to his toumbe,
Which she finds open by the stones remove,
But naught she sees with in his empty toumbe,
But linen cloths, which had inwrapt her love
Whom when she finds not, she does weep and moan,
Imaginning that he was stolen and gone.
O you profaine and Sacraligious thieves,
Who have (quoth she) his sacred corpse bereft;
It is a sin, to rob from him that lives,
To rob the house of death, is dubble theft,
Was not your envy by his dying past,
But after death the same must also last?
O Envy; thou art a more blaker sin,
Then bloody murder, who seeks naught but death,
His thirsty appetie has quenshed been,
But thou thy killing sword do never sheath,
The act being done he often does relent,
But thy hell-borne malice nere is spent.
I had not long enioy'de his blessed sight,
But thou did take him to the Cross from me,
Where having kill'de him in thy self dispite,
Thou seem'dst content that he intomb'de should be,
There did I think I should his presence have,
But thou have also taine him from his grave.
Unhappy I to come no sooner hither,
I might as well have come the day before,
Now they have taine him hence I know not whether,
And I am never like to see him more,
The Spice and Ointments which with me I brought,
I cannot now bestow on him I sought.
With this two Glorious Angels do appear,
To Comfort this uncomfortable one,
They tell her h'is risen, bids her not fear.
But cease her sad complaints and heavy moan,
Whilst she stands doubtful of this happy news,
Her loving Lord himself unknown she vewes.
She takes him to be gardener of that place,
And gently does bespeake him (as dismai'de)
That if he did his body thence displace,
He would inform her where the same was lai'de;
He lovingly discouers whom he is,
She does adore when thus her Lord she sees.
Her humbled body to the earth she bows,
In odarac'on of his Dietie,
Mean while her joyful soul her-selfe bestows
In Contemplac'on of this Mystery;
Of heavenly joy she feels so sweet a taste;
That she forgettes her ancient sorrows paste.
O thou that art the heavens and earthes Creator,
Thou great dispensor of Caelestiall treasure,
Thou that of Angels, Men, and Beasts art maker,
Whose profound wisdom has nor end nor measure,
How merciful (O Lord) art thou; for each good deed,
Thou do repay us with a dubble meede.
She wash'de thy feet with tears her eyes had shed,
To cleanse her soul thy blood thou did perfuse,
She powr'de her precious oyntement on thy head,
In her thou did Caelestiall grace infuse,
She for thy absence did great sorrow take,
Thou with thy presence did her joyful make.
Give grace (O Lord) to me unworthy one,
To imitate this blessed Saint of thine,
Fill thou mine eyes with tears, my heart with moan,
That I may wayle those greuious sins of mine,
And if salt tears unto mine eyes be scant,
Be merciful (O Lord) for this my want.
Make me (like her) all worldly joys reject,
And let my soul be wedded to thy love,
Thy loving sweetenes let me not forgete,
All other fancies from my heart remove,
And if I do not love thee as I should,
Have mercy Lord; accept of that I would.
Finis Deo gratias. I. N. R. I.
cross

