The Promises: OR, A TREATISE Showing how a godly Christian may support his
heart with Comfort, AGAINST ALL THE distresses which by reason of any
afflictions or temptations can befall him in this life.

Containing all the most comfortable places through the whole Bible, orderly
digested

By N. Bifield Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middlesex.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Ralph Rounthwaite. 1619.

TO THE MVCH Honored and right worthy, Sir William Throgmorton, Knight and
Baronet: and Sir Francis Darcie, Knight, N. Bifield wishes the increase of all
Grace and happiness that accompanies the love of the Lord Jesus in sincerity.
IF the many crosses and temptations with which the life of all men, even the
most godly is distressed, be seriously weighed, and withal the great
disconsolation that too often surpriseth the hearts of most Christians, be
compassionately thought on: and if with all the singular glory of a godly mind
framed unto immovable rest, and steadfast contentment, be thoroughly conceived
of; it cannot but be manifest, that if a way can be showed how a Christian
may fill his heart with comfort in any condition he can fall into, in respect
of affliction, that such a course is profitable, and all ought to take notice
of it, and with all care and pains employ themselves about it. This by Gods
assistance upon apparent grounds of Scripture I have endeavored to show in this
Treatise; and doubt not but by experience humble and godly Christians will
find much refreshing and establishment of heart, if they apply themselves
distinctly and diligently to draw of the water of life, out of those wells of
salvation, opened for them every where in this roll of Gods Promises.

This Treatise I present to your Worships, and under the countenance of your
names, desire to commend it unto the Church of God: and this I am induced to
do for diverse reasons: your forwardness in the profession of sincere Religion
for many years, the public service you have done in your Country in the
administration of Justice, for the encouragement of the good, and reformation
of abuses, your great care from time to time to plant painful and profitable
teachers in the places of your abode, together with the excellent gifts with
which God has furnished your minds, deserve to be freely and publicly
acknowledged in the Church of God; and in mine own particular I have been so
many ways obliged, that with much gladness I embrace this occasion, to let
the world know my desire to be thankful for the many helps and furtherances
my ministry has received from the countenance and endeavors of both your
Worships, as occasion has at any time bin offered. Desiring your acceptance
hereof, and praying God to preserve you in his fear without offense, till the
Day of Christ, and to enlarge in you the desire and power of well-doing in all
things, I end and rest, Isleworth, Octo. 1618.

Your Worships in the service of Jesus Christ, to be commanded, N. Bifield.

The chief Contents of this Book.
Chap. 1.
THE drift of the whole book is, to show abundant comfort against any
distress. page 1. Two things taken for granted, viz. both that godly men shall
be distressed, and also that comfort may be had in any distress, p. 2. 3 The
worth of those promises. p. 4. 5. To whom the promises belong. p. 6. 7. The use
they will serve for, being learned. p. 7. 8. 9. 10 The infallibility of those
promises proved by 13. Arguments. p. 11. 12. to 20. The promises sealed 4.
ways. p. 17. Six rules to be observed, if we will profit by the promises. p.
20. 21. 22. 23
Chap. 2.
3. Sorts of promises. p. 24. 25 Sorts of afflictions, in which we need
comfort, p. 26. 27. 28. 29.
Chap. 3.
12. Privileges of the godly. p. 32. to 47.
Chap. 4.
What meant by outward afflictions. p. 48. 10. Arguments of consolation to
support us against outward afflictions. p. 48. to 64
Chap. 5.
Men need comfort against reproaches. p. 65. 12. Arguments of consolation
against reproaches. p. 66. to 78
Chap. 6.
Many principal objections of the godly about reproaches answered. page 78. to
90.
Chap. 7.
Directions in the case of reproaches. p. 90. 91. 92
Chap. 8.
How the godly may comfort themselves in the case of adversaries. p. 93. to
104.
Chap. 9.
3. Things taken for granted, about temptations. p. 104. 106. Satan tempts us
five ways, p. 106. 107. 3. Sorts of temptations by suggestion. p. 109. 110. 9.
Occasions of temptation. p. 111. to 118.
Chap. 10.
How many ways a godly man may comfort himself against temptations. p. 118.
to 126. 6. Things in Christ comfort us against temptations. p. 121. 122. How
far forth we may pray against temptations. page 125. 126. How we may know
that we are not overcome of temptations. p. 126. 127.
Chap. 11.
Two sorts of promises about infirmities. p. 131. What is meant by infirmities.
p. 132. 9. Arguments of consolation against our daily infirmities. p. 132. to
149. The goodness of Gods nature showed in 4. things. p. 135. 136. Many things
comfortable in Christ. p. 137. 138. 139. 9. Privileges about infirmities
assured us in the word. p. 141. to 147
Chap. 12.
Diverse objections about our infirmities answered. page 149. to 175. About
ignorance diverse comfortable meditations. page 154. to 158. The explication of
two excellent places of Scripture, with the sundry answers of many objections
met withal in those places, from p. 159. to 174.
Chap. 13.
Many consolations to support us against the fear of falling away, taken from
the consideration 1 Of God. p. 176. to 184 2 Of Christ. p. 184. 185 3 Of our
own estate in Grace, p. 186.

Chap. 14.
Three sorts of most comfortable promises about prayer, p. 187. to the end of
the book.
CHAP. I.
Containing the Preface.

THE drift of this Treatise is, to show a godly Christian, (who is already
assured of Gods favor, and knows he shall have abundant happiness when he
dies, in Heaven) how he may support his heart with sufficient contentment,
against all the miseries can assault him from the time of his conversion, till
his death. For this purpose I shall break open a Mine of Treasure: for I
intend from all parts of the book of God to select and set before thee those
rich promises, which God has there recorded, to be as Wells of comfort upon
all occasions.

Two things must of necessity be granted. The one is, that though we have
gotten the assurance of Gods favor and freedom from the power and guilt of
our sins; yet many things will still aile us, and oppose our consolation. We
shall meet with temptations and afflictions of all sorts, reproaches,
adversaries, trouble of spirit, and such like. The other is, that there can be
no such discouragement, difficulty, or affliction, but in the Word of God we
may have a sure consolation or direction for it, able every way abundantly to
sustain us.

But before I enter upon the unfolding of this great Roll of promises, I must
preface about five things, which tend to make us more fit to receive them.

First, it will be profitable for us to consider briefly the worth of the
promises; The worth of the promises.
they are called the unsearchable riches of Christ, to assure us that he is a
very Ephesians. 3. 6. 9.
rich man, that has his heart stored with the promises of God well applied. The
Apostle Peter says, 2 Pet. 1. 3.
that they are great, and precious promises, which God has given to us.
Promises in our hearts, are better then pearls or precious stones in our
chests. They are the inheritance God gives to his people in this life, and
therefore they are called the heirs of promise; Romans 4.
a greater portion then any King on earth can give to his child. The very
keeping of the Records of these promises, was a great prerogative to the Jewish
Romans 9.
nation: and it is accounted a singular happiness for the Gentiles, that they
may now partake of those promises. Little do we Ephesians 3. 6.
know what wrong we do to our souls, when we keep them ignorant of the
promises; and it is one of the greatest offices under the Sun, to dispense
these promises to man. 2. Tim. 1. 1. Titus. 1. 1. 2. 3.

Secondly, before I enter 2
upon the explication of the promises, I must To whom the promises belong.
likewise tell you, to whom they belong, and who they are that have interest in
them: For all unregenerate men, that live in their sins without repentance, are
strangers from the covenants Ephesians. 2. 12.
of promise. The children of the bondwoman Gal. 4.
have no part in the testament of Grace: only they that are Christ's, have the
benefit of the promises in Gal. 3. 22.
Christ. The children of God are the heirs of promise. Men must have
godliness, Heb. 6. 17.
that have the promises either of this life, or that to come. In short, all
those that have repented them 1. Tim. 6. 8.
of their sin, and believe in Jesus Christ, may come to these promises with
large hearts, as knowing that they read and hear that which they have clear
and full interest in.

Thirdly, concerning the 3 The use of the promises.
use these promises may be put unto all our life long: They will drive away
grief, discouragement, or fears, that at any time may seize upon us: They
will sweeten all our afflictions: they will exceedingly nurse up, and confirm
our faith, and further, they will have a singular use in preserving us against
the inticements of the profits, pleasures, and lusts of the world, and against
the cares of this life. Our affections are the feet of our souls, and with
the promises we may be daily shod; so as neither thorny cares prick us, nor
foul pleasures defile us, Ephesians. 6. The Gospel shows us still a better project,
when the Devil or the world entice us. And a true reason why many times we
are not able to resist inticements, is, because our hearts are not filled with
the promises, which else would show us so much sweetness, as all other things
would seem but base in comparison of them. When we are tempted with the
pleasures of sin, if we have not a more delightful project to offer to our
hearts, it is easy for us to be seduced. And further, these promises soundly
studied and laid up in our hearts, will breed cheerfulness of spirit, and
that contentation which makes godliness 1. Tim. 6. 7. 8.
to be so great gain. And besides, they will daily excite in us all
encouragements to well-doing, and they do also set out maruellously the glory
and splendour of Gods love, power, presence, providence, and grace toward us.
What shall I say? the promises give us even heaven upon earth, and set out the
incomparable gain of true godliness; yea, by them we approach so near unto
God, that as Peter says; By them we partake of the Divine nature. 2. Pet. 1. 4.


A fourth thing which I would preface about, is, concerning the infallibility
of these promises: For The infallibility of the promises proved by 13. ways.
that may much inflame in us the desire to store our hearts with them, (having
heard of their worth,) if we likewise be fully assured concerning the certain
accomplishment of all the good which is contained in them. I suppose, no man
doubts, but that if it could be made good, that a poor Christian might have all
those excellent things which are contained in all the promises of the Bible, he
were in a matchless estate. Now there are many things which may put us out of
all doubt in that point; mark them heedfully, for they may do thee singular
good.

First, observe that the promises are in some scriptures called in the singular
number, the Promise: and 1 They are all but as one promise.
why so? As for other reasons, so to assure thee, it is as sure and as easy
for God to fulfill all that goodness contained in all those promises, as if they
were but one only promise.

2 Consider the Nature 2 From the nature of God.
of God, he cannot lie, it is impossible for him to deny his word, he may as
easily deny himself. If God have said it, it must needs come to pass. This
argument is used in this point, Titus 1. 1. 2.

3 The antiquity of these 3 From the antiquity of them.
promises much add to our assurance. The Apostle in Titus 1. 2. says, that
these promises were made before the world was: and hitherto in all this time
God never failed of one word of his goodness.

4 We have the writing 4 From Gods writing.
of God to show for them, they are upon Record in the Scripture: and shall we
mistrust when we have Gods own hand to show for it? His word is true, and
righteous altogether, Ps. 19. 8

5 Yea, we have the oath 5 From Gods oath.
of GOD too, that by two things, in which it is impossible for God to change,
the heirs of promise might have abundant consolation, whenever they make
recourse unto the promises, Hebr. 6. 17. 18.

6 We have these promises 6 From the messengers sent about them.
preached unto us by Ambassadors sent of purpose, at the commandment of God,
who has enjoined them to make it manifest, that God will be as good as his
word in all those, Titus 1. 3.

7 Yea Christ Jesus himself 7 From the Ministry of Christ himself.
did employ his Ministry, to assure and confirm the promises made before to
the Fathers, as the Apostle shows, Romans 15. 8.

8 Yet more; we have 8 From the death of the Testator.
the blood of Christ, and the death of the Testator, to confirm this new
Testament, and all the promises contained therein, Hebr. 9. 16. so as in Christ
they are now all, yea and Amen: there can be no nay nor denial of them; they
well may be now pleaded in any Court of the Justice of God.

9 The Anointing that is upon us, may assure us, and establish us. Was there
ever any King anointed of God to be a King, that 9 From our Anointing.
made doubt of the Kingdom? Why? The anointing of God is upon our hearts, the
graces of the spirit powered out upon us, are our assurance, that God will not
withold from us our regal privileges, if we seek them, 2. Cor. 1. 20. 21.

10 It is some settling to 10 From the extent of the promises.
us, to consider the extent of the right to those promises: For God has
excepted no sort of men, but in Christ they may get to have their part in those
promises, as the Apostle shows, Galath. 3. 27. 28. 29.

11 The Law was the 11 From the time of giving the promise.
only thing that might hinder us of the enjoying of the promises. And the
Apostle has proved, that the Law cannot disanull the Promises, in which the
nations of the earth should be blessed, made 400. years before the Law was
given on Mount Sinai, Galat. 3. 17. 21.

12 We have the seal The promise sealed four ways.
of GOD to this writing: now God has sealed four ways.

First, in his Counsel: the 1 In his Counsel.
book of his eternal counsel was written within, and without, and it had
seven seals, to signify that it was perfectly ratified, and though none in
heaven and earth could read it, yet for our comforts we know, that the Lamb
of the tribe of Judah, the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, has opened it now,
and made it manifest, Revel. 5. 1. 2. etc.

2 In his Son: for him 2 In his Son
has God the Father sealed, John. 6. 27. God made all sure when he sent out
Christ; he sealed his commission in all things, that concerned the happiness
both of Jews and Gentiles.

3 In his Spirit; and 3 In his Spirit.
thus all the belieuers are said to be sealed by the Spirit of Promise: and
this is Gods privy Seal.

4 God has sealed to all his promises in the Sacraments, 4 In the Sacraments.
which are given us as Gods broad Seals, and outward tokens and pledges to
confirm our Faith.

13 We have the experience also of all the saints, 13 For experience.
who in all ages found God as good as his word, and had ever reason to say as
David did, In the Lord will we praise his word, Psalm. 56. 10. The Patriarchs
embraced the Promises, as the chief stay of their lives in their pilgrimage on
earth, Heb. 11. 13.

Thus of the fourth point.

5 A fifth thing I would preface about, is concerning certain rules to be 6
Rules to be observed if we will profit by the Promises.
observed, if we would ever receive the sound profit of these promises, and so
we must look to six directions.

First, when we come to these promises, we must renounce our own merits, and
all opinion of our own worthiness, and acknowledge from our hearts, that all
the grace we find in the promises, is in and through Jesus Christ. All the
promises 2. Cor. 1. 20. Romans 4. 14.
are yea and Amen through him, and only in him.

2 When we have the promises laid open before us, we must believe them, Gal.
3. 22. Romans 4. 16.
and apply them to our selves, or else they will do us no good.

3 We must be further careful to hide them in our hearts, and to commit them
to memory, that we may be often thinking of them, and musing upon them. It
will not serve the turn that we have them written in the Bible, or in our
notebookes, but we must get them written in our hearts too: we must be at
the Psalm. 119. 11
pains to acquaint our selves distinctly with them, and to fill our heads with
store of them.

4 When any thing ayleth us, we must fly to him for refuge, and cast the
anchor of our hope upon them, that God himself may see Heb. 6. 18.
that our hearts are bent to trust upon his Word.

5 We must never cast away our confidence in them, but wait with patience, and
not limit God to the time, or manner, or means of accomplishment, but hold
fast to his promises, and ^eaue the rest to God, as in many places of Scripture
may appear, especially, Hebr. 10. 36. Romans 4. 22.

6 In short, we must ^ooke to it, that we be not slothful and idle, and such
as will not be at the pains to study and commit to memory, and rest upon these
glorious comforts; but we must follow them which through faith and patience
Heb. 6. 22.
do inherit the promises.

Thus of the Preface.
CHAP. II.
The division of the Promises.

THE Promises may be divided into three parts.

1 The first may contain such places of Scripture, 3 Sorts of Promises. 1
Privileges
as show the Privileges of the godly above other men; and that is one chief
way by which the Lord does refresh the hearts of his people, by assuring them
in general of such and such prerogatives, which he will confirm upon them,
and upon none but them.

2 The second may contain 2. Comforts in affliction.
comforts; that is, places of Scripture which do foretell what goodness the Lord
will show to his people in affliction. For hither-vnto belong all those
promises which are given of purpose for the comforting and supporting of the
godly in all their trialls.

3 The third part may 3. Rewards of certain graces.
contain such Promises, as are made to certain particular Graces in the
godly, as promises made to prayer, faith, trusting in God, or such like. It is
the second sort of promises, which I intend here more at large to entreat of. I
would show what variety of comforts there are, with which a godly man may
inflame his heart, according to the several distresses may fall upon him, and
these may be thus subdivided.

All afflictions are either outward, or inward: Sorts of afflictions.
For outward afflictions, it were too tedious, and to little purpose to gather
comforts against every particular cross, and therefore one head may suffice for
the General, viz. the promises or consolations against all outward
afflictions. Now, because godly people are oftentimes more troubled with the
storms and reproaches of the world, which are cast upon them for well-doing,
then with the ordinary afflictions of life; therefore I would in the second
place gather the comforts against reproaches, and withal I would add in the
third place, consolations against adversaries.

Now for inward afflictions; they are the afflictions of the spirit of man, and
arise either from the temptations of Satan, or from the trouble of the
conscience unsatisfied in diverse scruples. I would therefore in the fourth place
show how we might be comforted against the temptations of Satan; and because
the trouble of conscience arises usually either from the burden of our daily
infirmities, or from the fear of our falling away: I would in the fifth place
show how we may be comforted against our daily infirmities; and then in the
last place I would unfold those promises, that may assure us of perseverance.

Now suppose a Christian Note.
soul clearly informed with the knowledge of those privileges wherein he
excels all the people of the world; and withal, that he knew how to comfort
himself against any outward afflictions, and had store of consolations in his
heart against the temptations of Satan, and did know how to support himself
against the sense of his daily weaknesses, and withal were settled and out of
fear for falling away; would you not think such a one wonderful happy? And
this may be here attained unto, if we be not slothful: and what can in this
life be grievous unto us, if we be soundly fenced in those things? There can
be nothing that can seem a misery unto us, but we may find comforts under
some one of these titles.

CHAP. III.
Showing the privileges of the godly above all other people.

THe first sort of promises, or comfortable places of Scripture, are such as in
general show the happiness of the godly in all estates of life; these I call
privileges. These are such comforts as are not restrained unto some certain
time, but are such as he is enriched with all at all times: These we ought to
know as the foundation of all the rest, and we should strive to have them
perfectly in our memories, so as any time we could number them if need were.

Every godly Christian has twelve privileges, 12 Privileges of the godly.
wherein he excels all the men of this world.

1 The first is, the love and favor of God, the especial The love of God.
grace of God toward him; this is the foundation of all his happiness: and if
Eze. 36. 28 Ioh. 14. 21.
he could order his own heart aright, he could easily see that he could not
be miserable, so long as he was in favor with his God. If the favor of great
persons be so much accounted of; what reckoning is to be made of Gods favor,
who is Lord of Lords? yea King of all Kings, and the more should a Christian
fill his heart with ioying in this prerogative, if he consider three
properties 3 Properties in Gods love.
in the love of God. For first, it is a free love, he 1. It is free.
stands not upon desert: he is gracious, looking upon his own goodness, and
not on ours, Hosea 14. 4. Secondly, it is an eternal 2. It is eternal.
love, and unchangeable, God will never be weary of loving him, Ierem. 31. 3.
His loving kindness is better then life; for it lasts unto all eternity,
without alteration: The favor of man in this world is mutable; Kings may
extremely loath, whom they yerwhile loved with their intirest affection; but in
God there is no shadow of changing, he loves with an everlasting love.
Thirdly, 3 It is infinite.
it is infinitely immense, and great, no affection in any, or in all the
creatures in this world, if they could be fastened upon one man, can reach to
the thousand part of Gods love to us, Ephesians. 2. 47. Esaias 49. 15. 16. This light
of Gods countenance shining upon us, makes us at all times more rich then they,
that are increased most in corn and wine, and oil, Psalm. 4. 7. 8.

2 The second is, the The second privilege is the giving of Christ to them.
donation of Christ; Christ is his, God has given him Christ, Romans 8. 32. so
as all Christ is his proper portion: and how is Christ his? even in all
dearness of relation. He is his Prince, his Priest, and Redeemer, his Father,
his Lord, his Master, his Friend, his Brother, etc. All these titles are given
to Christ, to signify, he is all that, which those things could shadow out.
No father, brother, friend, could so love their child, brother, or friend, as
Christ loves the Christian. No Lord, Master, Prince, can so prefer, provide, or
care for their servants or subjects, as Christ cares for the Christian. Look
what the favor or power of any of those, or al those could do, Christ is, and
will become much more unto the godly Christian.

3 The third privilege is Deliverance, and the Christians The third is
deliverance (...) things.
deliverance is exceeding great, if he consider seriously how he is delivered
from the Kingdom of darkness, from this present evil world, from the dominion
of sin, from the handwriting of ordinances, that was against him, from the
rigor and curse of the Law, and from condemnation.

The fourth is free pardon of all his sins past, his soul The fourth is, for
giuenes of all sins.
being washed in the blood of Christ from all his sins, so as now they were as
white as snow, though they had been red like scarlet, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. Esaias 1.
18. What rest and peace would this breed in our hearts, if we did daily think
of it in our own particulars, that we had obtained pardon and remission of
all our sins.

The fifth privilege is, the inhabitation of the Holy The fifth is the
inhabitation of the holy Ghost.
Ghost. The soul and body of a Christian, is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and
the Spirit of God does verily and truly dwell within the breast of a Christian,
and that not in a naked presence; but the holy Ghost is there, to teach him to
guide him into all truth, to tell him when he is ready to go out of the way,
on the right hand, or on the left, and to comfort him in all distresses, and to
seal the promises to his heart, and to anoint him with the oil of true
knowledge and grace, and to be as a pledge and earnest of his inheritance
looked for from heaven, and to teach him to pray, when he knows not how to
pray for himself; and many other excellent benefits he reapeth from this
spirit of God, whom the world cannot receive. He has for this respect a very
spring of knowledge, and joy and grace in his belly.

The sixth privilege is, The sixth is the restoring of Gods Image.
the Image of God restored in him, by the mighty power of Christ's voice in his
first resurrection, being made now a new creature to God, and so partaking of
the divine nature, in respect of the qualities wherein he does excellently
resemble God.

The seventh privilege The seventh is, freedom in Gods house.
is the freedom to Gods house, and to all the feasts, and Divine entertainment
which God makes there, Psalm. 36. 9. and 65. 4. Esaias 25. 8. Luke 14. 17. Reave.
2. The Word and Sacraments are his; he is Gods bidden ghest: he may always
come and welcome: The fatness and pleasures of Gods house, Oh how sweet are
they! Who can tell the excellency of the Manna that is hid?

The eight privilege is, The eight is, the hearing of his prayer.
entrance and access, and audience with God in all his suites. He may ask
almost what he will of God, he will not deny him any thing he asks in the
name of Christ. And sure he is worthily miserable that will not make himself
happy, when he may have what he will ask of him, that is able to give what
he can ask, Mark 11. 24. Ephesians. 2. 19.

The ninth privilege is, The ninth is the attendance of Angels.
The service and attendance of the Angels. The Angels do pitch their Tents
about those that fear God, Psa. 34. and are ministering spirits to every heir
of salvation, Heb. 1. vlt. Oh the dignity and safety of that man, whom the
glorious Angels do guard and attend upon! The poorest Christian has a better
guard about him, then the greatest Monarch in the world that is not a Christian.

The tenth privilege is, The tenth is the communion of Saints.
the Communion of Saints; he is mystically united in one body to all the
worthies that are in heaven, or earth; and does effectually enjoy the benefit
of communion of Saints; too large to be here reckoned up. If it were no more,
but the profit he has by the prayers of the godly all over the world: were it
not a great favor? Ephesians. 2. 19. and 3. 6. Philip. 1. 5. Colos. 2. 29. besides
all the comforts he has in the fellowship with the godly.

The eleventh privilege The eleue^th is the inheritance of the earth.
is, the inheritance of the Earth, which is restored to him in Christ; so as
he now passes that which he has of the earth, by as good a Title as ever
Adam held Paradise: yea, so as whatsoever in the whole earth is good for him,
shall not be withheld from him, Math. 3. 7. Psalm. 84. 12. Outward prosperity
he is sure of, so far as it is good for him, Job 8. 7. Psalm 37. 5.

The last privilege is that Inheritance immortal, The twelfth is, the
inheritance of heaven.
incorruptible, and that fades not, reserved for him in heaven, which for
excellency passes all that which ever the eye of man saw, or the ear of man
heard, or the heart of man can conceive, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

Now then, to sum up all this, let a Christian tell his own soul plainly,
and upon clear proof, by the signs of a child of God, that he is in favor
with God, and that Christ Note.
is his, and that he has obtained strange deliverance, and that all his sins
are forgiven, and that the holy Ghost dwells in him, and that the image of God
is restored in him, and that he is free to Gods house, and that he may beg
any thing of GOD, and that he has Angels to wait upon him, and that he is
near of kin to all the Saints in the World, and that he is Lord of the
earth, and that he shall certainly go to Heaven when he dies. Let this, I
say, be told to his soul, can he be dismayed? will not the Peace of God which
passes all understanding, keep his heart and mind, and that constantly for
ever?

CHAP. IIII.
Showing how the godly may support their hearts against all outward afflictions.

HItherto of the Privileges. Now it follows, that I should open those
consolations, that may support the hearts of men against all the distresses of
this life. And first I would show, how the Lord is pleased to comfort his
servants in several Scriptures, against all the outward afflictions may befall
his servants in this world.

By outward afflictions I mean such as these; What meant by outward
afflictions.
wants, losses, wrongs, troubles, exile, imprisonment, sickness, fears,
poverty, or any other thing, wherewith the life of man is molested in any
condition.

Now there are many The godly man may comfort himself against afflictions, by
the consideration, 1 Of the commonnes of them.
excellent ways of abundant comforts against these, or any of these, as

1 First, if we consider but the commonnesse of them, all things fall alike in
these things, Eccles. 9. 2, 3. Every man that is born of a woman, has but few
days, and is full of trouble, Job 14. 1. Christ has no Disciple but he is
told aforehand, He must take up his Cross, and that daily, Luke 9. 24. There
can be no affliction, but what accompanies, or may accompany the nature of
man, 1. Cor. 10. 13. The same afflictions are accomplished upon our brethren
which are through the world, 1. Pet. 5. 9. And we have the Prophets and
greatest worthies of the Lord, for an example of suffering, Iam. 5. 10. And all
the godly must through many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts
14. 22.

2 Secondly, if we consider Of Gods knowledge of our distresses and desires.
that God takes notice of us, and of all our trialls: The Lord knows the way
of the righteous, Psalm. 1. 6. None of our griefs are hid from him, All our
desires are before him, and our groaning is not hid from him, Psalm. 38. 9. and
he knows our souls in adversity, Psalm. 31. 7. And as he takes notice of al
our troubles, so he takes notice of all that is good in us: He knows them
that are patient, and trust in him, Nahum. 1. 7.

3 Thirdly, if we consider Of Gods compassion.
the wonderful compassion of God in the afflictions of his people: he does
not willingly afflict, but regards us with pity, and with love thinks of
redeeming us, and sends the Angel of his presence to comfort and save us, and
in all our afflictions is afflicted with us, Isay 63. 8, 9.

4 Fourthly, if we consider Of Gods high estimation of us.
the high estimation that God holds of his servants, notwithstanding their
afflictions. Crosses may make men love us the less, but they do not a jot
discommend us before God. He can take notice of his servants in their
distresses, as well as if they did shine in the greatest outward splendour in
the world. This is the consolation that God speaks to us (even when he
corrects) as to his children; and for that reason we should not refuse his
chastning, Hebr. 12. 6. Prou. 3. 11. We may be honorable in Gods sight, though
we be in a most forlorn and despised condition in the world: We may, I say,
be precious in Gods sight, and greatly beloved, Isa. 43. 4. 56. The Apostle
Peter shows, that a poor servant, when he suffers hard words, and ill usage
from his froward Master, does herein find acceptance with GOD, 1. Peter 2.
19. 20. Now this is an instance beyond exception: For, what condition more
vile, then of a servant? and what crosses were likely to be disregarded of God
sooner, then these domestical indignities? and yet we see a proof of the
regard and love of God even in those things.

5 Fifthly, if we consider Of the victory of Christ.
the victory of Christ over the world: Our Savior uses this as a consolation;
he tells his Disciples, In the world they shall have trouble, but he would have
them be of good comfort, he has over come the world, so as now they shall
never be hurt by their trobles. Their crosses may be too hard for them to
master, but Christ can order them so, as in him they shall have victory over
them. But of this more afterward, John 16. 33.

6 Sixthly, If we consider Of the holy Ghost comforting us.
the presence of the holy Ghost, he is given of Christ and the Father to be
our Comforter, and as our afflictions abound, so shall our consolations also,
Ioh. 14. 16. 2. Cor. 1. 4. Now, how shall a man be dismayed, that has Gods
spirit within him, to harten him, and assist him, and refresh him, and make
glad his heart?

7 Seventhly, if we consider Of the issue out of trouble.
the issue out of all troubles; Many may be the troubles of the righteous, but
God will deliver them out of all, Psalm. 34. 19. If GOD make us sore, he will
make whole: if he wound, he will bind us up again: In six troubles he shall
deliver them, and in seven there shall no evil touch them, Job 5. 18. 19. God
will give his people rest from the days of adversity, till the pit be dug
for the wicked, Psalm. 94. 13. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness
for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97. 11. It is well said, It is sown; For though
God do not presently give us ease and comfort, yet the Harvest will come, if
with patience we rest upon God, and be truly sincere, and keep his way: God
will settle his people, as in the former days, and it may be, do better unto
them, then at the beginning, Ezech. 36. 11. For Gods thoughts toward his
people, are thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give an expected end,
Ierem. 29. 11. so as Gods servants shall sing for joy of heart, when wicked men
howl for vexation of spirit, Esaias 65. 14.

8 Eighthly, If we consider the wonderful care Of the measure of our
afflictions.
of God about the measure of our crosses: For God will not lay upon man more
then right, that he should enter into judgment with God, Job 34. 23.
Therefore Jacob should not fear, because God will not make a full and final
end of him, as he will of the Nations, but will correct him in measure, not
leaving him wholly unpunished, Jeremy. 46. 28. God does wait to be gracious to
his people; he is a God of judgment, and does not consider what sin they have
committed to deserve affliction, but what strength they have to bear it: After
he has given them the bread of affliction, and the water of adversity, he
will not restrain his mercies from them, Isay 31. 18, 20. There is great
difference betwixt Gods dealing with wicked men that are enemies to the Church,
and his dealing with the godly. From hence the Prophet asks: Has he smitten
him, as he smote them that smote him? and resolves that God smites in
measure, and but in the branches, he will not cut them up by the roots, Isay
27. 7, 8.

9 Ninthly, if we consider Of the short continuance of them.
the short time of these afflictions: Heaviness may be in the Evening, but Joy
will come in the Morning: For Gods anger endures but a moment, but in his
favor is life, Psalm. 30. 5. The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot
of the righteous, Psalm. 125. 3. For the Lord will not cast off for ever, but
though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the
multitude of his tender mercies, Lamen. 3. 31. 32. For a small moment GOD may
forsake, but with great mercy will he gather us. In a little wrath hide I my
face, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord
thy Redeemer, Esaias 54. 7. 8. Hence Christ says, A little while, and ye shall
not see me, and again, A little while, and ye shall see me, John. 16. 16. The
godly may be in heaviness, if need require, but it is but for a short season,
1. Pet. 1. 6. and Paul says, The afflictions of this life are but light, and
for a moment, 2. Cor. 4. 17.

10 Lastly, if we consider Of the good effects of them.
the good we get by these afflictions. For God will make all work together
for the best, unto them that love him, Romans 8. 28. The godly may be troubled
on every side, and yet not be distressed: they may be perplexed, and yet have
no cause to despair, etc. 2. Cor. 4. 8. The godly in affliction may be like
the burning bush which Moses saw, which was not consumed: and there are many
particulars of the good they get by their crosses. For affliction is as the
fire, only to refine them, and try them, and make them more bright, Zach. 13.
vlt. they lose nothing, but their dross, and this is all fruit, even the
taking away of their sins, Isa. 27. 11. Besides, they meet with many
consolations in affliction, which otherwise they had not experience of, 2. Cor.
1. 7. and therefore we should count it all joy to fall into many temptation,
as knowing that the trial of our faith works patience, and if patience have
her perfect work, we shall be entire, wanting nothing, Iam. 1. 3, 4 Lastly,
the trial of our faith, which is more precious then gold that perishes, will
be found unto praise, and honor, and glory in the revelation of Jesus Christ,
1. Pet. 1. 7. and our light and short afflictions will work unto us an
eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4. 17. and if we endure temptation, we shall
receive the crown of life, Iam. 1. 12. Lo What thou must do in thy
affliction.
thus we have searched it: and thus it is, hear it, and know thou it for thy
good, Job 5. vlt Learn thou therefore in nothing to be careful, but in all
things to make thy requests known unto God with giving of thanks, Phil. 4. 7.
And if any man lack Wisdom to know what to do in his affliction, let him
ask it of God, who gives liberally, and reprocheth no man, Iam. 1. 5.

CHAP. V.
How the godly may comfort themselves against Reproaches.

HItherto of the co^forts against al outward afflictions in the general. Now
it follows, that I instance in reproaches, and adversaries.

For reproaches; it is evident, there is need of Men need comfort against
reproaches.
consolations, more specially against them, because naturally men stumble at
it, when they see Religion censured and scorned, and it hardens many men, when
their hearts are infected with this prejudice, that they hear this way every
where ilspoke^ of. Sometimes men are dismayed at the disgrace of sincerity in the
general. Sometimes they are troubled for what they themselves do suffer, or
may be in danger to suffer. Sometimes the weak are scandalized, when they
hear or see what others suffer. And it is manifest, that the best men have bin
put to a great plunge when they have been laden with reproaches. This makes
Jeremy so unquiet, Ier. 18. 18, 21. Now there Thou may comfort thy self in
the consideration.
are many ways, by which a Christian may establish his own heart against all
the scorns and reproaches of the men of this world.

1 First, if they consider that God takes notice of all the wrongs of that Of
the notice God takes of them.
kind done unto them. Thus David, O Lord, thou have known my reproach, and my
shame, and my dishonor, mine adversities are all before thee, Psalm. 69. 19. It
eases his heart, but to talk with GOD, and tell him, that he knows his
dishonor.

2. Secondly, it is an increase Of Gods great account of us.
of the comfort, if we further consider that God favors us, and accounts us
dear and honorable, whatsoever the wicked think of it: and this argument the
Lord himself pleades withal, Esaias 43. 4, 5. If Gods face shine upon his
servant, what cares David for the reproaches of all sorts of men, even of his
neighbors and familiar acquaintance. It is enough to him, that his best and
next neighbor and friend respects him, Psalm 31. 11. 12. 16.

3 Thirdly, thou may Of thy good report among the godly.
comfort thy self by opposing the good report thou have amongst the godly a
against the reproaches, with which wicked men pursue thee. As thou go through
ill report, so do thou through good report: thou have honor as well as
dishonor, and it is a great recompense to obtain good report amongst the
godly, 2. Corinthians. 6. 18. Hebr. 11. 2.

4 Fourthly, were it so Of thy praise thou shall have in the day of Christ
that thou had no honor in thy name on earth, and that well-doing were in no
request at all: yet this should comfort thee abundantly, that thy faith and
sincerity, and innocence, will be found unto praise, and honor, and glory in
the revelation of Jesus Christ. Thou shall have unspeakable praise at that
day, 1. Pet. 1. 7.

5 Fifthly, the same persons Of praise from them that now reproach thee.
that now reproach thee, may be so turned about by the power and grace of God,
that in the day of their visitation they will admire thee, and glorify God for
thee, 1. Peter. 2. 12.

6 Sixthly, we should be Of the small things thou suffer.
the less troubled with our reproaches, because this is not to resist unto
blood. God deals favorably with us. If we had lived in the days of our
Fathers, when to profess the Gospel of Christ, had been occasion of terrible
death; then we might have had some pretense of greeuance. But now in these
days, when the hurt is done only with the tongue of infamous men, it is a
great weakness to be disquieted, Hebr. 12. 3.

7 Seventhly, let us look Of the example of Christ.
upon the author and finisher of our Faith, even He was exposed to these
indignities, and yet for the glory set before him, despised the shame, and
endured the cross, and is now crowned in heaven, Hebr. 12. 2. What should the
servant complain of, when his Lord and Master is called Beelzebub?

8 Eighthly, David eases himself, by considering Of the cause of thy reproaches.
the cause of his suffering. For thy sake (says he to God) have I borne
reproach, shame has covered my face: The zeal of thy house has eaten me up,
and the reproaches of them that reproched thee, have fallen upon me: when I
wept and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach, Psalm. 69.
7. 9. 10.

Ninthly, why should we Of the condition of all the godly.
be troubled at that which is the lot of all the Saints? We have heard of David
before, how he was slandered by many, and on every side, Psalm. 31. 12. 13.
Jeremy complains, that they consulted how to devise devices against him, and
how they might smite him with the tongue, Ierem. 18. 18. False witnesses were
suborned against Stephen, and that in case of Religion, Acts 6. 11. 13. 14.
Many and grievous complaints were laid against Paul, Act. 25. 7. Yea, it was
the condition of all the Apostles, and the principal men of the Christian
world, to be made a spectacle to men and Angels, and to be accounted forlorn,
and as the off-scowring of all things, 1. Cor. 4. 9. 10. 13. And our Savior
Christ supposes the case of any blessed man, that men may say all manner of
evil sayings of them, Matthew. 5. 12, etc.

10 Tenthly, The Spirit of God and of glory does rest Of the presence and
assistance of the holy Ghost.
upon you, 1. Pet. 4. 14. Ye have the Spirit of God in you, what need you
care, what the world accounts of you? you have abundant treasure in your
hearts, and you have an heroycall or divine spirit in you, and therefore why are
you troubled about such mean things? and your patience and their rage, is a
sign you are in a happy condition, and have Gods spirit, and the spirit of
God, which in you, is a spirit of glory, and leads you to a better life. And
therefore seeing you are but trauelers here, why turn you again at the
barking of every dog? yea, these reproaches signify, that wicked men do see
some glory of God shiuing in you, which they strive by all means to vilify
and despise, being vexed in their hearts at it.

11 God will certainly Of the condition of those men that do reproach thee.
take an order with all that reproach his people. For first, he will reckon all
their reproaches, as cast out against himself; and therefore will indite them
of blasphemy, Psalm. 74. Col. 3. 8 1. Peter. 4. 14 1. Corinthians. 4. 13.

Secondly, in his due time he will put to silence those lying lips which
speak grievous things proudly, and contemptuously against the righteous,
Psalm 31. 18.

Thirdly, all that were incensed against the godly, shall be rewarded with
shame, which GOD will power upon them for the contempt with which they have
dishonored his servants, Esaias 41. 11. 14. And to conclude, God will certainly
bring them to judgment for these things, they must make their accounts before
the Judge of the quick and dead, that speak evil of other men, because they
will not run with them into the same excess of riot, 1. Pet. 4. 4. 5.

12 Lastly, God will provide Of the course God will take for thy clearing and
comfort.
for his own innocent servants. His thoughts are not to let his people be
shamed, Micah 4. 11. 12. and besides, he will bring forth their righteousness
as the light, they shall be cleared, Psalm. 37. 6. Job 5. 15. and they shall
receive double for all their shame, Isa. 61. 7. and their reward shall be
great in heaven, Math. 5. 12. For which reason Moses accounted the reproaches of
Gods people to be greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt, Hebr. 11. 26.
and in the mean time there is a hiding place with God from the strife of
tongues, Psalm. 31. 20.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein many principal Objections of the godly are answered.

NOW for the better establishment of men's hearts in the former comforts; it
will not be amiss to take off the obiectons with which many times godly men
do aggrauate their distress above the respect of the former consolations.

1. Ob. If they were ordinary reproaches, it would not so much trouble me, but
they are vile things which are objected against me?

Sol. They cannot be viler things then have bin objected against Christ and
the godly. For there have been objected;

Grievous things. Acts 25 7. Gluttony. Math 11. 18. 19. Madness: John. 10. 20.
Blasphemy. Mat. 26. 65. Ac. 6. 11. 13. 14 Deceiving. John 7. 12. Rebellion.
Acts 17. 6. 7. Railing. Acts 23. 4. Schism. Acts 28. 22. Wickedness of life. 1.
Pet. 2. 12.
2. Ob. But base persons do revile me, the very scumme of the people do
scorn me.

Solu. This is no strange thing. The abiects gathered themselves together
against David, they did tear and ceased not, Psalm. 35. 15. The drunkards sang
of him, Psalm. 69. 13. Those that derided Job, were such, whose fathers he
would have disdained to set with the dogs of his flock, Job 30. 1.

3. Ob. But I have lived long under such disgraces.

Sol. Rest thy self, and fret not at the man that prospers in his way, the
Lord will find a time to bring forth thy innocence, as the light, Psalm. 37. 7.
Zephan. 3. 18. 19. God will find a time to get thee praise in every place where
thou have been put to shame.

4. Ob. But I am almost buried with the almost infiniteness of scorn and
reproaches.

Sol. That was no more then was in David's case; he was so buried in disgrace,
that he was as a man dead, forgotten, and out of mind, Ps. 31. 14. he was a
reproach of men, Psalm. 22. 12. A byword, Psalm. 44. 9, etc. A proverb, Psalm. 69.
11. A wonder to many, Psalm. 7. 7. and the Apostles were a gazing stock to men
and Angels, 1. Cor. 4. 9. 2. Cor. 6. 13.

5. Ob. But great men set against me.

Solu. That was David's case: Fear was on every side, he heard the railings of
great men, which consulted together against him, Psalm 31. 13.

6. Ob. But I am sentenced and accused as an evil doer most unjustly, and that
publicly.

Sol. So was our Savior Christ, and that by a whole Council of men, Mat. 27.
1. John. 11. 47. 48. and so was Stephen, Act. 6. 12. and so were the Apostles,
Act. 4. 6. 15. and 5. 27. and so was Paul, Act. 23. 1. The most righteous may
suffer as evil doers, 2. Tim. 2. 9. The wicked so compass about the
righteous, that many times wrong judgment proceeds, Hebr. 2. 3. 4. but this
is his comfort, The Lord will not leave him in the hand of the wicked, nor
condemn him, when he is judged, Psalm. 37. 32. If God condemn us not, it
matters not for the sentences of unjust men. And the rather, because God has
further promised the godly man, that he will stand at his right hand, to save
him from the judges of his soul, Ps. 109. 31.

7. Ob. But I am by slander cast out of the Church with great pretense of the
glory of God.

Solu. The Lord in the Prophet Isaiahs time had observed such a thing as this.
For the Prophet tells the godly, that their brethren had cast them out, and
said; Let the Lord be glorified. But he assures them from the Lord, that God
would appear to their joy, and their brethren which cast them out, should be
ashamed, Isaiah 66. 5.

8. Ob. But they which have thus grievously wronged me, live in all prosperity,
no judgment lights upon them, God does not pleadmy cause against them.

Sol. Thou know not how GOD deals with them, God can judge them secretly,
and consume them insensibly, so as the world shall take no notice of it, as the
moth eats up the garment, without making any great rent, Isay 51. 8. And for
this reason they are exhorted in that place, not to fear the reproach.
Secondly, what know thou what God will yet do with them? For God has
pleaded the cause of his servants many times, by bringing strange judgments
upon the wicked. This Pashur shall be made Magor-missabib, that is, a terror
round about, and all that hear it, shall tremble, Ierem. 20. 3. God can cloth
thy adversaries with shame, and cover them with their own confusion as with a
mantell, Psalm* 109. 29.

9. Ob. But I am censured by good men with much bitterness, as if I were
guilty, and there is none to comfort or pity me.

Sol. So was Job deeply censured by his godly friends: and so was Paul of his
own hearers, 1. Cor. 4. 4, 10. Thus David was forsaken in his wrongs, so as
none would comfort him, Psalm. 69. 20.

10. Ob. But yet one thing much troubles me, that is, that since these
slanders, the hand of God has bin upon me in diverse particular judgments,
and this makes people to think, sure I am guilty.

Sol. So they thought of Paul when the Viper fell on his hand, being a man that
was before accused, and now sent as it were a prisoner, Acts 28. so they judged
of David when he was sick, that some evil disease did cleave to him, Psalm.
41. 8. Yea, this was our Lord Jesus Christ's case; For they judged him as
plagued, and smitten of GOD, Esaias 53. 4.

11. Ob. But the things objected against me are so foul, that when I hear
those things spoken of publicly, or privately, I blush, and that may cause me
to be thought to be guilty.

Solu. This was David's case being innocent; he says, Shame covered his face
when he bore reproach, Psalm. 69. 7. and his confusion was continually before
him; and the shame of his face covered him, for the voice of him that
reprocheth and blasphemeth by reason of the enemy, Psalm. 44. 14. 16.

CHAP. VII.
Directions in the case of reproaches.

I Conclude this point concerning reproaches, with certain directions. There be
diverse things to 4 Ways to avoid reproaches.
be done by us, if we would be rightly ordered in the case of reproaches.

1 We should shun the company of such as are given to slander, as it is said
of Paul, when diverse were hardened, and spoke evil of the way, he departed from
them, and separated the Disciples, Acts 19. 9.

2 Thy daily refuge against the scorns of reprochers, must be to go to God,
and hide thy self with himby prayer. When David is thus encountered, if you
ask, what he did? he says, when they railed, But I betook my self to
prayer, Psalm. 109. 4. and Ps. 31. 19.

3 Look to thy tongue, be silent, see thou render not reuiling for reuiling,
but rather trust in GOD, and bless them that curse thee, Psalm. 37. 7. 1. Pet.
3. 9. Psalm. 31. 14. 1. Cor. 4. 12. Ierem. 18. 20.

4 Live inoffensiuely, and be sure thou keep Gods way: For if any thing will
medicine their tongues, that must be it, 2. Cor. 6. 3. 8 2. Pet. 2. 12. and 4.
14. 15. Ps. 37. 34. For it may be at length the same mouth that cursed thee,
will bless thee, and glorify GOD for thee.

CHAP. VIII.
Showing how the godly may comfort themselves against their adversaries.

HItherto of the consolations against reproaches: Now it follows, that I
should show how a Christian may comfort himself against his adversaries, that
oppose him in his course of He may comfort himself from the consideration, 1
Of the common condition of all the godly.
godliness, and so there are many arguments of consolation.

1 The first may be taken from his condition as it is common to all the godly:
For this may stay a man's heart to know for certain, that every man that will
live godly, shall be opposed, and must suffer persecutions, 2. Tim. 2. 12.

2 The second may be taken from the appointment Of Gods appointment.
of God herein: and this stands of two branches. First, that God from all
eternity has decreed every man's sufferings this way. Thus Paul lesseneth the
thought of the cross, by pleading that God had appointed them thereunto,
meaning by his eternal decree, 1. Thessal. 33. Secondly, that GOD has
likewise appointed the end, and measure, and deliverance out of the affliction.
Thus the Church is comforted, Revel. 2. 10. If it were grievous to them to know
that the Devil should raise up wicked men, that should cast them into prison,
yet this may refresh them, that GOD has set the time when they shall come
forth again. It shall be but for ten days: It shall neither be so long as
the Devil and wicked men would haueit, for then they must never come out; nor
so little a while, as they themselves would have it; for then they would never
comein, or stay but awhile: but God will rule by determining the time for their
good.

3 The third may be taken from the refuge we may Of our refuge in God.
have in God: we may always make our recourse to God in all our wrongs, who
has promised to be our refuge, even our refuge in due time, Psalm. 9. 9. If God
will receive us, and hear our moanes, and undertake our protection, it should
be no great thing for us to endure the oppositions of unreasonable men.

4 The fourth may be taken from the prediction Of the prediction of Christ.
of Christ: we have been told before plainly what we should expect. We may
have peace in Christ, but he has foretold it, that in the world we shall
have trouble, Ioh. 16. 13. yea, that we must provide to take up our cross
daily, Luke 9. 24.

5 The fifth may be taken Of the deliverance promised.
from the deliverance GOD has promised us; for thus he assures us, The hand of
the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his indignation toward
their and his enemies, Isay 66 14. for that God that will be the strength of
the righteous in their trouble, will be their salvation out of their troubles:
he will help them and deliver them, he will deliver them from the wicked, and
save them because they trust in him, Psalm 37. 39, 40. This glory of the Lord
shall be known and feared from the East to the West, that if the enemy come
like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall chase him away, Isay 59 19. Therefore
fear not thou, O worm Jacob, for thus says the Lord, I am thy GOD, I will
sustain thee with the right hand of my Justice: Behold, all they that provoke
thee shall be ashamed, they shall be as nothing: the men of thy strife shall
perish, Isay. 41. 10 11. For the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptation, and to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished, 2.
Peter 2. 9. GOD will deliver the poor when he cries, the needy also, and him
that has no helper, Psalm. 72. 12.

6 The sixth may be taken Of Gods judgment upon our adversaries.
from the certain judgment of God that shall fall upon their adversaries: The
men of thy strife shall perish, and they that war against thee, shall be as
a thing of naught: They shall seek them and not find them, Isa. 41. 11. 12.
All these curses will the Lord lay upon their enemies, and upon them that hate
them and persecute them, Deuteronomy. 30. 7. All those evil neighbors that touch the
Inheritance of Israel, God will pluck them out of their land, and pluck his
people from among them, Ier. 12. 14. The wicked draw their swords, and bend
their bows against the godly; but their sword shall enter into their own
heart, and their bow shall be broken; for the arms of the wicked shall be
broken, and the Lord will uphold the just, Psalm. 37. 14. 15. 17. And besides,
for their full payment, they are reserved unto the day of Judgment to be
punished.

7 The seventh may be Of the effects and consequents.
taken from the consideration of the effects and consequents of this
opposition: For first, hereby we give our testimony to Christ and the Gospel,
when we partake of the afflictions of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 8. Secondly, these
oppositions do as much good for the present, when Gods servants fall into
these troubles, the fruit will be, it will try them, and purge them, and make
them white, till their time be come, for there is a time appointed, Dan. 11.
35. 36. Thirdly, God may turn the hearts of the wicked, and make them of Lions
and Tigers, to become Lambs, and no more to do hurt in the mountain of the
Lord, Isay 11. The Wolf and the Lamb may come to feed together, and the Lion
eat straw like the Bullock, Isay. 65. 25.

Lastly, we shall gain Of our own gain by them.
exceedingly by these sufferings; for we are assured, that if we suffer with
Christ, we shall reign with him in another World, 2. Timo. 2. 11. 12. We
should therefore rejoice, that we partake in the sufferings of Christ, because
we are punished, that when Christ appears in his glory, we shall then be glad
and rejoice, 1. Peter 4. 13.

CHAP. IX.
Of the ways how Satan tempts us, and the occasion of temptation.

HItherto of outward afflictions, and the comforts against them. The inward
afflictions follow, and here in the first place come tentations to be
considered of, even those conflicts which men have in their souls with evil
Angels.

Three things must be 3. Things taken for granted.
granted concerning temptations.

1 First, that the doctrine of temptations is obscure, because the disease lies
inward in the soul, and is such as the unregenerate world has little care of,
or judgment in.

2 Secondly, that when God leaves his children to be tried by this affliction,
and softens their hearts to feel this combat with Devils, it does wonderfully
amaze and disquiet them, and therefore this is a point needful to be handled.

3 Thirdly, that there is sure remedy in the word of God, even for this
affliction also.

Now, because this doctrine of temptations is somewhat obscure, I would, before
I entreat of comforts against them, consider of three things.

1 How many ways Satan tempts men. 2 To what things he tempts. 3 What are
usually the occasions he takes of tempting.
For the first, Satan Satan tempts us five ways.
tempts us diverse ways.

1 One is, when he tempts God against us, laboring to bring God out of liking
with us. Thus he insinuated the dispraises of Job to God, Job, chap. 1. and 2.
And thus Satan stood at the right hand of Joshua the high Priest, to resist
him before the Angel of the Covenant, Zachar. 3. 1.

2 Another way is, when he appears in some shape, and by voice, or otherways
terrifies men.

3 When he brings distresses upon men's bodies, or other heavy calamities, and
thus also he tempted Job by GODS permission.

4 When he stirs up other men to tempt us: thus he stirred up Peter to tempt
Christ, and dissuaded him from his suffering, Math. 16. And thus he tempted the
Woman by means of the Serpent: and thus also he imployeth wicked men, daily
to tempt by evil counsel and inticements.

5 The last and most usual way is by iniecting, exciting, or suggesting evil
internally within our spirit. This is that kind of temptation I here
especially mean.

2 For the second, that we may find out the nature of temptations, and the
things whereabout Satan works, we may refer all the temptations to three
sorts. 3. Sorts of temptations by suggestio^. 1. Temptations of blasphemy.


The first sort of temptations, are temptations to blasphemy: and thus he
tempts when he suggests monstrous things against God, or the word of God, or
the providence of God, or the like.

The second sort are, 2. Temptations to particular sins.
temptations to particular sins, as when he tempts to the denial of Christ,
as he did Peter, and so he tempts to lusts of all sorts. And so the Devil is
the father of lust, John 8. 44. and evil Angels are spiritual wickedness,
Ephesians. 6. 13. and thus also he tempts to rage or revenge; and therefore the
Apostle implies in his speech about anger, that to give place to wrath, is to
give place to the Devil, who usually excites those violent passions, Ephesians. 4.
26. And thus also he tempts to covetousness, in respect of which sin, the
Devil is said to enter into Judas: And thus also he tempts to lying, as in
the case of Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. and so he tempts men to murder,
either of themselves or of others.

The third kind of temptation 3. Temptations to despair.
is, the temptation to despair, which is, when he persuades with men to
despair of all mercy in God. Thus he made Judas despair: and into some degree
of despair for the time was David himself entered, Psalm. 77. Thus of the sorts
of temptations.

3 Now it is wonderful 9. Occasions of templations.
necessary in the third place to take notice of the occasions of temptations.
Satan usually tempts not, but upon some advantage given him, and so there are
many things, which as it were, tempt the Devil to tempt men, as

First, solitariness: the Devil watched to find Solitarines.
the woman alone from her husband, and then set upon her. Such persons as love
solitariness, love not their own souls; for they give great advantage to
Satan to assault them and circumuent them, and therefore we should take heed
of it.

The second occasion is security, when the Devil Security.
spies that men be careless, and keep no watch over their own hearts, and
are rechlesse in their courses, and go from day to day, and fear not evil,
then he lies in wait to assault, by iniecting some vile or base temptation to
sin.

The third occasion is Pride; when Paul is somewhat Pride.
lifted up with the consideration of his revelations, then does Satan take his
advantage, and set upon him with his messenger, even some vile temptation: when
we take liberty to make our selves great in our own eyes, and nourish the
pleasing thoughts of high opinion, and selfeconceit, if God do not greatly
guard us, we are near some desperate assault of Satan.

The fourth occasion is anger. The Devil seldom Anger.
forbeares to enter into the heart of the wrathful person, when anger has set
open the door, as was noted before out of Ephesians. 4. 26.

The fifth occasion is dalliance with evil thoughts, 5. Dalliance with evil
thoughts.
when the Devil sees us play with contemplative wickedness, and be well
content to let our thoghts run upon sinful proiects or imaginations of
sins, which perhaps we intended not ever to commit. This tempts him to
employ his skill to put fire to those thoughts, so long till the whole heart
be ensnared by them, or by other ways, to draw us into mischief. These lusts
will draw away, and Satan engendring with them can make them conceive, etc.
Iam. 1. 14.

The sixth occasion is, the 6. Intemperate use of outward things.
intemperate use of outward things. For the Devil walks about as a roaring
Lion, seeking who^ he may devour, and when he finds a man excessiuely bent to
the things of this world, as meat, drink, apparel, riches, pleasures,
honors, etc. he sets upon him by some of his methods to carry him away
captive at his will. Therefore the Apostle Peter wills us to be sober, if we
would prevent him; implying, that the Devil will give the onset, when he
finds us intemperate, 1. Pet. 5. 8.

The seventh occasion is 7. Vnsetlednes in Faith
unsettledness in our assurance of Gods favor, and our own salvation: We
cannot resist the Devil, if we be not steadfast in the faith, and we give
him wonderful advantage, if we be tossed about like the waves of the Sea, and
are unconstant or careless in matter of our faith; we never bar out the
Devil soundly, till we be steadfast in our assurance, 1. Peter. 5. 8. 9.

The eight occasion is, 8. Trial of Faith.
when sometimes the Lord will have us tempted, only for the trial of our
faith, and the grace which he has given unto us.

Lastly, the ninth occasion 9. Relapse into some gross sin.
is, a relapse into some gross sin after calling, which is scourged with
hideous temptations through a secret depth of Justice in God, who thereby can
show how fearful a thing it is so to offend.

CHAP. X.
How the godly may comfort themselves in their temptations.

THe consolations against temptations follow.

A Christian, that feels himself assaulted by the Devil, may raise up in his
thoughts diverse contemplations, able to succor He may comfort him self from
the consideration, Of the common condition of the godly.
him in his distresses: as

1 First, if he consider that this is the case of all the godly, to be
tempted: It is no new thing which has befallen him. Thus Paul comforts the
Corinthians, No temptation has befallen you, but what accompanies the nature
of man, 1. Cor. 10. 13. And the Apostle Peter hartens them to whom he writes,
by this argument: The same afflictions are accomplished upon your brethren that
are in the world, 1. Pet. 5. 9. This also the Apostle to the Ephesians
affirms, that those spiritual wickednesses are found even in the most heavenly
places on earth, Ephesians. 6. 12. The Apostles themselves were not free from this
combat, and therefore Paul says, We wrestle with principalities and powers,
etc.

2 Secondly, if we consider Of the measure.
the measure of them, God will not lay any more upon him, then he is able to
bear, he may fear his own strength, as Paul did, but God will make his grace
sufficient for him, 1. Cor. 10. 13. 2. Cor. 12. 9. Satan is limited, he can
go no further then his chain will reach, and for that cause it is, that we
are taught to pray, that God would not lead us into temptation, as
acknowledging that God does dispose and order the measure of this kind of
affliction.

3 Thirdly, if he consider Of the short continuance.
the short continuance of his temptations; They may be fierce, but they are not
long: GOD will shortly tread down Satan under our feet, Romans 16. 20. We shall
suffer but a while, 1. Pet. 5. 9. 10.

4 Fourthly, if he seriously Of diverse things in Christ: as
meditate of diverse things in Christ his Savior: as,

First, his example. It 1. His example
should be less grievous to be tempted, because Christ himself was tempted
in all things, as he is, sin sin only excepted, Hebr. 4. 15.

Secondly, Christ has 2 His victory over the Devil.
achieved an admirable victory over these principalities and powers, and has
triumphed over them, and made a show of them openly, Col. 2. 15.

Thirdly, there is in 3 His sympathy.
Christ a sympathy and fellow-feeling. He is touched with our infirmities, and
does much compassionate our case, Heb. 4. 15.

Fourthly, he has made intercession, and prayed for 4 His Intercession.
us, that our faith might not fail. For that which he assured to Peter, he
performs also for all the elect, Luke 22. 31.

Fifthly, Christ is the true 5 His virtue for healing us.
brazen Serpent, which is lift up of God, that when we feel our selves stung
with these fiery serpents, by looking upon Christ we are sure to be healed,
John 3. 15.

Lastly, we are sure to be helped and succored by 6 His succor.
Christ in the combat: He was tempted himself, that he might succor them
that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18.

5 Fifthly, if he consider Of the issue out of temptation.
the issue that GOD will give, He will give issue out of the temptation, 1.
Cor. 10. 13. He will tread down Satan, Romans 16. 20. He will stablish us, after
we have suffered a while, 1. Pet. 5. 9, 10. If we resist the Devil, he shall
fly from us, Iam. 4. 7. 8. If he lead us into temptation, he will deliver us
from evil, Math. 6. 13. The Lord will break the head of the great Leuiathan,
the crooked serpent, the Dragon of the Sea, Isay, 27. 1.

6 If he consider the effects of temptation, it is Of the effects.
the school of Christ to train us up in spiritual souldierly, they cannot
hurt us, they make us more humble, 2. Corin. 12. 8. 9. They are for our trial,
1. Pet. 1. 7. Satan does but winnow us, we lose nothing but our chafe, Luke
21. 31.

Ob. But it seems, temptations are a grievous evil, because we are taught to
pray against them in a special manner in the Lords prayer, which shows that my
estate is miserable, in that I am led into temptation.

Ans. It is true, that we How we may pray against temptations.
must pray against temptations, and that it is a judgment; but yet no other,
then sickness, poverty, or the like: and therefore we are not to pray against
them simply, but with submission to Gods will; only we must pray absolutely to
be delivered from the evil of temptation, which latter words do restrain or
correct the former.

Quest. But when I am tempted, how may I know that I am not overcome of the
temptation?

An. Observe thine own How we may know that we are not overcome of temptations.
heart in the entertainment of those vilde iniections. If thou abhorthem as
soon as they come in, and give no manner of consent unto them, thou art free.
For Christ himself was tempted by evil cogitations cast into his mind: (for
Note.
the Apostle says) He was tempted in like manner as we are, and yet he was
not guilty of the evil of the temptation. It is true, that for the most part
we are infected in some degree or other by it: but yet it is not impossible
for man to be free from the evil of temptation, as that example shows.

But secondly, thou may Two signs.
know whether thou be overcome or no, by two signs. For first, if thou feel
the temptation to be an affliction to thee, and account it an evil day, and art
burdened under it, as if it were a very buffeting of thy body, thou art yet
safe: The Devil has no victory, thou art not led captive, all this while
Paul was worse feared then hurt, 2. Cor. 12. 7. 8. 9. Secondly, all the while
thou resistest by prayer, and wrastlest, with it, and keep thy spiritual
weapons in thy hands, thou art the conqueror, for thou art assured of God. If
thou resist, the Devil will fly from thee in due time. Thou art never
overcome, till the temptation please thee, and thou resoluest to make no
resistance spiritually, Iam. 4. 8.

Quest. But what if I be overcome? am I not in a desperate condition, if the
temptation have prevailed over me?

An. Thy case is mournful, but not desperate: for Peter and David were
overcome of the temptation, and though it cost them many tears, yet they were
recovered. Christ has made intercession for thee, and will heal thee, if thou
make thy recourse unto him, and penitently plead for mercy before the throne of
Grace.

CHAP. XI.
Comforts against our daily infirmities.

HItherto of the consolations against the temptations of Satan. There remain
two other distresses of the Spirit. 1. The one arising from the sense of daily
infirmities. 2. The other from the fear of falling away, and losing of what we
have.

1 For the first, there are many ways, by which a Christian may fence his
heart against the discouragements that arise from the sense of daily
infirmities.

And these promises are Two sorts of promises.
of two sorts: For they are either such as give us arguments of consolation in
themselves, or such as withal remove the objections are wont to arise in our
hearts upon some particular consideration of the manner of the infirmities in
us:

By infirmities, I mean What is meant by infirmities.
defects, Ignorance, Indisposition, Fear, Discouragements, Forgetfulness,
Omissions, Distractions, Particular falls through frailty, some kinds of evil
thoughts, Dullness, Vncheerefulnesse, Doubts, and the evil of our good works.

The arguments of Consolation The comforts raised from the consideration.
are:

1 There are differences Of thy age in Christ.
in the degrees of the age of Christ in us: Some Christians are but weak,
young ones, lambs, babes, new formed, and GOD knows it, and looks for no more
from such, then what agrees to their age: He is a compassionate Father, that
does not require the same power of gifts in a weak Christian, which he looks
for in a strong.

2 It should much ease 2 Of thy condition now under grace.
us to remember, that we are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14.
We are delivered from the rigor of the Law, God now does not expect perfection
from us, nor accounts us as transgressors, because we are imperfect, but has
received us to the benefit of the new covenant: In which, perfection is only
required in Christ, and uprightness

3 We may be very 3. Of the fruitfulness may be in a weak Christian.
weak in strength and power of gifts, and yet very fruitful: we may do much
good while we are in the infancy of Grace, which the comparison of the vine (to
which the godly are resembled) shows. The vine is not the strongest of Trees,
and yet is more fruitful in pleasing fruit, then many other trees, not of the
field only, but of the garden also. Now the godly are likened to the vine, Esaias
27. 2. to show, that al their weakness notwithstanding, they may be abundant
in pleasing fruit.

4 The goodness of Gods Of the goodness of Gods nature: for he is
nature should much encourage and comfort us herein: and so if we consider
four praises in the nature of God.

First, he is gracious: he stands not upon desert, 1 Gracious.
we may buy of him without money, he can love us for his own sake, though we
be able no way to plead our own merits, Esaias 55. 1. 2. 3.

Secondly, he is merciful, 2 Merciful.
yea mercy pleases him, it is no trouble to him to show mercy, but he
delights in it, Mic. 7. 18.

Thirdly, he is slow to anger, Infirmities will 3 Slow to anger.
not provoke him to wrath; he can delight in us still, though we have many
wants and weaknesses, Ps. 103.

Fourthly, he is ready to forgive; if by our too 4 Ready to forgive.
much carelessness and frequency in offending, he be not urged to displeasure,
yet he is quickly pacified; a few prayers and tears in the confession of our
faults, will turn away all his displeasure, so as he will remember our
iniquities no more, Ps. 103.

5 The Lord will strengthen Of the hope of strength and
his own work in us by his Spirit, and though Grace be but in the bud, yet
his blessing shall be upon our buds, and he will make us grow as the willowes
planted by the watercourse: the hope of increase should stay us against the
present sense of weakness, Esaias, 44. 2. 3. 4.

6 There are many Of many things in Christ: as
things comfortable to be thought upon in Christ.

For first, he makes account 1 His opinion of us.
to find us sick, and sinners, he does not expect to find us righteous
altogether: He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance,
Mark. 2. 17.

Secondly, we have such an High Priest, as 2 His compassion.
knows how to have compassion upon those that are out of the way: he is
touched with our infirmities, he does rather pity us, then hate us for our
weaknesses, Hebr. 4. 15.

Thirdly, his intercession 3 His intercession.
couers our infirmities. If any man sin, we have an Advocate, even Jesus
Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins. He takes an
order in Heaven, that God shall not be turned away from us, he makes daily
intercession for us.

Fourthly, his blood will powerfully cleanse 4 His blood.
our Consciences from the deadness which is in our works, Heb. 9. 14.

Fifthly, he is the Lord our righteousness, and 5 The imputation of his
righteousness.
that is his name by which he will be called, Ierem. 23. 6. His perfect
righteousness is as truly ours, as if we had performed it our selves: so as
although we be most imperfect in our selves, yet in Christ God can find no
fault in us, nor see any transgression: Though our sanctification be spotted,
yet our justification has no blemish in it.

7 The helps God has The help of the Ministry.
affoorded us in his Ministers, may be some ease unto us: though for weakness
we be but lambs, yet God has provided for us; he has given us shepherds to
feed us, and given them a charge to look to his Lambs, as well as his
sheep. The Church is compared to a nurse with breasts, and we have a promise
to suck out of the breasts of his consolations Ierem. 23. 4. Esaias 66. 11. 12.
13. John 21. 19.

8 We should especially Of diverse particular favors God has assured us of.
be refreshed with the consideration of diverse particular favors, GOD has
assured us of in his word, as

First, that he will not deal with us after our sins, nor reward us after our
iniquities, Psalm. 103.

Secondly, that he will spare us, as a man spares his son that serves him.
No father can show compassion like to that which God will be bound to show to
his children, Mal. 3. 17.

Thirdly, that the smoking flax shall not be quenched, and the bruised reed
shall not be broken; though grace were in us but like the heat in the week of
the candle when the light is out, yet God has taken order that it shall not be
extinguished, Esaias 42. 3.

Fourthly, that in all times of need we shall have access unto the Throne of
Grace, and obtain a supply of all our wants; so as we may go boldly to ask
what we need, in the name of Christ, and it shall be given us, Heb. 4. vlt.

Fifthly, that he will accept of our desires, and our will to do his service,
shall be taken for the deed, so as he will reckon of so much good to be done by
us, as we desired and endeavored to do: our works are as good as we desired
to have them to be. The preparations of our hearts are reckned with God as
great things, Esaias 55. 1. Ierem. 30. 2. 2. Cor. 8. 12.

Sixthly, that in all his dealing with us, he will use us in all compassion with
a tender respect of our weakness. Our weeping and supplication shall be
accepted before him, and he will cause us to walk in a straight way, in which
we shall not stumble, Ier. 31. 9. In all our afflictions he is afflicted. In
love, in care, in pity he will redeem us, and carry us as in the days of
old, Esaias 63. 9. As he has borne us from the womb, so will he be the same
still unto old age, even unto the gray hairs. He will carry us in the arms
of his compassion: He has made us, he will bear, even he will carry, and
will deliver us, Esaias 46. 3. 4. He will gather the Lambs with his arms, and
carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are with young, Esaias 40.

Seventhly, that he will supply al our necessities out of the riches of his
glory, Phil. 4. 19.

Eighthly, that he will pass by our mere frailties, and take no notice of the
errors of our lives, that arise from mere infirmities; there is no God like
unto him for passing by transgressions, Mic. 7. 18.

Ninthly, That he will strengthen us, and make us grow in the gifts bestowed
upon us: The Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the
children of Israel. Joel. 3. 16. He gives power to the faint, and to them that
have no might, he increases strength: they that wait upon the Lord, shall
renew their strength, Esaias 40. 29. 31. He will be as the dew to his people. They
shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth their roots, as Lebanon. Their
branches shall spread, and their beauty be as the Olive tree, and their smell
as Lebanon. They shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine, Hosh. 14. 5.
6. 7.

And to assure all this, God would have us to know that he has married us unto
himself, and holds himself tied in the covenant of marriage with all
kindness and faithfulness, to take the care and charge of us for ever, Hosh. 2.
19.

9 To conclude this first sort of promises, what know thou what GOD Of what
God may bring thee to.
may bring thee unto, notwithstanding thy weakness? He can make thee to
multiply as the bud of the field. He can make thee increase and wax great.
He can make thee attain unto excellent ornaments, Ezech. 10. 7. Since thou
art the branch of his planting, the work of his hand, he may greatly glorify
himself in thee, so as thy little one may be as a thousand, and thy small one
as a strong Nation, God can perform it in his due time, Esaias 60. 21 22. Though
thou have but a little strength, God has set before thee such an open door, as
no man can shut: and God can make thee stand in the love of the truth, without
denying his name when the hour of temptation comes upon the world, and many of
greater understanding fall, Reu. 3. 8. 9. 10.

Hitherto of the principal consolations in the case of infirmities.

CHAP. XII.
Diverse objections are answered.

IT follows that I should answer certain Objections which do usually
depresse the hearts of men, and by the trouble of which they neglect the former
consolations.

Ob. Some one may say, My infirmities are the more grievous, because I find
affliction of spirit joined with them. These terrors and passions upon my heart
do dismay me, and make me doubt, those comforts do not belong unto me.

Solu. God may afflict thy spirit, and yet be well pleased with thee; yea
therefore thy case is the more comfortable, because thou feel the weight and
burden of thy sins, as these places of Scripture following, most evidently
and comfortably show: namely,

Psalm. 34. 18. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righ teous, and his ears are
open unto their cry.

Math. 11. 28. 29. Come unto me, al ye that are weary and laden, and I will
ease you.

Take my yoke on you, and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart, and
you shall find rest unto your souls.

Ierem. 31. 25. For I have satiate the weary soul, and I have replenished
every sorrowful soul. And their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they
shall have no more sorrow: the latter part of the 12. verse, etc.

Isaiah 63. 9. In all their troubles he was troubled, and the Angel of his
presence saved them. In his love and in his mercy he redeemed them, and he bare
them and carried them always continually.

Psalm. 31. 21. 22. Blessed be the Lord: for he has showed his marvelous
kindness toward me in a strong City.

Though I said in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight; yet thou heardst the
voice of my prayer, when I cried unto thee.

Psalm. 103. 9. He will not always chide, neither keep his anger for ever.

Ob. But I offend daily.

Solu. That is clearly answered in Gods promise: For he says, he will
multiply pardon, or abundantly pardon, Esaias. 57. 7.

Ob. But I find I grow worse then I have bin, my heart is much out of order.

Sol. If there be a heart in thee desirous to return, there is comfort also
against this distress. The Lord will heal thy backsliding, if thou take unto
thee words to confess thy falling away, Hosh. 14. 2. 3. 4. Behold (says the
Lord) I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and reveal unto
them the abundance of peace and truth, Ier. 33. 6. There is healing in the
wings of the Son of righteousness, and ye shall go forth and grow up as the
Calves of the stall, Malach. 4. 2.

Ob. But I am extremely burdened with my ignorance, this is a continual
grieuance unto me.

Solu. There are many co^forts against ignorance.

1 It is a special promise 8. Constructions about ignorance in the godly.
of God in the new Covenant, that he will write his laws in thy heart, and he
will make thee to know the Lord: thou may go boldly to the throne of Grace,
to beg the further illumination of the Spirit of God. This is one of the suites
God cannot deny.

2 God has promised to lead thee by a way which thou have not known: He
will preserve thee by his knowledge, though thou be unacquainted with the way
thy self. He that led his people from Babel to Sion, when they scarce knew a
foot of that long way, will lead thee in the straight way from earth to
heaven, if thou seek a way of GOD as they did, Isay 42. 16.

3 We have such an High Priest, as knows how to have compassion on the
ignorant. He that required that property of the High Priest in the Law, will
much more express it himself, Hebr. 5. 1. 3.

4 This must be thy glory, and the crown of rejoicing, that though thou be
ignorant of many things, yet thou know God, and Christ crucified, and this
is eternal life, Ioh. 17. 3.

5 The Ministers of the Gospel are ours, and therefore if we attend upon the
Word, and continue in it, we shall know the truth: their instructions shall
be daily distilled into thy heart like drops of rain, 1. Cor. 3. 22. 23.

6 The anointing thou have received, shall teach thee all needful things, and
lead thee into all truth, 1. Ioh. 2. 27.

7 There is a seed of heavenly doctrine cast into thy heart, which shall ever
remain in thee. It is indelible, it cannot be blotted out, 1. Ioh. 3. 9.

8 Lastly, knowledge is the gift of Christ, and as we know that he is come, so
we believe that he will give us understanding, that we may know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: this is
the true God, and eternal life, 1. Ioh. 5. 20.

Ob. But we want, or have lost the means of knowledge; our teachers are taken
from us.

Solu. It is true; Where vision fails, the people faint, but yet:

1 After God has given you the bread of affliction, and the water of
adversity, he will restore teachers, and no more restrain instructions, Esaias
30. 20.

2 Though thou see no way of help, yet thou know not how God can provide;
He can open Rivers on the tops of mountains, and he makes the wilderness a
standing poole, when his people thirst and cry unto him, Isaiah 41. 17, 18.

3 If ordinary means fail and be denied, God will then supply of his spirit,
and make that means which is left, to suffice for thy preservation, and
building up, Philip. 1. 9.

Now that there may be the more abundant support unto our hearts in this case
of infirmities. I will open two places of Scripture that do meet with the
most objections of our hearts.

The first is, Exodus 34. The full explication of the words in Exodus 34. 6. 7.
6. 7. where the Lord proclaims the goodness of his nature, that all men may
take notice of it, and give him the praise of his rich grace, where he so
describes the Lord, that in his titles he gives an answer to many
objections.

1. Ob. If thou say thy infirmities may alienate the Lord from thee?

Solu. He answers, that he is Jehovah, always the same, unchangeable. He
will not alter his love toward thee, but love thee to the end, and for the
more assurance, he repeated that title twice, because he knows, we most doubt
of that, and have most need to be succored with that Argument, as the
foundation of all our comfort.

2. Ob. If thou say thou have strong inclinations to sin, or strange
temptations, or great impediments, or many adversaries and discouragements?

Solu. He answers, he is God, or strong; to signify that nothing shall hinder
the work of his grace toward thee, but he will keep thee by his power, and
make his grace sufficient for thee.

3. Ob. If thou say he is of pure eyes, and cannot but discern thy faults,
and sin is sin in the sight of God.

Sol. He answers, that he is merciful.

4. Ob. If thou say thou deseruest no such mercy.

Solu. He answers that he is gracious, and does not stand upon desert. He will
show mercy, not because thou art good, but because he is good.

5. Ob. If thou say, The daily repeating and renewing of thy sins may provoke
him, though he be merciful and gracious.

Solu. He answers, that he is long-suffering.

6. Ob. If thou say thou have many defects and wants to be supplied.

Solu. He answers, that he is full of goodness.

7. Ob. If thou say, thou art ashamed of the igno rance, which is more then
can be conceived.

Sol. He answers, that he is abundant in truth to supply thy defects, and to
perform his promise, though thou have but a little faith.

8. Ob. If thou say thou do believe that God is all this unto some men, and
that Abraham, and David, and others that were in great favor with GOD, have
found all this. But for thy self thou art so vile a creature, and so mean a
person, as it is not for thee to expectsuch great things of God,

Solu. He answers, that he keeps mercy for thousands. He has not spent all
upon David, or the Patriarchs, or Prophets, or Apostles, or Martyrs, or
Ministers: but he has an Ocean of goodness still to be showed, without
respect of persons, to all that come unto him for mercy.

9. Ob. If thou yet say, thou art guilty of diverse sorts of sins, and that it
is not one offense only, but many that lie upon thee, and some of them such as
thou dare not name, they are so vile,

Solu. He answers, that he forgiues iniquity, transgression and sin, that
is, all sorts of sins, of nature, of weakness, or of presumption.

10. Obiec. If any other should say, this is a doctrine of liberty, and may
embolden men to sin,

Solu. He answers to that, he will by no means clear the wicked, those are
favors only he will declare to the penitent, that are weary of their sins,
and would feign offend no more.

2 The second place is, The full explication of the words in Ezech. 36. 25. etc.
Ezech. 36. 25. and 7. where many objections are evidently answered, the
consolations being fitted of purpose, so as every word almost preuents some
doubt might arise in men's minds: as

1. Ob. I am exceeding loathsome, and a creature extremely filthy in respect of
my sins.

Solu. I will power clean water upon you; that is, I will wash your souls in
the fountain of my grace, and both forgive you, and sanctify you.

2. Ob. Oh it cannot be that any means should do me good, I am so totally
defiled.

Sol. Ye shall be clean; it is easy for God to cleanse us, it is our own
unbelief hinders us: God has promised our cleansing.

3. Ob. O but my sins are great and gross sins, I have offended more
grievously then other men.

Sol. From your Idols, and from your filthiness will I cleanse you; though thy
sins were as great as Idolatry in the first Table, or whoredom in the second,
yet God can forgive and sanctify thee.

4. Ob. But my nature is so bad, that if I were forgiven, I should offend
again.

Sol. A new heart will I give thee; where GOD forgiues our sins, he gives us
another disposition, and changes our natures, verse. 2. 6.

5. Ob. O, but I am so ignorant, I cannot but offend.

Solu. A new spirit will I put within you; he will give us understanding and
wisdom.

6. Ob. But I am so dull and hard-hearted, that I am not sensible of my own
distress or wants, and cannot be affected with the excellency of the goodness
or promises of God.

Solu. I will take away the stony heart out of your body; God will cure us of
hardness of heart.

7. Ob. But if my heart were softened, and that I had some feeling, it would
grow hard and senseless again.

Sol. I will give you a heart of flesh.

8. Ob. O, but if all this were done for me, yet I know not how to order my
self, and what to do to go on in a religious course of life.

Solu. I will put my Spirit within you, verse 27.

9. Ob. If the Lord do give me his Spirit, yet I fear I shall not be ruled
by it, but offend and grieve the Spirit of God, through ignorance, or want of
strength.

Solu. I will cause you to keep my Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments,
and do them: The Lord will work our works for us, and teach us to obey, and
give us power to do what he commands.

10. Ob. I find a marvelous unfitness in the very things of my outward
estate.

Solu. Ye shall dwell in the land; the Lord will bless us in outward things,
as well as in spiritual.

11. Ob. But when I come to use the creatures, me thinks I see such
unworthiness in my self, that I am almost afraid to meddle with them.

Sol. I gave the land to your Fathers: you hold these outward blessings, not by
your deserts, but by my gift, and my gift is ancient, I bestowed these things
on your Fathers.

12. Ob. It may be so; our Fathers were in covenant with God, and more eminent
men, and more worthy then we.

Solu. Ye shall be my people, and I will be your God: Gods covenant of grace
is with the Fathers, and their generations after them: if he have been thy
Fathers God, he will be thy God also, and thou shall be of his people.

13. Ob. O, but I find such daily sins, and I am polluted in every thing I
do, I am many ways unclean.

Sol. I will also save you from your uncleanness: God will multiply pardon, he
will forgive us, and comfort us against our sins after calling.

14. Ob. But how shall I believe all this? for I see, God has plagued us by
famine, and scourged us with great want, which still lies upon us.

Solu. I will call for the corn, and increase it, and lay no more famine upon
you, and I will multiply the fruit of the trees, and the increase of the field,
etc.

15. Ob. But is there no condition on our part?

Solu. Yes; for all this shall be done unto you, when you remember your own
evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves
for your iniquities, and for your abominations. These comforts belong unto us,
when we are thoroughly displeased with our selves for our faults. And besides,
for all this must the Lord be sought unto, we shall obtain all, or any of
these, but we must ask first, verse. 31. 37.

CHAP. XIII.
Showing how a godly man may comfort himself against the fear of falling away.

HItherto of the comforts against our daily infirmities. The consolations
against the fear of our falling away follow.

We may three ways comfort our selves against this fear, namely, if we
consider God, or Christ, or our selves.

1 In God there are two things of excellent observation, both of them expressed
in the Scriptures. The first is, that he has undertaken to preserve us from
falling away. The second shows us distinctly, how he will perform this.

For the first, that GOD will keep us from falling away, we have four things
to assure us.

First, the promises of God directly to that end: for he assures us, that his
Elect shall enjoy the work of their Four things may assure us that God will
keep us from falling away.
hands, and shall not labor in vain, Esaias 65. 22. 23. The smoking week shall
not be quenched, nor the bruised 1 His promises
reed broken. Esaias 42. Not one of them shall be lacking in the whole flock,
Ierem. 23. 4. God will build them, and not pluck them down, he will plant
them, and not pull them up. Ierem. 24. 6. He will confirm us, in and to the
end, that we may be blameless in the Day of our Lord Jesus Christ: for God is
faithful, who has called us to the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord. 1. Cor. 1. 8. 9.


2. Secondly, the decree 2 His decree.
of GOD, concerning which the Apostle says, That the foundation of God
remains sure: he knows who are his. Though Hymeneus and Philetus fall away,
yet none that call upon the name of the Lord, and depart from iniquity, can
never be lost, 2. Tim. 2. 19.

Thirdly, the attributes of God: and so there be 3. Three attributes in God
viz.
three things in God may wonderfully settle us against this fear. The one is,
his faithfulness. The other is His faithfulness.
his power. The third is his immutable love: All three are laid to pawn for
the performance of this preservation, and so pleaded in Scripture. For his
faithfulness, the Apostle therethe^ce concludes, that the godly shall be
confirmed to the end, as was alleged before, 1. Corin. 1. 8, 9. and so he
reasons, writing to the Thessalonians: The Lord is faithful, who shall
stablish you, and keep you from evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. And of the power of God
these places speak, We are kept His power.
by the power of God to salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 5. I know (says Paul) whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him against that day, 2. Tim. 1. 12 Now unto him that is able to
keep you from falling (says Jude) and to preserve you faultlesse before the
presence of his glory, with exceeding joy. To the only wise God our Savior,
be glory, and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever, Jude 24. And His love.
for the love of God, that it is unchangeable, there is apparent proof. Whom
he loves, he loves to the end, John 13. 1. so as we may be confident in
this, that he which has begun a good work in us, will perform it till the
day of Christ, Philip. 1. 6.

Fourthly, we have the 4 His seal.
seal of God for it, and he has given us earnest, that we shall certainly
enjoy the inheritance purchased for us. And thus every one that believes, is
sealed by the holy Spirit of promise, which also is our earnest, Ephesians. 1. 14.
15. and therefore we shall be stablished, 2. Cor. 1. 22.

Now for the second; If any ask how GOD will do this?

I answer, That the Scripture shows how this will be performed thus: For

1 God will not cast off his What God will do to keep us from falling away
people, he will never forsake his inheritance, Psalm. 94. 14. 1. Sam. 12. 22.
For the Lord loves judgment, and for saketh not the Saints, and therefore they
are preserved for ever, Psalm. 37. 28.

2 God will put his fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from
him: For this is his Covenant with his people, that He will not turn away
from them to do them good, and he will put his fear into them, that they
shall not depart from him, Ierem. 32. 40, 41.

3 To make all the surer, he will put his Spirit into them, which shall lead
them into all truth, and cause them to keep his statutes, and to do them, Ioh.
14. Ezech. 36.

4 He will uphold them, and order their ways, and keep their feet, that they
fall not. The steps of the good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights
in his way: Though he fall, he shall not utterly be cast down: for the Lord
vpholdeth him with his hand, Psalm. 37. 23. 24. He holds our soul in life,
and suffers not our feet to be moved, Psalm. 66. 9. He will keep the feet
of his Saints, 1. Sam. 2. 9.

5. Lastly, GOD will work their works for them, and continually assist them
with his presence, and blessings, Esaias 26. Eze. 36. Phil. 2. 13. And thus of
the comforts that we may gather from God.

Now secondly, in Christ there are three things may minister much establishment
Three things in Christ may comfort us.
in our hearts against this fear.

1 His Intercession: he 1 His intercession.
has specially prayed for us, that God would keep us from evil, John 17. and
therefore is able to save us to the uttermost, because he ever loves to make
Intercession for us, Hebr. 7. 25.

2 The consideration of 2 His office herein.
his office herein. It is his work to be Omega as well as Alpha, to be the
finisher of our faith, as well as the author of it: He is the end as well as
the beginning, Reu. 21. 6. Heb. 12. 2.

3 The power of Christ, 3 His power.
None can take us out of his hand, Ioh. 10. and as was said before, he is able
to save us to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. Thus of the consideration of Christ
also.

Now thirdly, in our selves we may look upon three 3. Things in our selves
may comfort us.
things, as we are in the estate of grace.

For first, we are borne again to a lively hope of an immortal inheritance
reserved for us in Heaven: Our new birth intitles us to heaven, and it is kept
for us, and our hope is lively, 1. Pet. 1. 3.

Secondly, our seed abides in us: It cannot be blotted out. He that is borne
of God, sins not, because his seed remains in him, 1. John. 3. 9.

Thirdly, eternal life is begun in us, Ioh. 17. 3. Now if it be life
eternal, how can it end? How can we fall away from it? Natural life may end,
but Spiritual life can never end.

CHAP. XIIII.
Promises that concern Prayer.

HItherto of promises that concern affliction. And in as much as my purpose was
but to fence the godly man settled in his justification, against the grieuances
which might befall him in respect of afflictions, during the time of his
pilgrimage here: I shall end with the discourse of those promises, saving that
I will give a taste of the last sort of promises, viz. such as are
encouragements to holy graces or duties.

I will not instance in the promises made to the love of God, to meekness, to
such as seek God, to the love of the Word, and the like: But only I will open
the promises made to the prayers of the godly, and the rather, because
Christians are most troubled about their prayers.

The promises that concern Those promises referred to three heads.
prayer, may be referred to three heads; For either they are such as assure us
that God will hear the prayers of his servants, or they show us, what in
prayer he will hear: or else they describe the wonderful goodness of God in
the manner how he will hear. For the first, that the Lord will certainly
hear prayer, these places of Scripture do most comfortably assure us.

Esaias 58. 9. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry,
and he shall say, Here I am.

Math. 21. 22. And whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe, ye shall
receive it.

John. 14. 13. And whatsoever ye ask in my name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son.

1. John. 3. 14. 15. And this is the assurance that we have in him, that if
we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have
the petitions that we have desired of him.

Job. 22. 27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee,
and thou shall render thy vows.

Job 33. 26. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and
he shall see his face with joy; for he will render unto man his righteousness.

Psalm. 34. 15, 17. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears
are open unto their cry.

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me.

John 15. 16. That whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may
give it you.

John 16. 23. And in that shall ye ask me nothing: Verily, verily I say unto
you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.

2 For the second, it may much comfort us, if we consider that God will not
only hear our prayers in general, but our voice, Psalm. 5. 3. Our very
desires, Psalm. 10. 17. Our tears, Psalm. 39. 12. The very naming of Christ
shall not be done without regard, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Our groaning, Psalm. 102. 20.
When we are destitute of words to express our selves, our groaning, our
tears, yea the very desires of our hearts is an effectual prayer to God. He
does not look what we do say, but what we would say. If we come like little
children, and but name our Fathers name, and cry, making moan, it shall be
heard.

3 But in the third point appears the wonder of his compassion: For

1 God will hear without despising their prayer, Psalm. 102. 17.

2 He will not reproach them, nor hit them in the teeth with what is past, or
their present frailties, Iam. 1. 5.

3 He will prepare their hearts too: he will as it were help them to draw
their petitions, Psalm. 10. 17.

4 He takes delight in hearing their prayers, Pro. 15. 8

5 He looks from heaven of purpose to hear their groans, Psalm. 102. 19,
20. His ears are open, there is not the least impediment in his hearing, Psalm.
34. 15. It is his very nature to be a God that hears prayers: It is not
contrary to his disposition, Psalm. 65. 1.

6 He thinks thoughts of peace to give an end, and expectation, Ierem. 29 11,
12, 13.

7 He will be plenteous in mercy, to them that call upon him, Psalm. 85. 5. Iam.
1. 5. He gives liberally.

8 He will answer them, and sometimes show them wondrous things, which they know
not, Ierem. 33. 3.

9 He will refresh them also with much joy and comfort of heart: He will be
many times, as the dew unto their hearts, Job 33. 26.

10 It is a singular compassion that he will hear every one that comes with
petitions to him, he will except no man: All shall be heard, whosoever asks,
shall have, Mat. 7. 7. Lu. 11. 10

11 It is yet more compassion, that God will hear them in all they ask,
whatsoever they desire of him in the name of Christ: They may have what they
will, Mark. 11. 24. John 15. 7.

12 The spirit shall help their infirmities, when they know not what to pray
for as they ought, Romans 8. 26.

13 God will crown the prayers of his servants with this honor, that they
shall be the signs both of their sanctification, and of their salvation, John
9. 31. Romans 10. 13. If God hear their prayers, he will receive them up to
glory.

14 Lastly, the Lord shows a wonderful compassion in the very time of hearing
prayer: he will hear in the morning, Psalm. 5. 3. In the very season; the due
time, when we are in trouble: yea so, as he will in our affliction in a
special manner let us know, that he is our God, and that he will deliver us,
Zach. 13. 9. Psalm 51, 15. and 91, 15. He is ready to be found, Psalm 47. 1.
Daniels prayers were heard from the very first day he made them, Daniel 10. 12.
yea God will hear us while we speak unto him, and answer us, before we can
express our selves unto him many times, Esaias 65. 24. Yea the Lord hears the
prayers of his people, even then when they think they are cast out of sight,
Ps. 31. 32.

FINIS.

