A Prognostication made for ye year of our Lord God. 566. Declaryng the
change, Full, and Quarters of the Moon, with other, accustomable matters,
serving all England. By Master. F. Cox. Physician.

Imprynted (...) London at the long Shop adioining unto S. Mildreds Church in
the Pultrie by John Alde.

Of the Eclipse.
THis year the.xxviii. day of October at. v. of the clock. xxxv. minutes
after noone shall appear an Eclipse If ye Moon and shall be darckened, ^^iii.
points. Although that the ^^^^pse of the Sun, or Moon be (...) natural and
yt Philosophicallye reasons may be given while it so chau^ceth: yet
notwithstandi^g I wish the loving reader to take aduertisment by this and
other most strange impressions seen of late in the air to flee from sin,
wherewith the world almost (...) where swarmeth. For vndoubtidly these terrible
tenmpests, and seldom seen sights do preach unto us gods forathfull
indignation to be even at our doors (if we spedely repent not) utterly to
destroy us. What wunderfull sightes were seen at Jerusalem before the
destruction thereof: Josephus does testify, and (...) people took no regard
the run to but still perseuered in their most filthye and ungodly lives: God
at last performid that he had thretnid and so destroyed them executyng on them
the rod of his Justice and terible indignation, which took no regard to his
sweet and fatherly admonition Deserte not therefore the (...) return, put not
of repentance from day to day, least that whilst you so dissemble with your
duble hearts, god utterly turn away his face and when ye would there be no
place lest unto you to repent, as of late days within the county of Sussex we
have had a-moste terrible example in one that dyed most lamentablye
despayringe in the mercies of God. Of whom I purpose god willing to set out ye
whole story, or rather most fearful tragedye to this intent that we beholdi^g
yt severe Justice of almighty god, in yt party: may learn to shake of our
vile carnal securytie and after the council of Christ to watch with prayer.

Of Winter, the first part of the year. Criii,
Hyems, omnium consensu, frigida et humida dicitur, non tamen ea de causa, quod
reliquis temporibus frigidior h(...)diorque sit, sed quod frigiditas in to
superat caliditurem, et humiditas siccitatem.
WInter begins ye. xii. day of Decembre when the su^ enters in to ye first
degree of Capricorn which day is the shortest day in the year for then is the
sun fardest of from us. The^ begins the day to encrece again and the
night to decrece. This part of ye year by nature is cold and moist and
therefore the diseases that happen in this part of the year ar cold and moist
diseases, as Coughes, Rewmes, Horsnesse Goutes Fluxes. etc. This time of the
year shall the Choleric parso^s be in best lyking. In this quarter of the
year as testefieth. Hippocrates. 1. Aphor. 15. We ought to eat much and to
drink little and to eat those meats as ar hot and dry of complexio^. as ar
Cunnies, Pigions, and all small birds. etc. This time meats roasted are more
wholesome then sod.

Of Ver or Spring time.
Ver saluberimum est, minimeque morbis qui mortem afferani, obnoxium.
VEr begins the.xii. of March when the Sun enters into the first minute
of Aries, then is the day and night equal. This quarter of the year after the
mind of some is hot and moist, but after the mind of Hippocrates and Galene
it is temperate and therefore is the most holsomest part of the year. In this
part of the year I council those to be let blood who doubt them selves to be
vexed with any sickness the rest of the year after, for by yt means shall
health be preseruid. The disseases yt happen this quarter of the year do most
commonly proceed of blood and superfluity of moisture, as Pleuresies, Madness.
Blodye flyres, Scabbes, Ulcers and such like. The sanguin this time of the
year shall prosper and so shall the Melancholic also. This time of ye year
must we eat less the^ we did in winter and drink something more and also use
more sodd meats then roasted and also such meats as are nurishing.

Of Summer.
Estas calida et sicca cristit.
Summer begineth the.xiii. day of June at what time the Sun enters in to
Cancer. that day is the longest day in all the year. The Summer by nature is
hot and dry, his disseases proceed of Choler and blood, a^ hot burning Agues,
Quotidia^s Tertians. This part of the year, shall the Flegmaticke complexion,
be in best lyking. In this quarter we ought to eat little and to drink much
and those meats we eat: ought to be sodde meats and of cold complexion.

Of Autumn.
Autumnus inequalis est.
AVtumne begins the xiiii. of September when the sun enters into Libra
then is the day and night equal. This part of the year is the most
vnholsomest part, and is distemperid in complexion, and therefore is callid the
nurice of all disseases. This time we ought to use good and wholesome diete and
to eat more then we did in summer and also to drink less.

Of Sickness that shall happen this year.
IN the Spryng time of this year and Winter also shall be many daungerouse and
greuouse sicknesses as Pleuresies pain in the Lunges. Fevers, Vertigines,
Falling sickness Rumes, Apoplexy, Madness, Iaundyes, Leprosy, Ulcers, Byles,
Ache in the Iointes and such like. The Summer time and Autumn shall bring hot
fevers, as Chr^^ice et Erratice, we consu^ptions Cholick, Stra^gury with other
great obstructio^s and putrefactions. Let us therefore make our prayers unto ye
eternal god to give us grace to amend our lives and to flee from sin, that
we being turnid from our wickednesses, he may also turn him from the plages
wherewith he has devised to punish us. Pray therefore continualye. Amen.

For blood letting.
I found in a little book entitled (Amicus medico^um. concerning blood letti^ge
as follows The first day of the Moon, is meetly good. The second and third
euel, the iiii v. vj vij viij. and ninth euel. the.x. but meetly good the.xi.
is meetly good for yung men having need The xij. good the xiij. meetly good.
xiiij. and xv. euel. xvi. and. xvij. meetly good xviij good for yung me^ that
be choleric^ a^^ for old men xix. and. xx. euel.xxi. good. xxii. very good, ye
xxiij. xxiiii xxv and. xxvi. good. xxvij. euel. xxviii and if (...) xxix. euel,
the.xxx. wurs.

The disposition of the wether in the.xij. Months of the year.
January.
depiction of a group sitting at an indoor table

The full Moon the.v. day at.ix. of the clock.xi minutes after noon clowdy,
wind Northerly.

The last quarter the.xiii. day at viii. of the clock in the morning, rain and
wind.

The new Moon the.xxi. day at x. of the.clock in the morning. seasonable for
the time of the year.

The first quarter the.xxviii. day at. iii. of ye clock after noone, rain with
some frost.

February.
depiction of a group sitting by a fire

The full Moon the.iiii day at. i, of the clock. xxxi. minutes before noone
rain wind southeast.

The last quarter the.xii. day at ii. of the clock in ye morning, frost after
rayn with sleet.

The new Moon the.xix day xi. of ye clock. xx. minutes after noon rain, sleet,
hayle and blusteringe wyndes.

The first quarter the.xxvi. day at. x. of the clock after noone, disposed to
moisture.

March.
depiction of two men planting seeds

The full Moon ye. v. day at xi. of ye clock after noon, rain, wind south.

The last quarter the.xiiij. day at. i. of ye clock in ye morning, wind.

The new moon ye xxi. day at. xi. of the clock before noone, blustering wether
after inclined to moisture.

The first quarter the.xxviii. day at one of the clock in the morning fair
wether.

Apryl.
depiction of two men scaring birds

The f^ll moon the.iiij. day at. ij of yt clock after noon some sweet showers.

The last quarter ye. xij. day at v. of the clock in yt afternoon, fair.

The new Moon the.xix. day and vii. of the clock after noone, fair, after
inclined to moisture.

The first quarter the.xxvi day at. x. of yt clock before noone rain

May.
depiction of a group sitting at an outdoor table while one plays a standing
stringed instrument

The full moon the.iiij. day at vi. of the clock in yt morning rain and wind
northeast.

The last quarter the.xii. day at viii. of the clock before noone, disposed to
rain and mist

The new moon the.xix. day at iii. of the clock in ye morning, fair wether
wind west.

The first quarter the xxv. day at x. of the clock after noone fair.

June
depiction of a man and woman shearing sheep

The full Moon the.ii. day at. ix. of the clock after noone, clowdy.

The last quarter the.x. day at. vi of the clock after noone fair and temperat
whether.

The new Moon ye. xvii. day at. x of the clock before noone, mistye, inclined
to wind.

The first quarter the.xxiiii. day at. x. of the clock before noone, fair
wether.

July.
depiction of a group cutting hay with a scythe and stacking it

The full Moon the second day at xi. of the clock before noone fair.

The last quarte. x. day at, ii of ye clock in ye morni^g, some moisture.

The new moon the.xvi. day at vii. of the clock after noone, fair.

The first quarter the.xxiii. day at. i. of the clock before noon fair.

August.
depiction of a group standing in a field of tall corn or wheat

The full Moon the first day at x. of the clock in the morning some thing
disposed to moisture.

The last puarter the.viii day at x. of the clock before noone, fair wether.

The new Moon the.xv. day at iiii, of the clock in the morning, some rain and
much wind.

The first quarter the.xxii. day at vii, of the clock after noon fair.

The full moon the.xxx, day at ii of the clock after noone

September.
depiction of a man sowing seeds

The last quarter the.vi day at. ii of the clock after noone fair,

The new moon the.xiii, day a^ ii, of the clock after noone fair,

The first quarter the xxi, (...) xi, of the clock, l, ninutes (...) noone,
disposed to rain, (...)

The full Moon ye xxix. dai at. iiii of ye clock in ye morni^g, fair wether.

October.
depiction of a man rolling barrels

The last quarter ye v. day at. vi of the clock after noone, rain,

The new moon the xiii. day at iii. of the clock in the morni^g fair

The first quarter ^ee xxi. day at (...) of the clock in the morning, ^^^^d to
rain,

(...) ^ul Moon the xxviii, day at v. of the clock after noone, rain,

November.
depiction of a group cutting and gathering wood

The last quarter the iiii, day art v, of the clock before noone fair

The new moon the xii day (...) of the clock in the fore noone (...)

The first quarter the (...) one of the clock in the (...) dark and gloomy
we^^^^ (...)

The full moon the (...) ii, of the clock in the (...) Hail and stormye
wh^^^^^ ^pan^

December.
depiction of a man and woman working outdoors

The last quarter the iii, day at (...) of the clock after noone, fair, (...)
new moon ye, xi, day at, iii, (...) ^lock in ye after noone, fair, (...)
^^rst quarter, xix day at, v.

(...) after noone fair, at (...) ^^oinde (...) ^one the xxvi, day at.i (...)
after noone dark and gloo^^ (...) ^isposed to snow (...)

Here follow the principal through out England kept every Fairee Month in the
year.
January.
The. vt. day at Salisbury. and at Bristowe the.xv. day at Bristow and at
Chirching ford.

February.
The second day at Bathe, at Maidestone The 14. at Feuersham. A shewednesday at
Lichefeelde, Roiston and Tamworth The 24. at Henly upon Themmes and at Teuxbury.

March,
The first monday in Lent at Cicester at Abingdon. The 4. Su^day in Lent at
Sta^ford and at Sudbery. The 5. Su^day at Grantha^ The monday before our Lady
day at Salys-bury, on Palm sunday even at Wisbiche and at Kendall. The 13. Wie.
The midlent Sunday at the Mount and so to Bodman, on Palm su^day at Pomfret and
at worcester. The. 20. day at Durha^. The. 25 at Northampton, at Walton at
great Chart, at Newcastel at Huntingto^; all the Lady days.

April.
The. 5. day at wallingford. The 7. at Darby. The. 9. at Bickelsworth, at
Billingworth. The monday after at Euesham. The 3. Sunday after Easter at
Lowoth. The. 23. day at Ipswich, at Amtil, at Hinningham, Gilford and at S.
Pombes in Cornwall, The 25. at Darby, ye 26. at Tenterden.

May.
The 1. day at ^erm in Cornwall. at Stow the old, at Reding, at Lecester, at
Maidstone, at Chelmesford. The 8 day at Beuerlay. Assention day at Newcastel,
at Yarne, at Brimingham, at S. Edes at Bishop standford, at Banbury,
Beckha^sfeeld, and Storford. On whit sunday at Rye hill, at Cribby and at
Kingston upon Themes. On the tewesday at Lewis. On Trinity even at Stokesly at
Kendal. On Trinity Sunday at S Mary ^uke at Rowel, on whitson monday at
Datington, at Excetur, at Bradford on the Tewsday at Jews. The 29 day at
Crambrook. The 27. day at Lenham.

June.
On Thursday next after Trinity Sunday at Banbury, at Storford, at S. Annes,
at Newbery. at Couentrie, at S. Edes at Bishop Standford, and at Rosse, the. 9
day at Maidston, ye 11. at Okigham, The 23 at Shrewesbury and S Albanes.
Midsommer day at Bedel, Stastoke S. Annes and at wakefeeld. The 24. at
Cranbroke, Gloucester, at Lin at Winsor, Cambridge and at Harrisam, The 26. at
wolleth, and Peterborow, ye 27. at Folkstone. On Saint Peter's dai at wadhurst,
marlborow, Holsworth. Northampton and Peterborow. The 24 at Harisam. The 28. at
Hetcorne and at Pombes.

July.
The 7. day at Rychmund in the North, at Topelit at Canterbury, ye 11.
Horsfayre at partney, at F^abor and at Felix. the. 12. at Lid, ye 16. at
Pinchbeck ye 17. at Winchecombe, ye 24 at Vxbridge and Catesby, the 22 at
Barnades Castle at Magdalene, and at Otly. the 23. at Marlborow, at winchester,
Colchester, Tedbery. 25 at bristow, Dover, Chilham, Ipswiche Northampton,
Darby. S. James by London, Reding, at Lowth, Maulmesbury and Thirsby, the 26.
at Dankester, Poglington the old and at Thropson.

August.
The 1. day at Exceter. Feuersham, Dunstable. S Edes-at Bedford, at Marham
church at Wisbiche and at York, the. 9. at Romney, the 10. at Laurence wal^am,
at Hu^gerford, Bedford. Strods, at Blackamore, at S. Laurence, at Bodma^ at
Molton, at Bedford and at Farnam, ye. 11. day at Ca^bredge. The 24 at London at
Terox bury at Sudbery, at Norwiche, at Northhampton, at Dover and at Rye, the.
28. at Asheford.

September.
The 8. at Wakefeeld, Sturbridge fair at Ca^bridg at London in Southwark. at
Suide, at R^coluer, at Eisboron, both ye Lady days, at Partney. iii. Lady
days, The 14. at Richemund in the North, at Rippon Penhall, at Bersley, at
Waltain abbey at Wutton under Hedge, at Wendouer, and at Smaldig. The 21. at
Marlborow, at Bedford, at Croido^. at Hulden in Huldernes. at S. Edmonds Bury
at Malton, at. S Ines, at Hadley, at Lana^, at Miltmal, at Siningborne, at
Dover and at Estay The 29. at Stamdrop, at Malton horsfair, at way hill, at
Newbery, at Lecester and at La^terbery, S. Denise day at Harborow.

October.
The 4. day at Michel the 6. at S. Siths beside Norwiche. The 13. at Grauesend,
at Winfore, at Marchefeeld at Ely at S^aneton, at Charing, ye 18. at Vpan, at
T^rist. The 21. at Saffran walde^ The. 28 at Newmarket, at Hertforde, at
Liceter, the. 30. at Stokesly, at Bridge north, on S Lukes day

November.
The 1. day at wakefeeld, The 2. at at Blechingly, the 6 at Newporryo^^, and at
Sta^dley, the 10 at Lenton beside Notingha^, the 11. at Marlborow, at Dover
The. 13. at S. Edmundes very, the. 20. at Heth, at Ingarstone, the 23. at
Sandwich. The 30. at Coligborow, at Rochester, at Maidenhed, ye, vi. at Tregny
in Cornwall.

December.
The v day at Plukely The vi, at Spalding and at Exceter. The seueth at Sa^d
hurst The xxix. at Canterbury.

Finis.

