THE PATTERN OF WHOLSO^^ WORDS.

Or a collection of such Truths as are of necessity to be believed unto
salvation, separated o^t of ^he body of all Theology

Made evident by infallible an^ plain proofs of Scripture.

And withal, The several uses such Principles should be put to, are
abundantly shevved.

A Project much desired, and of singular use for all sorts of Christians.

By N. Bifeild, Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middlesex.

2. TIM 1.13. Keep the true pattern of wholesome words, which, thou have heard
of me in faith and loue^ which is Christ Jesus.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for Samuel Ma^^ dwelling in Paul's Church yard,
at the sign of the Swan. 1618.

To the most Noble Lady, the Lady DOROTHIE, Countess of Northumberland. And
to the highly honored Ladies her Daughters, The Lady DOROTHIE SYDNEY, and the
Lady LVCIE HAY: N. BYFEILD Wishes the abundance of true grace and peace.
Right Honorable,
I Have long since undertaken (as in the course of my Ministry you have often
heard) to extract out of al Theology contained in the Scriptures, the
Principles, that is, such doctrines which are fundamental, and absolutely
necessary to be known of as many as are to be saved. This Project ought to
be well accepted of all sorts of Christians, that wish their own good; partly
in respect of the necessity of the doctrines here collected under their
several heads; and partly in respect of the apparent evidence of the proofs of
Scripture, which are such, as make infallible demonstration to the conscience,
by the express light contained in them; and partly, because the Uses which may
be made of the several Principles, are every where abundantly showed.

And in as much as the Lord has been pleased, to give some testimony to my
endeavors herein in the public preaching; I am not out of hope, but that the
printing of those Principles may be profitable to many godly and plaine-hearted
Christians, that desire in the plainest manner to understand the meaning of
their heavenly Fathers will.

I humbly dedicate this work unto your Honors, and pray your acceptance, and
the patronage of it: and to give me leave in the view of the world to signify
this way, both my observance of the many noble and excellent virtues, which are
eminent in each of your Honors, as also my unfeigned thankfulness for the
many favors I have received, and for the countenance and encouragement of my
Ministry; accounting it a singular mercy of God, that any labors of mine
should find acceptance with persons of so high place and quality, or any way
be successeful to the prospering of any part of the work of Gods grace in your
hearts.

Now the God of all consolation, fill your Noble breasts with all riches of the
true grace that is in Jesus Christ; that you may abound in the knowledge of the
mysteries of his Kingdom in all judgment, and love of the truth which is
according to godliness, and in all those gifts which may be found unto honor,
and praise, and glory in the revelation of Jesus Christ.

Your Honors in all service N. Bifeild.
Isleworth, March 27. 1618.
CERTAIN OF THE chiefest things contained throughout the whole Book.
Chap. 1.
THree things intended in this work distinctly. Page 1.2. Three ways to know
a principle. p. 6.6. An excellent course for catechizing, showed, p. 7.
Chap. 2.
The method of all the principles. p. 8.9.
Chap. 3.
The principles that concern the Scriptures. p. 10.11. etc. That the
Scriptures are the very word of God proved by six testimonies external, as
also by the internal testimony of the spirit. p. 11.12.13. That they are
perfect. p. 13. Six duties urged from thence. p. 14. 15. etc. the Papists
reproved in four things. p. 19.20. and the carnal Protestant in 4. things. p.
21.22. and many godly men in 4. things also. p. 22.
Chap. 4.
Four principles concerning God. p. 24. That there is a God, proved by three
testimonies internal; and by four testimonies from the world; and two
testimonies in the Church. p. 25.26.27. Ten glories in the nature of God. p.
28.29. etc. Eight duties arising from the consideration of Gods nature. p.
32.33.34. Six rules to be observed in the study of the nature of God. p.
35.36. Plain proofs of the Trinity. p. 39. with uses. p. 41. that there is
but one God proved, with uses. p. 42.43.44.
Chap. 5.
Five principles concerning the Creation. p. 45.46. Six duties taught by the
Creation. p. 48.49.
Chap. 6.
Seven principles concerning Gods providence. p. 52.53. to. 58. Eleven things
admirable in Gods providence. p. 58.59.60. Four sorts of men reproved. p. 62.
Eight uses for instruction. p. 63.64.65.66.67. Four ways to show our patience
in adversity. p. 64.65. Comforts from the meditation of Gods providence. p.
69.70.
Chap. 7.
Two principles concerning man's estate of innocence. p. 71.72. Man made after
the image of God many ways. p. 72. etc. Man was the image of God in respect of
his substance, and so both of his being, and of the manner of his being. p.
72.73. Man made the image of God in respect of his gifts 3. ways. p. 74. Four
sorts of free-wills. p. 75. The special favor of God to man in his creation,
both in respect of the time when, and the place where, and the manner how he
made him, both in respect of soul and body. p. 76.77. The doctrine of man's
first happiness teaches diverse duties. 1. To God. p. 78. 2. To our selves. p.
79. 3. To other men. p. 80.
Confutation of Papists about pictures. p. 81.
Chap. 8.
Three principles concerning the fall of man. p. 82. Seven things to show the
greatness of Adams sin. p. 84. How it is that godly men beget ungodly
children. p. 86. Four general instructions. p. 87.88. Three occasions of
apostasy. p. 87.88 Five degrees of the devils tentation. p. 90. Four sorts of
men in particular warned by the fall. p. 91.92.
Chap. 9.
Four principles concerning sin. p. 93.94. Fourteen foul blemishes in
every man's nature. p. 95.96.97.98.99. Nine uses for information. p.
103.104.105. Seven things charged upon civil honest men. p. 106.107. Many uses
for instruction, with consolations also. p. 108.109.110.
Chap 10.
Seventeen sorts of punishments inflicted on man for sin. p. 114. to 128.
The punishment of the damned in hell, amplified by the degrees of it, and the
place, and the continuance of it. p. 124.125.126.127. Many uses, from p. 128.
to 136.
Chap. 11.
Five principles concerning election. p. 137.138. Four instructions. p. 139.
to 146. Signs of election of two sorts. p. 146. to 152. Eight privileges of
Gods elect. p. 152. to 156.
Chap. 12.
That Christ is God, proved 6. ways. p. 157.158.159. Why it was needful he
should be God. p. 159. The uses for humiliation, and for instruction in many
things, and for consolation. p. 160. to 164.
Chap. 13.
4 Principles concerning the humane nature of Christ. p. 164. to 167. Why
Christ was incarnate. p. 167. Why the second person in Trinity was incarnate,
p. 168. Five instructions. p. 169.170. Many consolations from the incarnation
of Christ. p. 171. to 175.
Chap. 14.
Of the conception of Christ, the uses. p. 176. etc.
Chap. 15.
How Christ could be borne of a Virgin, with the uses. p. 180. to 186. Four
sorts of making man at several times. p. 184.
Chap. 16.
Of the personal union, with the uses. p. 186. to 191.
Chap. 17.
Principles that concern the mediator-ship of Christ. p. 191. to 197. When
Christ was given to be mediator. p. 194. Three sorts of covenants of God. p.
197. Wherein the covenant of grace and the covenant of works agree, and how
they differ in six things. p. 200. to 206. Nine privileges of the covenant of
grace. p. 206. to 211. The properties of this covenant. p. 211.212. Ten
arguments to assure the infallibility of the covenant of grace. p. 212.213. The
persons capable of these privileges. p. 214. Comforts in the curse of sin,
and in the cross of affliction, and in the curse of death. p. 215.216. What
we must avoid in respect of this covenant. p. 217.218. What we must do that
we may be fitted for this covenant. p. 219. Eight things to be done that we
may walk worthy of this covenant. p. 220.221.222.
Chap. 18.
What the Prophetical office of Christ is, the parts of it, and the manner how
he executed it. p. 226.227.228. Seven principles concerning the prophetical
office of Christ. p. 229.230.231. Christ differed in teaching from all others
in diverse things. p. 235.236. Six instructions. p. 237.238. Eight comfortable
things in the manner of Christ's teaching. p. 240. to 245.
Chap. 19.
Four principles concerning the obedience of Christ. p. 247. to 250. with the
uses, to p. 254.
Chap. 20.
Six principles concerning the Passion of Christ. p. 255.256.257. The extreme
things Christ suffered for us. p. 257. to 262. Many duties to be performed upon
the consideration of the Passion. 1. Toward Christ himself. p. 263. to 267.
2. Toward others. p. 268. to 271. 3. Toward our selves. p. 271. to 279.
Five uses for information. p. 279. to 284. Many consolations from the passion
of Christ in general, from p. 284. to 291. Many particular consolations. p.
291 to 301.
Chap. 21.
Four principles concerning the intercession of Christ. p. 301.302.303. Seven
distinct things in the intercession of Christ. p. 304. Confutation of Papists.
p. 309. Four instructions. p. 310. Ten cons^lations. p. 311. to 315.
Chap. 22.
Seven principles concerning the regal office of Christ. p. 315. to 325. The
method of the doctrine of Christ's Regal office. p. 325. to 331. Twelve
general uses for instruction, besides particular uses. p. 331. to 340. Many
consolations. p. 340. to 344.
Chap. 22.
Seven principles concerning the Church. Nine uses for instruction. p. 355. to
361 Many consolations. p. 361. to 364.
Chap. 23.
Eight principles concerning Justification. p. 364. to 371. Eight uses for
instruction, p. 371. to 378. Six consolations. p. 378. to 381.
Chap. 24.
Six principles concerning sanctification. p. 383. to 388. Motives to
holiness. p. 389.390.391. Rules concerning sanctification: where ten things to
be avoided. p. 392. to 396. Rules about the matter, end, manner and means of
sanctification. p. 396. to 340. Seven signs of a man unsanctified. p. 402.403.
Many consolations against the imperfection of sanctification. p. 405. to 409.
Chap. 26.
Four principles concerning the resurrection. p. 410. to 414. That there shall
be a resurrection, proved by variety of Arguments. p. 415. to 419. Six
things in the manner of the resurrection. p. 420.421. Five instructions. p.
422. to 425. Many consolations. p. 425. to 436. Six glorious things shall
befall our bodies at the resurrection. p. 429. Objections answered. p. 433.
etc.
Chap. 27.
Seven principles concerning the last Judgment. p. 436. to 445. Six
instructions. p. 445. to 455. Six ways of offending in censuring. p. 447.
Nine things to be done, that we may have comfort in the day of Judgment. p.
451. to 455. The use for terror at large. p. 455. to 460. Many objections
answered. p. 460. to 478. It shall be a terrible day for fifteen sorts of
offenders. p. 472. to 478. Many consolations. p. 478. to 482.
Chap. 28.
Four principles concerning the glory of heaven. p. 482. to 487. Six uses
for instruction, with diverse notes. p. 487. to 497. Six things we must do,
that we may be sure to go to Heaven. p. 492. etc. The consolations; from p.
497. to the end.
The description of the parts of the glory of Heaven, and the perpetuity of
it.

FINIS.
CHAP. I. Containing the nature and use of this Treatise.
THe purpose and drift of this Treatise is to effect three things:

First to extract Theology contained in the Scriptures such truths, Things
intended in this Treatise.
as are of necessity to be believed unto salvation; the knowledge whereof is
required of all: In the defense whereof we should be ready to suffer the
extremest things, even death it self; and which we should account the very
Characters of true Religion, the distinct knowledge whereof we should lay up,
as great riches.





The benefit of attending to this course.
Singularly great would the profit of this project be, if there were a heart in
man to use a little diligence in matters of so great moment. Is it not a
marvelous benefit in this contending world for a man to know distinctly, what
truths be infallible; and to have the truths, that are absolutely necessary
to be believed, separated from such, as a man may be ignorant of, and yet be
saved?

And for the second thing, it is certain, the most Christians know their
grounds but by hearsay, and the common judgment of others: whereas here
they may be informed of them so, as to know them by proofs of Scripture,
which with a little labor they may commit to memory, as seed-plots of
contemplation.

And for the third, what is the reason, that Commonplace Divinity is so out
of use in popular teaching? or that Catechismes are looked upon so dully, and
learned or taught with so little profit? but that the use of such doctrine has
not been distinctly showed: so as men think of Principles, as of certain
inferior truths, because they see other points in textuall course handled with
directions for the use of them. Whereas it is certain, that no doctrines in
Religion have more abundant use in the life of man, nor more urged with
variety of uses in the Scriptures, then the heads of Catechism.

The warrant of this course.
And for the warrant of the project, it is evident, that the Apostles did make a
separation of truths, and did extract the fundamental truths out of the
maine body of doctrine, and those they delivered to ye Churches, as the common
treasure of all the Saints: and those both for the honor and use of them they
described by diverse titles.

They were called the principles of the praises of God, Heb. 5.12.

The principles of the doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1.

The doctrines of foundation in the same place.

The pattern of wholesome words, 2. Tim. 1.13.

The form of the knowledge of the truth, Romans 2.20.

The form of doctrine, into which they were delivered, Romans 6. All which
titles show the singular use of them.

Now if any ask me, Question.
how I will know a Principle?

I answer by these marks. Answer.


First, it is such a truth to be believed, Principles may be known three
ways.
as is contained in the express words of Scripture: so as I take a Principle
to be a Doctrine plainly expressed in the Word: and so differ from Doctrines,
that are deduced from the Scriptures only by consequence, or are there but in
dark and obscure words.

Secondly Principles are first truths, that is such, as have been from the
beginning, and have been believed in all ages of the Church.

Thirdly, they are such truths, as being stubbornely and wilfully denied, the
whole building falls down, and men hold not the foundation. Besides, any man
may be guided herein, that will make use of the judgment of the Churches in
their Creedes and Confessions, and Catechismes; though it be true, that if men
narrowly observe the most Catechismes, they either have not all Principles in,
or else they have more then Principles, such truths, as are strong meat, and
so prove hard sayings to the weak. Neither am I so transported with any
ouerweaning of my self in this project, but that with all readiness I shall
subject my endeavors herein to the correction of the godly learned: if my labor
may provoke others more sufficient to perfect this work with such exactnes, as
is further requisite, I shall rejoice in it, and think I have attained a happy
end.

I doubt not, but that this labor may be of great use for younger Divines to
point out a way, how they may Catechize with more profit by making the uses of
every Principle, as they teach the grounds to the people: yea, it is one part
of the Sabbaths days best employment in Sermons to treat in this, or the like
manner; and so to let the people be truly informed concerning the
Characteristicall truths in their Religion, with use of them in their
conversation.

Lastly, it will be some content unto ingenious minds, to see the Principles
cast into some method for the help of memory and quickening of delight, and
the more easy learning of them.

CHAP. II. The Method of the Principles.
The division of Principles according to their chief heads.
THe Principles concern either the fountain and original of Doctrine and
knowledge, which is the scripture or word of God; or the subject of knowledge,
which is God himself:

In God we consider: 1. His Nature: 2. His Works.

The works of God, as the principles take notice of them, are: 1. Creation: 2.
Providence:

The providence of God must be considered either in general, or as it
concerns man only.

The providence of God, as it concerns man has Principles, that look upon
him in his fourfold estate.

In the estate of Innocence.

In the estate of Corruption, or

In the estate of Grace, where 1 The means of grace, viz. Election in God; and
Redemption in Christ. 2 The subject of Grace, viz. the Church. 3 The degrees,
or sorts of Grace: viz. Justification, and Sanctification.


In the estate of Glory, where 1 Of the resurrection of the dead. 2 Of the last
judgment. 3 Of the glory of Heaven.


CHAP. III. Of the Scriptures.
2. Tim. 3.16. For the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, etc.


THe original or fountain of knowledge is the Scripture, that is, the books
of the old and new Testament, and those books were first called Scripture, Two
principles about the Scriptures.
in the new Testament.

There are two principles concerning the Scripture.



of themselves alone, to guide us in all things needful to salvation, without
adding ought to them, or diminishing ought from them.

For the first, that they are by divine inspiration, is infallibly evident from
the testimony of the Scriptures themselves, such as these. 2. Tim. 3.16. before
recited.

2. Pet. 1.20.21. So that ye first know this, that no prophecy of the
Scriptures is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old
time by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost.

And for our more abundant satisfaction, The Scripturs are the very word of
God, proved by testimonies external and internal.
there are other testimonies, that prove the Scriptures to be the very word
of God, and these both external and internal.

The external testimonies are such as these:

Moses the writer of the Law, and God testified his presence also by the cloud
and smoke about the Arc, in the Tabernacle, and Temple: Fire from heaven
devoured the sacrifices, and God gave answer by the Vrim and Thummim.





contained in the Scriptures.

The conversion of the souls Scriptures, and the comfort the godly find in
them in all afflictions.

The miraculous calling of the Moses and the Apostles, that wrote the
Scriptures, etc.

The internal testimony is the witness of Gods spirit, who in the hearts of
the godly does avouch so much, and this is a testimony proper to the household
of God.

Thus of the first principle.

The second Principle is, that the scriptures are perfect, which these places
show:

2. Tim. 3.17. That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works.

Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

Gal. 1.8. But though that we, or an Angel from heaven preach unto you
otherwise, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

John 1.7. Prou. 30.6. Revel. 22.18.
Duet. 12.32. Therefore whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: thou
shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom.

Prou. 8.7.8. For my mouth shall speak the truth, and my lips abhor
wickedness.

All the words of my mouth are righteous and there is no leaudnes, nor
frowardness in them.

The uses.
The consideration of which principles may serve us for diverse uses; both for
instruction and reproof: for trial and for consolation: First, 1. For
instruction.
we should here be persuaded

To study the Scriptures with

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures: for in them you think to have eternal
life, and they are they, which testify of me.

Col. 3.16. Let the word of God, or Christ dwell in you plenteously in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selves, etc.

Psalm. 1.2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his law does he
meditate day and night.

Laboring by all means to acquaint our children, and family with them.

Deuteronomy. 6.7. And thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and
shall talk of them, when thou tariest in thy house, and as thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, etc.

For whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning,
that we through patience, and comfort of the scriptures, might have hope. They
are a sure word; we may rest upon them, 2. Pet. 1.20. as believing, that every
word of God is pure, and that God will make them good to such as trust in them,
Prou. 30.5.6.

Scriptures with all due preparation and attention, and high estimation,
receiving them as the word of God, and not of man: 1. These. 2.13. laboring to
bring clean hearts, and a meek and teachable spirit to them, as being able to
save our souls: James 1.21.22. with a resolution to do whatsoever God
requires in them.

We should love them above

We should therefore make whether our works be wrought in God, and showing
the power of the word in the demonstration of the apparent life of it, in
commanding all our particular actions, that men may see the light of the word
in the light of our good works.

Phil. 2.15. That we may be blameless and pure, and the sons of God,
without rebuke in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, amongst whom you
shine as lights in the world.

Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon
them, and mercy upon the Israel of God.

Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my path.

Yea we should daily try and search the secrets of our hearts by it, as that
which only can do it. Heb. 4.12. For the word of God is lively, and mighty in
operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through even unto
the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

We should therefore in all think of no man, above what is written, Gal. 1.7.
1. Cor. 4.6. Esaias 8.20.

Thus much for instruction.

Secondly, For reproof.
these Principles reprove the Papists and carnal Protestants, and the godly
too:

The Papists are here reproved, Of the Papists in 4. things.


1. For making the authority of the Scriptures to depend upon the testimony of
the Church, whereas the Church is built upon the Scriptures, Ephesians. 2.20. And
are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone.

2. For not holding it to be sufficient without traditions, contrary to the
express word, 2. Tim. 3.17. That the man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect unto all good works.

3. For withholding the Scriptures from the common people, keeping from them
the sight of their Fathers will, contrary to the word, John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures: for in them you think to have eternal life, and they are they
which testify of me.

Col. 3.16. Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom, etc.

4. For judging controversies without them: contrary to the commandment, Esaias
8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony. If they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them.

The carnal Protestants are here

1. For their miserable neglect of the reading, Of Carnal Protestants.
hearing, meditation, and the care to yield obedience to the Scriptures: yea,
for the wretched neglect of the very buying of the Bible for their use, and the
use of their families, and for daring to live without the preaching of the word
in times of spiritual famine.

2. For their vilde audaciousnesse, that dare live in such sins, as they hear
threatened in the Scriptures, profanely despising the warning daily given them,
Esaias 30.11.12. Ier. 23.9.10.

3. For their scorning and deriding of such, as honor the word, and frequent
the hearing of it.

Esaias 57.3.4. But you witches children come hither, the seed of the adulterer,
and of the whore: On who^ have you iested? Upon whom have you gaped, and thrust
out your tongs? Are ye not rebellious children, and a false seed?

4. For their irreuerence, when they come to the house of God to hear, Eccles.
5.1.

Of the godly.
1. For their distractions in the hearing and reading of the Word. 2. For
neglecting the counsels and directions given out of the Word. 3. For not
resting upon it through unbelief. 4. For too much aptnes to receive opinions,
if they come from men they account godly, though they have no warrant from the
word. There be traditions on the right hand, as well as on the left.


Thus much for reproof.

Thirdly, For trial.
we may all try our selves, what we are by our respect of the Scriptures: If
we love and hear the word, we are of God, Ioh. 8.47. He that is of God,
hears Gods word: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. Gods
people are a people, in whose hearts is Gods Law, Esaias 51.7. Psalm. 37.31.

Lastly, For consolation.
it may be a singular consolation to all such, as find the word of God to
testify with the^: it matters not what the world says, or thinks of us; if we
can find that the word of the Lord is good concerning us: our hearts may be at
rest, when God speaks peace by his word, and we may be sure we are in the
right way, when we follow the directions of the word.

CHAP. IIII. Of God.
Psalm. 72.18.19.
HItherto of the principles concerning the fountain of knowledge: the subject
of knowledge is God, who must be considered two ways: first, In his nature:
secondly; In his works.

Principles concerning God.
Concerning God considered in his nature, there are four principles:

that there is a God.

glorious in Nature.

three in Persons.

one in Essence.

every leaf, yea almost in every line of Scripture; and therefore I spare
quotations, it being out of all doubt, that the Scripture says so.

And against all seeds of Atheism, That there is a God, is proved, first by
testimonies internal.
men may keep in their minds these other testimonies; both inward and outward.

The inward testimonies that prove there is a God, are these:

The horror of conscience, that sin, dreading a supreme Judge; which
terrors we see are oftentimes such, as are most dreadful, and such as no
outward thing can still.

The testimony of the holy Ghost infallibly satisfying the godly herein.

The revelation of God to the which presence of God they likewise miss, if
they sin presumptuously.

By testimonies external, and so either in the world,
The external testimonies are taken from the works of God; either more
generally in the world; or more specially in the Church.

The world testifies there is a God;





Judgments that fall upon the wicked, sometimes in the very act of sinning, and
sometimes at the very instant of the wishes of wicked persons.

times acknowledged a God.

In the Church God has proved himself to be: or in the Church.
1 By apparitions: God has showed himself by certain forms, or signs of
his presence: thus Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, etc. saw God. 2 By
the miracles wrought beyond all the course of nature: as when he raised dead
men; divided the sea; made the Sun go backward, etc.


Thus of the proof of the first principle.

That God is also maruellously

Exodus 33.18. Again, he said, I beseech thee show me thy glory.

19. And he answered, etc.

Esa. 6.2.3. And one cried to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord
of hosts: the whole world is full of his glory.

1. Tim. 6.16. Who only has immortality, and dwells in the light that none
can attain unto, whom never man saw, neither can see, unto whom be honor,
and power everlasting, Amen.

Glories in the nature of God.
And how can he be but exceeding glorious, when as he is,

Incorporeall, beyond the perfection God is a spirit.

Before the mountains were made, and before thou had formed the earth, and
the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art our God.

Is it true indeed that God will dwell on the earth? Behold the heavens, and
the heavens of heavens are not able to contain thee, how much more unable is
this house that I have built.

Ier. 23.24. Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord?

Immutable without shadow Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the father of lights, with whom is no
variableness, neither shadow by turning.

Numb. 23.19. God is not as man, that he should lie, neither as the son of
man, that he should repent: Has he said, and shall he not do it? and has he
spoken, and shall he not accomplish it?

Omnipotent, so as nothing is But our God is in heaven, he does whatsoever he
will.

Mat. 19.26. And Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, with men this is
impossible, but with God all things are possible.

Job 42.2. I know that thou can do all things, and that there is no thought
hidden from thee.

Great is our Lord, and great is his power, his wisdom is infinite.

Romans 11.33. O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

Hebr. 4.13. Neither is there any creature, which is not manifest in his sight:
but all things are naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have to do.

For thou art not a God that love wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with
thee.

Esa. 6.3. And one cried to another, and said, Holy, holy is the Lord of hosts.

All-sufficient and independent. The Lord appeared to Abraham, and said unto
him: I am God all-sufficient, walk before me, and be thou upright.

Exodus 3.14. And God answered Moses: I am that I am, etc.

Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be
glory for ever. Amen.

Most merciful. Exodus 34.6.7. So the Lord passed before his face, and cried:
The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, etc.

Reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and
sin, and not making the wicked innocent.

Psalm. 136. the whole.

Lastly, Immortal: so as he can never die or cease to be. 1. Tim. 1.17. Now
unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be honor
and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The uses.
And all this should teach us:

For instruction.
Romans 11.33.35.36. O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, etc.

Blessed be the Lord God, and blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let
the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen, Amen.

Psalm. 96. verse. 1. etc. Oh sing unto the Lord all the earth, bless his name,
declare his glory from day to day; the Lord is great and greatly to be praised:
give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name.

Psalm. 147.1. Praise ye the Lord; for praise is comely, Psalm. 148. the whole.
Revel. 5.9. etc.

With special admiration to And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart,
and the heart of thy seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live.

Oh these beauties should make us wonderfully in love with God! who only is
worthy to be accounted of a good nature.

Matthew. 19.17. And he said unto him, why call thou me good? there is none
good, but one, even God, etc.



Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the father of lights, etc.

What are we, that so great a God should set his heart upon us to show us
mercy?

God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and
truth.

sin, and strive for all possible imitation of his holiness. Psalm. 36.10.
Extend thy loving kindness to them that know thee, and thy righteousness unto
them that are upright of heart.

1. Pet. 1.15.16. But as he which has called you is holy, so be you holy in
all manner of conversation.

Because it is written: Be you holy, for I am holy, etc.

1. Ioh. 5.18.19. We know, that whosoever is borne of God sins not: but he
that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and the wicked touches him not, etc.

Job 42.6. Therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

Finally, we should strive to get and increase in the true knowledge of our
glorious God, If we would study the glorious nature of God, we must observe 6.
rules.
we should study his glory; but then we must be warned, when we go about this
study, to look to diverse things.

1. We must repent us of our sins, for this knowledge requires a clean heart.

2. We must bring an humble and teachable mind: Psalm. 25.9. Them that be
meek will he guide in judgment, and teach the humble his way.

3. Let the Word be thy guide: look for him in the Word: Thou must captiuate
thy Reason, and advance thy faith.

4. Thou must go to the Son to reveal the Father: pray Christ to show thee
the Father: Ioh. 1.18, No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten
Son, which is in the bosom of the Father; he has declared him, etc.

5. Pray for the spirit of revelation to form this in thee, and resolve to get
thy heart established in the knowledge of God, by many prayers.

6. Observe him in his Image in his children, get affection to them, and live
much with them. 1. Ioh. 4.8.12.16, He that loves not, knows not God; for
God is love.

No man has seen God at any time; if we love one another, God dwells in
us, and his love is perfect in us, etc.

Thus much for Instruction.

Here is also much matter of Atheistical thoughts, For humiliation.
and base conceits which are in men's minds concerning God: and for the daily
neglect of Gods presence; forgetting him days without number, and for daring
to sin in his sight; but especially for want of those burning desires after
God, and that surpassing love of his glorious nature.

Consolation unto all those that are assured they are in favor with God. For
consolation.
Why do not our hearts say, We have none in heaven but God? and do desire
none in earth with him? Psalm. 7.3.23. seeing he is so all-sufficient, able to
do us so much good, and our plentiful reward, Genes. 17.1. and knows our
ways, Psalm. 1.6. and entertaines his people with so much grace, Psalm. 36.7.8.
and the rather because he will never change, and love thee with an eternal
love. Iam. 1.17. 2. Tim. 2.13. Numb. 23.19.

This should be the life of our lives, it is very eternal life to know him to
be ours in Christ. Ioh. 17.3. Ierem. 9.24.

Thus of the second principle.

The third Principle is, that there be three persons in the Trinity, which may
be proved two ways:

That there is more then one Proofs for the Trinity.
Genesis 1.26. Furthermore God said, Let us make man in our own Image, according
to our likeness, etc.

That there are three in number. And lo the heavens were opened unto him, and
John saw the spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him.

And lo a voice came from heaven, saying; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased, etc.

Matthew. 28.19. Go therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost.

2. Cor. 13.13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the communion of the holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.

Ioh. 14.16.17.28. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, etc.

Ioh. 15.26. But when the Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from
the Father, etc.

1. Ioh. 5.7. For there are three which bear record in heaven; the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost: and these three are one, etc.

These three were called in the old Testament, the Lord, the Angel of the
Lord, and the Spirit of God: and in the new, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. Uses of the doctrine of the Trinity.


The use should be:

what is beyond the reach of men or Angels: thou must believe, that this is so,
though reason cannot tell ^hee, how it is; let it suffice thee to know, that it
is. Thou shall know more how it is, both when they knowledge is more grown on
earth, and when thou come to thy perfect age in heaven.

When thou come to worship persons of their glory: But know, that there are
three persons, not one person only.

Learn thou in thy course of

This may be an unspeakable Trinity is to thee: thy holiness and happiness was
conceived, decreed, framed, purchased, renewed, and shall be for ever testified
by ^^ree in heaven, 1. John 5.7. For there are three which bear record, etc.
Genesis 1.26. as before.

Thus of the third principle.

That there is but one God proved.
Deu. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only, etc.

Esaias 44.6.8. Thus says the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the
Lord of Hosts: I am the first, and I am the last, and without me is there no
God. You are my witnesses whether there be a God beside me, etc.

Mark. 12.29. Hear Israel, the Lord our God is the only Lord, etc. Ephesians.
4.5.6. 1. Cor. 8.4. We know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that
there is none other God, but one, etc.

The uses are these: The uses.


Adore him, whom al creatures

Psalm. 86.9.10. All nations, whom thou have made shall come and worship before
thee O Lord, and shall glorify thy name:

For thou art great, and do wondrous things, thou art God alone, etc.

Love him alone, or above all: The Lord our God is Lord only:

And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy might, etc. Mark. 12.29.30. as before.

It should repent us, that ever extremities, as these places show, Deuteronomy.
32.37.38.39. Isay 37.16. 1. Sam* 2.2.3.



Mediator to him, 1. Tim. 2.5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between
God and Man: Which is the Man Christ Jesus, etc.

coherence.

Hitherto of the nature of God; the works of God follow: His works are either
of Creation or Providence.

CHAP. V. Of the Creation.
Revel. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power:
for thou have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are, and have been
created.


THere are five principles concerning the Creation: Principles concerning the
Creation.


That the World had In the beginning God created the heaven, and the earth,
etc. Prou. 8.24. etc. When there were no depths was I begotten; when there were
no fountains abounding with water, etc.

Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world,
etc.

God that made the world, and all things that are therein, etc.

John 1.3. All things were made by it, and without it was made nothing, that
was made.

Gens. 1.1. Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all
the host of them by the breath of his mouth.

Isaiah 40.28. Know thou not, or have thou not heard, that the everlasting
God, the Lord has created the ends of the earth? etc.

Colos. 1.16. For by him were all things created, which are in heaven, and
which are in earth: things visible, and invisible, etc.



Romans 4.17. Before God, whom he believed: who quickneth the dead, and calls
those things which be not, as though they were.

Heb. 11.3. Through faith we understand, that the world was ordained by the
word of God, so that the things which we see, are not made of things which did
appear.

That God made all things by

That all things in their Creation And God saw all that he had made, and lo
it was very good, etc.

The use may be: Uses.


For Information: The glory Lord shall endure for ever: For information.
He shall rejoice in his works, Psalm. 104.31.

For Instruction, and so the Uses for instruction.


1. To fear him, and stand in awe of him, even all the inhabitants of the
earth, who are the work of his hands, Psalm. 33.6.7.8.

2. To study the knowledge of these works of his; to remember them,
contemplate of them, and praise his workmanship, and admire his glory, that
does great things, and unsearchable, yea marvelous things without number, etc,
Job 9.10.11. shall we not sing unto the Lord all our life, and praise our God
while we live, etc, Psalm. 104 33. seeing The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament shows the work of his hands, Psalm. 19.1. and the invisible
things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are seen by the
creation of the World, being considered in his works, etc, Romans 1.20. Let us
remember, that God gave a Sabbath, of purpose to remember the glory of God in
the creation.

3. To observe the distinct glory of every person, admire that Son, by whom
God made the worlds, Heb. 1.3. Col. 1.16. and that Spirit, that sitting upon
that Chaos, first hatched it, Genes. 1.2.

4. To acknowledge Gods sovereignty, let him take whom he will away, who can
say, what do thou, Job 9.13. God will not withdraw his anger, and the most
mighty helps stoop under him.

5. Upon all occasions, and in all distresses to seek unto him for help,
assistance and succor: Psalm. 124.8. Psalm. 134.3. yea believing in him,
though we see no hope in respect of outward means, Rom 4.17. Heb. 11.3. Isaiah
37.16.

And as this is true of affliction, and outward distresses; so is it true of
all spiritual distresses about the means or matter of holiness: for God
himself uses the word (create) in both, to show us, that it is lawful for
that reason to rest upon him, Isaiah 57.19, I create the fruit of the lips to
be peace, etc. Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, etc. so it is applied
to good works, Ephesians. 1.10. and to our protection in general, Esaias 4.4. and 5.
To show, that if it were as difficult, as to make heaven and earth at the
first, yet God will do it.

6. To teach us compassion to the creatures, we should love the work of his
hands, and not be cruel to them, or void of pity.

Uses for reproof.
These principles also may serve for reproof of wicked men:

Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not be afraid at my presence, which
have placed the sand for the bounds of the sea, by the spiritual decree* a
perpetual, that it cannot pass it, etc.

For not regarding his works, And the harp, and viol, and timbrel, and pipe,
and wine are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord,
neither consider the work of his hands.

For hardening themselves in

And lastly, for consolation to all, that put their trust in him, Psalm. 116.5.6.

He can dispose of all, since the earth is the Lords, and all that is therein.
Oh, what is man? that God should be mindful of him, and give him such
pre-eminence over the works of his hands, Psalm 8.4.5.6.7.8. Proverbs 8.31.

Thus of the Creation.

CHAP. VI. Of Gods Providence.
Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and for him, are all things. To him
be glory for ever. Amen.


Principles concerning Gods providence.
THe principles concerning Gods providence are;

That God still

Prou. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord in every place behold the evil, and the good.

Zach. 4.10. These seven are the eyes of the Lord, which go through the whole
world.

Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any creature, which is not manifest in his sight,
but all things are naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have to do.

Psalm. 113.6. Who abaseth himself to behold things in the heaven, and in the
earth.

That God vpholds, and gouerns,

Psalm. 119.91. They continue even to this day by thine ordinances: for all are
thy servants.

John 5.17. But Jesus answered them: My Father works hitherto, and I work.

Acts 17.25.28. He gives to all life, and breath, and all things: For in him
we live, and move, and have our being.

Psalm. 104.14.21.27.28.30. He causes grass to grow for the cattle, and herb
for the use of man, that he may bring forth bread out of the earth.

The Lions rore after their prey, and seek their meat at God.

All these wait upon thee, that thou may give them food in due season:

Thou give it to them, and they gather it; thou openest thy hand, and they
are filled with good things.

Again, if thou send forth thy spirit, they are created, and thou renewest the
face of the earth.



Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and for him, are all things: To him
be glory for ever. Amen.

Matthew. 10.29.30. Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them
shall not fall on the ground without your Father:

Yea, and all the hairs of your head are numbered.

Psalm. 147.8.9.16.17.18. Which covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares
rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grow upon the mountains.

Which gives to beasts their food, and to the young ravens that cry.

He gives snow like wool, and scatters the hoare frost like ashes.

He casts forth his ice like morsels, who can abide the cold thereof?

He sends his word, and melts them: he causes his wind to blow, and the
waters flow.

That of al creatures, God has

Prou 8.31. And took my solace in the compass of his earth, and my delight is
with the children of men.

Psalm. 8.3.4. What is man, say I, that thou art mindful of him? and the son
of man, that thou visitest him?

1. Cor. 9.9.10. For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not mussel
the mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn; does God take care for oxen?

Either says he it not altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt it is
written, that he which eareth, should ear in hope; and that he that thresheth
in hope, should be partaker of his hope.



Amos 3.6. Or shall a trumpet be blown in a City, and the people be not
afraid? or shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

That he does whatsoever pleases But our God is in heaven, he does whatsoever
he will.

Jonah 1.14. For thou (O Lord) have done as it pleased thee.

Eccles. 3.14. I know, that whatsoever God shall do, it shall be for ever: to
it can no man add, and from it can none diminish: For God has done it, that
they should fear before him.

That Gods dominion is everlasting, The Lord shall reign for ever, O Sion, thy
God endures from generation to generation: praise ye the Lord.

The uses are: The uses.


For information: this is a glorious For information.
and if we search into it distinctly, there are many things admirable in Gods
government; Things admirable in Gods providence.
as,

1 First, ye vicegerency of Christ his Son, Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness
of the glory, and the engraued form of his person, and bearing up al things by
his mighty word, etc.

2 Secondly, the splendour of the means he uses, even Kings on earth are his
servants, Pro. 21.1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers
of waters: he turns it whithersoeuer it pleases him: yea Angels in heaven,
Oh the admirable glory of the government of angels in the world! as is shadowed
out in Ezech. 1.4. to 15.

3 The variety of means he has, and can raise; even all the armies in heaven
and earth.

4 His working sometimes without means, Genes. 2.

5 His working against means sometimes, Psalm. 105.12. to 16. The Sun must
stand still: Fire must not burn: the Sea must not drown, etc.

6 The extent of his government; what a work to order all things?

7 The preservation of all the sorts of things even by the word of God: By
succession perpetuating his creation; and supporting all things, providing
daily for them.

8 The destruction he makes amongst the creatures, Psa. 104.29. By deluge,
fire, sword, pestilence, tumbling down Monarchies, etc, Psalm. 68.1.

9 The ordering of the disorders of the world, turning sin to good, as an
Apothecary does poison; and directing evil instruments, wicked men, to punish
the wicked, or to correct the godly. To see how God looks one way, and they
another. Nabuchadnezzar intends to satisfy his own pride, revenge, ambition,
covetousness: yet God guides it to another use, even to correct his people,
which he shows by burning his rod, Esa. 10.5.6. Esa. 14.5.6. and 29. and God
directs the evil actions of the wicked to a good end: so of the Jews in
killing Christ, etc.

10 But especially his admirable disposing of all things, notwithstanding the
infinite multitude of all things in the world, which is shadowed in the
wheels, Ezech. 1.15. etc.

11 All this to be done without labor, or vexation: say therefore, as Psalm.
104.1.24. My soul praise thou the Lord: O Lord my God, thou art exceeding
great, thou art clothed with glory and honor.

O Lord how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy riches.

Psalm. 106.2. Who can express the noble acts of the Lord, or show forth all
his praise?

47. Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, that we
may praise thy holy name, and glory in thy praise, etc.

Psalm. 107.8. Let them therefore confess before the Lord his loving kindness,
and his wonderful works before the sons of men.

22. And let them offer sacrifice of praise, and declare his works with
rejoicing.

Psalm. 113.2.3.4.5. all the Psalm.

The second use is for reproof Uses for reproof.
1 Of such Atheists, as say God does not see, or not regard, Psalm. 94.7. etc.
Yet they say the Lord shall not see; neither will the God of Jacob regard it. 2
Of such, as acknowledge chance or fortune. 3 Of the coffeehouse, that is in
man with their condition: David calls himself a beast for this, Psalm. 73.22.
So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was a beast before thee: an excellent Psalm
clean through. 4 Of the security of wicked me^: If God govern, woe to them.
Psalm. 139.7.8, Whither shall they go from thy spirit? or whither shall they
fly from thy presence?


If they ascend into heaven, thou art there; if they lie down in hell, thou
art there.

Job 9.4.5. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength, who has been fierce
against him, and has prospered?

He remoueth the mountains, and they feel not, when he overthrows them in
his wrath.

Psalm. 107.42, The righteous shall see it and rejoice; and all iniquity shall
stop her mouth.

Psalm. 146.9, The Lord keeps the strangers, he relieueth the fatherless and
widow: but he overthrows the way of the wicked.

Thirdly, the doctrine of Gods Uses for instruction.


1 Take not thought what thou shall eat, etc. thou art at Gods finding, Matthew.
6.31, Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we drink? or wherewith
shall we be clothed? etc. cast thy care upon God: for he cares for thee.

1. Pet. 5.7, Cast all your care upon him, for he cares for you.

Psalm. 55.22, Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: he
will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever.

Say with Abraham, God will provide, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with those things that ye have; for he
has said, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee, etc.



1. By restraining grief and sorrow in thy self, Psalm. 39.9. I should have
been dumb, and not have opened my mouth, because thou did it.

1. Sam. 3.18. So Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him: Then he
said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

Prou. 3.11.12. My son refuse not the chastening of the Lord, neither be
grieved with his correction.

Affliction comes not out of the dust.

2 By not using ill means.

By not fearing the rage of any creature, Luke 12.4.5.6.7. etc. And I say unto
you my friends be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that are not
able to do any more, etc.

Matthew. 10.28.29.30. Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? and one of them
shall not fall on the ground without your father, etc.

1. Pet. 4.19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God,
commit their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

4. By seeking to God, though we see no means, for he has a thousand ways
we know not of.

Seek all good things at his

Acknowledge all good things not to thine own nets, Habak. 1.16. Therefore
they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their yarne, because by
them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous.

proiects, nor in the means, Ier. 10.23. O Lord I know that the way of man is
not in himself, neither is it in man to walk and to direct his steps.

Deuteronomy. 8.3. Therefore he humbled thee, and made thee hungry, and fed thee with
man, which thou knew not, neither did thy fathers know it, that he might
teach thee, that man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord does a man live.

Psalm. 127.1.2. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that
build it; except the Lord keep the City, the keeper watches in vain.

It is in vain for you to rise early, and to lie down late, and eat the
bread of sorrow; but he will surely give rest to his beloved.

But commit thy way to God, and trust upon him, Psalm. 37.4. And delight thy
self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire.

Pray God to direct the works of thine hands, Psalm. 90.17. And let the beauty
of the Lord our God be upon us, and direct thou the works of our hands upon
us, even direct the work of our hands.

If God govern, do good and And men shall say, verily there is fruit for the
righteous; doubtless there is a God that judges in the earth.

Observe Gods works, keep a Catalogue of experiments, Psalm. 107.43. Who is
wise, that he may observe these things? for they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord.

And make known his deeds, talk of his wondrous works: Remember the
marvelous works he has done, Psalm. 106.1.2-5. Praise ye the Lord, because he
is good, for his mercy endures for ever: who ca^ express the noble acts of
the Lord or show forth all his praise? etc.

He has made every thing beautiful in his time: also he has set the world
in their heart, yet cannot man find out the work, that God has wrought from
the beginning even to the end.

I know, that whatsoever God shall do, it shall be for ever: To it can no man
add, and from it can no man diminish: For God has done it, that they should
fear before him, etc.

The fourth use is for consolation Use for consolation.
our bones and hairs are numbered, Psalm. 34.20. He keeps all his bones, not
one of them is broken.

Luke 12.6.7. Yea all the hairs of your head are numbered, fear not therefore,
you are of more value then sparrowes, etc.

He knows our way, Psalm. 1.6. For the Lord knows the way of the righteous.

Our tears are in his bottle, Psalm. 56.8. Thou have counted my wanderings: put
my tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy Register?

He will not leave us nor forsake us, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with those things that you have: For he
has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee.

No good things will he withhold, Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is the Sun and
shield unto us: the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly.

Esa. 48.15.16. Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the
son of her womb? though they should forget, yet will I not forget thee.

Behold I have graven thee upon the palm of mine hands; thy walls are ever in
my sight.

He that believes shall not be ashamed.

Thus of the providence of God in general: as it concerns man in special, it
looks first upon the estate of Innocence.

CHAP. VII. Of Man's first estate, viz. of Innocence.
Eccles. 7.31. Only lo, this have I found, that God has made man righteous:
but they have sought many inventions.


THere are two principles concerning man's first estate.

God made man at Furthermore God said, Let us make man in our own image
according to our likeness, and let them rule over the fish of the sea, etc.

1. Cor. 11.7. For a man ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the
image of God, etc.

Colos. 3.10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after
the image of him that created him.

Only lo, this have I found, that God has made man righteous: but they have
sought many inventions.

Ephesians. 4.24. And put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness.

Note, that I say, chiefly (as that which is a principle): for else man was
created after the image of God:

Man was after the Image of God three ways.
either of the, 1. Being of God: or 2. Of the manner of his being. 1. Of his
being, as he has in him a spirit, a nature: 1. Spiritual incorporeall. 2.
Immortal. 3. Invisible. 4. Intelligible.
2. Of the manner of his being: for as in man is one soul, and yet diverse
faculties, as cogitation, memory, will, etc. so is there in God one essence,
and three persons.



Secondly, in respect of his eminency, Lord of all, Genes. 1.26. Furthermore
God said, Let us make man in our Image, according to our likeness, and let
them rule over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the heaven, and over
the beasts, and over all the earth, and over every thing that creeps and
moves on the earth.

Psalm. 8.6.7.8. Thou have made him to have dominion in the works of thine
hands: thou have put all things under his feet, etc. For if the man be Gods
image for the Sovereignty, he has in the family, as 1. Cor. 11.7. and the
Maiestrate for his superiority in the Commonwealth, Psalm. 82. much more man in
general for dominion over all.

1. In respect of knowledge: for in the mind of man, there is hid,
a-resemblance of Gods wisdom to know God, his will, and works with the
natures and properties of them. 2. In respect of original Justice, which stood
in the rectitude of his nature, the spirit subject to God, the soul to the
spirit, the body to the soul without any sin. 3. In respect of freedom of
will.


There are four sorts of free-willes: 1. Only to good; so in good Angels, and
the blessed. 2. Only to evil; so in devils and the wicked. 3. Partly to
evil, and partly to good; so in the regenerate on earth. 4. So to good, as it
might be to evil; so in Adam, etc.


The power of his freedom was such, as he could do all things convenient to
his estate; whether,

Works of nature, as eat,

Works of policy; as govern

Or, Works religious: 1. Internal; to love, fear, and trust in God. 2.
External; to teach, pray, sacrifice, etc.


The uses follow.

The uses.
We should inform our The special favor of God to man in his Creation.
when he had provided all things made for him:

But in the place in Paradise,

And in the manner --

Both of making his body. He did not say, let it be; but as it were, framed
all with his own hands; the man of the dust, the woman of the rib:

And of inspiring his soul, he breathed the breath of lives into him,

Genes. 2.7. The Lord God made the man also of the dust of the ground, and
breathed in his face breath of life, and the man was a living soul.

He begat his soul as it were a divine spark or particle of God; therefore
called the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.9. Zach. 12 1. Acts 17.28.

And in both he says, let us make; calling all the Trinity to the care and
workmanship.

But especially that he should as it were, be made like unto God himself; and
therefore let us sing, as Psalm. 8.3, What is man that thou thus mindest him,
etc.

Of true blessedness, wherein viz. not in idleness, riches, lust, pleasure,
sports, etc. for none of all this was in paradise, yet Adam happy perfectly,
etc.

The second use is for instruction,

Duties.
1. Unto God; To God.
and so first we should with all thankfulness affectionately acknowledge his
love to man.

2. It should instruct man earnestly to study and endeavor, To know God, To
fear, To resemble him. To praise his workmanship.


For these were the ends of man's creation, no other creatures could reach it;
therefore God made man reasonable. We do not answer the end of our creation,
if we make not God in some sort visible by our holiness, and praise his works,
etc.

To our selves.
and so it should teach us:

1. First, to care for the precious and immortal soul, yt God has breathed
into us above all, as Matthew. 16.26. For what shall it profit a man, though he
should win the whole world, if he lose his own soul? or what shall a man give
for the recompense of his soul? What should we dote on temporal things, when
our souls are created to the possession of eternal blessedness?

2. To be patient, and trust upon God in distress, Psalm. 22.11. Be not far
from me, because trouble is near; for there is none to help me, etc.

Psalm. 139.14. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wondrously made:
marvelous are thy works, and my soul knows it well.

3. To lament our fall.

4. To study our recovery, and we see hence what to seek, viz. knowledge and
goodness.

5. To long for the time mentioned, Psalm. 17.15. When we shall be satisfied
with his Image.

To other men.


1. First, wrong not man: for he is Gods image, Genes. 9.6. Who so sheadeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God has he
made man.

2. Love one another, especially where this Image is repaired: for we were
created to this end, that we should delight one in another.



1. For our insensiblenesse, forgetfulness, and vncapablenesse of these
considerations, especially for our want of lamentation for the ruins in our
nature.

2. For our horrible neglect of knowledge and goodness, without which man is
more like a beast; yea, in respect of sin like a Devil.

3. Of the Papists about pictures Image.

CHAP. VIII. Of the fall of Man.
Eccles. 7.29. Only lo, this have I found, that God has made man righteous:
but they have sought many inventions.


THe misery of man in his estate of corruption must be considered two ways:

In the cause of it.

In the parts of it.

The cause of it was the fall of our first parents, concerning which are these
principles:

Adam and Eve fell, Principles concerning the fall of man.
and lost speedily the happiness, in which they were created, as appears,
Genes. 3.7. etc. and thus they did loose God; Paradise: Gods Image.


And that they lost it speedily appears, in that the devil is called a
murderer from the beginning, and the fall is presently related after the story
of his innocence in the creation.

Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and
so death went over all men, for as much as all men have sinned.

Eccles. 7.29. as before.

defiled, and deprived of the glory of God, Romans 5.12. as before. 18.19.
Likewise then as by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to
condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the benefit abounded toward all
men to the justification of life.

For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of
one shall many also be made righteous.

The uses follow.

The uses of these woeful principles may be first for information, and so we
should study to satisfy, and settle our hearts more at large concerning two
things.

The one is the grieuousnes of

The other is the Justice of God

For the first, there be many things may assure us, that the sin of our first
parents was a most grievous sin: for it admits fearful aggrauations; as,
Things to show the greatness of Adams sin.
1. That they durst venture all their happiness about so small an advantage to
them. If we think, it was a small offense to eat an apple; think with all, it
was a desperate wickedness to venture eternal life for the possession of an
apple. 2. This was Gods first commandment that he gave them, and to neglect
God so soon in a thing, wherein they might so easily have obeyed, must needs
appear to be desperate wickedness. 3. This sin was committed, when they had no
inward concupiscence to tempt them, nor that pronenesse of nature, that is in
man now to sin. 4. They offended, when God had abundantly provided for them;
they wanted nothing that was good for them. 5. They herein violated the whole
Law, because they broke the agreeme^ts which were made between God and them:
according to that of James 2.10, For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and
yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all. 6. Because it was a sacramental
fruit: to cast bread to dogs is no great offense; but to cast consecrated bread
to dogs is a grievous sin. 7. This sin was accompanied with diverse
monstrous sins; first, horrible doubting of Gods truth: secondly, compacting
with Gods utter enemy, and so making Apostasy from God to the Devil: thirdly,
consent to the blasphemies of the devil, when he spoke enuiously, and
scoffingly at God: fourthly, affectation of divinity: fifthly, a wretchlesse
disregard of what should become of his posterity, through his ventrous course:
with many other sins.


Adam was the common root of all mankind, and we were in his loins, as Leui
was in Abraham's, when he paid tithes; and are not traitors punished in their
children? the Act of a burgess in the Parliament is the Act of the country.

Object.
But yet at least godly men should not beget ungodly children.

Answ.
They beget children, as men, not as godly men; I mean, they derive such a
nature as they have, which is corrupt after calling: though they be justified
perfectly, yet they are sanctified but in part: The father that was
circumcised, did beget a child that was uncircumcised; and take the cleanest
corn in the world, and sow it, and it brings forth chafe in the ear with the
corn.

Thus much for information.

The doctrine of the fall may serve also for instruction; and so both in
general. particular.


In general it should teach us four things:

First, to take heed of the fountains Apostacy. There were three things
occasioned mightily the fall of our first parents:

The first was a rebellious desire to be, Occasions of Apostasy.
what God would not have us to be.

The second unthankfulness: all the pleasures of Paradise will not please
them, if they be crossed in some one thing, though never so little.

The liberty they took to add or detract from Gods word: they added the word
touch, and they detracted, when they said, lest ye die: and these three sins
are, and ever will be, causes of Apostacy; if they be not prevented.

Apostates are like the devil; they will not be quiet, till they make others
fall away with them.

of lesser sins: we see here what the eating of an apple did, which the most
men would feign think was but a small matter; and the rather, because
monstrous sins may be committed about a small offense in it self. Think of
the man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, and of the case of Ananias
and Sapphira.

We must get on our armor, Devil. We see here how he thirsts after the ruin
of man; and if he prevailed so over Adam, how much more easily may he prevail
over us? and if he could deceive by the means of a serpent there; how much
more now, when he speaks to us by men like our selves? yea then we saw a
proof of it, For how quickly was Adam enticed, when the devil spoke to him in
the mouth of Eve his wife.

And we may here observe the Devils method in tempting, and the degrees of
tentation: For there was Degrees of the devils tentation.
1. First, the suggestion it self. 2. The obscuring of the thoughts about the
eminency of God, and the excellency of the image received of him. 3. An
impression of forgetfulness in the memory, not distinctly remembering what was
before done, or commanded of God. 4. The tickling of ambition, affecting to be
more then they were. 5. Trust given to the flatteries and baits of the devil,
and a contracted familiarity with him, with inclination of the will and
affection to the prohibited fruit.


Thus much in general.

In particular, four sorts must be warned: 1. First, women should here be
much humbled, and for ever be mistrustfull of their Counsels, and carriage: for
Satan knows how to make use of them still. 2. Secondly, men must take heed of
the whisperings, and enticing advice of women. 3. Thirdly, the weak must
carefully look to themselves, that Satan employ not them as instruments of
tentations; and they should learn not to be so violent in things they are not
fully grounded in. 4. The strong must take heed lest they fall: If Adam fell in
Paradise, they are in more danger now in the world; neither may they trust in
their own gifts, but learn to place all their trust in God. 5. As any are
more godly, so they must know they shall be more assaulted.


Thus for instruction.

This doctrine of the fall has matter in it of extreme humiliation, in that
eternal shame lies upon our nature by this vile offense, both in respect of
the extremity of our loss, and the fearful displeasure of God.

Lastly, it may comfort the godly to think of their estate by Christ, having
received the assurance of a better condition, then ever they could have had in
Adam; and the rather, because they are now confirmed as the Angels of heaven,
that they can never fall from the happiness they have in Christ.

CHAP. IX. Of Sin.
Romans 5.12. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin; and so death went over all men; for as much as all men have sinned, etc.


HItherto of the cause of our misery.

The parts follow, viz. 1. Sin. 2. Punishment.


The principles concerning sin, Principles concerning sin.
are,

First, that all men have sinned, The fool has said in his heart, there is no
God: they have corrupted and done an abominable work; there is none that does
good.

The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there
were any that would understand and seek God.

All are gone out of the way, they are all corrupt, there is none that does
good, no not one.

Prou. 20.9. Who can say I have made mine heart clean? I am clean from my
sin?

1. King. 8.46. There is no man that sins not, etc.

Eccles. 7.22. Surely there is no man just in the earth, that does good, and
sins not.

Romans 3.9. What then, are we more excellent? No in no wise: for we have
already proved, that all both Jews and Gentiles are under sin.

Iam. 3.2. For in many things we sin all.

1. Ioh. 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us.

The second principle is, that Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness?
there is not one.

Job 15.14. What is man that he should be clean? and he that is born of a
woman that he should be just?

Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me.

That this infection has ouerspread the whole nature of man, principle: we
must consider that the nature of man is tainted 14. ways: For there is in man
by nature,

Extreme darkness, Foul blemishes in every man's nature.
sightlesnes, especially in the knowledge of God and happiness.

Colos. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness.

1. Cor. 2.14. But the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned.

Having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their heart,
etc.

He feeds of ashes; a seduced heart has deceived him, that he cannot deliver
his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand?



Romans 8.7. For the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God.

Romans 7.23. But I see another law in my members, rebelling against the law of
my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members.

5. Impurity, foulnes, filthiness, all over, Tit. 1^ 5. Unto them that are
defiled (...) ^^beleeuing, is nothing pure, (...) even their minds and
conscien^^ are defiled.

Psalm. 14.3. All are gone out of the way, they are all corrupt, there is none
that does good, no not one.

6. Abundance of false principles.

7. Pronenesse to al sorts of evil, Romans 7.14.21. For we know that the law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin.

I find then by the law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me,
etc.

Concupiscence.

All are gone out of the way, they are all corrupt, there is none that does
good, no not one, etc.

Romans 3.10. As it is written, There is none righteous, no not one.

Neither give you your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, etc.

Know ye not, that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey, his
servants you are to whom ye obey; whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness, etc.



Christ himself is an offense: a rock of offense, 1. Cor. 8.7. 1. Pet. 2.6.

A natural sauouring and relishing Satan, Ephesians. 2.2. Wherein in time past you
walked according to the course of this world, and after the prince that rules
in the air, even the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience?
This has been ever since the first tentation in Paradise.

Corruption of memory.

Forgetting Good. Retaining Evil.
A natural disunion one from From whence are wars and contentions amongst
you? are they not hence, even of your lusts that fight in your members.

These things prove that we have all vile natures, that there is not one of a
good nature in the world by nature.

principle is, that besides these sins that stick fast upon our natures,
every man is guilty of horrible, and many, and vile actual sins, Psalm. 14.
1.2.3. They have corrupted and done an abominable work, etc.

Job. 15.15.16. Behold he found no steadfastness in his Saints: yea the heavens
are not clean in his sight.

How much more is man abominable and filthy, who drinks iniquity like water.

Rom, 3.12. They have all gone out of the way, etc.

Such as are,

1. A world of evil thoughts, Genes. 6.5. When the Lord saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and all the imaginations of the
thoughts of his heart were only evil continually.

Atheistical thoughts, innumerable. Impure thoughts, innumerable. Vain
thoughts, innumerable.
Errors in all parts of Religion.

2. Vile affections: Impatiency: Lust: Anger: Envy: Suspicion: Malice: Worldly
fear: Trust: Joy: Love, etc.

3. Vile words: bitter, idle, false, flattering, sla^dering, proud, filthy,
deceitful, scornful, censuring words.

4. Atheistical works, Psalm. 14.1.3. as in many places before.

Against Gods worship in all the parts. Against the Sabbath. In our particular
and general calling. At home and abroad. Secret, open. Of omission, and
commission. Of ignorance, of knowledge. Sudden, and of custom. In company, out
of co^mpanie.
Hypocrisy, pride, security, unbelief, impenitency, etc.

In prosperity, adversity, etc.

Partaking with others sin.

Our own righteousness, as Esa. 64.6. is as filthy clouts, and we all do
fade like a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away.

Besides personal faults, as drunkenness, usury, swearing, whoredom, etc.
works of the flesh, Galath. 5.19.20.21 Moreover the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, etc.

The uses of these principles are fourefold. Uses for information.


First for information, and that

1. That there can be no justification by our works, Romans 9.20. Therefore by
the works of the law shall no flesh he justified in his sight; for by the law
comes the knowledge of sin.

Psalm. 130.3. If thou (O Lord) straightly markest iniquities, (O Lord) who shall
stand?

For every mouth must be stopped, and all the world be guilty before God.

2. That the cause of all Gods dis-regard of us, and the miseries that befall
us, is in our selves.

How can we murmr at our crosses, if we look upon our sins? There is
mercy in the greatest Judgment: for it is his mercy we are not consumed, Lam.
3.22. It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not, etc.

If Adams one sin deserved it, what do all these in us.

3. That it will never go well with the wicked, though God forbear for a long
time, Eccles. 8.11.12. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily: therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set to do evil.

But it shall not be well to the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days;
he shall be like a shadow, because he fears not before God.

4. That no man has cause to brag of his good nature, there are so many
springs of sin, within us.

5. That the things that defile a man, are from within, in himself, it is not
any outward deformity, ill clothes, natural foulness, etc.

6. That a little repentance will not serve the turn.

7. That there is difference between the wicked, and the godly in sinning.

8. Concerning Gods providence in the death of Infants: we kill young snakes
and adders, because they will sting, as well as the old, because they have
stung.

9. Say not, God is the cause of our ruin: nor is it thy chance, or ill luck,
or only the devil, that brought thee into this or that mischief: it is thine
own ill nature.

Secondly, for humiliation:

First, to the godly in two respects: 1. Because they find so many of their old
corruptions, having received such graces and mercies from God: 2. Because they
yet are the means of the conueiance of original sin to their children.


Secondly, to such wicked men as live in open sins, yet repent not. Why does
their hearts carry them away? Job 15.12.14.

Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? are they guilty of so many
reasons, and fallen into the hands of a righteous Judge, and yet secure? Psalm.
82.5. They know not and understand nothing, they walk in darkness, albeit
all the foundations of the earth be moved.

Things make civil honest men miserable.
how vild their estate is, though God have restrained some evils in them: for
1. They want the Image of God. 2. They have an infected nature in all the
former fourteen things. 3. There is in them a disabilitie in the manner of all
holy duties. 4. They partake of other men's sins many ways. 5. They are
guilty of many omissions. 6. They abound in inward sins, by which God is
vexed, as Genes. 6.5. When the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great
in the earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only
evil continually: and Satan by the^ can set vp^^ strong holds, 2, Co. 10.5. 7.
They are guilty of many outward evils against the least commandments.


The third use is for instruction, and so strong Christians should learn to
admire and praise God

1. That could be pacified: Oh what is man, that God should here look upon
such a dounghill!

2. That has so vouchsafed to make us clean in part from such filthiness,
taking away the body of sins, and seasoning the fountain, and drying it up.

Christians should never be at rest, till they get assurance of their pardon
in the blood of Jesus Christ.



1. Sold strive after the contrary holiness, and to express the reformation
of their natures and lives, Ephesians. 4.22. and cast off concerning the
conversation in times past, the old man, which is corrupt through the
deceivable lusts* etc.

2. Should walk humbly all their days, because of the many remainders of
corruption, as Romans 7.15.16. etc. For I allow not that which I do: for what I
would, that do I not: but what I hate, that do I. and look to their hearts,
Heb. 3.12. Taking heed lest at any time there be in any of them an evil heart,
and unfaithful to depart away from the living God. And looking to it, that sin
reign no more, Romans 6.16. etc.

3. It should work in all the godly a wonderful desire of final redemption,
Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death! Psalm. 14.7. Oh give salvation unto Israel out of Zion, when the Lord
turns the captivity of his people, then Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall
be glad.

Oh how should we desire to get out of the world! seeing all so leprous, the
plague sore running upon every man, so as we are in danger to be infected in
all places, and by all persons.

4. It should work in wicked men a fervent desire of remission, and constant
endeavor in the confession of sin, crying out daily with the leper, unclean,
unclean.



1. First, to all men for the Lord uses this, as an argument of pity and
mercy, Genes. 8.21. And the Lord smelled a savor of rest, and the Lord said in
his heart, I will hence forth curse the ground no more for man's cause: for the
imaginations of man's heart is evil even from his youth, neither will I smite
any more all things living, as I have done. Isaiah 48.8.9. I knew that thou
would grievously transgress; therefore have I called thee a transgressor
from thy womb: yet for my name sake will I defer, etc. 2. Chro. 6.35.36.
Then hear thou in heaven their prayer, and their supplication, and judge their
cause:

If they sin against thee (for there is no man that sins not), and thou be
angry with them, and deliver them unto the enemies, and they take them, and
carry them away captive unto a land far and near, etc.

2. To the godly: they should admiringly rejoice in their privilege in the
blood of Christ, and in the remission of all their sins.

CHAP. X. Of the punishment of sin.
Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin: and so death went over all men, for as much as all men have sinned.


HItherto of the principles concerning sin: Now concerning the punishment of
sin, follows this principle, viz.

That all men in their natural estate are extremely miserable, in respect of
the punishment, unto which they are liable for their sins.

Nahum. 1.2.3.6. God is ielous, and the Lord reuengeth, even the Lord of anger,
the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserueth wrath for his
enemies.

The Lord is slow to anger: but he is great in power, and will not surely
clear the wicked: the Lord has his way in the whirlewind, and in the storm,
and the clouds are the dust of his feet.

Who can stand before his wrath, or who can abide in the fiercenes of his
wrath? his wrath is poured out like fire, and the rocks are broken by him, etc.

Romans 5.12. Job 10.17. Thou renewest thy plagues against me, and thou
increasest thy wrath against me: changes and armies of sorrows are against me.

Job. 31.3. Is not destruction to the wicked, and strange punishments to the
workers of iniquity?

2. These. 1.9. Which shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom we also had our conversation in times past in the lusts
of our flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh and of the mind, and wear by
nature the children of wrath, as well as others.

That this principle may be explicated, I will reckon up the several sorts of
punishments, which have been inflicted for man's sin.

17. sorts of punishments inflicted on man for his sin.
1. The loss of Paradise, from which we are all exiled, so as we live as
banished men, while we are in this world, Genes. 3.24. Thus he cast out man,
and at the East side of the Garden of Eden he set the Cherubines, and the
blade of a sword shaken, to keep the way of the tree of life.

2. The curse of the creatures: the creatures are subject to vanity, and
subdued unto bondage, under which they groan for man's sin, Romans 8.20.21.
Because the creature is subject to vanity, not of it own will, but by reason
of him which has subdued it under hope, etc. the earth was cursed for our
sakes, Genes. 3.17.18. Cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou
eat of it all the days of thy life.

Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee, and thou shall eat
the herb of the field.

3. An impure and painful birth, Genes. 3.16. Unto the woman he said, I will
greatly increase thy sorrows, and thy conceptions: in sorrow shall thou bring
forth children; and thy desiers shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall
rule over thee.

4. The displeasure of God, and his fearful anger conceived against us, John
3.36. He that obeieth not the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him.

Nah. 3.6. And I will cast filth upon thee, and make thee vilde, and will set
thee as a gasing stock.

5. A privation of that admirable knowledge of God, and the nature of the
creatures, unto which we were created; so as we are all for horrible ignorance
almost like the beasts, in comparison of what once we might have had, Prou.
30.2. Surely I am more foolish then any man, and have not the understanding of
a man in me: and this light is wanting both to the mind, and the conscience.

6. Bondage to Satan, who has naturally strong holds in every man's heart, and
such spiritual possession, that having men in his snare, he leads them at
his pleasure, and works effectually both in them, and by them, Ephesians. 2.2.
Wherein in time past you walked according to the course of this world, and
after the Prince that rules in the air, even the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience.

2. Tim. 2.26. And that they may come to amendment out of the snare of the
devil, which are taken of him at his will.

2. Cor. 10.5. Casting down the imaginations, and every high thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of God, etc.

7. Spiritual death, which comprehends in it the loss of communion with God
(the life of our lives), and all the joys of his favor and presence, together
with the obduratio^ of our hearts, which are become as a stone within us; so as
we are altogether insensible of the things that concern everlasting happiness.
Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened, that were dead in trespasses and sins.

Ephesians. 4.18. Having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the
life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of
their heart.

Ezech. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will
give you a heart of flesh.

8. Miserable bodies. Our bodies are become miserable, both in respect of
deformity, and in respect of imbecillitie; as also in respect of the many
pains befalles them, both from labor, and from diseases of all sorts, Genes.
3.13. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the
earth: for out of it wast thou taken, because thou art dust, and to dust shall
thou return, etc.

Deuteronomy. 28.21.22. The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he
has consumed thee from the land, whether thou go to possess it.

The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with the fever, and with a
burning ague, and with seruent heat, and with the sword, and with blasting, and
with the mildew, and they shall pursue thee, until thou perish, etc.

9. Judgments in our outward estates in temporal things by wars, famine,
fire, earthquakes, in-undations, ignominy, poverty, and such like of many
sorts, Deuteronomy. 28.16.17.18. etc. Cursed shall thou be in the town, and cursed
also in the field:

Cursed shall thy basket be, and thy dough:

Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the
increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep:

Cursed shall thou be when thou come in, and cursed also when thou go
out, etc.

10. The restraining of good things from us, even blessings of al sorts; and
that sometimes when they are by the free mercy of God bestowed upon others:
Isai. 59.2, But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and
your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. Job 31.2, for
what portion should I have of God from above? and what inheritance of the
Almighty from on high?

Act. 17.30. And the time of this ignorance God regarded not.

Ier. 5.25. Yet your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins
have hindered good things from you, etc.

11. The cursing of blessings, when God blasts the good gifts he bestowed, or
suffers prosperity to become a snare, or trap, or ruin unto man, Mal. 2.2. I
will curse your blessings,

Ierem. 12.13. They have sown wheat, and reaped thorns, they have put
themselves to much pain, and had no profit: and they shall be ashamed of their
revenues, because of the fierce wrath of the Lord.

Psalm. 69.22. Let their table be a snare before them, and their prosperity
their ruin.

Prou. 1.26. I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear
comes etc.

12. Scourging of sin with sin, which is one of the most grievous
punishments; when God leaves a man so, as he suffers him to fall into
flagitious courses, and to commit sin with greediness; or delivers man up to a
reprobate mind, Romans 1.26.28. For this cause God gave them up unto vile
affections; for even their women did change the natural use, into that, which
is against nature.

For as they regarded not to know God, even so God delivered them up unto a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient.

13. Hellish terrors, which wound the soul with insupportable torments, many
times God softening the heart to feel inward smart, or suffering Satan to
torment the soul with unspeakable fears and horrors, Hebr. 10.27. But a
fearful looking-for of judgment and violent fire, which shall devour the
adversaries.

Esa. 33.14. The sinners in Sion are afraid, a fear is come upon the
hypocrites, who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us
shall dwell with the everlasting burnings?

Esa. 65.13.14. Therefore thus says the Lord, behold my servants shall eat,
and ye shall be hungry; behold my servants shall drink, and ye shall be
thirsty; behold my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed.

Behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of
heart, and shall howl for vexation of mind.

14. Fear of death, which in some measure is in all, though the former be not;
every man being in that respect like a prisoner that is condemned, and looks
every day when he shall go to execution, Heb. 2.15. And that he might deliver
al^hem, which for fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage.

15. A terrible general judgment, when all men's sins shall be ripped up
before the whole world, to their eternal shame; and an order given for
unavoidable execution of the sentence, Act. 17.31. Because he has appointed a
day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man, whom
he has appointed. etc.

16. A miserable departure, and loss of life, the soul and body being rent
asunder, and both losing for ever all the pleasures, or felicities of this
life; Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin; and so death went over al men, for as much as all men have sinned,
etc.

Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is death.

17. Lastly, eternal pain: Now this eternal misery is lamentable, if we
consider, 1. either the degrees of it: 2. or the place: 3. or the continuance.

The degrees of damnation are;

1. First, they have no communion with God, nor participation in any of the
blessings of God, 2. Thessal. 1.9. Which shall be punished with everlasting
perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power* etc.

2. Secondly, they are united to the devil, with whom they have an eternal
fearful fellowship, Matthew. 25.41. Then shall he say unto them on the left
hand; depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and all his angels.

3. They endure an unspeakable confusion, and most bitter ignominy, upon the
consideration of the discovery of their many shameful offenses.

4. They are inwardly affected with incredible horror, and torment of
conscience, arising from the sense of Gods anger for their sins, Esa. 30.33.
For Tophet is prepared of old; it is even prepared for the King; he has made
it deep and large; the burning thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of
the Lord, like a river of brimstone does kindle it.

Romans 2.8.9. But unto them that are contentious and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath.

Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil:
of the Jew first, and also of the Grecian.

5. The bodies of the damned shall suffer inexpressible torments, which is set
out in Scriptures by their lying in fire and brimstone, Esa. 30.33. as
immediately before.

Luke 16.23. And being in hell torments, he lift up his eyes, and saw Abraham a
far off, and Lazarus in his bosom, etc.

Revel. 21.8. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liars,
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death.

Matthew. 25.41. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

This misery is increased by the fearfulnes of the place where it is to be
suffered, to which in diverse Scriptures, diverse names are given to intimate the
horror of it, as Hell, the pit, the great deep, or bottomless gulf, Prison,
Darkness, utter darkness, and many other terrible titles.

Matthew. 22.13. Then said the King to his servants, bind him hand and foot; take
him away, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

Revel. 20.1. And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, etc.

And the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore, and they shall have no
rest day nor night, etc.

Now follows the Uses.

The use may be first for singular reproof of the marvelous security of
multitudes of people, that can live quietly in so miserable a condition; were
not man sunk deep into rebellion, and besotted with unspeakable
senselessness, one would think it were impossible for him to eat, or sleep,
or ever to hold up his head. If we heard a story of the one half of these
distresses that were befallen another man, and did lay our hearts to it to
think tenderly of it, we could not but wonder, that that man could so forget
his own safety, as to neglect any means for his own release? but this very
observation shows two things, viz. that men are guilty of vile Atheism, and
unbelief, and of incredible Apathy, or insensiblenesse. Oh that men would but
think of these particulars, and ponder them seriously! but alas, a deceived
heart has seduced them, that they cannot say, here is my perdition, if I
repent not. And this reproof is aggrauated against some men in this, that they
are angry at any that shows them their danger, as we see by experience of men,
that live in gross sins: yet let the curses due to those sins be applied
to them, how do they rage? how are they like the very horse and mule, and much
worse?

sin, Ephesians. 5.14.
and learn to live righteously. 1. Cor. 15. Act. 17.31.
These Judgments may warn all men every where to repent: and seeing they are
thus undone by the first Adam, Romans 5.^2. etc.
to seek release from this dreadful misery by the second Adam; and ^.1. Mat.
11.29.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; and there can be
no access to Christ without repentance from dead works, 1. Ioh. 2.1. Gal.
3.13, 2. Cor. 5.17.
and faith in him. Oh how were men sure to be freed by Christ, if they were
once weary and heavy laden! There is a full propitiation for all sin in him;
he has borne all that curse of the law, only if any man will be in Christ he
must be a new Creature.

This may instruct the godly,

1. The weak Christian should labor by all means to be established in the
faith, that as Christ has freed him from all these miseries (as curses), so
faith may free him from the fear of them; and to this end he should earnestly
and constantly pray, that God would make him worthy of his calling, and fulfill
all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power, 2.
Th. 1.11.12.

2. All Christians should forcibly compel upon themselves a careful practice
of 6. duties:

1. All ages should admire the exceeding riches of the tender kindness and
mercy of God, and the great love wherewith he has loved us, that has
forgiven us so great a debt, and freed us from so unspeakable confusion, Ephesians.
2.4.7.

2. We should often look upon Christ, that has borne all the malediction of
the law for us, and that both to move us to compassion, and mourning for our
sins, that so pierced him, Zach. 12.10. And also to settle our selves against
the fear of any of these miseries, seeing Christ has fully paid our debts,
and suffered the uttermost in our rooms: and further, if we did often set
before us that marvelous passion of our Lord and Savior, it might ravish our
hearts to a greater love toward him, and desire to be with him to give him
eternal thanks.

3. Have we escaped so much danger, which sin brought us into? Then let us
for ever be warned, and go our ways, and sin no more. Let us watch over our
selves, that we be not bewitched by the deceitfulnes of sin. For here we
may learn, that God can make sin extremely bitter unto us, but especially
let us leave sin, even because God has dealt so graciously with us.

4. It should teach us with all compassion to pity others with whom we
converse, that yet live in this misery, we should strive with all
effectualnesse of persuasion to draw them out of such an estate, and use our
uttermost power to pull them out of this fire, provoking them to holiness, and
good works, and exhorting and rebuking them with all instance, that they may
not perish in so great condemnation, Heb. 10.25.

5. It should teach us to endure all sorts of afflictions, yt God shall please
to try us withal, and that because they are no way comparable to the
punishments we are escaped from: and besides, God is pleased to cause them to
work our good: they try and increase our faith in Christ's merits: they make us
know our selves more thoroughly: they mollify and soften our hearts: they tame
our flesh: they scour our gifts from rust: they weane us from the world, and
excite the desire after, and care to provide for the world to come.

6. It should teach us with all gladness of heart to remember our miseries, as
waters that are past, and establish our selves in a daily solace, especially in
the expectation of the full and final deliverance from all the remnants of
distress in the day of Christ, when God shall be made marvelous in them that
believe, 2. These. 1.11. And the more we should lift up our heads, upon whom the
ends of the world are come, because the day of that redemption draws near.
Let us ever say with David, Psalm. 16.6. The lines are fallen upon me in
pleasant places: yea I have a fair heritage: Psa. 22.24.
and The Lord has drawn us out of many waters: let us therefore love the Lord
dearly, and rejoice always in the Lord, Phil. 4.4.

CHAP. XI. The estate of Grace.
Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world.


HItherto of the second estate of man.

The third estate is the estate of Grace, which is three ways to be
considered: 1. First, in respect of the means of the foundation of it. 2.
Secondly, in respect of the subject of the possession of it, which is the
Church. 3. Thirdly, in respect of the degrees of application, and
manifestation, which are two: viz. Justification, Sanctification.



The means of foundation is twofold.

1. Election in God: 2. Redemption in Christ.
Concerning Election, there are these evident Principles:

First, that there was a choice Election made by God, Ephesians. 1.4. As he has
chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world.

Secondly, that this choice was For ere the children were borne, and when they
had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain
according to the Election, not by works, but by him that called, etc.

That only some men are Election? etc, Matthew. 20.16. Many are called, but few
chosen Mat. 22.14.

Election is the only free grace of God, not our works, Ephesians. 1.5. Who has
predestined us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according
to the good pleasure of his will, etc.

Romans 9.15.18. For he says unto Moses; I will have mercy on him, to whom I will
show mercy: and will have compassion on him, on whom I will have compassion.

Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardneth.

Election is unchangeable, all the Elect shall be saved, Romans 8.30. Moreover,
whom he predestined, them also he called; and whom he called, them also he
justified; and whom he justified, them also he glorified, etc.

Isaiah 46.10. My Counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will.

2. Tim. 2.19. But the foundation of God remains sure, and h^th this seal;
The Lord knows who are his, etc.

John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that
comes to me, I cast not away.

Matthew. 25.34. Then shall the King say to them on the right hand, Come ye
blessed of my Father; inherit ye the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundations of the world.

The consideration of this doctrine of man's Election should teach us diverse
things:

Every one of us should study grace: now one labor does both, if we make our
calling sure, we make our Election sure, 2. Pet. 1. 10: and we may be sure our
calling is right, if we add virtue to our faith, if we can find the gifts of
grace in our hearts: for this (I fay) we must study the doctrine of the signs;
of which before.

Election, we should with all thankefulnes acknowledge Gods goodness to us,
and the riches of his free grace, as the Apostle teaches us, Ephesians. 1.3. and
2. These. 2.13. But we ought to give thanks always to the Lord for you brethren,
beloved of God, because that God has from the beginning chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and the faith of truth: and so
rest in this happiness, as our chief desire to God should be still to
vouchsafe us this favor to bless us with the favor of his chosen, Psalm.
106.4.5. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor of thy people, visit me with thy
salvation,

That I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice in the joy of thy
people, and glory with thine inheritance.

And for ever stand and gase at the marvelous riches of Gods grace, that
suffered us not to perish in the condemnation of the world.

Our Election should work upon And fashion not your selves like unto this
world, but be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove,
what is the good will of God, and acceptable, and perfect.

Deuteronomy. 14.2. For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord
has chosen thee to be a precious people unto himself above all the people,
that are upon the earth.

God has chosen us, and called us with a holy calling; and therefore we should
as a people peculiar unto him, be zealous of all good works, and show forth
the virtues of him that called us, and walk before him with all desire to
please him, that has thus Elected us; we should ever be ready to choose the
Lord to be our God, and to show it by auouching him, and by walking in his
ways, as these Scriptures plentifully show.

Deuteronomy. 7.6.7. For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, the Lord thy
God has chosen thee to be a precious people unto himself, above all the people
that are upon the earth.

The Lord does not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more
in number then any people: for ye were the fewest of all people.

Deuteronomy. 26.16.17. This day the Lord thy God has commanded thee to do these
ordinances and laws, keep them therefore, and do them with all thine heart,
and with all thy soul.

Thou have set up the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways,
and to keep his ordinances, and his commandments, and his laws, and to
hearken to his voice.

Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.

1. Pet. 2.9.16. But ye are a chosen generation, a roial Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him, that
has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.

As free, and not as having the liberty for a cloak of maliciousnes, but as
the servants of God.

We should give our names to God, as they that will subscribe and deuote
themselves only to the God of Jacob, Isaiah 44.1.5. Yet now hear, O Jacob, my
servant, and Israel, whom I have chosen.

One shall say, I am the Lord; another shall be called by the name of Jacob;
and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and name himself by
the name of Israel.

4. It should teach us to imitate God, and choose the godly, as the persons we
would most observe, admire, love, defend, and live withal, Ioh. 15.17. These
things command I you, that ye love one another. John 17.26. And I have
declared unto them thy name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou
have loved me, may be in them, and I in them, etc. Yea we should not have the
glorious faith of Christ, in respect of persons to despise poor Christians,
and only respect great men: for God has chosen the weak things of this world
to confound the mighty, and the poor he has chosen to be made heirs of the
Kingdom, and rich in faith, James 2.5. 1. Cor. 1.27. Yea, we should be
content, as the Apostle says, to suffer all things for the Elects sake, seeing
they are so dear to God, 2. Tim. 2.10.

We may know our Election by two sorts of signs: First, the one respects God:
Secondly, the other respects our selves. God declares his eternal choice by
diverse marks of it, and man proves himself to be Elect of God by diverse tokens
of it.

God shows whom he has chosen from everlasting three manner of ways:

1. By Election in time, when God separates a man from the world unto himself
and his service: It is a manifest sign of Election: it shows an eternal
choice, when God singles a man out from the multitude of carnal and careless
men, and inspires him with an unchangeable resolution to deuote himself to
God: it is an evident declaration of Gods predestination to glory; God
separates a man from the world, when he makes him a weary of wicked and
unprofitable society; and takes away from him the taste in earthly things, so
as the love of the world is not in him, and sanctifies him to his own use.

2. By the entertainment God gives them in his house, and especially by the
efficacy of the word, and principally by the life of the promises: for God
makes his word a word of power, and the holy Ghost falls upon their hearts,
and they at sometimes feel a marvelous assurance in hearing, and so much
comfort, that they can receive the word, though it be with much affliction, and
rejoice greatly in it; and the word transformes them also to a constant desire
of practice, and imitation of the godliness of the Saints, 1. These. 1.4.5.6.
Knowing, beloved brethren, that ye are Elect of God:

For our Gospel was not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the
holy Ghost, and in much assurance:

And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, and received the word in much
affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost.

Psalm. 65.4. Blessed is he whom thou chusest, and causest to come to thee, he
shall dwell in thy courts, and we shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thine
house even thy holy temple.

Romans 9.8.11. That is, they which are the children of the flesh, are not the
children of God: but the children of promise are counted for the seed.

3. By the sanctification of their afflictions, even by the many experiences of
Gods love in afflictions, as when God comforts their hearts in the midst of
distress, when they come to him making their moan; and when he turns the
cross to a blessing to them, making them more humble by it, exercising their
gifts, purging out their sin, etc. and at the length giving gracious
deliverances, causing all to work together for the best, so as they themselves
being Judges, they can say it was good for me, that I was afflicted, Romans
8.28.29. Also we know, that all things work together for the best to them that
love God, even to them that are called of his purpose, etc.

Psalm. 119. in many places.

Now as God manifests his own choie by these and such like signs; so the
godly make sure their own election by diverse marks of it, as generally by the
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, 2. These. 2.13. But we
ought to give thanks always to God for you brethren, beloved of the Lord,
because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit, and the faith of truth, so in particular.

1. By the virtues of Christ, which more or less in some measure shine in
them, such as are humility, piety, knowledge, temperance, and contempt of the
world patience in adversity, and other excellent saving graces in them, 2.
Pet. 1.5.6.7.10. 1. Pet. 2.9. By their fruits you may know them, Ioh. 15.16.

2. Secondly, by the affections of godliness, that are in them above al
others, Ephesians. 1.5. 1. Ioh. 3.14. They approve themselves to be elect by love;
that is, by their great affections to God, to the word of God, and his
ordinances, and by their brotherly kindness to the godly, and this love is the
more evident mark, when it lasts even in affliction, when no distresses makes
us abate of our affection to God, or good things, or good men, Romans 8.28.

3. By their Priesthood: Gods elect are a kingdom of Priests, they offer God
daily sacrifice, they have the spirit of prayer, and they daily mortify (the
beast) their sins upon the Altar of Christ crucified. So then by their
praying and their mortification, Gods elect may be evidently known, 1. Pet.
2.9.10.

4. Fourthly, they are usually known by the opposition of the world: If they
were of the world, the world would spare, and love his own: but because they
are chosen out of the world, therefore the world hates them, and pursues them
with reproaches, and indignations of all sorts, Ioh. 15.18.19. If the world hate
you, you know that it hated me before you.

If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you.

5. Lastly, this doctrine of Election should fill the hearts of all the godly
with unspeakable rejoicing: Everlasting joy should be upon their heads, and
sorrow and mourning should fly away: and the rather, if they consider the
marvelous privileges of their Election, and the wonderful happiness, unto
which they are chosen of God. For if by the former signs thou know thy self
to be one of Gods Elect.

1. First, thou art sure of thy salvation, and the glory of heaven when thou
die, 2. Thessal. 2.13.14. Whereunto he called you by the Gospel to obtain
the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. The love of God to thee is unchangeable, God will never cast off the people
whom he has chosen, Romans 11.2. God has not cast away his people whom he knew
before.

3. Thou art sure of gracious entertainment in Gods house, and sweet communion
with God whilst thou live, Psalm. 65.4. Blessed is he whom thou chusest, and
causest to come to thee: he shall dwell in thy courts, and we shall be
satisfied with the pleasures of thine house, even of thine holy Temple.

Esa. 65.13.14. Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold my servants shall
eat, and ye shall be hungry: behold my servants shall drink, and ye shall be
thirsty: behold my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed.

Behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of
heart, and shall howl for vexation of mind.

4. Thou shall be sure of protection against all adversaries, that dare, or can
rise up against thee, Esa. 41.10.11.12.13. Fear thou not, for I am with thee:
be not afraid, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, and help thee, and
will sustain thee with the right hand of my justice.

Behold, all they that provoke thee shall be ashamed and confounded, they
shall be as nothing; and they that strive with thee shall perish.

5. Fifthly, all thy afflictions shall be sweetened unto thee, and work together
for the best, Romans 8.28. Also we know that all things work together for the
best, unto them that love God, even to them that are called of his purpose.

6. In all thy suites to God, thou art sure of audience, and compassionate
respect, howsoever thou be neglected in the world, Ioh. 15.16. Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye go and bring
forth fruit, and that your fruit remain, that whatsoever ye shall ask of the
Father in my name, he may give it you.

7. Christ will graciously communicate to thee the secrets of God, and the
mysteries of the kingdom, using thee therein as a most dear and careful
friend, Ioh. 15.16, as before.

8. Lastly all complaints brought unto God against thee, are sure to be
non-suted and cast out, so as nothing can be laid to thy charge, nothing can
condemn thee, in as much as Christ has paid all thy debts, and sits at the
right hand of God to make request for thee, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of Gods chosen: It is God that justifies, etc.

CHAP. XII. Of Christ.
Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other: for among men there is
given none other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved.


HItherto of Election. The second fundamental means of grace is Christ,
concerning whom the principles respect either 1. His Person. 2. His office.


The principles concerning his person, look either 1. Upon his divine nature.
2. or upon his humane.


The principle that concerns his divine nature is this: That Jesus Christ is
very God; and that he is God, may be proved,

1. First, by testimony of Scripture, Esa. 9.6. For unto us a child is borne,
and unto us a son is given, and he shall call his name wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God.

Ioh. 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that
word was God.

Romans 9.5. Of whom are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ
came, who is God over all, blessed for ever. Amen.

1. Tim. 3.16. And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness,
which is, God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit etc.

1. Ioh. 5.20. But we know, that the Son of God is come, and has given us a
mind to know him, which is true: and we are in him that is true, that is, in
his son Jesus Christ, this same is very God, and eternal life.

2. By the divine proprieties given unto him, as Eternity, Ioh. 1.1. Ioh. 17.5.
Omnipotency, Ioh. 3.31. Phil. 4.13. Savior, King of Kings, and the like.

3. By divine works done by him, as Creation, Coloss. 1.16. Forgiveness of
sins, Matthew. 9.6. Working of miracles, Ioh. 10.25.

4. By the divine honor due unto him, as Adoration, Psalm. 72.11. Heb. 1.8.
and believing in him.

5. By the conquest the Gospel has made in the world, 1. Tim. 3.16. and that
not by any carnal power, Zach. 4.6.

6. By the patient suffering of his Saints, Revel. 12.11. But they overcame him
by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved
not their lives unto the death, etc.

But why was it needful he should be God? Question.


For two causes chiefly. Answer.


1. The one was the greatness of our evil, which no creature could take off us:
viz. 1. the grieuousnesse of our sins. 2. The immense and intolerable weight
of Gods anger. 3. The Empire of death. 4. The tyranny of the devil. 2. The
other was the greatness of our good, which none but God could restore; viz. 1.
An obedience to justify many.

2. The image of God, 1. Cor. 1.30. Colos. 3.10.

If our Savior be the son of God, yea God himself, that holds it no robbery
to be equal with God.

Then it may first serve for humiliation, and so

1. To the world: In which this glorious light has risen, and yet their
darkness comprehended it not, Ioh. 1.5.10.

To the very godly, because they are not so affected, as may become this
marvelous glory of the Son of God; it should much abase us, that we have not
thoughts and affections to take that notice we should of this Son of
righteousness, so gloriously in the Gospel shining amongst us; we do not
receive him, and conceive of him as this doctrine teaches us; how often has
he come amongst his own, and his own received him not? Ioh. 1.11.

For instruction, and so it should

1. Illumination, to see the greatness of the mystery of godliness, that tells
us of God manifested in the flesh, 1. Tim. 3.16. Our eyes should in this point
receive sight and clearing. This doctrine should shine in our hearts, as the
Sun in the firmament; we should never rest informing our selves herein, and
praying for discerning, till after much neglect and unbelief past, we could
say with Thomas, My Lord and my God, Matthew. 16.16. Ioh. 20.28. This is the
rock, upon which the Church is built.

2. The estimation of his sufferings for us; this blood of the new Testament,
was the blood of God, Act. 20.28.

3. The celebratio^ of his praises is God over all: then let him be blessed for
evermore, Romans 9.5. Of whom are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh
Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen.

4. The adoration of his person, when God brings forth his only begotten
Son, let all the Angels of heaven worship him, Heb. 1.4.

5. Faith: this should make us believe in him, and rely upon the sufficiency
of the redemption in him; yea we should never rest, till we know him, and that
we are in him: For this is eternal life, Ioh. 1.7. The same came for a
witness to bear witness of the light, that all men through him might
believe, 1. Ioh. 5.20. But we know that the Son of God is come, and has
given us a mind to know him, which is true, and we are in him that is true,
that is, in the Son Jesus Christ, the same is very God, and eternal life.

The consideration of the divinity Christ should wonderfully comfort us, and so
it is used in diverse Scriptures. For if he be God, the^ he is full of grace to
supply our wants, Ioh. 1.14.16. He is infinite in righteousness to justify us,
Ierem. 23.6. The government being on his sholders: he will ever be known to
be wonderful: as a Counselor to direct us, as a mighty God to defend us; as
an everlasting father to love us, and pity us, and spare us, and bear with our
infirmities; as a Prince of peace, to preserve us in our reconciliation with
God, and to fill us with peace that passes all understanding: and that we may
not doubt of perseverance, the Prophet assures us, that of the increase of his
government and peace, there shall be no end: for he will order us, and
establish us henceforth, and for ever.

CHAP. XIII. Of Christ's humanity.
HItherto of the divine nature of Christ: There are four principles concerning
the humane nature of Christ: the one concerns the matter, the other three
concern the manner.

1. The first, that the Son of God was incarnate, did assume the true nature
of man, and was a very man amongst us, Ioh. 1.1. In the beginning was the word,
and the word was with God, and that word was God. 14. And the word was made
flesh and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof as the glory of the only
begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

Hebr. 2.14. For as much then as the children were partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part with them. 16. For he in no sort
took the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham.

2. That he was not conceived as other men, but by the holy Ghost, Luke 1.35.
And the Angel answered and said unto her, the holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the most high shall ouershadow thee: therefore also that holy
thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

Mat. 1.20. Fear not to take Mary for thy wife; for that which is conceived in
her is of the holy Ghost.

3. That he was borne of a Virgin, Esa. 7.14. Therefore the Lord himself will
give you a sign: behold the Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and she
shall call his name Emmanuel..

Matthew. 1.18. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was thus: when as his mother Mary
was betrothed to Joseph; before they came together she was found with child of
the holy Ghost.

Genes. 3.15. I will also put enmity between thee and the woman, and between
thy seed and her seed, he shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his
heel.

4. That his humane nature did subsist in the divine nature, and so both made
but one person, Colos. 2.9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily.

Luke 1.35. And the Angel answered and said unto her: The holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershadow thee: therefore also
that holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of
God, etc.

The uses may be raised severally from each of the principles, and so: First,
the doctrine of the incarnation of Christ may serve,

1. For information, and that both of the love of God, and of his wisdom,
which both shine in this work: His love, in that he sent us a Savior to take
our nature: and his wisdom, in that he sent us his Son.

But what need was there that Christ should be incarnate, Question.
and take man's nature rather then any other?

First, Answer.
that satisfaction might be made to God in the same nature that had offended.

2. Because without effusion of blood, there could be no remission, Heb. 9.22.

3. Because a Mediator should be meet to deal between both parties: therefore
he is God for the business with his Father, and man for the business with men.

4. That so he might have the right of the kinsman to redeem us, and so of
adoption, Ier. 32.8. Ruth 3.13.

5. To assure our resurrection.

Heb. 2.14. That he might destroy through death him, that had the power of
death, which is the devil, etc.

Question.
But why was the second person in Trinity incarnate?

Answer.
It was most conveniently, and comely it should be so?

1. By the Son was man made at the beginning, and therefore fitly by him was he
redeemed.

2. He most fitly repaires the image of God in us, who was himself the image
of his father.

3. He that was the Son of God most conveniently makes us the Sons of God.

Secondly, for instruction, and

1. First, to acknowledge both natures in Christ, and know, it is of necessity
to salvation to confess his glory in both.

2. It should work upon us the impressions of humility. This is a matchless
example of humility, that he, that was equal to the father, should make
himself so low, as to take upon him the form of a servant, etc. as it is
urged, Phil. 2.6.7.

It were intolerable shame for us to mind our own things, or to stand upon our
glory, and greatness. Oh, how should this make us easily deny our selves, if
we could thoroughly think upon it?

3. Thirdly, it should stir us up wonderfully to a desire to come unto
Christ, and to be made one with him, and to be like him. He drew near to us,
when he took our nature; and shall not we draw near to him in imitation of
his nature, and show forth his virtues? He descended from heaven to us, and
shall not we ascend to heaven to him?

4. This may serve for great humiliation to al such, as receive not the Son
of God: has he taken our nature, and dwelt amongst us, and saw we his glory,
as the glory of the only begotten Son of God: and are we yet ignorant of
him? do we yet neglect to come unto him?

5. Lastly, the incarnation of Christ, is the very fountain of all our
comfort. It is the sunneshine of religion, we should rejoice in it above all
things. There should be no godly man, but his heart should leap within him
upon the thoughts of this glorious grace of God. The Angels of heaven sang in
the air, when they brought this tidings; and can we sit desolate in heart, to
whom a Savior is borne, and for whom he was incarnate? Luke 2.10.

Christ's incarnation is the most clear looking glass to show forth the
wisdom, mercy, truth, and justice of God. This was a work far above the
creation of man; this doctrine is comfortable in the very respect of the honor
done to the nature of man, in that God has joined man so nearly to himself,
and it imports a wonderful love, that Christ does now unchangeably bear to
man, being himself of the same nature: but especially it should swallow up all
earthly discontentments to consider, that God has given him to us, and Christ
is all this for our sakes, Esaias 9.6. For unto us a child is borne, and unto us
a son is given: etc. How should Christ be unto us only in stead of all
things? The very peace we have by him should inflame us, peace above us with
God and the Angels: peace within us with our own consciences; peace about us
with all creatures, Luke 2.14. and specially it should establish us in the
assurance of the accomplishment of all that yet remains of our full
redemption, we need not doubt of his intercession: our suites must all needs
speed well, there sits one at the right hand of God, that is our own flesh and
blood, and we need not fear the last judgment. It cannot but be well with us,
if our own brother be our judge: we should not be afraid in the mean time in
the evil day. He will succor us, he has had experience of the frailty of
our nature, and therefore has a feeling of our infirmities, and will help us
in all time of our need, Heb. 2.18. For in that he suffered, and was tempted, he
is able to succor them that are tempted.

Heb. 4.15. For we have not an high Priest, which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities: but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet
without sin.

Yea, the very glory of Christ in heaven is by this means ours. Christ is my
portion, my flesh, and my blood, where my portion reigns, there believe I,
that I reign; where my flesh is glorified, there I think my self in glory;
where my blood rules, there think I my self exalted.

And all this is the more comfortable, if we consider, that God had not respect
of persons in this, which may appear by the manifestation of the incarnation.
It was reueiled to shepherds, and to the Wise men; the one poor, the other
rich; the one learned, the other unlearned; the one Gentiles, the other Jews;
the one near, the other far off. This light appeared to Anna a woman, as
well as to Simeon that just man. And besides note the wonderful wisdom of
God in the manner of revealing Christ: viz. to every one according to his own
estate. For to Simeon and Anna, as more spiritual persons, the nativity was
revealed by the instinct of the Spirit. To the Shepherds as ruder men, by the
voice and speech of Angels. To the Priests and Scribes that searched Scripture,
by an Oracle of the Scripture. To Herod a stranger, by the testimony of the
Wise men that were strangers. To the Wise men, that were students of Astrology,
by the rising of a new star.

CHAP. XIV. Of the conception of Christ.
THus much of the uses of the incarnation of Christ: the uses of his conception
follow.

The doctrine of his conception by the holy Ghost may serve:

First, for information, and that in diverse things:

1. First, concerning the wonder of his birth, here is a new birth given to
the world, never such a one before: he that is the only Son in heaven, is by
this means the only man on earth to be admired. When God was to be made
visible on earth, and to come to dwell amongst men, a heavenly temple is
provided for him; the holy Ghost builds him a temple in the womb of a Virgin.

2. Concerning the freedom of Christ from Original sin, we might ask,
Quest.
How could Christ be free from sin, seeing he came of Adam, whose nature was
infected in all his posterity.

Now this is answered in this principle: Answ.
for Christ came of Adam, but not by Adam, but by the holy Ghost: The holy
Ghost miraculously formed Christ's body of the substance of the Virgin, stopping
the course of original sin, and sanctifying it: sin comes into the world
by propagation only.

3. Concerning the sufficiency of the sacrifice of Christ: It must needs be
an admirable sacrifice, that is thus fitted from the womb.

4. Concerning the superstition of the Papists about the Virgin Marie: for they
attribute the purity of Christ's nature to the holiness of the Virgin, that
she was without sin; whereas it is evident, it is to be attributed to the
holy Ghost.

5. Concerning the possibility for Christ to be borne of a virgin: It is as
easy for God to frame unto Christ a body in the womb of a Virgin, as to make
man's body at the first of the myer of the earth.

Instruction, and so this conception by the holy Ghost should teach us:

1. First, to be wise to sobriety in this mystery of the incarnation of
Christ: a purer sense and a cleaner hearing is called-for here: the
ouershadowing of the virgin shows, that we must bring faith to believe the
mystery without further inquiring.

2. To desire fervently the sanctifying of our natures, that we as his members
might be conformed unto him as our head, and so we are, if Christ be conceived
in our hearts by the holy Ghost, as he was conceived in the womb of the
Virgin, Gal. 4.7

For consolation, and so his 1. First, the holiness of his conception will
justify us from the unholiness of our conception, and quit us from the guilt
and filth of original sin. 2. Secondly, it may comfort us in the expectation
of our perfect holiness. He that was so careful to have his natural body
fitted so exquisitely, will not neglect his mystical body the Church, but will
love it, and wash it, till it be without spot and wrinkle, and the rather
because it is bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.25.26.


And thus of the use of the conception.

CHAP. XV. Of Christ as borne of a virgin.
THirdly, in that our Savior was borne of a Virgin it may serve

Information, and so

1. Concerning the marvelous wisdom of God in the manner of our salvation: By a
woman came sin and death into the world: and lo here the seed of the woman
breaks the Serpents head. The devil got to be the god of the world by
beguiling a woman. Now see how the Lord has devised to destroy his dominion by
one made of a woman: they were both Virgins, affianced to husbands, but not yet
known of man.

But might some one say, Object.
This is beyond belief, that a Virgin should bring forth, and yet remain a
virgin, having never known man, this seems to be incredible.

If it had been a thing, Solution.
which had no resemblance in nature: yet it had been nothing to believe the
power of the God of nature: but yet there is instance of things borne in nature
without generation. The Bees have young, and yet know not marriage. The
Eastern bird the Phoenix is borne, and newborn successively, and yet without
parents; and shall we hold it beyond belief for God to do this great work upon
him, yt was to restore the world. Christ is like ye flower, which has the
heaven for father, and the earth for mother.

Object.
But how can it become the greatness of the Son of God, to abase himself to
lie in the womb of the Virgin?

Solution.
The Sun in the firmament receives not infection from any place, nor can any
thing cast into the fire steine it; much less can the Son of God be polluted
by being borne of a Virgin.

2. Secondly, this may furnish us with an argument against Transubstantiation.
The Scripture teaches us to believe, that Christ was made of a woman, Gal.
4.4. but not a word is there, that he should be made of a piece of bread.

Secondly, has God created Jesus, who is assigned us thus wonderfully of God
to be our way, our light, and our life? This very doctrine was used long since
to rebuke men's extreme distractions, and loss of time, and labor in the way
to the Kingdom of heaven, Ier. 31.21.

Yea, this doctrine ought to be unto us Gods sign, that he will deliver us
certainly, and fulfill al his promises; and it extremely threatens the
unbelief of man, as the Prophet Isaiah urges it in the days of Ahaz, Isaiah
7.14.

Thirdly, this should kindle in us a vehement desire to have God reveal his
son in us, and to have Christ borne in our hearts: we think the Virgin
blessed above women, that Christ was conceived in her womb; why certainly it
is a great wonder, and we were blessed amongst men and women, if the Lord
Jesus be conceived in our hearts, and we keep our selves chaste virgins to him.

There has been four ways of making man: 1. The one was to make man without
either man or woman; so was Adam made. 2. The second was to make man without a
woman, so was Eve made. 3. The third was to make man by both man and woman, and
so we their posterity are made. 4. The fourth way, was to make man without man
by the woman only, and so was Christman made.


Now if we admire the first, second, and fourth of these; why should we not
also admire the creating of a man, without womb, even in the heart of a man:
Is it not a great wonder, that the Son of God should be formed in our breast;
and yet such is the work of God in the new birth of a Christian: Christ is
formed in them, Galath. 4.9. My little children, of whom I travel in birth
again, until Christ be formed in you.

CHAP. XVI. Of the personal union.
ANd thus of the birth of Christ of a Virgin. The personal union may serve
both for information, and for consolation.

Christ, especially of the exaltation of the humane nature. Here is an union
singularly wonderful, and wonderfully singular. Nay, what say I, a union? Why?
there be so many unions in Christ, that worthily all may be said to be
gathered together in one in him. There is a natural, personal, mystical, and
sacramental union in Christ.

The natural union is with the Father and the holy Ghost, in one nature or
essence.

The personal union is this of the divine nature with the humane in one person.

The mystical union is of Christ with the Church, in one body.

The sacramental union is of the body and blood of Christ with bread and wine
in one ordinance. This union is not a union of inhabitation, as God dwells in
the Saints: nor of consent only, as the faithful are one in the Father and the
Son: Nor of commixtion, as water and wine are one: nor of combination, as two
boords fastened together are one: nor of composition, when of two things is
made some third thing in one. But it is (I say) a personal union, the humane
nature of Christ being assumed into union with the person of the Son of God.

From whence arises:

Christ, differing from other men. For soul and body make a person in other
men, but not so in Christ. For his soul and body are borne up and subsist in
his divine nature. As the luie or Misseltoe grows without a root of it own
upon the body of another tree; so is it with the humane nature of Christ: As
soul and body in us make one man: so God and man make one Christ in him.

1. Cor. 2.8. Act. 20.28.

The collation of gifts upon Christ does excel all creatures for wisdom,
goodness, holiness, power, majesty, and glory, in as much as the Godhead
dwelles in him bodily, Col. 2.9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily; and so the second Adam does far excel the first.

It was needful Christ should be God and man in one nature.

1. That so he might reconcile or make God and man one again. 2. That so he
might be a meet Mediator, as being a kin to both parties. 3. That he might
pacify God by his death, which he could neither feel as God, nor overcome as
man. 4. That the works of redemption done in the flesh, might be sufficient
price for sin, by which the infinite God was wronged.
Here is also consolation in this doctrine: for hence arises manifest reason
of hope of pardon, and peace with God; and besides, out of his fullness we may
now all receive grace, and a supply for all our wants. Here we have all the
treasures of wisdom and grace in Christ-man; and he is now able to be a
fountain of more good to us, then ever the first Adam was of evil.

CHAP. XVII. Of Christ as Mediator.
HItherto of the principles concerning the person of Christ: his office
follows.

The principles concerning his office, consider it either in the whole, or in
the parts of it.

The whole office of Christ is to be a mediator, and so the principles that
concern the mediatorship are five:

First, that there is but one Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 2.5. For there is one God,
and one mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus.

Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other: for amongst men there is
given none other name under heaven whereby we must be saved.

Luke 2.11. That is, that unto you is borne this day in the City of David a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Because there is none more merciful, Heb.
2.17. Nor more able, Heb. 7.25.

Christ, 2. Tim. 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling,
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which
was given to us through Christ Jesus before the world was.

Tit. 3.4.5. But when the bountifulness and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared.

Not by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost.

Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves; it is the gift of God.

That this mediation was from Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same also
is for ever.

1. Pet. 1.20. Which was ordained before the foundation of the world, but was
declared in the last times for your sakes.

Revel. 13.8. Therefore all that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him, whose
names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb, which was slain from
the beginning of the world.

For in the knowledge, destination, and acceptance of God, the two natures
were accounted as united, and with him the things done and to be done, present
and to come, are all one.

For explication of this principle, if we ask when the mediator was given, it
must be answered three ways: 1. If we respect Gods decree, he was given before
all eternity, Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him before the foundation of
the world. 2. If we respect the virtue and efficacy of his mediation, he was
given when need was from the beginning of the world, Revel. 13.8. Which was
slain from the beginning of the world. 3. If we respect his manifestation in
the flesh, he was given in the fullness of time: 1600. years ago, Galath.
4.4. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, and made under the law.


1. Tim. 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all men, to be a testimony in due
time.

4. That without the mediation of Christ no flesh can be saved, Act. 4.12.
Neither is there salvation in any other: for among men there is given none
other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved.

Psalm. 143.2. And enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight
shall none that lives be justified.

Iam. 3.2. For in many things we sin all.

5. That by the mediator a new agreement or contract was made with God, Ierem.
31.33. But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel: after those days says the Lord, I will put my law in the inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be
my people.

Heb. 8.13. In that he says a new Testament, he has abrogated the old; now
that which is disanulled, and waxed old, is ready to vanish away.

Romans 3.23.24. For there is no difference, for all have sinned, and are
deprived of the glory of God, and are justified freely by his grace through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

Galath. 3.21.22. Is the Law then against the promise of God? God forbid: for
if there had been a law given, which could have given life, surely righteousness
should have been by the law.

But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe.

For the explication of this principle we must understand:

1. First, that the Scriptures make mention of three covenants, that God has
made.

The one general, and terrene with all creatures about their preservation from
the universal deluge: of this, Genes. 9. etc. but of this covenant we have
nothing to do here.

The second was the covenant, called the covenant of works, this was made with
all mankind in Paradise, and stands still in force, since the fall, as men are
in the estate of nature, the condition whereof on man's part is in the moral
law.

The third was the agreement made with man by means of the mediator, this was
called from the fall to the days of Abraham, the promise, as being contrived
in those words of promise, Genesis 3.15. I will also put enmity between thee and
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: He shall break thine head, and
thou shall bruise his heel, etc.

From Abraham to Moses, it was called the covenant, Genes. 17. etc. From Moses
to Christ, and so still the Testament; and as it stands in difference from the
covenant of works, it may be called for all this time, the covenant of grace.

mediator, the mediator did undertake for two things:

1. To pay all our debts, and satisfy Gods Justice, by a price of infinite
value, Esa. 53.5.6. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken
for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed.

All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way,
and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.

Job 33.24. Then will he have mercy upon him, and will say deliver him, that he
go not down into the pit: For I have received a reconciliation.

1. Tim. 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all men to be a testimony in due
time.

2. To purchase and merit for us Gods favor and kingdom by a most absolute
and perfect obedience, Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his grace,
wherewith he has made us accepted in his beloved.

Thirdly we must understand wherein these new covenants agree, and wherein
they disagree.

These covenants agree in these two things: First, that they both were tendered
to us by God. Secondly, that they both require a full and perfect
righteousness, as the condition of eternal life.

They differ:

1. In the manner of knowing of them. For the law or covenant of works is
known in some measure by nature, Romans 2.15. Which show the effect of the law
written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their
thoughts accusing one another, or excusing: But the Gospel or covenant of
grace is not known at all by nature: It is a mystery, Colos. 1. 26. Which is
the mystery hid, since the world began, and from all ages, but now is made
manifest to his Saints.

1. Cor. 2.7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hid
wisdom which God had determined before the world, unto our glory.

2. Tim. 1.10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ.

2. In the ministers of both: Moses was the minister of the law, but Christ of
the Gospel, Ioh. 1. 17. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ.

3. In the means of attaining to the end common to both: the law is a law of
works, and requires doing, or else will not give wages: but the Gospel is a
law of faith, requiring believing in him, that justifies the wicked, Romans
3.21. But now is the righteousness of God made manifest without the law,
having witness of the Law, and of the Prophets.

Romans 4.5. But to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

Romans 10.5. For Moses thus describes the righteousness which is of the law:
that the man which does these things shall live thereby, etc.

Again, the law requires perfect righteousness in our own persons, but the
Gospel offers the righteousness of another to be received by faith, Romans
8.3.4. For that that was impossible to the law, in as much as it was weak,
because of the flesh, God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh; that the righteousness of
the law might be fulfilled in us, etc.

Romans 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one shall many also be made righteous: Romans 10.4. For Christ is
the end of the Law for righteousness, unto every one that believes.

The Law requires our debts every farthing, the Gospel publishes the
acquittance of the principal, by reason of the satisfaction of the surety.
The Law gives heaven, as wages for work done; the Gospel gives heaven gratis.

4. In effects or efficacy; the Law requiers good works, but gives no power to
do them, Deuter. 29.4. Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive,
and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day: but the Gospel gives the
Spirit of God, which works what he requires, Ier. 31.33. But this shall be
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: After those days,
says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

Ezech. 36.27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

2. Cor. 3.9. For if the ministry of condemnation was glorious, much more does
the ministration of righteousness exceeds in glory.

The Law shows the disease, and the Gospel cures it, Romans 7. 6. But now we
are delivered from the Law being dead unto it, wherein we were holden, that we
should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter.

24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? etc.

The knowledge of sin is by the Law, but that which heales us, is the tidings
of remission in Jesus Christ.

5. In the persons, to whom they belong: the Law is for the unrighteous, 1.
Tim. 1.9. Knowing this, that the Law is not given unto a righteous man, but
unto the lawless and disobedient, to the ungodly, and to the sinners, to the
unholy, and to the profane, etc.

But the Gospel belongs to the poor and penitent, Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should preach the
Gospel to the poor; he has sent me, that I should heal the broken heart,
that I should preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to
the blind, that I should set at liberty them, that are bruised, etc.

The uses may be.

Mediator, and the new covenant in him may be the more distinctly formed in
us, if we consider: 1. The privileges and benefits we reap by this new
covenant. 2. The properties of the covenant. 3. The persons, to whom it may
belong.


Mediator in this new covenant, we receive many admirable prerogatives and
blessings, as

1. The abrogation of the old covenant, Heb. 8.13. In that he says a new
Testament, he has abrogated the old: now that which is disanulled, and waxed
old, is ready to vanish away. So as now we are not under the Law, but under
Grace, Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not
under the Law, but under grace, etc.

2. Communion of Saints from all parts of the world: men of all Nations coming
in upon this new agreement, Isaiah 49.6.11. And he said, it is a small thing,
that thou should be my servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the desolations of Israel: I will also give thee for a light of the
Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the world.

Matthew. 8.11. But I say unto you, that many shall come from the East and West,
and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven,
etc.

3. Reconciliation with God, and the pardon of all sins, 2. Cor. 5.19. For God
was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their sins
unto them.

Ier. 31.33.34. But this shall be the covenant, that I will make with the
house of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will be their God, and
they shall be my people. And I will forgive their iniquity, and will remember
their sins no more. Heb. 9.15. And for this cause is he the Mediator of the new
Testament, that through death, which was for the redemption of the
transgressions, that were in the former Testament, etc.

The mediator paying all our debts.

4. A righteousness answerable to that of the Law wrought for us, and imputed
to us, Romans 8.4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us,
which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

5. The inhabitation of the Spirit of God taking possession of us unto Gods use
for ever, Isai. 59.21. And I will make this my covenant with them, says the
Lord; my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, says the
Lord, even from henceforth for ever.

6. The Law of God put into our hearts from the least to the greatest, Ier.
31.33. But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel:
After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, etc.

7. A covenant with all creatures, who must be at peace with us, and
serviceable to us, Hosea 2.18.21.22. And in that day will I make a covenant for
them with the wild beasts, and with the fowls of the heaven, and with that,
that creeps upon the earth: and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the
battle out of the earth, and I will make them to sleep safely. And in that
day I will hear, says the Lord, I will even hear the heavens, and they shall
hear the earth.

And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they
shall hear Israel.

8. Gods sanctuary in the midst of us, and his presence with us for ever,
Ezech. 37.26.27.28. Moreover, I will make a covenant with them of peace: it
shall be an everlasting covenant with them, and will set my sanctuary amongst
them for evermore.

My tabernacle also shall be with them, yea I will be their God, and they
shall be my people.

9. The promise of an eternal inheritance, Heb. 9.15. And for this cause is he
the Mediator of the new Testament, that through death, which was for the
redemption of the transgressions that were in the former Testament, they which
were called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance, etc.

The second part of the consolation

That it is free, and God He, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters;
and ye that have no silver, come buy, and eat: come, I say, buy wine, and
milk without silver, and without money.

Wherefore do you lay out silver, and not for bread? and your labor without
being satisfied? hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and
let your soul delight in fatness.

Behold, I gave him for a witness to the people, for a Prince and a Master
unto the people, etc.

For the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down; but my mercy
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace fall away,
says the Lord, that has compassion on thee.

And we may the rather be assured of this, if we consider: 1. The nature of
God: Mercy pleases him, and he is so desirous of reconciliation, that he
beseeches men to be reconciled, 2. Cor. 5.19.20. Hosea 2.19. 2. The
propitiation in Christ God has proclaimed it from heaven, that in him he is
well pleased, and fully pacified, Mat. 3.17. etc. And Christ is given for a
covenant of the people, Isai. 49.8. 3. That there is an act for it in the
counsel of God from everlasting, 1. Cor. 2.7. 4. That God has sworn to keep
this covenant, Heb. 6.18. and 7.19.20.21.22. Isai. 42.6.7. 5. That it is
confirmed by the death of the restator, Heb. 9.16. Matthew. 26.27. 6. Because he
ever lives to make request for us at the right hand of God, and is able
perfectly to save those that come unto him, Heb. 7.25. and 13.8. 7. Because the
Law cannot disanull it, Gal. 3.17. 8. That we have sacraments to confirm it,
and seal to it: and if we can be persuaded, that the Flood shall come no
more, when we see the Rainbow; how much more should the glorious sacraments of
the new Covenant, settle us in the assurance of the unchangeableness of Gods
good will toward us? 9. That the covenant is kept, not only in the word, which
cannot be blotted, but also we have the keeping of it in our own hearts, Romans
10.4.5. 10. That God is now long since known to the Church by the name of
Jehovah, which notes both his constancy and al sufficiency, Exodus 6.3.




What should I say, the whole world is invited, and worlds of people may be
reconciled to God, 2. Cor. 5.19.

And as this is comfortable at all times, so there is comfort to be gathered
out of it in special distresses, as 1. In the case of sin. 2. In the case of
affliction. 3. In the case of death.


For the first, in the case of sin after calling, it is a memorable place, 1.
John 2.1. My babes these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: and if any
man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

For the second: in the case of affliction, there are many Scriptures that have
recourse to this doctrine for comfort. If the godly be grieved and oppressed,
and come unto God, and humble themselves, the Lord will remember this covenant,
and hear them: as Exodus 2.2.4.5. and Exodus 6. 4.5.6. Leuit. 26.41.42. etc.

The godly know in all afflictions, whom they have trusted, and ought to
believe, that he will keep yt, which by covenant is committed to him, 2. Tim.
1. 12. Christ has commission from God by virtue of this covenant to say to the
prisoners, go forth, and to them that are in darkness, show your selves, Esa.
49.9.10. For a small moment God may forsake, but with great mercy will he
gather us: In a little wrath he may hide his face, but in everlasting kindness
will he have mercy on us: For this is as the waters of Noah, etc. The
mountains may depart; but his kindness, and the covenant of his peace shall
not depart, nor be removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on us, Esa. 54.
from the 7. to 11.

For the third, in the case of Job, how he comforted himself in his Redeemer,
in the midst of all his wonderful distresses, that seemed to threaten his
death (as it were) every moment, Job 19.25. For I know that my redeemer lives,
and he shall stand the last on the earth.

Thus of the uses for consolation: The instructions follow, and may be cast
into two sorts.

For this doctrine of the new covenant in the mediator may teach us; 1. both
what to avoid; 2. and what to do.

The consideration of these principles should teach us to shun two things:

1. The conceit of merit of our own works, and all boasting of any
worthiness in our selves. For this were to make the promise of none effect,
and the grace of this new covenant void: it were to stand to the old covenant,
Romans 4.14. For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and
the promise is made of none effect.

Romans 3.27. Where is then thy rejoicing? it is excluded: by what law? of
works: nay, but by the law of faith.

Romans 10.4. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness unto every one
that believes, etc.

2. The forgetfulness of God; whatsoever befall us, we should not forget God,
nor deal wickedly in his covenant, Psalm. 44.17. All this is come upon us, yet
do we not forget thee, neither deal we falsely concerning thy covenant.

The duties we should do, may be referred to two sorts: for either, 1. they are
such as fit us for this new covenant; 2. or such as we should do to walk
worthy of it.

If we would have any comfort by the mediator, and this new agreement with God.

1. We must turn from our And the Redeemer shall come unto Sion, and unto them
that turn from iniquities in Jacob, says the Lord.

We must be new creatures, al things in us must now be new, our old things
must be passed, and given over, 2. Cor. 5.17.18.19. etc.

Going and weeping we should go, and ask for the way, Ierem. 50.4.

Secondly, we must come to Christ being weary, and laden, and receive him,
and lay hold upon him by faith. This new agreement is chiefly published for the
obedience of faith, Romans 16.26. Romans 3.25.

That we may walk worthy of this covenant, we must look to diverse things.

Lord Jesus, and be ready to acknowledge his wonderful love to us, that
dedicated this Testament with his blood, Heb. 9.16. Esa. 59.16. etc.

My flesh fails, and my heart also: but God is the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever. What now should be our hope? our hope should even be in
God, Psalm. 39.7. And now Lord what wait I for, my hope is even in thee?

We should for all other things of this life confess our selves to be
strangers, and pilgrims, and embrace only these new promises of a better
happiness, Heb. 11.13.

We should never be ashamed Lord, nor of this doctrine of the mediator, for all
the Papists in the world; but partake willingly of all the afflictions may
befall us for this glad tidings in the Gospel, 2. Tim. 1.8. to the 13. But
rather glory in our singular riches, which is Christ in us, Colos. 1.27.

We should strive to live like 17.18.19.



Do not abhor us for thy names sake, cast not down the throne of thy glory.
Remember and break not thy covenant with us.



We should be easy to be reconciled, and keep our promises, though made with
disadvantage. Ministers also may learn from these principles, how to divide
the word. The Law is to be preached to the unrighteous, and this new covenant
of promise in Christ to the penitent and humbled soul, 1. Tim. 1.9. Luke 4.18.

The last use may be for terror unto all wicked men that live in the Church,
and securely sin on without regard of reconciliation, or seeking the benefits
of this new covenant. Who can express their misery, which receives aggrauation
from their neglect of this grace offered. these are children of the bondwoman,
Galath. 4.24. Upon these God will fearfully avenge the quarrel of his
covenant, Leuit. 26.25. Esa. 24.5. Ier. 34.18. Ezech. 20.36.37. Though they cry
unto God, he will not know them, Hos. 8.1.2.3. Their covenant with death and
hell shall be dissolved, Esa. 28.15.18. For they are all under the curse,
Galath. 3.10. Yea if the Lord proceed to take his staff, even beauty, and cut
it asunder, and dissolve even his public covenant he has made with the
nations; oh how then beyond all hope of cure would be their miserable
condition! or if he do not do that, yet if he remove their candlestick, by
taking the means from them, how will these people (whole congregations, that
forget God) be turned into hell, and all the multitudes of them!

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Prophetical office of Christ.
HItherto concerning the principles, that look upon the office of Christ in
the whole. The principles that concern the parts of his office follow.

First, there are three sorts or parts of the offices of Christ.

1. His Prophetical office. 2. His Priestly office. 3. His regal office.
This division may be proved two ways:

By the degrees of man's misery:

1. Ignorance of the evil into which he is plunged, and of the good he wants.
2. Ataxy or disorder in all parts of his heart and life. 3. Guiltiness arising
hereby: Now in the offices of Christ is a threefold remedy. 1. His prophecy
heales ignorance. 2. His kingdom takes away disorder. 3. His priesthood
abolisheth guiltiness.

Christ.

First, of the Prophetical office of Christ: where, 1. What it is. 2. The
parts of it. 3. The manner of executing of it.


1. The prophecy or prophetical offices of Christ is that work of his, by
which he instructs his Church concerning the will of God, especially his
secret counsel about redeeming mankind.

2. The parts are two: First, the external promulgation of doctrine. Secondly,
the internal illumination of the heart, or the making of doctrine effectual by
the spirit, renewing and inclining the mind and will of man.

The external promulgation of doctrine has three things in it: 1. The
preaching of the Gospel, or the doctrine concerning Gods grace or redemption
in Christ, Esa. 61.1. 2. The interpretation of the law according to the mind
of the lawgiver, Matthew. 5.17. etc. 3. Prediction of things to come.


1. Mediately by Patriarchs and Prophets in the old Testament: and by Apostles
and ministers of the Gospel in the new Testament. 2. Immediately, and that
either by his divine nature, or by both natures: By his divine nature he
instructed the Patriarchs and Prophets in the old testament, by visions,
Oracles, and dreams. By both natures, by word of mouth in the new Testament
he himself taught amongst men, 1. Pet. 3.19. and 1. Ioh. 1.5.


The principles concerning the Prophetical office of Christ are.

1. That in Christ are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Colos. 2.3.
In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

2. That it is Christ only, that reueales the truth out of the bosom of his
Father, Mat. 11.27. All things are given unto me of my Father, and no man
knows the Son but the Father: neither knows any man the Father but the
Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.

Ioh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which
is in the bosom of the Father, he has revealed him.

Ioh. 6.68. Then Simon Peter answered him, Master, to whom shall we go, thou
have the words of eternal life.

3. That Christ has himself taught doctrine amongst men, Hebr. 1.2. In these
last days he has spoken unto us by his Son.

Esa. 61.1. The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord
anointed me; he has sent me to preach good tidings unto the poor, to bind up
the brokenhearted, to preach liberty to the captives, and to them that are
bound, the opening of the prison, etc.

4. That he has revealed the whole counsel of God, Ioh. 15.15. For all things
that I have heard of my Father, have I made known unto you.

Ioh. 17.8. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they
have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, etc.

Deuteronomy. 18.18. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren like
unto thee; and will put my words into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them
all that I shall command him.

5. That the Ministry in the Church is by authority from Christ, Matthew.
23.34. Wherefore behold, I send unto you Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes.
Ephesians. 4.11. He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers* etc.

2. Cor. 5.20. Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech ye through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled
to God, etc.

6. That the whole efficacy of doctrine either recorded in scriptures, or
thence taught unto me^, depends upon Christ, 2. Pet. 1.20.21. So that ye first
know his, that no prophecy in the Scripture is of any private motion:

For the prophecy came not in old time by the wit of man: but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

1. Cor. 3.6. I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase.

7. That the Prophecy of Christ belongs generally unto all Nations, Isaiah
49.6. And he said, it is a small thing, that thou should be my servant to
raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the desolations of Israel. I will
also give thee for a light of the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation
unto the end of the world; though especially Christ was sent unto the lost
sheep of Israel, Mat. 15.24. But he answered, and said, I am not sent but unto
the lost sheep of Israel.

Zach. 9.10. He shall speak peace unto the heathen, and his dominion shall be
from sea unto sea, and from the river unto the end of the Land.

These principles may serve:

For information, and that in

1. First, we may hereby understand the reason, why Christ is called the
messenger, the Angel of the Covenant, the Word, Wisdom; the Minister of
Circumcision; Pastor, Doctor, Archbishop; the Apostle of our profession, etc.
namely, because of his Prophetship, and Ministry in revealing Gods will to the
Church.

2. We may here take notice of the dignity of the Ministry; we al serve under
Christ, and have our commissions signed, and sealed by him. Christ himself was
a Minister of Circumcision, Romans 15.8. And anointed to preach the Gospel,
Isai. 61.1.

And he works mighty things by the service of men, and that the calling might
be the more honorable, he would not write Scripture himself, nor continue
his preaching, but left both to his servants (so the head did dictate and the
members did write it). Wherefore let men esteem us, as the dispensers of the
secrets of Christ, 1. Cor. 4.1.2. And be persuaded by us, 2. Cor. 5.20.

3. Thirdly, we must here know, that we must depend upon Christ only for
doctrine needful to salvation. There is but one Law giver: away with traditions
and revelations of men's own hearts; if an Angel from heaven would teach us
otherwise, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. Iam. 4.12. Will any man teach God?
Job 21.22.

4. We may here see the horrible estate of such, as will be still ignorant and
live in their sins, having the Scriptures, and preaching in the name, and by
the authority of Christ. John 1.10. Ioh. 3.19. Christ in these cries, but men
regard not, Prou. 1.20. etc.

5. We must take heed that we mistake not, and that in two things.

1. First, about the difference of Christ, and all others in teaching. 2. About
the continuance of this prophetical office: Christ teaching in his own person
did excel all other, so as we might truly say, who teaches like him? Job.
36.22. 1. For first he taught with more authority, Matthew. 7.29. For he taught
them, as one having authority, and not as the Scribes. 2. He teaches by his
spirit not by sound of words only, or by ink and paper. 3. He graueth his
words not in stone, but in the fleshly tables of men's hearts, 2. Cor. 3.3. etc.
And for the continuance of prophecy, we must know, that it lasts but for this
life: for in the other world prophecy shall cease, 1. Cor. 13.8. Love does
never fall away, though that prophesyings be abolished, or the tongues cease,
or knowledge vanishes away.

instruction, and so these principles may teach,

First, all in General, and so diverse duties: 1. First, with all carefulnes
therefore to hear the voice of Christ, Mat. 17.5. Behold, there came a voice
out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased:
hear him. 2. In all wants to run unto Christ, and pray that he would teach us,
Psalm. 25.5. Lead me forth in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of
my salvation: In thee do I trust all the day, etc.

Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, let thy good
Spirit lead me into the land of righteousness.

3. But then, if we would ever profit by Christ's teaching, we must be poor in
spirit, broken in heart, and mourn for our sins, Isaiah 60.1. etc. Malach. 3.
from the 1. to the 7. And make conscience to leave all sin, and be renewed
throughout, Ephesians. 4.17. to 23. 4. To love the house of God, where the Son of God
exercises his prophesying, Psalm. 84.4.10. Blessed are they that dwell in
thine house, they will ever praise thee:

For a day in thy courts is better, then a thousand other where; I had rather
be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the Tabernacles of
wickedness, Mat. 12.42. We should long for it, and call upon one another, Isaiah
2.3.

5. To cleave to the counsels, reproves, doctrines, and exhortations of Christ
in the execution of his office, Ioh. 6.68. And to receive the truth with all full
assurance, Heb. 3.6. 2. Pet. 1.19. 6. Not to be too busy one against another
in doubtful, or indifferent things, Iam. 4.11.12. There is one Lawgiver,
which is able to save and destroy; who art thou that iudgest another man?




1. Not to affect the praise of men for the greatness of their gifts, or glory
of their work. They must not be called Rabbi, seeing one is their Doctor, even
Christ, and they have nothing, but what they have received from him, Matthew.
23.8. But rather learn of John Baptist, John 3.30.31. who said, He must
increase, but I must decrease.

2. When they discharge their duties; not to be afraid of men, or to be
overmuch careful in their trouble, what to speak or do. They should settle
this in their hearts: for Christ will give them a mouth and wisdom, which all
their adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, or resist; one hair of their
head shall not perish, and therefore in patience they should possess their
souls, Luke 21.14. to the 20.

3. To be diligent in the execution of their office, seeing they must make up
their accounts to Christ, whose Ambassadors they are, and they should speak as
the words of Christ, and not their own words, Romans 12.6.7.8.

Thirdly, here is singular consolation to all the godly from the prophetical
office of Christ, and that if we consider three things: 1. What Christ will
teach us. 2. How he will teach us. 3. Whom he will teach.


For the first, it may be an exceeding comfort that God has given us his
Son to be our Prophet: for thereby we may be assured, that he will be our
counselor in all estates, Isaiah 9.6. He will teach us to profit, Isaiah
33.22. And when we are dejected and broken in heart, and mourn for our
corruptions, he does acknowledge it to be a part of his office to apply the
Gospel to us, and to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and to pour
upon us the oil of gladness for the Spirit of heaviness.

For the second: Christ's teaching

1. Freely: he will give us our teaching, he stands not upon hire, John 17.8.
For I have given unto them the words, which thou gave me, etc.

2. Powerfully and effectually, so as if our hearts were dead within us, yet he
will revive them; the dead shall hear his voice, John 5.25.

3. Familiarly, and with great delight, as a mother would instruct her child
at home in a chamber, Canticles 8.2.

4. Fully: keeping from us nothing, that may be needful for us, he will
teach us all things, John 15.15. Hence forth call I you not servants: for the
servant knows not, what his Master does, but I have called you friends: for
all things that I have heard of my Father, have I made known unto you? Col.
2.3. In who^ are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, etc.

5. Gloriously, and with a marvelous shining light of knowledge; that may
ravish our hearts, and much affect us, 2. Cor. 4.6. For God, that commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, is he which has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. 2. Cor. 3.18. But we all behold as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord
with open face, and are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by
the spirit of the Lord.

6. Confidently: He will so teach us the truth, as he will be ready to
justify it, as a never failing faithful, and true witness, Revel. 3.14. And
unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans write, These things says Amen
the faithful, and true witness, the beginning of the creatures of God.

Isaiah 55.4. Behold, I gave him for a Witness to the people, for a Prince,
and a Master unto the people, etc.

7. Inwardly, as well as outwardly: to this end he has given us the
anointing, even his spirit in our hearts to teach us all things, 1. John 2.27.
But the anointing which ye received of him dwells in you, and ye need not
that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you of all things,
and it is true, and is not lying, and as it taught you, ye shall abide in him.

8. Compassionately with singular tenderness, fitting himself to every ones
nature and ability, John 10.11. I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd
gives his life for his sheep.

Ezech. 34.23. And I will set up a shepherd over them, and he shall feed
them, even my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their
shepherd, etc.

Isaiah 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the
lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall guide them with
young, etc.

sex, condition, or nation soever; They shall be al taught of God, from the
least to the greatest: A b c daries, as well as they of higher forms, Isaiah
54.13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and much peace shall
be to thy children.

Ier. 31.34. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every
man his brother, saying, know the Lord: for they shall all know me from the
least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord.

And therefore let us observe these things, and acknowledge this goodness, and
receive his testimony: for thereby we seal, that God is true, John 3.33. He
that has received his testimony, has sealed, that God is true, etc.

Thus much of his prophetical office.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Priestly office of Christ.
THe Priestly office of Christ follows, which is that part of his function,
whereby he makes satisfaction unto God for men.

This office in the execution of it has in it three things; or there be three
things Christ must do, as the Priest of the Church: 1. He must obey the Law of
God perfectly. 2. He must make expiation for our sins by sacrificing to God.
3. He must make intercession for us.


principles that concern his obedience; there are four things we are bound
to believe concerning the obedience of Christ:

1. First, that he was without sin in his nature, Ioh. 8.46. Which of you can
rebuke me of sin?

2. Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin.

1. Pet. 1.19. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled
and without spot.

1. Pet. 2.22.23. Who did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth,
etc.

Heb. 4.15. For we have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet
without sin, etc.

2. Secondly, that he fulfilled the whole law of God perfectly in all his
actions: Hence called the holy one, and the holy Child Jesus, Act. 2.27.
Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt suffer thine holy
one to see corruption. Act. 13.35.

Act. 3.14. But ye denied the holy one, and the just.

Act. 4.27. For doubtless against thine holy Son Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, etc.

30. So that thou stretch forth thine hand, that healing, and signs, and
wonders may be done by the name of thine holy Son Jesus.

1. Ioh. 2.20. But ye have an ointment from him that is holy, and ye have
known all things.

For (that that was impossible to the law, in as much as it was weak because of
the flesh) God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and
for sin condemned sin in the flesh, etc.

That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Romans 10.4. For Christ is the end of the law, for righteousness unto every one
that believes.

Romans 5.18. Likewise then, as by the offense of one, the fault came on all men
to condemnation, so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all
men to the justification of life,

That this righteousness Elect of all ages, and such a righteousness as
cannot be lost, Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and
upon thine holy City to finish the wickedness, and to seal up the sins, and
to reconcile the iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness.

The uses may be,

consolation: for hereby all the faithful may be assured, that though they be
very unrighteous in themselves, yet they are made the righteousness of God in
him, Ierem. 23.6. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely; and this is the name whereby they shall call him, The Lord our
righteousness.

2. Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin,
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him.

He is the end of the law to every one that believes: we have as certain
justification to life by his obedience, as ever we were subject to death by
Adams disobedience, Romans 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners; so by the obedience of one shall many also be made righteous.

And if his righteousness be ours, how rich are we? and how ought our hearts
to be established in his well doing? etc.

Secondly for instruction: and 1. First, an establishment of faith in our
reconciliation, and a willing yielding of our selves to acknowledge this free
gift of God in his Son, 2. Cor. 5.21. Romans 10.4. 2. Secondly an imitation of
his marvelous holiness: a striving to express his virtues, that we may be
holy as he is holy; for he communicates the benefit of his obedience only to
such as live justly, and walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit,


Romans 8.4. That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, which
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

1. Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him, that
has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light, etc.

Matthew. 11.29. Take my yoke on you, and learn of me, that I am meek, and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls, etc.

2. Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new creature,
etc.

Which of you can rebuke me of sin? and if I say the truth, why do you not
believe me?

And partly by wicked life, keeping out all conformity with Christ; as also by
choosing rather to live in wicked company, then to cleave to Christ: Is not this
to deny the holy one, and to choose a murderer to be given them? Act. 3.14.
What communion between Christ and Belial? between his righteousness, and
such unrighteousness?

Thus much of his obedience to the law.

CHAP. XX. Of the expiation of sin.
THe principles that concern the expiation of sin follow.

This expiation was made by the passion of Christ, concerning which we must
believe these things of necessity:

1. That the Passion of Christ was by the decree and everlasting
fore-appointme^t of God, Act. 2.23. Him, I say, have ye taken by the hands of
the wicked, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God, etc.

2. That the sufferings of Christ were for our sins, and for our sakes, so as
he bare all our iniquities. 1. Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in
his body on the tree, that we being delivered from sin, should live in
righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed, etc.

Isaiah 53.5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed.

8. For the transgression of my people was he plagued, etc.

12. Therefore will I give him a portion with the great, and he shall divide
the spoil with the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death:
and he was ^ounted with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and
prayed for the trespassers.

Romans 4.25. Who was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for
our justification. 1. Cor. 5.7. For Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.

3. That by his passion he did pacify God, and make expiation for all our
sins, Mat. 17.5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, bear
him.

Ephesians. 5.2. And walk in love, even as Christ has loved us, and has given
himself for us to be an offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
unto God.

1. Ioh. 2.1. My babes, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: and
if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just,
and he is the reconciliation for our sins.

4. That in his own person he fulfilled and finished all sufferings, needful
for our salvation: he did it once for all, 1. Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has
once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God.

Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and unto
them that look for him shall be appear the second time without sin unto
salvation.

Heb. 10.11.12. And every Priest appears daily ministering, and often times
offers one manner of offering, which can never take away sins.

But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever
at the right hand of God?

5. That the passion of Christ is a sufficient price for the sins of the
whole world, Ioh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of
the world.

6. That Christ suffered extreme things for us, even the most grievous things
could be imagined: as

1. A marvelous privation of his own glory, abasing himself, that was in the
form of God, to live amongst men, without showing that fullness of Majesty and
glory which was in his nature, Ioh. 17.5. And now glorify me, thou Father,
with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was.

2. Most base entertainment in the world, such as extreme poverty in his
birth and life, Luke 2.12. And this shall be a sign to you, ye shall find
the child swadled and laid in a cratch.

Matthew. 8.20. But Jesus said unto him, the foxes have holes, and the birds of
the heavens have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to rest his head.

Exile, and flying before his enemies, Matthew. 2.14. So he arose, and took the
babe and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt.

Mark. ^.6.7. And the Pharisees departed, and straight way gathered a Council
with the Herodians against him, that they might destroy him.

But Jesus avoided with his disciples to the sea, etc.

Ioh. 11.54. Jesus therefore walked no more openly amongst the Jews, but went
thence, etc.

Ioh. 8.59. Then took they up stones to cast at him, but Jesus hid himself
and went out of the Temple.

Slanders and extreme indignities, called a Samaritan, a glutton, a seducer, a
traitor; despised, mocked, buffeted, railed on, beaten, betrayed, and sold by
his own servant, and that for a base price, forsaken of his own disciples,
denied, and renounced by oath, falsely accused, whipped, spit upon, taken and
bound as a malefactor, etc. as the story of the Evangelists show, etc.

3. Imputation of the sins of all the elect unto him; so as the guilt of them
was laid upon him, and he sustained their person. This is a wonderful
abasement, he was made sin for us, that knew no sin in himself, 2. Cor.
5.21.

4. Fearful agonies in his very soul, arising

1. First, from several conflicts and tentations, Hebr. 2.18. Heb. 4.15. But
especially set upon with all their fury inuisibly when he was on the Cross,
Colos. 2.15. And has spoiled the principalities and powers, and has made a
show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same Cross.

2. Secondly, from the pouring out of the vials of Gods wrath for sin, which
befell him chiefly in the garden, when he swet blood for very anguish; and on
the Cross when he cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

5. A most miserable manner of death: to die as a condemned man, and condemned
too both by Jews and Gentiles: to die such a cursed death, as the death of the
Cross, which was both by God and man designed out, as the most ignominious
kind of death; and to be put to death in the midst of such malefactors,
being reckoned amongst sinners, Esa. 53.12. Therefore will I give him a portion
with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he
has poured out his soul unto death, and he was counted with the
transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and prayed for the trespassers.
And to suffer the nailing of his body, yea and the effusion of his most
precious blood.

These are exquisite things.

The consideration whereof may serve both for 1. instruction, 2. for
information, 3. and for consolation.



1. To Christ himself. 2. To our neighbors. 3. To our selves.
The meditation of the passion of Christ should inflame in us a desire and
resolution:

1. To acknowledge the marvelous mercies of our Savior, and to confess his
praises, and to adore his name, that could be willing to suffer such things
for us, Phil. 2.11. Every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is the
Lord, unto the glory of God the Father.

Esa. 63.1.2.7.8. Who is this that comes from Edom with red garments from
Bozra, he is glorious in his apparel, and walks in his great strength, etc.

I will remember the mercies of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord,
according unto all the Lord has given us, and for the great goodness toward
the house of Israel, which he has given them according to his tender love, and
according to his great mercies.

2. To mourn affectionately for our sins, that have so pierced the Son of
God, as we are taught, Zach. 12.12. They are the nails that pierced, and the
lance that let out his heart-blood: Would thou not be grieved, if thou
had killed thine own brother?

3. To sin no more, but for ever to be afraid of crucifying the Son of God
again, Romans 6.6. Heb. 10.24. etc. But rather to live to him that died for us,
and to deuote both souls and bodies unto his service, 2. Cor. 5.15. He died
for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him which died for them, and rose again.

1. Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that
we being delivered from sin, should live in righteousness.

4. To love him with our utmost affections, and with all the sincerity of our
hearts, accounting them accursed, that love not the Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 16.22.
Ephesians. 6.23. 1. Pet. 1.9. Shall the Father love Christ for his willingness to
die for his sheep, and shall not we? Ioh. 10.17.18. Therefore does my Father
love me, because I lay down my life, etc.

5. To come willingly at the time of the assemblies of his Army under his
colors in holy beauty. When we see the banners of Christ crucified, displaied,
we should run with all readiness, professing our homage, and willingness to
live and die in his service; the youth of his womb, that is, such as are
begotten of his loins in the Gospel, should for multitude flock to the house
of God, as thick as the dew that falls from heaven in the morning; so thick,
that the concourse of Christians should now be like a very mist of dew, Psalm.
110.2.3.4.

6. Not to be the servants of men; that is, to be bound to no man's example,
will, lusts, humors, likings, but to be free unto the service of Jesus Christ
only, who has paid for us so dear a price, 1. Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with
a price: be not the servants of men.

7. To suffer any thing for his sake, that has suffered so great things for
us: so as we could be willing to forsake father and mother, brother and
sister, house and land, and all for his sake, and for the Gospel.

8. To celebrate the memory of his death and passion with all reverence,
honor, and hearty affection: this is that we should do in the receiving of the
sacrament, which does crucify Christ before our eyes, and show us how he was
taken, broken, given, and slain for our sakes, shall we not do this in
remembrance of him? shall we not eat the sweet flesh of this immaculate
lamb, with the sower herbs of contrition, and grief for our sins and
unworthiness? shall we not at this feast put away all leaven out of our
dwellings? God forbid, we should dare to eat of this bread, or drink of this
cup unworthily, and so make our selves guilty of the body and blood of Christ:
rather let us all examine our selves, and so let us eat in remembrance of him,
judging our selves, that we be not condemned of the Lord. Thus of the first
sort of duties.

Secondly, the meditation of Christ's passion should direct us, and stir us up
to the care of diverse things in our carriage one toward another, and these
duties are either General to all, or special to some.

There are four general duties we should learn from the passion of Christ:

1. The first is harmelesnesse: seeing Christ our Passover is sacrificed for
us, we should keep the feast with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth,
and put away all leaven out of our dwellings; even all leaven of malice and
naughtiness, all vile affections one against another, 1. Cor. 5.7.8.

2. The second is humility: the same mind should be in us, that was in Christ
Jesus; who being equal with God, was content for our sakes to make himself of
no reputation, taking upon him the form of a servant; we should in lowliness
of mind each esteem others better then themselves, doing nothing through
strife or vainglory, looking not on our own things, but every one also on
the things of others, making our selves equal to them of the lower sort, being
of one accord, of one mind. If we would learn any thing of Christ, we must
learn lowliness, and meekness of him, Phil. 2. from the 2. to the 9. Matthew.
11.29.

3. The third is love, and that in the feruency and constancy of it, refusing
no pains, nor dangers to show our affection to the brethren: we should walk
in love, as Christ loved us, and gave himself a sacrifice of sweet smelling
savor to God for us, Ephesians. 5.1.2. Yea, our lives should not be dear to us to
declare our love to the brethren: but as Christ laid down his life for us, so
ought we to lay down our lives for the brethren, 1. John 3.16. Hereby have we
perceived love, that he laid down his life for us: therefore we ought also to
lay down our lives for the brethren.

4. The fourth is pity, and that in special to such as suffer in soul: If
there be any bowels in us, the remembrance of the agony of Christ in the
garden, and on the cross, should make us with more tenderness of heart pity
them, that for the grief and fear of their hearts cry out, that God their God
has forsaken them. If Christ needed an Angel to comfort him, what need have
these of comfort? The marvelous fear and distress Christ was in, shows that
these kinds of sufferings of spirit, be the most grievous distresses.

Thus in general.

In the fifth to the Ephesians, this marvelous love of Christ to the Church
showed in his passion, is used as a motive to persuade husbands to love their
wives, and in all deerenesse of affections to cherish them, and provide for
them; denying themselves, that they may profit and content them, as Christ did,
when he gave himself not only to the Church, but also for the Church, Ephesians.
5.25. etc.

Thus of the duties also to others.

Thirdly, the meditation of principles about the passion of Christ, should
excite us to the practice and care of diverse duties, that concern our selves,
as

1. First, we should here learn to joy and glory in the cross of Christ above
all things. The remembrance of the love of Christ herein, and our wonderful
deliverance from the unspeakable dangers we were in, by reason of our sins,
should breed in us a marvelous inward and hearty exulting in this expiation of
sins by the passion of Christ. Thus Paul; God forbid I should rejoice in any
thing, but the cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14.

2. We should (while we live) have more care of our precious souls; the price
paid to ransom them, should teach us their worthes, and to know that they are
things, must be looked to with more care then ordinary. There was more given
to redeem a soul, then needed to be given to buy the whole world, yea, many
worlds. We are wont to be exceeding careful to keep such things, as cost
dear with all circumspection; never any thing cost more then the soul; and
therefore nothing must be so attended as the soul, which is committed to thee
to preserve, till the day of Christ.

3. Thirdly, these extreme things, Christ has suffered for us, to show his
love to us, should make us for ever trust him, and rely only upon him, as the
life of our lives, and the breath of our nostrils, so as we should always
resolve with the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2.20. that the life we now live in the
flesh, we will live by the faith of the Son of God, who showed his love to
us, by giving himself for us, Phil. 1.21. For Christ is to me both in life,
and in death advantage.

4. These terrible agonies and sufferings of Christ should make us live in
fear, and spend the time of our soiourning here in a singular fear to offend
God any more by our sins; yea, seeing we were to be washed in blood, before
we could be clean, we should be desirous to get such purity, as that if it
were possible, we might not have a spot, or wrinkle of sin about us, 1. Pet.
1.17.18.19. Pass the time of your dwelling here in fear:

Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and
gold, from your vain conversation received by the traditions of the Fathers:
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and without
spot.

Ephesians. 5.26. That he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water
through the word. 27. That he might make it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy, and
without blame, etc.

5. We may here learn an excellent way, how to mortify sin, and destroy the
power of any corruption. Look how God did with sin, so should we: but God
used crucifying, as the best medicine to kill the force and guilt of it, and so
should we. Hence it is, that the term of crucifying is given unto the
mortification of sin: Gal. 5.24. For they that are Christ's, have crucified
the flesh with the affections, and the lusts, etc. We are therefore counseled
to crucify the flesh accordingly in many places of Scripture. Now that we may
crucify our sins:

1. We must have them to the cross of Christ, force them before the tree, on
which he suffered; it is such a sight as sin cannot abide. It will begin to
die within a man upon the sight of Christ on the cross: for the cross of
Christ accuses sin, shames sin, and by a secret virtue feeds upon the very
heart of sin.

2. We must use sin, as Christ was used, when he was made sin for us; we
must lift it up, and make it naked by confession of it to God; we must pierce
the hands, and feet, and heart of it by godly sorrow, and application of
threatenings against it, and by spiritual revenge upon it.

The hands, I say, in respect of operation, that it may work no more. The feet
in respect of progression, that it may reign no longer; and the heart in
respect of affection, that it may be loved no longer: we have an inward seat
for concupiscence to lodge in. And thus as we should upon all occasions, so
especially in the preparation to the Sabbath, and when we are to keep a
Passover to the Lord. That was the time chosen to crucify Christ in, and
certainly it is a wonderful fit time for us to execute this work of
mortification upon our sins.

Lastly, this doctrine of the passion of Christ should wonderfully arm us with
patience in all afflictions. The Captain of our salvation was consecrate
through afflictions, Heb. 2.10. For it became him, for whom are all things, and
by whom are all things, s^eing that he brought many children unto glory, that
he should consecrate the Prince of their salvation through affliction. Though
he were the son, yet he learned obedience by the things he suffered, Heb. 5.8.
For as much as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, we should arm our
selves with the same mind, 1. Pet. 4.1. For we are hereunto called, and
Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps
in doing well, and taking it patiently, when we suffer evil, 1. Pet.
2.19.20.21. etc.

Afflictions are the marks of Christ, and we should glory in it always to
bear about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2. Cor. 4.10. Gal. 6.17.
And God has predestined us, that we should be conformed to the Image of
his Son in sufferings, Romans 8.29. And therefore if we will reign with
Christ, we must suffer with him, 2. Tim. 2.12. Let us therefore be fully
persuaded to take up our cross also daily, and follow him, Luke 9.23. Let us
therefore also go forth to him without the camp bearing his reproach, Heb.
13.13. And with patience run the race that is set before us; looking to him,
that being the author, and finisher of our faith, endured such contradiction of
sinners against himself; endured the cross, despised the shame, and resisted
even unto blood, Heb. 12.1.2.3.4. We should never therefore be weary, or faint,
having such a pattern before us, and knowing the end God gave to him, and has
promised to us, and accomplished in the experience of others of his servants;
but even learn to obey God in this commandment about afflictions, as well as
any other.

Thus of the uses for Instruction: the uses for Information follow.

The doctrine of the passion of Christ may inform us in diverse things, as

First, concerning true felicity in the negative consideration of it: for in
as much as Christ had so little to do with the world, and spent his days so
without the profits and pleasures of this life, it shows, that his kingdom
was not of this world, and that the best treasures lie not in these things; and
besides, that one may be truly blessed, and yet be extremely destituted of
these outward comforts of life.

2. Secondly, concerning the dangerousnes of the doctrine of the Papists: for
these principles show us, that we must for ever separate from them, if they
persist in their heresies: for they teach us, that Christ did not once for all
fully sacrifice to God, but that the sacrifice must be renewed daily in the
Mass, contrary to the express words of the text, Heb. 9.26.28. For then must
he^ have often suffered since the foundation of the world: but now in the end
of the world has he appeared once to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself:

So Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many.

Heb. 10.11.12. And every Priest appears daily ministering, and often times
offers one manner of offering, which can never take away sins:

But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever
at the right hand of God.

And besides, they teach, that men may make satisfaction to God for their sins
by their own works, and by the works of the Saints.

3. Thirdly, concerning the most woeful condition of wicked men that live in
their sins, they may fully see, how they shall speed with God by this that
befell Christ. If God spared not his only begotten Son, that was but a
surety for sin, will he spare them that are principals? would not God find
out such a mercy to Christ, as to free him from such extremities; and do they
trust to a mercy in God never revealed in the word, never showed to Christ? was
not Christ able without such woeful tortures to bear the wrath of God; and do
they think to be able to endure those rivers of brimstone, and fire in Hell?

4. Concerning a singular and new way of obedience in Christ: if we will
needs have works of supererogation, let us acknowledge them only in Christ:
for the doctrine of his passion tells us of an obedience to a commandment of
God, that was not in the Moral law; and that was his special submission to
that singular will of his Father, in being that one that should die for the
people. To expiate for other men's sins, is a special kind of righteousness,
not mentioned in the Law.

5. Concerning the offense of the Cross, though both Jews and Gentiles
stumbled at this doctrine at the first; yet we see there is no reason why we
should be troubled at the abasements of Christ, but rather to rejoice, and
wonder at the dreadful expiation was made to God for us in them. For thus it
behooved him to suffer, as all the Prophets from Moses have witnessed, 1. Cor.
1.23. Luke 24.45.46.

Thus of the use for information.

The consolations follow.

The doctrine of the passion of Christ is exceeding comfortable, and that both
in general and particular consolations.

It is generally comfortable:

1. First, in respect of the establishment of our hearts, in the assurance that
Jesus of Nazareth was the true Messiah promised to ye Fathers. Which may
appear, if we consider but the history of his passion, in as much as in him
were fulfilled al these signs foretold in the several ages of the old Church.
The old prophesies were all accomplished in him. The scepter was now departed
from Judah, foretold, Genes. 49.10. They divided his garments, and cast lots
upon his vesture, according to Psalm. 22.8. They pierced his hands and feet.
Psalm. 22.16. The chief builders refused him, according to Psalm. 118.22. In his
arraignment he was silent, and opened not his mouth, according to Esa. 53.7.
He was reckoned amongst the wicked in his death, according to Esa. 53.12. They
gave him gall and vinegar to drink, according to Psalm. 69.21. He accomplished
the meaning of the sacrifices in shedding his blood, and suffering without the
camp Heb. 9.14. Heb. 13.11.12.

2. Secondly, if we consider the effects of his passion: for from hence flows
to us, and every believer,

1. First the purchase both of our souls and bodies, 1. Cor. 6.20. For ye are
bought for a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit:
for they are Gods.

Romans 7.4. So ye my brethren are dead also to the law by the body of Christ,
that ye should be unto another, even unto him, that is raised up from the
dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God.

2. The ratification of the eternal covenant, Heb. 9.16. For where a testament
is, there must be the death of him that made the testament, etc.

3. The reconciling of us to God, Romans 5.10. For if when we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled,
we shall be saved by his life,

1. Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins: the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God, etc.

4. The abolishing of sin, both in respect of the remission of the guilt, 1.
Ioh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

Matthew. 26.28. For this is my blood of the new testament, that is shead for
many for the remission of sins. And sanctification against the power of it,
Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body
of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, etc.

5. The swallowing up of death, 1. Cor. 15.54. So when this corruptible has
put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on immortality: then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written: Death is swallowed up into
victory. Vanquishing him yt had power of death, freeing us that were in bondage
to the fear, and that of death, Hebr. 2.14.15. For as much then as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part
with them, that he might destroy through death him that had the power of death,
that is, the devil.

And that he might deliver all them, which for fear of death were all their
life time subject to bondage.

2. Tim. 1.10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality unto
light through the Gospel, etc.

6. Liberty to enter into the most holy place of heaven, by a new and living
way, Hebr. 9.12. Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own
blood entered he in once unto the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption
for us.

Hebr. 10.19. Seeing therefore, brethren, that by the blood of Jesus we may be
bold to enter into the holy place.

Thirdly, if we consider the order of priesthood, of which he was in offering
this sacrifice. He was a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, and not after
Aaron, Psalm. 110.4. The Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedeck.

Heb. 7. all the chapter.

Of all the Priests that were types of Christ, Melchisedeck was the most lively
and noblest type, and did most fully shadow out both the person and office of
Christ: For by Melchisedeck three most comfortable things in Christ were
shadowed out:

The first was his dignity: he was so a Priest, as he was a King also, able to
feed and nourish the most mighty on earth, as the King of Salem did Abraham.

2. The second was the efficacy of his Priesthood, noted in two admirable
benefits flowing from his obedience and passion, viz. Righteousness and Peace:
Righteousness, for he is the Lord our righteousness: Peace, in that he
fully pacified Gods anger for our sins, as our atonement, and so he was
indeed that King of Zedech, that is, of righteousness: and of Salem, that is,
of peace.

3. The third was the eternity of his Priesthood; he is a Priest for ever, he
dies not, as did the sons of Leui, nor does the efficacy of his Priesthood
ever cease. The holy Ghost of purpose concealeth the mention of the birth and
death of Melchisedeck, that so he might be the fuller type of Christ, who had
no father as man, nor mother as God; and of his days there is no end; which
last thing is the special consolation, for which I alleged this type. There
is no time wherein we can want the benefit of Christ's sacrifice, if we have
access to God, and the throne of his grace; and the rather because God has
sworn and will not repent, Psalm. 110.4.

Thus in general.

In particular, there are many excellent comforts may be raised from the
passion of Christ, for

First, hence we may gather a matchless testimony, and undoubted, of the
infinite love of God to man, in that he spared not his own Son, but gave
him to the death for us, Ioh. 3.16. For God so loved the world, that he has
given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish but have everlasting life, etc.

1. Ioh. 4.9. In this appeared the love of God toward us, because God sent his
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, etc. Which
may likewise assure us, that there is nothing can be good for us, but he will
certainly give it us also, Romans 8.32. Who spared not his own Son, but gave
him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things also?

2. Secondly, shall we ever doubt our freedom from condemnation, that know
from hence what a price was paid for discharge of our debts by such a surety?
How can we be so vildly infected with unbelief? as to fear arresting, or
imprisonment, or undoing, when all is in Christ so fully and exquisitely
satisfied to the very uttermost farthing. How could the surety have ever
escaped such justice in God? such malice in men, and devils, the sargeants and
iaylors? if he had not most abundantly paid all could be demanded.

3. Thirdly, what an encouragement may this be to believe what Christ says to
us? was not he a faithful witness, and teacher, that sealed his doctrine with
his blood? great therefore is the infallibility of the Gospel, that truth
which is according to godliness, and to be received with all full assurance
without wavering or fear, Revel. 1.5.

4. Fourthly, shall not his example comfort us in all trials, especially when
we suffer the extremest things can befall us in this life? what are those to
the sufferings of Christ? and with what compassion will he receive us in
affliction, that was so afflicted himself? Esa. 63.1 -- 9. etc.

And in particular, it may ease in pains, and in death it self, to remember
the dolours of Christ, especially considering that from thence flows a virtue
to help us in all our pangs and distresses, in life and death.

5. Lastly, there are many particular comforts may be gathered from the manner
of his sufferings, and diverse particularities in them: as

1. He suffered in Jerusalem, and so both fulfilled the types of the old
Testament: for there was Isaac offered up, and there the sacrifices were
slain, and also signified unto us, that he had obtained for us the vision of
eternal peace, which the name Jerusalem imports.

2. Secondly, he suffered the first part of his chief passion in a garden, to
comfort us in the abolishing of the first sin, which was committed in a garden,
and imputed to Christ.

3. Thirdly, he was betrayed, taken, bound, and forsaken, and all for us: he
was betrayed, to expiate our treason in Adam: he was taken, to restore us
captives: he was bound, that we might be loosed: he was forsaken of all, even
of his own best disciples, to let us know, that he alone did perform the
work of satisfaction and redemption for us, Esa. 63.3.

4. Fourthly, he was araigned and condemned both by Jews and Gentiles in the
consisiory of the Priests, and at the tribunal of Pilat, thereby to notify
both to Jews and Gentiles, that he was given to sacrifice for sins of both, and
to signify yt he was the true Messiah, or Shiloh, because now ye scepter was
departed from Judah* Genesis 49.10

5. His silence to the most accusations shows: 1. that he was a greater person
then he that judged him: 2. Secondly, that he fulfilled the Scriptures, that
said he opened not his mouth, Esa. 53.7. 3. That he suffered for our evil
words, but especially it assures us, that he suffered them as our surety, in
that he did endure the imputation of such monstrous crimes, and yet held his
peace.

6. He was whipped, and crowned with thorns; he was whipped, to deliver us
from both spiritual, corporal, and eternal scourges that was due unto us.

The crown of thorns may signify: 1. That he expiated our ambition in Adam.
2. That he might merit for us an eternal crown. 3. That he would gather a
kingly people out of the most thorny and hurtful nations, which as a crown
should compass God about in serving and honoring him. 4. That he had borne
our thorny cares, and therefore we should cast all our care upon him.


7. He was clothed with a purple garment, and a reed in his hand, which both
signified, that he was a King, though they did it in scorn. His purple garment
shows, that he was that great Warrior, which was forespoken of, when they
said, Who is this that comes from Edom with red garments? etc. Isaiah, 63.1. to
7. The reed was two ways comfortable: for first it showed, that this was he,
that should break the Serpents head: for a reed is the most mortal thing to a
Serpent, as the learned record, and therewith they were used to kill them; and
besides by a reed, as by a pen he did blot out the handwriting in the
debt-booke, that was against us.

8. He suffered in Golgotha, a place of dead men's bones, in which the most
notorious offenders did suffer their punishment, that so he might raise up the
Banner of Justification, even in the very place of contamination, and damnation.

9. He was unclothed, and made naked to satisfy for the sin of our first
parents, who were spoiled of the garment of innocence; and to deliver us from
sin and mortality, of which the garments of skin given to our parents, were a
monument; and perhaps to show, how we should enter into heaven, viz. as Adam
did into paradise naked in body, but clothed in soul with Innocence and
immortality: but chiefly to expiate for our shameful wickedness before God.

10. He was hanged upon a tree, that so as death by the tree entered into the
world, so on a tree it should be destroyed, and life brought back again. And
besides herein Christ answered the type in Isaacks offering up, and the brazen
Serpent lifted up on high, Ioh. 3.14. and that Christ lifted up in the air,
might overcome the Prince of the air, and all his spiritual wickednesses,
Coloss. 2.15. And that he might bear the curse of the Law, being in that kind
of death made a special curse for us, Gal. 3.13.14.

11. He drank gall and viniger, wherein he both fulfilled the Scriptures,
Psalm. 69.21. For they gave me gall in my meat, and in my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink, etc. And as the second Adam bare the punishment of the first
Adams offense in tasting the juice of the forbidden fruit.

12. The nailing of his hands and feet, assures us of the cancelling of the
handwriting of ordinances, that was against us; both of the dissolution of all
ceremonial agreements, and of the full cancelling of the bond moral for so
much, as concerns the forfeiture that lay upon us, Coloss. 2. 14, etc.

CHAP. XXI. Of Christ's intercession.
HItherto of the expiation of sins.

The third part of the Priesthood of Christ follows, and that is the
intercession of Christ: concerning which there are four principles.

1. That Christ at the right hand of God makes intercession for us, Romans 8.34.
Who shall condemn? It is Christ, which is dead, yea, or rather, which is risen
again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us.

Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them, that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

2. That we have no other intercessour in heaven but Christ, 1. Tim. 2.5.6. For
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, which is the Man
Christ Jesus:

Who gave himself a ransom for all men to be a testimony in due time.

Isaiah 59.16. And when he saw, that there was no man, he wondered, that there
was no intercessour; therefore his arm did save it, and his righteousness it
self did sustain it.

3. That the intercession of Christ is perpetual, he so does it once, as he
will never fail to do it in all ages, Heb. 7.25.28. For the Law makes men
high priests which have infirmity: but the word of the oath, that was since the
law, makes the son, who was consecrated for evermore.

4. That he makes intercession only for the Elect, John 17.9. I pray for them:
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me: for they are
thine etc.

Now for the explication of these principles, three things must be opened.

The first is the acceptance of the word intercession: for it signifies

Sometimes the prayers which the godly make in the name of Christ the
intercessor, to turn away Gods judgments from their brethren in this world,
and so it is taken, 1. Tim. 2.1. I exhort therefore, that first of all
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men, etc.

Sometimes the complaints, that men make or pretend to make against the faults
of others: Thus Elias made intercession against Israel, Romans 11.2. And the
Jews made intercession against Paul, Acts 25.24. But usually it signifies
that part of the mediation of Christ, in which he appears before God to
prevent or pacify his displeasure toward the Elect.

2. The second is, how many ways Christ makes intercession for us, and so
there are seven distinct things in the intercession of Christ: for

1. First, he presents himself before God with his merits tendering his
sacrifice for our satisfaction, Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered into the
holy places that are made with hands, which are similitudes of the true
sanctuary: but is entered into very heaven, to appear now in the sight of God
for us. And so pacifying God toward us, Ier. 30.31.

2. He prayed, and still does pray for us: all his prayers on earth were a
part of his intercession, and he still prays for us in heaven, Romans 8.34. Who
is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us.

Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them, that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, etc.

3. He offers up our prayers and praises to God, Revel. 8.3.4. That he should
offer with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden altar, which is before the
throne.

And the smoke of the odours with the prayers of the Saints went up before God
out of the Angels hand. And so all our good works, Col. 1.22. In the body of
his flesh through death, to make you holy and unblameable, and without fault in
his sight.

4. He undertakes for us before God, and gives his word for us, that we being
mindful of reconciliation through him, shall eschew sin by his grace, and
not provoke God any more, as we have done. This sponsion is a necessary part
of the office of an intercessor, John 17.6. I have declared thy name unto the
men, which thou gave me out of the world, thine they were, and thou gave
them me, and they have kept thy word.

25. O righteous Father, the world has also not known thee, but I have known
thee, and these have known that thou have sent me.

26. And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it, that the love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

5. He pleades our cause as an advocate, and remoues and non-suites all
accusations, which men or Devils may make against us to God, Romans 8.34. as
before, 1. Ioh. 2.1. My babes, these things write I unto you, that ye sin
not: and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father: Jesus Christ
the just, etc.

6. He pours out upon us the spirit of intercession, which causes us after
an unutterable manner to make our moanes and requests to God, Romans 8.26.
Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray
as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes request for us with sighs, which
cannot be expressed, etc. So in the 15: For ye have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear again: but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby
we cry Abba Father.

Gal. 4.6.7. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his
Son into your hearts, which cries Abba Father, etc.

7. He sprinkleth his blood upon us, by application of his merits to us, which
cries and makes intercession for us, Heb. 12.24. And to Jesus the Mediator of
the new Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things,
then that of Abel, etc.

The third is, in which nature he makes intercession? and I answer, in both.
For howsoever, if we consider the Divine nature of Christ, Christ is then
equal with the Father, and the same in essence, and so it cannot fitly be
said, that Christ requesteth any thing of the Father; yet if we respect the
person of Christ in his divine nature, as it is personally united to ye humane
in the dispensatio^ of grace, as voluntarily he has undertaken for us: so it
is no more inconvenient to pray for us, the^ it is to take upon him the form
of a servant for us; and the office of a Mediator, unto which belongs this
work of praying.

The use of all may be, first, for confutation of the Papists, who do most
sacrilegiously dishonor the intercession of Christ, by substituting secondary
intercessors. The office is bestowed only on the Kings son, and they most
injuriously would employ the kings servants: we know no Master of requests, but
Jesus Christ; nor does it help the^, that they say, they have mediators of
intcrcession, but not of redemption, but only Christ: for when they acknowledge
and beg not only the prayers, but the merits too of the Saints to purge away
their sins, and supply their wants, they make them mediators of redemption
also.

Secondly, for instruction, and so it should teach us:

1. To imitate this part of the Priesthood of Christ, both by praying to God
for our brethren, and for all sorts of men, though they be our enemies, 1.
Tim. 2.1. and also by making peace, and keeping it, as much as is possible
amongst men. Blessed are the peacemakers: for this makes them like the Son
of God, Matthew. 5 7. and seeing the Saints shall judge the world, they should
put in to end the quarrels amongst the brethren, if it may be.

2. Secondly, to live so, as Christ may have credit by us, in giving his word
for us. Has Christ undertaken for us to God, and shall not we be careful to
the uttermost of our power to be such, as he has promised for us, we shall be,
John 17.10.18.19.

3. To pray and give thanks much, and so to do all the good we can, seeing it
shall all be presented to God by Christ, Colos. 1. 22. Revel. 8.3.4.

4. To establish our selves in the full assurance of faith, seeing all our
imperfections are covered in Christ's intercession, and we may approach to God by
this new and living way, and be sure of heaven also, even to come within the
veil, when we die, Heb. 10.19.

Thirdly, for consolation: for we may and ought to be much refreshed, if we
consider, that by the intercession of Christ

1. The favor of God is established upon us, and God is kept quiet from being
provoked against us; God and we are now through him all one, Ioh. 17.21.

2. The compassion of God is implored in the times of distress and affliction,
Zach. 1.16. etc.

3. The devil is restrained, he cannot hurt us, either by tempting, or
accusing; our faith shall be kept, that it fail not, Zach. 3. 3. Romans 8.34.
Luke 22.32.

4. Our sins which we daily commit, are forgiven us, he being an earnest
advocate to plead for us, 1. John 2.1.2.

5. We shall be protected against the hatred of the world, John 17.14.15.16. I
have given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because they are not
of the world, as I am not of the world.

I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou keep
them from evil, etc.

6. Our prayers and suites shall be all presented and obtained, Revel. 8.4.

7. We shall be kept from evil, and preserved unto the end, until we be
perfected from all sins and wants, Ioh. 17.11. And now am I no more in the
world, these are in the world, and I come to thee: holy Father keep them in
thy name, even them whom thou have given me, that they may be one as we are.

15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
keep them from evil.

23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, etc.

8. We have assured hope of the glory of heaven, and to dwell in the most holy
place, that is, within the veil, Heb. 10.19. Seeing therefore brethren, that
by the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the holy place, etc.

Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, etc.

Ioh. 17.24. Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with me,
even where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me; for
thou louedst me before the foundation of the world.

Colos. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.

9. We shall be laden with all needful blessings in the mean time, Heb. 12.24.

10. All this is the more comfortable, because he lives ever to make request
for us. There is no cessation of this office, but at all times we may have the
benefit of it, Ioh. 17.20.

Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them that come unto God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, etc.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Regal office of Christ.
HItherto of the priestly office of Christ, his regal office follows. And
here first I will plainly lay down the principles, and prove them: and then
for more evidence methodically for explication show the parts of his office
herein: and lastly make uses of all.

There are seven things to be believed concerning Christ, which belong to his
regal office.

First, that he overcame sin, death, the grave, and hell, and rose again
from the dead, and ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God
in majesty.

That he is risen from the dead, these places are evident to keep in our
memories, Romans 1.4. And declared mightily to be the Son of God, touching the
spirit of sanctification by the resurrection from the dead.

Romans 4.25. Who was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for
our justification.

1. Cor. 15.54. Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up into victory.

Ioh. 20.12. And saw two Angels in white, sitting the one at the head, the
other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had laien, etc.

Mark. 16.6. But he said unto them, be not afraid, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth,
which has been crucified: he is risen, he is not here, behold the place where
they put him, etc.

14. Finally, he appeared unto the eleven, as they sat together, and reproved
them of their unbelief, and hardness of heart, because they believed not them
which had seen him, being risen up again.

2. Tim. 2.8. Remember that Jesus Christ made of the seed of David, was raised
again from the dead, according to my Gospel, etc.

That he ascended into heaven, these places may suffice to prove it, Mark.
16.19. So after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received into heaven, and
sat at the right hand of God.

Luke 24.51. And it came to pass that as he blessed them, he departed from
them, and was carried up into heaven.

Act. 1.9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken
up; for a cloud took him up out of their sight.

Ephesians. 4.8.9.10. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high: he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.

Now in that he ascended, what is it, but that he had also descended first
into the lowest parts of the earth.

He that descended, is even the same that ascended far above all heavens,
that he might fill all things.

That he sits at the right hand of God, these places prove, Mark. 16.19. So
after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received into heaven, and sat at
the right hand of God.

Heb. 1.9. Unto which also of the Angels said he at any time: Sit at my right
hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool, etc.

Heb. 8.1. Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum, that we
have such an high Priest that sits at the right hand of the throne of the
majesty in heaven, etc.

Ephesians. 1.20.21. Which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead,
and set him at his right hand in the heavenly places.

Far above all principalities and power, and might, and dominion, and every
name that is named, not in this world only, but also in that that is to come,
etc*

Colos. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.

2. That Christ who purchased the Church by his blood, is appointed of God to
be the King, and head of the Church, and Prince over the people of God, having
all power in his own hands, Psalm. 2.6. Even I have set my King upon Sion mine
holy mountain.

Matthew. 28.18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them saying, All power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth.

Ioh. 13.3. Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands,
and that he was come from God, and went to God.

Colos. 1.18. And he is the head of the body of the Church, he is the beginning
and the first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have the
preeminence.

Revel. 19.16. And he has upon his garment, and upon his thigh a name written:
The King of kings, and Lord of lords.

3. That he is likewise appointed to be the lawgiver to the Church, and the
Judge of the whole world, Iam. 4.12. There is one lawgiver, which is able to
save and to destroy: who art thou that iudgest another man?

Ioh. 5.22. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
unto the Son.

27. And has given him power also to execute judgment, in that he is the
son of man.

Act. 10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify
that it is he that is ordained of God, a judge of quick and dead.

Act. 17.31. Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed, whereof he has
given him an assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead,
etc.

2. Tim. 4.1. I charge ye therefore before God, and before the Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and in his
kingdom, etc.

4. That his government extends to the people of all nations, Psalm. 2.8. Ask
of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of
the earth for thy possession.

Matthew. 28.18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying: All power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth, etc.

Phil. 2.10.11. That at the name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth.

And that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the
glory of God the Father.

5. That his kingdom is not of this world, but a spiritual and celestial
kingdom, Ioh. 18. 36. Jesus answered, my kingdom is not of this world; if my
kingdom were of this world, my servants would surely fight, that I should not
be delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence.

Romans 14.17. For the kingdom of God is not meat, nor drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

6. That he will be with his people to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.20.
Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo I
am with you always until the end of the world, Amen.

7. This his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, Luke 1. 33. And he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end.

Heb. 12.28. Wherefore seeing we receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken, let
us have grace, whereby we may so serve God, that we may please him with
reverence and fear.

Dan. 2.44. And in the days of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a
Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and this kingdom shall not be given
to another people, but it shall break and destroy all these kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever.

Dan. 7.14. And he gave him dominion, and honor, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations, and languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall never be taken away, and his kingdom shall never be
destroyed, etc.

Against this last principle may be objected the words of the Apostle,
Objection.
1 Cor. 15.24. Then shall be the end, when he has delivered the kingdom up
to God, even the Father, when he has put down all rule, and all authority,
and power. And therefore after that time it seems he shall reign no more.
For answer thereunto, we must know, Solution.
that Christ shall not then cease to reign, but only cease to reign after the
same manner he does now. That manner of administration, which he now uses in
gathering and preserving his Church shall then cease, there shall be then no
need of it.

Thus of the principles.

Now for the explication, that we may more distinctly conceive of this office
of Christ, as King, we must consider of four things in it.

1. The victory over the enemies, that opposed his title. 2 His kingly glory,
with which he was qualified, and prepared for government. 3. His taking of
possession of the kingdom. 4. His administration, after he had possession.
For the first, Christ fought for his kingdom, and most victoriously overcame
the Devil, sin, death and hell, and rescued his subjects from their
thraldom, 1. Cor. 15.54.55. Colos. 2.15. Heb. 2.14. And this victory he
accomplished, and proclaimed in his resurrection from the dead.

For the second: the Regal glory of Christ consisted in two things: the first
was the glorification of his humane nature. And the second was his triumph over
his enemies.

The glorificatio^ of his humane nature contained, 1. the deposition of all the
infirmities accompanying our nature, which he undertook for our sakes; so as
now he ceased to hunger, or thirst, or be weary, or feel any pain, or
grief, nor could he suffer any more, or die.

2. The perfecting of his humane nature, with all the degrees of celestial
gifts and endowments could possibly befall a created nature, both in body and
mind. His very body was glorified, surpassing the Sun in the firmament, for
splendour and brightness.

Now for the triumph of Christ, he acted it two ways: 1. In those frequent
manifestations after his resurrection for the 40. days he was pleased to
abide on earth. 2. In that most glorious ascension riding in the chariot of
triumph up into heaven, leading with him captivity captive.


The third thing is, his taking possession of his kingdom, and this he did,
when he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty of God, and was exalted
above all that is named, and had power over all things given him of his Father.

The fourth thing is, his administration of the kingdom, of which he is now
possessed; and this has in it four things: 1. The calling and gathering
together both of Jews and Gentiles belonging to the election of God, Romans
8.30. Ephesians. 4.11. 12. Esa. 11.11.12. 2. The prescribing of laws, as the only
lawgiver of the Church, and this he does when he propounds unto his
subjects the rules both of believing, and living by the word and ministry of
the same, adding thereunto the work of the Spirit, writing his laws upon their
hearts, Iam. 4.12. Ier. 31.33. 2. Cor. 3. 17.18. 3. The donation of gifts,
inabling men to the Kingdom of God, Ephesians. 4.8. Philip. 1.29. 4. The execution
of Justice, and so he does justice,


1. Amongst his own subjects, and so he does them Justice, 1. In justifying
them from their sins, in acquitting them and pronouncing them absolved from all
the sentences of Gods justice given out against them. 2. By distributing
rewards among them, both in spiritual and temporal things. 3. By keeping them
in their bonds, and preserving them in the fear of God, and a just course of
life.


2. Against his enemies, whom he either restraines, or subdues: he restraines
them, by setting them their bounds, which they may not pass; by infatuating
their counsels, and by being a wall of brass about his own. He subdues them
either by converting them, and so making them come in, and do him homage, or
else by confounding them, which he begins partly by outward judgments, partly
by induration, as delivering them up to a reprobate sense, and accomplishing it
in their miserable ends, casting them into utter darkness.

This administration of his kingdom he executes, partly in this life, and
partly in the world to come: the one is his kingdom of grace, the other of
glory; what is but begun here, is fully made complete in that other world.

The Uses of the Regal office of Christ follow,

And those are partly for Instruction, partly for Consolation.

First, for Instruction, and we should learn,

1. To ascribe all glory, and dominion to him for ever, we should so admire
the greatness and majesty of our King, as our hearts should be most
affectionately moved to his continual praises: Let the people praise thee, O
God, yea, let all the people praise thee; O sing praises to our God, sing
praises, sing praises with understanding, Psalm. 47.6.7. Revel. 1.5.

Revel. 5.12.13.14. Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb, that was
killed to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and praise.

And all the creatures, which are in heaven, and on the earth, and under the
earth, and in the sea, and all that are in them heard I saying; Praise, and
honor, and glory, and power be unto him, that sits upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb for evermore, etc.

And to this end we should learn

2. To pray, that God would give us the spirit of wisdom and revelation, that
the eyes of our understanding may be enlightened to discern the working of his
mighty power, which he wrought in Christ; when he raised him from the dead,
and set him at his own right hand in heavenly places far above all
principalities, and powers, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come; and has put all things under his
feet, and made him head over all things belonging to the Church, Ephesians. 1.17.
to the end.

And with all we should stir up our selves

3. To pray daily, that his kingdom may come, that the people that yet are in
darkness, may be converted; and that his glory may shine more and more in
those, that have submitted themselves to his Scepter: and to this end, that the
ordinances of his kingdom, especially the preaching of the Gospel may run
with power, and mightily conquer and enlarge the bounds of his kingdom; and
that all opposite kingdoms may be subverted, as is that of Antichrist,
especially that his kingdom of glory may be hastened upon us.

And for our own parts we should every one be ready,

4. To send our Lamb to the Ruler of the earth, Isai. 16.1. to tender our
homage, and offer our service, and testify our aleageance with all humility,
and thankfulness unto this King of Kings, the Lord our mighty Redeemer, and
throughout the course of our lives.

5. To bow at the name of Jesus, and to fear him, that is a great King above
all gods, and has a name above all names: to confess his sovereignty, and
submit to his government, and to tremble before him, and to think of him with
all reverence, Phil. 2.9.10 11. Psalm. 2.10.11.

6. And to come willingly at all the times of the public assembly of his
armies in holy beauty, we should all flock to the colors of the King, and
never give over the care of assembling our selves in the courts of our God; but
with all gladness go up to the house of the Lord, the courts of the King, the
place of his holy presence, where he sits in his throne amongst us, Ps. 110.3.

7. To seek to Christ in all our necessities, seeing he is so exalted, that
now he is able to help us in all times of need according to the riches of his
glory.

8. To be tender, and zealous for the glory and honor of Christ: shall not our
hearts rise at the dishonor of our King?

9. To observe whatsoever he commands, in nothing refusing him, that speaks
from heaven, Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you, etc.

Heb. 12.25. See that ye despise not him, that speaks; for if they escaped
not, which refused him, that spoke on earth: much more shall we not escape, if
we turn away from him, that speaks from heaven, etc.

10. To seek those things that are above, where he sits at the right hand
of God, and to have our conversation in heaven, since as subjects of his
kingdom we are freemen of the new Jerusalem, the Metropolis of his kingdom.

Philip. 3.20. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for
the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ.

Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God, etc.

11. To dwell securely, as acknowledging we have secure protection in his
service, and not to be afraid of any fear, Ier. 23. 5.6. Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a
King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the
earth.

In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is
the name whereby they shall call him; The Lord our righteousness, etc.

12. To carry our selves, as the servants of the King. His subjects should
differ in their manners from all other nations; and his servants should order
themselves so, as may become his honor. And thus we should always resist to
our power the kingdom of darkness, and set our selves to overcome the world,
and as conquerours to deny our selves in the affection to the profits, and
pleasures, etc. of the world: and live out of the fear of the disgrace of the
world, knowing it is honor enough to be such a Kings servants; and out of fear
even of death it self, as knowing our deliverance by the victory, which our
Savior had over death; and the assurance that he will come again, and make
our vile bodies like to his glorious body.

And as this may teach men in general, so there be diverse things to be urged
from hence upon particular persons: as

First, Kings, Judges, and Rulers of the people should take notice of this, and
do their homage, and bring their presents to this King of al Kings, Psalm.
68.29. and seeing they are but his Vicegerents, they should be learned in the
Laws of his kingdom, and get wisdom to carry themselves so, as may become
those that represent his person, not daring to oppose the government of Christ,
or to set themselves to oppress his subjects, Psalm. 2.10.11.

Secondly, Ministers should especially stir up themselves to mind this great
work of separating men from the world, to the kingdom of Christ.

Thirdly, private Christians must take heed of judging one another: for all
judgment is committed to the Son, and he is the only supreme Judge and
Lawgiuer; and therefore the Apostle James inferres, we ought not to judge our
brethren.

Fourthly, such as have parted with their friends by death, must not sorrow for
them that are gone, as men without hope, seeing the kingdom of God is come upon
them, and they are with the Lord, and their dead bodies shall Christ bring with
him in his coming, therefore they should not shame the government of Christ by
the ignorance hereof, but comfort themselves with these things, 1. These. 4.13.

Secondly, this may serve for wonderful consolation to the godly, and that two
ways, 1. The children of Zion may rejoice in their King, Psalm. 149. 2. Let
Israel rejoice in him, that made him, and let the children of Zion rejoice in
their King. If they consider their wonderful happiness, in being subject to
such a King, as 1. Was chosen and appointed by God himself immediately, Psalm.
2.6.7.8. Even I have set my King upon Zion mine holy mountain. 2. Was
qualified with gifts above all his fellows, even above all the men on earth,
or Angels in heaven, Psalm. 45.2. 3. Is independent: his subjects are not
charged with supporting or defending him, but he defends and maintains them,
Isaiah 9.7. 4. Is always present with his subjects, Matthew. 28.20. And lo, I
am with you always until the end of the world, Amen. 5. Is head of all
principalities and powers, and has all honor and power given him in heaven
and earth, rules over all nations, people, and languages, Col. 2.9. Dan. 7.13.
14.27. 6. Cannot die, but lives for ever.
2. They ought exceedingly to rejoice, if they consider the privileges they
have in being subjects in the Kingdom of Christ: for thereby 1. They have the
favor and presence of God with them; his covenant of peace, and his sanctuary
with them, Ezech. 37.26.27. 2. They have great dignity, they are made Kings
themselves, a royal Nation: they are Princes of the people, even all the
people of the God of Abraham, Revel. 1.6. 1. Peter 2.9. 3. They have royal
entertainment, and are daily feasted of their King, daily banquets in the Word
and Sacraments, Christ supping with them, Revel. 3. yea, giving his own body
for meat, and his own blood for drink, Isa. 25.6. 4. They dwell safely, and
find shelter and succor in all distresses, Isaiah 25.4. Ezech. 34.25. Michael
the great Prince stands for the children of the people, Dan. 12.1. 5. Their
King is exalted to the supremest honor, and therefore is able to preserve them
wonderfully; and promised before he was exalted, that he would provide them a
place, John 14.2.



CHAP. XXIII. Of the Church.
Ephesians. 1.22. And has made all things subject under his feet, and has
appointed him over all things to be the head to the Church, etc.


HItherto of the means of grace, the subject of grace follows, and that is
the Church.

The Church is the whole multitude of men elected to eternal life by God in
Christ.

Concerning the Church, there are these Principles:

First, that it is a company of men separate from the world, gathered by the
voice of Christ: the Scripture still makes a difference between the world, and
the Church; and the word signifies such, as are gathered together by the voice
of Gods Criers, John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for
them which thou have given me: for they are thine.

Verse. 14. I have given them thy Word, and the world has hated them, because
they are not of the world, as I am not of the world, etc.

Secondly, that she is one, Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body, and one spirit, even
as ye are called in one hope of your salvation.

Cant. 6.8. But my Dove is alone, and my undefiled, she is the only daughter
of her mother, and she is dear to her that bare her, etc.

Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew, nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor femal: for ye are all one in Jesus Christ.

And the Church is one, as in many other respects; so because all the godly are
mistically united in one body, Romans 12.5. So we being many are one body in
Christ, and every one one another members.

Ephesians. 4.15.16. But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up
into him which is the head, that is, Christ.

By whom all the body being coupled, and knit together by every joint for the
furniture thereof (according to the effectual power which is in the measure of
every part) receives increase of the body into the edifying of it self in
love.

Thirdly, that she is knit unto Christ her head by an indissoluble union,
Colos. 1.18. And he is the head of the body of the Church, he is the
beginning, and the first horn of the dead, that in all things he might have
the preeminence.

Colos. 2.19. And holds not the head, whereof all the body furnished and knit
together by joints and hands, increases with the increasing of God.

1. Cor. 12.27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members for your part.

Ephesians. 1.22.23. And has made all things subject under his feet, and has
appointed him over all things to be the head to the Church,

Which is his body, even the fullness of him that fills all in all things. So
as she is truly bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. For we
are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones.

One with Christ, not in nature as the Trinity is one; nor in person, as the
two natures in Christ, but in spirit, Ioh. 4.13. Hereby know we that we dwell
in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. For the spirit of
the Son dwells in us.

Fourthly, that she is holy, Ephesians. 5.27. That he might make it unto himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and without blame, etc.

1. Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him that
has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light, etc.

Dan. 7.18. And they shall take the kingdom of the Saints of the most high,
and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.

And so she is holy,

1. By separation from the world, in that the godly are consecrated to holy
uses: they are holy by calling.

2. By inchoation of true holiness in nature, and practice, Tit. 3.5. Not by
the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he
saved us by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost.

3. By imputation of Christ's holiness being washed in his blood, Heb. 10.10.
By the which will we are sanctified, even by the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once made.

4. By consummation of all holiness in the other world.

Fifthly, she is Catholic: this is one of the Articles of the Creed: the
Church is Catholic in three respects: 1. In respect of time, all the godly
being members of this one body, though they live in all the several ages since
the beginning of the world. 2. In respect of place, because all the just both
in heaven and earth are all of this one body, Ephesians. 1.10. That in the
dispensation of the fullness of the times he might gather together in one all
things, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth, even in Christ. And
so from all parts of the world is the Church gathered, all the particular
Churches in the world are but members of this Church universal. 3. In respect
of persons, because it is gathered especially since Christ, out of all nations,
there being no difference put in respect of men's outward condition, Revel.
5.9.10. And they sung a new song saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and
to open the seals thereof, because thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to
God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.


And have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on
earth.

Galath. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor
free; there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

Sixthly, that she is militant, that is, she is in this life exposed to
crosses, and afflictions, and tentations, and oppositions, 2. Timoth. 4.7.8. I
have sought a good fight, and have finished my course: I have kept the faith.

For henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at the day, and not to me only, but unto
all them also which love his appearing.

Luke 9.24. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it.

Act. 14.22. Confirming the disciples hearts, and exhorting them to continue in
the faith, affirming, that we must through many afflictions enter into the
kingdom of God, etc.

Revel. 1.9. I John even your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the
kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle called Patmos, for the
word of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ.

Revel. 12.11. But they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word
of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death, etc.

Ephesians. 6.12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, and against the worldly governors, the princes
of the darkness of this world, etc.

Now the Lord would have his Church so exposed to crosses, both for his own
sake, and for hers, and for his enemies sake: 1. For his own sake, that he
might show his hatred of sin, even in his own, and the glory also of his power
and mercy in their deliverance, as well as his justice in their afflictions. 2.
For their sakes, that being in the warfare humbled and tamed for their sins,
they might not perish with the world, 1. Cor. 11. 31.32. and may be herein like
to Christ, Romans 8.27. 3. For their enemies sake, that they may know, that they
shall never be spared, if God spare not his own children, 1. Pet. 4.17. For
the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: if it first
begin at us, what shall the end be of them, which obey not the Gospel of God?

Seventhly, that she is invincible, Matthew. 16.18. And I say also unto thee,
that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church; and the gates
of hell shall not overcome it.

Romans 8.37. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then conquerers,
through him that loved us.

38. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come:

39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

1. Pet. 5.10. And the God of all grace, which has called us unto his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a little, make you perfect,
confirm, strengthen, and stablish you, etc.

The uses of these principles may be either for 1. Instruction. 2. Consolation.


1. For instruction, and so the sound consideration hereof may serve:

First, to stir us up to pray, that God would open our eyes to see the glory
of his power and grace in the calling of his Church out of the world; and the
most happy supremacy of Christ over the Church, and our own felicity, if we
be members of the Church, Ephesians. 1.17. etc.

Secondly, to inflame in us the care to make our calling and election sure,
that so we may be infallibly assured that we are members of the true Church. If
any ask for some plain sign, by which briefly the heart of man may establish
it self in this point: I answer, that to be assured that we are true members
of the Church, and body of Christ, we must carefully try our selves by such
signs as these. For they are members of the Church.

1. That are called out of the world by the voice of the crier, and separated
by the power of the word.

2. That rely upon Christ's merits for righteousness and salvation.

3. That cleave unto such as fear God with unchangeable affections, as the
only people of the world.

4. That are reformed from their old evil conversation, to the constant
endeauours of a holy life.

Thirdly, if we find our selves to be of the Church, we should strive for
exceeding thankfulness to God, that has called us out of darkness to this
marvelous light, and saved us from the common condemnation of the world, 1.
Pet. 2.9.

Fourthly, we should labor by holiness of life to exceed all the Papists, or
Pagans of the world, that men might see by our piety, that God has done more
for us then for any such as they: our works should speak for us, that we are
of the true Church; and not by our sinful lives dishonor God, as our Father,
or the Church as our mother, Ephesians. 1. 4. Ephesians. 2.8. Christ comes into his
garden, to see how his plants grow, Cant. 6.10. I went down to the garden of
nuts, to see the fruits of the valley, to see if the vine budded, and if the
pomegranets flourished.

Fifthly, we should know no man after the flesh, nor reckon of men by their
means in the world, but by their relation to Christ, or the Church, 2. Cor.
5.16. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh; yea though we have
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more.

Sixthly, we should therefore avoid the society of the wicked, and not forsake
the fellowship of the godly, 2. Cor. 6.15. What concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has the believer with the infidel, etc.

Ephesians. 5.7. Be not therefore companions with them.

11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even
reprove them rather.

2. These. 3.14. If any man obey not our saying, note him by a letter, and have
no company with him, that he may be ashamed.

Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves, as
the manner of some is: but let us exhort one another, and that so much more,
because ye see the day draws near.

Seventhly, we should therefore carry our selves one toward another, as
fellow-seruants in the same family, and fellow-citizens in the same City, with
all meekness, patience, unity, and love, Ephesians. 4.2.3. With all humbleness of
mind, and meekness, with long suffering, supporting one another through love,
endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, etc.
Willingly employing our gifts for the good of the Church, Romans 12.6.7.8.

Eighthly, seeing we are in a continual warfare, we should stand upon our
guard, quitting us like men, and be strong, putting on all the armor of God,
Ephesians. 6.10.

Ninthly, we should for ever learn to think and speak reverently of the
Church of God, seeing it is the house of God, the family of Christ, the ground
and pillar of the truth, and that Gods people are Gods hidden ones, Ephesians.
3.15. 1. Tim. 3.15. Psalm. 83.3. And in particular, both Ministers and
Magistrates, that are deputed to the government of the Church under Christ,
should be careful to do their duties with all care. Ministers are charged in
these Scriptures, Ioh. 21.15.16. 1. Pet. 5.2. 1. Cor. 12.28. 1. Tim. 3.15. as
before.

And Magistrates must remember that God has given them to be nursing fathers
to the Church, Esa. 60.10.11. 2. Chro. 34.33. and 35.3. etc.

And here is matter of singular consolation for all the true members of the
true Church, if they consider:

First, the love of Christ toward them. He affecting them, as a Spouse or
Wife, 2. Corint. 11.2. Revel. 19.7.

Secondly, the fellowship they have with Christ, 1. Cor. 1.9. God is faithful,
by whom ye are called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
etc.

Thirdly, the care of Christ for their sanctification, Ephesians. 5.25.26. Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and
cleanse it by the washing of water through the word.

Fourthly, the royal furniture, with the which from Christ they are clad,
being not destitute of any heavenly gifts, 1. Cor. 1.7. So ye are not
destitute of any gift, waiting for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
has blessed us with all spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ.

Col. 2.19. All the body furnished and knit together by joints and bands,
increases with the increasing of God.

Fifthly, their safety in all their warfarings, and their conquest and
deliverance out of all their troubles, and their assurance of full happiness
in the end.

Romans 8.37. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then conquerours,
through him that loved us:

Verse. 38. For I am persuaded that neither life nor death, etc.

Verse. 39. Shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Col. 1.18. And he is the Head of the body of the Church: he is the beginning,
and the first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have the
preeminence.

1. Pet. 5.10. The God of all grace, which has called us unto his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a little, will make you
perfect, confirm, strengthen and stablish you, etc.

And all this should comfort the more;

1. If we remember what we were, and are in our selves. The Church is black,
Cantic. 1.4. And the daughter of Pharaoh, Psalm. 45. and Christ found her out
first in her blood, Ezech. 16.6.

2. If we consider, that there is no accepting of persons: but the Eunuchs and
the strangers may be admitted into the Church, as well as the children of the
Kingdom, Isaiah 56.3. Let not the son of the stranger which is joined to the
Lord, speak, and say, the Lord has surely separate me from his people,
neither let the Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Justification.
HItherto of the subject of grace, viz. the Church: the degrees of grace in
this life are two.

First, Justification.

Secondly, Sanctification.

Concerning Justification, there are these principles:

First, that al men have sinned, and the whole world is guilty before God
naturally, and in themselves, Romans 3.19.23. Now we know, that whatsoever the
Law says, it says to them, which are under the Law; that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world be culpable before God.

For there is no difference: for all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory
of God.

Gal. 3.22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise
by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe.

Secondly, that by men's own works no flesh can be justified, Romans 3.20.
Therefore by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight:
for by the Law comes the knowledge of sin.

Titus 3.5. Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but
according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of the new birth, and the
renewing of the holy Ghost.

Gal. 3.11. And that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is
evident: for the just shall live by faith.

Phil. 3.9. And might be found in him, that is, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness, which is of God through faith.

Justified, I say, before God: for by works we may be justified before men,
of which justification the Apostle James speaks in his second Chapter, etc.

Thirdly, that the righteousness, which makes us just, is in Jesus Christ,
being made ours by imputation.

2. Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin,
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him.

1. Cor. ^.30. But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

Romans 5.18.19. Likewise then as by the offense of one, the fault came on all
men to condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward
all men to the justification of life:

For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of
one, shall many also be made righteous.

Phil. 3.9. And might be found in him, that is, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith.

Ier. 23.6. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely,
and this is the name, whereby they shall call him, The Lord our righteousness.

Romans 4.7. Blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered, etc.

4. That this righteousness is made ours only by faith, and so we are
justified only by faith, as it apprehends, and lays hold upon, and relies on
the righteousness of Christ, Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is
justified by faith, without the works of the Law.

Gal. 2.16. Know that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by
the faith of Jesus Christ, even we, I say, have believed in Jesus Christ, that
we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law;
because that by the works of the Law no flesh shall be justified.

Romans 1.26.17. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the
power of God unto salvation to every one that believes; to the Jew first, and
also to the Grecian:

For by it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, as it is
written: The just shall live by faith,

Heb. 11.6. But without faith it is impossible to please God.

5. That this faith is the gift of God, Ioh. 6.29. Jesus answered and said unto
them; This is the work of God, that ye believe in him, whom he has sent.

Romans 12.3. For I say through the grace that is given unto me, to every one
that is among you, that no man presume to understand above that which is meet
to understand: but that he understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt
to every man the measure of faith.

Phil. 1.29. For unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should
believe in him, but also suffer for his sake.

Ephesians, 2.8. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves: it is the gift of God.

Hebrews, 12.2. Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, etc.

Sixthly, that all men have not faith, Isaiah, 53.1. Who will believe our
report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

2 Thessalonians. 3.2. For all men have not faith.

And therefore this faith is called the faith of Gods Elect, Titus 1.1. Paul a
servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of Gods
Elect.

Seventhly, that there is but one kind of faith, by which all the elect of God
are justified, Ephesians. 4.5. There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, etc.

Eighthly, that being justified by faith, we have peace with God, and
forgiveness of all our sins, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a
reconciliation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness by the
forgiveness of sins, that are passed through the patience of God, etc.

Romans 5.1. Then being justified by faith, we have peace toward God through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

The consideration of these principles should work in us:

First, a special care of diverse duties; as

1. The detestation of that doctrine, that teaches men to rest upon the merits
of their own works, contrary to these express Scriptures, Romans 3.20.
Therefore by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for
by the Law comes the knowledge of sin.

Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse:
for it is written, Cursed is every man, that continues not in all things,
which are written in the book of the Law to do them.

Ephesians. 2.8.9. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God:

Not of works, least any man should boast himself.

Titus 3.5. Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according
to his mercy he saved us.

All which we should carry in our minds.

2. The infla^mation of the love of Christ in us, and the admiration of the
riches of Gods grace, Romans 5.6.7.8. For Christ, when we were yet of no
strength, at his time died for the ungodly.

Doubtless one will scarce die for a righteous man: but yet for a good man it
may be, that one dare die.

But God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us.

3. An especial care above al things to believe, accounting all things but
dung, in comparison of the knowledge of Christ herein. Without this faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. We should never rest, till we could say,
it is the Lord our righteousness, Ier. 23.6. We are undone, if we have not
such a faith as will justify us.

Quest. Tell us distinctly, what we must do about believing, which being
done, we may be sure we are justified.

Solut. First, thou must believe, that Jesus of Nazareth is the promised
Messiah, and the very Son of God, Matthew. 16.16.

1. John 4.15. Whosoever confesses, that Jesus is the Son of God, in him
dwells God, and he is in God.

Secondly, thou must rest upon the passion and obedience of Jesus Christ, as
the only sufficient means of thy happiness, receiving the promises, that
declare thy liberty so to do, Romans 4.23. 24. Romans 5.17.

Thirdly, thou must in thy prayers present Christ to God, and make it known as
a covenant of thy heart, that thou do rely upon him only; and so give
glory to God against the fear of the Law, sin, death, and hell.

Fourthly, thou must resolve to rest in this course, and never to depart from
thy confidence herein: thus the just must live by their faith.

Thus of the third use.

Fourthly, we should be stirred up to show forth daily the use, and power, and
truth of our justification by the effects of it; which we should strive to
stir up in us, as namely we should show, that we are justified:

1. By confirming our consciences in peace and tranquillity.

2. By going boldly to God, and the throne of his grace; as knowing in how much
grace we stand with God.

3. By comforting our selves in the hope of glory, as knowing that we are
heirs of the world.

4. By glorying in tribulation, being never ashamed of our faith and hope, Romans
5.1.2.3.4.5. etc.

5. The doctrine of our free justification should teach us to carry our selves
with all compassion and meekenes toward other men, that yet live in their sins:
for we were such as they once, till the grace of God appeared without any
desert of ours.

Titus 3.1.2.3.4.5. etc. Put them in remembrance, that they be subject to the
principalities, and powers, and that they be obedient and ready to every good
work.

That they speak evil of no man; that they be no fighters, but soft, showing
all meekness unto all men:

For we our selves were in times past unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving
the lusts, and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousness, and envy, hateful,
and hating one another, etc.

6. We should be careful of good works, to free the glorious doctrine of
liberty from the aspersions of evil men, and to show our thankfulness to God,
and the truth of our faith, Romans 3.31. Do we then make the law of none effect
through faith? God forbid; yea we establish the law.

Iam. 2. the latter part of the Chapter.

Tit. 3.7.8. That we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life.

This is a true saying, and these things I will thou should affirm, that
they which have believed in God, might be careful to show forth good works,
etc.

7. This should make us for ever to judge of men's worth by their faith, Iam.
2.5.
and to say, Oh, he, or she is blessed, that believed; and to account highly of
poor Christians, that are rich in faith.

8. For ever while we live, we should glory not in our selves, but in the Lord,
acknowledging whatsoever we are, we are by the grace of God, 1. Cor. 1.31. That
according as it is written, He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord, etc.

Romans 3.27. Where is then the rei^ycing? It is excluded: by what law? of
works: Nay, but by the law of faith* etc.

Secondl^, this doctrine should work in us much consolation, even life from
the dead: Justification is called justification of life, Romans 5.18. It should
quicken us above many other doctrines, and the rather if we consider,

1. That in Christ there is a daily propitiation for all our sins, Romans 3.25.
1. Ioh. 2.2. He will see our filthy garments taken off us, and clothe us with
change of raiment, Zach. 3.3.4.

2. That the very blessing of Abraham comes upon us; we are heirs of the world
as well as he, Galath. 3.9. They which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham. Romans 4.11.12.

3. That though this be clogged with a condition of believing; yet we are not
excepted, but may lawfully rest upon Christ; yea we are commanded to believe,
1. Ioh. 3.23. This is then his commandment, that we believe in the name of
his Son Jesus Christ, etc. Yea God does beseech us to be reconciled, 2. Cor.
5.20. Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to God, etc.

4. That this believing in Christ, makes us accounted as righteous as ever Adam
was, or we could have been, if we had kept the moral law, and God is as well
pleased with us: our faith is accounted for righteousness, and in stead of it,
Romans 4.5. But to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

5. That we may from hence gather also assurance of reigning with God in
another world, as the Apostle shows, Romans 5.9. 10.11. Much more then being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.

For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.

17. For if by the offense of one death reigned through one; much more shall
they which receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness,
reign in life through one, that is, Jesus Christ.

Romans 8.30. Whom he justified, them also he glorified, etc.

6. Lastly, that nothing shall separate us from this love of God, no accusation
shall be received against us, Romans 8.33.34. 35.

Thirdly, this may serve for great reproof,

1. First, for the neglect of faith in many; oh who has bewitched thee, that
thou should not believe? why will ye still be shut up, and live under the
curse? Galath. 3.1. O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you.

10. As many as are under the works of the law, are under the curse, etc.

23. Before faith came, we were kept under the law, and shut up, etc.

2. Of the most of us, for leaning still too much to our own works; we can
hardly tell, how, in our either glorying, or grieuing, to quit our selves from
the infection of pleading merit of works.

3. Of many dear servants of God for their slothfulness, and miserable
neglect of the assurance of faith; resting still in their weakness of faith,
and not striving to be fully persuaded.

CHAP. XXV. Of Sanctification.
1. These. 4.4. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification.


HItherto of Justification; Sanctification follows. Concerning Sanctification
there are these principles:

1. That whom God justifies, he sanctifies, Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he
predestinate, them also he called, and whom he called, them also he
justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Ezech. 36.26.27. etc. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will
I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I
will give you an heart of flesh.

And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes,
and ye shall keep my judgments and do them, etc.

2. That to be truly sanctified, is to die to sin, and to rise again to
newness of life, Romans 6.1.2.3.4. What shall we say then? shall we continue in
sin, that grace may abound? God forbid: how shall we that are dead to sin,
live yet therein?

Know ye not, that all we which have bin baptized into Jesus Christ, have been
baptized into his death?

We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father; so we also should walk
in newness of life, etc. Or it is to repent and believe the Gospel, Mark.
1.15. The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent, and
believe the Gospel.

3. That except we be borne again, we cannot enter into the kingdom of God,
Ioh. 3.5. Jesus answered, verily, verily I say unto thee, except that a man be
borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without the which no man
shall see the Lord.

1. Ioh. 1.7. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses
us from all sin.

2. Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new creature:
old things are passed away, behold all things are become new.

Fourthly, that sanctification is Gods gift, and work in Jesus Christ; we can
no more convert our selves, then we can beget our selves at first: we can no
more create our selves new men, then we can create our selves men, Act. 5.31.
Him has God lifted up with his right hand to be a Prince, and a Savior, to
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

Act. 11.18. When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified
God saying: then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.

2. Tim. 2.25. Instructing them with meeknes, that are contrary minded; proving
if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth.

1. Cor. 1.30. But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption.

Ezech. 37.28. Thus the heathen shall know, that I the Lord do sanctify
Israel, when my sanctuary shall be amongst them for evermore.

Tit. 3.5. Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but
according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of the new birth, and the
renewing of the holy Ghost.

Fifthly, that our sanctification is imperfect, while we live in this world,
1. Ioh. 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us.

Prou. 24.16. For a just man falls seven times and rises again: but the
wicked fall into mischief.

Esa. 64.6. But we have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness
is as filthy clouts; and we do all fade like a leaf, and our iniquities like
the wind have taken us away.

The uses may be for Information: Instruction: Humiliation: and Consolation.


For the first: we may here take notice of the wisdom of God in curing the
posterity of Adam. We received a double disease from Adam: the one was guilt
of eternal death: the other was corruption of nature. By Justification the
first was abolished, and by Sanctification the other is healed by degrees.

For the second, we may here learn many things:

The first is carefully to study our own sanctification, and compel upon our
selves a more constant endeavor of sound reformation. To this end I propound
two things:

1. Certain motives which we should have continually in our minds, to stir
us up to the care of holiness, and to get true grace.

2. Certain rules, which may exceedingly further us about our Sanctification.

The motives are these, amongst many:

1. The commandment of God, 1. These. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification.

Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them.

2. The conscience of our debt, which we owe herein, Romans 8.12. Therefore
brethren we are debtors, not to the flesh to live after the flesh: being
redeemed by Christ.

Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people to him self, zealous of good
works.

3 The consideration of our own dignity: we are the children of God, the
temples of the holy Ghost, Kings and Priests unto God; Gods own peculiar
people and inheritance.

4. The rich promises that belong to godliness, 1. Tim. 4.8. For bodily
exercise profits little: but godliness is profitable unto all things, which
has the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come.

5. The assuring hereby of our calling, and Election, 2. Pet. 1.10. Wherefore
brethren, give rather diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if
ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

6. The excellency of good works: they are sacrifices seasoned with the salt
of faith, kindled with the fire of the holy Ghost, offered by the merit of
Christ, and accepted of God, 1. Pet. 2.5. And ye be made a holy Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

7. The silencing of the ignorant from speaking evil, 1. Pet. 2.15. For so is
the will of God, that by well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of the
foolish.

8. Because else,

1. The name of God will be blasphemed, Romans 2.24. For the name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you.

2. Sam. 12.14. Howbeit because by this deed thou have caused the enemies of
the Lord to blaspheme, the child that is borne unto thee shall surely die, etc.

2. The spirit of God will be grieved, and the works of the spirit deaded,
Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto
the day of redemption.

3. The judgment of God will be provoked, Psalm. 89.31.32.

The rules we had need to be put in mind of, that concern Sanctification,
either show us what to take heed of, or what to do.

That we be not deceived in this great work of true grace, we must take heed,

First, of wretchlesnesse and security, whereby a man lives so, as he is
insensible and careless of reformation altogether. Awake thou that sleep,
Ephesians. 5.14.

Secondly, of the daily baits, and methods of sin: be not ensnared with the
pleasures of sin, which are but for a season; but circumcise betimes the
soreskins of your hearts, Ier. 4.4.

Thirdly, of procrastination, and delaying of time in the business of
reformation. For thy life is uncertain, Matthew. 25.13. and every day adds to
the heap of sin, and of wrath, Romans 2.5. Sin not against thy purposes of
amendment, lest thou grow more hardened.

Fourthly, of hypocrisy, and fained holiness, Esa. 58.2. Iam. 4.8.

Fifthly, of the persuasion of the merit of your own works, Romans 10.3. For
they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to stablish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness
of God etc.

Sixthly, of temporary righteousness, Hosh. 6.4. Ephraim, what shall I do unto
thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud,
and as a morning dew it goes away. Or being weary of well doing, Gal. 6.9. Let
us not therefore be weary of well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if
we faint not, etc.

Seventhly, of the precepts of men, Mat. 15.9. In vain they worship me,
teaching for doctrine men's precepts.

Ezech. 20.18. But I said unto their children in the wilderness, walk ye not in
the ordinances of your fathers, neither observe their manners, nor defile your
selves with their idols.

Eighthly, of looking after the example, and fashion of the world, Romans 12.2.
Frame not your selves like unto this world.

Ninthly, neglect of prayer for the particular furtherance of reformation and
grace, Lam. 5.21. shall he not give us his holy Spirit, if we ask him, as our
Savior shows in the parable?

Tenthly, let the best of us take heed of a strange deceit, and that is to rest
in fair words, and attentive hearing. How is it, that men, that hear many
precious counsels, comforts, and reproves, go away without any reformation,
and think they do well, if they commend the Sermon? etc. Oh, how common is
this disease to be awake to hear of the disease, or medicine, and fall a
sleep before it be applied? like those hearers in the Gospel, of whom it is
said, They heard, they marvelled, and they went their ways.

Thus much of what we should avoid, that the work of sanctification be not
hindered.

On the other side there be diverse things to be observed by us, as

First, we must look to the matter to be done, which has two considerations
in it:

1. That in general whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely,
and of good report, that have virtue and praise in them, that we should think
on those things, and study how to glorify God, and enrich our selves by well
doing them, Phil. 4.8. Ephesians. 58. etc.

2. That we strive to keep our selves free from, or speedily mortify such
evils as usually stain the profession of religion after calling. Besides the
mortification of gross evils, which the first repentance puts away; we must
watch carefully against other sins, such as are lying, rotten communication,
deceit, anger, wrath, and all bitterness, and cursed speaking, Col. 3.8.
Ephesians 4.25.

Secondly, we must look to the end of all our actions, the end I say both of
intention, and continuance: For

1. We must propound the glory of God, as the maine end of all our actions,
1. Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God. Philip. 1.11.

2. We must so begin reformation and good works, as we be sure also to
endeavor with all constancy to hold out to the end, Luke 1.75. All the days of
our life in holiness and righteousness before him.

Psalm. 106.3. Blessed are they that keep judgment, and do righteousness at
all times.

Thirdly, we must look to the manner of our reformation, that it be done with
all sincerity, and so we do,

1. If we turn from all sorts of our transgressions, Ezech. 18. 30.31.
Therefore I will judge you, O House of Israel, every one according to his
ways; return therefore, and cause other to turn away from all your
transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your destruction.

Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and
make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O House of Israel?

2. If we labor for a sanctification that is throughout in all parts, in
soul, in body, and in spirit, that is, in our outward man, and in our
affections, and in our judgments, and thoughts.

Fourthly, we must be exceeding mindful of the means of sanctification, and
so we must especially think of

1. The Word, to subject our selves to the power of it: for if we hear our
souls shall live, we are sanctified by the truth, and God will have his Law
magnified, and the Word is able to build us up still further, till we come to
heaven, Isai. 55.4. John 17.19. Isaiah 42.21. Acts 20.32.

2. The Sabbath: for that is the sign of our sanctification. It is a sign to
assure, that God will not fail us in his blessings; and it is a sign that we
are indeed a holy people, if we be careful to keep the Sabbath. It is the
market day for our souls, and by the right keeping of the Sabbath, we shall be
the better able to serve God all the week after, Exodus 31.13. 14. Keep ye my
Sabbaths: for it is a sign between me and you in your generation, that ye may
know, that I the Lord do sanctify you.

Ye shall therefore keep the Sabbath, for it is holy unto you; he that
defiles it shall die the death: therefore whosoever works therein, the same
person shall be even cut off from among his people.

Isaiah 56.2. Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man which
lays hold on it: he that keeps the Sabbath, and polluteth it not, and
keeps his hand from doing any evil, etc.

Thus of the uses for instruction.

Thirdly, these principles may terrify all men that are unsanctified, that
have not true grace, that live in their sins: Woe unto worlds of men because
of sin! for thereby they may gather, that there is no cure done to their
natures, that they are not at all justified before God, that they have no part
with Christ, and that all they do is still impure, Mat. 7.18. Tit. 1.15. Yea,
and that the wages of their sins will be death, and that in the state they
are in, they cannot be saved, Romans 6.23. John 3.5. and in the mean time, what
know they how soon the whirlwind of the Lord may fall upon the wicked? Ier.
23.19. Behold, the tempest of the Lord goes forth in his wrath and a violent
whirlwind shall fall down upon the head of the wicked.

And for all the things they have done in the flesh, they must come to
judgment; and the rather because they have not taken warning, Acts 17.31.
Because he has appointed a day* in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness by that man, whom he has appointed, etc.

Object. But some one may say, what tell ye us of these terrible things? we
have no reason to think of our selves, that we are unsanctified, how can we,
or you tell, who are not sanctified?

Sol. It is easy to tell in the negative, who are not sanctified, you may know
it of wicked men:

1. Because they are a sleep, and dead in sin, and have not not any true
feeling of the hatefulness of their many sins, Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he
quickened, that were dead in trespasses and sins.

2. Because sin reigns in them, it has an unlimited power in them, Romans
6.12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that ye should obey
it in the lusts thereof.

3. Because they sin by covenant, they hire themselves; their purpose is with
their whole hearts to commit and continue in sin, they obey as servants, Romans
6.16. Know ye not, that to whomsoever ye give your selves, as servants to
obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death,
or of obedience unto righteousness.

4. Because they are silent from prayer, and confession of sin, Psalm.
32.23.5.

5. Because they have no savor of the things of the spirit, but altogether
savor fleshly things, Romans 8.5. For they that are after the flesh, savor the
things of the flesh: but they that are after the spirit, the things of the
spirit.

6. Because they never had any marriage affections to Jesus Christ, Romans 7.5.

7. Lastly, a wicked man finds in himself not only an impotency, but an
impossibility to be subject to the Law of God. He resolves, that he cannot
possibly yield to the directions of the word, nor will not: whereas a godly
mind loves the Law, desires to obey, endeavors it, subjects himself to it,
though he fail many ways.

Fourthly and lastly, the godly may be comforted in the observation of this
work of the spirit of grace, that is in Jesus Christ, which killes sin in
them, and has made them alive from the dead.

Object. But some weak Christian might say, There is much comfort in this
doctrine of the healing of their natures, save that the imperfection of their
sanctification is a continual discomfort.

Solut. Christians may and ought to comfort themselves against the imperfection
of their sanctification many ways, and so if they look

1. Upon the Spirit of God in their hearts, and so two things may relieve them;
first the assistance of the Spirit, which will help their infirmities, Romans 8.
26. And then if they consider the very fountain of all good actions, and every
good gift to be the same spirit of God, they must needs conclude, it is some
divine thing which is wrought in them, in as much as it flows from the holy
Ghost; howsoever it be imperfect through the corruption of their hearts.

2. Upon Jesus Christ; and so if they behold,

1. His intercession, and that likewise has a double comfort in it: for first
Christ made intercession for us, when he prayed for our sanctification, it
should much comfort us to remember, that our sanctification was one of the
things Christ prayed for, John, 17.19. Secondly, Christ in his intercession in
heaven, couers all the imperfections of the godly, and is their advocate before
the Father, 1. John, 2.2. Romans 8.34.

2. His death and resurrection, from whence flows a virtue continually, which
is of singular power, to make our sins still die in us, and quicken us to
newnes of life. Romans 6.4. For this cause did Christ sanctify himself, that
he might sanctify his members by the influence come from him, as from their
head, John, 17.17.

3. Upon the hope of perfect holiness: for the time will come, when they shall
be without spot, or wrincle, Ephesians. 5.27. The merit of their perfect holiness
is found in the price paid by Jesus Christ, Heb. 10.14. It should much solace
them, that one day there shall be a perpetual end of all sin and infirmities.

4. If in the mean time they look upon the good nature of God, assuring them
by his promises,

1. That they are under Grace, and not under the Law, Romans 6.14.

2. That he will not deal with us after our sins, Psalm. 103.

3. That he will spare us, as a man spares his son that serves him, Mal.
3.17.

4. That he will accept of the will and desire for the deed, 2. Cor. 8.12.

5. That he is slow to anger, and ready to forgive, Psalm. 103.8. And mercy
pleases him, Micha. 7.18.

6. That he will pass by our infirmities, and mere frailties, and not take
notice of them, Micha. 7.18.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Resurrection.
Ioh. 5.28.29. Marvel not at this: for the hour shall come, in the which all
that are in the graves, shall hear his voice:

And they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life;
but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.


HItherto of the principles that concern the third estate of man.

The fourth estate of man is the estate of glory; and in this we are to
consider the three degrees of it: 1. The Resurrection of the the body. 2. The
last Judgment. 3. The glory of Heaven.


The principles concerning the resurrection are these:

First, that the bodies of dead men shall rise out of the dust of the earth,
and their own souls shall enter into them again, Job 19.23.26. For I am sure
that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth.

And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my
flesh.

Esa. 26.19. Thy dead men shall live; even with my body shall they rise: Awake
and sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the
earth shall cast out the dead, etc.

Ioh. 5.28. Marvel not at this, for the hour shall come, in the which all
that are in the graves, shall hear his voice.

1. Cor. 15.16. For if the dead be not raised, then is Christ not raised, etc.
in the whole chapter.

Secondly, yt the bodies of all men shall be raised, Ioh. 5.28. as before.
Small and great; the earth, sea, fire, beasts, fowls, air, etc. shall deliver
up their dead, Revel. 20.12.13. And I saw the dead, both great and small, stand
before God; and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which is
the book of life, and the dead were judged of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works.

And the sea gave up her dead which were in her, and death and hell delivered
up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man according to
their works. Just and unjust shall rise, Act. 24.15. And have hope toward God,
that the resurrection of the dead, which they themselves look for also, shall
be both of just, and unjust. Though the unjust shall not rise in the same
manner, nor by the same power, that is, by the virtue of Christ's resurrection,
Dan. 12.2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt.

Quest. It may be objected, that Daniel says many shall rise, not all.

Answ. He may speak so, because we shall not all die; but those that are
alive at Christ's coming, shall be changed in stead of death and resurrection,
1. These. 4.15. For this say we unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which
live, and are remaining in the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which sleep, etc. 1. Cor. 15.53.

Thirdly, that the same bodies, which men carry about with them in this world
shall rise again, Job 19.26.27. And though after my skin worms destroy this
body, yet shall I see God in my flesh.

Whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me,
though my raines are consumed within me.

Psalm. 34.20. He keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken.

This very corruptible must put on incorruption, 1. Cor. 15. 53. For this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality,
etc.

The reasons are, 1. because every man shall receive in his body, what he has
done, either good or evil, 2. Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things which are done
in his body, according to that he has done, whether good or evil.

2. Because else it were absurd that any other body should be crowned, but
that which suffered: or punished, but that which sinned.

Fourthly, that this resurrection shall be at the end of the world, even the
last day of the world, Ioh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me, draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.

And therefore we must distinguish between particular resurrections, and the
general or universal. Particular resurrections have been past in some cases
miraculously, as at the time of Christ's death: but the principle speaks of the
universal resurrection.

The uses may be for Information. Instruction. Consolation. Terror.


First, for information, and so we should strive to inform our selves in three
things: 1. The certainty of it, that it shall surely be. 2. The manner of it,
since it must needs be. 3. The glory of the life in Christ, that can effect
this.


For the first, we may find many ways to affect our hearts with a full
assurance that our dead bodies shall rise again: many things tend hereunto,
some probable, some infallible, some show it that it may be, others that it
shall be.

That it is not impossible, other works in nature show: as first, the Phoenix,
a bird in Arabia, of which it is written, that waxing old, with the sticks of
Frankincense and Cassia, with which she filled her nest, she makes a fire,
and being put in the fire, and burned to ashes, by and by after the dew of
heaven lights upon her, she comes forth alive. Secondly, we know that many
little birds, which for the wintertime lie out of the way in deep marshes, or
such like places; yet in spring time come out alive again. Thirdly, we see
that trees, and plants in winter loose all their ornaments, and being dead to
see to, yet revive again. Fourthly, thus does the seed also which the
husbandman throws into the ground, 1. Cor. 15.36. O fool, that which thou
sowest is not quickened except it die. Fifthly and lastly, night and day,
sleep and waking, shows us thus much: the day dies into the night, and yet
reuiues to the world with all his glory.

Yea in man himself there is grounds of singular probability: For,

First his deliverances, from dangers and distresses, are (as it were) lesser
resurrections, and the term is given to it. The houses in which the Jews were
captives, were as so many graves; and their return, as a rising from the dead,
Ezech. 37.12. 2. Cor. 1.10.

Secondly, he has had an experience of the first resurrection in his soul
already, and how can he doubt the rising of his body? Romans 6. Ioh. 5.25.28.
Reu. 20.6.

Thirdly, diverse particular men have appeared raised from the dead; as Lazarus,
Ioh. 13.43. the Saints that appeared out of the graves after Christ's death,
Mat. 27.52.53.

Fourthly, God showed this in a vision to Ezechiel, when he saw a field full of
dry bones, receiving at Gods commandment flesh, and nerves, and life, Ezech.
37.

But we have more then probabilities, we have certain arguments for it, as

First, the word of God assuring it, 1. These. 4.15. as was proved before, to
whom all things are possible, Luke 1.37. For with God shall nothing be
impossible, Luke 18.27. The things which are impossible with men, are possible
with God. Romans 4.21.

Secondly, the Son of God undertaking to effect it, John 6. 39. And this is
the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I
should loose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day, etc.

Thirdly, the resurrection of Christ to assure it, who rose as our surety, 1.
These. 4.14.

Fourthly, the Sacrament of Baptizme seals both the resurrection of soul and
body.

Fifthly and lastly, the Apostle proves at large the necessity of the
resurrection, by many arguments: showing in effect, that all religion is
ouerturned, if the resurrection be not believed, 1. Cor. 15.12.

Thus that it shall be: How it shall be, follows.

The manner of the resurrection will be thus:

First, when the last day of the world is come, Christ on a sudden, in the same
visible form he went to heaven, will come in the clouds with his Angels, and
thousands of the souls of his Saints, Jude 14. 1. These. 4.15.

Secondly, the trumpet of God shall then sound, the voice of the Arch-angell
shall then be heard: Christ shall command, What these things mean is unknown.
exhort, and call upon the dead to rise and come away to judgment, 1. These.
4.16.17. so as the very dead shall hear this shout and voice of Christ, Ioh.
5.29. Matthew. 24.31.

Thirdly, immediately the spirit of Christ will bring the souls of all the
godly, and they shall enter into their bodies; and then they that have slept in
the dust of the earth, shall be raised to life.

Fourthly, the bodies of the wicked shall then be raised also by the power of
God, by a way unknown.

Fifthly, men, that shall then be alive, shall have a change on a sudden in stead
of death, and resurrection, 1. Cor. 15. 1. These. 4.15. 16.

Sixthly, the Angels shall then gather the Elect, and chase in the reprobates
from the four winds of heaven, and present them before Christ, Matthew. 24.31.
Thus of the manner.

Thirdly, this may inform us concerning the glorious life of the Son of God,
who does not only live himself; but gives life to millions of men by his
spirit, Ioh. 5.21. and raised dead bodies so miraculously.

Thus of the uses for information.

From the doctrine of the resurrection we should learn diverse things.

First, it should teach us not to mourn immoderatly for the dead, since when
Christ comes again, he will bring them with him; and the earth and seas shall
make a true account of their dead in the day of Christ, 1. These. 4.13.14.

Secondly, it should teach us to have the very body in honor, and not to
transgress against it, seeing it is redeemed by Christ, and shall be raised to
immortality at the last day.

Now men sin against the body:

1. When (according to the traditions of men, and through will worship) they
withhold from the body due sustenance, Col. 2.23.

2. When men pollute their bodies, that should be prepared to immortality, with
filthiness; such as is whoredom, drunkenness, sodomitry, and such like
abominations, 1. Cor. 6.13.14.

3. When the bodies of the Saints are not carefully and with meet honor
buried, or their burying places uncivilly dis-regarded.

Thirdly, the consideration of this great work of the resurrection of men's
bodies, should teach us to trust God in lesser matters, and believe his
promises, though there be never so great unlikelihood of the accomplishment,
in respect of outward means and appearance. Romans 4.17.18.

Fourthly, we should especially be careful to get the assurance, that our
bodies shall have a glorious resurrection, Act. 24.15. And that we may be so
assured:

1. We must pray God to give us his holy spirit, as the pledge of it. For then
if the spirit of Christ be in us, the same spirit that raised Christ, will
raise up our natural bodies at the last day, Romans 8.11.

2. We must be sure of the first resurrection, that the body be dead in
respect of sin, and the soul raised up to a lively care of newness of life:
Rise first in soul.
they that have their part in the first resurrection, shall never taste of the
second death, Romans 6. Revel. 20.6.

3. In particular, we must be sure to get faith in Jesus Christ, who is the
resurrection, and the life, and in whom whosoever believes, he shall not die
for ever, Ioh. 11.25.

Fifthly, we should resolve to live, like such as believe a glorious
Resurrection, and to this end

1. We should be steadfast, and immovable in all conditions of life, 1. Cor.
15.58.

2. We should live, as men devoted wholly to the service of Jesus Christ, whose
we are both in life and death, Romans 14.7.8.

3. We should strive to abound in the work of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15.58. rousing
up our selves to the care of well doing, 1. Cor. 15. 34. studying to keep a
conscience void of offense toward God and man, Acts 24.16.

4. Our minds should run on that time, and our conversation should be in
heaven, Philip. 3.20.

Thus much of the uses for instruction.

Thirdly, the doctrine of the resurrection has singular comfort in it, and
Christians are charged to comfort themselves, and one another with these
things, 1. These. 4.18. And David did rejoice, and was glad at heart for this
reason, Psalm. 16.9. For that is the time of the refreshing of all Christians,
Acts 3.19. And so the godly have been wont to comfort themselves against diverse
maladies, as

1. Against the pains and tortures of the body; so did Job, Job, 19.25.26.27.
For I am sure, that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on earth.

And though after my skin, worms destroy this body; yet shall I see God in my
flesh.

Whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me,
though my reins are consumed within me.

And so did the godly mentioned, Heb. 11.35. The women received their dead
raised to life; other also were racked, and would not be delivered, that they
might receive a better resurrection.

2. Against the troubles and general miseries of this life, and so Gods people
are comforted, Dan. 12.1.2. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
Prince which stands for the children of thy people; and there shall be a time
of trouble, such as was never since there began to be a nation unto the same
time; and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be
found written in the book.

And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt.

Isaiah 26.19. Thy dead men shall live; even with my body shall they rise:
Awake, and sing ye that dwell in dust; for thy dew is, as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall cast out the dead.

3. Against death it self, and so the Apostle triumphs, 1. Cor. 15.55.56.57. O
Death where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy victory!

The sting of death is sin: and the strength of sin is the Law.

But thanks be unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Object. Now if any ask, What in the doctrine of the resurrection should
comfort us in those cases?

Solut. I answer: The consideration of the marvelous glory of our bodies, in
which they should rise, should fill us with sweet refreshings, Phil. 3.21. Who
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue al things unto
himself. For six things shall befall our bodies at that day:

1. Immortality: so as they can never die again, 1. Cor. 15.42.43.44.53.

2. Incorruptiblenesse: they shall never be inclined to putrefaction, or any
corruption.

3. Spiritualnesse: our bodies shall be raised spiritual bodies; they shall
be like spirits, as it were, and that in diverse respects:

1. Because they shall be possessed fully by the Spirit of God, so as they
shall be both governed by the Spirit, and be subject to the Spirit wholly.

2. Because they shall live as the Angels in heaven do, without meat or
raiment, or any other bodily helps or sustenance.

3. Because they shall be for nimblenesse, as it were spirits; they shall be
able with incredible swiftness, to pass into all the parts of the world,
earth, or air, etc. for they shall meet Christ in the air, 1. Thessal. 4.17.

4. Power: for of bodies full of weakness, and subject to many calamities and
distresses, and pains, they shall be raised in power; that is, strong, able,
and impassible.

5. Perfection: for they shall be freed from deformity, vnhandsomnesse,
maimes, lamenesse, etc. and become most fair and comely; neither infancy, nor
old age hindering them, but shall appear in full age and beauty.

6. Shining and splendour, as the Sun or Stars in the Firmament: the body
being clothed with a celestial glory and divine light, 1. Cor. 15.40. Dan.
12.3. And they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament;
and they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever
and ever.

Matthew. 13 43. Then shall the just men shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father: He that has ears to hear, let him hear, etc.

And as we may comfort our selves by the meditation of these distinct glories
in our bodies then, so it may add unto our comfort, and the establishment of
it, if we consider three things more; to wit, first, the certainty of all
this, that it shall come. Secondly, the shortness of the time thither.
Thirdly, the condition of the body till then.

For the first, we should not doubt of it, because we are borne again to this
hope, we are children of the resurrection now, and so called, Luke 20.36. And
besides, Christ has a charge to loose nothing; no, not of the bodies of the
Saints, Ioh. 6.39. And this is the Fathers will, which has sent me, that of
all which he has given me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up
again at the last day.

And he came to this end, to dissolve the works of the devil, which is sin,
and death by sin, 1. John. 3.8. Christ also is the first fruit of ye dead, 1.
Cor. 15.20. And further we have felt of the power of Christ in raising our
souls already: he that by his word made all things, can by the same voice
bring back our bodies again.

Ob. That the bodies resolved to dust and ashes, should rise, is against common
sense and reason.

Solut. It is above reason, but not against it. Can men of ashes make glass,
and cannot God of dust make again the body?

Ob. But the bodies dead are often mingled with the bodies of beasts or other
creatures.

Sol. The Goldsmith by his art can sever metals, and extract one metal out
of another, and cannot God distinguish these dusts, etc?

Ob. Flesh and blood cannot come into the Kingdom of heaven. 1. Cor. 15.50.

Sol. By flesh and blood is not meant the body simply, but as it is clothed
with sin and infirmity, which shall be done away in the resurrection.

Ob. The condition of man and beast is one, Eccles. 3.19. For the condition of
the children of men, and the condition of beasts are even as one condition unto
them: As the one dies, so dies the other: for they have all one breath, and
there is no excellency of man above the beast; for all is vanity.

Sol. First, they are like in dying, not in the estate after death. Secondly,
it may be said, those words are the objection of the Epicure, not the opinion
of Solomon.

(...) second, it may add to our comfort, that the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.5.
and that it is but a little season thither to, Revel. 6.11.

(...) third, the present condition of our bodies even in the grave should
comfort us: for

1. The covenant of God is of force even with them, as they lie in the dust of
the earth, Mat. 22. 31.32.

2. The union with Christ holds still, Col. 1.18.

3. They are not dead, but a sleep in Jesus, 1. These. 4.13.

(...) fourth, woe unto wicked men, even because of the resurrection: they shall
sleep for a while in their bodies, but when they wake, they must be had away to
execution. They that have done evil shall rise unto shame, and contempt, and
condemnation: their bodies shall rise in dishonor, deformity, passible,
tormented with eternal and unutterable tortures, living in darkness without
light, (living, I say for ever, only to feel the pains of eternal dying)
shut up in prison, and denied the comfort of the meanest creatures; it were
well for them, if they did never rise, Revel. 20.14.15. Dan. 12.2. John, 5.29.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the last Judgment.
2. Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every man may receive the things which are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil.


HItherto of the Resurrection; the last Judgment follows.

The Principles concerning the last judgment are these:

First, that there shall be a general judgment, Jude, 14.15. And Enoch also,
the seventh from Adam, prophesied of such, saying: Behold, the Lord comes
with thousand of Saints:

To give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them of
all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against him.

Psalm. 9.8. For he shall judge the world in righteousness, and shall judge
the people with equity.

Psalm. 50.1. The God of Gods, even the Lord has spoken, and called the earth
from the rising up of the Sun, unto the going down thereof, etc.

Heb. 9.27. And as it is appointed unto men, that they shall once die, and after
that comes the judgment.

Dan. 7.9.10. I beheld till the thrones were set up, and the Ancient of days
did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the
pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning
fire:

A fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him: thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand thousands stood before him: the Judgment
was set, and the books opened.

Secondly, that Christ shall be the Judge, and that in the humane nature, Act.
10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it
is he, that is ordained of God a Judge of quick and dead.

Acts 17.13. Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness by that man, whom he has appointed, whereof he has
given an assurance to al men, in that he raised him from the dead.

2. Tim. 4.1. I charge thee therefore before God, and before the Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing, and in his
Kingdom.

John 5.22. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
unto the Son.

Ob. The Apostles shall judge the twelve Tribes, Matthew. 19.28.

Sol. 1. The Apostles judge the twelve Tribes by their faith and doctrine, the
example whereof shall take away all excuse from the Israelites.

2. They shall be as Justices of Peace on the Bench, and consent to Christ's
judgment.

Ob. The Saints shall judge the world, 1. Cor. 6.2.

Sol. As assessors with Christ, bearing witness to it, approouing it, and
assenting to it, as the Apostles before.

2. As they are members of Christ the Judge.

3. As their example shall be alleged to condemn the wicked.

Ob. But the Father and holy Ghost judge too.

Sol. The Father does judge by the Son, as by his representative Wisdom,
John 5.22. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto
the Son.

Dan. 7.13.14. As I beheld in visions by night, behold, one like the Son of
Man came in the clouds of heaven, and approached unto the Ancient of days, and
they brought him before him;

14. And he gave him dominion, and honor, and a Kingdom, that all people,
nations, etc. Or thus: the authority of judging is common to the three persons,
but the execution only proper to the Son.

Thirdly, all men shall be judged at that day: just and unjust; quick and
dead; small and great, Jude 15. To give judgment against all men, and to
rebuke all the ungodly among them.

Romans 14.9. For Christ therefore died, and rose again, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead, and the quick, etc.

2. Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Jesus
Christ, etc.

To. 14.10. We shall all appear before the judgment seat of Jesus Christ.

Psalm. 9.8. For he shall judge the world.

Object. All men are believers, or unbelievers; now the believers shall not
come unto judgment: as appears, Ioh. 5.24. Verily verily I say unto you, he
that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life,
and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death unto life. And
the unbeliever is condemned already, Ioh. 3.18. He that believes not is
condemned already.

Solution. The believer shall not come into the judgment of condemnation, and
the unbeliever is condemned already in effect and substance: 1. In the counsel
of God: 2. In the word of God: 3. In his own conscience, but yet the
manifestation and finishing of this judgment remains unto the last day.

Fourthly, all the secret things of men's natures, or works shall be brought to
light, Luke 8.17. For nothing is secret, that shall not be evident: neither any
thing hid, that shall not be known, and come to light.

1. Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come,
who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the
heart manifest.

Romans 2.16. At that day God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. And
therefore called a day of revelation or declaration, Romans 2.5.

Fifthly, it shall be at the last day, but the precise day and hour is not
known to any men or Angels; the proof for the like principle concerning the
resurrection, serves for this place, Mat. 24.36.

Sixthly, the judgment shall be most just and righteous, and all shall
confess it, Romans 14.10. But why do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou
despise thy brother? for we shall all appear bofore the judgment seat of
Christ.

2. Tim. 4.8. For henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day: and not to me
only, but unto all them also which love his appearing, etc.

Romans 2.5. But thou, after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest
unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the
just judgment of God.

Psalm. 9.8. For he shall judge the world with righteousness, and shall judge
the people with equity.

Seventhly, the judgment shall be according to men's works, 2. Cor. 5.10.
Every man shall receive the things which are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil, etc.

Romans 2.6. Who will reward every man according to his works.

Object. We are justified by faith alone without works.

Solution. 1. Works are inquired after in the last judgment, as the signs of
faith, and unbelief.

Sol. 2. We are justified by faith only, but shall be judged by faith and
works both together. For that, judgment does not serve to make men just, that
are unjust, but only to manifest them to be so indeed, which were so in this
life being truly justified.

The consideration whereof should serve for diverse uses, and first for
instruction, and so it should teach us,

First in general, speedily to repent us of our sins, and it should stir
us to all possible care of holy life, and to the love of all well doing, by
which our reckoning might then be furthered, Act. 17.31.

2. Pet. 3.11. Seeing therefore that all these things must be dissolved, what
manner persons ought ye to be in holy conversation and godliness?

14. Wherefore beloved, seeing you look for such things, be diligent, that ye
may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

Philip. 1.10. That ye may discern things that differ one from another, that
ye may be pure and without offense, until the day of Christ.

Tit. 2.12.13. And teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts and that we should live s^berly, and ^ighteously, and godly in this
present world.

Looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and
of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Secondly, in particular it should teach us,

1. Not to doat upon earthly things, seeing they must all be consumed in that
day in the fire.

2. To be patient under all wrongs, seeing we are assured there shall be
vengeance rendered at that day, 2. These. 1.5.6.7. Iam. 5.6.7. Phil. 4.5.

Thirdly, to take heed of rashness in judging other men: and men offend in
censuring;

1. When they inflict censures, and meddle over busily, or curiously with them
that be without, 1. Cor. 5.12. For what have I to do, to judge them which are
without?

2. When men speak evil of that which is good, and call good evil, Esa.
5.20. Woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good; which put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet
for sour.

3. When men judge of things doubtful, as the hidden things of the heart, and
the secret things of darkness, 1. Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing before the
time, until the Lord come, who will lighte^ things that are hid in darkness, and
make the counsels of the heart manifest. And censure things in the worst sense.

4. When men uncharitably censure others about things indifferent, Romans 14.3.4.
Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him which
eats not, judge him that eats, for God has received him.

4. Who art thou that condemnest another man's servant? he stands or falls
to his own master: yea he shall be established; for God is able to make him
stand, etc.

13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but use your judgment
rather in this, that no man put an occasion to fall, or a stumbling block
before his brother.

5. When men commit, what they condemn, Romans 2.1.2. Therefore thou art
inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that iudgest? for in that thou iudgest
another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou that iudgest, do the same things.

But we know, that the judgment of God is according to truth, against them
which commit such things. Or being guilty of greater faults, condemn others
for lesser, Mat. 7.1.2.3. Judge not, that ye be not judged.

And why see thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and perceiuest not
the beam, that is in thine own eye, etc.

6. When men make a fault worse then it is.

Fourthly, it should strike a fear into our hearts concerning God, and his
dreadful Majesty, and Justice; and make us afraid to offend him, and seek by
all means to glorify him, whatsoever become of us and the world, Revel. 14.7.
Saying with a loud voice; fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of
his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea,
and the fountain of waters, etc.

Fifthly, we should be sober, in not enquiring into things not revealed, and
look to the maine business: as for the precise time, or place of the
judgment, or from whence the fire shall come that shall burn all, or what
kind kind of throne it shall be, or what the sign of the Son of man shall be,
or such like; we believe that they shall be, but ought not to enquire when,
where, or how they shall be.

Sixthly, chiefly this doctrine of the last judgment should compel in all of
us a care so to live, that we may be sure to have comfort in that day: and that
we shall be sure to find;

1. If we believe in Jesus Christ, Ioh. 5.24. Verily verily I say unto you,
he that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death unto
life.

2. If we be sure to judge our selves here, God will not condemn us with the
world, 1. Cor. 11.31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged, etc.

3. If continually we consult with the word of God, to see that our deeds be
wrought in God, Ioh. 3.19.20.21. He that does truth, comes to the light,
that his deeds might be made manifest, that they are wrought according to God.

4. If we watch and pray always, they that pray much on earth, shall stand
before Christ with comfort at that day, Luke 21.36. Watch therefore and pray
continually, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and that ye may stand before the Son of man.

5. If we be merciful and loving, and bountiful to the godly in their
distresses, Matthew. 25. 31 etc.

6. If we be sheep; sheep I say: 1. For tractablenesse, so as we know,
hear, and be ruled by the voice of Christ. 2. For sociablenesse: a sheep will
not be alone, nor sort with swine. 3. For profitablenesse* that we be not
idle, nor unfruitful, Mat. 25. Ioh. 10.

7. If we can get the seal of the spirit, as our earnest of our final
redemption at that day; the witness of the spirit in this life will make all
sure against that day, Ephesians. 1.14. The spirit of promise is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the possession purchased unto the praise
of his glory.

Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but
ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.

8. If we hold fast what we have, and loose not what we have wrought, Revel.
3.11. Behold I come shortly; hold that which thou have, that no man take thy
crown.

2. Ioh. 8. Look to your selves, that we loose not the things which we have
done, but that we may receive a full reward.

9. If we often receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper with due
preparation: for therein

1. Christ does familiarly converse with us, and is given to our nourishment to
eternal life.

2. The outward elements are unfeigned pledges of the remission of all our
sins.

3. We therein remember the death of Christ for us, and how he was judged for
our sakes, and thereby have our hearts settled against the fear of any severity
from him.

4. In the right preparation for the Sacrament, we prepare for the last
judgment too; one work serves to both purposes.

5. The Sacraments are Gods broad seals, to assure us that we shall speed well
at that day.

Thus of the uses for instruction.

Secondly, this doctrine of the last judgment has singular terror in it to
all impenitent sinners, which may be considered either more generally, or more
particularly.

First, in general, it is terrible for them to hear, and know, that God has
set them a day, and has given them final warning to repent; or else
undoubtedly he will judge them with all severity, Act. 17.31. Because he has
appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by
that man whom he has appointed, whereof he has given an assurance unto all
men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

Jude 15. To give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly
among them of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of
all their cruel speaking, which wicked sinners have spoken against him.

Romans 2.5. But thou after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent,
heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration
of the just judgment of God.

Who will reward every man according to his works, etc.

Secondly, in particular, this terror is the more grievous, if they consider
either the distinct miseries shall then fall upon the^, or the several sins
God has reserved to trial and punishment at that day.

What heart ca^ stand before the serious thoughts of ye particulars?

1. They shall hear the thunder of Christ's fearful voice summoning them.

2. They shall be chased in by the Angels before Christ, from all the four
winds of heaven.

3. They shall be set at Christ's lefthand, as a sign of miserable disgrace,
Matthew. 25.33.

4. A fire shall devour before Christ, and it shall be tempestuous round about
him, Psalm. 50.3. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence; a fire shall
devour before him, and a mighty tempest shall be moved round about him, etc.

2. These. 1.8. In flaming fire rendering vengeance unto them, that do not know
God, and which obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

5. They shall be everlastingly shamed, and before all the world, Dan. 12.2. And
many of them, that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt; when all their
sins shall be discovered, and set in order before them, Psalm. 50.21. These
things have thou done, and I held my tongue; therefore thou thoughtst, that I
was like thee: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee, etc.

6. They shall be sentenced to eternal condemnation, containing in it,

1. Separation from God, Christ, and all the godly, Go ye cursed, etc. Matthew.
25.41. etc.

2. Pain and anguish unutterable, Romans 2.9. Tribulation and anguish shall be
upon the soul of every man that does evil: of the Jew first, and also of the
Grecian.

3. Fellowship with the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25. 41. as a little
before.

Ob. Some one might say, We hope it is not certain, that there shall be such a
day.

Sol. It is most certain, It is appointed, as certain, as that men shall die,
Heb. 9.27. And as it is appointed unto men, that they shall once die, and after
that comes the judgment.

Acts 17.31. Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness, etc.

Besides, the terrible plagues, which have been and are in the world, shows,
that God is extremely wrath with sin, and will call to judgment; such as the
drowning of the old world, burning of Sodom, swallowing up of Corath, Dathan,
and Abiram; the neglect of the Gentiles, the reiection of the Jews, the
punishing of Christ, the afflictions of the godly, the wars, pestilences,
famins, etc. that are in the world.

And they themselves may guess somewhat at it, by the sharpenes of the word,
the accusing of the conscience, the checkes of the spirit, and the fearful
terrors of conscience which fall upon some men.

Ob. But God we hope will be merciful.

Sol. It is a day of wrath, not of mercy; the date of mercy will be then out,
Romans 2.5. But thou after thine hardness and heart, which cannot repent,
heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration
of the just judgment of God, etc.

Ob. But God says nothing to me all this while: I escape, and am not troubled;
I discern no way that God is displeased with me.

Sol. 1. Seaes of wrath hang over thy head daily, though thou discern them
not, John 3. vlt. He that believes in the Son has everlasting life, and he
that obeys not the Son, shall not see the life, but the wrath of God
abides on him.

Sol. 2. Many signs of Gods displeasure are upon thy soul, though thou feel
them not. It is one extreme curse to be left off unto such a spirit of slumber.

3. Though God does not yet discover to thee his displeasure, yet will he
awake to thy judgment, Psalm. 50.31. These things have thou done, and I held
my tongue; therefore thou thoughtst, that I was like thee: but I will reprove
thee, and set them in order before thee.

Ob. But I may find some means to help my self at that day.

Sol. Riches will not avail in the day of wrath, Job, 36.18. For Gods wrath
is, lest he should take thee away in thine abundance: for no multitude of gifts
can deliver thee.

Verse. 19. Will he regard thy riches? he regards not gold, nor all them that
excel in strength. And there shall be none to deliver, Psalm. 50.22. O
consider this, ye that forget God; lest I tear you in pieces, and there be
none that can deliver you, etc.

Ob. But I may then repent.

Sol. No: As death leaves thee, so shall judgment find thee; it is a day of
the declaration of the righteous judgment of God, Romans 2.5. But thou after
thine hardness, and heart, that cannot repent, heapest unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.

2. Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every man receive the things which are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil.

Ob. But there is a world of people in the same case.

Sol. He will judge all the ungodly, he cares not for the multitude, Jude, 15.
To give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly amongst them
of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of al their
cruel speaking, which wicked sinners have spoken against him.

Besides, he has plagued multitudes, as the old World, etc. and he can easily
do execution: for he comes with thousand thousands of his Angels, Jude, 14.
And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of such, saying, Behold, the
Lord comes with thousands of his Saints.

Ob. But who knows my faults?

Sol. 'The hidden things of darkness, and the secrets of men's hearts shall then
be discovered, 1. Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing before the time until the
Lord come, who will lighten things, that are hid in darkness, and make the
counsels of the hearts manifest, and then shall every man have praise of God.

Ob. But by what evidence can I be convinced? God may forget my faults before
then.

Sol. No: God has them written in his book of remembrance with a pen of iron,
and a point of a diamond, Ier. 17.1. The sin of Judah is written with a pen of
iron, and with the point of a diamond, and graven upon the table of your
hearts, and upon the horns of your altars. And evidence will be easy to be
had upon the opening of these books, Revel* 20.12. And I saw the dead both
great and small stand before God, and the books were opened: and another book
was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were judged of those
things which are written in the books, according to their works.

Besides, the Heavens will declare his righteousness, Psalm. 50.6. And the
creatures abused by them, will give in evidence against them, Ier. 17.1. And
the word that men have heard shall judge them. And their own consciences shall
be dilated, and be in stead of a thousand witnesses: and the Spirit of God
that has so often reproved the world of sin, can easily accuse them, Ioh.
16.8. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment, etc.

Ob. I know no great fault by my self.

Sol. Though thou forget thy sins; yet Christ will remember them, Matthew. 25.
It will not serve the turn to say, When did we so?

Ob. But I never did Christ any great wrong.

Sol. Thou have many ways sinned against Christ, though thy careless heart
perceive it not: but if thou had not, yet in as much as thou have done wrong
to Christians, thou have done it to Christ, Matthew. 25.

Ob. But I have done much good in the world.

Sol. If thou have not had true faith, and love, and repentance, it shall not
avail thee, as these places show, 1. Cor. 13.3. And though I feed the poor
with all my goods, and though I give my body, that I be burned, and have not
love, it profits me nothing.

Ob. But we never had such means of knowledge, as others have had.

Sol. They that have sinned without the Law, shall be judged without the Law;
and they that have sinned under the Law, shall be judged by the Law, Romans 2.
12. For as many as have sinned without the Law, shall perish also without the
law; and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law.

Ob. But it is a great while thither.

Sol. It is not: for the Lord is at hand, 1. Pet. 4.7. Now the end of all
things is at hand; be you therefore sober, and watching in prayer.

Iam. 5.8. Be ye also patient therefore, and settle your hearts; for the coming
of the Lord draws near.

Besides, the signs of the last judgment are the most of them accomplished
already; Antichrist is revealed, and almost pulled down, 2. Thessalon. 2. 1.
John 2.18. The World has been full of spirits of deceivers, 1. Tim. 4.1. The
sins of the last age are every where at the full: Iniquity abounds, 2.
Timoth. 3.1. Matthew. 24.12. The powers of heaven are shaken, which appears by
the often Eclipses of Sun and Moon; and by the uncertainty of the Seasons
both in Summer and Winter, Matthew. 24.29. The sea roares and is outrageous; men
are secure now as in the days of Noah, Matthew. 24.37.

3. Were it that it were further off: yet the day of death, which is the day of
thy particular judgment, is not far off.

Ob. But yet sure there will be some kind of warning.

Sol. No: he will come suddenly, as the thief in the night, 1. These. 5.2.3.
For ye your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord shall come, eue^ as
a thief in the night.

For when they shall say, peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden
destruction, as the travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape.

Mat. 24.39. And knew nothing, till the flood came, and took them all away; so
shall also the coming of the Son of Man be,

And the rather should men be affected with the terror of this day, and be
thereby persuaded to repentance:

1. Because God will be Judge himself, Psalm. 50.6. and therefore there can be
no appeal, he being supreme Judge.

2. Because it is a final sentence, there will be no time of respit, or
change, or reuocation.

3. Because they shall be judged by him, whom they have so much despised, and
wronged, Revel. 1.7.8. Behold, he comes in the clouds, and every eye shall
see him; yea, even they which pierced him through, and all kindreds of the
earth shall wail before him.

4. Because Gods proceedings shall be all cleared, and every tongue shall
confess, that God has done nothing but Justice, Romans 2.5. It is a day of the
declaration of the just judgment of God: and Romans 14.11.

And this justice will the more appear

1. By the equity of Gods dealing: they have had their days of sin, and
therefore reason he should have his day of wrath, Romans 2.5.

2. By the consideration of his patience, what a wonderful while has God
deferred this last judgment, 2. Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his
promise, as some men count slacknesse, but is patient toward us, and would have
no man to perish, but would all men to come to repentance.

Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience,
and long suffering, not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to
repentance, etc.

3. God will then discover a world of offenses in every wicked man, that are
not now known.

4. God will then unfold the secrets of his Counsel, and bring forth exquisite
reasons of his proceedings, which are now like a great deep unto us, Romans
11.33. O the deepenesse of the riches, both of the wisdom, and knowledge of
God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! etc.

And as this doctrine is terrible, in respect of the parts of their misery,
and in respect of the taking off of all objections: so is it, because the
particular sinners are particularly mentioned in Scripture, that shall be sure
to speed ill at that day: for Christ with terror will then judge,

1. The man of sin, who shall be sure to be consumed with the breath of his
mouth, though he lord it for a time over all that is called God, 2. These. 2.4.

2. All that worship the beast, and receive his mark, shall be cast into the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Revel. 19.20. and 14.9.10.

3. All Atheistical mockers of religion, and the coming of Christ, 2. Pet.
3.3.

4. All false teachers, which bring in damnable heresies, 2. Pet. 2.1.

5. All Apostates, that sin willingly after they have received the truth, Hebr.
10.26. For if we sin willingly after that we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins.

27. But a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall
devour the adversaries, etc.

6. All goats, that is, unruly Christians, that will not be kept within the
mou^ds of Christ's government, Matthew. 25.32.

7. All Hypocrites shall then be unmasked, Luke 12.1.2. Psalm. 50.17. Take heed
to your selves of the leven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

2. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, neither hid,
that shall not be known.

8. All railers shall receive the punishment of their ungodly words, Psalm.
50.19. Jude 15. To give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the
ungodly among the^ of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their cruel speaking, which wicked sinners have spoken
against him, etc.

9. All censorious and masterlike men, that judge other men in what they are
guilty themselves, Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever
thou art, that iudgest: for in that that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest
thy self, for thou that iudgest do the same things.

3. And think thou this, O thou man, that iudgest them which do such
things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God, etc?

Iam. 3.1. etc. My brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall
receive the greater condemnation, etc.

10. All merciless and covetous rich men, Iam. 5.1. Go to now ye rich men,
weep, and howl for your miseries, that shall come upon you.

2. Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth-eaten.

3. Your gold and silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire, ye have heaped up
treasures for the last days.

5. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and in wantonness; ye have
nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.

Matthew. 25.41. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

42. For I was an hungered, and you gave me no meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me
no drink, etc.

Iam. 2.13. For there shall be judgment merciless, to him that shows no
mercy.

11. All whoremongers and adulterers, Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable among
all, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, etc.

12. All drunkards and Epicures, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at
any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares
of this life, and lest that day come upon you at unawares.

13. All deceitful persons with their scant measures, and false waights, Mich.
6.10.11. Are yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and
the scant measure that is abominable?

Shall I justify the wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful waights?

14. All liars, and all that love lies, Revel. 21.8. But the fearful, and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Revel. 22.15. For without shall be dogs, and enchanters, and whoremongers and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves, or makes lies, etc.

15. Lastly, all that disobey the Gospel, 2. These. 1.8. In flaming fire,
rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God, and which obey not unto the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And thus for terror.

Lastly, the doctrine of the last judgment should be exceeding comfortable to
all the godly, and that in many respects:

First, if they shall consider who shall be their Judge, even he that is their
brother, husband, advocate, head, and redeemer: he that was judged for their
sakes; and therefore they need to fear no hard sentence from him.

Secondly, if they consider the present assurance of hope.

For first, has not Christ given them many promises, that it shall go well
with them at that day?

2. Has not Christ justified them already, and absolved the^ from all their
sins? Romans 3.24.25.

3. Have they not received the earnest of the spirit, and the seal of the
Sacraments? 2. Cor. 1.21.22. 2. Cor. 5.5.

4. Have they not judged themselves, and therefore are they not free from
condemnation with the world? 1. Cor. 11.31.32.

5. They have been judged already, the afflictions of this life will be
accounted sufficient unto them, 1. Pet. 4.17.

They may trust their souls to God: and that God, that has begun his good
work in them, will perform it till the day of Christ, Philip. 1.5.6. 1. Cor.
1.8.

Thirdly, if they consider the benefits they shall attain unto at that day:
for Christ will be made marvelous in all them that believe, 2. These. 1.10.
They shall have honor, and praise; their innocence shall be cleared, and their
miseries and sins ended. And when Christ shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in glory, Colos. 3.4.

Fourthly, if they consider the circumstances of the Judgment, as

1. The neernesse of the time should make them hold up their heads, Matthew.
24.22.33.

Philip. 4.5. Let your patient mind be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand.

Iam. 5.8. Be ye also patient therefore, and settle your hearts for the coming
of the Lord draws near.

2. The greatness of the assembly, before whom they shall be so much graced
by Christ, they shall be honored before all men, and Angels.

3. The condition of the sentence, it shall be a final sentence never to be
revoked, but acknowledged to all eternity.

4. And besides, they shall have this favor, that nothing shall be remembered
but goodness in good men: their sins shall not be mentioned unto them,
Matthew. 25.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the glory of heaven.
1. Cor. 2.9. But as it is written, The things which eye has not seen,
neither ear has heard, neither came into man's heart, are, which God has
prepared for them that love him.


HItherto of the principles that concern the resurrection, and the last
judgment: The principles that concern the glory of heaven follow.

There are four principles concerning the glory of heaven.

The first concerns the greatness of it: It is unspeakable, and in respect of
us here on earth, incomprehensible, 1. Cor. 2.9. as in the beginning.

1. Ioh. 3.2. Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not
appear what we shall be, and we know, that when we shall appear, we shall be
like him; for we shall see him as he is.

Colos. 3.3.4. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

When Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with
him in glory.

2. Cor. 12.4. How that he was taken up into Paradise, and heard words which
cannot be spoken, which are not possible for man to utter,

Revel. 2.17. Let him that has an ear hear, what the spirit says unto the
Churches: to him that overcomes will I give to eat of the manna that is hid,
and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
man knows saving he that receives it.

Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me the path of life, in thy presence is the
fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Psalm. 31.19. How great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee, and done to them that trust in thee, even before the sons of
men?

The second concerns the continuance of it, and so it is eternal; and
therefore is this life called eternal life, and immortality, Matthew 25. verse.
46. And these shall go into everlasting pain, and the righteous into life
eternal.

2. Timoth. 1.10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior
Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality
unto light, through the Gospel.

1. Pet. 1.4. To an inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for you, etc.

2. Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be
destroyed, we have a building given of God, that is, an house not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens.

The third concerns the cause of it: Heaven is the gift of God, and proceeds
only from his free grace, and not for any merit in us, Luke 12.32. Fear not
little flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom.

Titus 3.4. But when the bountifulness and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared; not for our righteousness, but according to his mercy he saved us,
etc.

Ioh. 3.16. For God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.

Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, etc.

1. Pet. 1. all the chapter.

The fourth concerns the persons that shall enjoy it: the elect of God only
obtain this glory, 1. Cor. 15.50. etc. This say I brethren, that flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit
incorruption.

Revel. 21.27. And there shall enter into it none unclean thing, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or lies, but they which are written in the
Lambs book of life.

1. Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom
of God? be not deceived: Neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers,
nor wantons, nor buggeres, etc.

Romans 2.7. That is to them which by continuance in well doing, seek glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life.

10. But to every man that does good, shall be glory, and honor, and peace, to
the Jew first, and also to the Grecian.

The uses follow, and are either for instruction, or for consolation.

First, for instruction: and then the doctrine of the glory of heaven should
work diverse impressions upon our hearts.

1. We should with all earnestness importune God, to enable us to behold by
the effectualnesse of contemplation, the greatness of that felicity, is
provided for us in heaven: we are naturally extremely unable for the
contemplation of it, we should beseech God by his spirit to force open our
eyes, and make us able to stand and gaze with admiration at the glory to come,
Ephesians. 1.18.19. Romans 5.2.3.

2. Our hearts should be fiered with an ardency of desire, and endeavor to
praise the glorious and free grace of God, which has without our deserts
appointed us unto such glory; we can never walk worthy of heaven, till we be
fitted to a daily and affectionate praise of Gods love to us therein: All ages
should stand and wonder at such rich grace and tender kindness of God in Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 1.6. Ephesians. 2.7.

Thirdly, it should raise up in us a wonderful estimation of the godly, who
are therefore the only excellent Ones, because as princes of God they are borne
heirs to so great a Kingdom: No meanness of their outward condition should
abate of our reverence to them, that are so rich in faith, and heirs of such
glory, etc. Psalm. 6.3. James 2.5.

And seeing we must live with them for ever, we should choose them, as the most
happy companions of our lives here, and receive them, as Christ received us to
glory, Romans 15.7. 1. Ioh. 4.7.17, etc. And live in all peace with them, Ephesians.
4.23. And for this reason husbands should make much of their godly wives, as
heirs with them of the same grace of God, 1. Peter 3.8. And Masters should use
with all respect their religious servants, knowing that of the Lord, their
very servants shall receive the reward of inheritance, Colos. 3.23.24.

Fourthly, it should exceedingly raise the price of godliness, and make us with
all hearty affection deuote our selves to weldoing, seeing there is such an
invaluable gain arises unto such, as with patience and painfulness continue
in doing good: we should be abundant in the work of the Lord; if for no
reason, yet because of the great reward in heaven, 1. Cor. 15.58. Romans 2.7.10.

Fifthly, it should make us to take off our affections from the World, with
disdain and indignation at our selves for being so foolish, as to settle our
hearts on things below. And since necessity enioynes us to use the world, this
religious hope should make us use it, as if we used it not, expressing all
sobriety and temperance, and contempt of those transitory things, and setting
our hearts there, where those matchless treasures are. What profit is it to
win all this World, if our souls be shut out of Heaven? and what loss can it
be, if we loose this World, and find our right unto the World to come? This
doctrine should make us feelingly know, and profess our selves to be
strangers and pilgrims here; and to desire to be no other, then such, as long
to be absent from hence, that we may be present with the Lord in this glory.

1. Cor. 7.31. Col. 3.1.2. 1. Pet. 1.13. Matthew. 6.19.20. Matthew 16.25.26. Heb.
11.13. 2. Cor. 5.6.

Sixthly, we should be especially careful to be all that, that is required
unto eternal life.

And so in general we must be sure, we be borne again, else Christ is
peremptory, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Ioh. 3.5. Heaven is
an inheritance, and therefore we must first be sons. That glory must
penetrate into our hearts by the beams of it, so as we be changed from glory
to glory, 2. Corint. 3.18. We must enter into the first degree of eternal
life, and that is in this life, we must bear the image of Christ.

And in particular, we must distinctly look to these things:

1. We must be careful to be provided of the means to teach us the way to
heaven; we must labor for the meat, that endures to eternal life, John 6.27.
As knowing, that the preaching of the Gospel is the power of God to salvation,
Romans 1.16. Romans 10.14.

2. We must seriously study the mysteries of this Kingdom, and keep our
selves close to profitable things, which may edify us, Matthew. 13.11. Titus
3.8.9.

3. We must purge our selves as he is pure, we must seriously, and soundly
employ our selves in the duties of mortification of our corruptions, 1. John
3.3. And every man tha^ has this hope in him, purges himself, as he is
pure, etc.

4. We must be sure, that the tempter deceive us not in our faith: for that is
our evidence for those things, which are not seen, and that makes them (as it
were) present, Heb. 11.1. Now faith is the ground of things which are hoped
for, and the evidence of things which are not seen.

1. These. 3.5. Even for this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent him
that I might know of your faith; lest the tempter had tempted you in any sort,
and that our labor had been in vain.

1 Pet. 1.7. That the trial of your faith, being much more precious then gold
that perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto your praise,
and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

2. Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves, whether you are in the faith: examine your
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
you be reprobates?

For by faith Christ lives in us, Gal. 2.20.

5. We must be sure, we be not ashamed of Christ in this World, and that we
do not deny him here on earth, but contrariwise, Matthew. 10.32. Whosoever
therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father, which is in heaven.

Verse. 33. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before
my Father, which is in heaven.

6. We must get the earnest of this inheritance, which is the spirit of
promise: for that will stablish us, Ephesians. 1.14. 2. Cor. 1.22.23.

For when God gives glory in heaven, then the spirit of glory rests upon men
in this life, 1. Pet. 4.14.

And the spirit is our earnest, either by anointing us with saving grace, (for
they assure us as infallibly of this kingdom, as the oil poured on the Kings,
did assure them of their Kingdom) or by refreshing, and satisfying our hearts,
in hearing the promises, or receiving the Sacraments, or answering our prayers:

But in all this we must remember these things:

1. To do this work first: first, seek the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33. defer
not the time to the last gasp.

2. To do it constantly: Let him that is righteous be righteous still, Revel.
22.

3. Praying in the holy Ghost, and keeping our selves in the love of God, Jude,
20.21.

4. To do it violently: Heaven shoul suffer violence, Matthew. 11.12.

5. To do it humbly, renouncing all our own merits, and ascribing all to the
free grace of God, and the merits of Jesus Christ, Romans 6.23. Ephesians. 2.8.9.

For heaven is an inheritance, and therefore comes by favor, not by purchase;
and besides, we are adopted children too, and not natural.

6. Having finished al things, to stand fast, and hope perfectly for the grace
of God to be brought unto us at the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.13.

Secondly, these principles may serve for singular consolation, and so

1. Against the instabilitie of this present life, while we look upon our
abiding City in Heaven. Thus the Patriarchs comforted themselves, Heb. 11.13.

2. Against the grief for the death of our friends, why do we sorrow for
them, that are so happy?

3. Against the many afflictions of this life, the fear and care of which
should be swallowed with the hope of eternal life, as these places show, Romans
8.18. For I count, that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy
of the glory which shall be showed unto us.

2. Cor. 4.17.18. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes
unto us a far most excellent, and an eternal weight of glory, while we
look not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not seen:
for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not
seen, are eternal.

4. Against the fear of death: for these principles teach us to believe, that
the dead are blessed, Reuelat. 14.13. Then I heard a voice from heaven saying
unto me; Write, Blessed are the dead, which hereafter die in the Lord: even so
says the Spirit: for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them. And that this death will be quickly swallowed up of victorious life, 1.
Cor. 15.16.17. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law.

But thanks be to God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

These comforts will be the more abundant, if we consider, either, first, the
particulars of this glory; secondly, or the properties of it.

For the first, our glory in heaven may be thus shadowed out;

It consists of perfection of holiness and happiness.

Our holiness shall then be perfect, we shall be without spot or wrinkle,
Ephesians. 5.27. Gods people shall then be all righteous, Isaiah 60.21. Thy people
also shall be all righteous. And this perfection shall be both of Nature, and
of Action.

In nature we shall be perfectly holy, which may be considered in respect of
the holiness.

First, of our souls; secondly, of our bodies; thirdly, of our soul and body
together.

First, in our souls there shall be

1. Exquisite knowledge; we shall then know as we are known, when that which is
in part is done away: we shall no more understand as children, but shall have
our minds enlightened above the knowledge of Prophets and Apostles in this
world: for God himself shall be our everlasting light, 1. Cor. 13.10.11.12.
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
abolished.

When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as
a child: but when I became a man, I put away childishnes, or childish things:

For now we see through a glass darkely, but then shall we see face to face;
now I know in part, but then shall I know, even as I am known.

Isaiah 60.19. Thou shall have no more Sun to shine by day, neither shall the
brightness of the Moon shine unto thee: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting
light, and thy God thy glory.

2. Freedom of will, when all the impediments of desire and endeavors shall
be taken off, which now as fetters hinder us in communion with God, and as
cords, hale us after vanity: where it shall be also as easy to do good, as
to desire it.

3. Unspeakable charity; our hearts being filled with all those affections, that
are now any way required in the word of God, either toward God or man, 1. Cor.
13.8 Love does never fall away, though that prophesying be abolished, or the
tongues cease, or knowledge vanish away. What is now the life of our lives
more, then to love and to be beloved? This earthly love is but a spark in
comparison.

Secondly, in our bodies, there shall be a perfect conformity of all the
members for the service of God and the soul, they shall be no more weapons of
unrighteousness, as they have been, Romans 6.13. Romans 6.19.

Thirdly, in both body and soul, there shall be,

1. The perfect Vision of the admirable beauties of God, which of it self is
more worth then the possession of the whole world, and this Vision of God shall
not only be mental by contemplation, of which 2. Cor. 12.2. but also
corporal; for so Job avouches Cap. 19.25. For I am sure my Redeemer lives,
and he shall stand the last on earth.

Verse. 26. And though after my skin worms destroy this body: yet shall I see
God in my flesh,

Verse. 27. Whom I my self shall see, and my eyes behold, and none other for
me, though my reins are consumed within me.

We shall then see him perfectly in the creatures, and have him perfectly in
our selves, and behold the Trinity in the glory of it after a way now
unutterable.

2. The perfection of the image of God in both: we shall then be, as he is,
partaking perfectly of the divine nature, 1. John 3.2. 2. Pet. 1.4. which is
signified by those pure white garments, mentioned, Revel. 3.4.5. and 6.11. and
7.13. and 19.8.

Thus shall we be perfect in nature.

The perfection of our actions, or obedience shall then be obtained, we shall
then serve God, and love our brethren without all defect. We shall praise God
with the Angels to all eternity: for that shall be the maine outward service
of God: for prayer shall the^ cease, Revel. 4.10.11.

Thus of the perfection of holiness.

The perfection of happiness shall have in it diverse things.

The first part of our felicity is acknowledgement in the kingdom of heaven;
which is a work of Christ, declaring us in particular to be elected of God,
and his children, and friends. And this is more comfortable, because we shall
thus be proclaimed the heirs apparent of heaven before God, and all his holy
Angels, Matthew. 10.32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him
will I confess also before my father which is in heaven.

2. Glorious liberty reserved for the sons of God unto that day, of which,
Romans 8.21.

And this liberty may be considered two ways, viz. 1. From what we shall be
free. 2. To what we shall be free.


For the first, we shall then be free:

First, from the torments and miseries of the damned in hell, we shall have an
eternal discharge from that most fearful place, which is promised us already
in this life, Romans 8.1. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, etc.

Revel. 20.14. And death and Hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is the
second death, etc.

Secondly, from the displeasure of God; he will never be angry with us any
more, there shall be no more curse, or Anathema, Revel. 22.3. And there shall
be no more curse, but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and
his servants shall serve him.

Thirdly, from sin, and the power to sin: our holiness shall be better then
Adams in Paradise; he might sin, but we shall be confirmed, as the Angels of
heaven: so as we shall not only be free from sin, but from the possibility
to sin, Ephesians. 5.26.

Fourthly, from all aduerfary power; we shall never more be molested by
devils, nor by wicked men, either spiritual, or corporal. There shall be a
perpetual triumph without war; all our enemies shall be cast into the lake
of fire, Revel. 21.8. Revel. 20.14. Revel. 22.3. As we shall not loose a
friend; so we shall not fear an enemy.

Fifthly, from all infirmity in our natures; as from ignorance, and all
disabilities, from sorrow, discouragement, hardness of heart, fear, and
perturbations, Revel. 21.4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither
shall there be any more pain; for the first things are passed. And so also
from all such graces, as suppose either imperfection in us: such as faith,
hope, and repentance: or misery in the creatures without us, as grief, anger,
fear, hatred, and the like, 1. Cor. 13.

Sixthly, from all inferiority, and subjection, and servitude, none shall be
under the jurisdiction of others: all Oeconomicall, Political, and
Ecclesiastical relations shall then cease. We shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 8.11.

Seventhly, from all labor and affliction of life. Their labors shall cease,
and afflictions shall be cast into the sea, they shall enjoy an eternal
Sabbath, the true Canaan, Revel. 14.13. Then I heard a voice from heaven,
saying unto me; Write, blessed are the dead, which hereafter die in the Lord,
even so says the spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them, etc.

Heb. 4.9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God, etc.

2. These. 1.7. And to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, etc. And by labors, I
understand also all the pains or difficulties we are at, even about the
service of God: for God shall be all in all.

Eighthly, from all shame and blushing: There shall be nothing but honor and
praise to all eternity: whereas in this world the inward shame of some offense
imputed, or committed, make life it self many times a burden, and there is
little ease to the mind, but in remembrance of the day of Christ, when it
shall be removed.

Ninthly, from all envy: envy is said to be bitter, 1. Cor. 3.3. But when
charity shall be perfect, then shall that property of not envying be made
perfect too, 1. Cor. 13.

Tenthly, from all interruption both in holiness and felicity; which in this
life is grievous, and arises many times from good things, and good persons as
well as evil.

Eleuenthly, from all the means of a natural life, and from the inconveniences
too: there shall be no need of meat, drink, sleep, marriage, raiment,
physic, nor the light of the Sun: For there shall be no hunger, thirst,
heat, cold, darkness, or the like grieuances, but we shall live as the
Angels of heaven, etc.

And so in a word we shall be free from the first things, Revel. 2.4.

Thus much of what we shall be free from.

Now follows, what we shall be free to.

First, we shall be free of heaven, the most holy place, Heb. 10.19. Seeing
therefore brethren, that by the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the
holy place.

Paradise: Luke 23.43. Then Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, to day
thou shall be with me in Paradise.

Our fathers house: John 14.2. In my Fathers house are many dwelling places: if
it were not so, I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you.

The new Jerusalem: Revel. 21.2. And I saw the holy City, new Jerusalem, come
down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride trimmed for her husband.

The heaven of heavens, which for lightness, largenes, pureness, delightfulnes,
and all praises of a place almost infinitely excels all this visible world. Nor
shall the godly be restrained only to heaven, but they shall be free of the new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness, 2. Pet. 3.13. But we look for a new
heaven, and a new earth, according to his promise, wherein dwells
righteousness, etc.

Secondly, we shall be free to the enjoying of the happy society of all the
glorious Saints and Angels of heaven, Hebr. 12.22.23. But ye are come unto the
mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to
the company of innumerable Angels.

And to the congregation of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and
to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men.

Thirdly, to the glorious presence of God, and the Lamb; we shall always
dwell in the Kings presence, Revel. 21.3. And I heard a great voice out of
heaven, saying, behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be their God
with them.

Revel. 21.23. And the City has no need of the sun, neither of the moon to
shine in it: for the glory of God did light it, and the Lamb is the light of it.

Revel. 22.3.4. And there shall be no more curse; but the throne of God, and of
the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him.

And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads.

Fourthly, to all the treasures of heaven; which are inexpressible, shadowed
out by some comparisons; as by being free to eat of the tree of life, Revel.
22.2. In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the river was
the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and gave fruit every
month, and the leaves of the tree served to heal the nations with, etc.

As also by being free to drink of the water of life freely, Revel. 21.6. And
he said unto me, It is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end,
and I will give to him that is athirst of the well of the waters of life
freely: even out of a river, that is pure as Crystal, Revel. 22.1. And he
showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of
the throne of God, and of the Lamb: And such like.

Thus of Liberty.

The third part of our felicity in heaven is majesty: all the godly shall be
there seated as Princes in thrones of Majesty, and prince-like splendour, being
crowned with crowns of glory; which glory shall be so great, that the Kings of
the earth are supposed to bring all their glory and honor to it, and yet all
too little to shadow out this exceeding glory of all the Saints, Revel. 3.21.
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
overcome, and sit with my father in his throne.

2. Tim. 4.8. For henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me
only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

Revel. 21.24. And the people which are saved, shall walk in the light of it,
and the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto it.

Which as it imports a perfection of splendour in every Saint, so it does not
dissolve the degrees or orders of glory, every man shall be advanced in his
own lot, Dan. 12.13. But go thou thy way, till the end be; for thou shall
rest and stand up in thy lot at the end of the days.

1. Cor. 15.40. There are also heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies; but the
glory of the heavenly is one, and the glory of the earthly is another.
Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, Martyrs, shall not want their eminency in
heaven.

The fourth is dominion, and rule over all creatures; that which we lost in
Adam, shall be perfectly restored in heaven, after the last judgment, Revel.
2.26. For he that overcomes and keeps my words unto the end, to him will I
give power over nations.

The fifth is possession of all the pleasures, which are at Gods right hand,
unutterable joys, rivers of pleasures. This is that, which in a sparing
language is called the time of refreshing, Act. 3.19. Amend your lives
therefore, and turn, that your sins may be put away, when the time of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence is the
fullness of joy; and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. For if
the joy of the godly in this life be called, 1. Pet. 1.17. A joy unspeakable
and glorious.

And if the Lord give them drink out of the river of thy pleasures in this
world, as Psalm. 36.8.9. How much more shall it exceed all language in heaven!
called the masters joy.

The felicities which I have here mentioned, are for the most part common both
to soul and body.

Now there is a peculiar felicity in heaven belonging to the bodies of men,
which consists in that marvelous transfiguration of them to a condition, in
respect of qualities, far above what they are, or can be in this world. Our
bodies in general shall be made like the glorious body of Christ, though on
earth they are but vile, Philip. 3.21. Who shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby
he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

They shall enjoy eternal health, but of the glory of the body I have
entreated before, in the use of the doctrine of the Resurrection.

Thus of the parts of this glory.

The Adjuncts of it follow.

And so there be four things in the consideration of the glory to come,
should much affect us.

First, that it is a glory unspeakable, that is, it is so great, that no
language on earth can describe it. For though we mention those foresaid parts
of it, yet our narrow hearts and mouths are infinitely straightened, in
comparison of the full glory of man in these things, 1 Cor. 2.9. But as it is
written, The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither
came into man's heart, are, which God has prepared for them, that love him, etc.

Secondly, that it is certain, and we cannot be disappointed of it: else it
were uncomfortable to hear of so much felicity and holiness, and yet not be
sure to possess it. The certainty of it, that God will bestow such glory, may
appear diverse ways.

1. There is an act or ordinance for it in Gods eternal Counsel, 2. Tim.
2.19. But the foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal; The Lord
knows who are his, and, Let every one that calls on the name of Christ
depart from iniquity.

Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.

Romans 8.30. Moreover, whom he predestinate, them also he called; and whom he
called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdom prepared
for you, from the foundations of the world.

2. Christ purchased it with his blood, Ephesians. 1.14.

3. Christ has made intercession, when he was on earth unto his Father, that
he might have his redeemed Ones to be where he is, John, 17.11. And now am I
no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee, holy
Father, keep them in thy name.

Verse. 24. Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with me,
even where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me: for
thou louedst me before the foundation of the world.

4. God has made us many promises, and given us not only his word, but his
oath to assure it unto us, Heb. 6.17. So God willing more abundantly to show
unto the heirs of promise, the stablenesse of his Counsel, bound himself by
an oath,

Verse. 18. That by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God
should lie, we might have strong consolation, which have our refuge to hold
fast the hope that is set before us, etc.

5. He has sealed to it, not only in the Sacrament, but by his spirit, which
will be our witness, and is our earnest, Ephesians. 1.13. Wherein also after that
ye believed, you were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise.

Verse. 14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of
the possession purchased unto the praise of his glory.

6. He has begun eternal life in us already.

7. Christ is gone into heaven of purpose to provide a place ready for us, Ioh.
14.3. And though I go to prepare a place for you: I will come again, and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also.

Heb. 10.19. Seeing therefore brethren, that by the blood of Jesus we may be
bold to enter into the holy place,

Verse. 20. By the new and living way, which he has prepared for us through the
vale, which is his flesh.

Thus of the certainty of it.

The third thing is the eternity of it, all this glory were the less, if it
were thought, it would ever end: but it shall never end: for

1. Nothing of it shall be lost, or decay.

2. There shall be no death there: for death and hell are cast into the lake
of fire.

3. There shall be no old age, or withering condition in men that possess it:
it withers not, 1. Pet. 1.4. To an inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and
that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you.

4. God being all in all, there shall be no weariness, no fullness of
affections, or satietie, no loathing.

Divines are wont to shadow out eternity, by the similitude of a little bird
drinking up a drop of water out of the sea; if every ten thousand years the
bird should come and drink up but one drop, yet the sea might be dry at
length: but yet this lasting of the sea, is nothing in comparison to the
lasting of the glory of heaven.

Fourthly, and unto these may be added the proximity of it: the day of the
Lord is at hand. It were some lessening of our happiness, if it were a long time
to it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. lin. 22. for Praises, read Oracles. p. 51. l. 4. r. by a perpetual
decree. p. 74. l. 16. put out, a. p. 107. l. 17. r. up, for upon. p. 108. l.
16. for Sold, r Should. p. 407. l. 4 r. wrinckle. p. 434. l. 17.21. and p.
435. l. 8 put out Sol and r. Secondly, Thirdly, Fourthly. p. 486. l. 11. put
out, all the Chapter. p. 499. l. 11. r. or secondly.


