THE AMBASSADOR BETWEEN Heaven and Earth, between God and Man.

OR A BOOK Of Heavenly and Healthy Meditations and Prayers for earthly and
sickly Souls and Sinners.

Fit to be borne in the hand, and worn in the heart of every good Christian.

By W. C. Preacher of the word.

MATH. 7. 7. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and you shall find, knock
and it shall be opened unto you. LONDON Printed by N. O. for Lenard Becket and
are to be sold at his shop in the Inner Temple. 1613.

To the Christian and supplicant Reader.
REligious reader, the manifould myseries and calamities of this our wretched
life, our Savior Jesus Christ, the Apostles, and fathers of the Church; these
and every one of these, with as many motives, as there are thoughts in the
heart, or spectacles to the eye of man, teach us and have taught unto us the
necessity, force, and use of prayer, and withal inciting us both to frequency
and feruency therein, without which besides many other benefits which thereby we
either obtain or lose, can neither satan be resisted, nor our faith
manifested, nor God daily honored: with an innumerable consideration on the
other side, us like-wayes thereunto moving, as the shortness of our life, but
a span, the suddenness of Christ's coming in a moment, the strict and
fearful account that must be rendered at the day of his appearing. And for
that prayer is a mourning and desire of the spirit to God for that which she
lacks, even as the sicke-man sorroweth for his health, whereby being
reconciled to God by faith we may enjoy the thing we crave or have need of; In
what a desperate danger and securitye may we be then thought, if we shall show
our selves slack or careless herein, in this so avayleable a duty, let us
therefore pray in all places, and at all times calling to mind the largnes of
Gods gracious love, and his loving kindness in Christ Jesus our savior, who
bids us ask and it shall be given, knock and it shall be opened, and
whenever thou art burdened or oppressed with thy sins, or any other misery or
calamity in the world, be thou assured the Lord will offer himself to be
reconciled to thee if thou thy self be ready and faithful to call for the
same at his hands, to the furthering whereof, and as it were the tracing a path
thereto thou have hear good reader both the manner and the method, both the
form and the fashion, both how to pray and what to pray; mouldes and methodes,
fitted unto several occasions and purposes for thy releife and benefit, as
time and necessity shall require in that behalf, which requisite regard and
serious consideration (that these heavenly Ambassadors may be the more
gracious in the eyes of God, and successe-ful in our occasions) is most
entirely to be tendered thereunto. So that God may bless both them and us,
with an happy e^rnest in this world of the eternitye in the world to come,
whither by his blessed will (so prospering this intended means that it be able
to bring us) he grant, for the glory of his own great name Amen.

Thine in the Lord. W. C.

IF by the absence of the author, difficulty of the hand, misplacing of points,
some sillables or words mistaken, the sense in any place be obscured, the
iuditious reader may be pleased to correct such easy faults as by these means
have escaped, which I trust are not many.

A view of the Contents and Prayers as they orderly stand in this Book.
1 A Treatise of the vanity of all earthly pleasures, and the misery of our
life, such as they are to enjoy them. 2 Of the force, the use, and necessity of
Prayer. 3 A Morning Prayer for the Saboth day. 4 An Evening Prayer for the
saboth day. 5 A Description of Heavenly Jerusalem, and the happiness there,
out of the Manual of Mr. Crashaw. 6 An euery-dayes sacrifice, or a Morning
prayer for any day in the week, or every day in the week. 7 An Evening prayer
for any day in the week, or every day in the week, for a private person, or
other, changing but the number. 8 Another Morning prayer. 9 An Evening Prayer
to the same. 10 A Morning prayer for a private family* 11 An Evening prayer for
a private family* 12 A prayer to God the father for the forgiveness of sins.
13 A prayer to be said before the undertaking of any journey. 14 Another for
the same, somewhat more ample, both by sea and land. 15 A prayer for internal
and external peace, and against debate, and contentious going to law. 16 A
prayer for seasonable weather, upon sensible consideration therefore. 17 A
Meditation of Gods love and mercy toward us, and our unthankfulness toward
him, alluding to the phrase of Saint Austin. Misereri mei Domine indigna
facientis, and digna patientis. 18 A meditation against the fear of death
written in French by P. M. S. de Plessis. 19 The sick-mans Prayer. 20 The
commendation of the soul to be said at a sick man's death, out the Manual of
Mr. Crashaw. 21 Six signs upon the which a man may rest confident of his
salvation. 22 Another meditation against the fear of death, and for strength
and patience in that last hour. 23 Sir Thomas Moors verses of the uncertainty
of life. 24 A Prayer or Meditaion before the receiving of the holy Communion.
25 A meditation or thanksgiving after the receiving of the Holy Communion. 26
A thanksgiving to God the father, used by the R. W. Musc. and fit to be used
of al good Christians. 27 Martin Luthers Prayer. 28 Saint Austins Prayer. 29 A
Prayer for a woman with child, or in travail. 30 The Prisoners Prayer,
written by a Gentleman in passion and penitence a few days before his trial.
31 A thanksgiving for our Redemption, and for other both corporal and
spiritual blessings. 32 Of the danger of deferring our repentance, with a
prayer suddenly to conceive it, and soon to practice it. 33 A Prayer against
that dangerous and deadly sin of Desperation. 34 A prayer in time of
pestilence. 35 A prayer for Humility. 36 The living words of a dying man,
closed up in that virtue. 37 The sum of the prayer of the Lady I. G. at the
time of her execution. 38 A general thanksgiving to God for all his benefits
and mercies to man. 39 A thanksgiving before meat. 40 A thanksgiving after
meat. 41 Two other for the same. 42 Certain Rules and Preceps for the good
ordering and government of a man's life. 43 Certain Sentences, or Rules of
good life, and pertinent to the precepts going before them. 44 The Deriuation
of man. 45 Admonition against sin. 46 Zacheus certain gain, the worlds
imagined loss. 47 The five thoughts of a Christian. 48 Four kind of men,
according to David, that are most indebted unto God for their lives. 49 A
Prayer for Constancy and grace against all worldly vanities and allurements. 50
A short Memoratiue of the mortality of our life, and folly of our living.
SHORT CALENDAR NOTES.
Of the Year, and the parts thereof.
A year is properly that space of time that the Sun runs through the whole
Signs and Zodiac.

A year contains Months Solar. 12 Lunar 13 Weeks 52 and a Day. Days 365 So
many veins in the body of Man. Hours 8766

The year Astronomicall adds thereunto 6. hours, and 8. minutes, which
every fourth year increase a day, which makes the Leap-yeare, and takes
place on the Eve of Saint* Mathias* then adding to the month of February one
day.

a day Natural has 24 hours Artificial 12

A Rule to know how many days be contained in every Month.
November and September say
They have great wrong to want a day
And June and April likewise lame,
That more then thirty cannot claim.
When all the rest, as they pass by,
Have one and thirty wet or dry,
But February more bereft,
That has but eight and twenty left,
Except a Leap-yeare, once in four,
That sends her one day and no more.
Holy Days.
The holy days within the year,
Are three tims ten, or very near;
But if you reckon Sundaies so
There Is two and fifty more you know.
For Kalends, Nones, and Ides, and such like, that are more for knowledge then
use, I pass them over, being store of Tables in that kind.

Of the vanity, imperfection, and sudden decay of all earthly Pleasures, and
the Shortness and Misery of our life, such as they are to enjoy them.
UNTO all the sinful and wayward generation of mankind, the eternal
wisdom of that great God of heaven and earth has so decred it, that the life
and period, and existence of man, be it lengthened as the days of our
forefathers the most fullest of years, or shortened as to these abridged times
of ours, not a handful in their comparison, be it more or less at his
pleasure that gives it, for the uncertainty, folly, and dimnesse thereof it is
but compared to a shadow, and for the swiftness and shortness thereof
resembled to a spanne, and his few, not many days, are not repleat with few,
but many evils: And that if Ambition and Pride and the height of wordly
happiness did not so dazzle our eyes with looking upwards thereunto, that we
run our poor and ungoverned bark headlong upon sands and shelues that lie
under us, whilst w^e sailing upon this dangerous sea, without our compass,
which so ouermaskt with vanity and deceit present a safenes that we cannot
perceive them, until we shipwreck thereon: we should else discern to
inambush in multiplicity of pleasures, but in numerability of desires, in
enlargement of possessions, but more copiousnesse of care, in diuturnity of
days, but assiduity of sorrows, Eccles. 2. 10. 23. and fix we our thoughts
and desires on our Tabernacles but Tents, or on what may more delight us, with
the most assurance we can, we shall find in them but a changeable and fleeting
uncertainty of estate, being oftentimes snatched from the land of the living
when our thoughts have scarce traveled to the habitations of the dead, let the
earth be summoned to council, and all the generations both past and present
examined, what true content ever set foot upon the face thereof, since there
was a touchstone of sense to try it, and a wisdom truly to suruay it? if our
affections, might feed on the food of Angels, it would in time grow distasteful
unto us, if our possessions stretched our themselves, from the rivers unto the
ends of the world, from one circle thereof unto the other, yet would we strive
to enlarge them: if our eminency were above the stars, yet would we strive
to exalt our heads higher then their firmament, for the thoughts and desires of
man are endless, above all things, and he has an unfaithful heart, as deep
as the sea, and who can find it out? The Ambitious has his thoughts as large
as hell, the voluptuous his thoughts more large then his belly, for when his
stomach was full, his desire was unsatisfied, come, let us eat and drink,
not because we are hungry, but because to morrow we shall die, and better is
a living dog, then a dead Lion: The coueteous man his whole thoughts are,
Soul t^ke thy rest, to d^y, or to morrow we will go into such a City, and
there continue a year, and buy, and sell, and gain much: Hereditary misery of
mortal and wretched man, first begot in the thoughts of our first parents, and
so descended linially down, as by a vein or issue of blood, to us, and the
very last of their seed and propagation upon earth, who thought not Paradise
circuit enough for their unlimited habitation, nor all the lushious delicates
and unspeakable perfections of that selfe-planted Eden of God sweet enough for
their taste, nor the fruition and fellowship of God himself a society good
enough for their presence, O soul where is thy rest? O life where is thy love?
And o God how are they mistaken then, that in this transitory and all changed
world, seek content, which upon earth, in Paradise it self, was not to be
found. As some do in riches, some in honor, some in beauty, some in carnal
love, possessed with a madness thereto, beyond immagination, and the more,
although with the less reason, in these latest, barren, and declining days of
ours, then ever heretofore, where if desire might at any time meet with
content, it is so fading, brittle, transitory, and subject to decay, that it
dies before it lives, and withers in the blossom, before it spread the leaves,
or bud out to any perfection, and if there might be found a heaven upon earth,
a pleasure without any allay or limitation in it self, it were nothing, for
yet it would be thought a hell upon earth, to think of the sudden
dissolution thereof, yet lamed and decrepid cripples, as they are, how many
have run themselves headlong to hell to for the momentary inioying of them
for a season, a little time, and a very little season: But where the heart, and
the rebellious thoughts of man are so subdued and brought under, that
godliness is accounted gain, and the holiness and goodness of the Lord of
life of most precious esteem, there the lust of the world, and the dust of the
world, the riches of the world, and the pleasures thereof, shall be valued
together as things of equal worth and continuance, that is of neither worth nor
continuance at all. For what minion did she ever produce as her greatest
favorite upon the circle of the earth, amongst the sons of men, that either
enjoyed all pleasures, or that had wisdom, that found not vanity and vexation
of mind to attend the^? Enioyest thou a fair house, a bountiful table, a
comely wife, generous, affable, well-descended children, Like the Olive
branches round about thy t^ble, heritages to bequeath to thine heirs after
thee? Be thou thy self beautiful, valiant, strong, healthful, learned,
excellent in arts, so that the world favors thee, and al things succeed
prosperously unto thee? if the wh^e^e of fortune lift thee to the stars, if
thou reign happy in all these a thousand years? What then? they so suddenly
pass and vanish away, as things that had never been; and a man inspired with
true wisdom from above, finds so much content left behind after the use and
possession of them all, as a poor man that had dreamed he was a King, and
that he had had all the pleasures and contents the world could afford him in
his power and fruition; and being afterward awaked, finds nothing so. What man
that ever lived before, or after Solomon, that had a greater portion in this
world of eminency and glory then he? and yet this Solomon, King Solomon, King
Solomon in all his royalty in some particulars inferior to the Lillies of the
field: let the power of the wicked be never so potent, the heart of the most
cruel tyrant that ever reigned, never so envious, and though his pleasure
therein be as great as his power; neither he nor it can exceed Pharaohs: and
yet was both he and his exceeded, vanquished, and brought to confusion, and
his whole Egyptian Host by the insensible creatures of Gods most sensible
power, the course of waters, or the waters of the red sea, wherein they were
ouer-whelmed, and put to confusion. Let the power of his command be never so
absolute, never so unquestionable, that it be of force throughout territories
and dominions, to stifle and strike dead that vapor and breath of life (that
was first breathed by GOD in the face of man to make him a a living soul) that
it keep not his wonted progress and passage throughout the gates of his body:
let his voice be as terrible as the roaring of a Lion, be it never so
fearful, be it never so ample, more fearful and ample then
Nabuchaddonezers it cannot be; yet was he in the midst of his pride and
iollity, compast and inuirond in for seven years, within the walls of wild
Asses. Let his clothing be never so sumptuous, the Throne where he sits
never so Maiesticall, his speech and eloquence never so plausible, and his
praises never so general, yet in these was Herod his equal; and yet not
defended by these from the worms that gnawed out his bowels. Take a survey in
the present from the Monuments, Histories, Traditions and Relics of ancient
ages, going up from these low descended times of ours, to those first that
began the world, and long since expired, and imagine that if the best and most
iuditious obseruer that lived in every age (since that time that God said: Let
there be Day and Night, and Times and Seasons, or shall live whilst these
creatures of his world that give rest and labor shall last and endure) should
stand up to report, and point out, the chiefest men and virtues that in them
ever lived and were; whether for wealth or wisdom, fortitude or temperance,
eloquence or learning. For continency or patience, beauty, magnanimity, or
whatsoever else might be numbered in the bead-roll of excellence that could say
in the perfection and largest indowment hereof here is munition against the
grave, and with this will I preserve my body from corruption, they would all in
their several turns confirm and testify the grave has closed them up
without resistance of quality or virtue, and they sleep with their
excellencies together raked in the earth. Is it then so, and are we no more
but thus? Is there not one man of former ages can stand forth to be darted
through with all eyes of wonder and admiration, as a monument never yet beheld,
to say, I have perverted the sentence, and the decree has past by me, and I
have made a League with Death, and a Covenant with the Grave, and I shall live
for ever, and my body shall not descend into that bed of darkness? If not,
what true content can be taken in this life, in any thing we enjoy, which
goes not warranted with an hours security, but in the peace of conscience,
wherein is true joy, present, given as a taste or earnest of that real
eternal joy and gladness we shall inherit in the kingdom of heaven to come.
Unmindful, wretched, miserable man, shall the best find no evasion to escape,
and do the worst think to be freed from thence? Shall beauty descend into
corruption, and yet will it idolize it self in conceit of immortality? will it
plaster over that earth with colors like the morning-Sunne, which must be
suddenly transformed into earth, and true earth indeed, and make her bed in
the darkness, more obscure then the clouds of the night. Will not wisdom
defend a man? What folly is it then not to have so much wisdom as to make ^
serious preparation thereunto? can strength, nor magnanimi^^ make no
resistance? how sudde^ly then will weakness and infirmity yield it self? Will
not riches defend a man? the rich man in the Gospel answeares no, for they
sooner transport him thither, whether then we run over the lives of the
virtuous, and godly, such as withstood the temptations of Satan and the
illusions of the world, with that most forcible president, the innumerabilitie
of her followers, which without thought carries so many headlong to perdition.
Or the state and condition of the most dessolute and unrepentant sinners, such
as run through the race of there lives, in a most careless and dessolute
security, not regarding there end, nor the cause of there being, we see an
equal conclusion, and period, and end of there da^es, all bound up and
shackelled together in the same bundle of corruption, and there resolution so,
that the eye of man cannot distinguish in the grave between the bones and
ashes of the one and the other, between Vashti the most beutifull Queens and
the blackest Egyp^ian bond-womans that ever was: yet when the Lord both of life
and death shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, he alone can
distingu^sh, which shall raise up the one to everlasting life, and the other to
an endless death, ever dijng yet never ending, and herein let the godly take
comfort, who have not taken there por^ion and pleasure in this world, that they
shall be known, and raised up, and distinguished from the wicked, and let them
willingly and joyfully therefore, without the least fear inbrace this
messinger of the Lord, which to their bodies brings but a quiet sleep, from
the which they shall be awaked to joy. And let the wicked, who have cause fear
him as their enemy, that is the subduer and danter of all flesh and the
finisher of all wordly pleasures, that takes the earth and ashes of the most
maiesticall composure, stuffed with ambition and pride, with thoughts beyond
bound, without warrant, from trampling and wounding the breast and bosom of
there mother, in scorn and contempt, into the darkesome and solitary chambers
of her womb, where that earth, taken out of that earth that thought it self
more then earth and yet was but earth, becomes earth, and less then earth,
even to moates and grains in confusion. Let us cast up our days by Jacobs
account, and valew^ them not to be more, not to better then he did his few and
evil as he that truly considers it, shall most rightly find it true, for the
first that they are few, what age since there were creatures that lived and
breathed and died in it, and hours and years to wast and spend themselves, to
give it a quantity and quality thereof, that might speak with more
probability and exemplarie experience hereof then ours, when our young men in
our streets, in our houses, oftentimes part with there health, there life and
all within an hour, and others fall down dead as they travail upon the way,
and the latest years of our old men, accomplish not the childhood of our
forefathers, with such daily other presidentes of death before our eyes both
of untimely youth, and old age, that might move us to look into our selves,
yet as if we took leases of our lives, as we do of our houses, we incroach
and build, and set up, and pull down, and alter and repair and like
earth-deluing-moles, press and crush our own bowelles and consciences, to
heave up little piles of rubbish, and earth, toil our bodies and beat our
brains to join our possessions together, dispeopling whole villages that we
may be Lords alone, drawing the earth from the poor that they live and tread
upon, by exactions, plottes and tyrannies, pulling the bread from out there
hands, and the food from out there mouths, calling our habitations after our
own names, as if we should for ever live, or our posterities after us succeed
to the worlds end, or world without end; when he that sits in heaven laugheth
them to scorn, for he that thinks to be rich or great without him, in the
prophanenes of his heart, Esaias. 14. 15. let him know, Genesis 11. 7. that the
least breath of his mouth shall so batter his seat that the place thereof shall
be no more found, and scatter his riches as the dust before the wind, or the
chafe that slies in the air, and all there thoughts and inte^tions more
vain the^ vanity it self; if we lived like Adam without any president of
death before our eyes, and the length of our days in some measure stretched
out like to his, it were some little security for presumption to build upon,
but we that have seen our thousand, and three-thousand, weekly, and such a
dearth of health that the sick have been more then the sound, the dead more
then the living, and death has so laid about in our streets, and in our
houses, that grass, has grown in the one, and solitariness so taken up the
other that the sight of a man in either has been more precious then the gold
of Ophir, sometimes come so near us that it has pulled away the wife from our
own bosom, children from our own loins, reueld in the dark of the night,
at the noone of the day, disposest us of neighbor and friend, near, and
distant far of; spared none from the child, supported by the hand for
weakness, to him that walks with the staff for age; with such an
innumerable and daily witness, in which number our own bowelles sometimes a
part, the sentence of God upon all flesh, as a forerunner, and the
accomplishme^t thereof with such a ^ercenesse succeeding, all crying with a
loud voice and proclaming this proclamation of God Statutum est omnibus
semelmori, O but may the young man, or some not aged say, although we must once
die yet we may live many years, and therefore we will take our pleasures whilst
we may, and when they have forsaken us, when age shall ceaze upon us with her
whiteness and die our locks into another coullor, then will we repent us and
think of our end. O but who ever thou art that thinks so deceive not thy
self with this vain procrastinating folly, but let Salomons experienced
council be the tutor to thy youth, forget not to remembe his Meme^to: To
remember thy creator in the days of thy youth before the evil days approach,
and the times wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them, and being a
reasonable creature offer not God that indignity that has made thee both body
and soul, given thee both health and strength, thy being, thy benefits, all
that thou have, as to offer him the husks and refuse of Satan. What earthly
master, that but for a few temporal benefits, as in sustayning our years of
infancye, although all that he could for us, were but as a gravel stone, in
comparison to the whole sea shore of his goodness, that would not expect in
recompense hereof the abilitye of our best service to his employment, which if
we should neglect him in, and forsake him vnacknowledged so long until our
youth and strengthes were spent, and old age were crept upon us, and we
disabled to help our selves, much less to stand him in stead, or deserve his
former kindness, yet then with blushlesse faces should offer to put our selves
upon him for a second suppertance, that with the acclamation and consent of the
earthly masters in the world, would not only turn his face away, but utterly
reject, and forever cast us off from his acknowledgement. Is it then just with
us, and is it not much more just with God? We are all servants to him in a
thousand duties, he fashioned us in our mothers womb, carefully took us out
from thence, ever since protected and preserved us, upon the finger of whose
providence we stick as the sun in the firmament, and shall we from him that
has done so much for us, dedicate the joy and marrow of our bones to the
enemy of our God, our good, and the welfare of all mankind, to him that
compasses the earth seeking whom he may devour? shall we I say in our ripest
judgment and ability of largest consideration make no use hereof but run one
with the spur of the flesh, and the prick of the devil all the sunshine of
our days in oblivion and forgetfulness of him we should ever remember? If we
do the evening will bring heaviness unto us, which will not endure for a
night, and joy approach in the morning, but a night without end of sorrow and
lamentation, whom no day shall ever arise to clear, and he that has lost
Christ, in a large youth, and run from him many years must not think that few
will vntread that path again and recover him, but rather that a year may so
lose him, that many shall not find him again, though with Joseph and Mary he
be sought in sorrowing, Presume not upon that text of mercy to much: At what
time soever a sinner, although it be an Oracle of truth and truth it self, for
if thou refuse the time of grace that is offered thou know not whether it
will be offered thee again, whether thou shall ever after have a time to repent
thee of thy sins from the bottom of thy h^rt that thine own conscience shall
not disquiet, and the devil drive thee to despair in; so that thou can not
truly repent, and late repentance is seldom true repentance: and besides it
stands not with the Lords honor to be so often shaken off when he would lodge
with us: and how many in these thoughts have perished suddenly, prevented by
death of their expectation and preparation proposed, and if notwithstanding all
this, that neither consideration, nor persuasion can move us to be early wise
for our own good, and the good of our souls let us know if we defer our
repentance to the last, judgment shall but justly requite us, if either death
do strangle us before we speak, or the wrath of God rebound upon us when we
have gone out and wept betterly, wept our fill, therefore I say again, prevent
it, lest thou be prevented by it, and frustrated of they expectation cast from
the favor of God, thou be condemned for ever to that lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, the terror and torture thereof as inexplicable as
insufferable, which cannot be endured, and yet must be indu^ed without ceasing
or determination. By this we are now resolved we must die, either in youth or
in age, at one season or at another the cannon and decree so direct to all,
that no one shall ever find an evasion, the son of God himself having taken
our nature upon him was not exempted, but died and was laid in the bowels of
the earth to sweeten it to all mankind, we know in regard of our time we have
but a short time to live, and that short, not sweet but full of mysery; we know
that as we live so we shall die, according to that ancient and true sentence
Qualis vita finis ita, vt cecideris it^ eris, and as we die so shall we rise to
judgment: we know that our sins of Omission and Commission, of desire and
consent, our thoughts and our deeds, shall be brought unto judgment with us,
and we must render an account of our idle words, if so, no marvel that the
scripture tells us (when these all in us, and all in all of us are let loose
at liberty, without any restaint or reckoning) That many are called, but few
are chosen. And we know that we have broken all thy Commandments, and the
breach of the least is eternal damnation. These things considered, and daily
and seriously laid to heart, which concerns the welfare of every Christian,
what cause have we but to mourn and sorrow? For what will it profit a man to
win all the world, to enjoy all the riches and pleasures thereof, and to
loose his own Soul? And if we stand upon pleasure, what pleasure is like
unto this: To lay up Treasure in Heaven, which the moath shall not corrupt, nor
thieves break through and steal, to walk in the paths of the Lord all the
days of our life, to live in his fear, that we may dye in his favor, that at
the last day we may stand with confidence unshaken, when the wicked shall
tremble at his presence, like Popler in the Forest. What are all the pleasures
of this world but Vanity, but vanity, and vexation of the mind, and there is
no true content under the Sun: And in their passage, (which is very sudden)
they leave a kind of sting behind them: and there besides is more grief in a
little sorrow, then content in a great deal of pleasure. And this is the sour
reckoning that ever killes the sweet welcome of all earthly pleasure. And
therefore once again, if we stand upon pleasure, what pleasure is like unto
this (and the more pleasant because the more secure) to think how sweet that
breath that flows from the lips of our Savior, shall be unto us above:
Myrrh and Cassia: Come you blessed, I was hungry, and you fed me, I was naked
and you c^oathed me, inher^te the Kingdom of my Father, prepared for you from
the beginning. On the other side, the thought of that heavy Sentence, the
thought and imagination whereof, like the upper and the nether Millstone, is
able to c^ush and grind in pieces all the pleasures of the world, and the
sensual appetites thereof, and to throw them into the air, like Chafe
against the wind, that endanger or bring us within the compass thereof. The
tenor whereof shall be more grievous, against whom it is pronounced that day,
then all the pleasures of the world, in the fullest sail, were ever
contentiue: Ite Maledicti, Go you cursed, descend to the lake of perdition,
you that have had your portion in this world, Purple and fine Linen, and fared
dilitiousoy every day, that have neglected me in my members, in charity and
pity, and in deeds of mercy, that being hungry, gave me no food, and
being naked, gave me no raiment. Will this be the answer of Christ at that
day, to those that to him in his persecuted and afflicted members, denied their
relief, when they therewith plainly euicted excuses, shall crave mercy at his
hands, and shall not obtain it. Si in igne ardebit, qui non dedit propria
sua, vbi ardebit qui surripiat aliena. Si sterilitas in ignem mittitur,
rapacitas quid merebitur. All the sons and daughters of men in the world,
from Adam the first man of the race, to the last that shall stand upon the
earth, shall to their joy or grief receive one of these two sentences,

Then If
Let us all therefore labor to be partakers of the best of the blessed, and that
we may, let us serve him in love: For Seruire eo regnare est, his service is
perfect freedom. Let us obey him in fear: for The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. Let us be acquainted with him in this world, that we
may not be as strangers and aliants to him in the world to come: Let us hear
him when he speaks unto us, and not with our ears stopped pass by him, like
the deaf Adder, not regarding the Voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
wisely, lest the Prophets and Preachers of the Word, the Law and the Gospel,
our Parents and Tutors, our own Consciences consenting and witnessing
thereunto, send us unto the Judgment seat of GOD, with this Inscription
written on our Foreheads: No^^erunt i^cantari, they would not be charmed, they
would not be acquainted. Let us not waste our time, and weigh ^t not; heap up
sin, and fear it not; awake GODS wrath, and sorrow not; lie fettered in
death, and struggle not; slip into the Grave, and see it not; least we
perish, and prevent it not. And let us not have less regard of our time, then
we have of our treasure, which we sometimes reckon by grain and weight, that
we reserve with heed and care, employ with diligence and forecast, and let
that pass a thousand times more precious without Arithmetike and Balance,
thought or regard. Let not the slashes of vainglory, that fly through the
world like lightening, and the subtle plots and policies of our flesh,
grounded upon such weak and tottering foundations of dust and sand, shaken
with every little blaste of adversity, and the foundation of our hopes here on
earth vnder-propped with such slender basses, so quickly weakened and thrown
down, that we leave the rock Christ Jesus that we should build upon. Let not
Honor, Ambition, Pre-eminence, Titles, and such like, occupy our thoughts, and
possess our bodies and minds with a weariness in longing and pursuing after
them, which being attained bring not content, but lie level to a thousand
discontentes, envy ever lying at the root as a canker, to blast what ever good
we expect from thence. Be we in authority or subjection, be we rich or
poor, be we young or old, of what estate or degree soever we be off, were
we as we could wish, had we all that this earth could yield, yet our estates
and our desires would never keep a concordant Harmony, For the Sun as yet,
never looked upon that son of man that found not a defect, a saciety, or
loathing, in what estate soever he possessed, and desired to see a change. In
our young youth, we wish for gravity, and age, because we want the respect and
reverence that it goes accompanied with, and being attained and clothed
therewith, we wish that the heat and iollity of youth might again be renewed
in us, ever perverting the times, and preventing the means that God has
prefixed, and wearing and wasting our selves soonest* in possessing that we
would enjoy longest. In want we desire riches, persuaded if we inioyed them
we should be contented, these attained, deceive us, then we seek for honor,
and from one step thus we would clime unto another, to seek that which is
not here to be found.

For who did ever yet in honor, wealth,
Or pleasures of the sense contentment find?
Who ever ceas't to wish, when he had health
Or having wisdom was not vextin mind?
S. I. D.

The way then to balance our selves and our desires is, to fix our whole hope,
confidence, and desire in him, who is the fountain of all happiness and
content, within the compass of whose protection, and their fruition we are no
longer then we walk within the bounds of his direction, and miserable are
those that wander out of the arms thereof, and his safeguard, yet if the Lord
should forget us, as we forget him, nay if he should not remember us a
thousand times, ere we remember him once, and keep us in* we should daily
and hourly wander out and perish, but his mercy is above all his works, and
his benefits so generally extended, that the wicked have their portion
therein, as well as the godly, his enemies as well as his friends, if the Lord
should revenge our injuries and ingratitude against him* and contempt of his
will and commandments, and deal with us, as we deal amongst our selves,
what would become of us, but woe and confusion? Let us therefore learn from
him, the pattern of all goodness, in some poor measure to be like unto our
Lord and Master Christ Jesus* from whence we derive our name, and are called
Christians, let us, whose image we carry stamped by the fingers of his own
hands, be not only shadows but bodies moving after his steps that is our
Head, let us walk here, as Ambassadors sent from heaven on the Lords
message, to give the sons of men a pattern of good life, and imitation, in
such humility and sobriety, as our Lord, the true pattern of all goodness and
piety, has walked before us, the printe of whose blessed feet we daily*
look on with our eyes, and consider in our hearts with joy and comfort, for
if we will be his Disciples, We must take up his cross and follow him,
making it our glory, that we are the people of his Pasture and the sheep of
his hands, who although in simplicity grasing on the mountains, are either
fleeced of the Shearer, grown into wool, or snatched up by the Butcher,
grown into flesh, and the water of affliction be wrung unto us out of a full
cup, and we be exposed to the shame of the world, and the winds still beat on
our sails, and our lives bound up in vexation and sorrow, whilst the Wicked,
like the bramble, in confidence of their shadow, dare challenge to be Kings
over the trees of the forest, Judge. 9. 15. and though they sail calmely, as
in the haven, and their breasts are full of milk, as Job speaks, Job. 21. 24
and their bones of marrow, and though with David in the 73. Psalm, wherein the
property of the wicked is lively set forth, How they come not to misfortune
like other folk, neither are they plagued like other men, their eyes swell
with fa^nesse, and they do even what they list: yet let us take comfort to our
selves and stay our souls on the anchor of his providence, as the same Prophet
did, although in the consideration of his chasticement, all the Day long, and
every morning, and the prosperity of the wicked, he himself confessed and said,
Pene moti sunt pedes, my feet had almost slipped, Yea and I had almost said as
they, until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I the end of
these men: Namely, how thou set them in slippery places, and castest them
down and destroyest them, how suddenly they come to a fearful end: so when
death shall make us both even with the earth (here is our comfort) the grave
shall be to us as a fould till our Shepherd come, and to them a shambles,
till the destroyer of their souls shall have received an endless commission
to torment them: Therefore they are not the pleasures of this life, neither
health, nor wealth, nor liberty: which at the best are but candied wormwood,
that delight the taste, but destroy the stomach, without a true and sanctified
use therein, that makes those happy and blessed that have them, for if with all
the goodly branches of delectation and pleasure they cast, their tree answer
not with fruit, these leaves will not protect her from the fire, And cursed is
he that is blessed in this world to be cursed in the world to come, yet here
we have the eloquence of the flesh to persuade us, the inticementes of the
Diuill to allure us, the company of the wicked to associate us, all these to
divert our course from whither we are bound, and the world with her
inticements to train us furthest from what we seek, and the pride of our
life to persuade us for trifles to forgo the interest we have in heaven, and
our branched corruption, every way ready to set us foreward, being Ambitious
like Adam, Genesis 3. 5. who if he may be as God, there is no command can
restrain him, vainglorious like Esau, Genesis 33. 1. who if he may have a
train of men at his heels will soon digest the loss of his birthright, and
so by usury if our bags may thereby be made fuller, the word of God shall
not restrain us from it, if the sons of men shall take the devil at his
word, as the Son of God did not, and for the glory of the world, which he
shall show, and cannot give, shall fall down and worship him, if he show
honor, preferment, pleasure, riches, saying, all these will I give thee,
though the Minions and Lovers of the world, that seek for their heaven upon
earth, shall be ready to betray their souls, as Judas betrayed Christ, with
their hayle Master, shall be ready to embrace him, to serve him, to serve
themselves, yet with the Son of God Math. 16. 20. after his fasting, be thou
so strong in thy strength as he was in his weakness, to bid him depart and to
say him nay: For it is but a bitter recompense to buy the pleasures at so dear
a rate, as at the prise of thy soul, in thy everlasting confusion, for a short
and fading life, and but the length of a spanne: if thou think it more, take
the counters into thy hand, and see what reckoning thou can make of it, what
is past grieueth thee with the remembrance thereof because so much of thy time
is spent, what is present burtheneth thee with the weight thereof, because in
sweat and sorrow, study, and travel, thou do wast thy time; what is to come
troubles thee with the uncertainty of it, least the grave do swallow thee
before thou see it: yea make thy account as as thou ought, and thou shall
find it swifter then the Weauers shuttle, Job. 7. 6. and speedier then a post
on the wings of the wind: Job. 9. 25. Then in consideration of this, and
whatsoever has been spoken to the vncloathing of our nakedness, and humbling us
before God, to the pulling off of our roabes of leuity and lightness, and the
preparing our bodies to the grave, and our souls to this ensuing exercise,
whether (to the daunting of all flesh) all must come; and the hour may be
near but it cannot be far off, and howsoever we forget it, it will be
sure to remember us, and therefore let us know that here as Pilgrims and
strangers we wander, having no abiding City, but we seek for one to come,
but we must not seek to find it here, nor suffer the vain applause of the
world, and the vainer conceit of our selves, to make us forget where we live,
what we are of our selves being but as a tree turned upwards, having no sap
from the earth, but refreshed and moistened with the dew of heaven, let us so
husband our journey that we miss not the City we seek for, let us so run
our race that we obtain the victory and reward we run for, and therefore if
thou expect in thy labor blessing, in thy peace continuance, in affliction
comfort, in thy death triumph, in thy judgment joy, respect in thy life
sobriety, in thy calling honesty, in thy pleasures judgment, in thy sorrows
mercy, in thy life religion: For if God be not with thee to direct thee, that
thou stray not, to correct thee that thou presume not, to sustain thee that
thou famish not, to pardon thee that thou despair not, to support thee that
thou stumble not, to strengthen thee that thou fall not, and to sanctify thee
that thou sin not, and to glorify thee that thou perish not. If the Lord
throughout the whole course of thy life, and in thy death, be not present and
powerful to thee, thou faintest in the one, and failest in the other, and
desperation inuironeth thee on every side, for where the Lord keeps not
watch, or turns away his face, all the miseries in the world lay their
siedge, therefore to him let us day and night send up our supplications and
prayers, without ceasing, like incense into the air, to continue what we have,
and give us what we want, to support us by his grace, to direct us by his
Spirit, and so lead us through this exemplary world of sin and wickedness,
with our eyes so looking forward fixed on him that we let not temptations in at
their windows, so captiuating our desires unto his will, that with Lot we may
be righteous, in a City, in a world of uncleanness, that so we may save our
souls at the last (though we loose all the pleasures in the world besides)
the loss whereof would more rejoice Satan, then he sorroweth for the
damnation of his own, which grant Lord for thy mercies sake, Amen.

Of the Force, the use and necessity of Prayer.
SInce all the days and hours of the life of man, the consumers of the world
and the measurers of time it self are the subjects and succeeders of the Lords
own hands, and by him only lent to thy use, be not thou then so unnatural
against the Lord the owner thereof and against thine own good as not sometimes
to lend him some of his own hours to his service for thine own good; Amongst
the many perturbations and troubles of this life, as sickness, imprisonment,
loss of friends, vexation of spirit, wrought by the brethren, with us of the
same inheritance, in the portion of the same infirmity, from the loins of our
first parent Adam, The world in Rebellion offering diverse assaults against the
peace and tranquillity of her children, and nothing to be found under the sun
but Vanity and vexation of Spirit. The unruly passions, and affections, of our
own nature, and the headstrong lusts of the flesh, and the concupiscence
thereof ever at enmity with the spirit, ever ready to entangle us in the
snares of sin and death, our pronenes unto evil, and our backwardness unto
good, The Many that are called and the few that are chosen, the certainty of
our death, the uncertainty of the time when, or the manner how, the fearful
account that must be rendered unto thee at the day of thy appearing in Majesty
and power, to judge both the living, and those that are departed; the
consideration whereof in the heart of a Christian touched with the least finger
of his grace that can heal all our infirmities, will call him aside into his
retired clofset or chamber, where he may not only find ease for his body, but
ease also for his soul and spirit within him, by calling to mind the promises
of God, the largeness of his love, the extention of his favor, the
inheritance laid up, the kingdom prepared from the beginning, the peace and
rest everlasting, which no distraction, tumult, nor vexation shall annoye,
which by the ouer-eager pursuit of our affections, and love to this world,
which is but a sea subject to all passions, and Mare amarum, a bitter sea with
all kind of myserie, we may lose (if we take not heed) And being so with-drawne
with most prostrat humylitie and obedience, we may sacrifice the good thoughts
of the spirit, and send up prayers like the smoke of incense into the air,
laying our mouths to the ears of that wisdom that knows our wantes better
then we understand them our selves, be we new so afflicted, before we utter
them, going unto him that calls, come unto me all you that travel and are
heaven laden and I will refresh you, To him therefore let us go, to him let
us send up these trusty ambassadors our Prayers, Prayer the sweet cesterne and
conduite of grace, by the which all the benefits and guiftes in that heavenly
treasure-house, are continued, reserved and renewed unto us. Prayer the keye
that opens where no man shuts, and shuttes where no man can open, that enters
where no man has passage, and returns where no man can hinder. Prayer the
life of the soul, when being perplexed with such grief of heart, as neither
Wine nor strong drink, according to the advice of Solomon, can comfort her
misery, having no word to speak, nor comfort to apply, when it is day wishing
for nights approach, and when it is night saying to her self, when shall it
be morning? how ever the season no comfort succeeding neither by light nor
darkness, nor in any worldly felicitye, wishing as often as she opens her
lips, and draws in breath into her nostrils; if God were as hasty to fulfill
as she to desire: O that thou would hide me in the grave, and keep me
secret until thy wrath were past, Job. 14. yet then, even then, she assumeth
the wings of a dove, the motion and agility of the spirit of God, she flies
by the strength of her Prayers into the bosom of Gods mercy, and there like
the arc upon the mountains of Armenia is at rest, Therefore if any be
afflicted, let him pray, let us not presume in the height of our prosperity
with David, to say as he did: I shall never be removed: thou Lord of thy
goodness have made my hill so strong, least with him we suddenly shall see a
change, Thou did but hide thy face and I was sore troubled, then cried I
unto the Lord and prayed unto my God saying: what profit is there in my blood.
Psalm. 20. therefore let him that stands take good heed that he do not fall,
let us put our confidence in the Lord our God, and pray unto him, and to none
other; neither let us presume upon our selves, nor any earthly means beside,
for her was never contemplation, exercise or any kind study in the world so
acceptable to the majesty of God, so gracious in his sight, so linked and true
a friend to him that makes use of it as prayer is. It waketh in the night
season, it restes not in the day, it forsakes us not by land nor by sea, in
health nor in sickness, in prosperity nor in adversity, in weal nor in woe,
living nor dying, it is our last friend, and most indissoluble companion. Let
us therefore love it, and therefore let us use it. There was never name in
heaven or earth so worthy to be called upon, so mighty for deliverance, so
puissant for protection, so gainful for success, so compendious to abridge
unnecessary labors, as the name of JEHOVAH, our most merciful Father, and the
image of his countenance, Jesus Christ. Therefore to the Lord, there was never
Sanctuary so free for Transgessors, in the strongest privilege never such
safety, never holes in the rock so open for the doves of the field, the arms
of any mother so open to her child, as the bowels of Gods compassion to all
faithful believers. Therefore to him, and therefore faithfully, and in that
method, fitness, and propriety as Thomas, having the object of his prayer
before his eyes, even Christ Jesus, my Lord, and my God. There was never
creature living under the line of the Sun, that saw not affliction in his
days; never was there any to whom affliction was not grievous and irke-some:
yet never was there affliction so great, but it has been under the correction
of the Lord, whose hand has been able to master it. Therefore to every
affliction, as they come in several kinds, for our several sins and
transgressions, so our prayers must be several, and framed, and fitted
thereunto, and powered forth both with wisdom and zeal, that they come not
harshly, undigested to those ears that can both sift and try the one and the
other, the delicasie and tenderness whereof must be wisely entreated, and the
favor of his countenance carefully sought: after the example of him that knew
in his soul, that a faint and dissembled prayer would return empty into the
bosom of him that sent it up; But a broken and contrite spirit the Lord would
not despise, never sent up his petitions but with the deepest affection, and
zeal of his mind, with the most sincere integrity, and meditated zeal that
might be: for Every night washed he his bed, and watered* his Couch with tears,
the blood of the soul, and the wine of Angels, the precious and significant
pearls of contrition, that prevail without words, and effect where words
fail. And therefore fervently after his example, that thou may have the
force of two tongues in thy suit, the better to speed: And to avoid the
malediction which thou may else receive in stead of a blessing: for cursed is
he that does the work of the Lord negligently. And as we may learn precepts,
and draw many excellent examples from the lines of the heathen Philosophers and
writers, so here to this we may learn a zeal in our prayers, even of those
wodden Priests, K. 1. 18. of whom it is written: that they called upon the name
of Baal from morning to noone, and when they had no answer, they cried aloud;
nay they cut themselves with knives till the blood flowed: so they prayed not
only in tears, but in blood: and shall not we, the children of the light,
be as zealous in our generation? And from the agony and zeal of the son of
Righteousness, that in the days of his flesh offered up prayers and
supplications with strong cries and tears to him that was able to help him;
learn to adresse our selves in our necessities, of whom the Gospel further
declares, not only that he kneeled at the naming of whose name all knees have
bowed both in heaven and earth, and under the earth, but that he fell upon the
ground, the footstool of his own majesty, and lay upon that face that never
Angel beheld without reverence: and when he had prayed before, he prayed more
earnestly, as the Scriptures record, he once prayed and departed, and a second
time, and yet a third time departed, and departed evermore using the same
petitions, his prayer ascending by degrees, like incense and perfume, and not
only his lips went, but his agony and contention within was so great, that
an Angel was sent from heaven to comfort him, and with the trouble of his
soul, sweat like drops of blood, trickling down to the ground. Let us not
therefore offer up this sacrifice, but remember this blessed example of this
our blessed savior, in our imitation, that they may be blessed in their speed,
and we in their success, and not to utter them remiss and careless, as if
our spirits and tongues were strangers, ignorant of eithers purpose, the
lips babbling without, the heart no compunction within, honoring God with our
mouths, but our spirits far from him, our hearts not bleeding, whose drops
should be heard and pitied: our Altar without fire, prayer without heat, words
without intention, suppliancy of the body, without the harmony and consent of
the inward man. And as they must be zealous, so directed to him alone: for
neither to Angels nor Saints, Mediators or Friends, one or other, greater or
lesser, in heaven or in earth, they are not due, are not to be offered, but to
the ears of him and his anointed, after the example of so many, both ancient
and righteous Patriarks, Prophets, Judges, Kings, recorded in the book of God,
and in an hundred and fifty Psalms, a hundred whereof, at the least, are
prayers and supplications, and in all the devout requests that the Apostles of
Christ, and other his Disciples sent into heaven to him alone, and his blessed
Son our Savior, without intercession or request to any other: And by the
example of that Kingly Prophet in the 86. Psalm: Bow down thine ear unto
me, I am poor and needy, my distress requires thy help. Be merciful unto
me, O Lord, I cry unto thee continually: Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for
unto thee O Lord, do I lift my Soul. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and in
earth that I desire in comparison of thee? But it is good for me to hold me
fast by God, to put my trust in the Lord God, etc. Psalm. 73. And to whom we
must not only pray with zeal and desire, but with fitness and congruity, and
application unto our several necessities: as for the general blessings and
benefits of God, there must be general thankesgiuings for sins in general,
general confessions, ancient and usual forms of prayer, for ancient and
usual occurrences, we may take unto us words, as the Prophet Hosea speaks,
and say unto the Lord at all times, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips. But as the diversity of
our sins, our newness, and strangeness, and abominations therein, shall
pull from the Judgment seat of God, new and varyed, and diu^rs^^y of
punishments, and judgments therefore: so we must accordingly vary our
prayers, and speak in the language of their necessity. In time of plague or
infection. sickness and mortality, our prayers must be to God, that he would
stay and sheath up the sword in the hand of his devouring Angel, that on every
side strikes down to the grave, emptying houses and streets to fill up
Church-yardes, and vaults, making them a me^hridate, or preservative against
the Contagion and danger thereof (which indeed is the souerainest restoratiue
under heaven, to make sound again what sin has hurt and wounded)
acknowledging with a sorrow from our hearts, that our sins have procu^ed ^t*
and the hand of GOD most justly inflicteth it therefore, acknowledging the
original cause thereof to proceed more ou^ of our own corruption and nature,
then the air or any other secundary cause, beseeching his majesty, as Phinees
did, that the plague may cease, and that he will visit no longer with that
kind of judgment. If a barrenness possess the land, leanenesse, and
scarsity, and famine dwell upon her borders, so that the Children thereof cry
for bread, and swoone as they go in the streets for food, we must pray in
another style, that the Lord will vouchsafe to hear the Heavens again, that
the Heavens may hear the Earth, the Earth the Corn, and Wine, and Oil: And
these Israel and all other his distressed people, Hosea 2, and that he will
visit no longer with this kind of judgment. If the enemy shall threaten our
Land, to invade our Territories, to make a deuastation, spoil, and havoc of
all that we have, that may fall in his way, saying: Come, we will devour,
we will devour, the name of Syon shall be no more had in remembrance, Joel.
2. We must address our petitions to the Lord in another key and form of
Supplication: Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thy heritage to reproach,
that the Heathen shall rule over them. Wherefore should they say amongst thy
people: Where is now their GOD? O cease to visit thy servant with this kind
of judgment. If the clouds yield not their moisture upon our fruits upon
earth, so that the labor of our hands, and the fat of our fields perish
through sterility and drought. Still as the Plagues are new, so let us come
before him with new Complaints, new Songs, new Intercessions and Obsecrations,
meekly Kneeling before the Lord our maker, lowly prostrate at the footstool of
his mercy, that these judgments may be diuerted and turned away from us. Thus
did that great pattern of wisdom and experience, Solomon, whose
foote-steppes are worthy our imitation, beseeching the Lord, that when the
people should pray unto him, according to their several necessities, whether
afflicted with the assault of their ene^y, or with want or superfluity of
rain, with pestilence, famine, or mill-dew, captivity, or any other
affliction, either in body or in mind, he would then in heaven hear their
complaints upon earth, and be merciful unto them. And as our prayers will not
ascend unless faith and devotion bear them up, nor will speed unless they
issue from a heart that vows an unfeigned repentance: which that we may the
more effectually do, we must call to mind our sins and transgressions,
that have procured those judgments, that we may repent, and wash them from
us, that God may hear us, and have mercy upon us. But this Repentance, that
here is meant, is more bitter then many imagine: For as concerning Repentance,
every sorrow is not repentance, for then should worldlings repent. Some think
every confession to be repentance, then had Pharaoh and Saul repented. Others
imagine every weeping repentance, which is not, for then had Esau repented.
Others take every little humiliation repentance, but mistaking, for then had
Achab repented. Others, that every good word, and promise is repentance: if
that were so, the^ should sick men repent. Some think to cry God mercy is
repentance, then should every fool repent. But true repentance indeed, and
such as is here meant, is more then the hanging down the head like a
Bull-rush, or to wring out a tear, to sob out a sigh, to wear sackecloth or
haire-cloth, or only with a verbal sound and pronuntiation of the lips,
without the priuity of the heart within, to cry, Lord have mercy on me, and so
cease, but it is the scourging, renting, wracking, and launcing of the very
soul, and a down right shower of tears from a broken and bleeding heart, and
a filling of the rai^es wi^h exceeding bitterness of sorrow and anguish for
sin committed, And to this school of* sharpness, but sweetness, of pain
but of pleasure, let no man think it too early to go, too early to begin,
o go to it in thy youth, and let Solomon be thy Tutor: Remember thy Creator in
the days of thy youth, let it be often recited that it may be once remembered.
Nor no man think it to late, least he omit and loose that which he might
otherwise have gained: For at what time soever a sinner shall repent him of his
wickedness from the bottom of his heart, the Lord will forgive and forget it,
and his sins shall vanish from his sight and presence, as the dew before the
Sun, O heaven before heaven! o heaven upon earth, and the contrary persuasions
on the other part, o hell before hell, o hell upon earth, and damnation before
the time; I say again, if he repent of his wickedness, it is not the misery
of this wretched life, nor terror of conscience, nor malice of foes, let them
be men or devils, let them be seven in one, a legion in another, all the
Principalities and Powers of darkness in the third, that shall hinder the
ascension, and blessing of his prayer, that shall ^inder the forgiveness of
his sin, for never was the shadow more faithful to the body, then a blessed
forgiveness to a faithful repentance, on the one side, then good success
has been to a fervent prayer; on the other side, zealously conceived in the
breast and powerfully uttered by the voice of the tongue and the spirit, I cr^^d
^n ^^ affliction (...)to ^he Lord and he heard me, but this success, as
formerly instructed, must not be looked for if it want these necessary
adiunctes, these vndenayed, vndelayed assistantes, that bless the company
wherein they come, and speed the suite wherein they are Sollicitors and
Plaintiffes, that beat not the air with sounds, that arise from the hollow
and emptiness of them, like brooks that roar and make a noise, but show
their empty bottomes, that contain nothing but gravel and filthiness within
them, like the dissolute and fashionable prayers of us and our times, both at
home and abroad, in chamber and Church, who like hipocrites or Gentiles utter a
form of words rather of custom then of zeal, as the Parrat of Ascaniae
recited the Creed, flattering God with our tongues, but dissembling with him in
our hearts, and withal so full of toys and fancies for want of faith and
reverence that when we have prayed we had need to pray again, that he would
forgive our sins in our prayers, because we think least of him, when we pray
unto him; Never remembrng the Majesty of his Person to whom we speak, nor the
excellency of the work we take in hand, never rowsing up our spirits with the
thoughts thereof, or if we stir the^ up then to pray, leaving the^ again as
Christ his Disciples before we have thoroughly awaked the^, as if the offering
of the halt and the lame body without soul, or soul without devotion, sound
of our lips without the thought of our heart, one part of our selves without
the other* or the whole without a whole, intention without clamor, and crying
aloud could please him, The prayers of David we may read were not thus cast
off at random in the 55 Psalm, says he, I mourn in my prayers and make a
noise, evening, and morning, and noone, will I pray and make a noise. and in
the 38 Psalm, before I rore for the very grief of mine heart, Lord my whole
desire is before thee, and my sighing is not hid from thee, Cor meum palpitat,
my ^e^rt is in travel, runs to and fro, I have no rest, no quietness
within me: Such were the pangues and prickings of Jobs heart, I^b. chapter 3.
My gronings comes forth before I eat, and effund^ntur velut aqua rugitus
mei, And my roarings are powered forth, and wave like waters, not groaning, nor
crying, but plain roarings, with a continual in-undation, Velut vnda,
impellitur vnda, as one wave dasheth forth another, now when the soul is thus
prepared to speak, the ears of the Lord are ever open to hear, these are
wonderful passions, the hungry Lion in the desert oppressed with extremity of
suffering and want, never rored so much for his prey, nor the heart braying
after the w^ter-brookes, as the goodness of the Lord, in the soul of the
faithful after him, The mighty Lord of heaven and earth blessed and hallowed
be whose name for ever, in earth as it is in heaven, and blessed are those
that are in love with his goodness, and trace nearest unto his steps, to
give us here another example has been fervent, and even roared in his
supplications as we read for Lazarus and Martha and others whom he loved,
and afterward in his own cause, when his soul was hedged in, and environed
round about with vexation, even unto death and anguish, and sorrow incompast
him on every side, as also then in his greatest agony, when he cried with a
great voice, not for particular persons, as before he wept, but undergoing the
burden and punishment of all the sins and sinners in the world, My God my
God why have thou forsaken me' and crying again with a great voice grave up
the ghost: therefore that blessed Apostles mentioning the days of his humanity
and the exercise of his sacred life and fruit of his lips and the passions of
his spirit thought it not enough to give notice to the world that he prayed to
his father, that he prayed with tears which distilled down his blessed
cheeks and watered the ground, nor of a cry alone weakly sent out, but of a
vehement and strong cry which if heaven were brass were able to pearse
through it and find way into the sanctuary, into the ears of the almighty and
such a prayer as it asce^ds lightly up, borne upon the wings of faith so it
ever comes laden heavily down with a blessing on the head of him that first
gave it flight, thus then this lantern of our direction, and composition of
humility and goodness, this glorious and never enough admired Lord of life,
who pressed and oppressed with the weight and bu^then thereof groned under the
affliction of our sins, in a most perfect form of exact obedience with his
bleeding tears for them, for us, showed us the right form of saithfull
supplications for our selves, bids us be importunate and fervent in our
prayers that they may wrestle with God and overcome him: Was he thus grieved for
us, and shall not we greiue for our selves? groned he under the weight of our
deseruings of no infirmity in himself but in compassion and pity toward us?
whom we continually grieve and no way so much as in committing of sin and
drinking it down the throat with gredinesse and appetite as Behemoth, drinks
down Jordan, without sense, or sorrow, or grief for the same, the
consideration whereof and what it may procure us hereafter bids us be
importunate and fervent in our prayers to prevent it before the dreadful
Majesty of the omnipotent Lord of heaven, and earth, whom we stand before, the
royalty of his nature. subl^mitie of his place, dominion over men and Angels,
that boweth the heavens and sayleth upon the wings of the wind who with the
breath of his nostrils is able to destroy our both bodies and souls, change
the world and the beauty thereof into a chaos and heap of confusion, turn the
sun into darkness and the moon into blood and alter the property and
being of all the creatures in the world at the twinkling of an eye,
considering what we are that speak, that offer the Calves of our lips and the
fruits of our repe^ta^ce, poor naked, impotent, unworthy wretches da^natos
antequa^ natos, all these considerations and many more bid us be importunate
and fervent in our prayers, the suruay and consideration of our wretchedness and
mortality, our nakedness in all good works that it may make us ashamed as it
did our first parents when they hid themselves from the presence of their God,
and as M^riam of her leprosy altogether abashed and astonished, after mortality
exceedingly mortal, the view of our sins exceedingly sinful, the number, the
weight, the danger thereof, that hang about our necks like milstones that we
are not able, are not worthy, to cast up our eyes to heaven and after our sins,
our misery exceedingly miserable that the Prophet of God was astonished to see
either man or the son of man so kindly visited, bids us be fervent in our
prayers, lastly the success we expect, unless we call in question or doubt of
the promises of God which are Yea and Amen, and more stable then the pillars of
the earth, or the base of the surest foundation, except we will cast our grain
into the earth and expect no harvest, plant vines and not drink the wine
thereof, power out our plaintes and petitions, and think that God either
hears not or regards not at all, or will not grant as far as is expedient
for our good, which if we shall do the contrary upon the truth and security of
his warrant, there is another motive for feruency in our prayers; lastly the
pretiousnesse of the f^uour of his countenance which must be carefully sought
for our own benefit and all these respects and consideratitions thereunto
tending, do cry unto us to cry unto him, to be seruent in our prayers, for
we must not think that the noise of our lips, as the ringing of basins, mere
soundes and voices that wake and fly up whilst the inward man does slumber and
keep down procure us audience at the hands of God, V^lentiores enim voces
apud S^cretissimas d^i at^res non faciunt verba sed d^sideria the strongest and
most effectual spech in the secret cares of God proceeds not from words but
from intention, he that hears without ears can interpret our prayers without
our tongues, he that made both the one and the other knows the language of
both a like, he that saw and fansied Nathaniell under the figtree before he was
called: saw and sanctified John Baptist in his mothers womb before he came
forth, and hard the heart of Zacheus before his conversion, sees and blesses
our prayers fervently conceived and sown in the root of our consciences before
they spring forth, but if they are only verbal and vocal soundes, without
wringing any drop of contrition from the conscience, blood from the spirit,
they may beat the air with empty soundes, but the ears of the almighty shall
they not enter, but their want of devotion shall be answered by him as the
prayers of those idolaters in Ezechiel. 8. Though they cry in mine ears with a
loud voice yet will I not hear them, therefore enter not hereunto unworthily,
presume not to speak with God but with due respect and reverence of his
majesty to whom thou speak, stir up both thy tongue and thy spirit that
they may join hand in hand the sooner to prevail, and if thou have oftentimes
powered out thy petitions and plaintes to God and have not prevailed, yet be not
discoraged thereby, go on still in thy sure, importune him more and more, weary
his patient ears with thy clamors and thou shall at last obtain although
peradventure not in the same manner thou desire yet in that which he sees
more convenient for thee, be of Jobs mind though he kill me yet will I trust
in him, though he deny thee yet despair not in him: how long did the holy
Patriarchs and Prophets expect the fullfilling of there Prophesies, yet in the
fullness of time they were fulfilled: heaven and earth shall pass but not one
title of his word shall fall to the ground; and therefore I say again and
again, when thou have ended thy suite, begin it a new, repeat it and recite
it, ingeminate it and dwell upon it, and be not beaten by any distrust or
temptation from thy hold, learn adherence to thy suite from the mariners
constancy, we beseech thee o Lord, we beseech thee, set thy heart truly a work
and it will find this theme to think on, for where the affection is fastened
the tongue is easy and willing to dwell thereupon, O Absolon, o my son
Absolon, o Absolon my son, my son, was the mourning of David, when he heard
of the death of Absolon, and as if his affection had only dwelt upon the name
and memory of his son, and his tongue had forgotten to pronounce all other
speech save only Abs^lon, It manifests likewayes what love our Savior bore
toward that holy City, in that he ingeminated and repeated his sorrows over
and over it, O Jerusalem Jerusalem, if I forget Jerusalem let my right hand
forget her cunning, so must our affections be in love with him and his blessed
name more then son, or City, or any worldly delight that it may be ever
meditating in our hearts and walking on our tongues, my God, and my Lord; and
the more we are held off the nearer let us press, let us attend his leisure
and pleasure, with patience, without distrust, without wearines, the longer
Abraham talked with God the more he prevailed he brought him from the whole
number to fiftye and from fiftye to ten before he gave him over: Behold I
have begun to speak unto my Lord and am but dust and ashes, let not my Lord
be angry and I will speak again, and semel and iterum, once more I have
begun, and again I will speak and let not my Lord be offended, and so far
was God from it that he gave him both a patient ear and a gracious answer in
that his most importunate request. If ten be found there I will not destroy it,
consider and behold herin the force of prayer from the tongue of a righteous
man that it so far was powerful with God that if in the whole City, a City
so excedingly sinful that the cry thereof ascended up into heaven, and they
entered into the Sanctum Sanctorum even into the ears of the holy of holiest
with such continual loudnes and clamor that they gave him no rest, yet
notwithstanding in his wrath and resolution of there overthrow, and his
determinate decree past thereupon, in that populous and sinful City if there
had been but ten righteous persons to have stood up betwixt his wrath his
judgments and there sins, for there sakes it had not been destroyed, It
pleases the ears of his majesty right well to be longer entreated, whose
blessed condition and nature is never so truly leuelled at as when we persuade
ourselves our importunacy therein can never be burdensome unto him, as he that
has twice and ten-times together ingeminated and recited over and repeated
again the riches of his mercy, as Ex: 34. The Lord, the Lord is merciful,
gracious, s^ow to anger abundant in goodness, and truth, reserving mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity and sins and transgressions: what did he mean
thereby but that twice and ten-times together we should ingeminate, recite and
repeat over again our requests and petitions, and cry for his mercy, and
then though he seem deaf for a while unto our petitions and make as though he
heard them not, yet through our importunity at last we shall get him to
confess an Audience, and if our words and prayers alone will not prevail let
us then join thereto our tears that God may say to us as he said to Ezekiah, I
have seen thy tears, for they are such powerful Ambassadors that they can no
sooner appear but the eye and compassion of God is upon them, yea David says
that God has heard the voice of his weeping, and tears are weighty words,
texts that contain in the^ large commentaries* for in the ears of God a
vehement desire is a strong cry, a remiss and earelesse intention, a silent
and still voice, a tear in sorrow for our sins, that with the Publican cries,
Lord be merciful unto me a sinner shall be more justified and acceptable to
God then all the Pharisiticall brags and ostentation of our worthiness we can
make, therefore glorify God with thy body and thy spirit and all the facultes
of both as is most meet and requisite, for all are his: lift up thy soul with
David, lift up thine hands also with Moses; thine eyes with S. Peter, and thy
voice* with Deborah: and thus seeking you shall find, thus knocking it shall
be opened unto you, give but thy prayer a voice to ask with, for it must not
be dumb and silent, give it an eye to seek with, for it must not be blind
and careless, give it an hand to knock with, for it must not fear to molest
and disquiet, and not only the doors but all the treasures and iewelles of the
kingdom of heaven shall be open unto you, whither and to which our blessed
Savior himself inuites us, come unto me, all you that labor and are laden* O
love without example! where the king himself commands our appearance who
shall keep us back? where he commands, open ye gates of righteousness and be
ye opened ye everlasting doors, who shall oppose them against us? what need
we hear of mediators, intercessors or friends, where he himself has given
his voice, and calls us to himself alone, and yet though the francknes of his
love has given us this access, let us not come unto him with the less
respect or reverence (which does deserve the more in a far greater degree, that
notwithstanding his omnipotency and state that sits in glory at the right hand
of his father, and we poor worms creeping upon the footstole of his earth
that he will vouchsafe we should speak unto him as it were face to face, power
out our petitions with our own voices into his most sacred ears) then to an
earthly king: we all know by daily experience the kings of the earth keep
themselves within strict watch and wary regard, and there persons are full of
majesty and terror, and not spoken unto but with difficulty and friendship,
beside the infinite distraction of suits and business more then the ears of any
mortal man can receive, drive them of necessity to the deputation of
subordinate ministers, whose breath is in there nostrilles, and whose life is
the life of there country and there people with whom they live, and therefore
requisite that wary regard and attendance should dwell about there persons, but
in God who rides upon the Cherubins and makes his enemies his footstool,
there is neither danger in his person, nor defect in his hearing, for he that
planted the ear does he not hear? he that stands and knocks at our doors
and calls for entrance when we knock at his, will he not grant entrance. In
earthly courts, amongst which we live, we may have many impediments, few that
will hardly favor us, but many that may hinder us, before we ca^ deliver our
message. But at these heavenly gates, at which we must always call, the Lord
is porter alone, for when the friend knocked in the parable of Luke at
midnight, the heauiest and deadest hour of the night, who was nearest the gate
first awoke if he slept at all and first answered O quam d^re vult! O how
willing is he to grant, that is so willing to be disquieted, how glad to here
thy knock that has placed his bed so near the gate O qua^ non ad ianuam
tantum sed ipsa Ianka. dominus fuit, and how truly may we say, that he was
not only near the gate but the Lord himself, and the very gate, who when his
children were fast a sleep, the ears of Angels and Saints shut up, first and
at very first call, nay only amongst the rest made answer unto it, the Lord
is always nearer unto us then we are to him, Psalm. 10. He hears the des^re
of the poor, he first prepares the heart and sets it on work to pray,
and when he has so done bends his ear unto it, giving unto us both the
cause and the effect, both the blessing and me^anes of the blessing, doubtless
the trustiest and most effectual messenger we have to send is prayer, if we
send up merits the stars in heaven will disdain it, that we that dwell at
the footstool of God dare presume so far, when the purest creatures in
heaven are impure in his sight, if we send up fear, and distrust the length
of the way will tire them out, and with the weight they will sink to the
ground, before they come half way vpto the throne of salvation, if we send up
blasphemies and curses all the creatures in heaven and earth will band
themselves against us, the Sun and the Moon will rain down blood, the fire
hot burning coals, the air thunderbolts upon our heads, but prayer is a
messenger freed from all these imperfections, which neither the tediousness of
the way, nor difficulties of the passage, can hinder from her purpose, quick
of speed, faithful of trust, able to mount above the Eagles of the sky, into
the heaven of heavens, as a Chariot of fire leading us aloft into the presence
of God to seek his assistance and grace, the least finger of whose right hand,
is of more puissance then the whole arm either of flesh or any spirit besides,
yea then the whole loins, whole substances, whole bodies of Angels, or of Men,
silver, gold, silk, purple, all other creatures, so it shall walk through
life and death without controulement, if it find Angels, Principallities,
powers, things present, things to come, or any other creature in the world
stopping her passage, and rebuking her forwardness, she shall clear her way
notwithstanding and clime into the presence of her God, and in his ears
deliver her message, Be we in sickness to him the true Ph^sition that knows
both the cause and the cure, she comes for health: be we in imprisonment
there she sollicites a release from him the Lord of liberty: be we oppressed
with poverty or want, The earth is the Lords and all that dwell therein, to him
she comes, for the blessing of the Lord makes rich, are we afflicted above
measure, beyond the strength of man, insomuch that we doubt whether we live or
no, receiving the sentence of death, within our selves, so as in our opinion,
we comprehend no delivery, no evasion, but lie open to the direct
accomplishment thereof, yet in this exigent and extremity we come to God in
this means, even almost beyond hope, without expectation, and by his good
pleasure we are delivered, therefore herein let us receive comfort: he has,
he does and will deliver us, not only from the death of our bodies, when
worms and rottenness have made their long and last prey upon them, but from
the death of our minds too, when the spirit is buried under sorrows* and
there is no creature found in heaven or earth to give it comfort* Therefore be
our misery, be our affliction never so great, and though in our weak
immagination we can imagine no delivery, no release, when all earthly means
and comforts forsake us, let us not yet forsake this refuge, let us not
despair in his help, no more then Jonas did, who in the bottom of the sea
within a prison, within that bottom, in such an affliction, so great, so
strange, as greater nor stranger could not be, nor to humane reason more
without hope, yet says he, Jonas 2. 2. I cried in mine affliction unto the
Lord, and he heard me, out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my
voice, Therefore I say again, in adversity let us not despair, but pray with
hope, In adversity be it never so great, let us pray with confidence, In our
prosperity let us pray, in our prosperity never so flourishing let us pray, let
us pray continually: In our health and prosperity let us pray to continue it;
in our sickness and adversity, let us pray to release it, And if we consider
our estate rightly, we shall perceive many reasons that may move us to this
exercise daily, to seek his favor and loving countenance, without whose
protection and care over us we are ready to fall into a thousand dangers, to
perish continually, let us therefore in time and season, with words suitable to
our purpose and intention, either thankes-giuings for benefits received, or
with petitions, and entreaties for necessities implored, in the time of
sickness, in the time of our health, in the time of our adversity, in the
time of our prosperity, let us come before him, suting our words in the habit
of our occasions, with such fitness and decency, that they sal not harshly and
from the purpose in the ears of the Almighty. And to that end good Reader I
have here compiled and set down many forms and moulds of prayer fitting for
several persons, occasions, and times, after the example of our Savior
Christ, the true pattern of all wisdom and goodness, who has given us the
first and best form thereof himself, who has both taught us to pray, and
taught us how to pray, and that will both hear our prayers and grant our
requests, as far as seems expedient to his unsearchable wisdom, that
knows our wants before he hears our complaints, and our necessities better
then we our selves, and for because Prayer is so excellent a thing, so ready,
so swift, so powerful, so vnseperated from us, that it cleaues unto us when all
other means forsak us, and therefore that we should the more earnestly embrace
it, more zealously imply it, more dearly esteem it, there is great reason
that it finds us oftentimes out comfort in greatest extremities, that when we
find our selves in misety, our ways hedged up, as with thorns, that we
cannot stir to deliver our selves there. hence, when we are overflowed with
the deluge of sin as with a flood, and judgments inuiron us on every side,
this is the Dove that brings unto our souls the Olive branch of comfort, yet
because for the most part we kill the life therein through the coldness of our
devotion, and carelessness of our delivery, and unfit preparation thereunto,
and find not the sweetness and success that else we might expect, and
obtain at the hands of God thereby, Therefore I have here drawn them out to
life, showed both the excellency thereof, and preparation thereunto befitting,
that these forms hereafter following and all other whatsoever in this kind may
be the more powerful, blessed, and comfortable to all that shall use them,
without the which it is impossible that they should please God, or any good
success follow thereupon.

The Ambassador between Heaven and Earth.
A morning Prayer for the Sabbath day.
MOST merciful God and eternal father, what may we render unto thee for all
thy loving kindness; for the which blessings and thankes-giuings for evermore
be heaped upon thy holy name, in whom the treasures of mercy and loving
kindness dwell bodily, who of thine own good will and pleasure have been
pleased to communicate unto us so many of thy favors, so many several ways
without any manner of desert of ours, to the which may it please thee to ad
still to the number, by taking away those iniquities of ours, that take away thy
favors and blessings from us, or as a stranger that knows them not pass by
our transgressions, retain not thine anger against us forever, though w^
retain our sins, the cause of thine anger, but return to us by grace who
return not to thee by repentance, and have compassion upon us who have not
compassion on over own souls, subdue our reigning and raging unrighteousness
and drown our offenses in the bottom of the sea, which else will drown us in
the bottom of destruction, raise up our souls from the dead sleep of sin
as thou have raised up our bodies from this night of darkness, protect us
from all dangers from the which no minute we are secured of our selves, but in
thee, brought us to the beginning of this thy blessed sabbath of rest which good
father so sanctify unto us through thy blessed spirit that thy name may be
hallowed, thy power admired, thy mercy magnified, and thy love manifested to
thy glory and our everlasting comfort, fill thou our hearts with such a desire
and longing after thee (that no earthly felicity the trains and allurements of
the flesh wherewith this vain world with her multitudes is tol'd a long) take
hold on us, that see me honey in the mouth but are found wornewood in the
stomach, that say peace, peace and all is well when destruction and death is
bayted ore with them, but let our delight be in thy law and therein to
exercise our selves both day and night our whoole felicity: Let that treasure
be our pleasure that is laid up in heaven, all other ioys are brittle and
fadinge and there end is bitterness, but in this there is neither bitterness,
nor end, bless good Lord the seed of thy word that shall this day be sown in
our hearts, and all faithful teachers and hearers of the same, that it may
fructify and bring forth fruit to the ame^dment of our lives and the
salvation of our souls in that great day of joy and sorrow, and for the better
furtherance thereof, good father enlarge and reform our understanding, keep
the watch of our tongues and the door of our lips in such sort that no ill
word be uttered by or through the same, and so rule and govern our hearts that
they think not, our hands that they touch not, our feet that they go not too,
our eyes that they see not, our ears that they hear not, our senses that they
taste not, our hearts that they consent not to any thing but that which is to thy
glory and our good, that thereby thy love may be confirmed in us and we in it;
that so we may walk cherfully in our vocations, waiting for that full
redemption and crown of glory that remains for all such as persevere in thy
ways, without weariness to the end: which grant and whatsoever besides in
thy wisdom thou know needful and necessary for us (good father) for thy
dear son Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name we further entreat thy mercy
and goodness toward us in that form of prayer which he himself has both
commanded and taught us saying our father etc.

An evening Prayer for the Sabbath day.
O eternal God and most merciful father which art the Lord of heaven and
earth, of Angels and men, principalities and powers, light and darkness, day
and night, in whose hands is contained that ouerflow of goodness, that
fills all the empty and indigent creatures in the world, in the air, in the
earth, in the sea, and on the land, who ordaynest times and seasons,
successions and discentes, old age, and childhood, a beginning and an ending,
a rest and a labor, an increase and a decrease, and a perpetual motion and
change over all the sublunary things in this world* the lively witness whereof
is this day which not many hours since broke out of darkness and cheard the
world with her light, and the sun arose and came forth as a bridegroom out of
his chamber, and rejoicing as a Giant to run his course, and his beams are
now steeped in night and darkness, the true resemblance of all earthly glory,
and transitory pleasures, and delights, which have there increase, there
height, and there sudden decrease again, and there is no continuance or
stability in any thing under the sun, and by this motion and change the time
is now come that thou have appointed for rest, which Lord so bless unto us that
as this day thou have graciously ministered strength unto us to walk in our
vocations, and bless our good endeavors, studies and labors, our hearing and
meditating on thy word to the comfort of our bodies and souls, so we may be
thankful therefore, having always thy hand to sustain us, to effect and
finish those councels and labors which we undertake for thy glory; so good
Lord bless this night unto us that we may now receive that comfort and
strength which thou have granted to our weak nature, by the which we are
sustained and daily renewed and refreshed to our labors, and further we
beseech thee as the night shadoweth and darkeneth all things that they are
unseen, so for thy dear Christ's sake hide our sins from thy sight that they
never stand up to accuse us unto thee, being buried in eternal oblivion, that
as our bodies shall have the rest of sleep this night, so our minds by the
hope of thy mercy may enjoy the rest of a quiet conscience for ever: that so
being wholly refreshed both in body and in mind we may arise with alacrity and
cheerfulness unto thy service this day ensuing and all the days of our life
after succeding, that when death, which is the end of all flesh, shall remove
us from thence into the grave of corruption where our bodies shall dissolve to
the matter they are, though now they seem not, from the which it is as easy for
thee to raise them up from the smallest grain of dessolution as from our
natural sleep, for I believe that the time shall come when all that are in
the grave shall hear the voice of the son of God, when he shall speak unto
the earth give, and to the sea restore my sons and daughters, and to all the
creatures in the world keep not back mine inheritance, and to the prisoners
of hope, lodging a while in the chambers of the ground, stand forth and show
your selves and the earth shall disclose her blood and shall no longer hide her
slain* and the sea shall find no rest till her drowned be brought forth, nor
any creature in the world be able to steal one bone that it has received, but
all kinds of death shall be swallowed up in general victory, and in his name
that has won the field for us, we shall joyfully sing thanks be to God that
has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, whence our bodies being
awaked to that everlasting day of light which shall never be obscured with
darkness more, where we shall be made pertakers of that unspeakable
inheritance that thy saints and holy ones enjoy, which is honor, and glory,
and peace, a garland of righteousness, an incorruptible crown, fruit of the
tree of life, sight of the face of God, following the lamb, fellowship with
Angels and Saints, and the congregation of the first borne, new names and white
garments, pleasures at the right hand of God and fullness of joy in his
presence for evermore: whither he bring us that has made us, that must raise
us from both these sleeps for the glory of his blessed name.

Amen.
A further Description of this heavenly Jerusalem, and blessed happiness
therein, taken out of the Man. Cathol. of W. C.
IN Syon lodge me Lord for pity,
Syon David's Kingly City,
Built by him that is only good,
Whose gates are of the crosses wood,
Whose keys are Christ's undoubted word,
Whose dwellers fear none but the Lord,
Whose walls are stone, strong, quick and bright,
Whose keeper is the Lord of light.
Here the light does never cease,
Endless spring, and endless peace.
Here is music heaven filling,
Sweetness evermore distilling.
Here is neither spot nor taint,
No defect, nor no complaint,
No man crooked, great nor small;
But to Christ conformed all.
Blessed town divinely graced,
On a Rock so strongly placed:
Seated sure from fear of war,
I salute thy walls from far:
Thee I see, and thee I long for,
Thee I seek, and thee I groan for.
O what Joy thy dwellers taste*
All in pleasure, first and last.
What full enjoying bliss divine?
What Jewels on thy walls do shine?
Ruby, Iacinth, Chalcedon,
Known to them within alone.
In this glorious Company,
In these streets of Syon, I
With Job Moses, and Eliah,
Will sing the heavenly Heluiah.
An Euery-dayes-Sacrifice, or a Morning prayer for any day in the week, or
every day in the Week.
TO thee the God of Heaven and Earth, that by thy wisdom ^ast ordained all
things by thy power created all things; and by thy bounty and mercy, as the two
breasts of thy never dried goodness, preseruest and sustainest all things, all
the Creatures in the world, that thy hands have fashioned, both man and beast,
both plant, and flower, whatsoever, and wheresoever. To thee alone, most
merciful Father, and into thy protection do I render my soul and body, and
the whole government thereof, as an unworthy sacrifice, beseeching the^ that
it may be acceptable unto thee: preserve me, O Lord, this day without sin,
this week following, and all the days of my life; and as thou have renewed
this day unto me, and brought me safely to the beginning thereof, so give me
grace to renew my life from my former sins, that I may now amend whatsoever
heretofore has been amiss, that I may be more careful to walk in thy
ways, then ever I was careless to run out of them: I confess, O Lord, that
it is thy mercy that indureth for ever, and thy compassion, which never fails,
that is the cause that I have not been long ago consumed: for with thee, o
Lord, there is mercy, and plenteous redemption, Psalm. 130. 4. In the multitude
therefore of thy mercyes, and confidence in thy merits, I entreat thee that
thou would not enter into judgment with thy servant; neither be extreme to
mark what hitherto I have done amiss: for if thou do, then no flesh can be
justified in thy sight, I have been borne in sin, and in iniquity has my
mother conceived me, and in thought, word, and deed I have broken all thy
Commandments, and there remains nothing for me but shame and confusion; I
have done more against thee this week, then I have done for thee since I was
borne, following the desires of mine own will, and the lusts, and
concupiscences of mine own flesh, not caring to be governed by thy holy word
and Spirit: and which is worse, yet have I not resolved to amend: what father
but thou, would suffer this contempt, and be neglected still? O where is my
fear? O where is my love? yet when I think upon thy Son, all my grief is
turned into joy, because his righteousness for me, is more then my
unrighteousness against my self: settle my faith in thy beloved, that I may
truly meditate what he has done for me, that that sin that launced his side,
may also lance my soul, with such effect, that I may never again commit that
with delight, that thou have sustained with such passion and heaviness. And
here, O Lord, from the bottom of mine heart, I render unto thee thanks for all
the blessings and benefits thou have bestowed upon me, both in my soul and
body; for my election, redemption, sanctification and preservation from my
youth, until this present day and hour, by thy most gracious love and
providence: And so good Lord, I further beseech thee, protect me this day, and
all the days of my life, from all evil that may hurt me, and from falling
into any gross sin that should offend thee: be thou present and assistant to
all my good endeavors, and bless thou my purposes and intentions; and let thy
good spirit so rule my heart, that all that I shall do, think or speak, may
be to thy glory, and the good of others, and the peace of mine own conscience.
And for ye better success therein, into thine hands I commend my self, my
soul, and body, my ways and actions, and all that appertain unto me, to thy
gracious protection, and direction; be favorable unto me therefore, O Lord,
and unto all them that fear thee, be near unto all such as faithfully call
upon thy name, and comfort all such as be sick, or comfortless, or by any
cross or affliction that thou have laid upon them, either outwardly in body,
or inwardly in mind, and by daily and howerly presidences of death and
mortality before mine eyes, teach me to be mindful of mine own end, to set it
always in my view, and to make my preparation by faith and repentance
thereafter, that I may be ready whenever thou shall call me out of this
wretched life, and that whether I live or dye, I may rest in thee, to thy
eternal glory and my everlasting salvation, through Jesus Christ, my only
Savior and Redeemer, in the mediation of whose blessed name I conclude this my
imperfect prayer, in that form and model of prayer which he that must hear
our prayers, and have mercy upon us, or we perish everlastingly has prescribed
in form, and sanctified with his own lips, saying, Our father, etc.

An Evening prayer for any day in the week, or every day in the week for a
private person.
O Eternal God and most merciful Father, the faithful guardian both of our
bodies and souls, who art about my bed, and know my down-lying, and mine
vprising, and art ne^e unto all such that call upon thee in truth and
sincerity, be present therefore O Lord, I wretch^d sinner do beseech thee, and
with thy mercy cover the multitude of my sins, which like a leprosy have run
over my whole body, and so defiled both the outward and inward man, that but
for thy word and promise sake, and the examples of thy mercy and forgiveness
so frequent and usual to sinners of so high a degree in offending, such as
were Peter, Mary Magdalen, the Publicane, the Prodigal child, the Thief on
the Cross, and others, thy praying for thine enemies, thy torments, thy
crucifiers, and many such examples of my comfort, and thy compassion, that else
with Judas, in the bitterness of heart, and desperation of mercy, I should cry
out: My sins are greater then can be forgiven, and so be utterly discouraged
from presuming to come into thy presence, considering the hardness of mine
heart, and the unruliness of mine affection, and the uncleanness of my
conversation, by means whereof I have transgressed all thy laws, and broken
thy Commandments, and deserved thereby thy heavy displeasure, which in justice
might draw from thy hand some fearful punishment upon this wretched body of
mine, and my soul to languish the death of sin, my reputation and name to
perish upon earth, as salt that has lost his savor, and my temporal estate to
be ruind by casualties and loss: For why should any thing prosper that I take
in hand, being thus ouergrowne in wickedness, and wherefore should thou give
good success to that which I attribute not unto thee, how ever it fall out?
bu^ to the work of mine own hands, and the policy of my contriuing, robbing
thee of thy honor, and due to whom it belongs: O Lord, as thy mercy has thus
long preserved me sound in all these, so let it work in me, that at last I may
^ee my error, and amend it, see my wound, and labor to cure it, my finnes,
and repent me of them from the bottom of my heart, that thou may forgive me
them. Turn me, O Lord, and I shall be turned, wash me clean with water, and I
shall be cleansed, renew me as the Eagle her days, and I shall be renewed,
gather thy thosen Flock from the mountains and deserts wherein they stray, to
fulfill thy fold, and I shall be gathered, sweep thy house and find thy great
and I shall be found, be gracious unto me heareafter, as thou have been good
unto me heretofore, let not my unworthiness weary out thy goodness, but
continue it unto me to the end: and now O Lord I give thee hearty thanks and
praise for that thou have this day preserved me from all harms and perilles,
notwithstanding all my sins and ill deserts, so I beseech thee likewayes defend
me this night from all the dangers and assaults that may accompany this
uncomfortable season, and to this end I commend into thine hands my self, my
soul and body, beseching thee my Lord and God not to suffer satan nor any of
his ministers to have power to do me any hurt or violence this night, and
grant good Lord* that whether I sleep or wake, live or dye, it may be unto
thee and the salvation of my soul, which grant Lord for thy mercies sake. Thy
grace o Lord Jesus Christ, thy love o heavenly father, thy comfort and
consolation, o holy and blessed spirit be with me and dwell in me both in heart
and mind, in soul and body this night, and all the nights and days of my life.

Amen.
Another mornings Prayer.
Either private or public, changing but the number.

MOst gracious God in the name of Christ Jesus our most merciful Savior and
redeemer we give thee most humble and hearty thanks for the quiet rest and
repose, this night thou have bestowed upon our weary and tired bodies to the
refreshing and norishing of the same, and for thy gracious providence and
vigilance over us, all the days and nights past ever since we were borne and
came into the world, for our creation, redemption, for thy most sacred word, a
lanshorue to our feet, and a light unto our steps, for thy long and unwearied
patience, so long expecting our repentance and turning unto thee, that day by
day have put thee off, till we have heaped up many years of iniquity by
greiuous sins in tedious times over and upon our own heads, able and weighty
enough to pull us down to the pit of perdition, where long since we have
deserved to have layne in endless woe and mysery, but that thy mercy and loving
kindness has prevented us, o Lord give us grace to be mindful of these
mercies that our tongues may speak and hearts may meditate thereon in exultation
and joy, and Lord give us grace to consider and make use thereof, that as the
night is past wherein our spirit and vigor is renewed, which brought us into
sleep, the true image of death and laid us in our beds the representation of
our graves, for, vt somnus mortis sic lectus imago sepulcri, and that the day
has taken us up again to begin our toil with his, which suddenly finds a
period and conclusion and sets it self again in darkness which afterward
must give place to the light, and that these two consumers of the world, the
day and night, which with there easy lenghts, there spannes and fadomes since
the commandment was first given, let there be day and night, have brought age
and maturity, the sithes and sickles that have reaped down whole haruestes of
flesh and laid the groth of nature in the dust, teach us o Lord with this
remembrance to way the instability and transmutation of time and nature, the
incertainty of all worldly things, our unwarranted lives that hang upon a
brittle third, a dials point, that with the sun in the morn with strength and
splendour address our selves like giantes to run our course, when many times
we are taken up within few minutes after and carried into the bowels of the earth
in the beginning of our race, becoming worms and not men, guestes for the
solitary tabernacles of silence, and forgetfulness, and to frame our lives and
actions thereafter, that whenever thy good will and pleasure is to take us
out of this world of misery to bind up our bones in peace and rest, we may
yield up our souls and bodi^s into thy hands, with full confidence and
assurance that our sins and offenses are washed away in the blood of that pure
and immaculate lamb Christ Jesus, and shall not condemn us, prosper us o Lord
in all our actions, give good success to our true indeauors, and grant that
this day and all the days of our life may be so spent, by thy council favor
and direction, that we may so bear our selves through this dale of mysery,
that at the last we may reign with thee in eternity and glory.

Amen.
An evening Prayer to the same.
MOst gracious God and merciful father in Christ Jesus we do hear how down
the knees of our souls and bodies in thy presence, offering up our prayer and
praise unto thee with all possible thanks for all thy favors toward us,
namely for electing us unto eternal life, for creating us unto thine own
image, for redeeming us by the blood of thy son, for sanctifying ^s by thy
holy spirit, for our health, peace and liberty, and all thy blessings that we
rejoice in, for the which we can give no reason for, but thy mercy: and if thou
should withdraw them all back again, we cannot accuse thee of injustice,
not deserving the least, of them by reason of our sins which are so grievous and
infinite that we cannot reckon them, able to make a perpetual separation
between thee and us but that thou art a merciful, patient, long suffering God
and thou desire not the confusion of sinners but that they should turn from
there wickedness and live, and to that end thou have forborne us hitherto with
a heavy and grieved aspect, and have not reigned down thy punishments upon
us, therefore now o Lord give us a time of grace as thou have given us time of
mercy, that we may take a suruaye of our estate, that perceiving the danger we
are in from the which none can deliver us but thy outstretched arm, we rely
not upon our selves, nor continuing therein forsake thee so long, till at last
thou forsake us and we perish utterly, but Lord (preventing it) so rend our
hearts that they may bleed in sorrow for the same, that thou may forgive us
our great vnthankefullness, end all the rest ^^ our sins, our ignorances,
wilfulness, necligences, presumptions, and all other our transgressions and
rebellions, o Lord forgive them all unto us for Jesus Christ his sake, wash
them all away in his blood, nail them fast unto his Cross and bury them in
his grave, where let them consume to nothing having not that resurrection that
our bodies shall have from thence, least thy should come to judgment with us,
cloth us we pray thee with his robes, and honor us with his spirit, work in
us godly sorrow and remorsfull minds, mortify our sinful lusts and adorn us
withal thy graces, open our eyes that we may see thy will and incline our
hearts to follow it, direct us in thy ways and keep us from declining from
thee, teach us so to frame our lives before thee in this world; that we may
live for ever with thee in the world to come: and to that end we beseech thee be
merciful unto us at this time, and receive us into thy fatherly protection,
pardon the weakness of our prayers, watch thou over us to our good, and give
us such rest and sleep that we may be fitter enabled to serve thee the next
day in our exercises, studyes and callings: hear holy father from heaven, and
grant us all these our requests and whatsoever else thou know may be for
our good for Jesus Christ his sake thine only son and our only sauious, to
whom with thee and thine holy spirit one most wise glorious and eternal God be
rendered all power praise and glory this night and for evermore.

Amen.
A morning Prayer for a private famely.
It is in vain to rise early and to lie down late except the Lord be with us,
so vain a thing is man, therefore we will not attempt any thing before we have
taken counsel and strength from the Lord that he may deliver us from every
evil work, if we ask that thing which is evil deny our ignorance, if we
ask that thing which is good Remember thy promise.

IN peace and safety we laid us down and rose again for thy gracious eye
watched over us, that we might take our rest The heavens declare thy glory, and
the earth is full of thy goodness: yet thou have not so respected all nations,
and thou have loved Syon thy little hill, a nooke and corner of the world far
separated from the serpent, and fenced from the wild beast yet who considers,
the evil we have deserved, is gone into other lands, because their Gods be
not like unto our God we have had much experience of thy goodness, and yet we
try thee still, we prove thee still, and yet we see thy works, thou have
separated us from schism and heresy, that we should be joined unto thee even a
new creature come out of darkness to light, according to the working of
knowledge in us. O bind our hearts with thy fear, that we part not from thy
love: for our selves and for our brethren, we here prostrate our souls before*
thee, O Prince most excellent, for the name of thy only Son, one drop of
mercy to cool this ^ire of sin, nothing, good Lord, ^o change thy mercy: yet
the whel^es do eat the crummes that fall from their masters Table, first we
yield thee hearty thanks* for all at once: next, we humbly beseech thee for
the general quittance which thy Son has sealed for our sins: then for all
graces we pray thee, let us not want the thing without which we cannot serve
thee, plant in our hearts true fear of thy name, obedience ^o^ our Prince, and
love to our neighbor, give power, good Father to our prayers, that they may be
effectual sollicitors for thy grace and favor in all occasions, and seasons,
grant us true humility in prosperity, perfect patience in adversity, peace in
Christ, and joy in the holy Ghost. This is our desire to live godly,
righteously, and soberly; so bless us and keep us, good Father, to the end of
our lives. Turn us O God of our salvation, grant that we may grow from
strength to strength, that thy Church militant may be like thy triumphant in
heavenly charity, and al communion of Saints, write thy Laws on the Table of
our hearts, with the finger of thy good Spirit, that by us they may be often
and evidently read and practiced in our lives and conuersations. Bless them
which bless us, look upon this realm in thy mercy, preserve our King, let
not the eye of Great Britain become dim, or loose his sight: be gracious and
merciful unto our friends and parents according to ye flesh: comfort thy
afflicted Saints and members, confound the power of Antichrist, send thy fear
amongst them, make their time short, and defend thine own cause: and as thou
art sanctified in us before them, so be thou magnified in them before us, y^
all the world may convert and say: En Deus Christianorum, Great art thou O God
of the Christians, and there is none omnipotent besides thee, just, and
merciful, recompensing righteousness, and revenging iniquity and
transgressions, yesterday and to day, and the same for ever, and every where.
Grant these things, O heavenly Father, with thy blessing upon this family, O
Lord lead them out, and bring them in, be at the beginning, the middle, and
end of all their businesses, that thou may see them accomplished to their
best advantage; and for because the world is a forest of briers, and many
dangers therein, that may entangle us, so that when we part and go out* we
are not sure to meet and come in again, unless thou guide us by thy hand, and
protect us under the wings of thy safeguard. Therefore be present and
assistant unto us, and every one of us; then happy shall we be, and all things
shall prosper that we take in hand, which Lord fulfill unto us, and whatsoever
thy good pleasure shall better foresee for our good, even for his sake who died
for sin, and sinned not: in whose name we further pray unto thee, as he has
taught us, saying: Our Father, etc.

God the Father which has made us, bless us; God the Son which has
redeemed us, preserve us; God the Holyghost which has sanctified us, confirm
our faith, to the end, and in the end. Oh God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
save us.

AMEN.
An Evening prayer for a private Family.
Our transgressions are more in number then the hairs of our head, we repent
us of them all from the bottom of our hearts. O Father, be merciful unto us,
and forgive us them.

O Lord God, our most merciful Father, unto thy divine Majesty what might we
render as an Oblation acceptable unto thee, which have made us when we were
not, molded us from the dust of the earth, an element so base and
contemptible, to so excellent a perfection, to a creature so glorious and
admirable as man is, not only the work of thine own hands, but the Image of
thine own Person, from the very jaws of Death and damnation delivered us, if
we wilfully run not into it again, that in continuing thy blessings day by
day upon us, have showed thy self to be our most gracious, merciful, and
loving Lord, and have hitherto preserved us by thy powerful providence, yt we
have drawn out y^ third of our life unto this time: these are thy mercies our
God, and not our merits, given us freely without any desert of ours: for the
raiment of our backs, for the food of our bellies, for the air that we
suck in and breath out, for the fashion of our bodies, for the motion of the
members thereof, for our capability and reason, the creation of all thy
creatures in the world, to the use and subjection of man, and so many thy
benefits that whatsouer we express, the more we remember: yet for all these
thou requirest nothing else of us but that we know and acknowledge thee to be
the Lord and giver thereof: what could thou require less of us then to
acknowledge thee, to obey thee, to fear thee, love thee, and to keep thy
commandments? and yet do we scant thee of that moitye of thy due, that easy
task, but the sound of our lips, and y^ consent of our hearts, that so we
might become thy faithful children, and be made true heirs and partakers of
thine everlasting kingdom, and reign with thee for ever. Guilty therefore, O
Lord, in this gross offense we stand forth to accuse our selves of wonderful
folly, and ingratitude, having strove, as much as in us lies, to stop the
stream of thy mercies, that land-comfort to our souls in all our extremities,
y^ they should not come near us: we have been careless of thy word, neither
have we taken any delight to fulfill thy laws and Commandments: and
therefore if thou had long ago, as a flower before a Sithe-man, mowed us
down, as many, more worthy of* these blessings then we, have been, and
brought us to the Bar of thy Judgment, and from thence cast us (who are
before thy face, but as chafe before the wind, or as stubble before the fire)
into the laks of perdition, who is he that could accuse thee of injustice? nay,
our own consciences would acquit thee, and condemn us: for seeing thou have
sought us, and we would not be found, it is good reason we should cry unto
thee and find no mercy. But O Lord, thy mercies are above our iniquities, so
thou have spared us many years, and past over our manifold transgressions, as
one that were ignorant of them, in silence and sorrow, in witness whereof the
heavens, with their apparitions si^ke of disasters and events have been
portenders unto us, that we might be forewarned, the earth upon her bases,
proppes and foundations so firmly laid has of late been shaken at the
aspecte of thine anger, and tottered to and fro like a drunken-man, thy waters
and the whole courses thereof, that roll with indignation up and down there
channelles being tied within bounds and limittes (as the lions in there dens)
dash themselves with indignation against there dammes and there shores, stoppes
to there fury fixed there by thy word, Hitherto shall thou pass and no
further, have of late by thy sufferance borne down there keepers many years,
and sweld higher then there brinkes and in there merciless furies preyed upon
whole countries leaving nothing but desolation behind them, and all for our
sins and forwarnings, besides thy threatening us by drought, famine and
pestilence, the fearful denuntiation of thy word applied unto our guilty
consciences, that so perceiving thine anger we might fear and be saved: even
so I Lord as thou have been gracious in forewarning us by these, so give us
grace that we may be forewarned by them, that in time we may repent and turn
from our wicked ways, and no longer abuse thy patience, but run unto thee in
repentance and humility, that so we may be saved in the day of thy appearance,
which so work in us that overcome at length with thy goodness and patience,
we may no longer delay to ask council of thee and thy holy word what we
ought to forbear, and what we ought to follow, that we be not puf^ up with
prosperity, nor to much dejected in sickness and adversity, that we may
despair of our selves and the help of our own hands, but may expect all
things from thy goodness, that we put not our confidence in transitory things,
but wholly rely upon thee and thy promises. Bless this famely O Lord and every
member thereof, bless also our parents and friends according to the flesh and
nature, and continue thy blessed word unto us and to our posterities after us,
even unto the ends of the world for thy dearly beloved son Christ Jesus our
Saviors sake into whose hands and protection we commend our souls and our
bodies this evening and the rest of our lives ye were bought and redeemed with
his most dear and precious blood: whose acceptance he grant for his own
dear sake. Amen.

Let thy mighty hand and outstretched arm o Lord be still our defense, thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear son our salvation, thy
true and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy spirit our comfort and
consolation, unto the end and in the end. Amen.

The Lord bless us and save us the Lord make his face to shine upon us and be
merciful unto us, the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us, and
this night and evermore vouchsafe to send us thy everlasting peace. Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore.

Amen.
A prayer to God for the forgiveness of sins.
MOst holy, most just, most merciful and omnipotent God thou alone do
punish and no man can releive, thou alone do chastise and no man can
controwle, thou alone do save, and no man can condemn, thou bring to the
grave, and bring back again pardon I beseech thee my sins, more in number
then the drops in the sea, then the stars in the firmament, and purge my
corruption, beyond bound, without measure, look not upon my merits, for they
are none at all, for the purity of mankind is defiled in sin, wherefore to
me O Lord, to me thy poor servant belongs nothing but shame and confusion,
but to thee is mercy and judgment and glory inherent, destroy not I humbly
entreat good father of mercy, the creation and frame, and composition of thine
own hands de^ace not the image wherein thou thy self art so lively portrayed,
but haste to comfort me, make thy corrections my instructions, that in patience
awhile I may hear possess my soul, and in thy promise have an assured hope
to live with thee for ever in the life to come, through Jesus Christ my Lord
and only Savior.

Amen.
A prayer to be said before the undertaking of any journey.
O Eternal, wise and glorious God, that foreseest the end of all things before
they come to pass, and blessest the endeavors of those that go forth in thy
fear, and direction, be present therefore O Lord, and protecting in this my
travel, guide thou my course and shorten thou my way, by the blessed
communication of thy spirit within me, give thine holy Angels charge over me
to keep me in all my ways and to guide me to and fro in this my journey, as
thou did to Toby the younger, who by thy Angel Raphael was guyded unto
Gabaell a City of the Medes: our whole life O Lord is as a pilgrimage and the
days thereof are few and evil, by thy appointment we soiorne upon the face of
the earth for a time and our spirit also within us, it comes and returns as
a traveler upon the way, or bourdeth with us as an inmate or guest or tenant
at will, whom we hold by no lease nor condition but thy pleasure, which art the
owner thereof, a quarter, a year, or perhaps many years, till thy messinger
from heaven to earth knock at our doors with a Ilinc migrate coloni, slit
hence my tenant, and then exit de terra nostra, it departs from us and our
bodies fall down to the earth and our pilgrimage is at an end: teach me to
use this world as in my travail I shall use mine inn, taking up my rest for a
night, and preparing for my passage in the morning, knowing there I am but a
stranger and have no abiding place, for so the world is but mine inn and
because it is fair and beutious, full of many goodly rooms and spacious
walks, beutified with the firmament and the greater and the lesser lights
thereof, the Sun, the Moon* and the stars, yet that I seek not to make it
my habitation for ever, but give me grace to use it as if I used it not,
providing me with such necessaries as may sustain me in my travail, not
ouerburdening my conscience to clogge me in my way, ever looking up to thee
the star of my direction, whither my course is bound, as the haven from this
impatient and troublesome sea, where at the last I shall anchor at rest, whither
Lord conduct me with thy right hand, as in this my temporal and present
journey defended from all perils and dangers of the day, I may happily
accomplish my desire with thy will, and all the days of my travail and labor
assigned, ended, I may there arrive where all tears shall be wipt from mine
eyes, and drops from my brows, weariness from my bones, sighs and sobbes
from my soul, all dried up in the presence and joy of thee and thy saints and
Angels for evermore, which grant good father for thy mercies sake.

Amen.
Another Prayer or med: to be used before the undertaking of any journey or
business either by sea or land.
GOod father, the mysery and blindness of our nature is such, and our
ingratitude so great, that we steal thy benifites, and take them absolutely to
our selves, and enjoy them freely to our own use as if they were originally
the work and labor our of our own hands and we had them without thy
knowledge and assistance, that riches are the succeeders policy, that health
is either recovered or kept by observation or diet, and lost by disorder or
abuse, that success or defect in any our proceedings, suit according to our
wisdom or industry in contriuing the same, and so in a settled persuasion, and
resolution hearin we go forward in this blindfould course asking council nor
craving success of any but our selves or creatures of the same f^aylty and
being that we ourselves are of, whereby oftentimes we fail of our purpose,
and know not the reason thereof, Lord give us grace to correct this error, and
give us light in this our blindness, teach us to know that we are ashamed, we
are ignorant of that, Except thou build* the house, they labor in vain that
build it: For it is thou that must command thy blessings to be with us in our
storehouses, and in all that we set our hands unto, or our labor dies
between our fingers* like an untimely fruit. And as a sparrow falls not to
the ground without thy sufferance, so there is nothing that comes to pass
without thy appointment and direction: therefore what business soever we have,
what regard soever we have thereunto, let us have so much regard thereto as to
regard thee that must regard it, or else all will fall to the ground: let us go
out in thy name, with thy assistance implored on our knees, let us loose so
much time to gain so great advantage: for it abridges the way, and cuts off
many tedious imperfections in whatsoever: in thy protection let us enter
again, let us not take our bread, our daily food, our sustenance without
thankfulness to thee: let us not couch our selves in the bed of our rest, but
close our eyes in thy favor and blessing: for it is that that must be upon
the building of our houses, opening of our Shops, and warehouses, watching of
our Cities, tilling of our ground, in feeding of our bodies, in the education
of our children, or whatsoever pain, industry, or labor in the securest
course we can devise: for without this aid and assistance all falls into
emptiness and vastity; Lord give us grace to consider it, and bless this our
out-going and our coming in, the fruit of our bodies, and the fruit of our
hands, our intents and purposes: Be regardfull unto our labors, whatsoever
we take in hand; walk by us on the land, on ye water, as thou did by thy
Disciples, and save us, or we perish: for neither the land ye safer, nor the
sea ye more dangerous, can protect us, nor destroy us* till thou have sealed
thereunto thy consent, nor any creature nor casualty in ye world offer either
violence or injury, where thy hand but takes our part; and where that is
opposed, though all the creatures in the world, the whole host of heaven and
earth should join with us, we go to rack and ruin. Give us therefore grace
to be mindful hereof, and thoroughly persuaded herein, to make our preparation
thereafter, that we may ask, and thou may give thy success and blessing upon
all that we take in hand, or enjoy, which grant us Lord in this present
occasion, and in all occasions and times hereafter, for thine own dear sake.

Amen.
A prayer for true peace, which is the peace of God in the peace of conscience,
and for the external peace of the body, disquieted often with revenge, debate
and contentious going to law.
O Lord my God, which art the author of peace, and lover of concord, and the
hater of all those y^ are not lovers thereof, but delight in contention and
strife: therefore I beseech thee, because I would not be as one out of thy
favor give unto me that mind that a peaceful man should have: and let thy
spirit assure my spirit, that my sins are washed away in the blood of thy
son Christ Jesus, that my conscience within me may have peace and rest,
without which all joy will turn into bitterness, and I shall mourn in the
midst thereof, as the Pelican in the wilderness; The body will bear the
infirmity thereof, but an aching and wounded Conscience who can sustain? O Lord
settle this assurance in me, that I have peace with thee, and I shall have peace
with all men, with whom to have peace, and to be at wars with thee: to be at
peace with the world, and at enmity with thee, is to make unto my self a
dangerous truce, a league of peace against the king of peace, the very breath
of whose nostrils is able at once to destroy a thousand worlds, and all the
Creatures therein; and therefore vain is the combination that is plotted
against thee. Give me patience, O Lord, to digest and pass over the injury
and malice of those that contentiously and causlessely by the malice and
instigation of Satan, seek to stir up strife and disturb my quiet, wherein
in the mediation of thee, and thy mercies toward me, I might meditate day and
night free from this troublesome and entangled world, with her thousand snares,
and whereby by righting my wrong a little, I wrong my self a great deal, and
the remembrance whereof, (as my means) with her so many branches, to the
vex^tion and expense of my mind and body, and substance endlesly eat me up, y^
I forget what I live but to remember, and woe to him that goes to law for that
which y^ Gospel has taken order for. Therefore good father, give me such a
patient and disgesting mind, that I desire not to injury others, to molest my
self, but rather by y^ example of thee, the true pattern of all imitation,
that to thy accusers did not open thy mouth, but wast dumb like a sheep
before y^ shearer, and wast so far from revenging the injuries of man, that
thou did not defend thy self. And if at any time I be forced to use the
means to take this sword into my hands, that I do it not with delight, but
unwillingly, and with such moderation and clemency, that it be to defend my
self, and not offend others, that I offend not in the true use thereof but that
I labor to have peace with thee, and peace with all men, which grant thou that
art the God of peace, for thy Son Christ Jesus sake our Savior.

A prayer for seasonable weather, a punishment the Lord has lately inflicted
upon us and our whole land for our sins.
Eternal, Almighty, and Everlasting God, forasmuch as by thy holy word we are
taught that when thine anger is incensed against us for our sins, amongst other
thy punishments, thou do shut up the heavens, y^ there may ^^no rain that ye
earth thereby may deny her fruits unto us, and now thou do justly manifest
this thy displeasure unto us, in shutting up the heaven which was wont to drop
down her wholesome showers in due season upon the fruits of the earth,
hardening them as Iron or brass, in dispersing y^ clouds, so that they drop
not upon the dry and parched soil, burnt up and withering in the heat of thine
indignation. O Lord, though we are sensible of this thy disple^sure kindled so
heavily aginst us at this time, yet groaning under the weight of our manifold
sins and transgressions so great and so innumerable, we are afraid in our
selves to approach unto thy Tribunal, to crave a release of this thy
punishment, or to beg any other mercy at thy hands; yet because such is thy
gracious goodness toward mankind, that by thy Prophet Zachary thou have
mercifully promised us the first and the latter rain, to make white clouds,
and give showers to every one grass in the field. Therefore we acknowledging
our own unworthiness, and relying only upon thy mercies, with lowly contrite
and broken hearts, do presume to power out our humble supplicatio^s before thee,
beseeching thee y^ thou would hear our prayers, as thou did sometimes the
earnest supplications of Helias, who prayed, and the heavens gave rain, and
the earth brought forth her fruit. And as it has pleased thee, most gracious
God, likewise to promise by the mouth of Moses thy servant unto Israel. And in
another place by thy Prophet Hosea, that if that people would forsake their
sins, and turn wholly unto thee ye Lord their God, thou would give rain
unto the land in due time, the first rain and the latter, that they might
gather in ye wheat* and the oil; and y^ thou would send grass in their
fields for cattle, that they might eat enough; and y^ if they would turn unto
thee with unfeigned repentance, thou would hear the heavens, and they should
hear the earth, and the earth should hear the grass, the corn, the oil, and
thou would have mercy upon them that were not pitied. Merciful Father, with
an humble confession of our great ingratitude, a hatred, and loathing of our
former transgressions committed with a high and presumptuous hand against thy
sacred majesty, and with a serious purpose to walk in the ways which thou
have commanded: and so in the grief and agony of spirit for our former sins we
turn unto thee, turn then unto us most merciful father, and extend thy great
goodness and compassion toward us, that we may taste and see how gracious thou
art, in hearing of these our prayers, and answearing them graciously in the
seasonable supply of this our necessity, to the honor of thy great name, and
the comfortable refreshing of thy servants, for the merits of thy son Jesus
Christ our only Lord and Savior.

A meditation of Gods love and mercy toward us and our vnthankefullnesse*
toward him alluding to the phrase of S. Augustine.
Miserere mei Domine indigna facientis and Digna Patientis.

Eternal, Almighty and most merciful God upon the knees of our hearts we
prostrate our selves, our souls and bodies at the throne of thy grace, being
altogether wretched and unworthy sinners, unworthy of the least of those
benefittes, that have not fallen unto us seldom, now and than and that in a
weak and restrained measure* but in bundles and shows of a large allowance
daily and howerly thrown upon us from thy royal and plentiful hand, as
though we had always performed thy will and our delight and been to walk
wholly in the paths of thy commandments, which we have been so far from,
witness (dear God) our own consciences that we have derided them and set
them at light, trod them under foot, upon the least advantage or occation, nay
in sport and merriment, and to show us men of resolutions presumptuously we
have taken them in vain, and that in so careless and high ameasure that it is
thy vncomprehended mercy, that before this thou have not abridged our days,
cut us off and cast us into the bottomless pit of hell, from whence there is
no redemption or thought of mercy but in vain: wherefore bouldened by this one
mercy of thine, thy patience, and long suffering, (more then all our deserts
can ever recompense) we will presume to beg another, which is that thou will
touch our hearts with a godly sorrow for our sins, not small but greuious, not
a handful but innumerable, not past but present, not secret but exemplary and
open in the face of God and man, so that if thou should deal with us
according to our deserts, Satan would rejoice, but we should mourn, never to
see thy face again, the sun nor the moon, the day nor the night (although a
perpetual darkness) the heaven nor the earth, nor any other of the blessed
works of thine hands that of thine infinite goodness thou have prepared for man:
what shall we then do but under the wings of thy mercy seek our refuge,
beseching thee to extend thy goodness and compassion toward us, which thy
dearly beloved son our Savior and redemer with a love above all love has so
dearly purchased for us by his innocent and precious blood, the least drop
whereof is sufficient to heal all our wounds, and to wash away all our
iniquities, to releive all our wantes, and blot out all our transgressions but
without thy grace, a light unto our feet and a lantern unto our paths we are
able to do nothing but sin, losing our selves in the thick mists of
iniquity: Therefore good father as thou have appointed all the creatures in the
world to serve man, and have ordained him only to serve thee, so give us grace
that we, considering the largeness of our privilege and the honor thou have
endued us withal, with changed affections our wills and natures regenerate
and purified by thy gracious spirit we may serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life, until we be renewed to the image of
thy son, in whom thou art well pleased, and in us wilt be well pleased if we
displease not thee to please our selves, if we be angry with our sins, the
devil, our vanities and all that would separate us from thee, and with hearty
repentance for our former misdeedes, and a zealous indignation against our
selves that ever we have fallen into so beastly corruption, taking heed that
we fall not again into the same relapse* upon pain of thy heavy displeasure,
and yet there is no cause O God, most just, why thou should be pleased with
sinners which art displeased with sin, but for his sake that dearly paid
therefore in the heat and burden thereof, and sinned not, the bosom of whose
merry, (in this desert of his) if it be not open with Abraham's to receive us
poor and impotent Lazars, with the rich glutton we go down into hell, from
the which deliver us for thy mercies sake sweet Savior Christ.

Amen.
A meditation against the fear of death written in french by the learned P. M:
s. du Plessis.
THe Crown and end of all wretchedness and mysery, the key to let us out of
this world of sorrow, the door and the passage to all eternity, why should we
fear, why should we think of, with so leaden an appetite, why should we fear
to find that we live to seek, why should we not harken to the summons thereof
with joy as the sick man harkeneth to the clock which to the godly brings an
end both of sin and sorrow and all the miseries which are due unto either,
being so many and so great that they pass the explication or comprehension of
man, for the best of this life what ever was it, but as a bed of flowers
ouergrowne with a field of weeds, but as a calm of the sea disquieted with
the breath of every wind, the temper of what man's breast was ever so seasoned
that it was not subject to a thousand passions, wrested and wrung with so many
discontentes that the weight and burden thereof has ouer-borne the patience
of suffering. In beauty, honor, riches, wealth, or in any other sensual
pleasure who ever found contentme^t that has wisdom to way them and esteem
them truly as the were, for the first who ever possessed it in the greatest
desire with the largest extension that found not saciety or discontent in the
fruition and possession, that was not tormented with envy or iealousy, the one
lancing within, or the other reuelling without, in honor or riches or any
other corporal or mental gift, the fairest and most admired flowers that the
earth brings forth to the delight and pleasure of mankind, from the which
pre-eminence or praise or pleasure may be derived, or nature something soothed
up, which itches after ambition and admiration, that found not under these
flowers, weeds 'nay serpents to poison and sting the very life blood of that
felicity, if any there were in them, from the fullest fountain of worldly joy
flows some bitterness, and there was never pleasure so absolute, were it as
short as the flash of lightning, that before a man has power to say behold*
inlightneth the world and then dies in obscurity, that was not alayed with some
abatement, and if it were absolute for the time, the time is so short that
there is a grief therein, and what are all pleasures but as a vapor that
appear for a little time and afterward vanish away, sometimes pleasure
asswageth pain, but most commonly pain kills pleasure, and if our days
were distinguished the good with white and the evil with black stones, at the
end of our lives we should find more black then white, the pleasures, in the
days of Noah, there eating, drinking, marying and giving in marriage, thy gave
there content for a time, till the flood came and took them all away, the
yongman has is pleasure to rejoice in, the days of his youth, the
chearfullnesse of his heart, and the lusts of his own eyes, but in all these
there lies a bitterness, the richman has his pleasure Luke. 16. Purple and
fine linen and delitious fare every day and he knows not what the grief of
Lazarus means, and yet there li^s a worm under the root of all these goodly
branches, and surfets, and sacieties with these creep in upon him, and if he
set his heart thereupon let him know with the yongman and all that are carried
away with any pleasure in the world, that there is a heavy re^conning to be
rendered for these things, the thought w^ereof in the midst of all ^ollities
shall be stricken dead therewith, and to these the thought of death will be
grievous. Be not therefore drunk with these sensual delights and pleasures as
with new wines, which are not pleasures absolute but limited, allayed with a
thousand discontents, and if they were absolute yet of no continuance, and
therefore grievous, and since there is nothing else but the inioyng of these,
that seem what they are not, as we have already examined, that make thee to
desire life, that thou may rejoice therein the forsaking whereof makes it
death unto thee to think of death, yet know they are all but vanity, and thou
must die aut sero aut setius either sooner or later, for there is no prevention,
no resistance can hinder it and therefore that which must be embrace willingly
make a virtue of necessity and though thou might escape it yet it were but a
madness, because (if we pervert not the true nature of it) it is the end of all
misery* and sorrow, and labor, and travail and the gate that opens the may
unto all true pleasure and happiness, whereof all in this world are but
counterfets and shadows, so resolve thy self hereof, and prepare thy self
hereto that the remembrance of thy passed days augment not the bitterness
thereof at the last hour, and then thy pains shall not dismay, thee because
thou trauellest to bring forth eternal life, which for the merry-madnesse of
one hour take heed that thou lose not for ever. But use thy pleasures with
such moderation, ever remembering they are momentary and he that has most has
not all, and he that least has some, that for a moments joy thou reap not
eternity of sorrow, that thou love them not so much y^ you forget God, in whose
presence is fulness of joy and at his right hand pleasures for evermore psalm:
16. and who gives us drink out of a whole river of pleasures psalm. 36.
contemn therefore these transitory pleasures and reserve your selves for
pleasures there eternally complete, where neither envy, nor iealousy, nor
sickness, nor taint, shall alter or distaste your happiness where your joy
shall be ever present, and yet you cannot be filled, rather you shall be filled
but cannot be satisfied, or if not satisfied then there is hunger, or that you
may, then there is a loathing, I know not how to express it, Deus habet quod
exhibeat, God has something there to bestow which I know not, but, ibi beata
vita in font there is blessedness at the head of the spring, not in cisternes
that thou may be sure of, and could you drink up the pleasures of the whole
world at a draught, as Cleopatra drunk the value of 5. thousand pound, yet
remember it is but a draught and quickly down the throat and there has an
end, and therefore I say again use them with moderation to sweeten and allay
the many anguishes, that if ever perdominant would untimely weigh us down to
our graves, and we should faint in the midst of our race, ever looking up
from these to that eternal rest and peace of mind which hereafter we shall
enjoy, and then when death shall approach near unto thee his aspect shall not
be fearful which shall end all our miseries, heal all our infirmities, wipe
away all discontents, and in it we shall there find an end of sinning* an end
of all uncleanness, an end of all wandering thoughts and cogitations, by it we
be freed from this wicked and exemplary world when the soul cannot look out
at the eye as her window, but a whole army of vanity is ready to sease upon
her, nor use any of her servants whereby treason is not offered unto her, by
death the soul shall be delivered from this thraldom and bondage, and as the
Apostle speaks this corruptible body shall put on incorruption and this
mortal immortality, 1. Cor. 15. 53. O blessed, thrice blessed be that death
that ends in the Lord, which delivers us out of so evil a world, and freeth us
from such corruption and bondage. Why then should we fear that we would not
escape* because our chiefest happiness is behind, where we cannot come: but
we must pass through this door of death: and if every hour of our life we
should dye a death, were too little to keep us from thence. And but that our
portion and felicity is behind: and when this our shadow of life ends, our
true life begins, and the grave shall not ever enclose us in her womb* which
if it should, then woe were man above any other creature living, when
senseless and irrational creatures, as the Stagge, the Raven, and the Daw,
Rocks and Trees, and such like, have an ages date beyond man, for whose use
they were all created and made, but that he has an everlasting inheritance in
heaven, with that great God that created and made both him and them, when so we
shall rain everlastingly, whilst they upon earth in distance of time shall
moulder and rot, and drop down to nothing. O let us not then dote so much upon
these unprofitable and fading vanities, upon our wodden cottages, and our
tottering buildings of painted clay, such as our bodies are, which are but y^
tents of ungodliness, and habitation of sinners, but let us look and long
after this heavenly City, whose builder and maker is God, whither that we may
the sooner come, let us with the Apostle, desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ.

The Sicke-mans Prayer.
O Gracious God, look down from heaven with y^ eyes of mercy upon me a most
miserable and wretched sinner, grievously afflicted in body and in mind, a
worm, and no man: if a man, such a one that never any with more need lifted up
eyes, nor heart to the throane of thy mercy, from whence all comfort comes,
look upon me, O Lord, with y^ eyes of thy mercy, give me patience to endure
this my affliction and trial, and give me grace O Lord, to make such use
thereof that it may be to thy glory and my good, put into my mind all ye*
precepts, comforts, instructions, I have heard, or read of al my life before,
as strong meditations to comfort me in this my extremity. Be not far from
me, O Lord, lest Satan prevail over me, make thou my bed, and I shall rest in
peace: visit me O Lord, as thou did visit Peter's wives mother, and the
Captains servant: for unto thee belongs health and salvation, thou bring
to the door of death, and to the brinke of the grave, and yet if thy good will
and pleasure be, thou restorest to health and perfection again. And gracious
and loving father, seal in my heart by thy holy spirit, the forgiveness of
all my sins, throughout ye whole course of my life, that what I have done or
said amiss, may be buried in the wounds of thy son, so that they be never
laid unto my charge, nor imputed against me: in his blood purge my body and
soul from all their corruptions; and if this my visitation be not unto the
death, may it please thee to help me upon the bed of my sorrows, speak but
the word, and it shall be done, renew my former health unto me, that I may
take up my bed and walk, and by a happy transmutation turn my whole heap of
sorrow into a bundle of joy. Heal me, and I shall be whole, save me and I
shall not be condemned: deliver me from the pit of corruption, that opens
her mouth, and shuts us therein, and keeps us as part of her own bowels:
For the grave will not acknowledge thee, nor the dead confess thee; but the
living shall extol and magnify thy name world without end. But if to thy
vncomprehended wisdom (to balance against which all the wisdom in the
world is but folly) it seem better to thee that I dye then live, then deal
with me according to thy good pleasure, give thine Angels charge over my soul,
that it may be received in peace, which into thine hands I commend, that gave
it me: strengthen my faith in thee, and in thy Law, that I may willingly
resign that into thy hands that was due unto thee the first day that I lived,
if it had pleased thee to call for it, by a double right; nay so many rights
that might claim a thousand lives, if I had them to lay down for thee, that
have laid down thine own Sons, and done so many things for me, and for my
sake, and for all mankind: and teach me, O Lord, to make such true use of this
my sickness, that the former miseries of this wretched life, joined with my
present grief and anguish, make me weary of these times of sin, and willing to
resign my soul into thy hands, prepared by this unwelcome, yet wholesome
summoner, that will transport me out of this vale of misery, to that
everlasting kingdom which thou have purchased for me; which grant I beseech
thee, for Christ Jesus sake, my only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
The commendation of the soul to be said at a sick man's death, out of the
Man. of M. Crashaw.
I Here commend thee to Almighty God most dear brother, and I commit thee to
him* whose creature thou art: Go forth therefore, O Christian Soul, get thee
gone out of this filthy world, go forth in the name of the Almighty Father,
who created thee, in the name of Jesus Christ, who dyed for thee; in the name
of the Holy Ghost, who has been powered out upon thee: and when thou, happy
soul, art delivered out of the prison of the body, the glorious quier of
heavenly Angels meet, and the Company of all holy Saints entertain thee, the
loving countenance, and cheerful face of Jesus Christ shine upon thee, a
merciful judge be he unto thee, that thou may have sentence to sit for
evermore amongst his Saints on his right hand: thy dwelling be in peace, and
thy habitation in the heavenly Jerusalem for evermore: far be it from thee
ever to feel or know how horrible the darkness, how terrible the flames, how
intolerable the torments of hell are, Satan and all his hellish g(...) be
confounded at thy presence; and if he dare set upon thee, victory and triumph
be on thy side, shame and trembling fall upon him from the presence of Gods
Angels, and be he banished into the black mists, and confused Chaos of
eternal darkness. But let the Lord arise, and his enemies be scattered: and
as the smoke vanishes, so let them fly away, but let the just be exalted,
and rejoice in the presence of the Lord: let the infernal legions not dare to
touch thee, nor all Satan's Hell Hounds presume to hinder thee; and he, who
disdained not to dye for thee, be he thy Savior and deliverer from all
spiritual vexation. Be the gates of Paradise open unto thee, and thy Christ
give thee thy place and mansion in the same: and he that is the true Pastor,
and great Shepherd of the sheep, acknowledge thee for one of his true sheep,
and receive thee into his fold. Jesus Christ absolve thee from all thy sins,
and place thee on his right hand, among his elect, that there thou may see
thy Redeemer face to face, and in the society of blessed souls may enjoy the
comforts of heavenly contemplation, and the blessed vision of God for ever and
ever.

Amen.
W. C.

Six signs, according to S. Anselme, upon the which a man may ^est confident
of his salvation.
1 If he believe the articles of Chrian faith, as many as are determined by the
Church. 2 If he rejoice to dye in the faith of Christ. 3 If he know that he
has grievously offended God. 4 If he be heartily sorry for it. 5 If he resolve
to forsake his sins, if God give him life. 6 If he hope and believe to come
to eternal salvation, not by his own merits, but by the merits of Jesus
Christ.
Then say to the sick person: If Satan object any thing against thee, oppose
thou the merits of Christ betwixt thee and him. And thus without all doubt he
shall be saved.

Another Meditation against the fear of death, and for strength and patience
in that last hour.
Statutum est omnibus semel mori.

THe metal and substance whereof we are made, being but dust and ashes, slime
and corruption, might alone, without* further motive and reason, persuade us
that we are not everlasting, nor made for continuance, what is man therefore, O
Lord, that he should be proud? or what are our bodies, that we should so regard
them, the beauty and delicasie whereof so much pampered and adorned, so much
accounted and esteemed of, so curiously and carefully preserved and kept, must
so suddenly descend to corruption amongst the worms and creepers of the earth,
and to rubble and ashes. This mutation and dissolution of our bodies, the
separation and seuering of two ancient Inne-mate-friends, must needs, as in the
act, so in the consideration thereof, strike a strange amazement in a weak and
unresolved Christian, that truly understands not what death is, which is indeed
to the godly, and those that have made a preparation thereunto, the gate and
passage to a better life, the end of sorrow, and a rest from labor: yet O
Lord, consider the weakensse of our nature, and help us in that, which even
thy blessed Saints, Prophets, and Apostles, that knew thee in a measure above
our knowledge, that have given rules, and motives, and reasons against the
^eare thereof; yet in the trial and accomplishment thereof, have found the
imbecility of flesh and nature repugnant against it; and for the adding of a
few lingering days of further cares and sorrows, some have forsworn thee,
others have wept unto thee, and all have been willing to stretch it out to the
last minute; and yet it is but a prolonging, not a preserving. Ezechias may
turn to the wall and weep, and mourn like a Dove, and pray for life, yet at
the last he must render it up. O Lord, give us therefore patience to part with
it, being no inheritance to us, but debt to thee, being most certain, and
assuredly persuaded, that thou will one day restore it to his former, nay
fuller perfection* lessen our love toward the world, and our selves, and
increase it toward thee, and thy Kingdom. Make this, good Father, the
frequent thought and meditation of our hearts, to think that we must dye,
that it may breed in us humility and godliness, as a happy preparation
thereunto: let us resolve patiently and resolutely to undergo that task
assigned by thee, the dissolution of nature: for the corruption of nature, the
sting is gone, and we need not fear it, being but that which all the
several ages and generations of the world that are past, have accomplished;
and in the^r times and seasons descended to corruption, and others have taken
their places, and all that are to come must drink of the same portion.
Mathusalem. though he live 969 years, yet must he not live ever: the portion
never so long, the person never so eminent, his preservation never so great, to
this at last he must surely come, and all mankind besides, although not all
by one means, yet all brings to one end, though some by water, some by fire,
some by famine, some by pestilence, some by the jaws of wild beasts, some by
the hand of an enemy, some in the bed, others in the field, Haman by the
gallows, Iesabel by dogs, Herod by worms, the Sons and daughters of Job
by the fall of an house, the Mothers and Infants of Jerusalem by famine. One
cries my head, my head, as the Shunamites son, another my bowels, another my
feet, feet, as Asa, the Stone, the Gout, the Fever, and a thousand other
punishments, not yet equal to our sins, thy just Executioners of that
sentence: Thou shall dye the death, pronounced against our first Parents, and
in them to the whole race of mankind: Remember thy end, says the wise man,
and thou shall not do amiss. Teach us, O Lord, to remember it, and make use
thereafter, that will in time remember us, if we gorget it, Though we escape
the pit we shall be taken in the snare, we shall fly from a Lion and a bear
shall meet with us, or lean our hand upon a wall and a serpent shall bite us:
we may be delivered from six troubles and the seventh shall dispatch us, for
neither council nor art, nor means can preserve us ever for it is the will of
God and the cannon of his own lips, against the which there is no evasion, no
conuenant to be made with death and the grave, let this meditation be unto us
as the star that lead the wisemen unto Bethleem, where Christ then lay in a
ma^ger in a^inne that now sittes at the right hand of his father in heaven,
from whence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead yt it may lead
us to the throne of his majesty where now he reigns in glory for evermore,
sweeten O Lord this remembrance of death and the grave unto us with this
cogitation that it was thy bed, that in our strength and youth our veins full
of blood, and our bones of marrow, in our liuelihood and iollity we may think
of our dissolution with a quiet mind, and with S. Paul desire to be dissolved
and to be with Christ, whose presence in such full and ample measure as we
shall there enjoy it, far exceeds all the pleasure and delight that this
transitory world afford thee: give us more wisdom O Lord then to esteem the
ruinous and rotten cottages and houses, we live in fortresses and castles of
everlasting refuge, not built upon rocks for continuance, but upon tottering
heaps of sand and ashes, shaken about our ears with the winds and storms of
infinite casualties and afflictions, gaping still for ruin and confusion, teach
us to know that hear, we have no abiding City, but we look for one to come,
that we pass not our time in this vale of misery day and night, youth and age,
in pleasure and delight, that so we make our end, and the remembrance thereof
bitter unto us, neither let us think that because we have fatness in our
bones and health in our joints, that therefore we shall live many years, and
se the succession of our sons and nephews, if we do, what will become of
this? if we flatter our selves, soul take thy rest and upon the sudden are
snacht to hell, once more let us speak like Abraham, one thing, and one thing
more we will beg at thy hands, that since thy decree is set down and thy word
is past, the accomplishment whereof never fayles in the least title, that all
shall dye, confermed by so many millions of creatures, since the beginning of
the world to this present, which shall not cease to run on whilst there are
creatures breathing upon the circle of the earth to the end of the world and
dessolution of all things, since we must all wax old as does a garment, and
from one defect to another draw thereunto, since the son of God himself
upon the earth was not privilege, that now in this time of preparation we make
sweet and honey our passage, by a due and godly preparation thereunto, that when
our friends and our children forsake us with grief and sorrow on both sides,
the Physician gives us over, (wishes us well but can do us no good) that then
when no comfort, is left unto us, besides we have comfort in our souls through
the forgiveness of our sins, and though we have a grave before our eyes,
greedy, inexorable, unsatisfied, opening her mouh to receive us, and having
received us closing hereuerlasting iaiawes upon us, never to return us back
again till the worms and vermin of the earth have devoured us, we despair
not though the strongest man living a heart of marble and iron shall find terror
enough in the thought and acco^plishment of these things, yea Aristippus
fears death as well as the common people, but if the wrath of God which
consumes like a river of brimstone for our former transgressions shall accompany
them, thrice woe unto us, our dull and heavy cogitations will then exclude all
thought of mercy, and our souls shall sleep in death clogged with a burden
of sins which were never repented of: therefore O Lord teach us true and
timely repentance for our sins that the extremity which then outragiously will
assault us may be lessened, and the sting thereof pulled away before hand that
now we may live the life of the righteous, that then we may die the death of
the Godly, that we now gird on our armor before the battle begine, that we
now think of repentance and do it before it be to late, before this welcome
or vnwellcome guest, as we our selves make him, comes, which brings in his
hand, either tidings of great joy or a message of everlasting sorrow giving we
all such grace, unto us to possess these transitory things, that they possess
not us, that we may so use this world as if we used it not: to pass through
this vale of misery, our few and evil days, with such regard to our life,
such love to thy law, such obedience to thy precepts, that we may enjoy the
first, and avoyde* the later, which grant Lord for thy mercies sake. Amen.

Sir Thomas Moore.
Fleres si scires vnum tua tempora mensem.
Rides quid non sic forsitan vna dies.
Knew thou a month should end thy days it would give cause of sorrow.
And yet perhaps thou laughes to day, when thou must die to morrow.
A Prayer or meditation before the receiving of the holy communion.
MOst merciful and most worthily beloved Lord the eternal son of the
eternal father, thou blessed Jesus Christ what should we render unto thee for
all thy loving kindness, for all that thou have done and suffered for us, thy
creatures, of privilege above all the creatures in the world, the sons and
daughters of men, endued with wisdom, capability, and understanding, the
steps of thy foot the printes of thy hands, fixed in a spattous world, and the
innumerability of creatures there, of delight and admiration for us to
contemplate thereon, and employ to our use a delight more heavenly and truly
entire alone, then all the irration all and hud-winked creatures in the world
can taste besides, and therefore all those in subjection under our foot, besides
fashioned and framed us to thine own image with a stature ascendant, shooting
upright into heaven, when all other creatures go groueling and precipitated
down toward the earth, yet O Lord for all these benifits and excellent
indowments that we should behave our selves so ungratefully toward, thee, that
it should repent the to have made man, that our rebellious and unnatural sins
should unwillingly on thy party draw thy punishments even from out thy grasped
hand: Oceans of waters from thy clouds to drown all the world but eight
persons, shall pull fire from heaven to burn whole Cities and towns as
Sodom and Gomorroh were, and not ten righteous persons to be found, amongst
ten thousand unrighteous, and yet thy love to be so f^r continued,
notwithstanding that when all mankind had perverted their ways, and there was
not one that did good, no not one, and we lay bare and open to the law, and
satan triumphing over our infirmities leading us captives under the bondage of
sin, that thou should send thy son into the world, descending from the
throne of his majesty into the bowelles of humanity, from thy right hand in
heaven, to thy footstool the earth, there to be laid in a manger, persecuted
by Herod being a child, to pay tribute, to preach, to pray, to fast, to be
tempted, to be betrayed, to be mocked, to be scourged to be crowned, to be
crucified, and all by ungrateful man, that would oppose a power against him
that gave them power* to take away his life that was the author of life, and
breathed the breath of life into there nostrils yet O love without example,
without imitation: that very night that he was betrayed, when the hour and
the power of darkness met together, when the blackest consultation that ever
day or night was witness too was held, to darken the sun, to extinguish the
light, to undermine the intirest innocence, that ever possessed the breath of
being: yet O love above all love, that night and that hour of that night, when
these heads were combining against thee wast thou instituting and ordayning
this thy blessed Sacrament, to the salvation of there souls, and all the
wretched sinners in the world besides, as many as by a lively faith, shall
apply it to there wounded consciences, O gracious God open thou our eyes in the
largest consideration, that we may see thy love and consider what thou have
done for the sons of men, that for thy love unto us, more strong then death,
we may return our love to thee more weak then our own life, cold, dull and
frosen, which let us seek to warm in the hottest zeal of our affection, that
in some poor measure we may be worthy to receive this thy sacrament of thy
most blessed body / and blood then by thee ordained to our everlasting
salvation and ye admiration of men and Angels, and that we may so do, prepare
us O Lord to this thy heavenly banquet with all due and requisite regard, with
penitent and bleeding hearts that we come not there without our wedding garment
least we turn that blessing into a curse and by eating and drinking our own
damnation, be guilty of thy body and blood which is otherwise able to save
our souls, and to that end we beseech thee, set a part in us whatsoever thy
majesty is most offended with, or makes us unworthy of this thy blessed
sacrament, and give us new hearts and new desires, purged and swept, and
prepared fit for the intertainement of so worthy a guest, and though with the
Centurion in the Gospel, we be not worthy that thou should come under our
roof, yet speak but the word and we shall be saved, and then having so
received thee, we may bouldly with Zacheus confess, Hodie salus Iehouae, this
day is salvation come unto my house, come unto my soul, the which cause, and
effect, preparation and blessing, grant Lord for thy mercies sake.

Amen.
A meditation or thanksgiving after the receiving of the holy communion.
Honor, glory, and praise be given to the O God, the everliving son of the
everlasting father, the stay and comfort of all Christian souls, at whose
right hand in heaven thou sit and raignest for evermore, what may we render
unto thee as a sacrifice acceptable, that have given thy self a bleeding
sacrifice for us and for our sins, A broken and contrite heart O Lord that
thou will not despise, which daily in the meditation of this thy love and mercy
toward us, and what thou have undergone for us our sakes, shall be rent and
torn, that it may be healed in thy wounds, and bound up in the bundle of thy
mercy, that so we may stand spottlesse before thee ye day of thy appearing, and
good Lord so continue thy favor unto us, that this learnest and pledge of thy
love, left as a monument to all after-worldes and ages to come, may be so
powerful and effectual unto us that it may seal in our hearts the
forgiveness of our sins washed away in the stream of thy blood, and buried in
thy side, never to open there mouths against us being there condemned to
everlasting silence, and if at any time the frayltie of the flesh by the
instigation of Satan shall draw me unto sin, forgetting what thou
sufferedest therefore, yet let my wandering thoughts, be called home to thy
fould, in remembrance of these visible signs, whereby the breaking of thy body
and the shedding of thy blood is so lively presented unto me, that I behold it
as with my eyes mourning in my self, not accusing the jews, the scribes nor
pharisees, high priests nor elders, Judas nor Pilate, but my sins that
tormented, wounded, crucified the Lord of life to death, they were the cause,
these were but the instruments whereby it was effected, O what is man that thou
should so regard him, or the son of man that thou so kindly visitest him:
let every nail that was driven into thy hands and feet, by the hammer of our
sins, be a thousand daggers at our hearts, to launch and let forth that
putrified corruption, that returned such muddy chan^elles, to thee the
fountain of living waters, that but with so a high a price, and dear expense
could not be purified, but now being thus purged and made clean let us be
wary we pollute them not again, having received so pure a guest, let us not
harbor with him the unclean, least to our everlasting loss he take his
flight, and forsake us, when then our unclean thoughts and cogitations, which
his presence expelled and kept a loofe of from us, retire themselves, every one
accompanied with seven worse then themselves, and our end be worse then our
beginning, and so that become unto us the savor of death unto death, which
otherwise had been the savor of life unto life, wherefore O Lord bless us at
this time, and this thy holy institution that by our unworthiness we turn not
that to evil which was ordained for our good, make it O Lord the plaster to
heal all our wounds, the garment to cover our nakedness, the spiritual and
corporal bread to the stay of our bodies and souls, let it be the cock to
remember our sins, and the rock to stay our souls upon that we never fall
from thee again, and to that end so bless us most gracious God, y^ this thy
sacrament now received, may be to our everlasting good and welfare, so
conducting us through this vale of misery with so godly a direction and guide,
envy, contention, and malice laid a side, forgiving the offenses of our
brethren toward us, as we expect forgiveness at thy hands, that so in a
godly society in this world we may live together in peace until we shall
reign with thee in glory, which art the end of peace, where we shall then
behold thee with our bodily eyes, as we behold thee now with faith, by the eye
of the Spirit, and see that body that was broken and bruised for our sins,
those hands that have made us, and fed us, that head that was crowned, now all
glorified, never to be debaced more. To which blessed vision, and fruition, he
bring us, that has so ransomed us, for the glory of his sacred Name.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving unto God the Father, used by the reverend and learned, W. Musc.
and fit to be used of all good Christians.
LET all true Christians say and acknowledge with one heart and mouth, say also
with them, O my Soul, say in this mortal body, without this mortal body,
Glory, Honor, and Praise be unto thee, most merciful God, throughout all
ages and Generations of the world, which have not spared thine only Son, but
offered him up a bleeding Sacrifice for the sins of thy people given him to
death even to the death of the Cross, for most wretched mankind, to that end
that through him we might be saved and delivered from destruction and brought
into the liberty of everlasting life, grant unto us by thy spirit that we may
perfect and continue in this thy grace for ever and ever.

Amen.
Mart. Luthers Prayers.
COnferme in us O God that which thou have wrought, and finish the work thou
have begun in us, to the glory of thy name, and the saving of our souls at
the dreadful day of thy Visitation, for thy mercies sake.

Amen.
Saint Aust.
O Deus omnium miserationum, pater Abyssus misericordiae tuae absorbeat abyssum
peccatorum meorum.

O Father of all goodness and mercy, let the depth of thy mercy dry up the
depth of my sins.

A Prayer for a Woman with child, or in travail, to be said by those present
with her.
O God most wise, most just, the blessed Father of our blessed Lord and savior
Christ Jesus, creator, preserver, and governor of all things, next under thee
under the subjection of man, so largely entitled by thy love, extended by thy
favor, created with so goodly and beautiful a perfection in the estate of
Innocence, that he was ye model, and figure, and lively Image of thee, the
fountain of all perfection and happiness: but through sin is our image
defaced, our beauty and perfection darkened our whole disposition and purpose
altered, the earth made barren, and cursed for our sake, and we cursed in the
curse, by the sterility, labor, and manuring thereof, that now denies the
increase that before she brought forth without ye sweat and sorrow of the
heart and brows of man. And for y^ woman, a party in the sin, a party in the
curse: In pain and sorrow shall thou bring forth. And to the Serpent, upon thy
belly shall thou creep, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.
Yet to this woman, O Lord! as her present necessity requires, be propitious,
and near unto her, let thy birth sweeten her sorrow, that broke the head of
the Serpent, that was the cause of the breach of thy Commandment, that has
sweetened the sorrows of all mankind. Hear her, O Lord, and answer her
favorably, and be not angry with thy servant for presuming to cry unto thee,
for the incessant beating thine ears with her clamou^s, for grief compels
her to speak, and the misery she indureth inforceth her to cry unto thee:
have mercy upon her, O fountain of mercy, and hearken to her agony, that
cries for thy help. To her, and all women with child, or in travail, be
merciful, and give them grace with patience to undergo and suffer the decree
and pleasure of thy holy will: let them never strive against thee through
impatience, but in true faith, and invocation of thy name, suffer thy cross
contentedly, which their own original sin and wickedness drew from thy
hands unwillingly. O Lord, if her heaviness induce for a night, let her
comfort come in y^ morning, for joy that a child is borne into the world: and
to that end, blessed God, be thou present and powerful in the exigent and
strait of her greatest extremity (for as all thy works are wonderful, and
past finding out, as our souls know right well, so are they not manifested in
a shallow measure) in the connection, creation, and nourishment, and
preservation of the infant in the womb of the mother, in the birth and
bringing forth of their little limbs into the world, all whole and perfect; to
the which if thy aid and hand be absent, though all help beside in the world
be present, they perish undoubtedly, both the one and the other. Wherefore thou
God of wonders, and Father Almighty of heaven and earth, as thou have by the
death of thine only Son, taken away the sins of the whole world, and
condemned sin in the flesh, so take away the anguish of Childe-birth, brought
forth by sin to all woman-kinde, especially to this woman now in thy hands,
that she may joyfully bring forth that which by thy blessing, she has
happily conceived, that she may be to her Husbands and her own comfort, as
the fruitful vi^e on the walls of his house, and his children like the Olive
branches round about his table. Thy blessing upon those y^ fear thy name,
which blessing for thy blessed name sake grant thou God of al power and goodness.

Ame^
The Prisoners prayer, written by a Gentleman, in passion and penitence, a few
days before his trial.
O Everliving God, and most merciful Father, that art present in all places,
and near unto all such as call upon thee, have mercy upon me most wretched
sinner, odious in the sight of God, hateful in the eyes of man, banished from
thy favor, from the lights of the Sun and firmament, all humane comforts
denied me, fettered in body and in soul, with the links and chains of my sins,
and even bound to destruction, unless thou send me succor from above. My life
I have abused and diuerted my course from the paths of thy commandments, by
the which I have not only offended my brethren in ye flesh, and the law of
man, by the which my body is condemned to dye, having only power over that:
But thee, the great God of heaven and earth (that made me, and induedst me
with many of thy good gifts, and blessings, as health, strength, agility of
body, had I had but one blessing more, that was grace, to have used them well)
that art able to cast both body and soul into Hellfire: yet though by my
offenses against David's choice, I have fallen into the hands of man, from whom
I expect no favor for my life, yet with thee there is mercy for the
forgiveness of my sins beyond expectation, which with that happy Thief, not
in his life, but in his death, I trust in thy goodness to find so, that when
the day shall come that shall finish the Sentence that shall end my misery and
wretchedness in this life, That day I shall be with thee in Paradise, though
evil have been my life ever since I had power to think or execute, so far
forgetting humanity and nature, as if I had sucked the Dragons in the
wilderness, having done those things that I ought not to have done, and left
undone those that I should, never remembering thy dreadful name, but in the
abuse thereof, never hearing thy word, but with contempt, never taking
admonition, but with scorn, and quenching the good motions of the spirit with
the whole deluge of sin, dishonouring my parents, and all good men,
delighting in riot, drunkenness, whoredom and sloth, yet never toutht in
conscience for any, nor for all, so far had custom hardened me, and Satan
possessed me, that I was sick, even to death, and felt not my ill. I was at the
brinke of hell, and yet perceived not my footing. For the which O pardon me, my
God, and show thy mercy upon me, and all prisoners and captives: teach me,
that by this my restraint, that my liberty and loose life never pointed finger
unto, that it is a happy compunction in the body, that makes a blessed
compunction in the soul; And it is not thy least favor unto me, that thou
have stopped my headstrong course in the midst of mine iniquities, in the
readiest path to destruction, that the Diuill could prescribe, or flesh and
blood follow, ere I had filled up the measure to the brimme, are my
condemnation was sealed, and thy face for ever turned away from me. Give me
grace, O Lord, to make such use of this little time I have to live, that what
with many days and sins I had lost, with many tears and sobbes I may recover;
and that whether my life be prolonged beyond my expectation, or ended
according to my account, I may never from this time fall from thee, but take
such deep root by this thy mercy, that being fully persuaded my sins are
washed away in the blood of the lamb, and my transgressions do^e away in his
satifiying, I may endeavor to live in such newness of life and conversation
amongst men, that whom my evil life corrupted by example, my better may
restore again by imitation, to the praise of thy name, the good of thy
Chiloren, and and the salvation of my soul, and the magnifying of thy mercy
world without end.

A Thanksgiving for our redemption, purchased through the blood of Christ, and
for other both corporal and spiritual blessings.
What can man say that he inioyes amongst the innumerability of all thy
benefits and mercies, that he has not received from thee, and for the same
ought to be thankful, but especially ought thy glory to be magnified by us,
for our Election, Creation Justification, Sanctification, who have preserved us
from day to day, and from a thousand dangers threatening both body and soul to
their utter confusion. O most gracious and loving Father, which art beloved for
thy goodness, honored for thy greatness rejoiced in for thy happiness,
praised for thy merits, and prayed unto for thy mercies, I acknowledge my self
all too mean and imperfect to sound forth thy praises in such a key as I
ought, or thou deseruest: when I think thereof, a debility ceizeth upon all my
parts, and I want words to express and power out my soul before thee. Enlarge
O Lord, mine understanding, that I may the more fully conceive and apprehend
thy benefits, that y^ abundance thereof may teach me new language, and phrase
of more copious signification and content, and fill my heart with joy above
measure in the apprehension thereof. By thy love I was elected, by thy goodness
I was created by thy spirit I was called, by thy merry I was justified, by thy
grace I was sanctified, and by thy power I am preserved, and by thy sufferings
I shall be saved. By thy permission and goodness I move, live, and have my
being: naked came I out of my mothers womb, and thou have clothed me; hungry
have I come to thy gates, and thou have fed me; harborlesse have I been
exposed, and thou have taken me in: well therefore may I admire thy mercies in
silence, but speak of them as is meet I cannot, for there words forsake me,
and my tongue becomes mute. Merciful father for all these thy benefits have
I laid them to heart, resisted the motions of y^ flesh, the temptations of the
devil? No, I have sinned grieuosly in thy sight, preferred the desires of my
flesh before ye precepts of thy law, choosing rather a short and momentary
taste of days in iollity and pleasure in this world, which at their fullest
height are ever waning, and attended on by sorrow, then the eternal joys of
thy kingdom in the world to come, nothing dreading ye displeasure of thy
Majesty, whose breath shakes the foundations of the earth, and makes the
spirits of darkness to tremble, and burns vnquenchably in ye bottomless pit
of hell, whose power is so infinite, y^ in the twinkling of an eye, or more
sudden the ye flash of the lightning is able to consume what ever his hands
have made: yet notwithstanding, sinful and careless creature that I am, have
I bin bold to do wickedly, to persevere in the same, so now touched in
conscience by ye finger of thy good spirit, I am bold to speak, being but
dust and ashes, prostrated before ye throne of thy majesty, heartily to beseech,
and humbly entreat thee, that thou will not deal with me according to my
deserts: for then O Lord, where should I stand to plead my case? fire and
brimstone should be my portion to drink, that have drunk down sinnne as
Behemoth drinks down water: but thou art gracious and compassionate,
therefore under the shadow of thy wings will I seek for refuge, desiring thee
to nail all my sins to thy cross, that through thy sufferings I may obtain
remission thereof. I am a sinner, yet redeemed by thy precious blood: a sinner
I am, remember thou came into ye world to save sinners, whereof I am chief,
lost in a wilderness of errors, wandering from thy presence: help me, O Lord,
or else who can deliver me? save me, O Lord, or else I perish, for there is no
redemption no salvation without thee: hear him O Lord that condemns
himself, and caleth upon thee. O Savior, whom will thou save, if y^ sinner
shall descend to perdition that dispaireth of himself, and trusts in thee? O
blessed Savior and Redeemer of the world, aswage my grief heal my diseases:
thou have called me when I, like the deaf Adder, would not hear thy voice:
will thou then turn away thy face when my cries come unto thee? will thou
suffer that to be lost which thou purchasest at so dear a prise? No Lord, for
thy mercies sake, for thine own sake sweet Jesus.

Of the danger of deferring our repentance, with a prayer suddenly to conceive
it, and soon to practice it.
MErciful God, and most loving father, what may I render unto thee for all thy
benefits, more in number then the moaths in the sun, or ye sands by the
seashore, that have made to be when I was not, predestined me from y^
beginning of the world, to be in due time and season, protected me in my
mothers womb, carefully taken me out from thence, ever since been my guardian
to these years of my youth: and for all these thou requirest naught but
thankfulness toward thee, and remembrance of thee in my younger years and
capacities, and shall I neglect and defer then to give thee the gifts of
thine own giving? shall I give the first of my life, and best of mine years,
the strength and marrow of my days to the service of Satan, and think that
thou will receive me in my hoary age, when sin leaves me, and I not it? Good
Lord wipe all such ingratitude out of my mind, yt I may with a present joy and
felicity in thee, embrace thee in due time in some measure, which have done and
suffered so many things for my soul and body: put far from me, O Lord, the
thoughts and imaginations of wicked men, that upon thy long suffering and
patience, pass over their days in mirth and iollity, and think their latest
years, or last gaspes sufficient satisfaction for a lewd and long mis-spended
life. Thy father and thy mother in the days of thy humanity, loosing thee in
the temple went but one days Journey without thee, but sought thee 3. days,
sorrowing before they found thee. He y^ has lost thee many years, must have
many years to find thee again; and late and constrained repentance is
seldom true repentance: our time is not when we our selves will, but when God
does call, hear we must when he speaks, open we must when he knocks, else
we shall power out our petitio^s in vain: for when we pray he will not
hear us, the first and best is his due, and more then we can give, or he
expects; and the last and worst is not sufficient, and he justly may and will
reject it. Grant therefore merciful Father, that thy word may work in us so
free and voluntary obedience to thy will, that thou may accept it, which in
us is willing subjection, not by thy judgments, which is constrained obedience
for fear of destruction, which thou little regardest. O Lord take from me that
common and dangerous sin of presumption, presumption of thy mercies, that thou
desire not the damnation of sinners, that our years and youth, observation
of diet, and curiosity of our health, will carry us to the l^st years of our
expectation; and when we draw near to our end, that then safely enough we may
begin to think upon thee, and all in due season And thus make presumption the
rock whereupon we shipwreck our souls, and by ye which many millions have
perished, it drowned the old world, it threw the rich glutton into hell. Lord
make my sense and understanding as a bulwark to beat back all the policies and
assaults that Satan can devise to beat against with that engine: that to day I
may hear thy voice lest thou harden my heart. And if I will defer upon hope
and example, make me that I rather fear the portion of the bad Thief, then
the success of the good, and let me not re^use thy grace in my health, when
thou offerest it, lest when I shall crave it in my sickness, thou refuse to
give it me: Touch me, O Lord, with a consideration of the danger thereof,
that in time I may have grace to call for thy grace to prevent it, that I may
now amend, and not defer till hereafter, to the end, to my death, when there
is no remedy, but either I must to heaven or to hell, to God or to the devil,
and when that comfort is seldom, found which presumptuously was imagined, when
the memory presents fantasies and dreams, the heart aches, the hands trembl^,
the tongue faltereth, the eyes wax dim, checkes pale, lips black, feet weak,
and the whole body and soul possessed with anguish, and grief, and terror,
what repentance shall we then make? when our sins are so great they
ouer-presse us, our comfort so small that we have noe feeling of it, our time
so short that we cannot think of them, our friends weeping that they put us
out of them, amasement and distraction peeping wildly throughout all our
senses, miserable is that man in this case whose end and repentance comes so
near together-therefore Lord: whatsoever at the time of my death I would wish
to have done, grant that in this time of my health I may do it, and Lord make
me understanding, capable so wise in my generation, so gracious in thy grace
that foreknowing these things I may prevent them, that with the wise virgins I
may ever have the oil in my lamp, that is be in readiness to go with thee
whenever it please thee, that now I hear thy voice when thou speak unto
me, be acquainted with thee, that thou be no stranger unto me; but a friend
and a friend indeed, as at all times, so especially at this exigent and last
extremity, which how long it may be I will not presume, nor how short it may be
despair, but prepare my self against it, my readiness being my resolution
that whenever it shall come it shall the less affright me, in that before I
have set my house in order and disposed my self thereto which preparation that
I may make, and success that I may find, grant me Lord (though so many
neclect it) for thy mercies sake.

Ame^.
A prayer and meditation for a strong faith and against that dangerous sin of
desperation.
THough our sins were as red as scarlet, thy blood O Lord will wash them as
white as snow, though in sin we have been borne, and in iniquity our mothers
have conceived us, yet will we trust in thy loving kindness all the days of
our life, if we should trust in our own merits, desperatio^ would inuiron us
on every side, yet Lord when we consider the multitude of our sins, and that
every day of our life we add to there number, so that all the water in the
Ocean-sea cannot rince us from them, for the least of which in thy justice,
thou m^yst throw us down to the bottomless pit of hell, our faith faultereth
and we begin to despair, but that we trust in the merits of his suffering who
in ye bundle of his afliction has gert up ours, and will either nail them to
his cross or cast them into the bottom of the sea, and hang millstones about
there necks y^ they shall never rise up in judgment to condemn us, y^ else
would never suffer us to rise up to be saved. Lord give us grace to be wary to
our steps, and vigilant to our paths, to have an eye to our souls, for Satan
compasses the earth, watches, and roreth and walks, transformeth himself
into all shapes that he may win us in all sins, into an Angel of light being
but a fiend of darkness, to sift and winnowe us as wheat, grain after
grain, that if it were possible he might surprise us: good God what need have
we of thy assistance and grace to bear v^ out, that have such enemies without,
and such enemies within, the weakest whereof is stronger then we, so that we
need the prayers of our own spirits, and the spirit of God that gro^eth with
gronings not to be expressed, and of the son of God himself who sits at
his fathers right hand and makes intercession for us that our faith fail not,
and that we fall not into desperation, for alas what ability have we of our
selves? or what strength have we in our sinn^wes? who are not as pillars of
brass or the deaf rocks of the sea (against the which there waves dash
themselves and they are not shaken, being substances so firm and v^alterable
that cannot be removed) but dust and ashes cracked with every flaw and blast of
affliction, and unless thou support us we are not able to stand and there is
no safty but under the wings of thy mercy, we have sinned against heaven, and
against thee, the father of our spirits, the father of our flesh, against him
y^ gave us his law, and he that gave our nature, birth, and being, by our
misdeedes and abominations both the tables have we broken and done very
wickedly in thy sight all the creatures in the world have in there kind and
degree been more dutiful and serviceable unto thee, then man, so much beloved
of thee made according to thine own image, endued with reason, directed by thy
law and thy precepts: auering thus offended men and brethren what shall we
do, all the creatures in heaven and earth accusing and condemning us, and ye
Lord himself complaining against us: I have norished and brought forth
children and they have rebelled against me, what shall we say that our sins
are greater then can be forgiven? no let us with David, though our faith have
almost failed and our feet slided with his, yet let us with him recover
out-selues again, by laying hold upon thy promises, support us O Lord where
thy Angels fell, Caine, Judas, Achitophell, for they dispayred in thy mercies
and there fall was i^* recouerable, even to the bottomless pit of hell, from
whence there is no delivery, but we will trust in thy mercies and loving
kindness all the days we live in, and kiss the son least he be angry, and o
turn away the favor and light of his countenance from us, and least his wrath
be kindled against us his fierce and furious wrath, which O Lord who is able to
abide: the extent and copiousnesse whereof is as his mercies are inexplicable,
and therein sueth an abundance of misery with a train and conjunction of all
plagues and punishments out of the ready st^re-house of the restrained
inundations of his wrath, that let at liberty range in an open field and there
is none to resist them, we are all by nature the children of wrath borne to the
inheritance thereof as to our fathers lands, for nothing remains so
hereditary to us as sin and confusion, but y^ the blood of Christ has
purchased favor for us, Lord give us grace to continue it in keeping a wary
conscience to offend, and walking carefully in thy fear, but for such O Lord
that are already condemned, that run on in an endless labyr^nth of sin,
the race to destruction without turning unto thee, drawing the unhappy breath,
which if it had never ben breathed into there nostrills whereby they were made
living creatures, (it had been well with them) without repenting, heaping up
anger against the day of wrath, and not caring to blunt the edge thereof, there
end is the end of the sentence and they are sure to perish, not in the life of
the body alone, but in the life and eternity of there souls, not for an age
and a period of time but whilst God reigns in heaven; able to do justice, to
avoid which greuious plagues and punishments give us grace O Lord suddenly to
turn unto the whilst the time of grace remains least the grave open her
mouth and sh^t it again upon us, and close us up in our sins, and deliver us
guilty into the hands of perdition, from the which we shall never be freed.
Let us quench this wrath in time with the blood of the Lamb, stain from the
beginning of the world, and through the stream of his mercy, and the riches of
his merits, seek acceptance, acquaintance, and friendship with our God, that
we perish not: let us not despair in our sins, nor presume on his merits too
much, but lay hold thereon by faith, so applying the benefit of thy passion and
merits to our selves and our souls, that we may find favor, and be
acceptable in thy sight. Thy mercy, O Lord, is ye crown of all thy works, and
my sins though they were more then I can commit, are not more then thou can
forgive, the assurance of this promise and the probation of thy goodness,
evermore, shall be the rock whereupon my faith shall anchor, and I will sail
my brittle bark throughout this sea of uncertainty, temptation and danger thou
being the star of my direction, throughout y^ waves and surges thereof that
sometimes lift me up unto the clouds, by the good thoughts and motions of
the spirit, and sometimes cast me down to the ends of the earth, even to the
bottomless pit of hell, by the temptations and allurements of the world and
the devil, till I come unto the haven of my rest to the which Lord bring me
for thy mercies sake.

Amen.
In time of pestilence.
TThe life of man, most glorious Lord thereof, by whose hands it was made, and
in whose hands it is enlightened with such understanding, capacity, so large and
ample, thy creatures, and benefits so good, so innumerable and all for the
delight and service of man, which are so powerful and comfortable to him in the
ouerlooking thereof in his large discourse and reason, that he could wish in
this world a perpetuity without change, not knowing in his fleshly and blinded
indgeme^t, what may be more in heaven with thee to content his natural desire,
that he inioys, not in this eclipse and glimpse of thy goodness upon earth, that
lands, possessions, sumptuous building, gorgeous clothing, the comfort of
children, friends, servants with many other adiunctes, cannot be equalled or
exceeded in ye world to come: we confess O thou giver of all good guiftes y^
we are not worthy of ye least of these thy benifits, not thy friends but thine
enemies, and such that have pulled thee from the crown to ye Cross, nayld
thee there unto death, and not greeuing our selves that we have thus grieved
thee, snacht thy benefits out of thy hands not returning that easy curtesy unto
thee thou requirest of us, which is nothing but gratuity and thanks, being
more ungrateful unto thee for all we have, for by thee we live and move, and
have our being, inioying nothing but from thy al-filling hands, from that
ouerflowing fountain of thy goodness, yet more returning to a mortal man for
one single curtesy, then to thee for all these, correct O Lord this fault in
nature, this universal defect in mankind: O Lord if thou have prepared so good
things for thy enemies and friends together, what have thou in store for thy
elect there severed: surely such things as ye eye has not seen the ear has
not hard, ye tongue cannot utter, ye heart cannot conceive, we thee o Lord there
is fulness of joy and at thy right hand pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16. and
who gives us drink out of a whole river of pleasure. Psalm. 36. where joy shall
be ever present yet we cannot be filled, or rather filled but not satisfied,
what it is O Lord thou know best, but there is ye fountain and spring from
whence all goodness flows, take us into thy besome, under the wings of thy
mercy, into that celestial habitation where the sight and splendour of yt
heavenly presence, shall more delight then all ye obscured and mixed pleasures
the world can afford, on the other side we know as a strong motive unto us, the
unsupportable and heavy judgment prepared against the day of wrath, for those
y^ have drunk down sin as the Leuiathan the waters, terrefie O Lord our
understanding with there horror and fearfullnes, y^ we never come there to
feel them, bring us by one means or other to the heaven of our happiness,
what thy promises cannot persuade, let thy threatenings perform, by y^ terror
of thy punishments, which are impossible to be uttered, and yet must be
endured, bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, where thy favor
nor mercy shall neuer-more be extended: where nether the light of the sun,
nor the moon, or stars, much less the light of Gods face shall ever shine,
where for ever shall be weping and gnashing of teeth, without determination or
ceasing. O Lord who is able to endure it: thy Angel y^ walks in the darkness,
and strikes at noone days, ye many dangers that accompany our wretched lives,
ye least of which one time or other strikes home, take us in our palace, in
our garde^s, in ourwarehouses, in ye field, on ye sea on ye earth, in ye air,
in our beds, at our tables, whatsoever our bodies do, whatsoever our minds
think, comes thy messe^ger in one shape or another takes us by the hand,
leads us from whatsoever is dearest unto us, to the tribunal seat of thy
justice and mercy, where we are either to be acquitted, or condemned, either to
be received or thrust out. Lord therefore deal with us according to thy mercy,
that if thou prolong our lives and bring us safe out of this storm and tempest
of mortality, that by y^ fall and slaughter of others we be brought to such a
serious consideration of our own mortality and estate y^ we make our
preparation thereunto, all y^ days of our life, knowing y^ he may fall in his
tent, y^ has escaped y^ field perish in y^ haven y^ has passed y^ Ocean, and
y^ it must be surrendered one time or another, and if it please thee ye we fall
by y^ stroke of this thy devouring Angel, as ye corruption and ranlinesse of
our nature infectious enough to procure it and bring to pass that thou accept
as my deed my will, desire, and purpose to serve thee, my intent for my action
that I would, as if I should live to glorify thee, and make me out of love
with this wretched world and all the allurements and baytes therein, and in
love only with thee and thy heavenly kingdom for thy blessed name sake.

Ame^.
For humility upon these considerations.
THou mighty Lord of heaven and earth, who hold the ball of the world in thy
hand, and keep all times and seasons as in a register, who art all hand, all
eye, all foot, for strength, for fight, for swiftness, to whom the in-most
chambers and retired clossets, the tabernacles and habitations of mortal men,
nay the hearts and bosoms of all the creatures in the world, are unfolded and
laid open as leuill to thy sight, as the air which we look on with our eyes,
what ca^ we do ye is hid from thy sight, ten thousand times brighter then y^
sun, or whether can we go y^ our sins and offenses lie not naked before thee,
surely no otherway there is, but only to inuolue them in the clouds and mistes
of sighs and repentance, repentance the gift of God, the joy of Angels, the
salve of sins, ye heaven and refuge of sinners: O where remains the subject of
ye title, ye Angels sin not and therefore need not repentance, nor ye spirits of
darkness for the sentence is already past and condemnation sealed, it is only
for me most wretched sinner y^ I am, and for my brethren of ye same
inheritance, to us alone does it belong, and we perceive it not, we eat and
feed delitiously, we are wanton with thy gifts, O God abusing them in surfeit
and riot, and luxuriouslye, we sin in drinking, in procuring an appetite to
exceed therein, we sin in our clothing, most superfluously attyred like the
rich glutton condemned to hell, as if we would exceed Solomon, and match the
lillies of the field, and we ^eed not only our selves, but our oxen in our
meadows and stalles to feed our unprofitable carcasses, and our horses in ye
stable to bear our unprofitable carcasses, when the poor in our streets and
at our gates, feed upon empty air for lack of sustenance, and we remember not
the^, not Christ in them, ye hungereth and Christ ye must feed us which is ye
advocate for ye poor, and y^ judge of ye rich, in this oblivion and height of
our sins: what is become of humility, of repentance, we are all begotten in
sin, and to misery are we brought forth: concupiscence has been the nurse
whose milk we have sucked from time to time, and as we have grown in years
so has corruption grown up with us as part of our own nature: what remains
the^ O Lord for us but humility and repe^ta^ce, to prostrate our selves upon ye
knees of our hearts, and say Lord have mercy upon sinners with the poor
publican, and not with y^ proud Pharise to say I am not like this man, or other
my brethren for I do thus and so, let us not be so mad as to forget nature so
much, all our imperfections, the substance and metal whereof we are made,
and that we must suddenly turn to ye earth, upon which now we trample with
such contempt and scorn, and must become chamberers and fellows with worms
and rotlennesse: and what cause have we then to be proud? Nay, what cause have
we not to be humble? when of all the large possessions and inheritances we
possess, we have no more truly our own then the length and breadth of our
Carcasses. And again, let us humble our selves, that Christ may exalt us, and
not exalt our selves, lest he throw us down, as he scatters the proud in
the imagination of their hearts. Let us learn of him to be humble and meek,
which although the King of heaven and earth, having all power and pre-eminence,
and proud in subjection under his feet, yet was not touched with this vice
himself, that chose poor Fishermen to be his Disciples, paid tribute to his
inferiors, rode upon an ass, prayed for his Persecutors, embraced young
children, cured the halt, and the lame, and the blind, and regarded the low
estate of his Handmaid, and will regard us if we regard this virtue, which he
so regarded, if we be imitators of his steps, and examples, which he grant
that has thus led the way, the God, the King, the Prince of humility, for his
own dear sake.

Amen.
The living words in effect of a dying man, closed up in this virtue.
I Unto thy hands, O Lord, I commend my soul and body, prostrate in all
humility and obedience to thy good will and pleasure, Lord Jesus have mercy
upon thy humble and prostrate servant.

The sum of the Prayer of the Lady G. at the time of her execution.
Willingly and joyfully O Lord, come I hither into thy hands to resign my
soul and body, in whose protection I trust they shall be safer and better
then in this life (although in the best measure) they ever were: give unto me,
my God, thy poor and weak servant and vessel, patience, constancy and
strength to undergo this my sentence of death, strengthen the frailty of my
sex, in the act of this my suffering: and though I dye for that I never of my
self desired, yet howsoever lest any sin in the least consent or thought
has defiled my purity therein, for it pardon me my God, and blot it out of the
book of thy remembrance; and not only that, but ye whole course thereof,
throughout my whole life, that my soul with the wings of faith in thy mercy,
may cheerfully ascend to thy blessed kingdom.

And so preparing her self to dye with these words rendered her life.

Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. A general Thanksgiving to God for all his
benefits and mercies to man.
O Eternal God in Christ Jesus, most gracious and merciful, for all thy
blessings both temporal and spiritual, bestowed upon me, the least of thy
servants, and most unworthy to cast up mine eyes to thy heavenly Tabernacle,
where thou reignest in glory, do I yield all possible and hearty thanks unto
thy divine Majesty for all thy blessings and mercies bestowed upon me,
especially for the singular benefit of my Justification, and the admirable
gift of eternal salvation, purchased by the righteousness and dearest life of
thy beloved Son Christ Jesus my Savior. My lot is fallen in a pleasant place,
well is me, and yet woe is me, because it is, and I understand it not: have
thou been favorable unto all thy creatures in the world, or have thou
neglected others, and been mindful of me? Good Lord, why should thou
bestow thy health, thy wealth, thy rest, and liberty, aduancements, friends,
possessions, Children like the Olive. Olive branches and their trees for me and
them to repose securely under? Why should thou, I say, bestow these
blessings upon me more then upon others? I can give no reason for it, but stand
wondering and admiring thy mercy, which is the cause of it: and if thou
should take a survey of my worthiness to enjoy all these at thy hands, and
finding me so unworthy as I am of the least, should withdraw them all back
again, what could I say, but commend thy justice? Have I deserved liberty, and
Joseph thy servant deserved bonds? Have I deserved rest, and thy David to be
tossed to and fro upon his watery couch day and night? to have ye son of his
own loins, and the loins of his own body rebelling against him? Has thy
Lazarus deserved to lie at the gates, afflicted in body and mind, craving but
crumbs wherewithal to be refreshed, and I like the rich man, whose dogs more
merciful the^ their master came and licked his sores, sitting at my table
furnished with abundance, like his? Have I deserved health, and thy Job to lie
full of botches and biles upon the dunghill? Are these thy blessed servants
tried in the furnace of affliction, laid in the throat of hell, and am I wrapped
up into Abraham's bosom? have I their portion, and do they stand at reward, or
sent empty? Why my soul is it so well with thee? mercy, abundance of mercy,
and why art thou so ill my soul? O mercy, yet most wretched sinner that I am,
have I not in a Christian love, and godly nature been moved to serve thee in a
larger measure, considering these thy benefits upon me so largely multiplied,
then the poor and persecuted Children that never tasted thy mercy but in
imitation of their misery. Continue O Lord this thy goodness unto me, and the
more to persuade thee thereunto, lift my heart and spirit out of this dull and
earthly Center wherein it moves, to the meditation of thee, and these thy
mercies, with a thankful retribution of all my thoughts and affections, to
thee, from whence they come, that I may ever serve thee from this hour, with
those duties, which the world, the flesh and the Devil would have me deser
until the point of death: and good father grant, that I may love
righteousness and pity, with as great good will as ever I loved wickedness
and vanity, and that I may go before other in thankfulness toward thee, as
far as thou go in mercy to me before them. O teach me to seek thee in
all things, and all things in thee, even for thy name sake, for thy promise
sake, for thy Sons sake, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

A Thanksgiving before meat.
TO thee O Lord, the giver of al good gifts, upon whose bounty and mercy depend
all the creatures in ye world, which openest thy hand, and fillest us with thy
blessings, or we go empty away, and perish: Thy bounty and goodness it is, O
Lord, that furnishes our backs, and feeds our bellyes, and spreads our
tables, blesses, preserves, and vpholdeth all that we have, our basket, and
our store, the oil in our cruses, provision in our presses, the sheep in our
foldes, in our stables, the children in the womb, at our tables, the corn in
our fields, in our floores and garners, and all that we have, or is in the
air, in the earth, in the sea, or wheresoever else the least of which thy good
gifts and blessings, let us not at this time, nor no time else presume to
touch, make use, or enjoy without an awful reverence and respect to thee the
author and owner thereof. Sanctify therefore we beseech thee at this time,
them unto us, and us in them, so that thy name may be glorified, and our
bodies comforted, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Thanksgiving after meat.
Dear Father, we render m^st humble and hearty thanks unto thee as is most
meet and requisite, for all thy former benefits and good creatures, ordained
and given to our use, sacrificed and ready to be sacrificed every day for our
pleasures: so now at this time for the large and competent satisfaction thou
have bestowed upon us to the refreshing of our weak and fainting bodies. So
good Lord, as thou have been gracious unto us in breaking this thy corporal
and material bread unto us at this time, to the food of our bodies, so
likewise give thy Spiritual bread unto our souls in that abundant measure,
that the more they eat and drink thereof, the more they may hunger and thirst
after thee, to fulfill thy precepts, to walk in thy commandments, and to do
the works of charity and mercy toward others, to whom thy bounty has in some
measure been restrained; which grant most merciful Father, for thy mercies
sake.

Amen.
Before Meat.
TO thee the Author of our being,
Before the world our time foreseeing,
The time approach't thou had decreed,
That thought did cease, effect succced
Into the world, poor, naked; bare
We were brought forth, nursed by thy care;
Of whom ere since we beg and crave,
For food, for raiment, all we have,
Bless these thy gifts we shall receive,
Shall feed, shall taste of by thy leave,
And all things else, what ere it be,
That thou shall send, that come from thee,
Bless soul and body, basket, store,
Our health, our wealth, our rich and poor:
What ere we do, so bless the same,
That still our mouths may praise thy name.
Thy Church and king, God save and bless,
And grace from heaven so send,
That we may live a happy life
And make a god^y end.
After Meat.
Our bodies thus refresh't and fed,
Whom thou do daily fill,
So let our lives be spent and led
According to thy will.
And as thou break'st thy earthly bread
Unto our mortal hands,
So break that bread unto our souls,
Whereon our welfare stands:
For as the body does decay,
Does languish and complain,
From food and nourishment debarred,
That does her state maintain.
So will the soul, and all her powers
Dry, wither, parch, and per^sh,
If that thy grace, which is her life,
Refresh not, feed and chorish.
Lord therefore stretch thy mighty hand,
And let thy love appear,
In feeding this, in filling that,
In holding both so dear.
That when we leave this wicked world,
Whose pleasure is but pain,
In peace and rest in heaven with thee
We evermore may reign.
Amen.
Certain Rules and Precepts for the good ordering and government of a man's
life.
1 IN the morning when thou first awakest, bless God, give him thanks for his
careful protection and watching over thee, for the quiet rest and sleep he
has bestowed upon thee, to the refreshing of thy body, and the renewing of thy
mind, but be sure that he have the first place in thy heart.

2 Call to mind all thy business for the day following, and to thy self
propose to the effecting thereof, a good order and method, and ever think of
the end before thou undertake any thing; and to all thy honest intents and
endeavors, crave the direction of God, and his assistance, otherwise thou
toylest in vain, and thy labors will not prosper.

3 As for the success and effecting of thy business, so before thou setst thy
foot out of doors, put God again in mind of thy person, implore his
assistance and protection over thee, knowing that many a one has gone out of
his house, and never come in again, and that so it may befall thee if he
prevent it not.

4 At the evening when thou retirest thy self, call to mind what thou have
effected, what thou have neglected, what evil thou have healed that day, what
vice thou have stood against, in what part thou art bettered, and as thou went
i^ out in his fear, so return in his favor, giving him thanks for the
ability and motion of thy body in ye accomplishment of thy affairs: for of our
selves we are not able to lift our hands to head, food to our mouths, and
therefore by his goodness and sufferance, we have all, and enjoy all that we
have.

5 If thou have neglected any duty wherein thou may have pleasured thy
brother, not inda^gered thy self, any common courtesy, that by the law of
nature one man is bound unto another, Cor. 11. 13. If thou have offended any
man by deed or by word, by instigation or procurment, call them to mind,
condemn thy self therein, and be sorry therefore; and before thou seek to give
thy body any rest, rest not till thou have sought a pardon at the hands of God,
which will never be granted, but upon this condition; That thou be heartily
sorry for the same, and purpose in thine heart never to offend in that kind
again.

6 When thou preparest thy self to bed, likewise prepare thy self as for thy
grave, remembering that many go to bed, and never rise again till they be
raised we the sound of the last trum^et, and for ought thou know the thing
so often resembled thereby, may now be ready for thee: For vt somnus mortis, sic
lectus Imago sepulcri, the number of thy days expired, and thou must pass
from the land of the living in y^ moment; or howsouer, there is one of thy
number spent, and y^ art nearer thy end by one day. Therefore every night be so
wise as to know y^ which ye fool neglected, that that night thy soul may be
taken away, which came to pass upon him when he thought of ye enlargement of
his barnes, but thought not of that at all. Therefore omne creed diem tibi
deluxisse supremum.

7 Health is above gold, and a sound body above infinite riches, therefore
keep thy self from surfetings, from drunkenness, from whooredome: for
besides that they waste thy substance, and distemper thy body, they expend thy
time more precious the^ ye gold of Ophir, which is not lent thee but for other
ends and uses. If sickness come, but seek it not, be careful to pass it
over, to redeem thy health, but put not thy trust in the Physician: for he may
apply, but unless God perfect, his help and thy hope is in vain. Asa may
complain of his gout, Ezekias of his ulcer, the Shunamites child of his head,
but no help can be had where ye Lord does deny it.

8 Vnus introitus innumeri exitus. There is but one manner of entering into the
world, but many ways of going out. Mill modis morimur, vno been, we dye a
thousand ways, and but one way well. In the midst of our life we are in
danger of death, in the midst of our pleasures many times it is present, it
follows the body of all flesh, as the shadow that waits thereupon, and at one
opportunity or another will be sure to strike home. Set therefore sometimes
before thy eyes, that which always stan^s behind thy back: Remember thy end,
and thou shall fear to do amiss.

9 Keep ye wandering thoughts of thy heart, the suggestions of the fresh, which
are ever rebellious to the will of God within bounds and limits: suffer them
not to kindle and burn up the good motions of the spirit, but extinguish the
least spark that shall arise, whilst it is a spark, by the wholesome precepts
of Gods revealed will, be careful to use the time well which thou have, for
thou know not what time will be allotted thee more, and from thy worldly
affairs, the mart and traffic of thy businesses, wherewith the multitude
that look no further then the example of the world* and the eyes of nature
give them sight, are carried away, and draw thy self sometimes aside to the
exercise of prayer and thanksgiving: for how earnest soever ^hy business be
it shall speed the better for this, what haste soever this hinders not the
speed.

9 Whatsoever thou take in hand, though thou have beaten thy brains, and
wearied thy spirits, and it has succeeded well, yet think not that it brought
to pass with thine own endeavors, but by the sufferance and assistance of
God, without whose help it is in vain to rise early, and to go to bed late,
and eat the bread of carfulness: For except the Lord build the house, they
labor in vain that go about to build it. Except the Lord keep the City, the
keepers watch in vain: And therefore without this aid and assistance implored,
his direction and protection craved, endeavor not any thing, ^^t it lead thee
forth, and bring thee in, let it be the beginning, the middle, and the end in
whatsoever you undertake, vt been sit tibi, y^ it may go well with thee.

10 For food, raiment, ye fruits of the body, y^ fruits of the field, for
health, wealth, friends, for all y^ mercies and benefits thou receyuest from
God, whether out wardly or inwardly in body or inwardly in mind, receive them
not, use them not, touch them not without prayer and praise, and thanksgiving
to him, the creator and giver of all good things, whose ouer-flowing goodness
and mercy suffices the wantes and necessities of thee and all his creatures
and clientes in the world besides, and as Christ himself and his Apostle upon
earth gave thanks for the benefittes both of soul and body to God the father,
so learn thou by there example to do likewise.

11 Consider often and seriously of ye wisdom, power, omnipote^cy, majesty of
that dreadful Lord of heaven and earth, that created and governs the whole
frame of ye world, and all the creatures therein, that has made thee a
creature of such excellence and capability given thee rule and dominion over
all his creatures in ye world, done so many bleeding wonders and miracles for
confirmation of his love, to thee, defended thee by his gracious providence and
protection euerfince thou wast borne, as the apple of his own eye, ye
explication of whose love, the height of heaven above the earth, the distance
of the east from the west the love of fathers toward their sons, of mothers
toward the latest fruit of their wombes, hens toward their chickins, have
been but dull shows in a poor measure to express it toward thee, so amply
testified: in recompense whereof strive to give him thy heart, thy soul, and
best affections, which is all he desires, though much more he deserves.

12 Be ever careful to lay hold upon the fore-top of time, and defer not any
thing that must be done: for whatsoever is good is much bettered by ye speedy
performance of it, and one delay is the mother of many, according to the old
proverb, qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit, he that is not fit to day
will be less fit to morrow. Will thou observe y^ time, ye season, for the
tilling of thy ground for y^ sowing of thy seed, for ye gathering of thy fruits
for the setting of thy tree for the lopping of her branches, and will thou not
observe thy own time, observing so in these transitory and triuiall things,
which if thou let carelesty pass may never be granted unto thee again and
for that neclect thou perish.

13 Think with thy self thou have deferred many years thy repentance, and
think how gracious the Lord has been unto thee ye he has not cut thee of in
ye midst of thine iniquity, and resolve with thy self no longer to delay in
y^ kind, but make this thy present day upon pain of thy peril, least in the
bitterness and anguish of thy soul thou hereafter be enforced to cry out,
then was the kingdom of grace but that I have neclected, and now is the
kingdom of justice by which I am condemned, the^ was the saving of souls, now
the time of condemning them, the means then delivered by the tongs of men
mildly perswaciuely the account now in the trumpet of the Archangel, fierce and
terrible, woe is me therefore that I have thus deferred,

14 Then came it with tidings of great, joy to y^ world, but now with terror
and amasement to y^ whole humanity thereof, to all y^ kindred and generatio^s
therein, the^ with Laus Deo in exelsis, glory to God on high and peace upon earth
but now with a changed still ve ve habitatoribus terrae, woe to the inhabitants
of the earth then together the lost sheep of Israel into the fould, now to
sever the goats from the sheep, then to embrace both Jew the gentle, now to
divide between servant and servant at the same mil, between man and wife in
the same bed, between Jacob and Esaw in the same womb, to give a blessing to
the one and a curse unto the other, know therefore the danger of deferring thy
repentance and eschew that common sin, least it one day fall thus heavy upon
thee.

15 Often and ever think upon the love of Christ, never enough to be thought
upon, the gracious and admired work of thy redemption by the blood of that
immaculate and unspotted Lamb Christ Jesus, at the very name whereof shall be
bowed all the knees in heaven and in earth, but at the thought thereof shall be
rent all the hearts of both, a mystery so great that the host of heaven admire,
and the Angels desire to prye into, whom in thy poor measure imitate in
admiration of his mercy and justice, how they meet, embrace, and kiss each
other, and be thankful to him that has so graciously dealt with thee and all
mankind.

16 Periculosum existimo quod bonorum virorum non comprobatur exemplo: and e
contrario.

There was never that goodness or virtue in the world that might be imitated
either with ease or difficulty by life or death in whose steps some have not
imitated to tread, the end of whose days has been peace upon earth, and glory
with the saints in heaven, so on the other side there was never vice that set
foot upon earth from y^ least sense that infects, to that which waighes down
to the pit of hell that has not had imitatours, whose reward has been misery
and contempt upon earth, and a continuance and augmentation thereof in the lake
of perdition in the world to come, therefore let the reward of the on, and the
punishment of the other be ever set before thy eyes that thou may follow the
better and eschew the worse.

17 Do not that iniure to any other that thou would not another should do
unto thee though thou can, oppress not y^ poor by thy might, be not
quarellsome, a company keeper nor gamster, nor surety but for a tried friend
and a good occasion because for besides ye iosse of time which these expend
they draw o^ oaths and quarrels surfets and sickness and for the most part end in
blood, and he ye has any of these, cannot rightly entitle his own goods to
himself nor anything that he does possessed.

18 Again I say, haunt not tauernes, alehouses, brothels, but beware of the
danger, of the expense, the bane both of body and soul, and take heed y^ thou
take not delight in any unlawful thing for there is no one vice that having
wholly possessed a man that is not accompanied with a whole train of wickedness
at the heels thereof able to eat up and devour the very root and substance of
goodness it self, ther^ore take heed that thou fall not into ye snars thereof.

19 Keep not company with any notorious or detected person, by whom though not
otherwise thy reputation and credit may be called in question in the opinion
of the world, for by the company, be it good or evil that thou kepest such
shall thou be censured to be for similis similem querit, and in what company
soever thou come, have a care that the company may be rather bettered by thy
presence then any way impeached thereby and keep a straight watch over ye
words, thoughts, and deeds of thy heart, restraining the liberty thereof where
it would extend further then convenient and honest.

20 Be fearful to commit sin, especially any examplar sin, to show the
way, as it were, to others, least they perish therein unrepentant, and it be
one day laid to thy charge, every one shall have enough to answer for himself:
woe to him that shall be pressed with the weight of his own and others, every
sin as a millstone, to press him down to the pit of Hell.

Certain sentences or Rules of good life and pertitinent to the Precepts going
before.
Seruire Deo regnare est.
1 THE service of God is perfect freedom.

2 Where ignorance finds no mercy, contempt shall sure find misery.

3 There is no man borne without sin, happy is he that increases it least.

4 Till death there is no man happy, then happy is he that dies in the Lord.

5 Make use of time for it passes with a swift foot, and that which follows
most commonly is not so good as that which goes before.

6 He that ungodly dies rich shall have many mourners to his grave, but few
comforters at his judgment.

7 Expect that love from thy children that thou thy self have tendered to thy
parents.

8 So dispose thy time as if thou should live long and yet as if thou
should dye suddenly.

9 Do well to thine enemies that they may become thy friends.

10 It is the part of a wiseman to prevent injuries ere they happen, of a
valiant man to withstand them ere they come.

11 Out of other men's faults judge how odious thine own are.

12 There is more trust in virtue then in oaths.

13 He that will speak what he would, shall hear that he would not.

14 Delight not to speak ill of the dead.

15 Strive to be rich in that, that when thy ship shall perish suffers no
shipwreck.

16 Learn that being a child that will adorn thee being a man.

17 The wast of time is a dear expense.

18 It is better to fall amongst the Ravens of the air then the flatterers of
the earth, for the one strikes the dead but the other wounds the living.

19 He lives in vain that has no care to live well.

20 Greatness is not the cause of goodness, but goodness is the cause of
greatness.

21 So love that thou may hate, so hate that thou may love.

22 If by thy labor thou accomplish any thing that is good the labor passes
but the good remains to thy comfort, if for thy pleasure thou shall do any
thing that is ill, the pleasure passes, but the evil remains to thy sorrow.

23 The goodman will not ^in for the love he bears to God and goodness it
self; But the evil man for fear of punishment.

24 Be thou never so old thou may every day learn, therefore never be
ashamed to learn that thou know not.

25 Despise not old age but greiue to see it miserable.

26 Swear not often but perform what thou swearest being honest though to
thy loss.

27 It Is tyranny to do what may be done and not regard what ought to be done.

28 Whatsoever is dear unto thy body forbear it being any way preiuditiall to
thy soul.

29 So love thy best friend that thou be not thine own worst enemy.

30 Desire in any thing rather to be in substance without show, then in show
without substance.

31 Forbear to speak much for he that does shall not often speak well, and
it is better to be lame in the way then to run out of the way.

32 A good life and a bad make death apeare in two shapes, happy is he that
lives so that it appear in the best.

33 He that fears to dye, fears to find that he lives to seek.

34 If death be not good of it self, yet it is the end of many evils.

35 Health is above wealth, and a competency with content riches enough. And
many a one has the use of much money that has not the use of himself.

36 Be silent in thy intentions, least by the contrary thou be prevented and
laughed to scorn.

37 As the Touch-ston tries so gold tries man.

38 It is better to be truly reprehended by a friend then falsely flattered by
an enemy.

39 By other men's examples not by thine own, learn what is worst to eschew,
what is best to follow.

40 As he sleeps well that feels not he sleeps ill, so he sins much that
thinks not that he sins at all,

41 Several accidents have several remedies, but patience is appliable to all.

42 The later day is commonly the scholar of the former.

43 To conquer the affections of ones own heart is more then to conquer a
kingdom.

44 The couetuous man is good to non but he is worst to himself, and wantes
as well that he has as that he has not.

45 So trust thy friend that he cannot hurt thee being thy enemy.

46 He that does an injury to one threatens it to many.

47 It is hard to keep safe that that many men desire, as a fair wife, ready
money.

48 The eye nere offendes if the heart govern it well.

49 Nothing is thine own truly that thou can dispossess thy self of.

50 There is no day of a man's life so happy that something does not happen to
grieve him.

51 He that gives not willingly will always find some reason why he should
not give.

52 The increase of knowledge is the increase of sorrow.

53 There was never wise man but saw more cause of sorrow then joy.

54 That man's end is easy and happy that death finds with a weak body and a
strong soul.

55 Youth and nature pass over many infirmities that are owing till our age.

56 Who lives most vertuousoy will dye most patiently.

57 Live to dye once dye once to live ever.

58 Think of God with wonder, speak to God with reverence, serve him in love,
obey him in fear and do nothing but as in his presence, and sight, and thou
shall live the life of the godly and go the way of the blessed, live in his
fear and dye in his favor.

The diriuation of man.
59 Homo ex humo, cadauer ex carodata vermibus.

60 Sapiens miser plus miser est quam rusticus miser scit enim exaggerare
causas dolendi, quas rusticus miser nescit.

Admonition against sin*
61 When sin allures thee, think that thou see Christ coming toward thee
as he lay in the arms of Joseph of Arimathea, taken down from the Cross, all
wanne and bleeding, wounded, the delicacy, beuty and admiration of all his
parts, clouded, sullied and stained, speaking thus unto thee, o forbear to
commit it, for it fetched me from the arms of my father, from my royalty and
glory in heaven whole and untouched, to the arms of this mortal man, all
wounded and torn as thou see, and with this contemplation forbear.

Zacheus certain gain, the worlds imagined loss.
If Zacheus to win heaven restored fore-fould from those he had hut injured
single; how do they labor to win hell, that do injury foure-sould and yet
make not restitution single.

The five thoughts of a Christian.
1 Think of pleasure, to despise it.

2 Of death to expect it.

3 Of judgment to escape it.

4 Of hell to prevent it.

5 Of heaven to desire it.

Four kind of men, according to David, that are most indebted unto God for
their lives.
1 Those that have escaped a dearth.

2 Prisoners there bonds.

3 Those escaped in a mortal sickness.

4 Seafaring men, that are neither among the living nor the dead.

A Prayer for Constancy and grace against all worldly vanities and allurements.
Give me grace to effect thy will, O Lord, and command me what thou please,
give me constancy and perseverance in my calling and duties of life, according
to thy will and direction, and then let my course be in what thou will appoint;
Be I a husband, chastity and content shall adorn my calling, in despite of
the allurement of all other beauties, all other accide^ts. Be I rich, pride nor
oppression, nor contempt, the adherent vices of that Mammon shall not ceize me
with their easiness in their snares: be I whatsoever I am, be thou my guide
and rule of my life, and then all my actions shall be squared and fitted by
the aim of thy word, to the level of thy will, that so they may end in thy
glory and my comfort: and that they may so do, good Lord so guide and temper
my disposition with such a regiment of thy goodness, that thou let not ye
world with her smiles beguile me, nor with her frowns affright me: arm me
with sanctity, strength and wisdom, that I may use it as though I used it
not, and let not Satan deceive me therein: let not my own condition betray me
to his malice: let me every day increase my strength in thee, adding to ye
spiritual estate and welfare of my soul, that the longer I live, I may walk
more securely in the midst of so many enemies: give me a true estimation of all
earthly flatteries, vanities, and pleasures, and such deep sight therein, y^
through the shades and beauties* and allurements, I discern ye poison y^ lies
at their roots, and so forbear ye one that I perish not by the other: let my
delight be least taken when my body most lives, but whilst ye one walks dully
upon earth, let the other soar sprightly to heaven, let me not for y^ glimse
and shining like a glo-worme in this world, loose ye splendour and beauty more
glorious then ye stars in ye firmament in ye world to come, prepared for me,
and all that persevere in thy ways unto the end, which grant Lord for thy
mercies sake.

Ame^.
A short Memoratiue of the mortality of our life, and the folly of our living.
Ashes and earth, stand forth, thou art here acus'd,
That thou thy brittle substance have abused,
The potters vessels being earth and clay
Not safely guarded, suddenly decay:
And then their use, though needful much before,
Fails in effect, and are observed no more.
Thou wo^drous workma^ of vnbou^ded skill,
That show so large, art on a stuff so ill.
What are our bodies made of but of mould?
And yet how rich a substance do they hold?
The which so many ways we do deface,
That for the jewel should preserve the case.
Sometime a thousand vanities our guide,
We dash this bark upon the rocks of pride,
Or on the shelues of gluttony or lust,
We perish suddenly, and not mistrust,
Sailing along on this uncertain sea,
Where we are tossed and turmoyl'd every day,
Where we are lifted as the winds do keep,
Up to the clouds, and down into the deep.
Where if we pass the danger of the maine,
Within the haven landing we are slain.
What shelues, and sands, and winds, and waves with-stood,
Yields by infected air, or tainted blood,
Or vselesse whilst in readiness we stand,
And nere adventure on the sea from land,
Yet will continuance where the winds not wear us,
Dis-ioynt our joints, and all in sunder tear us.
Though sea and land, and al their danger saues
Yet will this crooked cripple dig our graves,
Where being accepted, world nor friend to mind us,
Death so having left us, so shall judgment find us.
For worms that eat our bodies, pierce our skin,
Waste us to nothing, do not waste our sin,
Which will not leave us where our friends forsake us,
But as a witness to that bar will take us,
Where we poor trembling wretches standing there,
Quake like the popler with espects of feore.
Conscience there wounding, and will not conceal
That which undoes us if it shall reveal,
Where if the righteous scarce shall favor find,
What place for graceless sinners is assignd?
Such as thy precepts have not kept in awe,
But broke each text, and canon of thy law,
Bin drown^ in natures pleasures al my life,
At peace with sin and sinners, but in strife
With thee the Lord that art the king of peace,
For which my woes begin, my pleasures cease,
Now all my glass of vanity is run,
For pleasures past I perish, am undone:
For appetites untasted, scarce enjoyed,
Are soul and body endlesly destroyed,
When to the blessed for a little pain,
Which was but pleasure, comes an endless gain.
Where this worlds w^, the sorrow and anoy
They have sustaind, is eaten up in joy,
Where as the light of Gods most glorious face,
Angels and Ministers of love and grace,
Prophets and Patriarchs there in raiment bright,
Which spent their oils to lend the world their light.
Whose blessed examples as the lives they lead
Brought them to heaven, brings others be-in dead,
Where their deceased parents, and their friends
And they embrace in joy that never ends,
Where they their sons and daughters did deplore,
That went before the^, meet and part no more
Ad what I may, the half no tongue ca^ tell,
But this am sure of, their estate goes well,
And mine lamented, what they gain I lose
Deprived of these true substa^ces for shows,
Soothed by exemplary and headlong times,
Reckning the venom'st vices venial crimes
As these our days fraught with all kind of sin,
Of ages past, and crimes that nere have bin,
New bred in us, that prey upon our blood,
Our health, our wealth, what is dear, what is near, what is good,
New sins with their new plagues to stop their tide
Which more lift, the more they are denied,
For which the land should mourn and weep in woe
But it runs forward, and it nere thinks so,
Surfets and pride, with other such excess,
Eat up our health, which we might else possess,
And our vnte^perance does dig our grave,
By which abuse that kills us that should save
By course of nature set these causes by,
Our sise decreaseth, and our old men dye
Full in account of years, if that they gain
The childhood that their parents did attain
And yet they died, tho many years god lend
A day still came, that al those years did end.
By which we learn the frailty of our kind,
The truth of Gods decree on sin assigned,
That takes possession on the long-liu'd man,
Upon the child that yesterday began,
Upon the rich in palaces of gould,
Upon the poor in cot^ages of mould,
Spares no degree from scepter to the swain,
From the first childhood to the last again.
Spares no condition, neither Prince nor King,
Titles are vain, as any other thing,
As we experience with more truth and w^,
The^ land ere mourned for, to co^irme it so,
Lays all their pomp and glory in the dust,
That former times ere had, or latter must,
Pulls down the plumes, of vanity, and pride,
Vnpaints our painted flesh, and does deride
Our childish follies that we so much cherish
That at a moment shall so quickly perish,
The face, the hand, the body so innured,
From lights of heaven and earth so much obscured,
That sun, nor air, nor wind, shall touch the skin
They so regarded, take so much pleasure in:
Those thou will strip, their trifles cast away
Into a winding sheet, and bed of clay;
Whereas the worms and vermin shall destroy
What was their own delight, and others joy,
Shall pull the flesh and sinows from the bone,
And what they leave, corruption ceize upon.
Where that proud earth, that so in height did stand
Resolves to a heap of dust, a grain of sand.
When thus it is, let all mankind appear,
And take a true view what we must be here:
Within the earth we there must make our bed
Upon our flesh being worms and verm^n fed.
Since youth, and strength, and health, and all decay,
And every one but hastens on the day,
Since former ages, could not one man save
To show a monument against the grave:
But every child and parent that they owed,
And saw brought forth, they saw again bestowd.
Thither our carcasses sink down and rot,
Our ill remembered, and our good forgot.
From out this transitory world of woe,
From which we part, to God that minds not foe,
Let us so live, that we forget not why
We live within this world, which is to die,
And both so live and die, that when we end,
Though world become our foe, Christ be our friend,
And then howeuer, whatsoere befall,
In loosing little we have gained all.
FINIS.

