THE LIGHT OF FAITH: AND, WAY OF HOLINESS.

Showing What to believe, and for what to strive together, earnestly contend,
and suffer for in this contending age.

And how to live in all estates, conditions, and degrees of relation, according
to this faith.

In both, delivering (as near as might be, in the life of Scripture phrase:)
only things necessary, as we mean to be saved, and avoiding utterly things
arbitrary, that distract, rather then direct a Christian.

Collected out of holy Scripture by an unworthy labourer i^ Gods vineyard,
RICHARD BIFIELD Pastor in Long-Di^ton, in Surrey.

Esa. 35. 8. And an high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called
the way of Holiness: the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for
those: the way fa^^ng men, though so^les, shall n^^ (...) therein. London,
Printed by T. H. for Ph. Stephens, and Chapter Meredith, 1630.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and religious Knight, my most bountiful Patron, St.
Thomas Euelin, and to the virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne, his Wife: R. B. wishes
Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
Right Worshipful:
AFter prayer to GOD, that these first fruits of my labors in this kind
offered to the glory of his Name, for the good of his Church, may be acceptable
to him, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost: I present this ensuing Treatise to
your worthy selves, as to a most excellent Theophilus, and an elect Lady. It
had indeed its birth in another place, but its polishing, (if yet it may be
termed polished) under your supportation. I would therefore it should in the
entrance, acknowledge for it self, and for me those large favors both I and
it do enjoy. But while it speaks, let none impute the folly of flattery or
acceptance of man's person: for should I so do, my Maker would soon take me
away.

Three things shall make your name, your memory, sweet and sauory in the Church
of Christ, and among the Saints.

First, your free bestowing of that ecclesiastical preserment the Lord
entrusted you with, without so much as suite or seeking on my part, or any on
my behalf; who yet was a stranger to your Noble self, family and kindred:
respecting nothing but the discharge of your conscience, the good of the
people, and the glory of the Lord Christ: which was abundantly showed when your
Worship was pleased to require at my hands these three things alone: residence,
like pains as I had bestowed, where bands of duty were less, and plain
teaching, with the pressing of the law thoroughly, to prepare for the Cordials
of surpassing grace discovered in the Gospel: What Christian that knows
this, will not say, Remember him O my God, for good, concerning this, and wipe
not out this good deed which he has done for the house of his God

Secondly your unwearied attendance on the ordinances of Christ with reverence,
on the Lords day, and on the week days: entering the assemblies with the
first, abiding there with the last; so that your deeds speak effectually in
Jacobs phrase: surely Genesis 28. 16. 17.
the Lord is in this place. How dreadful is this place? This is none other but
the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. The Lord, the God of Jacob,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, show you in that place for ever, Jacobs
Ladder; and the Angels of God ascending and descending on it, and himself
standing above it, and giving Oracles from the top of it.

Thirdly, your life led, in this wanton proud age, in such a way, as is free
from all the vices of our times. Others of our Gentry spend their days in
Hawking, Hunting, Bowling; in Carding, Dicing, Bowzing, while you seem alone
among many, to have learnt that which God has made, the calling of a Gentleman.

Go on still, Noble Sir, to make a further escape from the corruptions that
are in the world through lusts: it shall be your immortal praise, to
distinguish in deeds between Gentility and effeminatenesse, Generosity and
profaneness, frugality and covetousness, l^berality and prodigality, gravity
and van^ty, power and show of godl^nesse.

Speak I this to exalt you in your thoughts above measure, or speak I it not
to move the hearts of our Gentry to consider it? In as much as God has set me
thus in my place, I magnify my calling, if by any means I might provoke all
Patrones to emulation: and might save them from their injurious practices, and
ill offices done thereby, to the house of God. By whose Gehizing hands,
Symonizing Wolves prey upon themselves, and make a prey for Satan, thousands
of souls.

But what seek I herein to my self? surely this, that as often as I look on
these lines, I might fetch a renewed strength for the improuement of my Talent
to the good of your godly family, of this people, over which the Lord has
placed me (though unworthy) an ouerseer, and of the whole Church, according to
my line and measure. And that if I should be negligent, I might have many say
to me, that which Paul charged the Church of Colosse Col. 4. 17
to say to Archippus: Take heed to the Ministry, which thou have received in
the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

For the Treatise it self: you shall have matter, but words are not to be
expected from him who professes not himself a master of speech. The matter is
intended for the through furnishing of a Christian in only necessary things,
to all turns, at all times: large I confess is the promise, what is
performed, read and see. I shall the mean while pray for both your Worships
increase in grace and all gifts of the spirit, with length of days, to see
your sweet Children, (the Lords reward, your chief riches) flourishing and
spreading into families, with grace and favor from GOD and man: that the few
days of my pilgrimage, ma* also be made thereby the more comfortable and
happy, who am

Your Worships in the service of your faith humbly devoted, Richard By field.

The Contents of this Treatise in an Analiticall Table.
The Preface to the whole, The Parts: which are three. Or what it is, in the
profession whereof we are to live and die, this respects, The Articles of Gods
Covenant containing the substance of Christian truth, which concerns The
Scripture. 1. God the Father. 2. God the Son. 3. God the Holy Ghost. 4. The
Church. 5.
The seals of the Covenant Baptism and the Lords Supper.. 6. The answer of a
good Conscience.. 7. The order.. 1. The Precepts which are Precepts which lie
in common for all times: Precepts for the passing of every day, The Precepts
which ly in common for all times are, General and concern The qualifying of
the person that would lead a Godly life. 2. The Gates of righteousness that
open upon these paths.. 3. The enliuing qualities of all holy duties. 4.
Particular: and they order us. To God, and so To know him.. 5. To worship him..
6. To serve him.
With our persons where General Rules of preparation and execution of all
outward worship 7. The particular precepts that guide in the use of several
ordinances. Of hearing the word read and preach.. 8. Of receiving of the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood.. 9. Of Baptism.. 10. Of Prayer.. 11 Of
Feasting and solemn thanksgiving.. 12. Of Fasting. 13. Of Singing of
Psalms.. 14. Of Reading or meditation.. 15. Of Vows and swearing.. 16. Of
Serving God with our good.. 17. Of Keeping the Lords day where are discussed
The authority and The duties of the day.. 18. To men and these look To all men
for justice and mercy: For justice in The right disposition of the heart
toward them.. 19. The frame of the Conversation.. 20. The government of the
tongue more specially.. 21. The innocence of the hand.. 22: For mercy. 23. To
some men as the godly and the wicked, where The love of the godly.. 24. Our
Carriage to the godly in particular cases.. 25. The wisdom of our behavior
toward the wicked.. 26. To our selves, teaching how to abide with God In our
callings. 27. In our Christian profession.. 28. In the changes of life, as In
our wealth In afflictions generally considered In poverty. In sickness. In
persecutions.. 29 In our death, teaching. The cure of diseases The care of
necessary duties.. 30. Thus of the precepts which ly in common for all times
The precepts for the passing of every day.. 31. Where The order and use
hereof.. 1. The special rules which concern The more eminent relations Of
Magistrate and Subject The Magistrate both The supreme and governors sent of
him. The subject in general, The Courtyer The Ambassador The Counselor of
state.. 2. Of the Husband and wife.. 3. Of Parents and chiidren.. 4. Of Masters
and Servant. 5. Of Pastor and flock. 6. Rules for the more private estate as.
Of Neighborhood.. 7. Of Friendship.. 8. Of Enmity.. 9. Rules for those of mere
priuacy: as Of the aged. 10. Of the youth.. 11. Of the Virgin and widow.: 12.
THE PREFACE showing the occasion, order, and use of this Treatise.
CAsting in my The Holy days in the years 1625. and 1626.
thoghts which way I might most profitably spend this time of Assembling our
selves together on those days set apart by our Church, both for the discharge
of my duty, and for your edification, it came into my mind to undertake the
exposition of the Scriptures: but then the Lord directed my heart to resolve,
first to propose briefly the sum of faith and holy life, which might be both as
a key to open the door of true exposition, (for prophecy ought to be
according to the Analogy of faith, and also a rule which you might have always
by you, nay, with you; according to which you might walk, that peace might be
upon you, and mercy, though I should no^ accomplish among you my former
intended task.

We will then, the good hand of our God being upon us, proceed in this order;
viz. Give

1. The summ^ of faith 2. The paths of holy life, that guide men As they are
Christians which paths as they are Christians in such a condition lie in
common for all times. are applied in peculiar for the passing of every day.
of relation to other, as Magistrate. Subject* Pastor. Flock. Husbnad and
wife. Parent and child^. Master and servant. Of private state, as Neighbor,
friend, for, the aged, the youth, the single person both maid and widow.


Out of these every one may and must take to so many as may serve his own
condition, and so have before him Gods will concerning him, which will we are
all bound to know; Ephesians. 4. 16. And without which we can never order our
conversation aright, and therefore have not the promise to see the salvation of
God, Psalm. 50. 23. This setting an order in faith and life, is the only way to
walk as wise and understanding Christians, to walk uprightly, and so surely,
to walk worthy the Lord in all pleasing: to live profitably, and so
comfortably. Which while people are called upon to do by the Ministers yet it
is left undone by the hearers, or set upon with little heart, and often times
with less profit, even for want of direction. You, Beloved, (God assisting)
shall have it drawn out to your hands, that you may every one come to this
garden, and gather so many flowers, as may make up your posie suitable to your
several smells; yea, plant your heads and hearts with them, and thereby
refresh your spirits, and keep in you the good sau^ur and sweet sent of a
well-watered Garden, where your beloved may take his pleasure.

THE FIRST PART.
. 1.
THe sum of faith, or what it is in the profession whereof we are to live and
dye, respects the Articles the seals of Gods covenant.

The Articles are briefly comprised in the Creed, commonly called the Apostles
Creed, where we consider,

1 The substance of Christian doctrine, which concerns God the Father in the
1. Article, God the Son in the 6. following, God the holy Ghost in the 8. The
Church in her qualities, the 9. in her prerogatives in this life the 10. in the
life to come, the 11. and 12.

2 The answer of a good conscience to all that God reuealeth and promises: in
the word I believe, which is carried to every parcel of the Creed.

The seals of this covenant

are two Baptism. The Supper of the Lord.

For, the substance of Christian ^1
doctrine to be believed, as ever we would be saved; and for which faith we
must lay down our lives if God call for it: I will lay it down in words of
Scripture, according to the order and meaning of the Articles; save that these
Articles presuppose we have received the Bible, for the word of God, as being
an abridgement of faith, given to believers, not to Infidels. We must see
there what God commands we should bl^eue and hold concerning the Scripture,
out of which the Creed was taken; then what of himself, and of his Church.
Credenda.


God commands that I and every one do believe in our hearts, and profess
with our mouths, and be ready to seal it with our dearest blood:

That all Scripture is by inspiration, 1 Of the Scriptures. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.
Their authority.
or, the imbreathing of God: (namely, the books of the old Testament, as of
Moses and the Prophets and the Books of the New Testament:) and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may 2 Pet. 1. 18. 19. 20. Use.
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. A more sure word for us
to take heed unto, then a voice from heaven.

Further, that no man may add Perfection Reu. 22. 18 19. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Psalm.
119. 130. Perspicuity.
ought thereto, or take ought therefro: and that they are plain and clear to
all Gods elect in all truths absolutely necessary to salvation: the very
entrance into them, gives light, yea, understanding to the simple.

. 11. Thus of the Scriptures, out of 2 Of God.
these the Creed was taken; according to the order thereof our faith is carried
unto God as the chief object, and first it looks upon God the Father on this
wise.
I believe in God the Father Almighty,
HE that comes unto God Heb 11. 6.
must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them Deuteronomy. 6. 4 1 Ioh
5. (...) Esa. 48. 16. 17
that diligently seek him; that he is one only Lord, who is three in
persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: the Father God, the Son
God, the holy Ghost God: yet not three Gods, but one only. Notwithstanding,
the Father is not the Son, the Son is not the Holy Ghost, nor is the holy
Ghost, the Father or the Son; the Father is of himself, the Son is
begotten of the Father before all worlds: the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and the Son, altogether worshipped and glorified. That this one God
who is Father, Son, and holy Genesis 17. 1. Ioh. 4. 24. 1 Timothy 6. 15. 16. Exodus
34. 6. 7.
Ghost, is the Almighty, a spirit, eternal, all-sufficient, al-knowing,
unchangeable, infinite in wisdom, justice, holiness, truth, and mercy: and
therefore, most Glorious, Blessed, and only good.

Maker of heaven and earth:
Who alone created all things 3 Of the creation. Genesis 1. Col. 1. 16. Reu. 4. 11.
visible and invisible, heavens and their hosts, earth and their hosts in the
beginning, of nothing, by his word only, and all of them very good, his own
will moving him thereto, and not any need he had of them.

Who also made man after his 4 Of man's innocence. Eccles. 7. 29. Genesis 1 27.
Ephesians. 4. 24. 5 Of Gods providence. 1 Pet. 4. 19 Pro. 15 3. Heb. 1. 3. ^ol. 1.
17. Pro. 16. 1. 33. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Lam. 3. 37. 38. 2 Samuel 16 1^
own Image and likeness, both male and female, in knowledge, righteousness,
and holiness of truth.

Who likewise is that faithful Creator still, that sees, and rules,
vpholdeth and disposes all things from the greatest to the least, having care,
especially for man, and among men now chiefly for the righteous and believers:
so that neither good nor evil befalls any man without Gods providence; yea, he
disposes of even the evil actions of men, yet all this most wisely,
powerfully, Act. 4. 27. Ephesians 1. 11 Eccles. 3. 14 The necessity of a ^^edeemer.
6 Of the Fall. Genesis 3^ Eccles. 7. 29. 7 Of sin Original. Romans 5. 19. and 3.
12. 13.
and righteously.

Then was man made righteous: but Christian faith compels us to believe,

That our first Parents, Adam and Eve, by their own voluntary disobedience,
fell from that happy estate wherein they were created: thus, by the
disobedience of one, all were made sinners, and are defiled, and deprived of
the glory of God from their conception and birth, being blind in their
understandings, vain in their imaginations, defiled in conscience, rebellious
in their will, frail in their memories, corrupt in heart and life, and
alienated from the life of God.

And if they come to years, 8 Of sin Actual. Eccles. 7. 20. Psalm. 19. 1^.
13. 14. Ephesians. 2. 1. Romans 8. 7.
guilty of many transgressions that make them abominable in the eyes of God,
and not able to do any thing that may please God, dead in trespasses and sins,
whose mindings are not subject to the law, nor indeed can be. Now by 9. Of the
punishment of sin. Romans 5. 12. and 6. 23.
sin, death entered into the world, and is the wages of sin, both the first
and second death.

In God the Father
Man in this estate the child of wrath.

God so loved the world, that he 10 Of ^le (...). Ioh. 1. 16. 1 Pet. 1 ^0.
Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. 6.
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. This Son of his love before ever there was
a world, he sore-ordained to be our Savior and Redeemer, and in him, chose
some men, called therefore his elect, that they should be holy and without
blame before him in love, having predestined them to the Adoption of children
by Jesus Christ that Son of his love, according to the good pleasure of his
own will, to the Romans 8. 29 30.
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made them accepted in his
beloved: for whom he foreknew, them he predestined to be conformed to the
Image of his Son, whom he predestinateth, them he calls, whom he calls,
he justifies, whom he justifies, he glorisieth.

. III. Secondly, our faith looks upon the Son of God, the Messiah,
concerning whom we are to believe and profess, and to live and dye in that
profession and belief.
And Jesus his only Son,
THat Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah, and Savior of the world, being very
God, the only 11 Of Christ's person and natures. Ioh. 11. 27. and 6. 6.
begotten Son of the father, and true and very man, yet but one Christ,

Who is Jesus.

Jesus
The alone Savior of his people 12 Of his office in the whole. Mat^. 21. 1 Timothy
2. 5. 2 Timothy 1 9. Tit. 3. 5. Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. Esa. 49. 8. Gal. 3. 18. 22. Ier.
31. 3^^
from their sins, and the only mediator between God and man: in whom we are
saved according to the grace of God, and not according to our works, or ought
in us; ^or through this our Mediator, a new covenant God made with us, wherein
he of his free grace promises to be a God, and to give remission of sins,
and life everlasting to every one that believes in Christ, and repe^teth of
his sins.

Who is the Christ also.

Christ our Lord,
That is, this Jesus is the anointed 1 Of his offices in the parts. 13
Prophetical. Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
of God, to be Prophet, Priest, and King to his people.

He is that great Prophet of the Church, in whom are all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Act. 3. 22. Col. 2. 3. Ioh. 1. 18. Eccles. 12. 11. Ephesians.
4. 9. 10. Mat. 28. 10. Esa. 48. 17. 1 Cor. 3. 6. Esa. 50 4. Mat. 11. 28
who has plainly opened and revealed the whole counsel of his father
touching our salvation: and has instituted and ordai^ed a ministry of men in
the Church, for the building up thereof, and for the perfecting of the Saints:
whom he will be with to the end of the world, in this work, by his spirit,
through their ministry teaching to profit: for to teach the heart within, by
inlightning the mind, and working a belief of the doctrine recorded in
Scripture, or thence taught unto men, is his work alone, and such, as none but
he can do^; it is also one special part of his office, as he is our Prophet
to give comfort to distressed consciences, and to speak a word in season to
the weary soul.

He is consecrated a Priest for 11 Priestly Psalm. 110. 34.
ever to his Church, after the order of Melchisedech.

Our Lord,
He is the King, and lawgiver, 15 Kingly. Esa. 33, 22. Luc. 1, 33. Ioh. 18, 36
Psalm. 2, 8.
whose kingdom is spiritual, and not of this world, and perpetual, and such
as reaches to all Nations.

Now that we may know how the Son of God became flesh, we believe and
profess to the death,

Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary,
That in the fullness of time, for 16 Of his I^e rnation. Gal. 4, 4. Heb. 2,
16, and 4, 15.
us men, and for our salvation, the Son of God took on him the true nature
of man, and was in all points l^ke us, sin only excepted.

He was conceived, not as other men, but by the Holy Ghost, and was borne of
the Virgin Mary, Mat. 1, 18, 20.
upon whom the Holy Ghost came, and whom the power of Luc. 1, 30, 31, 3^. Esa.
7. 14.
the most High did ouer-shadow. This is that great mystery of godliness, God
manifest in the flesh: He is God and man in one person.

This is that lamb of God without 17 Of his active obedience. 1 Pet. 1, 19
Romans 5, 19 and 8, 3, 4, and 10, 4.
spot or blemish, who for us, and for our sakes, who do or shall believe in
his name, kept the law, that he might be the end of the law for righteousness
unto such.

He suffered under Pontius Pilate,
Who suffered also under Pontius 18 Of his p^ssiue. Genesis 49, 10. Act. 4, 27,
28. Mat. 26.
Pilate, an heathen Governor, the Scepter failing from Judah, but for this
Shiloh: to which suff^rings he was delivered by the determinate counsel of God.

Was crucified, dead,
He was wounded for our transgressions, Esa. 53, 4, 5, 6.
and on him were laid the Romans 3, 25 Ephesians. 5, 2. Phil. 2. 8. Gal. ^, 13. Heb.
1, 3, and 9. 26, 28.
iniquities of us all; and hereby he appeased Gods wrath, and made expiation
for all our sins. For he became obedient to the death, even the death of the
Cross, and was made a curse for us, thus he alone trod the wine press of
Gods wrath, and once for all by the sacrifice of himself, took away sin.

And buried: he descended into hell:
He was buried and laid in the grave three days, and three nights in the heart
of the earth: yet his soul was not left in hell, neither did God suffer his
holy One to see corruption.

The third day he rose again
For having overcome the 19 Of his resurrection. Romans 4. vlt.
power of death, hell, and Satan, he rose again the third day from 1 Cor. 15.
3
the dead, for our justification.

He ascended into heaven,
And went up into heaven, the 20 Of his ascension. Pal. 68, 18 Mar. 1^, 19 Acts
1, 9, 10, 11. and 3. 21. Heb. 6, 20. Ioh. 14, 3.
third heaven, far above all these heavens that are visible, whom, in respect
of his bodily pr^sence, the heavens must receive till the time of the
restitution of all things: and he ascended as o^^ forerunner to prepare a
place for us.

And sits at the right hand of God,
And sits at the right hand of 21 Of his session, and interecession.
God the Father Almighty, exercising the office of King and Judge for his
Church: being as God-man, made Lord of all, and crowned with glory and honor,
and ruling in all fullness of Majesty, power, and Sovereignty, being Act. 2.
34. 35. 36. Ph^l. 2. ^. Heb. 8. 1. and 1. 3. Romans 8. 34. Ioh. 17. 9. 20.
set far above all principality and power, and every thing that is named, all
things whether in earth, heaven, or hell, being in subjection under his feet,
saving alone that God did put all things under him. Where also he ever lives
to make request for us that are not of the world, but have believed through the
word taught by his Apostles.

From thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead:
This Jesus Christ shall come 2^ Of the last judgment Act. 1. ^1. and 17. 31.
Mat. ^4. 30
from thence, that is, from heaven, into which he ascended after his
r^surrection, and not from thence, that is, from sitting at the right hand of
God (for n^uer shall his kingdom and power be more manifest, then at this
day:) to judge the world at the last day: for we believe the world shall have
an end, and at the last day, Christ as he is the Son of man, shall judge the
world, descending from heaven in the same visible form, in which he went up,
and coming in power and great glory; at which day all shall be judged, 2 Timothy
4, 1 Mat. 12, 36 Eccles. ^2, 14.
both those that shall be found then alive, and remaining till that day, and
those that have been dead from the beginning of the world to that day; and
they shall be judged of all that they have done in their bodies, while they
lived in them, of every idle word, and of every secret thing, and every one
shall receive, without respect of persons, according to 2 Cor. 5. 10
that he has done, while he lived here, whether it be good or bad.

. IIII. We believe also and profess, and ought to hold till death
I believe in the Holy Ghost,
THat the Holy Ghost is God, 23 Of the Holy Ghost. Ioh. 1^, 26 2 Pet 1. 21.
Esa. 59, 21. Gal 4. 1 Cor. 12, 12, 13. Ioh. 14, 26. ^ Ioh. 2, 27
equal with the Father and the Son, proceeding from the Father and the
Son, who spoke by the Prophets in the Old Testament, and by the Apostles in
the New Testament: and still works in and by that word, who is also sent into
the hearts of Gods children, and is that one spirit, that knitteth all
Christians to Christ their head, and san^^ifieth them by applying the ver^ue of
Christ's death and resurrection, and comfort and preserves in the estate of
holiness, the true members of Christ, and abides with them for ever.

This sanctification is to dye 24 Of Sanctification. Romans 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1
These. 5. 1 Ioh. 1. 8. Esa. 64. 6. 1 Ioh. 3. ^* Ioh. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 5, 17. Joel 2.
^8 Act. 2. and 10
to sin, and rise again to newness of life; it is a work wrought in the
whole man, in soul, and body, and spirit, yet but imperfect in this life:
nevertheless the graces of this spirit wrought in us at our new birth, can
never wholly or finally be lost: and it is of absolu^e necessity that we have
this spirit of Christ, and find the work thereof in regenerating us, and
making us a new, or else we are not Christ's, nor shall ever come to heaven.
This is the privilege of the Christian Church, above the Jewish, The graces
and gifts of the Holy Ghost are powered forth on the Church in more plentiful
measure in the time of the New Testament, then they were in the Old.

. V. Concerning the Church of God, we believe
The Holy Catholic Church:
THe Church is a company of 25 Of the Church. Ioh. 17. 9. 14. Mat. 16. 18
Ephesians. 1. 3. 4. 5.
men separate from the world, gathered by the voice of Christ, in the ministry
of his servants which are his Cryers, which company do worship God in spirit
and truth.

There was, is, and ever shall be to the end, a true Church of God on earth.
Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation, with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus promised in the word, belong only
to the Church.

This Church and every member Esa. 26. 1. 2
thereof is holy, and she is Catholic, that is, universal, so that in every
nation he that fears Acts 10. 34
God, and works righteousness, is accepted of him.

Christ Jesus is the head of this Ephesians. 1. 22. and 5. 23. Can. 1. 5, 6
his body, and the husband of this his spouse.

This Church on earth is militant, liable to tentations, crosses, afflictions,
and oppositions of all sorts.

Now wheresoever the word of Esa. 59. 21. and 2. ^. Ephesians. 5. 26. Mat. 2^. 19 20.
God is truly preached and embraced, and the Sacraments rightly according to
Christ's institution administered, there the Lord has his Church.

Concerning her prerogatives in this life.
1 Communion of Saints ^^ Of the communion of Saints. Can. 6. ^.

There is a communion and fellowship of Saints, they being knit all together
into one, with Christ, by the holy Ghost that one 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 4. 5.
spirit, and by faith, and one with another by love: whence arises a glorious
partaking mutually of all good things: for, as members of the same body, they
have alike care one for the other, and a fellow-feeling of wrongs, and honor,
and labor to be of one mind, and heart, that there may be no schism in the
body, and they employ their gifts for the good of the whole society. 27 Of the
forgiveness of sins. 1 Ioh. 1. 10 Psa. 18. 22. and 51. 5.


2 Forgiveness of sins,
Every man even of this Church, while he is in this life, needs forgiveness
of sins, and all the members of this holy Church here do feel this need by
reason of sin dwelling in them, of sins committed by them, and of sins to
which by nature they are more prone.

The Lord for his Sons sake Jesus Christ, forgiueth the iniquity,
transgressions, and sins Exodus 34. 6. 7. Psalm. 32. 1. 3. 4. Job 33. 27. 28. 1
Ioh. 1. 9. Act. 3. 19. Romans 4. 6. 7. and 3. 20. 28.
of all that truly repent, so that he will never impute them, nor punish them
for them in this world, nor in the world to come: it is Gods free mercy that
our sins are pardoned: we are justified freely by his grace, through the
blood of Jesus Christ, and the redemption which is in him; of which
righteousness and bloud-shedding o^ Christ, we are made partakers by faith
only without the works of the law, for by the deeds of the law, can no flesh
be justified in the sight of God. Now being justified by faith in Romans 5. 1.
the blood of Christ, we have peace with God.

The Ministers of the Gospel are sent by Christ with this authority, that
whosesoeuer sins Ioh. 20. 23. Mat. 18. 18.
they do forgive according to the word of God, which they are sent to
dispense, they are forgiven in heaven, and whosesoeuer sins they do retain,
according to the same word, they are retained.

The resurrection of the body, and life everlasting.
At the last day, the dead bodies 28 Of the resurrection. Act. 24. 15. 1 Cor.
15. Job 19. 13. 26. Ioh. 5. 28. and 6. 44. 29 Of life eternal. Romans 6 23
of men, the very same bodies, in which both just and unjust lived here, though
now laid in the dust, and turned to corruption* shall rise again out of the
dust of the earth, and their own souls enter into them again: those that have
done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation, and those that have done well,
to the resurrection of life, even of life everlasting: which is the gift of
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and not the merit of our works, or any
thing in us.

. VI. These are the Articles of our belief: to these God has annexed two
seals, viz. Baptism, and the Lords Supper. For we are to believe and hold,
THat Christ has ordained (...) Of the Sacraments: whole number, nature,
two Sacraments alone, and these two necessary to salvation, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, and that Sacraments are Signs given of God to be seals of the
righteousness of Faith, even of that righteousness of Jesus Christ, brought
in by his obedience to the death, made ours by faith only: In special of
Baptism, the sign.
our faith and repentance.

The outward sign in Baptism, is the Ministers washing Mat. 28. 19
or dipping, or sprinkling the believer with water, in the name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The thing signified, and sealed hereby to
the believing The grace Ephesians. 5. 26. Tit. 3. 5.
penitent, is the washing of the new birth by the Holy Ghost, and the purging
of the conscience from dead works, by the sprinkling of Christ's blood thereon
by the same spirit of faith: assuring us of our adoption, ingrafting into
Christ, deliverance from Gods wrath, forgiveness of sins, communion with the
Saints, and resurrection of our bodies, to life eternal.

The outward sign in the Of the Lords Supper, the sign,
Lords Supper, i^ Bread and Wine, blessed, broken, powered forth, and given by
the Minister, and taken and eaten, and drunk by the faithful.

The thing signified and sealed The grace
to us, is the giving of Christ by God the Father, and Christ himself
willingly giving himself, his body and blood, broken and shed on the Cross
for our sins and transgressions, that they might be forgiven us. which we
must take, eat and drink by the hand and mouth of faith spiritually, as it is
offered to us in the word of promise; which says* This is my Body which is
broken for you, This is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you,
and for many, for the remission of sins; whereby our faith is strengthened,
and we grow in the assurance of Gods love, in the graces of his spirit, in the
life of holy duties, in repentance toward God, in love of the communion of
Saints, in assured faith and hope of resurrection to life eternal. 1 Cor. 11.
28. 31. Mat. 5. 1 Cor. 10. 16.


worthily, and not eat and drink damnation, that he discern the Lords body*
that he examine himself, and judge himself for his sins, that he forgive
those that have Psalm. 26.
trespassed him, and that he grow in love to the fellowship of the Saints, and
in hatred of all assemblies of wicked Idolaters and profane persons.

. VII. The answer of a good conscience.
I believe
THe Answer of a good conscience, 31 Of faith. 1 Pe^. 3. 20. Ioh. 1. 1^. 12.
Hab. 2. 5. Ioh. 17. 3. Romans 10. 10
is in this word, I believe, which is the receiving every one for himself, of
all and every one of these truths into our minds, to know them, and into our
hearts to assent to cleave to, and rest upon them for our justification, and
eternal salu^tion, and into our mouths to confess and profess them, and
into our whole man, to live the rest of our life in the power of them* so that
Gal. 2. 20.
we may li^e by the faith of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave himself
for us.

Such is the substance of our faith,

The paths of holy life, which guide men as they are Christians all their
days, and every particular day, follow.

THE SECOND PART.
. I. The order.
THey that thus believe Agend^s.
this matchless love of God, and his exceeding kindness to them in Jesus
Romans 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 14. P^al. 119. 9
Christ, have the love of God shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy Ghost,
which will constrain them ^o live not to themselves, but to him that dyed for
them, and rose again. The rule of such a life is Gods holy word, which in our
language contains Gods will concerning us. Wherefore it is to be diligently
attended, that we may learn, what this life beseeming the Gospel, and a
Christian redeemed at so great a price may be: and understanding what the will
of the Lord is, it is necessary that we order our conversation aright, an heart
to which work the Lord without doubt does give to as many as shall see his
salvation. Psalm. 50. 23 Col. 1. 10. Pro. 10. 9. and 14 8 Gal 6. 16 Psalm. 84. 11.


If we shall thus do, we shall walk in all pleasing, we shall walk
uprightly, and therefore surely, we shall understand our way; the wisdom of a
prudent man, m^rcy also shall be upon us, and peace, neither will the Lord
withold any thing that is good: for the Lord himself is the sun and
shield, he will give grace here, and glory hereafter, and no good (...) will
he withold from t^em tha^ walk uprightly. Up then and be doing, and (...)e
Lord will ^e with th^e. But thou wi^^^s^y, what should I doe^ f^r^th direction,
I present th^e our of Gods word, an Abstract of special precepts, for the
right ordering of thy conversation, wherein I desire, not like an hand, to
point it out to others, but as a fellow-traueller toward heaven, res^^lue by
Gods grace to be thy companion, to tread wit^ a right foot, in the way of life.
Come then, let Esa. 2. 3.
us jointly walk in his paths, and he will teach us of his ways.

The precepts of holy life, not restrained to a daily direction, are, first,
general which concern, 1. The qualifying of our persons, who would live holily.
2. The helps of an holy life. 3. The manner of well-doing. secondly,
particular, which order us toward God, other men, our selves. First, the
person ought to be rightly qualified, we being all by nature, a serpentine
generation, that will bite by the heel, him that passes on this way, and a
swift Dromedary, traversing the ways that lead to the chambers of death; but
not that brood of travelers, the generation Psalm. 24. 6.
of them that seek the face of the God of Jacob.

. II Of the qualifying of the person that would lead a godly life.
1. Whosoever would 1 The person qualified to walk in an holy life.
live, and that well, must be sure that he break off his former sins by
vnsaigned repentance, and become a new man: and must look to his faith, both
to be assured of his reconciliatio ^ith God through Jesus Christ, and by
believing to draw forth virtue and grace from him to enable him to walk in the
way of life: for the unclean cannot walk in this way, Esa 35. 8. 9
it is called holy; but it is prepared for those that believe and repent, and
these wayfaring men, Ephesians. 2. 2. Romans 8. 8. 9. Gal 2 10. Ioh. 15 5.
though fools, shall not err therein: till this also every man is dead in
trespasses and sins, and walks in the flesh, and therefore cannot please
God. It is faith by which we live, or rather Christ lives in us, now without
him we can do nothing: but if we abide in him, and he in us, we shall bring
forth much fruit. We^ are in our natural estate, Lepers, shut without the
Camp, and to rush into these walks of new obedience, not cleansed from this
contagious leprosy, is to pollute and defile all we touch, or have to deal
with. The true cause why many that have entered on the profession and practice
of holy duties, have made no happy progress, and why some after long time have
fearfully fallen back, is no other then this, they never laid a good
foundation, or made a good entrance by sound mortification. That it may not
thus fare with us, let us know and practice what God requires of us, that we
might break down the power of our former sins, and gain some c^mfortable
assurance of Gods love in Jesus Christ, in the pardon of them, and so you must

1 Examine and try thy ways, and turn to the Lord; not contented that thou
have heard say, we are all sinners, n^r bearing thy self upon that knowle^ge
of thy sins, which thou can gain by measuring thy self by thy self, lest
self-love and a deceitful heart do beguile thee. But the du^y required, is
to search and try thy self by the word of God, and thence to take a true
surucy of thy natural filthiness by sin; and, that thou may lay it
deeply to heart, take a roll or bill of such offenses against each
Commandment, as thou can directly accuse thy self withal, and learn to
gage thine own heart by that perfect law: and because we are by nature ready
to make a mock Pro. 14. 9.
of sin, (such is our spiritual folly) therefore to know the heinous and
odious nature of sin in Gods sight, weigh what it is.

1 By the law, which shows thee, it is the offense of an holy and infinite
justice and m^iesty, and the breaking of a law which thine own heart
approves, as spiritual, holy, just, and good; it is Rom 7. 12
such an evil as separates betwixt God and thee, it deserves for its wages,
death of body, of soul, of both for ever in hell.

2 By the Gospel, which shows thee plainly, that since Christ the Son of
God, dyed for all, then were all dead; sin could never be pardoned, and God
reconciled with thee a sinner in the least offense, had not Christ his Son,
as thy surety, become a curse for thee, 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15.

3 By all other mercies of God to thee in soul and body, against which they
have been committed, with many of which, by thee abused, they have been acted.

4 By the curse it has brought on the whole world, the earth, seas, visible
heavens, and all their hosts, Romans 8. 20. Genesis 3. 17. Deuteronomy. 28. 23. 24.

In taking thus the notice of thy sins, be advised, with chiefest heed, to
bring to light the sins whereto by nature thou art more addicted; and have
still in thine eye, some of thy notorious falls, with the circumstances to
aggrauate them. Thou shall not fail to make a true discovery of thy
sin-guiltines, if thou proceed in this order.

First withdrawing thy self in secret, set thy heart and ways in Gods
presence and say, what Ier. 8. 6.
have I done? Ask the Question. What is it I have done all my days which if I
lay on my death bed, and were summoned to the bar of Christ's tribunal, would
strike me with terror if it were not forgiven. Let conscience now speak, be
still and take the Answer, without hiding, diminishing, translating, or
excusing (for have thou not to deal with God?) spare not one, no not the sin
of thy bosom, but in sincerity as before the Lord deal truly: keep them in
memory, or rather note them if thou can; then secondly take the 10.
Commandments and by the help of some that have gathered the sins against every
commandment, mark out thine offenses which the former way did not yet
discover: Thus shall thou see thy transgressions, and this done, thou have
stepped one good step toward repentance, which step is required of all that
will repent, as absolutely necessary, and has the promise. Lam. 3. 40. Ioh. 11.
13. Gal. 6. 3. Ier. 8. 6.

2. Confess them before God with all opennesse of heart, in the best words
thou have, and beseech him to give thee words, who has commanded thee to take
unto thee words Hos. 14. 2. 1 Ioh. 1. 7 9 P^al. 32. 3. 4. 5.

3 This do till thou attain Godly sorrow, and thy heart be broken and
contrite, a sacrifice which God will never despise. Psalm. 51. 17. the measure
of thy sorrow is right, i^ it be such as thou have or coldest use for worldly
crosses. Zech. 12. 10. 11. 12. but thy heart will never melt within thee, till
thou ^ring thy self to look upon Christ the son of God pierced on the
Cross by thy sins and wounded for thy transgressions, this sight will prick
thee to the heart, and the beholding of such matchless love will not off
without the tears of love.

Now this sorrow is that which causes repentance never to be repented of 2
Cor. 7. 11. and has the promise Mat. 5. 5. Esa. 61. 3. Zech. 13. 1. Ier. 31.
18. 19. 20.

4 Then apply the promises to thy self, both that in Ioh. 3. 16 and those
special promises before mentioned, Happy is that man to whom any one word from
God is a word of comfort: but by all the former promises those that examine,
confess and mourn over their sins are proved Blessed, for Christ dyed for
them, all their sins are f^rgiuen, and their unrighteousness shall be cleansed

Pray you over these promises, that God would by his spirit give thee a
believing heart and them a quickening virtue to put life into thee.

Let nothing shoulder out this work. Doit, and that thoroughly that thou may
see the power of thy sins abated and thy heart refreshed in the assurance of
Gods love before thou meddle with the following rules, else all thy labor will
beto no end. The same way let all those take that have lost themselves and
their uprightness, or God and his favor by heedlesse walking or presumptuous
sins; the like be spoken to all that yet have set no order in their lives
though they have of a long time been offering and essaying in matters of
religion, and to those no less, that yet have not the assurance of the pardon
of their sins.

If thou have done it, or when thou have, then address thy self to the
precepts following, which precepts concern the helps to an holy life.

. III. Of the helps of an holy life. 2 The gates of righteousness.

THere are certain helps to an holy life, which are as the very Gates and
doors of righteousness: they lead or open fully upon the way everlasting,
come and see: make entrance and know it, these are they;

1 To redeem the time, a precious 1 Redemption of time.
commodity esteemed so by the wise merchant. Ephesians. 5. 16. sometimes thou must
buy it out: 1 Cor. 7 35 2 Timothy 2 4.
from thy sinful works ever more, from thy recreations and pleasurable works
most an end, and from the works of thy calling, both abstaining from the
things that may entangle and interrupt thee, and settling and ordering so thy
outward estate that some time be gained for the service of God sometimes thou
must exchange Never seek to sell it.
time with thy worldly employments as the occasions of prospering thy
spiritual estate are ^ff red, desiring to know, observe and serve the seasons
of Esa. 55. 6. Amos 5. 14
grace, and the opportunities of weldoing, sometimes thou must contract with
the present time for recovery of lost time that is past, always thou must use
it well and fill it with profitable employment: Pro. 6. 6.
this is to seek good: this is to haste to righteousness. This is to provide
for a winter: this is to prepare to serve the Lord without distraction. All ye
of this last age, hear this, for the days are evil.

2 To learn the knowledge of 2 The knowledge of the holy. Ephesians. 5. 15. 17. Pro.
10. 14 Job 11. 12. Esa. 1. 3.
the holy, to understand what the will of the Lord is concerning him. Ephesians 5.
17. This every man must have, and lay up if he would walk as a wise man, else,
a^ he is borne like the wild ass colt; So he may become more brutish then
ox or ass, that thou may thrive in knowledge how to do well: thou must

1 Search the Scriptures daily, musing and meditating upon them Psalm. 1. 2.
that they may dwell richly in thee Col. 3. 16. Which word alone gives light to
our feet Esa. 8. 20. Psalm. 119. Life to our dead h^rts, and power to assist us
to walk.

2 Be swift to hear Iam. 1. 19. not neglecting opportunities, nor careless in
the duty, while thou attendest on the public ministry, especially on the
Lords day, the day which God has Hallowed to thy good, thy market day for thy
soul.

3 In both, be wise for thy self Pro. 9. 12. take hold of those things that
fit thine own particular. For when we hear what we are to do, we shall
find somethings abutt full upon our selves, somethings we are extreme faulty
in, somethings would maruailously encourage us in righteousness, now let thy
wisdom appear in marking those things chiefly, retain them though all the
rest run out.

4 Avoid vain iangling and Pro. 4. 26. Ier. 31. 32.
keep close to profitable knowledge Tit. 3. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 23. 1. Tim. 6. 20.
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eye lids look straight before
thee. Beware of going about, lest thou hear from God, the term of Backslider.

5 Go unto the wise and ask the way to Sion with thy face thitherward. Pro.
15. 12. Ier. 50. 5. Stifle not but propound thy doubts. Gods people are an
inquisitiue people.

6 Pray, teach me thy way O Lord. Psalm. 27. 11. with a special lifting up of
heart, seek this way of him. He is the God which teaches thee to profit, and
leads thee by the way that thou should go. Psalm. 143. 10. Esa. 48. 17. 3
The society of the righteous.


3 To abandon the needless society of wicked and profane persons, and get
into the way and company of good men, that make conscience of their ways; a
rule of special note. Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep the
commandments of my God. Psalm. 119. 115. Pro. 4. 14. Psalm. 1. 1. Rowles of such
whose familiarity thou must eschew are given in 1 Cor. 5. 10. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 1.
2. 4. 5 Pro. 23. 19. 20. 21. be enwrapped in their society, thou shall be
infected with their evil; and then what winding out of their destruction? But
to sort thy self with discreet and sincere Christians, has in it unknown
gain. Pro. 2. 20. their path is as the shining light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect day. Pro. 4. 18.

4 To shun the false and 4 True guides.
take to true guides and rules. These are false guides of living. 1. the
example of the multitude. Exodus 23. entertain Ioshuahs resolution, Josh. 24.
15: 1 Cor. 9. 24.
I and my house will serve the Lord, run as if thou were alone to obtain,
run, though thou run alone. 2. Great and learned men, if thou be a servant
forget not that thou art Christ's freeman. Let no man's humor be thy guide in
religion 1 Cor. 7. 23. 3 Flesh and blood, carnal reason, sense, or carnal
friends are not competent Judges in divine things, with them consult thou not.
Gal. 1. 16. 4 A false faith as the Turks their Alcoran, the Papists, Popes
Decrees. 5. Thy lusts, which have a three fold front, the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eye, the pride of life. 1 Ioh. 2. 16.

These are true guides and rules. 1 Gods word Gal. 6. Psalm. 119. 9. 2 The Holy
example of the Godly Heb. 12. 1. Which will be like that cloud of the Lord to
the travelers in the Wilderness of this world that walk in the day light of
the holy precepts, the way of Gods people is diligently to be sought. Ier. 12.
16. 3 A settled ministry, they a^e Stars in Christ's right hand, they are the
light of the world, the salt of the earth, obedience is charged upon us to
those that watch for our souls, their Directions in the Lord must be followed
Heb. 13. 17. and their holy conversation is a Pattern given of God. Phil. 4 9.

5 To keep the heart withal 5 The guard of the heart.
diligence both in respect of secret hypocrisy and of the beginnings of sin.
Pro. 4. 23. the issues of life come therout, if they be defiled with sin or
tainted with hypocrisy, such must all the streams be of necessity. Eye, ear,
hand, and tongue, shall be overflowed with that polluted spring: abo^^ all
keepings, keep the fountain clear.

6 To repair daily to the 6 Trial of all our deeds.
light of Gods word to see whether our deeds be wrought in God, or no, Ioh. 3.
21. O excellent rule, worthy the Savior, the light of the world.

7 To observe our own defects, 7 The observation of our defects.
and think on, with holy and earnest covering, all those gifts that are more
excellent, 1 Cor. 12. vlt. He that would ever grow and go forwards, (now not
to go forwards, is to go backwards) must observe what is wanting, what is
weak, what is out of the way, what is crooked, what corruptions prevail,
where Satan gets most advantage; that those things may be supplied,
strengthened, straitened, subdued, prevented, and so the whole recovered, and
we pressing on still for the price of our high calling, to the mark, Phil. 3:
12. and 4. 8 9. Is there any thing true, honest, praiseworthy, of good report,
lovely, let that be thought of.

8 To keep alive the affections 8 The preservation of our first love.
of godliness, lest we lose our first love; be daily mortifying thy
corruptions, plowing up thy fallow ground, circumcising thine heart, that thou
may keep it ever low, tender, and thankful in all things.

9 To avoid the snares which 9 The auoidance of snares.
catch most of Adams sons, and fold them in a heap of evils, and weaken, if
not destroy their vigor. Upon the bare discovery of them, your hearts shall
acknowledge it.

1 Meddling with others business, 1 These. 4. 11.

2 Desire of superfluities, as to haste to be rich, 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10. Pro. 23.
4. and 28. 20.

3 The beholding of vanity, Psalm. 119. 37.

4 The sins of the time, which the world accounts but spots, Iam. 1. 27.

5 Carnal confidence, relying upon our wit, memory, praiseworthy parts,
dignity, virtues, and the like.

As if either power to do good, or reason why God should accept us, were found
in any of these carnal things; whereas in this new-created world of regenerate
men, Christ is all, and in all, Col. 3. 11.

6 Carnal fears which mightily beslaue: The heart is no sooner set within, to
the desires after well-doing, but many a fear befalls it: that he shall neu^r
be able to do this duty, that God will not accept him and his work. Such a
man will deride, such friends will frown upon him: there is also a mere
counterfeit of humility, which some delight in, because it favors much their
lazy flesh: press to any duty, and they plead their desires, and their love to
it, and now they wish they could so do, and what grief it is to them, they
fail therein, but they are flesh and blood, they dare not be so confident of
their strength, or, and in very deed, all is to save their labor, and keep
their old sinful course, or at least their former easy pace: yea, these
fears are accompanied with vile mistrust of God, and strange pleaes, that he
is not so good to them, as to give them that measure of grace, that power of
resolution, and thus stick not to charge God foolishly, yet he gives to him
that asks, liberally, and reproacheth no man.

7 The worlds flatteries, commending thee in thy vanity or excess, chiefly if
thou abound in this worlds goods, which will bring thee to two errors of the
wicked.

1 Contempt of reproof: 2 Despising of thine own ways; avoid them, or thou
shall dye.

10 To retain these Christian 10 The light of principles for practice.
paradoxes to be held for practice, and to exclude all false principles, there
is nothing found in the life, which is not according to some principle true or
false in the understanding: expel the false by the light of the true, and then
a single eye will make thy body full of light. Take in therefore these
lightsome truths.

1 A Christian is neither 1 Cor. 11.
borne, nor borne-againe for himself.

2 There is no sin so little, Mat. 5. 19.
as not worthy the avoiding, even as we would be saved.

3 Employment is a greater favor from God, then wealth or high place without
it.

4 The first place in dignity Mat. 9. 34.
over any, is the greatest place of service unto all.

5 To suffer for Christ's sake, Heb. 11. 26
is greater riches, then all worldly wealth.

6 Affliction, yea, death is to Job 36. 21
be chosen before iniquity.

7 Death ought to be provided Mat. 6. 32.
for, before life: Christ's kingdom and righteousness, before the necessaries
of life; yea, this is the way to thrive with a blessing.

8 Every godly endeavor receives Ephesians. 3. 20.
some blessing, and brings forth some fruit, greater then man can hope for.

9 When any storm of Gods wrath arises, it is the only safe way to run to
the place whence the storm comes, even to God for shelter; nature teaches a
man to flee from the tempest.

10 It is ost times good, that it go well with the evil, and ill with the
good in this life.

11 A wicked man never goes Esa. 57. 21.
unpunished, there is no peace to the wicked.

12 None shall ever please Mat. 5. 47. Act. ^6. 24. 2 Cor. 5. 13
Christ, till they appear odd, singular, and strange to the common sort. A
Christian is not right, till he seem to the world to be beside himself,
(...). What singular thing do ye?

13 Spiritual motions may ^e violent, and perpetual.

14 The foundation of all eternal Ier. 31. ^8. 19. 20.
joys, is laid in godly sorrow for sin. Ioh. 16. 20. Mat. 5. 4. Psalm. 126.
5. 6.


15 The unjust death of Godly persons, has more comfort in it, then the jolly
life of wicked men.

16 The righteous lives not, Hab. 2. 4.
where his faith gives him not life:

17 What God can do, that faith can do: to the believing, all things are
possible.

18 A poysonfull curse is prosperity Psalm. 69. 22
in wicked ways.

19 That Is thy good, which does thee good.

20 It is holy wisdom to fear, and not to desire abundance.

21 We should study more to Mat. 26. 29
give an account of our little, then how to make it more: for the improuing of
what we have, is the way to have more given.

22 Sin, and not affliction, argues Gods absence, and hinders us in our
way to heaven.

23 The infection of evil is much worse then the act.

24 It is a madness to run away from punishment, and not from sin.

25 Pride and infidelity, harden Heb. 11. 33. 4.
and make men fearelesse; only faith, truly valiant.

26 All hours are lost, wherein we enjoy not God.

27 We are guilty of all the evil we might have hindered.

28 We must be as well, ready to suffer ill, as to do good.

29 Remember the word of our Savior, it is better to give, then to receive.

30 Folly and wickedness are inseparable companions.

31 A wicked man deserves ill of those he never lived to see.

32 Good is not therefore good, because it prospers, but because it is
commanded. Evil is not therefore evil, because it is punished, but because it
is forbidden.

33 In good ways we cannot be too exact, too zealous, Mediocrity is not the
form of virtue, but conformity to the rule of Gods word, which says it is
good always to be zealous in a good thing; and Iukewarmenesse is a loathsome
temper, Gal. 4. 18. Revel. 3. 18. And Christians should endeavor to abound
more and more.

34 An evil intent always makes the action evil.

Cast out all false principles, such as these.

1 A good meaning makes the action good; nay, then persecutors had bin Saints,
Ioh. 16. 2.

2 Religion is but a policy to keep men in awe; nay* it brings life and
immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1. 10.

3 We may repent time enough when age comme^h; nay, to day if you will hear
his voice, barden not your hearts, Heb. 3. 7.

4 That is good which is profitable; Genesis 37 26. 27.
nay, then Judas counseled well to sell Joseph, and Judas the traitor did well
to sell Christ.

5 That which pleases a man is lawful; nay, to do our pleasure, makes all
duties of devotion, abominable, Esa. 66. 2. 3.

6 Do what ever thou art able; nay, how can I do this wickedness, and sin
against God? Gen* 39. 9.

7 It is lawful to make the Pro. 3. 27.
best of our own; nay, goods in thy hand are others due, when thy ability, and
their necessity meet.

8 Every man for himself, and God for us all; nav, Dives for himself, and the
Devil for him, Luc. 16 19.

9 Thou can do no injury to him that is willing; nay, thy poor brother may
sue to thee carnestly to borrow of thee upon use, yet may thou not be to him
as an Usurer, Exodus 22. 25.

10 Thoughts are free; nay, wash thine heart from wickedness; how long shall
thy evil thoughts lodge within thee? ^er. 4. 14.

11 It is enough to have a good heart to God; nay, thou must glorify him in
thy body, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

12 A young Saint, an old Devil; nay, a young Saint, with Joseph, and a Father
to Pharaoh, in age; a young Saint with Moses, and a God to Pharaoh, ere he dye,
Genesis 37. 2. and 45. 8.

Thus have I opened the gates of righteousness.

. IIII. Of the manner of well-doing.
THe third general concerns 3 The enl^uing qualities of all holy duties.
the manner of well doing, that the good thing we do, may be done well, and
acceptably: these are to be received with all possible observation, for they
do not only apparel all our works of godliness in the sight of men, but
give the inward form, and inliuing quality to the whole body of those duties
in the sight of God, and are the characteristicall differences to distinguish
the godly from the wicked in these works, who may also do many of them for
the matter: that you may not therefore present to God, the carcass of a duty,
without the soul, let all be done in this manner.

In all duties, see

In general, that thou offer up soul and body to God, a whole burnt offering,
and yield thy self unto him, as one alive from the dead; and thy members,
weapons of righteousness to holiness; consecrating thy self as a covenant
servant to righteousness, even as ever thou did, or any man does yield
himself, and his members, as ^eruants to uncleanness, and to inquity unto
iniquity; so shall thou have thy fruit unto holiness, Romans 12. 1. and 6. 13.
19. 22.

In special: Look you do all

1 With uprightness, Psalm. 18. 22. Even with a perfect heart, 1 Chro. 28. 9.
which is expressed,

1 In the sincerity and truth of the heart: this is that unleavened bread,
wherewith we must all our days, keep our Christian Passover, 1 Cor. 5. 8.
The contrary to this, is hypocrisy, and guile of spirit, when men advance a
profession of religion for (...)nall ends, that they might seem only: but God
hates a powerless show; let thy holiness, be holiness of truth. Ephesians. 4.
24.

2 In giving the whole of the heart, without division, entirely cleaving to all
the works of righteousness, without halting, without expostulating.

3 In doing all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

4 In universal obedience To all Gods commandments, not putting any of his
statutes from us, nor hiding our eyes from them. Say not in the words of Lot,
is it not a little one? nor in the words of Naaman the Syrian, only in this,
the Lord be merciful unto me: but without ifs, and ands, reseruations, and
exceptions, give thy self with David, to do all the wills of God, and resolve
Act. 3. 22.
upon the forsaking of all sin.

At all times, in adversity, as well as prosperity.

In all places, obeying absent from their Ministers, as well as present.

In every company, as well as in any company, Phil. 2. 12.

2 With joy and cheerfulness, accounting ourselves happy, when the Lord
opens a door, and gives any strength for holy duties: loving to be his
servants, Esa. 56. 6. Lex voluntarios quaerit, Ambros. in Psalm. 1. Gods people
are all voluntaries, they cast off those foul vices of procrastination and
security.

3 With feruency, not slothful in business, but glowing in spirit, serving
the Lord, Romans 12. 11. doing all we put our hands unto, with all our might,
Eccles. 9. 10. with all diligence, 2 Cor. 8. 7. We must be all zealots, for
cursed is he that does the Lords work negligently, Ier. 48. 10.

4 With fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17. Blessed is the man that fears always, Pro. 28.
14. There is a fear to be expressed in all parts of holy life, and it is that
reverence, tenderness, modesty, and carfulness, should be in all our ways,
fearing Gods presence, who should be ever set before us, be^ring reverence to
the Angels, to Gods Minist^rs; fearing our deceitful hearts, and the off^nce
of the godly, the infection of the wicked, and the ruin of those whom we might
help, fearing lest the day of Christ should come upon us before we are
prepared: and thus working out our salvation with fear and trembling; all
wretchlesnesse, rudeness, rashness, precipitation, conceitednesse and pride
laid aside, with all hardening of the heart in evil; no, no, fear, and depart
from evil.

5 With faith, for what so is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. This takes Gods
will for the warrant of our actions, raises up the heart to believe Gods
assistance, trusts God for the succe^^e, rests on the promise for acceptance,
makes us neglect the scorns and oppositions of the world, keeps us from being
just overmuch conceiting too highly of our selves for what we do, or wicked
over much, in thinking too vilely of Gods work in us, Eccles. 7. This cuts off
all carnal fears, as the fear of men and the superstitious fear of Gods
displeasure for breaking men's traditions: or the commandments of our own
hearts.

6 With simplicity and godly pureness, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and 11. 3. expressed in
these things.

1 A faithful retaining of the pure word of God without mixtures, looking
only thereto for the forms of holiness and happiness; no way lending ear
to false teachers, that would impose more upon us, then God requires: as do
the Papists.

2 An ignorance of the depths of Satan: simple concerning evil, Romans 16. 19.
not skilled in wily distinctions and excuses, to maintain sin.

3 Godly integrity opposed to fleshly wisdom and fraud, which is, when in
plainness of heart we desire to do what God requires, though it be never
so much derided in the world: Ambros. in locum.
without man-pleasing, or respect to our own lucre.

4 The love of holiness, for it self, and the hatred of sin as it is sin.

5 The desire to be what ever we are, in the sight of God, making Calvin in
locum.
his allowance our glory.

7 Preciseness circumspectnesse, accuratenesse, Ephesians. 5. 15. (...) Making
conscience of lesser sins, as well as greater, avoiding the appearance of
evil, and the occasions, as well as the evil it self, observing the
circumstances of time, ^^ace, and persons, in doing duty.

8 Meekness of wisdom, Iam. 3. 13. which consists in these particulars.

1 A calmness of heart, from turbulent and violent passions; out of which
springs gentleness of carriage, so that a man is not easily provoked.

2 A sense of our own vileness, which makes us not wise in our selves, and
to do good in the deep apprehension of our unworthiness to do any service
to God ^r man, and to avoid bit(...) s(...)ifes, and enuyings, Iam. 3.

3 Easiness^ to be entreated, Iam. 3. 17.

4 Corrigiblenesse and teachablenesse.

9 A Conversation in heaven, which is so to be in the world, as to let our
hearts run still upon God, and his kingdom and righteousness: having God in
all our thoughts and ways, and directing all our actions, some way to further
our holiness here, and hope of happiness to come, Phil. 3. 20. Earthly men
may have earthly minds, but heavenly mindedness beseemes Christian men, whose
God, Savior, and happiness, is above.

10 Patient continuance, and perseverance in well-doing.

Abounding in good works, filled with the fruit of all righteousness.

Perfecting holiness, and having our works full before God.

Increasing so, that our last works may be better then our first.

Doing all without weariness, Gal. 69.

Without dismayednesse and faintings, Heb. 12. 12. 13.

Notwithstanding all impediments.

That so we may escape fearful Apostacy, both inward, that our hearts cast
not off the care of godliness, the fear to offend, nor restrain prayer.

Outward, that we relapse not to the violent co^rses of the world, nor live in
gross sin.

Both total, in falling from all godliness; partial, in falling from some
ordinances of God, or to some transgressions.

Such are the general precepts of an holy life.

. V. Of our duty toward God, and first of the knowledge of God.
NOw when thou art rightly qualified by faith and repentance, and have set
foot within the gates of righteousness, and art fully resolved in this holy
manner to do the Lords work; come on, and tread the paths of the highest,
those even and pleasant ways which lead to the assurance of eternal
happiness: For, the work of righteousness is peace, and the effect thereof
Esa. 32. 17.
quietness and assurance for ever.

The particular and express precepts of holy conversation, respect thy
behavior toward God, other men, thy self,

Thy duty to God, is to know Thy duty to God.
him, to worship him aright, both for the inward affections of thy heart: and
for thy outward service.

1 The knowledge of God 1 To know him.
(desired more then burnt offerings) is that which must be in some good measure
found in all the true worshippers of him: and that such a knowledge as natures
light since the fall, reaches not unto, it being rather a sparkle, whereby we
discern that there is a God, then any flaming light, Romans 1. 20. 21.
that is able either to direct us how aright to conceive of him, or to warm
our hearts by lively impressions, that by the same we might be brought to
glorify him as God, and not prove unthankful; worshipping the creature, in
stead of the Creator, Ier. 24. 7. 1 Ioh. 5. 20.
who is blessed for ever. Scripture then does teach this knowledge, and God by
them does give an heart, as Jeremy speaks, an understanding, as S. John
says, To know him that is true: and to know him, that we might worship him.
And concerning this grace, it is required in the Scripture, as ever we mean to
know God, that not alone we know, but also follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.
3. The precepts thereof must direct in both.

1 The Rules for the guiding of our understandings, to know and conceive of God
aright, are these.

1 That we know him by no likeness, nor resemble him to any thing in the
world: he is a spirit, the invisible God: to whom then will thou compare him,
or to whom shall he be like? God forbids images in Churches, houses, and thy
head too; Commandment 2. Deuteronomy. 4. 12. 15.

2 How shall we do then to conceive of him, whom no man ever saw, nor can see,
of whom none may think by resembling him to any thing he does see? the Lord
himself has shown the way, ca^ie, glorious, and able to prepare our hearts
unto him, in any service, wherein we would approach near unto him; a way by
which he made himself known to Moses, Exodus 34. 6. 7. by his glorious titles
and attributes, the excellenci^s and praises of him, that is, I am the
Almighty, which is, which was, which is to come. Therefore in prayer, and all
other his worship, in all thy meditations, fasten thy thoughts upon him, as the
Lord, God, Gracious, Merciful, long-suffering, that pardons iniquity,
transgression, and sin, that will by no means clear the wicked, the most
Holy, Alsufficient, eternal, only wise God, with the like, which shall lift
up thy heart unto him, through the glory that shines in them. By this means
may thou have him in thy mind through the whole day. In the creatures thou
beholdest, inasmuch as these praises may be read plainly in that great book,
If thou will take the benefit of this direction, an help non contemnendum, not
to be despised; there are three ways to gather these glories of the highest,
out of the book of the creature. 1 By way of denia^l, removing from God in our
conceiving of him, what ever argues weakness or wickedness in the creature:
as to know him to be the God that cannot lie, that cannot dye, but is
immortal, that cannot repent, or deny himself. 2 By way of eminency,
ascribing what is good in the creature, to the Creator, by an excellency: as
see we knowledge in men, and he that teaches men knowledge, shall not he
know? is wisdom in men, and is not he most wise? are there any drops of
mercy, truth, or holiness, in the creature? the Ocean is in him, or rather he
is the Ocean. Does the creature live? with him is the well of life. 3 By way of
causing all things; so by the fabric of this world, we know him to be the
Creator; by wonders therein, we understand his eternal power and Godhead; by
gifts bestowed on the creatures, his bounty and goodness, by their order, his
wisdom, the God of order, by their continuance in the same estate to this
day, his unwearied providence.

3 Yet all this is not suffici^nt, we must know him to be that one God, who
is three; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and know God the Father, as the
Father of Jesus Christ, his Son, and as our Father in him, by the holy Ghost.
The first of these, namely, to hold the doctrine of the Trinity, distinguishes
Christians from Jews, Paynims, Turks, Arrians, Antitrinitarians. The second
which the Apostles calls the knowledge 2 Cor. 4. 6.
of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ his Son; distinguishes
true Christians from all Heretical, Papisticall, and formal Christians: which
is called saving knowledge by Divines, and is eternal life in the beginnings
of it, Ioh. 17. 3. Which has a power to transform the 2 Cor. 3. 18 Col 3. 10.
whole man into Gods image, and change him from glory to glory. It is a chief
part of Gods image in us: at which time the veil of ignorance is said to be
rent. And this is, when by the Gospel (we having first seen our misery by
the law, and how vile we are by sin) we understand the love of the Father set
upon us before ever there was a world, choosing us to life, and predestinating
us to the Adoption of children by Jesus Christ, whom he gave to us, and made
him to be to us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; and
also the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son, in taking on him our nature,
and dying for us, to reconcile us to God, and rising again to make us
righteous; and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, who unites us to the Father,
and the Son, and sanctifies, and preserves in the estate of grace, When I
say, we know with persuasion of heart, the love of God in Christ, pardoning
our sins, and receiving us for his sons and daughters: so that by the
spirit of the Son, sent into our hearts, we call him Abba, Father, then know we
him effectually.

And thus must thou conceive of him, and thus conceiving, approach to him when
thou worshipest him, Ephesians. 2. 18. In Christ we have, says Paul, access unto
the Father by one spir^t.

For this we should pray on ^he bended kne^s of our souls every day, that God
would enlarge our hearts to comprehend with all Saints, what is the height,
depth, length, and breadth, and to know the love of God, which passes
knowledge, that we may be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3. 17.
18. 19.

2 After thou can thus conceive of him, then follow on to know the Lord;
acquaint thy self with him, do not endure to spend thy time without God in
the world: this is done,

1 By remembering him in thy ways, and setting him ever before thine eyes,
walking before him, as Abraham, with him, as Henoch and Noah did, Genesis 17. 1.

2 By using thy self to soliloquies and meditations, and to this end
beseeching the Lord to open thine eyes, that thou might see his glory in his
word and works, that thence thou might extract matter of frequent meditation.

3 By seeking after him in the means wherein he uses to reveal himself
familiarly unto men: for we know but in part, and we have the promise, that
then we shall know, if we follow on to know the Lord: now these means are two,
1. Gods Ordinances. Hos. 6. 3.
2. Household, 1 Ioh. 1. 3.

Hitherto of the knowledge of God, the worship of God follows.

. VI. Of the worship of God.
THe worship of God is either 2 To worship him.
inward or outward: the inward is the life and soul of the outward, the acts
whereof, no tyrannical force can hinder, no du^geon can intercept: it is that
whereby we come nearest unto God, and which is most acceptable to him, who is a
spirit.

That thou may know how to set up this worship of the true God in thy heart
and spirit, these rules direct.

1 Thou must with full purpose of heart, cleave unto the Lord, placing all the
affections of thy soul upon him, Act. 11. 23. Josh. 23. 8. and f^llow hard
after God, Psalm. 63. 8. by the help of these feet of thy soul.

1 By believing in him, receiving every part of his word, so as to feel the
power of it in thine heart, of the Commandments to incite thee, of the threats
to t^rrifie and humble thee, of the promises to comfort thee; the promises both
of heavenly and of earthly things: no coming to God but by this believing,
Heb. 11. 6. 2 Chro. 20. 20.

2 By affiance and trust in God, resting on him, and making him our portion,
showed,

1 In committing our selves and our ways to him at all times, Psalm. 37. 5. and
10. 14. And in distress.

2 In rolling our cares and burdens on him, Psalm. 55. 22.

3 In relying upon his aid, not

Trusting to our own hearts, Pro. 3. 5.

Hasting to ill means, Esa. 28. 16.

Fretting at the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 37. 1.

But mark, if thou would have God take the care of thee, commit the keeping
of thy soul to him in well-doing; and then, is not he the faithful Creator? 1
Pet. 4. 1^.

3 By hope in God, which is a patient looking for the performance of good
things to come, which God has promised, and faith believed: expr^ssed in a
quiet and constant waiting upon God, encouraging the heart in him, Lam. 3. 26.
Psalm. 27. 14. Hos. 12. 6. and then do our souls wait, when denying our
selves, we resign up our selves, keep silence to him, abide his leisure,
expect his salvation, and the ways of escape, which he shall offer, without
limiting, tempting, presuming, or staying in second causes.

4 By the love of God above all, testified in honoring him, Mal. 1. 6. Longing
after his presence, both in his ordinances, Ps. 42. 1. and glory to come, 2
Cor. 5. 8

5 By delight in God, Psalm. 37. 4. which has in it,

1 A sweetness in the meditation of his mercies and providence, Psalm. 104. 34.

2 A joyful entertainment of all passages of his love, especially in the use
of his ordinances, Cant. 1. 2. As being the very kisses of his mouth, whose
love is better then wine.

3 A spiritual replenishing and satiating, arising from the sense of his love
and allowance, in which the heart of the Christian rests, when all others
disallow. As a child thinks it enough if the father commends him, and cares
not then for others dislike or cheek, Psalm. 63 5.

4 The extolling and commending of his praises and mighty acts, by discourse,
and by singing of Psalms, Psalm. 105. 1. 2

5 A glorying in him, 1 Cor. 1. 31. The height of this grace, when the soul
can climb so high above all inferior things and delights, as to make her
boast in the Lord all the day, Psalm. 34. 1. 2.

6 By the fear of God, which Timor Cu^t^s. Culpae.
is twofold, 1 the fear reuerentiall, whereby we bear awful regard to his
name, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. his judgments and justice, Psalm. 90. 11. his goodness,
Hos. 3. 5. his word, Esa. 66. 2. his mighty and marvelous acts, Reu. 15. 3. 4.
Ier. 5. 22. his majesty in all his worship, Psalm. 5, 7. 2 the fear to offend,
Pro. 8. 13.

7 By humbling our souls Genesis 32. 1^.
continually in his sight, Mic. 6 8. as less then the least of all his
mercie^, and all the truth he shows to us.

8 By pouring out our hearts before him on all occasions, Psalm. 62. 8. In
prayers, praises, Confessions, and complaints, Psalm 142, 2.

9 By obeying him, the soul ever yielded up to submissiue obedience to what he
shall command.

2 Thou must abhor all Idols, as being the images of jealousy, Ezekiel. 8, 5.
and the abomination of Desolation: oh never set them up in head or heart!

3 The affections of thy soul must be placed on him only, and on no creature
any otherwise, then as thou se^st God in it; and by it may be brought to
cleave to him the more; be it father or mother, brother or sister, wife or
child.

4 The affections of thy soul Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 5.
must be set on him in the full and utmost vigor and force of them. Thou must
love him with all thine heart, with all thy soul, with all thy might.

. VII. Of the service of God in general.
HIth^rto of the inward worship 3 To serve him.
of God, or how thou may aright worship him for the inward affections of thy
heart. The outward worship may be called the service of God, and it is charged
upon thee in Deuteronomy. 10. 20. and in Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve.

Now God is served with thy person, and goods; first, with thy person, and for
direction herein, the Lord in his word has laid down certain rules, some
general, which guide thee in all his service, some special, these pertain to
the several parts of his service, or to a special time of With our persons.
his service.

The general are rules of

Preparation. Execution.
1 For preparation, the approach Where rules of preparation in all service.
to Gods holiness, needs particular addresses; our hearts are naturally auerse
from holy duties, and require a special fitting and preparing, when we come
to the ordinances of God.

Which is done, when before all service of God whatsoever,

1 We commune with our own hearts, and cast out the love of all sin,
washing our hands in innocence, and preserving our uprightness, Psalm. 26. 6.
and 24. 4. and 66. 18. Otherwise our solemn meetings, our prayers, all we do,
will be but a weariness to God, such as he cannot away with, Esa. 1. 13. God
will not regard his service, who will regard iniquity in his heart. But if thus
thou prepare thy heart, thou shall lift up thy face before God, Job 11. 13. 14.
15.

2 We follow David's example, before we take up the duty, say, unto thee, O
Lord, do I lift up my soul. For the corruption of nature, which we always
bear about us, is as a weight pressing us down, and does easily beset us with
vn^hearefulnesse, distractions, security, fashionablenesse, and the like,
underminers of holy affections, Psalm. 25. 1. Heb. 12. 1.

And when before all service Especially in Gods house.
in the public assemblies in Gods house,

1 We look to our timely coming, to be present with the first, flying
thither with hunger and thirst after the means, and resolve on the continuance
there, till the blessing be put upon us by the Minister. Gods people are a
willing people in the day of assembling of his armies in holy beauty, Psalm.
110. 3. Esa. 60. 8. Number. 6. 23. 24. 25. Ezekiel. 46. 10.

2 We encourage and call on others to go with speed to seek the Lord,
provoking them by our own readiness, Zach. 8. 22. Esa. 2. 2. Prophecies that
fore. told of the Christians praise herein. In these two duties, the show is
good, though not to do it for show: in both, thou should secretly grieve
for the neglect and contempt of others, Psalm. 119. 136.

3 We look to our feet when we enter into the house of God, that our souls be
not lifted off from that reverence we should bear to the Lords most holy
presence, either by distractions, or by any pompous and stately shows of pride
in apparel or gate, which does take off the affections from the fear,
wherewith we ought always to serve the Lord, yea, and others affections too:
no, look to both thy feet, Eccles. 5. 1. And let the Lord see, and all others
too, that thou art ready, and come for that purpose, to offer an obedient
heart and ear to God, and not the fools sacrifice, even a service, which they
think must please God, though they obey him not; yea must buy at Gods hands a
liberty to disobey, a pardon to live as they lust.

2 For the execution, or right discharge of all duties of Rules of right
execution.
service to God, we must remember,

1 To do all to God only: Of all service.
Angell-worshippers hold not the he^d, Mat. 4. 10. Col. 2. 18.

2 To do all in the name of Christ, seeing our daily fra^^ties, and the evil
of our best works, and therefore relying on the merits and intercession of
Christ, to cover them, and present them to God, perfumed with the incense of
his obedience, Col. 3. 17.

3 To seek the face of God and his strength, resting in his approbation, and
taking heed we do not our service for the praise of men, or for fashionsake,
Psalm. 105. 4. Mat. 6. 1. 2.

4 To worship him with his own worship, according to the pattern received
from God, not according to the custom of the time, or traditions of men, Heb.
8. 5. 2 Chro. 17. 4. Mat. 15.

5 Not to worship him in an Image, Commandment 2. This evil was noted to
remain in the time of Manassehs reformation: the people did sacrifice still in
the high places, though to the Lord their God only, 2 Chro. 33. 17. Especially
in his house.


And in discharge of all service to God in his house, add these rules to the
former, that thou may know how to behave thy self in the house of God.

1 Let all be done with one consent, be of one heart, one mind, one judgment.
Zeph. 3. 11. saying, The Lord will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in
his paths, with one mind, and one mouth, gloryfying God. Romans 15. 6. Esa. 2. 2.

2 Let a special zeal and ferue^cy of spirit fire thee, and as it were eat
thee up, expressed, not so much in show of outward gesture, as in love to that
place, and the ordinances of God in the public: And an hearty and ready
performance of all duties there, with more then ordinary attention and
intention of heart and mind. be there as a green Olive tree, flourishing in
the affections of godliness, glorying in this mercy of God more then any worldly
Doeg does in his wealth, and flourishing in Kings favors and courts. Psalm. 69.
9. Psalm. 26. ^ and 52. 8. 9. And further watching against all decayings of
these joys in Gods Ordinances, that we may be fat in our old age and well
liking: to show that the Lord is upright, and that there is no unrighteousness
in him. Psalm. 92: 13. 14. 15.

These are the Rules of preparation and execution of Gods outward worship in
the whole: The several parts are such as follow.

. VIII. The first, the hearing of the word read and preached.
THe Precepts that guide us Of hearing the word.
herein, respect us, before, in, after hearing.

Before hearing.

1 We must lay aside these sins, malice, guile, or deceit in our dealings
with men, hypocrisies or guile of spirit in our duties to God, envy and
euil-speakings, as backebiting, judging, grudging, complaining, slandering,
with all bitterness of speech: yea, all maliciousness and all guile, as the
Apostle Peter exhorts. 1. Pet. (...).
2. 1. and the Apostle James more generally, All filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness. Iam. 1. 21. These corruptions of heart and life must be
mortified, if ever we would thrive by the word, and all of them: for a little
leaven will sour the whole lump, a small root of them will much infect.

2 We must seek meekness and lowliness, meekness to calm our hearts
from waiwardnesse, passions, and perturbations; and humility, that we be not
wise in our own eyes, and conceited of our gifts or abilities, but set our
selves down like scholars, at the feet of God, to receive of his words, Iam.
1. 21. Deuteronomy. 33. 3. 1 Cor. 3. 18.

3 We must be like children in our affections to the word, to love it, and
long for it, delight in it, and have our hearts set on i^ as affectionately, as
children do naturally thirst after the Breast, 1 Pet. 2. 2. esteeming it as our
appointed food, as the honey, or the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10. Job 23. 12.
renewing daily these our affections, so shall we grow by it, as by sincere milk.

4 Prayer is required for our selves, looking to the Lord that teaches to
profit, Psa. 25. 1 Cor. 3. 6. 7. Es^* 48. 17. and for the Minister, Col 4. 3.

5 Knowledge of the Catechism, that we understand the doctrine of the
beginnings of Christ, without which we shall be ever but dull of hearing, Heb.
5. 11. 12. with 6. 1.

6 Resolution to obey in all things that are spoken to us of God, Act. 10. 33.
To hear all his words, not putting any of his statutes from us* though
contrary to our reason, profit, credit, and the like. The contrary was found in
Iohanan and his confederates, who promised all this to Jeremy, but secretly
resolved to try what the will of God was, and to obey no further then it agreed
to their wills, Ier. 42 and 43.

In hearing, there is required;

1 Attention of the ea^e. bowed and inclined to hear, Esa. 55. 3.

Of the eye, if it may help affection, as it does, Luke 4. 28.

Of the whole body, as Mary* Luke 10. 39. Constantine the great, would stand
and hear, though he were admonished of his Nobles, not to do it.

Such a composure or posture of body, as may free from distraction, express
reverence, and help affection, is required: which will easily be framed, ^f we
mark the rules following; namely,

2 To hear as in Gods presence, Act. 10. 33.

3 To hear as the word of the living God, not as the word of a mortal man: it
then works effectually, when it is thus mixed with faith, 1 These. 2. 13. Hab.
4. 2.

4 Prayer, Oh thou that dwell in the gardens, the Companions hear thy
voice, cause me to hear it, Cant. 8. 13.

5 Intention of the mind, the thoughts not rouing, and the understanding
busied.

6 Retention of the memory, observing that rule, to be wise for himself, Pro.
9. 12. and 23. 19. He that so does, has a good, if not a great memory.

After hearing.

1 Meditation and rumination, in which work, three things are essential, that
we try the spirits, proving all things, and holding fast that which is good, 1
Ioh. 4 1. 1 These. 5. 21. And that we compare it and our selves together, Psalm.
119. 59. I have considered my ways, and turned my self unto thy testimonies;
and lastly, that we observe how gracious the Lord is in his ordinances, what
word soever he is pleased to sweeten to us with the taste of his special
goodness, to note that chiefly, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Psalm. 34. 6. 8.

2 The treasuring it up for practice upon all occasions, Psalm. 119. 1^. Thou
must presently set upon the doing of what thou have heard, and retain it not
for that day, but for ever. Which is easily done, if we turn it into action,
as Mat. 7. 24. else we deceive our selves, Iam. 1. 22.

. IX. The second part of Gods worship: viz. the receiving of the Sacrament of
Christ's Body and Blood.
THis holy ordinance of Of receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Christ, instituted in memory of his death and passion for our sins, does
present the grace and mercy of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus, to the
^ast and sight of the believer: of which we may say, Oh come, taste and see how
gracoius the Lord is. Near is our approach to the Lord of glory, when we see,
handle, taste him, when we are made one with him, when he lives in us. Who is
sufficient or meet for these things? Yet who would not his part and lot should
be in this business? if thy question be, what lets me to be part ker of
the Lords Table? I answer, Thou, and all other Christians baptized, that are
come to years of discretion, may, and must often, (even as often as the laudable
custom of the Church in which they live, requires) communicate at this
heavenly banquet and feast of fat things. To all such our Savior says, Take,
Eat, etc. And nothing hinders but thou ma^st with comfort draw nigh to this
ordinance, if thou follow the rules given, to make thee a worthy Communicant.

They concern thy preparation, and use thereof.

1 For preparation, four things are to be looked unto by The preparation.
him that would come and receive to his comfort.

1 His knowledge of the doctrine of salvation by Christ.

Of the nature and use of this Sacrament, that his heart be not through
ignorance, poisoned with superstition, or contempt, 1 Cor. 11. 23. Sacraments
are seals of the righteousness of faith, Rom 4. 11. It is then of absolute
necessity to be known, what this righteousness of faith is: it is the way of
making sinners righteous before God, by the righteousness of Christ the Son of
God, imputed to us of God, and received by believing of us; even the
righteousness of Christ, who being become man, wrought our redemption by his
blood, and was made sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him. And thus we should be justified, not by the works of righteousness which
we have done.

Unless this be known and believed, in vain shall we come to this ordinance,
where the seal is annexed to this, and no other Covenant.

On the other side, the nature and use of this Sacrament must be known. viz.
that it is given on Gods part as a sign, memorial, seal, and means, to
convey Christ and all the benefits of his death, obedience and blood shedding,
to the believer: and that it is on our parts, a solemn renewing of our
Covenant with God, and of our entire association to the fellowship of the
Saints.

2 The practice of the duty of examination: a reuiew of heart and ways, to
find out our sins, and to judge our selves for them, that we may come with
true humiliation, and may seek particularly the support of Gods ordinances
under our particular sins, both the assurance of his love in forgiving them,
and the increase of strength against them, 1 Cor. 11. 28. 31.

3 The forgiving of others that have trespassed us; in all things, for any
matter of revenge, malice, or secret grudge; a leaven that swells the heart, and
sowres the sacrifice, and makes it distasteful to the Almighty, 1 Cor. 5. 7.
8. And here we are bound to seek reconciliation, and offer agreement, Mat. 5.
23. 24. 25. 26.

4 His hunger and thirst after the mercy of God, and the grace of Christ there
offered to be exhibited, and assured to us. Esa. 55. 1. 3. Mat. 5. 6.

2 For the use of this Sacrament: to take, to eat, and to drink the bread and
wine, Mat. 26. 26. but also,

1 By faith to eat and drink Christ's body and blood, tendered verily and
indeed in the words of promise, This is my Body which Ioh. 6. 35.
is broken for you, and this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed
for you: unto which promise thou liftest up the hand, and openest the mouth of
thy soul, namely, a lively faith, and thus feedest on his Body and Blood
suffering on the Cross for thy sins. Thy faith must discern the Lords body,
that thou become not guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord: esteem not of
that bread, and that Cup, as of ordinary bread and wine, but as Sacramental:
so that thou believe the presence of Christ, and that God does as effectually
give Christ to the soul of the believer, as the Minister gives Bread and Wine
to his body, and exalting thy faith, thou must believe he is given to thee
also: neither does God delude thee, 1 Cor. 11. 29.

2 By feeling remembrance of thy particular sins which by examination were
found most burdensome and prevailing, to ^ate this true Paschall Lamb with the
sour herbs of godly sorrow, Exodus 12. 8.

3 By the effectual remembrance of the death of the Lord Jesus, which ought to
be showed forth by this action, till his coming again, with thanksgiving
recording his grievous sufferings for us; the breaking of the bread, and
pouring out of the wine does represent this, Luc. 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 26.

4 By love to Gods people and hearty communion with them, as being one bread,
and one body; for they all are partakers of one bread, and have all drunk into
one spirit, 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17. and 12. 12. 13.

And after Communicating, we must manifest the virtue is in Christ's body and
blood to nourish and cheer us to life eternal.

1 By keeping the feast in the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth,
avoiding all our days, all malice, wickedness and hypocrisy and society of
scandalous brethren, as leaven that swells and sowres all our actions and
virtues before God and men. 1 Cor. 5. 8.

2 By fleeing Idolatry, the society of Idolaters and Idolatrous service. 1 Cor.
10. 14, 16, 17.

X. The third: Baptism, where rules for the use thereof.
Baptism is the washing of regeneration. Of Baptism.
Tit. 3. 5. the Sacrament of our new birth which is not to be reiterated, or
often received as that other, but once only: as it suffices to life, to be often
fed, but once borne Yet the virtue and use of Baptism is of force to our lives
and: speaking therefore to men already initiated by Baptism, the rules of
direction respect

ours and our own Baptism.

Ours, For our children are not unclean, 1. Cor. 7. 14. To whom also the
promise is made to a thousand generations: here our duty is to present them
to the Font:

In due time, testifying thereby our high esteem of Gods mercy to our seed,
and our earnest desire to have his covenant scaled to them, lest the Lord
should strike us as he did Moses for a like neglect, Exodus 4. 24. 25. 26.

With faith in Gods covenant, which is, that he will be our God, and the God
of our seed, with thankfulness, accounting the benefit of this admission
greater, then if a king had adopted our child heir apparent.

Our own Baptism; which we are to make use of, all our life long, both as
Gods se^le, as our vow.

1. As i^ is g^^^n of God* by the ou^ (...) washing of the Minister, in the
name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, to signify as by sign; to assure,
as by seal, to convey, as by instrument, Christ Jesus and all benefits
spiritual with him: such as are

1 Receiving into Covenant with the Father, Son and holy Ghost, and adoption,
as son and daughter into his household and family, Gal. 3. 27.

2 Ingrafting into Christ and communion with him, as a member of his body, Romans
6. 5.

3 Deliverance from the seas of Gods wrath, 1 Pet 3. 17. 18. Mat. 3. 7.

4 The imputation of Christ's righteousness, and remission of sins, Ephesians. 5.
26. 1. Ioh. 1. 7. Gal. 3. 27.

5 Regeneration Tit. 3. 5. which has two parts,

mortification Romans 6. 3. 4. vi^ification Romans 6. 4. 5. of both Col. 2. 13.

6 Communion with all Saints, 1 Cor. 12. 15.

7 The resurrection of our bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 29. Romans 6. 8.

Now thus we must make use of it in diverse cases, as in case,

1 Of doubting of forgiveness of sins and of salvation, behold, baptism
saves, that is, effectually assures salvation, it saves as a figure: now we
offend not in trusting to Gods promises made in his word and figured and sealed
in baptism, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Reason then, has not God provided the Arc of
baptism to preserve me from the seas of his wrath? Again, has he not
cleansed away my sins by his sons blood, and presented this unto me in
baptism? The very for me of baptism shows, that therein the Lord gives the
Christian right and title to himself: here also remember, that the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost are one in covenant making, and in working thy salvation.

2 Of doubting of perseverance and of our resurrection. For if Christ be raised
in us, he can die no more in himself or in us, Romans 6. 9. 10. Gal. 3. 27. 28.
Mark. 16. 16. 1. Cor. 15. 29. Yea, all the holiness and happiness of a
Christian is sealed by three, 1 Ioh. 5 7.

3 Of oppositions: for in baptism thou have put on Christ who is a covert from
the storm, Esa. 4. 5.

4 Of temptation to sin: for debate it thus,

I have the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, named on me, shall not I
walk worthy and answerable to this dignity?

My baptism is the baptism of repentance, and do I yet live in sin? Act.
13. 14. Matt. 3. 11.

I was baptized into Christ's death and resurrection, and therein assured of
the virtue of both to kill sin in me and quicken me to holiness, shall I not
believe the operation of God in that Sacrament, Col. 2. 12. If I be dead to
sin, can I live any longer therein: if alive to God, how is it I want life in
the work of God? Are my corruptions preuayling, and shall I not seek the
strength and life of Christ? Romans 6. 1. 3. In thy security thou could say
with the Church in the Canticles, chapter 5. v. 3. I have put off my coat, how
shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Now much
more take up this saying, I have put on the Lord Christ, how should I put him
off. I am washed in his most precious blood, and shall I now defile my self? I
have put on the robe of his righteousness, it is now no time to uncover my
nakedness and to take to the rotten rags of the old man, Romans 13. 14. I will
never more make provision to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

5 Of temptation to presumption and security, in rest^^g upon the outward
washing: say with thy self, am I not taught that baptism^ which saves, is not
the washing away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience, 1 Pet. 3. 21. It is the bapti^me of repentance, the washing of the
new birth, which new birth is by water, and the sanctifying of the holy Ghost
through the word, Ioh. 3. 3. Ephesians. 5. 26. And if we bring not forth fruits
worthy amendment, God will rather take of these stones and raise up children
unto Abraham, then own a viperous generation, Matt. 3. 8. The baptism of the
Minister is little auayleable where Christ's baptism is not received, who
baptizeth with the holy Ghost and with fire. Truth, he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not, though he be baptized,
as was Simon Magus also, shall be damned, Marc. 16. 16.

2 Again, we are to make use of our baptism as it is a vow and promise on our
parts, and a dedication of our souls and bodies there to the worship and
service of that one God, who is the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
renouncing all others, now let this vow and profession of thine teach thee,

1 To abandon all impenitency and unbelief, lest thou become a
Couenant-breaker with God, one that make void the death of Christ, one that
crucifiest him afresh, one that sinnest against the spirit of grace, that
grieuest that holy spirit, disgracest the family, Gospel, and name of God, and
depriuest thy self of that salvation set forth by the Father, wrought by the
Son, applied by the holy Ghost, assured by all three to thee in thy baptism,
had thou looked to the condition, and not put a bar to such surpassing
mercy.

2 To fight against the flesh, the devil, and the world thereby remembering
whose thou art, and under whom thou warrest.

3 To acknowledge the communion of Saints, and know that thou art by baptism
bound to preserve brotherly love with them, as with the members of the body, as
with sons of the same father, and servants of the same lord, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
Ephesians. 4. 3 4. 5. No divisions should ar^se, 1 Cor. 1. 13. All names of sects
should be abolished; we should deuote our selves to no man's rule, were we
baptized into the name of Paul. Whose servants soever we are, we are Christ's
freemen, and whose freemen soever, we are Christ's servants.

4 To worship him in unity, and unity in Trinity, drawing near to the Father,
in the Son, by the holy Ghost, giving the distinct glory to each person; the
Father that elected and loved, the Son that redeemed, the holy Ghost that
sanctified us. The form of baptism requires this.

. XI. The fourth, Prayer.
THis rightly performed is Of prayer.
the soul of the soul, because it causes it to live in God: the exercise of
all the graces of the spirit at once; as faith, hope, love, fear to offend,
vprightnes of heart, delight in God, and the like, the Christians armou^; the
incense acceptable to God, the very key of heaven. In this service of the
living God, these special rules must be heeded,

1 Thou must pray with thy understanding, that it may not be said to thee, thou
know not what thou ask. It is the prime thing to be looked unto, that thy
understanding be not unfruitful: for it is not the tumbling over a few
words, without regard of the sense in them, and knowledge of the thing prayed
for, that is of any moment, but the pouring out of the soul in those words
which alone gives being to our prayers, 1 Samuel 1. 15. Psa. 142. 2. Lift up thy
heart with thy hands, Lam. 3. 41.

2 Pray with pure heart and hands, 1 Timothy 2. 8. The purity of the heart gives
purity to the hands, both are pure in prayer when they are lifted up.

1 Without double mindedness, hypocrisy or guile of spirit, the soul not
lifted up to vanity, Psalm. 24. 4. nor the heart set upon the love of any sin;
purify your hearts, ye double minded, and then draw nigh to God, and he will
draw nigh to you. Iam. 4. 8. But if thou were David himself, to whom God gave
his sure mercies, if thou regard iniquity in thine heart, the Lord will not
hear thy prayer, Psalm. 66. 18.

2 Without wrath, for if we forgive not, neither will our Father in heaven
forgive us, Mat. 6. 14. 15.

3 Without doubting, Iam. 1. 5. Ask and waver not.

3 Pray with feeling and feruency: (...).
how prevailing is the prayer of a righteous man? it is as an arrow shot home
to the mark, Iam. 5. 16. A speeding prayer, a laboring and working prayer.

4 Pray in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. Set thy delight on the Almighty, so cannot
any hypocrite, Job 27. 10. and cry Abba Father, by the spirit of adoption, Gal.
4. 5. with childelike affections and confidence.

5 Pray at all times, pray in prosperity, in adversity, pray every day, pray
and restrain not prayer before God: why should thou cast off his fear?
continuing instant, Col. 4. 2. Job 27. 10. The rather since our Lord says that
this faith he shall scarce find when he comes to judgment, Phil. 4. 7. Luk
^8. 8. in no thing be careful, but in all things tell to the Lord thy requests.

6 Pray only in the name of Christ, Ioh. 14. 13. and in Ioh. 16. 23. 24. We
are not only commanded to ask in his name, but chidden for our slownesse to
ask, seeing we have the Son of God our spokesman.

7 Pray all manner of prayer, complaints, confessions, supplication, petition,
thanksgiuings, and remember always giving of thanks in all thy requests Phil.
4. 7. 1 Timothy 2. 1.

8 Pray for all sorts of men, especially for all in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1.

9 Avoid vain repetitions: God is in heaven, thou art in earth, therefore let
thy words be few. Mat 6. 7. Eccles. 5. 2. Only see they be the true voice of
the heart, and they are not long if thy desire and feeling give them life, and
they are long though never so short if this be wanting, beware of length in
prayer to be seen of men, approve thy self to thy father that sees in secret.

I close up these directions with the saying of Ambrose in his book D^ Cain et
Abel lib. 2. c. 6.

Si tanquam pubescens adol^scat fides, qua defectum se^escentis devotionis
ableget and spiritu f^r^eat, and congrua distinction^ teneatur ^ensura
legitimae diuisionis and assiduitas commendet gratiam, tunc fit illud pingue
and tanquam adipale precationis genus, de qu^ dicit scriptura, impinguasti in
oleo caput meum Sicut n^agni multo lacte pinguescunt, and sicut oues been
pastae adipe ^^ent, ita Apostolico succo past^ fidelium pingu^scit oration,
horum si desit aliquid qua supra diximus, sacrificium non probatur,

If faith grow vigorous as coming to ripe age, so that it banish the defect of
withering devotion, and wax hot in spirit, and the measure of a lawful
division be held by a congruous distinction, and assidiuity commend the grace
of it: then that wel-liking and as it were fatty kind of praying is made, of
which the Scripture says thou have anointed mine head with oil. For like as
the Lambs grow fat with much milk and as sheep well-fed shine with fatness,
even so batteneth the prayer of believers, fedd with Apostolic juice. If ought
of these forespoken bewanting, the sacrifice is not allowed.

. XII. The fifth: feasting, or solemn Offeasting
Thanksgiving.
THis duty is performed aright if we follow these three essential directions.

1 Our feasting must be with praise to God, upon the recording of some favor
and benefit or deliverance, rejoicing in the work that he has done,
considering the works of his hands. Psa. 119. 24.

2 It must be with liberality to to the poor: that their loins may bless us
and their cry drown not the voice of our singing; Nay that the poor may taste
of our goods whereby their heart may be brought to the love and service of so
gracious a God that delights in the prosperity of his servants, and their
penury may be relieved. Hest. 9 22

3 Observe a rest from labors, else cannot our hearts be lifed up with that
spiritual joy and freedom from distractions as beseems so Angelical a
work. Rest take not for Idleness: they are Idle whom the painfulness of
action causes to avoid labors whereunto God and nature binds them, they rest
which either cease from their work when they have brought it to perfection, or
else give over a mean labor because a worthier and better is to be
undertaken. God has created nothing to be idle, or ill employed.

. XIII. The Sixth, Fasting.
THe next duty is religious Of Fasting.*
fasting: What this is; our age knows not almost to fast, the poor either by
their own Idleness, or by the rich men^ unmercifulness are compelled: to
fast religiously is our of use with poor and rich. Our Savior often styled
the Jews, this evil and adulterous generation, sure now would he add
concerning us, this evil, adulterous, drunken and gluttonous generation. We
feast often, but not to God; we fast never but when riot first has assubiected
us to the prescript of the Physician. Thus it is come to pass that first we
need some direct proof of the necessity, and large Encomium, of the
profitable use of fasting, before we gave directions for the right manner of
performance. The former is not my particular aim, yet receive this in brief.

1 That Christians owe this as a duty Matthew. 6. 16. Mat. 9. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 5.

2 And this duty is then to be performed, when

1 We undertake war, 2 Chro. 20. 3. 4. the example of Iehoshaphat:

2 Or eminent judgments are begun or ready to fall on us 1 Samuel 7. 6. 2 Samuel
12. 1 Chro. 21. 16. 1 Samuel 31. vlt. be they public or private.

3 Or greiuous sins are scand^lously committed Lev. 23 28. Whether our own
or the sins of-the times. Ezra. 10. 6 1 Samuel 7. 6.

4 Or the Afflictions of Gods people by enemies are upon them or decreed
against them. Neh. 1. 4. Hest. 4.

5 Or the accomplishment of some remarkable promise is expected to be
fulfilled to the Church Dan. 9. 1.

6 Or judgments are threatened by Gods Ministers according to a wise parallel
of neuerfailing truth in Scripture, and ruine-threatning sins in a
commonwealth. Ion. 3. 5. 1 King. 21.

7 Or some are designed to some great functions in Church or commonwealth Act.
13. 4.

8 Or in case of spiritual desertions, when the bridegroom is gone, then is it
time to mourn and fast in those days. Matthew. 9. 14.

These are the seasons of this duty, when the Lord calls to weeping, and to
mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. Let not that be
verified any longer upon us, that it should be said, and In that day behold joy
and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking
wine; let us eat and drink, to morrow we shall dye: then we may fear lest
that follow in the event, which follows in the Prophecy; And it was revealed
is mine ears by the Lord of hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged
from you till you dye, says the Lord God of hosts. Esa. 22. 13. 14.

3 Now for the praise of this holy Action, the saying of Ambrose shall suffice,
in his book De Helia et Ieiunio. c. 8.

Ieiunium continentiae magisterium est, pudicitiae discipli^a, humilitas m^ntis
castigatio carnis, forma sobrietatis, norma virtutis, purificatio anim^,
miserationis expensa, lenitatis institutio, charitatis illecebra, senilis
gratia, custodi^ i^^uentutis: Ieiunium et alleuamentum infirmitatis, alimentum
salutis.

Fasting is the chief rule of continence, the discipline of shamefastness,
the lowliness of the mind, the chastising of the flesh, the form of
sobriety, the square of virtue, the purifying of the soul, the cost of
(...)passion, the instruction of gentleness, the allurement of charity, the
grace of age, the custody of youth, the lightening of infirmity, the food of
health.

But rules for the right discharge of this work is that agrees to my purpose,
and here all shall be clear if this distinction be premised.

A fast religious is either public or private, the public is that which is
appointed by the civil Magistrate and by the Church on great, weighty and
public occasions and observed by many families assembling in one or many
congregations: we have no warrant for such assemblies but with the leave and
command of our governors. Joel 3. 7. 8. 2 Chro. 20. 3. the private is such as
is taken on right grounds moving thereto either by one man alone, or by a
private family, Hest. 4. 16. Mat. 6. 17. 18. for private fasts to be kept by
more families of Christians, Scripture knows not, nor allows: If our
governors see not the occasions, or hid their eyes from the necessity of the
duty when God calls for it, private men and families apart may mourn, and
mourn for this judgment in the midst of judgments, and if God call them at
any time that by virtue of their places they may speak, they ought modestly to
intimate the necessity, humbly crave the proclaiming of it, freely rebuke the
^ayling. Be not less careful but better advised to take up this duty as God
commands.

And for religious fasting, be it Public or private, be it thus ordered,

1 Let there be abstinence from all the necessaries; much more, delights of
this life for a ^ay at the le^st, as from food, and sleep 2 Samuel 12. 16. 20.
Ornaments Exodus 34. 4. 5. Matrimonial benevolence ^ Cor. 7. 5. Joel. 2. 16. and
works of our calling that it be a Sabbath for rest Lev. 23. 32. delights of
life Dan. 10. 3. recreations. Esa. 58. and works of gain, in all these use
such abstinence as may afflict the body, Lev. 23. 30. but yet with these two
caueats:

1 That the flesh be tamed by our abstinence, not killed or disabled for God^^
service.

2 That we do not these to be seen of men, Mat. 6 16. 17. in a private fast
eschewing wholly the show, in a public, not performing to the show, or to this
end that we might be seen.

2 Let the time be spent in religious duties, especially in humbling the soul
for sin, Joel 2. 12. 13. Psalm. 69. 10. I humbled my soul with fasting: for
thus religious fasting is differenced from all other, by the end for which we
abstain viz to stir up our zeal in prayer, to confirm our attention in
meditation, to manifest our grief for displeasing God, and to take spiritual
reueng upon our selves for offending.

3 There must be a r^linquishing and breaking off of our former sins,
especially of unrighteousness and oppression of others, Esa 58. 6.

Such is the fast which the Lord has chosen, when thus we cry, he will say,
here I am, his work also shall be as forward as his word, for then shall our
light break forth as the morning, and our health shall sp^ing forth speedily;
our righteousness shall go before us, and the glory of the Lord shall be our
rereward to gather us up.

. XIIII. The seventh, singing of Psalms.
FOr the right manner of singing Of singing of Psalms
of Psalms, the approved mirth of a true Christian, Iam. 5. 13. The Apostle
gives rules in two places to the same effect, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.

1 We must make use to our instruction, and mutual edification of the matter
con^eiued in the Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs we sing; remembering
these songs are Gods statutes, Psalm. 119. 54.

2 We must sing with the heart; 1. both with the understanding, and with the
affections lifted up as well as with the voice, Psalm. 25. 1.

3 With grace in the heart, 1. employing the graces of Gods spirit, as our
faith, hope, delight in Gods love, etc.

4 Our melody must be directed to the Lord and his glory, not used as a civil
employment, but as Gods service, nor as a mean to clear the pipes, and
preserve bodily health, but as a means to clear the soul of obstructiue
humors, and promote our eternal salvation.

. XV. The eight, Reading of Scripture, or meditation.
THis is a duty of no small benefit Of reading or meditation.
to the godly life of a Christian, for by it wordly cares are moderated and
sanctified, worldly pleasures dulled and extinguished, the mind furnished with
pure imaginations, the judgment enlightened and enlarged, the memory relieved,
the heart persuaded, the affections moved, the whole man secretly, yet sweetly,
drawn above the world, above himself; this is part of the benefit comes
hereby: and the comfort is no less, when thou shall know that this is one of
the three duties that make us happy, Reu. 1. 3. Blessed is he that hears and
reads, and keeps the words of this prophecy, and those things that are
written therein.

This duty I express by two words; reading, and meditation, 1. because this
duty pressed in the old Testament, is set down in two words, which signify,
to speak with the mouth, and with the heart; to read and to meditate too,
(...) Ge. 24 63. Psalm. 1. 2. Therefore it is usually translated, to meditate,
Josh. 1. 8. Psalm. 1. 2 2 Because the reading which is the duty, is not a
running* over a Chapter, uttering the words, like a child at school, without
regard of the matter, but this, musing, thinking on, pondering, debating of the
matters therein with our selves. 3 Because many through want of education,
cannot read, yet the duty to meditate, fasteneth upon all.

That this is a duty which all are bound unto, that saying of our Savior,
Search the Scripture, Ioh, 5. 39* does abundantly testify, and that command
laid upon Kings, of daily reading, notwithstanding their great employment of
state, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19. Besides, the holy Scripture is called in the Neh. 8. 9.
word, (...) the reading, because it ought to be read.

About your reading, these things must necessarily be observed.

1 That it be daily, the time such as we can best alotte from our worldly
affairs* but in every day, some time must be redeemed to this work, Deuteronomy. 17.
19. He shall read therein all the days of his life, Josh* 1. 8. Thou shall
meditate therein night and day. Psalm. 1. 2.

2 That we meditate upon it, or ponder what we read, storing our hearts with
good thoughts, lively consolations, and holy precepts by that which we read:
this will help to direct us all the day after, and season the heart in some
good measure, that it be not drowned in the va^ities of the world, and the
sins of the time, Psalm. 1. 2. This is to search and digg^ for wisdom, and
has the promise, Pro. 2. 1. 2. 3. 5. 6. 7.

3 That we wisely apply what we read to our selves, seeing all Scripture is
written for our instruction and comfort, and tends to make the man of God
perfect and furnished to every good work, Rom* 15. 4 We ought to persuade our
selves, that all precepts of duty and good life, are left recorded, to direct
us, not others only, that all the promises are to be believed by us, and we
find the grace or state of life, to which they are made in us. All the threats
denounced against us, as we are found in the transgressions, all reproves
check us for faults escaped, all exhortations and admonitions quicken our
coldness, deadness, drowsinesse, and lukewarmenesse.

4 That we bring a special and renewed delight to this work, else we shall
never hold out, but by fits and snatches at the best, take it up, Psalm. 1. 2.
Blessed is the man, whose delight is in the law of the Lord, to meditate
therein day and night.

5 That we hide in our hearts the Commandments, promises, threats, for
direction and use in our lives, endowed with David's spirit, who said, I have
hid thy commandments in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee, Psalm.
119. 11. that we obseru^ to do, as the command runs in Josh. 1. 8.

. XVI. The ninth, vows and swearing.
A Vow is a religious promise Of a vow.
of things lawful, conducing to the exciting of our hearts to Gods worship and
holy duties, and that for such things as God has promised: made with prayer,
and paid with thanksgiving, such was Jacobs vow, Genesis 28. 20. This is a duty
we owe by verrue of that command, Psa. 76. 11. Vow, and pay unto the Lord your
God. Vows are of two sorts, necessary, or arbitrary, Necessary which every
Christian must promise to the Lord upon all blessings he asks, and in all
suits he makes either expressly, or at least in the devotion of his heart, they
are 1. The sacrifice of himself, foul and body to God, Romans 12. 1. 2. The
renewing of his covenant for reformation of sins, which provoked God, Ier.
50. 5, 3. Contribution to the maintenance of Gods worship. 4. Charity to our
neighbors, Neh. 10. 29. 30. 32. An heart prepared to these four, should ever
be with us, but the arbitrary is the vow we speak of, and here these rules
must be observed.

1 Thy vow must be of things lawful.

2 It must be of things in thine own power, for if thou vow chastity, when
thou know not whether thou have the gift of continency, and whether thou
have power over thine own will, thou off^ndest, 1 Cor. 7. Be not rash with thy
mouth, and be not hasty to utter any thing before God, Eccles. 5. 2.

3 It must be some way conducing to the lawful worship of God, and such as may
help thy repentance, sobriety, chastity, abstinence, meditations, patience,
with the like. Thus it must have a right end, the glory of God, and the
furthering of thy heart to duty.

4 When thou have vowed a vow to God, defer not to pay it, for he has no
pleasure in fools, pay that which thou have vowed; better it is that thou
should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay, Eccles. 5. 4. 5.

Swearing also is a special service of God, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20 Of an Oath.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou
clea^^ and swear by his name. We must use it in this manner.

1 Thou must not swear in thy communication, Mat. 5. Iam. 5. 12. but must be
one that fear anoath, Eccles. 9. 2.

2 Thou art then called to swear, when some necessary truth is in question
concerning Gods glory, thy neighbors safety, and thi^e own good, which may
be determined by thy witness, and cannot otherwise be determined, but by this
testimony of thy conscience, Heb. 6. 16.

3 Then thou must swear by the Lord only, Ier. 4. 2. and 5: 7. how shall I
pardon thee for this, thou have sworn by them that are no gods.

4 In truth* lest thou forswear, for thy oath must not be against thy
conscience, nor must thou wittingly and willingly, sciens, volens, depart from
what thou have lawfully sworn, Psalm. 15. 5. He that swears and d^sappointeth
not, though it be to his own hinderance.

5 In judgment, not rashly, or for a trifle, taking deliberation to weigh the
nature of God, who is called to witness, to whose diuinereuenge thou
subiectest thy self, if thou willingly do deceive, the truth of thy speech,
the weight of an oath, and the matter about which thou swearest, that it be
well-knowne to thee, and not uncertain. The Romans used that most considerate
word, Arbitror, I think, when the Jurors said those Ambros. in Psalm. 119.
things which they knew most certainly: rightly says Ambrose, Nemo been
jurat, qui non potest scire quod jurat, iurare est indicium scientiae,
testimonium conscienciae. He swears not rightly that has not knowledge of
that he swears. Swearing is the disclosing of our knowledge, the testimony of
our conscience.

6 In righteousness, first, in things lawful, about things possible, and with
such words in the form of the oath, as may express due reverence and be no
ways contumelious to God.

Thus of s^ruing the Lord with our persons. With our ^ods follows.

. XVII. Of serving God with our goods.
THis is required of all, Pro To serve him with our goods.
3. 9. Not as the most do, to honor wealth as our God, but as all ought to
do, God with our wealth: so that it is not enough to be good husbands of our
own, and live frugally and honestly without endamaging others; or to give some
contemptible portion to the poor: but we owe part of our substance to
maintain his immediate worship; and of this we have examples from Abel the
righteous, to those godly women that ministered to our Savior of their wealth.

And here is charged upon us:

1 That we build him an house, where his honor may dwell, Exodus 15. 2. a place
for his public service. David makes that mournful complaint, they have burnt
up all the houses of God in the land, Psalm. 74. 8. the Jews commendations of
the ruler was, Master he is worthy for he has built us a Synagogue, Luke 7. 4,
5.

2 That we erect the Schools of the Prophets as our abilities may reach.

3 That we pay the tenth of all we enjoy: you have the law of God for it, and
Abraham's example and Jacobs Genesis 14. 20. 21. 22 28. Heb. 7. 4* 5. 6 7 8. 9. as
if you say, that concerned the Jews only, hard will it be to prove it, but I
answer the free grant of the Church formerly and the obligation into which she
has entered thereby to give God the tenth, binds us all, and cannot be revoked
though before it had been in our own power.

4 That we (if necessity should require) make them that instruct us partakers
of all our goods, Gal. 6. 6. not to a tenth only, but to such a supply, as that
Gods worship may be vpheld: according to this rule is that worthy work of
those who, being destitute of an able and Godly Pastor, thr^ugh either, the
sin of those that give entrance and open the door to them or the sin of
the parties that after their coming is manifest, but went not before hand,
unto judgment, do of their own charges maintain some godly Minister for their
Lecturer with the allowance of authority.

5 For the quality of that we Purum, probum, profanum, suum.
give, it is required that it be the choice and of the best, Mal. 1. 13 that
it be lawful and lawfully gotten, God hates robbery for burnt offerings,
Esa. 61. 8. that it be, that which has not been already consecrated to God,
Pro. 20. 25. and that it be a man's own.

6 For the end given as a Testimony of our affections to God and his service,
and an acknowledgement of his Lordship over all, and as a means to uphold
religion to perpetuity, and therefore directed to this end as near as may be.

Thus of the service we owe to God without limitation to a certain time: we
owe him next a seventh part of our time to be employed in his immediate
service, as the fourth commandment shows.

. XVIII. Of keeping the Lords day.
IN this point Satan has filled On the Lords day.
the hearts of many with poysonfull opinions, gainesaving the Authority and so
rejecting the Duty of this day: we must therefore briefly see to the
establishment of the first, that so none may be able to speak of the charge of
the latter.

The Authority of the Lords day is fully cleared, if two things be proved.

That the fourth commandment is moral,

That the charge of the day from the seventh, to the first day of the week, is
Divine:

1 The Morality of the Commandment is proved thus. It was instituted in
Paradise, before there was sin or need of a Savior or Ceremony and figure
of a Savior Genesis 2. 1. it was given to Adam and his posterity, not to Abraham
and therefore binds Jews and Gentiles: the use of it is moral and has
nothing of Ceremony in it, Psalm. 92 Such it, the singing of Gods mercies
morning and Evening, the meditation of his righteous judgments in rewarding
the godly though afflicted, in cutting off the ungodly in their green
flourishing advancement, in viewing the riches of his house the flourishing of
his servants under the means of grace and in learning to know God in his word
and works. It is given as a sign or document that the Lord does sanctify his
people, if they would try their estates, this is a note whereby they may know
the truth of their Sanctification, the conscionable observance of this
Commandment, Exodus 31. 13. It is put for the whole worship of God and
entirenesse in religion Esa, 56. 2. 6. and the utter euersion of piety is
called the polluting of the Sabbath. Ezekiel. 22. 26. Esa 58. but what need we
go further then the commandment it self. It is one of the laws given
immediately, from God, not mediately by Moses as the Ceremonies were, Deuteronomy. 4.
13. 14. it was written with Gods own finger, in Tables of stone, Exodus 31. 18.
Put into the Arc, Covered with the mercy seat, as containing part of the
sins nailed to Christ's Cross, and therefore not any that served to the
expiation of sin in the shadow: one of the ten words or precepts, which if
you tear out, you can make of the rest but nine, and so give God the lie Deuteronomy
4. 13. Let the words of the precept speak for its authority. The word Zacor is
indefinite, and is in English, to remember, because we are bound for ever to
remember this matter, as says R. Elias, Remember, shows also that this as the
other commandments was engraven in the hearts of the fathers, and that it was
enjoined before and observed, though easily neglected by corruption Exodus 16.
Remember to keep it holy, the end of the commandments is moral. Six days
shall thou labor and if the permission of the six days labor appertain to
us, do not the sanctifying of a seventh. We are no less charged on the Sabbath
to worship, then permitted on the six days to follow our ordinary calling: if
the Commandment be Ceremonial, Idleness is the best Christianity in the six
days, It is the day blessed and sanctified: now so long as we need the means
with the blessing of God on them for our recovery out of sin, and our
continuance in grace, so long we need some special day to which God has
promised a blessing in special. But you will say the Jews Sabbath was
blessed, but where find ye our Sabbath blessed, I Answer, in the Commandment
which says not, the Lord blessed the seventh day, but the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day (be it the seventh or the first day of the week which he shall
give in charge) and hallowed it: in a word, this commandment was given and
charged upon the strangers, and I do remember that a stranger was bound to
observe the Ceremonial law. If any say can you show where this is Commanded or
confirmed in the New Testament. I Answer I can, Mat. 5. 18. One jot or one
title of the law shall not perish and verse 19. Whosoever shall break one of
the least Commandments and shall teach men so, shall be called the least in
the kingdom of heaven, I will close this with the saying, or Irenaeus in his 4
book against heresies, the 31 Chapter: God needed not the love of man, but man
was destitute of the glory of God, of which by no means he could partake, but
by that observance which is owing toward God, for this cause M^ses says
choose life etc: unto which life prepa^ing man, the Lord himself by himself
spak the words of the De^alogue to all like: and therefore they remain with us
in like manner, receiving extent and increase, but not dissolution, by his
coming in the flesh. But the precept of bondage he commanded the people by
Moses apart, fit for their disciplining. These precepts which were given to
them for bondage and a sign, he has girt about with the New Testament of
liberty, but whatso are natural and common to all, he has increased: our
knowledge of God as father, our adoption, our love, our obedience to his word
without turning away the face, abstaining even from the lusts of evil works,
our fear child-like. So our liberty is not given as a cloak of maliciousness
but to the propitiation and manifestation of faith. To plead Christ's coming to
this and to blot out one of the ten commandments is to use Christian liberty,
for a cloak of wickedness, according to this man of God.

2 For the change of the day, The first day of every week is the Christans
Sabbath.
it is easily proved to be divine: it is called in Scripture The Lords day
Rev. 1. 10. as the Holy Supper of the Eucharist is called the Lords Supper. 1
Cor. 11. 20. First institu^ed by the Lord, and in its use r^ferred to the Lord:
for who could change the day of the Sabbath but he that is Lord of the
Sabbath, that is, Christ. Mark. 2. 28. the practice of our Savior and the
Apostles who app^ared on this day, and h^ld their assemblies on this day,
conuinceth it sufficiently to be commanded by our Lord and Savior. Ioh. 20.
19. 26. Act. 2. 1. and 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2. and reasons strong and many may
be given: the Commandment that a seventh part of our time be consecrated to
God is moral, as we have before proved, therefore the Institution of the
Lords day could not be deferr^d one whole week, for the Jews Sabbath in
respect of the determination thereof to the seventh day was abrogated de iure
in Christ's death: if it were deferred to the Apostles ordination, (though then
also it were divine, for they had the spirit of Christ, yet) the Church must
have been ^eft destitute of a Sabbath for a time, and only nine precepts have
stood in force for that space. Again it is not ^asie to cast off what some
Ancients have urged from that place Psalm. 118, 24. This is the day which the
Lord has made, for Christ himself tells us that his resurrection is handled
in that place Matthew. 21. 42. and who should appoint the day of worship in the
New Testament but he that instituted the ordinances of the N^w Testament and
from whom all bles^ing upon all worship is to be expect^d? We will therefore in
obedience to our Saviors institution with the Ancient Church call this day,
the Lords day, the day of bread, the Dies dominicus, dies panis, dies Lucis.
day of light, and wish that never any should reckon of the fourth Commandment
as otherwise then moral.

Thus of the Authority, I pray you hide not your eyes from seeing it, that so
you may receive the Duties of this day.

The duties of the Lords day, are the duties of the Sabbath both for the matter
and manner of performing. Take then your duty thus, it is referred to these two
Considerations,

1 What is charged on us.

2 On whom it is charged.

For the first we are charged to Prepare for the Lords day, or the Sabbath.
Keep it.

For preparation we are bound,

1 To R^member it before it come and to ob^erue it, as the word is used in the
repetition of the Law, Deuteronomy 5. that is both to inform our iudg^ments of the
Authority of the day, and to be mindful in every respect to keep the precept,
as well as any of the other, watching against our natural corruption, which nor
cares to understand, nor minds to obs^rue this Holy rest.

2 To fi^ish our works on the six days as God did his: doing all we have to
do, Genesis 2, 2. For if through our negligence a necessity be contracted of
doing some work on that day, then, though the work must be d^ne, yet thou
offendedst in thy neglig^nt preparation. Thou m^st so contriue thy worldly
affairs, that they trouble thee not with cares, nor call thee to labor, but
on the other side remember so to la^our that the day before the Sabbath may
have less imploym^nt then any other, so thy worldly aff^yres shall no way
incroach upon the bounds of that day which the Lord has (...)t a^art for
himself, nor break into the Lords enclosure.

3 To examine our selves for our sins, especially those of the week, and
repent, washing even our garments and drawing near with the best holiness we
can get, Genesis 35. 2, 3. Psalm. 26. 6. Neh. 13. 22.

We find a five sold trial laid upon the Christian.

He that would observe this duty must keep his Christian watch.

1 Daily, Psalm. 4.

2 Before the Communion, 1 Cor. 11. 28. 31.

3 In time of humiliation public or private, when any heavy judgment is
sought to be removed Lam 3. Zeph, 2.

4 In the time of sickness when we are summoned to leave this world Esa. 38.

5 Weekly before the Sabbath, this here.

4 To reform all household iarres, between husband and wife, Parents and
children, Master and servant, for these hinder our prayers and Leaven our
hearts and our Sacrifices Lev. 19. 3. 1. Pet. 3. 7. 1 Cor. 5. 8. Can God be
worshipped aright in his house when people live not quietly, dutifully and
lovingly in their houses. Domestical grieuances extend their infection to the
pollution of Gods Sabbath.

Do this and thou do prepare.

For the observation of the day, when the Sabbath is come, it must be kept: to
this end, there are charged upon us, three duties; first, rest; secondly, the
sanctification of the day; thirdly, the means of sanctifying the day.

1 The first duty is, that we rest that day; and so there is required a
threefold rest: the rest of the body from works of labor, and worldly
business in our particular callings, and from works of pleasures and
recreations, Esa. 58. 13. the Lord says, that the Sabbath is then consecrated
as holy, when we neither do our own ways, nor find our own pleasure, nor
speak our own words: under those words, the finding our own pleasure, is
condemned, all recreations, though they be honest and lawful at other times:
unless you call those only recreations, of which the Apostle James speaks,
chap. 5. verse 13. If any be merry, let him sing Psalms.

To carry burdens, and buy and sell on the Sabbath, is to keep the Sabbath of
the men of Sabbathum Tyriorum.
Ashdod and Tyrus, Neh. 13. 16. 20. and 10. 31. God forbid it should be heard
of in Israel: it would kindle an unquenchable fire in our gates, and devour
our palaces, Ier. 17. 27.

To rise up to play, and sit Sabbathum aureivituli.
down to eat and drink on that day, were to keep the Sabbath of the golden
Calfe, Exodus 32. 6. Obserua diem Sabbathi, non carnaliter, non iudaicis
delicijs, qui otio abutuntur ad nequitiam: melius enim vtique tota die
foderent, quam tota die saltarent: observe the Sabbath day, not carnally, not
with Jewish delights, who abuse their leisure to naughtiness: for better it
were, no doubt, they would dig the whole day, then dance the whole day. If
you hold it unfit to dig, this holy Father S. Augustine holds it worse to
dance that day.

The rest of the soul is required, Sabbathum satan^.
from the works of sin, which are every way our own works, Heb. 4. 10. and
every way servile, Esa. 56. 2. Evil actions on this day are double iniquities;
such a Sabbath kept, is a Sabbath for the Devil.

The rest of cattle is required, Sabbathum Boum and Asinorum.
that mercy may be showed to the Beast, and all occasions of man's labor may
be cut off for that day.

2 The second duty, is the keeping of the rest, to sanctify the day in works
of holiness: otherwise as bodily exercise profits little, so bodily rest
will profit as little. What, is rest enough? is this a Sabbath or acceptable
day to the Lord, to go fine, and do nothing? Thine Ox and Ass may keep a
Sabbath then as well as thou. Dives himself could afford that this precept
should be moral. Add holiness then to thy rest, and rest that thou may be
bound for the works of sanctity; but what are they?

They are the duties of piety, and the works of mercy.

The duties of piety, are either public or private: the public duties are
these, to hear and preach the Word with application, to sing Psalms, to pray
with the congregation, catechizing, receiving and administering of the
Communion, to be present at the administration of Baptism and discipline; this
latter is a work for the Sabbath, though not for every Sabbath. The private
duties, have either reference to the public, or are severally required: those
that have reference to the public, are duties to be done before we come to
the congregation, or after. Before we come, 1. we ought to read, or hear
the word read, or to meditate on some part of it. Blessed is the man in whose
heart are thy ways, they go from strength to strength, every one of them in
Syon appears before God: in thy walk to Gods house, if thou would be
blessed, Gods ways must be in thy heart. 2. We must pray both for our selves,
and for the Minister, for our selves, our requests should be chiefly for these
three things, 1. for pardon of sins, confessing and bewailing, and laying
aside malice, guiles, hypocrisies, enuyings, evil speakings, and all
superfluity of naughtiness, 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2. Iam. 1. 21. These sins will
dis-sauour and dis-relish the milk of Gods word, and keep us for feeling the
saving power and ability that is therein. 2. For increase of grace. 3. For Gods
blessing on the means. For our Minister, our prayer should be, that he may
come to us in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ. Ephesians. 6.
19. Romans 15. 29. these duties before. After the public assemblies, is
required, 1. examination of our selves, and our charge: for our selves, that
practice of David must be ours; I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto
thy testimonies, Psalm. 119. 59. For our charge, we should whet the doctrine
upon their hearts, and set an edge on the word delivered by familiar
conference, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. True it is, conference with others may be between
teachers and hearers, Mat. 15. 16. and between hearers, whether equals, as in
Mal. 3. 16. or superiors and inferiors, as the King and the Subject, 2 King.
3. 11. and master and servant. 2. The searching of the Scripture upon that we
have heard, not receiving the doctrine of a Paul upon trust. Act. 17. 11. 1
Ioh. 4. 1. 1 These. 5. 21* But proving all things, and holding ^ast that which
is good, especially good for us 3. Pondring it in our hearts, as did the
blessed Virgin, and hiding it there for practice, as did David, Psalm. 119. 11.
4. Prayer alone, or with others, Neh. 13. 22. These duties have reference to
the public. The duties severally required, are four: first, familiar
conference of things pertaining to the kingdom of God, not speaking our own
words that day, Esa. 58. 12. secondly, the catechizing of our families;
thirdly, the singing of Psalms, Psalm. 92. 2. fourthly, meditation on the word,
and the works of God; as upon the works of Creation, of Redemption, of
Providence for his Church, and against the enemies thereof, Ps. 92. and of the
riches of his house, and the flourishing in righteousness of all that are
planted in his coures, Psalm. 92. the latter end, this for piety.

The works of mercy, are either for the public, or the private. In the
public, are collections for the poor, 1 Cor. 16. 1. In private, mercy
respects the temporal life, as the works ab^ut sick persons, alms, the
meating of cattle, the preservation of things, that otherwise would perish: or
it respects the spiritual life, as to teach the ignorant, reclaim the
erroneous, admonish the backward, exhort and persuade the delinquent, rebuke
the offender, comfort the distressed, give counsel to them that need and seek
it, and to reconcile them them that are at variance. These are the works of
sanctity: but when are they done in a Sabbath like manner?

I answer, when they are done,

1 With readiness and delight, loving to be his seruant^, and to do his work
upon his day, Esa. 56. 6. and 58. 13. calling the Sabbath, a delight, the holy
of the Lord honorably; without which God takes himself not honored: this
delight is to be expressed in the public duties; 1. by being there with the
first, Esa. 2. 3. Ezekiel. 46. 10. 2. by avoiding all unseemly gesture,
sleepiness, drowsinesse, and all wandering thoughts: 3. by waiting for the
blessing to be put upon us by the Minister, Numb. 6. 23. 27. But chiefly see
thou solace thy heart in the inward rest, which is the Sabbath Sabbathum
secretum.
of the true Israelite, who worships God in spirit. These call this day,
desiderium dierum, the desire of days.

2 With special observance, not only to the rest, but also to the
sanctification of the day; that no duty be omitted, nor the day any way
profaned, tending our hearts and words.

3 With sincerity, observing it in our dwellings, as well as in Gods house;
within our gates, as well as within his doors, Leu. 23. 3. spending the whole
day, morning and evening, on Gods work, Psalm. 92. 2. Doing all with as much
diligence and earnest labor, for the meat which perishes not; as we do on
the week day for the meat which perishes: and as we look our servants should
not serve us an hour or two in the day, or slightly.

4 With belief, that God will bless that day, and the duties thereof to the
increase of grace, Genesis 2. 2. Ezekiel. 20. 20. and 46. 2. 5. resting on the
promises he has made in Esa. 56. 5. 7. and 58. 14.

The third thing respects the means of sanctifying the Sabbath, and so there
is required,

1 A place to assemble together, Leuit. 19. 30. Psalm. 132. 1. 2. 5.

2 Persons fit for the duties, such as are able and apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
For where vision fails, the people perish, Pro. 29. 18. And prophesying or
preaching, that is, giving the sense, and applying the word for instruction,
correction, comfort, and reproof, is the gift of the spirit, that should be
used in christian assemblies, 1 Cor. 14. 3. 4. 5. 24. 28. What alterations have
been for want of prophesying? see in these places, Judge. 17. 7. 1 Samuel 14. 2
Chro. 15. 3. 2 King. 17. 15. Therefore let us be so far from envying the
increase of their number and gifts, that rather Moses wish be ours: Would God
all the Lords people could prophecy, Numb. 11. 19.

3 The maintenance of both the places and persons.

Thus we see what is charged; on whom it is charged follows.

2 These duties are charged Thou, thy son, and thy daughter.
on all, but chiefly on the Magistrates, and Masters of families, who must nor
only do the duties of the Sabbath themselves, but cause others to observe
them, in respect of all outward conformity; that none within their gates, that
is, within their precincts, jurisdiction, power, habitation, or charge, be
suffered to violate the rest, or profane the day. The example of Nehemiah, is
worthy imitation of all in authority, of which you read Neh. 13. 16. 19. where
we may see especially these two thi^g^, that it belongs to all Governors of
Families, Towns, Cities, and Countries, to provide that the whole day be kept*
and all occasions as near as may be, of the profaning of the day he cut off,
and that the preparation for the Sabbath be not neglected: much less then may
any in place impose such har^ labor, and so extreme on the day before, or the
evening of the Sabbath, as disableth for the duties of that day. Again, that
he offends exceedingly, that having power, reformeth not the abuses of this
day.

Hitherto of our duty to God: our duty to other men follows.

. XIX. Of our duty to all men, as it concerns the right d^sposition of the
heart.
THe order of our conversation Thy duty to man.
to Godward has been showed: now we come to lay line and l^uell to our
hearts and lives, that they may be ordered aright to man ward; without which
God himsel^e r^ckons of all duties of his service, but as imp^ety and vile
hypocrisy; saying of these duties we owe to man, is not this to know me? Ier.
22. 15. 16. And again, pure religion, and undefiled Iam 1. 27
before God and the Father, is this. Such is the absolute necessity of
discharging these duties one to another, that if your hearts devoted to serve
the Lord should frame this question; wherewith shall I come before the Lord,
and how my self before the high God? the Lord himself gives this answer by
his Prophet Micah: He has showed thee O man, what is good; and what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy? M^c. 6. 6. 7.

And here I begin to set the Compass, and lay the Plummet: for what ever we
owe to man, is either carried to all men, or to some certain men, considered
as nearer to God. Such are the regenerate, renewed in Christ after the image of
him that created them, or as further off from God, as wicked men that live in
their sins, and serve sin.

To all men universally considered, as men; the duty we owe, is comprised in
this excellent speech, Do justly, and love mercy. In these two, viz. Justice
and Mercy, the Lord has a bridged them, and taught us how to fadome them.

That thou may do justly, To do justly.
and walk righteously towar^s all men, two things are to be heeded.

1 The disposition of thy heart toward men.

2 The frame of thy conversation with men.

Justice would, that thy heart In respect of the disposition of thy heart.
be thus disposed to all.

1 To love them: naturally our hearts are void of this Phila^thropie, or love
of man: selfeloue has eaten out the love of others, yet this is a main ground
of all holy conuersing with m^n. How often should that precept come to our
minds? Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Observe the words, 1. thy
neighbor must be loved, even every man: for there is, Identitas originis,
vinculum societatis, impressio Dei imaginis. The selfsame original; have we
not all one Father? were not Adam and Eve the ro^ke out of which we were hewn,
and the hole of the pit, out of which we were dug? there is the bond of
society which nature inclines us all unto, and would have kept inviolable, and
there is a spark of Gods own image in all, some true ground of honor and
respect: 2. all therefore thou must love; now love is affectionate, cheerful,
and speedy, and is expressed with meekness, and softness, freed from wrath,
envy, pride, swelling, self-love; it is exercised in holy things* and is
manifested in long-suffering, and all suffering, 1 Cor. 13. 4. 5. 3. thou must
love them as thy self: is he not a kind of otherselfe? As thou would
others should maintain, and as thou thy self wilt, to thy utmost, defend thy
dignity, life, chastity, goods* and good name, wife and possessions, from the
least injury; so must thou resolve with thy self, and by all means fashion
thy heart to tender as dearly every other man's dignity, life, purity, goods,
good name, wife, and possessions, from the least damage, even in the thoughts
of thy heart. The Lord keep this in the imagination of the thought of every
one of our hearts for ever. Labor and work thy heart with all d^ligence to
this thing. This is the sum of the six last Commandments, the work and
labor of true love; the least part whereof may not be denied by any to the
worst of men. Name the man, whom thou may iniure in the least kind, and yet
^e blameless. Little is this duty thought of, even by the godly, and who is it
but thinks he may both do many an injury, and neglect many an office of
love to many men?

The ^uties of the second Table, are the service an ^ debt of love to every
man, which we must daily pay, and yet daily owe, Romans 13. 8.

2 To pray for all men, men of all sorts; not a man whom thou may point out,
and except, heartily desiring their conversion: this good, the poorest may do
for the richest, 1 Timothy 2. 1.

3 To c^st our estates so, that our living in our places, may be inoffensiue
and harmless, 1 Cor. 10. 32. 33. Honest in the sight of all men, and
peaceable without contention with any, if it be possible, Heb. 12. 14. Romans 12.
18. This were to pursue peace, Heb. 12. 14.

4 To cast in our minds what things are true, are venerable, are just, are
pure, are lovely, are of good report, If any thing there be that is virtuous,
if any thing that is praise worthy, to think on those things: to pro^ect how
we may express those things in our conuersing with men, Phil. 4. 8. Here is
good employment for thy thoughts in thy priuacy and lonenesse.

5 To bear reverence and honor to all men in our hearts, without contempt or
despising any, not suffering to lodge in our breasts, thoughts of d^sregard, or
neglect of any, 1 Pet. 2. 17.

. XX. Of the guides that direct the particular frame of righteous conuersing
with men.
In respect of the frame of thy conue^sation.
THe heart thus disposed, is fit now to converse with others that: he would
express righteousness in his conversation with men, must heed these ^ules in
the general, as guides in all particulers.

1 To do to others as he would be done unto, is there any thing which he says
or does to his neighbor of which question is made in his own heart or by
others: propose it then thu^, would I that he should so speak and do to me?
Mat. 7. 12. an admirable rule of just dealing.

2 To give to every man his due, honor to whom honor, fear to whom fear,
custom to whom custom, tribute to whom tribute Romans 13. 7.

3 Every man to submit himself to other, though he never so honorable and the
other never so mean, knowing they are all members of one body Pol^tike* now as
in the body the chei^est member has need of the least, so that the head cannot
say I have no need of thee, and the chiefest cares for the least; so the body
of societies the greatest needs, and the greatest must stoop to do for the
least. And that in the fear of God, that is, even of Conscience to him that
requires it, or, fearing him, who as he has placed thee high^st and that other
lowest, so can, if he please pull thee down to the dung hill, and set the
other in the throne: For promotion comes not from the East, nor west, it is
God that sets up one and pulls down another. Ephesians. 5. 21.

4 Climb not at all, no not into the desires of thy heart, into the throne of
judgment, that thou should take to thee power to retaliate wrongs; remember
him that says vengeance is mine, I will repay. See that none render evil for
evil to any man, but ever follow that which is good both among your selves that
are Godly; yea to all men, thus showing our patience toward all men, 1 These.
5. 15. 14.

. XXI. Of the government of the tongue.
IN particular, righteousness In special the bridling of the tongue.
takes order for the tongue and deeds, and first for thy words set a watch
before the door of thy lips, that no wickedness break thorough the hedge
of thy tenth. Therefore if thou be utterly purposed that thy mouth shall not
transgress, note what David said to God in his prayer, by the word of thy
lips, I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer. Psalm. 17. 3. 4 The word
of his lips for the guidance of the tongue may be cast into these rules.

1 Take not up the name of the Lord thy God in vain: when thou speak of God
or religi^^, his word or works, h^s mer^ies or judgments, let there be an
honorable mention of them, and open thy mouth with all possible reverence,
fearing that great and terrible name, The Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28 58. break not
forth hastily into the discourse of holy things, till thou can see how some
way God may be glorified thereby, a wise man will conceal knowledge.

2 Let thy speech be good to edify withal, such as may minister grace to the
hearers, without corrupt or rotten communication. Avoid filthy speaking,
foolish talking, and iestings. Remember always that of our Savior, that For
every idle word that men shall speak, they must give account thereof at the
day of judgment. Ephesians. 4 29. and 5. 4. Mat. 12 36.

3 Let no guile be found in thy mouth, hate lying lips, and double-hearted
nesse in speech. Psalm. 34 13. Pro. 22. 23.

4 Go not about as a Talebearer. Imponens, augens, manisestans, in mala
vertens, qui negat, autminui^ ^acuit, la^da^que remiss.
Lev. 19. 16. Pro. 20. 19. and 11. 13. receive not an evil report against thy
neighbor. Psalm. 15. 3. Be far from all whispering and backbiting. Pro. 20. 19.
Detract not from his good name, by imposing a false crime, or revealing a
secret sault without just cause, or aggravating too much that evil that is
true by him, or despising the intent but not disallowing his evil deed: by
denying, or hiding, or diminishing, or, but coldly praising the good that is in
thy neighbor.

5 Reprove thy neighbor plainly for his faults, but hate him not in thy heart.
Lev. 19. 17. Pro. 28. 23. yet pass by mere frailties, Pro. 11. 12. He that is
void of wisdom despises his neighbor, but a man of vndrstanding holds his
peace.

6 Avoid flattery in thy speech bless not with a loud voice the flatterer
does lay a net for the feet of his neighbor. Pro. 29. 5.

7 In others wrath and p^ssion, give thou a soft Answer, Pro. 15. 1. and in thy
talk speak what is acceptable, and avoid all provoking speeches Pro. 10. 13.
32, and 13. 23.

8 Be sure thou justify not the wicked, nor condemn the righteous, this is an
ab^mination to the Lord, Pro. 17. 15. Psalm. 15. 4: Amos. 5 15.

9 In discourse mispend not thy time,

In judging and ce^suring others, Mat 7. 1. Iam. 3. 17.

In doubtful disputations about things indifferent which may entangle the
weak, Romans 14 1.

In curious questions Romans 12. 3.

In unprofitable reasonings, such as were genealogies, 1 Timothy 1. 4.

10 In the evil time be silent, and forbear the Communicating of thy secrets
to any, Amos 5. 13. Mic. 7. 5. but when righteousness and charity call for thy
speech, know that silence is sinful.

11 Let no cursing nor swearing be in thy communication, nor those excessive
speeches I protest, I vow, I swear, as sure I live. etc but yea and nay: that
is, barely affirm or deny as the truth requires Mat. 5. 34. 37. Iam. 5. 12.

12 Make a wise and discreet profession of Gods truth with all reverence, and
meekness when it is required, 1 Pet. 3. 15.

13 Keep on foot the memory of Gods works both his judgments and mercies,
Psalm. 145 4, 5, 6, 7. then thy tongue shall be thy glory, as it is called by
David in Psalm. 30. 12. Thou have put off my sackecloth and girded me with
gladness, to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent:
O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

. XXII. Of the innocence of the hands.
The ordering of thy actions.
Having thus cured and cared for the vices and virtues of speech, look next to
thy actions, the innocence of thy hands, that thy righteous carriage may adorn
thy Christian profession: and hereunto God has directed by these rules.

1 Give no evil example, but let the light of thy good works shine before
men: C^ristians ought to be as lights in the world, harmless and blameless,
the sons of God without ^ebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation.
Phil. 2. 15.

2 Be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5. this will hide your nakedness and shame
from others: express it thus. 1. In giving honor go one before another, not in
taking honor: Rom: 12. 10. 2 Do nothing through strife or vain glory, but in
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then himself, Phi. 2. 3. ^ Do
all without murmurings and disputings, not grudging at the esta^es* conditions,
wealth or o^ our superiors, equals or inferiors: not snarl^ng, rawling*
behauing our selves fr^wardly* to any Phil. 2. 14. but all patience
gentleness, courtesy, showed to all and in all things. 4 Put not forth thy
self to stand in the place of great men, Pro. 25. 6. 3 Bow down thine ears and
hear the words of the wise, Pro. 23. ^7. Be swift to Numb 12. 3. yet was Moses
no sheep when the Glory of God l^y at the stake.
hear, Iam. 1. 19.

4 Restrain and bridle thy passions in conuersing, as the expressions of
immoderate anger, fear, grief, joy; which show the weakness of our
disposition. and lay us op^n to contempt A wise man covers shame, when a
fool is presently known, meekness should be sought Zech. 2. 3. without
which righteousness will hardly be found. This was Moses his praise, the
meek^st man upon the face of the earth.

5 Avoid all scornful lustiul and rudegestures, put not off Modesty, and
graui^y: ^hey may be lost in glances of the eye, nods of the head, teachings of
the feet, touches of the hands kisses of the lips, embraces of the a^mes,
dancings, stage plays* songs, talk, a^tire and gesture of the body, a
stretched out neck, a mincing gate, and tinckling of the feet.

6 And that thou may walk honestly as in the day; shun, as the proper
works of darkness 3 couple of Sins.

Rioting and Drunkenness Chambering and Wantonness Strife and Envying. Romans
13. 13
7 Look to fidelity, not deceiving the trust of any committed to thee, the
worthy praise of Gaius. Beloved thou do faithfully whatsoever thou do, to
the brethren and to strangers. 3 John 5.

8 Seek contentment with thy condition and joy at thy neighbors prosperity
as much as at thine own, as the top and perfection of thy duty toward thy
neighbor, and in some kind the perfection of piety ^owa^ds God 1 Timothy 6. 6.
Rom 12. 15 This is a thing most unknown to our nature, to will and desire
whateuer we do desire, with the good of others.

9 See that thou lawfully come by, and lawfully keep thy goods and
possessions: a right title is, or the first finding of things not possessed by
any, nor that any have right unto: or inheritance, or gift, or reward for
labor, or Gods blessing on our labor, or bargaining without defrauding, a
lawful keeping is by thriftinesse without covetousness: and by spending in
necessaries without prodigality.

Thus of righteousness.

. XXIII. Of Mercy.
THe second general duty 2 To love mercy.
which we owe to all men, is Mercy: it is charged upon us by the Prophet Micah
in this phrase, that we love mercy; most of the rules that direct us herein,
are comprehended under these two words.

First it must be mercy: and so

1 For the kinds thereof, mercy Spiritual to the souls of men, Corporal to
their bodily life by Lending, Giving, Protecting, Releasing, Visiting,
Forgiving, clothing.

Not saying to the poor, go warm thy self and be filled, when he is naked
and destitute of daily food: what does this profit; are words, mercy? Iam. 2.
15. 16.

2 For the persons, mercy is a work of relief done to men in misery;
therefore it is not mercy (...) in nee^lesse entertainment on the rich, whereby
thou ^r (...)bled to g^ue to the poor, (...). 14. 13. He that oppresses, the
po^re to increase his riches, ^^d he that gives to the rich, shall surely come
to want. Pro. 22. 16. Nor is it mercy to lash out in prodigal manner on
riotous, ^u^e persons by se^ti^g open thy seller doors when the ne^dy have
least share, and sharkers abuse themselves and thee and thy provision. Nor is
it mercy to give to vagabonds that live up and down and keep not their place,
walking inordinatly, against the laws of God and the King unless it be to
preserve life in case of extremity, and then with admonition or correction
according to the power entrusted to us.

3 For the nature of the action: not the mercy of the cruel, as the mercy of
the usurer, who does good deeds in lending, as the debtors call them, when he
garbiges, and pluckes out the bowels of a man's estate; but true mercy which
indeed releiues and comforts.

Secondly we must Love mercy, it is not enough to acceptance with God, that
thou do mercy, which yet may releive the distressed: but thou must love it,
this love has in it these things.

1 Cheerfulness: hearty, answerable to our power and the opportunity of doing
good, that it may come as a matter of bounty not of covetousness, 1 Timothy 6. 18.
2 Cor. 9. 4. 5. 6. 7. Luke 12. 33. Pro. 22. 13. 23.

2 Compassion, sympathy, and fellowfeeling, we should have in us bowels of
mercy, Col. 3. 12. Job. 30. 25, 1 Ioh. 3. 18. Romans 12. 16. it may not be as a
matter of vain glory or of beholdingness Pro. 22. 7.

3 Service and labor, Gal. 5. 13. Heb. 6. 10. 2 Cor. 8. 16. 22.

4 Liberality, a bountiful eye. Pro. 22. 9. Opening the hand wide Deuteronomy. 15 8.
sowing bountifully 2 Cor. 9 6. and 8 9. and at all seasons, casting our bread
upon the waters, for after many days we shall find it, giving to seven and
also to eight Eccles. 11. 2. 3. etc. Luke 6. 8.

5 The enlarging our selves to the highest degree both for liberality and
compassion, that we can possi^ly work our hearts unto, This is the pouring out
of the soul to the needy, Esa. 58. 10.

6 Speediness Pro. 3. 28. not hiding our selves from our own flesh, Esa. 58. 7.

7 Constancy in what we purposed, willed, or prom^sed.

8 Continuance, remembering the poor Heb. 13. 16.

9 The casting out all wicked thoughts: not doing mercy with grief of heart,
Deuteronomy. 7. 7. 8. to 12.

Now because our corruption of nature is such that it makes insurrection
against every good motion and breaks forth to the defiling of every good
action, we must in showing mercy remember two rules more.

1 To show mercy with repentance which may both break up the fallow ground of
our hard hearts, that they may be more fruitful in this grace: and may also
wash away the pollution that cl^aueth to us, even in our best desire* to
distribute and communicate.

2 To show mercy with faith: both believing Gods gracious acceptance, and the
success and reward according to those promises in Eccles. 11 1. 2 Cor. 9. 9.
10. Luke 12. 33. Pro. 22. 21. Luk 11. 41. To them that give alms in a true
faith all things are clean without any ceremony of washing, such as the
hypocrisy of the couetuous pharisees had invented for purification and clensing
of Gods creatures.

. XXIIII. Of the love of the godly.
OF the duties of holy life The love of the brotherhood.
which we owe to all men hitherto: there^ remain some duties of a right
ordered conversation, which besides all the former, we stand bound to practice
toward men, as considered to be nearer, or farther off from God; such are in
Scripture, cast into these two ranks, godly men, and wicked men: these we are
next to handle.

And for godly men, all that binds us to holy carriage, respects them in
general, or in some particular case or state.

In general, to all Saints, we have our duty comprehended in one word, in 1
Pet. 2. 17. Love the brotherhood: the word brotherhood, directs us to the right
persons, upon whom the duty is to be conferred, and the right cause or ground
why we should do this duty, because they are the brotherhood: the word love,
charge us with the duty it self. Love respects the affection, and the
offices that express that affection, the nature of which affection, and the
several offices that manifest the truth thereof, it is bootlesse and
unprofitable to enquire after, till first we have unfolded the term
brotherhood, which tells us to whom we owe the same.

The brotherhood does not contain all men with whom we converse in societies,
who yet are brethren by creation; for have we not all one father, did not one
God make us? If so, how is it that in the former words we are commanded to
honor all men: and in these next words required, to love the brotherhood as a
sort of men not ^^ckoned with the rest, but claiming a greater dearness of
affections and declaration of respect then other. By this is therefore meant
the company of so many as are true Christians in the places of our abode and
acquaintance, the communion of Saints on earth, the newborn, who are the
adopted sons and daughters of the Almighty, which are borne not of blood, nor
of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God: resembling the image
of the father, in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness of truth, who are
allied one to another in a far greater and better bond, then that of natural
consanguinity.

Q. But how shall I know who are of this brotherhood?

A. By the judgment of infallibility, none can know another estate herein;
only every one that is of this brotherhood, may know it for himself: but by
the judgment of charity it may be known: such marks I now point at, as
help thee herein.

1 By their fruits thou shall know them, their fruit is to holiness, and
innocence in their own way of life, Romans 6. 22. Phil, 2: 25.

2 By their desire after the sincere milk of Gods word, and love to the house
of God, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Psalm. 26. 8,

3 By their language, if pure, if the language of Canaan, if nor corrupt nor
rotten; true and pure religion is to bridle the tongue, Iam. 1. 26. and 3. ^1.
2.

4 By the opposition of the world, that is, of men given to the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life, Ioh. 15. 19.

These must thou cleave to as thy brethren: and to all whom thou can not
without breach of charity, judge or discern from these. Every of these, as
well as some few with whom thou art more inward: nor may thou think that
thou have not violated the bonds of this holy brotherhood, when thou clea^est
to some of them only, with a manifest disregard of the rest in the place where
thou live, reckoning upon their dislike, only as worth the avoiding, and not
caring to run upon that which ministers apparent and just cause of distrust
of thy good and loving affections to others: for he that loves not all the
Saints, loves no Saint a right: neither is it here said, se^ thou love this or
that brotherhood, which thou have made by associating thy self with them, but
love the brotherhood which God has made by giving these testimonies to the
world, that they are borne of him: else in avoiding a rent from some, thou
may make a rent from many. To these the duty charged upon us, is love,
Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in love, the special commandment given by our Savior, and
the cognizance whereby his Disciples should be known, Ioh. 13. 34. 35. Love
notes the affections of the heart, and the office of love in the life.

1 The affection of love which we owe to the godly, is a special degree of
affectionate kindness and tenderness of heart framed in us by the holy Ghost,
through the Gospel, whereby we receive them as Christ received us, and
respect them as our brethren in him partakers of the same grace of God, and
heirs of the same inheritance of heaven, the grace of life eternal provided
for us: knowing that there is but one body, one spirit, one faith, one hope of
our calling, one Baptism, one Lord that redeemed them all, one God, who is the
Father of them all, who also is above all, and through all, and in them all,
Ephesians. 4. 4. 5. 6. Romans 12 10. Ioh. 13. 34. And thus this love of the brethren
differs from the love of men we spoke of before. Neither is it enough that I
love them, because they are men, and as men, but because they are Christians,
begotten of the Father, and as Christians that are newborn. The love of men,
the law commands, and wills it be squared by this pattern, as I love my
self: the love of the brethren, the Gospel only: and wills it be squared by
a more excellent pattern, as Christ has loved us: As the law reuealeth not
Christ the Mediator, so neither does it command the love of the brotherhood,
who are gathered out of the word by Christ. In this regard therefore our
Savior says, A new commandment give I unto you* Ioh. 13. 34. And to this
love of the brethren, in our conversion, were our souls purified, and still
does the Christian purify his soul in obeying the truth through the spirit, 1
Pet. 1. 22.

2 The offices of brotherly love, are these.

1 To make choice of them, as the only companions of our lives: associa^ing
our selves to their communion and fellowship, Psalm. 16. 2. 3. All our delight
should be in them: that kingly Prophet says; I am a companion of all them
that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts* Psalm. 119. 63.

2 To use hospitality one to another, without grudging, 1 Pe^. 4. 9. H^b, 13.
1. 2. and to be harbourers. forget not this office of love, for hereby, some
have received Angels into their houses unawares, Abraham and Lot, as we read,
pursued hospitality.

3 To employ our gifts for their good, as being members of the same body, and
therefore ought to have the same care one of another. All gifts are spiritual
or corporal, spiritual, as knowledge, utterance, and the like, all given to
profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. They must help others by what they have learned,
when they meet together, Pro, 15 7. 1 Cor. 14, 26 Col. 3. 16. By prayer, be
they present or absent, 2 Cor. 1. 11. and by admonitions provoking to love and
to good works, Heb. 10. 24. corporal, are riches, friends, authority, all to
be used chiefly for the good of the Saints, Gal. 6. 10. Phil. 2. 4. 2 Cor. 8.
19. Romans 12. 13.

4 To strive together for the faith of the Gospel, defending with one heart,
the cause and quarrel of religion, Phil. 1. 27. Like vowed soldiers, under
that one General, the Lord Jesus.

5 To bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2.
Their burdens, are either infirmities, temptations, griefs for wrongs done us,
or afflictions: of infirmities, our love should cover them. 1 Pet. 4. 8. and
we should show our readiness to lay their sorrows to heart, and to comfort
them, not by saying sin is no sin, or calling evil good; or soothing them
in security, but by directing them rightly to apply the consolations of God in
Scripture: If temptations, we should with all ten ^ernesse of heart, advise,
counsel, and comfort: If grief for wrongs done to us, that we let them see,
how easily we can forgive them, and forbear the least show of revenge, as also
Christ has forgiven us, Col. 3. 12 If outward afflictions, that we mourn
with them that mourn, and be ready to help them to the uttermost of our
power, for we owe our lives to the brethren, 1 Ioh. 3. 16. 17.

6 To confess our faults one to another, in case of damage done to our
brother: yea, be it we have not trespassed, yet to open the sores of our
dispositions, and discreetly to tell our frailties, failings, and corruption of
nature, which as it eases our own hearts, so it increases affections,
preuenteth loathing of us for our infirmities, and gains leave with freedom
to reprove them, when they see we are ready to condemn our selves, Iam. 5. 16.

These duties are of much intimatenesse, and therefore the soul had need to be
purified to this love, that it may be unfeigned, out of a pure heart, and
fervent, 1 Pet. 1. 22. And that it may in the affections, and the expression of
these offices of love, continue without interruption, we must watch against
these things chiefly.

1 The forsaking of their fellowship, Heb. 10. 25.

2 Judging and censuring about hid things, as the secrets of their hearts, 2
Cor. 4 5. and things indifferent, Romans 14. 10.

3 Grudging, murmuring and complaining, Iam. 5. 9. Phil. 2. 14.

4 Envy at their gifts and respects, Gal. 5. 26.

5 Respect of persons, Iam. 2. 1. 2.

6 Vainglory and conceitednesse, Phil 2. 4. 5. Gal. 5 vlt.

7 Schisms, rents, and divisions, and running into opinions, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Phil. 2. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 12. 25.

8 Inconstancy, Heb. 13 1.

9 Worldliness, looking only at our own things, 1 Cor. 13. 5.

10 Dissimulation, 1 Ioh. 3. 18.

11 Untrustiness, and unfaithfulness, 3 Ioh. 5.

12 Suits in law, 1 Cor. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4.

13 Mixing our selves with a brother or brethren, that prove lewd, we should
restrain our familiarity, and reprove them, that they might be ashamed and
amend, yet count them as brethren, not as enemies, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 2 These. 3.
Romans 14. 13. 14.


14 Scandale, to lay a stumbling block in our brothers way, Mat. 18 6. 7. All
scandale is thy sin, when it is g^u^n by thee, that is, when thou art the
cause of the hurt that comes by thy action, as well as the auth^r of the
action: and this is, when thou teach or approouest evil doctrine, whether
heretical or superstitious, when thou committest gross sin, as did David,
and when thou abusest thy Christian liberty 1 Cor. 8. 12. and it is abused when
in things indifferent, left free by the Magistra^e, thou use thy liberty, and
the weak are wounded and offended. But if the command of the Magistrate be
upon it, thou must obey, though a brother be o^fended, Sin may not be done to
please any, 1 Pet. 2. 13.

. XXV. Our carriage to the Godly in some particular case of falling, weakness
or strength.
THe former rules that concern Our duty to the brethren in cases of falling,
weakness o^ strength
the affection and offices of brotherly love belong to the brethren in every
estate; there remain such directions to be delivered as respect our carriage
toward them as set in some certain condition, as if they be weak or strong,
or fallen into some offenses. We take the last first and for our help in so
hard a task we find our text in the Epistle of Jude verse 22. 23. of rare use,
wherein the Christian is admonished that he is set in the Church for an help,
a Phisician, and an Isntrumental Savior of his brother, if he see him
overtaken with any fault, and that he is endowed with gifts and graces for the
edification of those with whom he conuerseth, and because there is required in
every one that undertakes so great a work, some competent skill and good
affection; for if ignorance to distingnish of patience and medicines, and
wre^chlesnesse be unfit for a Physician to the body, much more to the soul:
the words do fully direct unto the rules of cure, And of so^s have compassion,
and others save, with fear plucking them out of the fire, The manner of using
them, Putting a difference, Hating even the garments spotted with the flesh.

The manner of using these rules of cure concern the Christian that would
recover his brother fallen, or support him in falling, where he is directed;
How to begin the cure, he must put a difference, How to be disposed in the
whole, he must hate the garments spotted with the flesh.

1 First then thou must learn to put a difference, it is Christian wisdom to
distinguish between sin and sin, offender and offender, For as all patients
are not alike diseased, so all transgressors do not alike offend: is thy
brother fallen into any sin, thou art bound to put forth thy hand to save
him; but first consider aright the nature of his fall; observe then that,

Christians offend either in opinion or in parctice:

In opinion, and these. 1. In the foundation. 2. In matters of less moment,

In the foundation, and that, first of ignorance and blind zeal, both the
seducer and seduced.

Secondly, of malice and obstinately.

In matters of less moment, and there making a rent or schism or holding the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

In practice: so some sin,

1 Of ignorant and infirmity, in less, in greater points.

2 Of habit and presumption, grossly, and so fall into foul vices or extrem
omissions Some sin publicly, or privately.

2 Thou have then rightly put a difference in thy judgment, when thou have
d^scerned hereby how thy brother is fallen. Now proceed to apply the rules of
cure, if thy brother have offended in matters of opinion, that are of less
moment and have made no rent, or be it he has offended in practice of
ignorance, or infirmity, then see the rule of meckenesse and Christian
softness, have Compassion on him, If in matters fundamental, whether of blind
zeal or ^bstinate heat, or in other lesser points, yet making divisions; if
in practice grossly whether into foul vices or extreme omissions, be his
faults public or private, see the rule of Christian s^uerity, they are in the
fire, in danger of burning. Oh save them with fear, pulling them out.

Advice right Christian and divine, behold the rules of cure, and apply them
again to each part, that thou may see how to express thy meekness and
severity, putting also therein a difference, as well as to whom and when: for so
the words are put indifferently into the midst as being the life of the whole
work and every part of it.

3 For thy meekness consider

1 In what things to be expressed toward each or the rules*

2 How or with what affection, with compassion.

The rules are these,

If he offend in matters of opinion which raze not the foundation, and
disquieteth not the peace of the Church: walk with ^im in the unity of the
common faith and paths of holy life, which both have already attained unto,
and doubt not but God will reveal unto him that thing wherein he is otherwise
minded. Phil. 3. 15.

If ^e have fallen in matters of holy life through ignorance or infirmity
restore him by the spirit of meekness Gal. 6. 1. considering thy self lest
thou also be tempted, bear his burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

The affection with which thou must be touched in the practice of these rules
is Compassion, (...) (to use Saint Austines words) when there is compassio
miseriae, non simulatio misericordiae, a feeling of their misery, not a
feigning of mercy, this will give the due ^incture to thy carriage herein.

4 For thy severity consider 1 The rules, 2 The right carriage in the practice
of them, for The end, to save them.

The affection of the heart, fear.

The holy violence, where the cause also is intimated; they are in the fire,
pluck them out.

The rules are these,

If he offend in the fundamentalls* of blind zeal and ignorance, or being
seduced.

1 In meekness instruct him, if God peradventure will give him repentance to
the acknowledging of the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 25.

2 Be careful to maintain good work^s for necessary uses, Tit. 3. 8 14.

3 Pray earnestly and heartily for him, Rom* 10. 1. 2.

If as a seduce^ (...) or of malice and obstina^ely ^^e is then an heriticke
and thy rule is that in 2 Ioh. 9. receive him not to house, neither bid him God
speed, in his evil work. Tit. 3. 10. If the error be in matters of lesser
moment, and the party make a rent and scisme, thy rule is that in Romans 16. 17.
mark those which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which
ye have learned, and avoid them.

If it be in practice, that they are guilty of soul vices or extreme
omissions, such as that of Idleness among the Thessalonians.

1 Warn them in the beginning and reprove them sharply, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

2 If they amend not, restrain thy familiarity and be no companion for them,
that all may see thou approouest not their vice and if the offenders may be
ashamed, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 2 These. 3. 6, 14. yet not counting them as enemies, but
esteeming them as brethren.

If the fault be secret, observe our Saviors rule: tell it him, between him
and thee, if he mend not, take two or three discreet godly persons with thee,
and again rebuke him, if yet he amend not, then open it, tell the Church of
it, if he will not hear the Church, hold him as an heathen. Man. 18 15.

Now in thy practice of these rules, remember. Thy end in all thy carriage must
be to save thy brother not to show thy skill to find faults, much less to
traduce or blemish him.

Thy heart must be affected with fear, as thou would be if thou saw a
man ready to be drowned or fallen into the fire.

Thou must pull him out: doing this duty, with resolution, not thinking, how
will he take it, but (...).
looking on the danger he is in, there is misericordia puniens and crudelitas
parc^ens, as S. Aug. speaks in the like case, a mercy punishing, and cruelty
sparing.

Thus ought thou to carry thy self in the cure of thy brother fallen any
way: only there is one thing more that disposes thee to the right usage of
these rules set down in this place of Jude, viz that thou hate the garments
spotted with the flesh, that is Let thy heart be truly and thoroughly affected
with the hatred of al sin in thy self and others: the words are a double
similitude taken from the ceremonial law. Lev. 5. 4. Numb. 9. where the
infection of the Leprosy resembling the infection of sin, is such that it
defiles the bed, the Chair, the Leper sa^e on, the the garments ^e wore, the
very things he spat on ^ such like pois^n^ull contagion is sin, when thou
have hereby conceived of the infectious pollution of sin, and how loathsome it
makes in the eyes of God and man, even like any Leper, then shall thou deal
seriously and heartily with thy brother for his conversion and recovery. This
is of great moment in all thy carriage, for faith Iunius on this place,
personatae reprehensiones frigent, plurim^mque interest exa^i^^ omnia, vt
conscientia fert, animusque, facias, an de industria. Reproves which come from
a man as he acted a part in a play, are cold and dull, and it matters much
whether thou do things heartily, as thy mind and conscience carries thee,
or for the nonce only. Whereby again consider the words, and see how many
things ought to b^e hated by the godly Chr^stian. 1 The sin or transgressio^
2 The fountain and instrument of sin whereby it is affected, and that wherein
it sticks, the flesh. 3. The guilt of it. 4. The contagion. 5. The spo^t or
blot which is as the footesteppe it leaves behind it, when the act is past. 6.
The occasion and appearance, the very garment, as 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. so Jacob did.
Genesis 35. 4. with a mind thus affected and resolved, proceed in the use of the
former rules.

Toward the weak Christian thy ca^riage must be thus:

1 Entangle him not with doubtful disputations, Romans 14. 1.

2 Bear his weaknesses and mere frailties. Romans 15. 1.

3 Please him and not thy self in the use or restraint of thy Christian
liberty, Romans 15. 2. 1 Cor. 9. 20. 21. 22. Gal. 5. 15.

4 Offend him not, nor put any stumbling block in hi^ way, Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 10.
32.

5 Comfort and support him. 1 These. 5. 14.

6 Despise him not in his weaknesses, Romans 14. 2.

Toward the strong, be thus ordered.

1 Judge him not in the use of his Christian liberty, Romans 14.

2 Acknowledge such, 1 Cor. 16. 18.

3 Set them as patterns for imitation, Heb. 12. 1. Phil. 3. 17.

4 Submit your selves to them, to be advised and admonished, and your judgment
to theirs in doubtful things, 1 Cor. 16. 16. 1 Pet. 5. 5.

So far of our carriage toward the godly.

. XXVI. The rule for our behavior toward the wicked.
NOw for our behavior toward Thy duty toward the wicked
the wicked, the holy Ghost has abridged it in one plain rule delivered in
Col. 4. 5. walk in wisdom, or wisely, toward them that are without.

In Scripture, all men are cast into two ranks, those that are within, without
the Church: without the pale of it, as Infidels, without the true faith of it,
as heretics, without the path of holy life, as the openly wicked and
profane. To them that are within the pale, the says, the pathway of the
Church, is this precept given; ordering them in their carriage toward them
that are without the pale, the faith, the righteous path of the true Church:
that whereas most an e^d, or always, the report and fame of their conversation
will be carried abroad to them, and sometimes necessary commerce will enforce
those within the Church to converse with them, nothing might be done by the
Christian, which might give scandale, but all things that might win to the
love of the truth: therefore it is said, walk wisely. A direction of great
use, by the practice whereof, we might win them to glorify God, or silence
them from reuiling the truth, or at least, force their consciences to bless
us, and the good way of God. But this is a point of divine and heavenly skill:
for the wisdom here ^equired in our lives, is not the wisdom of the flesh,
which is earthly, sensual, deuillish: but of the spirit, the wisdom that is
from above, which God has taught, and not man devised.

Harken then ye Christians, and as you have been taught, as the truth is in
Jesus, what you owe to God, and what to your neighbors, and what to the godly,
or fallen, or weak, or strong, so receive from the same master Christ Jesus,
how you may behave your selves toward them that are without, and for your
direction, note two things.

1 The manner of conuersing as it respects them without, it must be toward
them, not with them.

2 The grace which should shine in all our ways, wisdom, this is the
predominant virtue, as charity is the predominant in our conuersing with the
godly; the sum of thy carriage toward the one is, walk in love; the sum
of thy carriage toward the other is, walk in wisdom.

1 To walk toward them, notes a well framed behavior, when through
necessity or calling, we have to do with them, to walk with them, notes a
voluntary sorting our selves with them, and the choosing of them f^r our
companions; hence the first rule is gathered.

That needless society may not be held with them that are without, such as are
Infidels, Heretics, or wicked men; neither w^lking in their counsel, nor
standing, in their way, nor sitting in their chaires, they are as leaven among
the Lords sweet bread and cakes, Psalm. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 5. 7. Pro. 23. 20. Much
more should we shun all unequal yoking with them, by marriage, leagues of
amity, contracts of friendship, and the like, 2 Cor. 6. 14. the sin of the
old world, Genesis 6 1. the sin of Esau, Genesis 26. the preamble of his
dis^inheriting. Calvin. Abdicationis su^ praeludium: the sin of Iehosaphat,
for which his works were broke* 2 Chro. 20. 37. the wiles of the Midianites,
where with they beguiled Israel to join themselves to Baal-Peor, Numb. 25. 1
18.

2 Yet seeing sometimes we are in the presence of, and sometimes the report of
our conversation, is carried to the wicked, (for how can this be avoided,
unless we should go out of the world) it is not the least of Christian care
to walk so as our profession may be adorned, even in their eyes: that this may
be, the Apostle says, walk in wisdom, much like that of our Savior to his
Apostles, Behold, I send you out as sheep among Wolves, be wise therefore as
Serpents, but what are the particulars of this wisdom?

1 Discretion, which respects the time, place, persons, and the end of our
actions: this discretion is expressed in speech, and in all other our affires.
In speech it is discretion.

1 To speak out little, swif^ to hear, and slow to speak, a talkatiue
behavior is extremely irksome: but even a fool when he holds his peace,
is counted wise, and he that shuts his lips is esteemed a man of
understanding: he that has knowledge, spares his words, Pro. 17. 27. 28. I
am 1. 19. Not that any fullennesse or want of affability is commended, for the
other is not so amiable, as these are soul and vn^eleeming: but that thou
observe thy place, that thy hand be on thy mouth in presence of thy betters,
that thou answer not a matter before thou thoroughly understand what was
demanded, that thou study to answer, and that thy heart instruct thy mouth,
Pro. 15. 28.

2 To be silent in the evil time, when thy speech cannot amend, but do hurt,
when there is no evident way to bring glory to God, but to run thy self into
danger. when thy calling requires it not Amos 5. 13. Pro. 14. 33. Wisdom
rests in the heart of him that has understanding, but that which is in the
midst of fools is made known, Psalm. 39. 1.

3 To forbear to reprove scorners, Pro. 9. 7. 8. and 23. 9.

4 To answer a fool according to his folly, that is, so as his folly may be
convinced; but not to answer him according to his folly, that is, with the
like passions, pride, frowardness, and reuiling manner, as he objects, Pro.
26. 4 5.

5 To season our words with salt, that they discover not vanity, lightness,
vainglory, conceitednesse, hastiness, desire of revenge, mal^c^, discontent,
excessive fear or joys, suspi^iousnesse and the like.

6 Not to judge them that are without; this provoke, but ^difieth not, 1 Cor.
5. 12.

This is discretion in speech.

All our affairs also should be guided with discretion, Psalm. 112 5.

1 That we keep our selves to our own line and measure, and be sure we have
our eye on the end and issue of things, 2 Cor. 10. 12. 13. 14.

2 That we trust not our selves too sarre with them, or believe every word:
too much suspicion breeds alienation: too much credulity, danger, Pro. 14. 15.
Ioh. 2. 24.

3 That we get out of their company, when we perceive not in them the words
of wisdom, Mat. 16. 14.

4 That we restrain our passions, and show all moderation of mind. Ever the
same, he that is hasty of spirit, exalts folly, Phil. 4. 5. Pro. 14 29.

Such are the particulars of discreet behavior, the first branch of wisdom:
to this, add these following, which wisdom binds to.

2 The honesty of thy conversation, 1 Pet. 2. 12. It is vain to think of
being religious, and cast off honesty: nay, the power of thy religion must be
proved before them, in the practice of duties of the second Table; outstripping
them in those things, which they themselves hold to be good: and so three
things will adorn thee.

1 Harmelesnesse, free from all courses of injury, cruelty, and oppr^ssion;
Phil 2. 15. An hurtful conversation is an unseemly conversation, the wisdom
of the Holy is joined with innocence, Mat. 10. 16. Thou may be a Serpent,
provided thou be a Dove.

2 Square^esse in thy dealing, just and true in words and deeds, abho^ring the
sins of deceit, and of couenant-breaking, and loving all plainness and
fidelity.

3 Taciturnity and secrecy in Est and fideli ^uta silentio merces.
things imparted to thy knowledge, he goes about as a slanderer, that
reuealeth secrets, Pro. 20. 19. and 11. 13.

3 The fairness and amiablenesse of conuersing: so these are alluring
virtues, evil men themselves being judges.

1 Affablenesse and vrbanity.

2 Meekness, so^tnesse or gentleness, and humbleness of mind, that nothing
froward* affected, or rude, come from us, Tit. 3. 2.

3 Peaceablenesse, studying to be quiet, and to meddle with our own business,
1 These. 4. 12.

4 Patience under personal wrongs.

5 Love of thine enemies, Pro. 20. 22.

4 The profitablenesse of thy life in two things, first, in works of mercy,
which are honorable before all men, Iam. 1. 26. and 3. vlt. Mat. 5. 16.
Secondly, in diligence in our particular callings.

5 The religiousnesse of thy conversation* and so these things are thi^e
ornament.

1 To express in thy life, the obedience of Gods statutes, Deuteronomie 4. 6.

2 Mortification, Esa. 61. 3. 8.

3 Reverence, fear, and meekness, when thou intreatest of matters of
religion, 1 Pet. 3. 16. Pro. 24. 26.

4 Zeal in a good cause, and courage undaunted, Pro. 24. 25. and 28. 4. and
25. 26. 1 Cor. 16 22. But take heed thy zeal be not in things controuerted
and doubtful amongst the godly wise, but clearly in Scripture warranted to
every one that shall read it, nor a zeal expressed in heat of speech, but in
strength of resolution.

6 The goodness of it for societies: where two things advance the glory of
profession.

1 Subjection to authority, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 15. 16. That it may be said of
us, as of Daniel, we shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except
we find it against him concerning the law of his God: so faithful and
without error or fault was he concerning the kingdom, Dan. 6 4. 5.

2 Concord amongst our selue^: peace one with another, Mark 9. 50.

Hitherto of such precepts as guide our lives toward other men. The duties
next to be handled, are such as respect our selves.

. XXVII. A right ordered conversation toward our selves, and that first in our
particular callings.
FOr the order of our life toward Thy duty in respect of thy self.
our selves, I find one general rule of large comprehension, of infinite
worth delivered in the 1 Cor. 7. 24.

Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, therein abide with God:

The words, besides the compellation, have two things considerable,

1 That every Christian has two callings, the one his calling of life and the
course or way he has to live in, in this world. The other his calling to be a
Christian.

For these words, wherein he is called, are made perfect by that in the 20.
verse. in the same calling, wherein he is called viz. to Christianity by the
Gospel embraced.

2 What is charged upon us concerning both these callings,

Concerning our particular calling, three things.

1 That every man have some calling.

2 That every man abide in that calling, not thinking that Religion and a
calling cannot stand together.

3 That he abide therein with God.

Concerning our general calling to be Christians.

1 To abide therein with God.

2 In all estates and changes of conditions in that calling of life we live in,
Therein also to abide with God. This is called in the old Testament, walking
with God the righteousness, perfection, faith and obedience of Enoch and Noah
is expressed in this one word, he walked with God Genesis 5. 22 and 6. 9.

Of these punctually and In thy particular calling.
briefly: and first for our particular callings. Where

First, it is a rule of a wel-ordered conversation to have some lawful
calling, or course of life in which we are to be employed: this is charged on
all Adams sons, in the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread, a painful
estate of life in some employment to the good of Church, Commonwealth, or
family, are none exempted from* that come from Adams loins, though not all
with the hands to take pains Genesis 3. 19. and Christianity has determined all
idle and unprofitable living to be a disordered or inordinate living, and that
if any brother obey not this word, that such be noted and that we have no
company with him, that he may be ashamed, 2 These. 3. 6. 10. the greatest Dames
in Israel might not eat the bread of Idleness, and the highest Magistrates
submit to this rule, who are appointed of God to their places, that the people
may live a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, Pro. 31. 27.
1 Timothy 2 2. how should any inferior think to rage and live without compass,
as if they were exempt from the Lords government.

A Gent^eman to whom lands The calling* of a Gentleman.
and possessions are left, whereby he needs not put his hand to labor, may
not spend his time altogether in hawking, hunting, riding about, or upon his
pastimes and sports, and what he lusts, either they are called to bear
office in the commonwealth, or not, if called to an office, let them wait on
their office: and seek abilities to discharge it. The study therefore of the
laws of God and the Realm is their calling, besides the Religious governing
of their families, and the upholding of their estate. Further they are to serve
then Prince and Country with body and good^, advice and Counsel, both in peace
and war, if they have or have not office, here is enough to spend their
hours, without gaming and revel, to prepare themselves hereunto, and yet they
are to take notice, that it is their parts to see to the provision for the
poor, the good order of the place where they are* the discountenancing of
sin and vice, the reconciling of persons at variance, and the Going before
others in works of mercy, and all good duties, as patter^es for imitation,
Here is your calling.

The woman's calling see in, Pro. 31. and 1 Timothy 5. 13. 14.

The calling of disabled poor is not to run the cursed Ca^^itish life of a
vagabond, but in his place to trust in God, and to wait on him without
fainting for that relief which shall be sufficient for them, looking on that
in Iam. 1. 9. the brother of low degree, let him rejoice in that he is exalted,
to be rich in faith and heir of the kingdom, but I speak not of such poor
as are mentioned in, Ier. 5. 4. Who are foolish, that know not the way of the
Lord, nor the judgment of their God.

God (seeing how necessary this is) gives six days to labor, one he
reserueth for his immediate worship: he has made us to do good, and
employment is a preservative against errors in opinion, weakness and decay in
Religion, and loose behavior, it is lusts extinguisher, the tamer of our
bodies, the very school wherein we improoue all our graces: here we can rest
on Gods blessing with comfort, take up our crosses with patience, because for
both we have the promise of God, who will keep us in all our ways.

Else, we our selves are thieves, and all our riches, Riches of vanity, Pro.
20. 4. Ephesians. 4. 28.

2 Secondly, we must abide in our calling and keep the stations wherein we are
ranked by our General, attend here to these rules.

1 That we be diligent in our callings, not having cunning but painful hands,
not busy in other men's matters, not pretending excuse or fearing the
difficulties of our callings, Pro. 20. 4. and 26. 13. not given to sleep and
sloth, Pro. 26. 14. 15. and then to be obstinate in that course verse 16. not
hunting Alehouses or the company of lewd persons which is now called
good-fellowship, by our base drunkards, Pro. 21. 17. not wandering from thine
own house, though it be not to place of ill same: but diligence beseems.
Pro. 10. 4. and 13. 4. the slothful shall be under tribute, and this diligence
extends it self to watchfulness over the opportunities of thy calling, Pro.
10 5. and 6. 6, 7, 8. Eccles. 9. 10.

2 That we be advised and provident in all our undertakings, Pro. 21. 5.
Prepare thy work in the field, and afterward build thy house. Nothing
threatens more an ill loose in all a^^aires; then precipitate beginnings. This
hastiness is either from leuity of mind or wilfulness.

3 That we keep within our compass, not meddling with those things that
either our skill or our estates are not able to weld, Which proceeds from a
mind greedy of gain; for the compassing whereof some having ventred in one
action all their estates, they have at once made shipwreck of all; the Lord
being pleased to cross, some way unexpected their over bold enterprises: so
that, many times having thus desired to set up their gates, they have come to
that, I cannot dig, and to beg I am ashamed.

4 That we abide in our callings, not fleeting or changing our course of life
without some evident warrantable cause, seeing the Lord first going out before
us, lest we be like a bird that wandereth from her nest, Pro. 27. 8.

5 Faithfulness in words and dealings, no defrauding, deceiving, coosening,
lying, dissimulation, etc. Pro. 21. 6. 1 These. 4. 6.

6 Cheerfulness and contentation with our estates, avoiding passion,
frowardness, Pro. 11. 29, and 16. 32. and 19. 11. and 25. 28. and 17. 22.
Eccles. 9. 7. 8.

3 Thirdly, we must abide with God in our calling and diligence and other
praise worthy qualities in our labor, prove us good laborers, but not good
Christians. Neither have they any promise unless we add this. But dwell in
the land and be doing good, and verily, Says God, thou shall be fed. Psa. 37.
3. and 128. 2 and 34. 9. 10.

What is it to abide with God? A.

1 It is to begin all in him, and look up to him in all our ways, in the
morning to a^aken with him, giving to God the first of our thoughts, our first
words and the first fruits of the day, Psalm. 5. 3. 4. and 119. 147. Pro. 6.
22. the time need not be long, it may be in so much space done ^elnigh as one
would say the Lords prayer over treatably: this will season the heart, and
remember for thy encouragement that place in 2 Chro. 19. 9. The eyes of the
Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in
the behalf of him whose heart is perfect toward him, then after thy awaking
with God; it is to begin the day with solomne prayer, it is to look up to the
Lord in all thy ways through the whole day. Psalm. 119. 168. walking always as
in his sight, this i^ to remember God in thy ways, an admirable preservative
against all evil: and it has the promise Mat. 6. 33. 1 Timothy 4. 3. 4. G^n. 24.
11. 12. 26 27. desire therefore to see God in ^ll; in his providence, in his
works.

2 It is to do all our labors not for gain and the desire to be rich; but as
duty, and because we are set of God in our places and do serve God in doing
our duty Col. 3. 24. Ios 1. 8. from whom also we exp^ct a reward: and so live
as Pilgrims and strangers, avoiding worldliness, not setting our hearts on
riches, if they increase Psalm. 62. 10. using the world, not loving it: not
careful any way about the success, or the after time but diligent and
provident, and refering the rest to Gods blessing. 1 Cor. 7. 32. Pro. 27. 1. 2
Iam. 4. 13. 14. 15.

3 It is to practice our Christian graces in our callings to the adorning of
the doctrine of Christ our Savior in all things Tit. 2. 9. as piety, the fear
to offend, faith, patience, obedience, truth, meekness, innocence etc that the
Lord may be sancti^^ed in our hearts and glorified in our lives: knowing we
have only so much and so many of these graces as we can express in the power
and life of them in our lives. If thou faint, says Solomon, in the day of
adversity, thy strength is small. Pro. 24. 10.

4 It is to watch against the Temptations of our callings which are the sins or
the crosses that meet us in our callings, 1 Sins that attend such a calling
are such as wicked men, the men of this world have used for gains sake, ^ither
out of couetuous desires to increase their estate, or when they were hard
bestead to get out of misery or avoid the inconveniences; thou must so order
thy estate, that those sins may be avoided. 2 The Crosses and afflictions of
thy calling. Know that no calling is without his trouble and gr^iuance, and
therefore it is not for thee to be weary of thy state and to desire change, as
if another calling would be freer from trouble, No, no: But rather arm thy
self to bear and take up thy crosses, not harkening to the ill motions of thy
flesh, the wicked counsel of Satan tendered to thy heart to haste to ill means,
but rest on God who gives an issue to the temptation, that we may be able to
bear it. Thus of our behavior in our particular callings: in our general
calling now follows.

XXVIII. The order of our conversation in our general calling, all our lives.
Our general calling is to be Thy duty in thy general calling.
Christians, the highest dignity of the sons of men; here i^ behooves all to
be inquisitiue what it is we owe in answerablenesse to this our high calling,
all our lives, and in all conditions and changes of life; that former text in,
1 Cor. 7. 24. gives it in the lump, all thy days, abide with God to whose
communion and fellowship thou art called by the Gospel of Jesus Christ his
son: and in the several states of life as in affliction, in poverty, in
sickness, in persecution, and in death, in every of those changes of thy
mortal condition; abide with God therein. The remainder therefore of the rules
concerning our conversation toward our selves are thus cast: as they concern
our general calling, they frame us in our abode with God,

1 All our lives,

2 In several changes of life, To abide with God always.
as in wealth, affliction generally considered, poverty, sickness,
persecution, the last work we have to do, which is, how to dye or in
preparation for death.

For our abode with God in Where.
the walks of Christianity, without consideration of the several alterations
of life we are subject unto, seeing here we walk by faith not by sight 2 Cor. 5
7. these things attend about thy faith.

1 The examination and trial Rules about thy faith.
of thy estate, Whether thou be in the faith or no, a matter so fearfully
neglected, almost by all: We are not more miserable in the multitude of our
transg^essions and the numberless swarms of inward masterlesse passions,
affections and lusts, then in our wretchlessenesse about the trial of our
estates: wherein we put all to hazard, and bless our selves in our own
ways, saying to our own heart, surely no evil shall befall us. Yet where the
Ministry has been in any life and power, nothing more speaks our
reprobation then this Careless ouerture. 2 Cor. 13. 5. and self deceit has
beguiled us if we give not all diligence to make our calling and election sure,
2. Pet. 1. 10. Gal. 6. 4, 5, 7. I must from Gods own mouth, tell you that he
was never effectually called, who cares not to be sure that he is in the
faith, and in the estate of salvation. The heart that was ever affected with
the knowledge of his damnable estate by nature, and of the way of Salvation by
Christ alone, cannot take quiet rest, till he know in some measure out of the
evidence of Scripture and experience of grace wrought in his heart, that Christ
is in him, and he translated out of that kingdom of sinful darkness. If now
thy heart be won to this trial, I present thee with these two trees to
behold in deepest thoughtfulness.

Note here, that any one branch or fruit of either root, will prove thee
enwrapped and folded in that blissful estate, or cursed condition.

2 The second rule is, that we build up our selves on our most holy faith, Jude
20, having examined, and upon examination found our selves to be in the faith:
and this we shall do, if

1 We endeavor to understand more fully, and to take into our hearts with
more enlarged thoughts, the mystery of God the Father, and of Christ, that our
hearts may be comforted, (being knit together in love) unto all riches of the
full assurance of understanding. Col. 2. 2. and for this cause praying in the
Holy Ghost, that Christ might dwell in our hearts by faith, etc. Ephesians. 3. 17.
18. 19.

2 If we inure our selves to live by faith, the only safe, happy, and
comfortable life for a Christian upon earth. By this the heart can say to God
in all distresses; Thou art my hiding place, Psalm. 32. 7. Hab. 2. 4. Now let
the power of thy faith cause thee to rest on God, and live in him.

For justification and salvation, by casting thy self into the merciful arms
of thy Lord, spread out upon the Cross, who will convey to thee, himself, the
virtue of his death and obedience, and the power of his spirit, to quicken thee
out of thy sins here, and out of the grave to raise thee at the last day.
Draw not back, dye rather at the throne of grace.

For sanctification, thy faith being the root of all graces, and the
attractiue virtue and magneticall force of thy heart, to draw thee up to
Christ, and to extract life and quickening grace from every part of Christ, his
incarnation, his life, death, resurrection, ascension, session and
intercession: that which makes every ordinance profitable. Baptisms, Mark. 16.
16. Col. 2. 12. receiving of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 29. the word heard,
Heb. 4. 2. and prayer, Mat. 21. 22.

For preservation: where thou must have,

1 A distinct knowledge of the promises: for they are pabulum fidei, the food
of faith. An abstract thereof I give thee here applied to several occasions.

The penitent, contrite, and humble heart is sure, in all estates

Of the free favor of God, Hos. 14. 4. in tendrest compassion, more then
motherly, Esa. 49. 15. in everlasting constancy, Ier. 31. 3. as the waters of
Noah, as the ordinances of heaven, Ier. 31. 36. and 33. 20. Esa. 54. 10.

Of Christ, and the redemption wrought by him, and of the spirit of Christ by
covenant, Esa. 59. 20. 21.

In the storms of afflictions, l^ue by these places, Psalm. 89. 33. and 50. 15.
Heb. 12. 3. 4. Psalm. 34 19. Romans 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. and that sweet promise of
giving liberally, even wisdom to behave our selves under the Cross, if we
ask it, Iam. 1. 4. 5.

In the midst of the venemou^ arrows of slanderous reproaches, headed with the
poison of Aspes, shot from the tongue of a railing Shemei, for Christ^ cause, 1
Pet. 4. 14. Psalm. 31. 1^. 19. Heb. 12. 2. 3.

Under wrongs by them that profess true religion in their unjust censures:
remember Job, and what an end the Lord made, Job 4. 6. and 11. 2 3. and Paul, 1
Cor. 4. 4. 10. Esa. 66. 5.

Against adversaries, Esa. 41. 11. 12. Gen 12. 3. Gal. 3. 9.

In temptations, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Romans 16. 20. Luc. 22. 31. Heb. 2. 18. and 4. 15.

Against daily infirmities* Exodus 34. 6. 7. Mat. 11. ^^. H^b. 4. 16. Esa. 55.
1, 2 3. and 42. 3.

In our spiritual barrenness lamented, Hos. 2. 19. Esa. 54. 5, 6.

In case of relapse, when the heart i^ smitten for it, Hos. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7.

In case of dismayednesse, under corruptions great and strong, and the thoughts
of our indisposition to any thing that is good, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. Phil. 4.
13.

Against the fear of falling away, 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9. 2 Timothy 2. 19. 2 These. 3. 3.
Ier. 32. 40. 41. Ioh. 10. 28. 1 Ioh. 3, 9. and 2, 27. Heb. 7. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

In spiritual desertions, Esa. 30. 18. Psalm. 77. Esa. 54. 7. 8.

In the works of thy calling, Heb. 13. 5. Psalm. 37. 2, 3.

In the ways of thy household, Psalm. 127.

In losses for Gods cause, 2 Chro. 25. 9. Mark. 10. 29. 30.

In the valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23. and 73. 26.

In all, in any estate, Psalm. 84. 11. Romans 8. 18, 28, 32.

Look also upon the promises to several graces, and to several degrees of
true grace contained in such places as these, Mat. 5. 1, 2. to 13. 2 Chro. 16.
9. 2 Pet. 1, 5, 6, 10, 11.

2 Thou must then hang upon these breasts of the Churches consolations, by
believing and applying them to thy self, and suck out the milk that may
nourish thee, and make thee grow, if so be thou have tasted, that the Lord is
gracious.

3 Keep a Register of Gods mercies in his providence over his Church in thy
time, as near as thou can, or at least over thee and thine, a role of
experiments.

How aduantagious this is, David's practice and precepts show in many Psalms of
his, Psalm. 78. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. to the end, and 107: 43. and 105. and 106. and
66, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

These three rules concern 2 Rules about thy repentance and obedience.
thy faith: furthermore, since we daily transgress, and repentance is the
work of our whole life; and seeing nothing more blemisheth obedience, then
inconstancy, to walk like a Christian, attend these rules following, about thy
repentance and obedience.

1 H^l^ firmly and iudiciously in what things the power of godliness does
consist, that the full bent of thy soul may be placed on these things: the
rather because these are the last and perilous days in which men should have
the show, but deny the power of godliness, 2 Timothy 3, 5. It consists not in
frequenting the public assemblies, in set hours of devotion, in taskes of
reading, in the outward abstinence of fastings, in professing or talking, in
knowledge for discou^se, in strictness of shunning controuerted ceremonies, in
opinions, in a strain of praise and words, though all stamped in Gods minte,
in defying the corruptions of the time, in descrying publicane-like sinners, in
praising the Martyrs or Saints departed, in commending former, and
discommending the present, in censuring others, in holding profession with the
forwardest in sincerity, in reuerencing a Philip, a godly Minister, in giving
liberally to the maintenance of Gods worship, etc. But in righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, in humility, patience, goodness, meekness,
and truth, in mercy and righteousness, dealing in mortification of the flesh,
government of the affections and the tongue, in heavenly mindedness,
selfe-denyall and contempt of the world, in the life of a pilgrim, and a
conversation with fear, in long-suffering* and gentleness, in sobriety and
temperance, in faith and fellowship with God, in brotherly kindness, and
charity amongst men.

2 Keep (by a watchful survey of thy heart) a bill of thy sins, that most
annoy thee since thy profession, as the Apostles made many of them agreeing to
the estates of their hearers severally, 1 Pet. 2, 1. Ephesians. 4. 31. Col. 3. 8.
9. Thus shall thou know what to confe^se and lament before God: thus shall thou
see how thou growest in grace, by the dying of thy preua^ling sins. The
profit is not known, but by those that have practiced it.

3 Seek after, and pray earnestly for direct thoughts, to see how far thou
have a^tained, and what is yet wanting in the graces of the spirit, or the
measure and degrees of them; which graces God requires, and has heretofore,
and does still adorn the hearts of his children with, Phil. 3. 11, 12, 13. To
help thee herein, that place of Paul, Gal. 5. 20. which sets down the
fruits of the spirit, is to be often weighed, and that of Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. And the illustrious examples of the Lords worthies in Scripture; a
catalogue of them we have in Heb. 11. the rest we may observe in our reading
and hearing.

4 Quench not the spirit, no^ grieve it: but stir up the gift that is in
thee, and improve it, 1 These. 5. 19. Ephesians. 4. 30.

5 Address thy self always to the battle, and take to thee the whole armor
of God, Ephesians. 6. 10.

6 In thy solitariness, meditate seri^usly of thy sins, of redemption by
Christ, of death, of judgment to come, of the glorious works of Gods
providence, of the joys of heaven, and the holiness there obtained, of the
torments of hell, of the vanity of all things under the Sun, of the true
glory of Christian graces, of the immortality of the soul, and of the sweet
and sumptuous feast of a good conscience, etc.

But here be wary, first, that there creep upon thy heart, no insnaring
delight upon the remembrance of some former sin that has been a minion sin;
secondly, that upon no imagina^y plot we entertain any project of a new sin;
thirdly, that the apprehensions of the exceeding riches of glorious grace in
Christ, be not an occasion of any looseness secretly in thy heart, to lessen
sin, or loose the reins to evil affections, but behold sin, as that that
nailed thy Savior to the Cross, and that which could not have been pardoned,
if the Son of God had not dyed for it.

7 Keep thy heart in the heart of inflamed love to God, the glories of whose
nature and in special, the riches of whose grace should in amore us: whose
works of merciful providence, and in special, the favorable audience of our
prayers, should fire us with desires after him, Psalm. 18. 1. and 116. 1.

8 Forasmuch as Christ will come at the last day in flames of fire, taking
vengeance on them that obey not his Gospel, and according to the Gospel,
shall the secrets of men be then judged; therefore it behooves all to take
special notice of the sins against the Gospel, and take heed they live not in
any of 2 These. 2. 9 Romans 2. 16.
them, for as nothing is more to the glory of God, and comfort of a man's own*
soul then to serve God in the Gospel of his Romans 1. 9. 2 Cor. 9. 13.
Son then ^ professed subjection to the Gospel, and to have ou^ conversation
in this world, not with 2 Cor. 1. 12
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace, of God, for in whomsoever it is found, in
them it is exceeding grace, 2 Cor. 9 14. so what is more damning then to turn
this grace into wantonness, and to transgress and not to abide in the
doctrine of Christ? Jude 4. 2 Ioh, 9.

To help thee herein I have A roll of the sins against the Gospel.
gathered a roll of the sins aagainst God in Christ, or against the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and do here present them to thee. Sins against the
Gospel are committed against Christ, or Christians, or Christian graces in us,
or men that are not Christians that live with us.

1 Sins against Christ are against, 1 Against Christ.
1. his person, 2 His natures, 3 His offices, 4. His doctrine, 5. His virtues
of life, 6. His ordinances 7, His spirit, 8. His day, 9. His discipline.

The sins against Christ are first against his person; so he His person
offends

That denies that Jesus of Nazareth is the Christ, Ioh. 8. 24. this man so
remaining shall dye in his sins, he is a liar, 1 Ioh. 2. 22.

That says that he is the Christ Mat. 24. 24. this is a false Christ.

That has base thoughts of Christ, Esa. 53. 3.

That denies the union of the humane and divine nature in the one person of
the son of God, Ioh. 1. 14. he beholds not his glory, the Glory as of the
only begotten of the Father.

Secondly against his natures His natures.
both Divine and humane:

Against his divine nature he sins;

That denies that Jesus is the Son of God, 1 Ioh. 4. 15.

That denies the Father and the Son, 1 Ioh. 2. 22. he is Antichrist.

That denies that God dwells in Christ bodily, Col. 2 9.

Against his human nature he sins.

That denies that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, 1 Ioh. 4. 3, this is that
spirit of Antichrist.

That denies he was like us in all things, sin only excepted, tempted like
as we are, touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Heb. 2. 17. and 4. 15.

Thirdly, against his Offices, His offices.
in the whole, and in the parts, in the whole, as against his Mediatorship,
and so he sins.

That worshippeth God without Christ, and not in his name Mediation alone, Romans
1. 9.

That says he has no sin, or has not sinned, as deeply as the Scripture
charge every man in Romans 3. 11. 12. etc. Psalm. 14. 1 Ioh. 1. 7. 8. there is
no truth in this man.

That sees not his estate of enmity out of Christ, for a Mediator, is not a
Mediator of one, that is, of parties that are alone and are not at odds. Gal.
3. 20.

Against his Offices in the parts, as against him as King, and so he offends;

That makes or takes traditions and precepts of men for laws and articles of
faith, Mat. 23. 8. 9. 10. this is to be called and to call men Rabbi, Father,
Master.

That exalts himself above all that is called God; or that is worshipped, so
that he as God sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God, 2
These. 2. 4, this is that man of sin, that son of perdition, that head of
Apostacy or of the Apostaticall Church that opposer, that Antichrist, that
wicked one; verse. 3. 8. 9.

That places Christ's kingdom in meats or drink, Rom 14. 17.

Against him as Priest both expiating and interceding:

Against his expiation are these sins,

The establishing of our own righteousness, Romans 10. 2. 3.

Expiating Ceremonies, Col. 2. 20. 16. 17. called rudiments of the world,

Having confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3. 3. that is in carnal prerogatives,
or ability. Glorying in any thing save in the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6. 14.

Against his intercession are these sins;

Angel-worship. Col. 2: 18. 18.

The mediation of Saints, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

Against him as Prophet of the Church are these sins;

Philosophy when it becomes vain deceit, Col. 2. 8.

The affectation of titles in the Church and the giving of flattering titles,
Mat. 23. 7.

The pr^ssing of thing arbitrary, as necessary and so to lay a s^are on
Christians, 1 Cor. 7. 6. 10: 25: 35.

Forthly, against his Doctrine His Doctrine.
there are diverse ways of offending; as to receive the grace of God in vain,
2 Cor. 6. 1.

To turn this grace into wantonness Jude 4.

To beguile or be beguiled from the simplicity that is in Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
11. 3.

To neglect our reconciliation Esa. 5. 2. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 20.

To use our liberty for a cloak or ^ccasion for, Maliciousness, Gal. 5. 13.
Licentiousness, 1 Pet: 2. 16.

Unbelief, an evil heart in departing from the living God, a soul that does
with draw: in whom the Lord says his soul does take no pleasure, Ioh. 3. 18.
36. Heb. 3. 12. and 10. vlt.

Impenitency, Mark. 1. 15.

Apostasy, 1 From the truth, Heb. 6 4.

2 From the practice of godliness, 2 Pet. 2. 29.

3 To the world from which we were redeemed, and had made an escape 1 Ioh. 2.
15. Demas his sin 2 Timothy 4. 10.

The Profaneness of Esau, Heb. 12. 16. For one morsel of meat he sold his
birthright.

Fear to confess Christ, Mat. 10. 32. 33.

To live without Christ and common with him, Ephesians. 2. 12.

To have a form but deny the the power of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 6

To speak evil of the good way of God Act. 9. 9.

To be ever learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth 2 Timothy 3. 7.

To wax worse and worse, 2. Tim. 3. 13.

Not to receive the love of the truth, 2 These. 2. 12.

Not to walk worthy our high calling, and Christ Jesus that has called us C^l.
1. 10 Ephesians. 4. 1, 2.

To sleep out the day of grace, and time of our visitation, Luc. 19. 42. Heb.
3. 7, 8. Ephesians. 5. 14.

Fifthly, against his virtues of His virtue^
life; so he sins, that does not imitate Christ in his praises, 1 Pet. 2 9.
Mat. 11. 29. Sufferings, 1 Pet. 2 21. Heb. 12. 2.

Sixthly, against his ordinances, His ordinance, as
whether against any of them severally, or all of them jointly. Against any of
them, as against prophesying or preaching, and so in the minister, it is
sinful.

To preach with wisdom of Preaching
words, 1 Cor. 2, 1.

To preach in an unknown tongue, or a style that passes the capacity of the
auditory, 1 Cor. 14. 19, 28.

To preach of envy, vainglory, or couetou^^esse, 1 These. 2. 5. 6. Phil. 1.
15, 16.

To run before he is sent, and crastily to creep in unawares, Ier. 23. 21.
Jude 4.

To teach lies in hypocrisy, and doctrines of devils, and not to bring the
doctrine of Christ, and God in him, 2 Timothy 4 1, 2, 3. 2 Ioh. 9, 10.

To daw be with untempered mortar, to prophecy visions of peace, when there is
no peace. To be women-Prophets, to sew pillowes to all armeholes, with lies to
make the heart of the righteous sad, whom God has not made sad; and to
strengthen the hands of the wicked, by promising him life: the misapplying, and
unskillful dividing of the word of God, and true doctrine, Ezekiel. 13. 14, 16,
18, 22.

To be as a dumb dog that cannot bark, or will not bark, or hunts up and
down for his covetousness, but wa^cheth not for souls, Esa. 56. 10, 11.
Phil. 2. 21. Heb. 13. 17.

Against preaching, in the hearer, it is sinful,

To despise prophesying, 1 These. 5, 20.

Not to receive Christ's Ministers, nor believe their report, Esa. 5. 3, 1, Mat.
10, 14, 15.

To put it from them, Act. 13, 46. this is to judge our selves unworthy of
everlasting lif^.

To gainesay, contradict, and blaspheme Romans 10, 21, Act. 13, 45.

To love the Minister the less, by how much the more he loves them, and can
spend, and be spent for them: and to reckon him their enemy, because he tells
them the truth, 2 Cor. 12. 15. Gal. 4. 16.

To have itching ears, that will endure sound doctrine, but after their lusts,
to heap to themselves teachers, 2 Timothy 4, 3, 4.

To withstand the passage of the Gospel, and envy the spread^ng of it, and to
forbid preaching, 1 These. 2, 16, Act. 13, 8, and 17, 5.

To receive to house, or bid God speed to him that brings not with him the
doctrine of Christ, 2 Ioh. 10.

To neglect or forsake the assemblies of Christians, Heb. 2. 3, and 10, 26.

Against hearing he offends, hearing.


That takes not heed how he hears, Mark. 4, 24. To this duty is required
special preparation.

That receives the word, as into the high way, or into stony ground, or among
thorne^, Math. 13, 3, to 8. which is expounded in verse 18, to 23. See the
place.

That he^reth, but is forget^ull, and does not practice, which is the best art
of memory, Mat. 7, 26. Iam. 1, 23, 24.

That marreth his taste with envy, malice, guile, hypocrisies, euill-speakings,
and brings not the desires of a babe newborn, 1 Pet. 2, 1, 2.

That humbles not himself at Gods feet to receive his words, laying aside all
superfluity of naughtiness, and receiving it with meekness, Iam. 1, 21.

Against prayer in the Holy Prayer.
Ghost: and so he sins

That neglects the privilege purchased by Christ, who ^y his blood has
opened the ^oly of holies, and made way to the Father, Heb. 10, 22.

That asks, and wauereth, ^am. 1, 6.

That asks to spend on his lusts, Iam. 4, 3.

That in asking is weary and faint, not pressing with holy importunity and
perseverance, Luc. 18. 1, 2, 3, 4.

That prays, but not all manner of prayer nor watches thereto, Ephesians. 6. 18.

That is not much in asking, till his joy be full, Ioh. 16, 24.

Against Baptism, and so he Baptism.
sins

That is ignorant of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, of their love, grace and
Communion into whose name he was Baptized.

That believes not the operation of God in that Sacrament. Romans 4. 11.

That rests in the outward washing without the answer of a good conscience, 1
Pet. 3. 18.

That lives in sin. Romans 6. 2, 3. The Lords Supper.


Against the Lords Supper: and so he offends;

That examineth not himself, nor judges himself before he come, 1 Cor 11.
28: 31.

That discovers o^ has any pride against the poor Saints, despising them,
not t^rrying for them or any way breaking fellowship and communion, ^ Cor. 11.
20, 21, 22, 23. This is not to eat the Lords Supper,

That discerns not the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11. 29. through ignorance or
otherwise.

That neglects to receive as often as he may, 1 Cor. 11 26.

That comes to the communion, and goes to mass or has any fellowship with
Idol worship, 1 Cor. 10. 21. 22.

That come together for the worse and not for the better, 1 Cor. 11. 17.

That eats with leaven in his vessel, 1 Cor. 5 7.

That come one hungry and another full, 1 Cor. 11. 21. 34.

That keeps not a solemn, faithful and feeling remembrance of Christ and
his death for him, Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 25.

Against all of them it is a All.
sin,

For the man in the Assemblies to have his ordinary cou^ring on his head 1 Cor.
11. 4.

For the woman in the assemblies to be without a covering, and to go in her
hair, 1 Cor. 11. 5 6. 7.

These are the sins against Christ's ordinances.

Seventhly, against his spirit it is sinful His spirit


To grieve the spirit, Ephesians. 4. 34.

To quench it in the motions thereof in our selves or others, 1 These 5. 19.

To lie against it and tempt it, Act. 5. 3, 9. the sin of Ananias and
Sapphira.

To set to sail, or offer to buy the gifts of the spirit, Act. 8. 13. the
sin of S^mon Magus.

To despite the work of it wilfully, Heb. 10. 26. the sin against the Holy
Ghost,

Eighthly, against his day His day so he sins;

That reckons it other then the Lord Christ his day. Rev. 1. 10. Psalm. 118.
24.

Not to be a willing people, in the day of assembling of his armies in the
beauty of holiness, Psalm. 110. 3.

Ninthly, against his Discipline His Discpline.
where those sins are eminent;

The sin of Diotrephes that loved to have the pre-eminence 3 Ioh 9.

The neglect of the excommunication of lewd brethren, ^ Cor. 5. 2.

To suffer a woman to preach Rev. 2. 20.

To suffer Heretics, that hold false doctrine, Rev. 2. 14, 15. and to admit
the doctrine and wills of Balaamitish seducers.

To lay hands suddenly on any, 1 Timothy 5 22.

To c^st out those that tremble at Gods word, Esa. 66. 5.

Thus of the sins against Christ. ^ Against Christians


2 Sins against Christians are committed against them either considered as
one body and members of that one body, or as set in private or several estates.

Against Christians considered as one body, there are these sins,

Schism 1 Cor. 12. 25. and Factions, 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13.

Want of fellow feeling 1 Cor. 12. 26.

Not improouing our gifts to their edification 1 Cor. 12. 7.

Not to think soberly and deal faithfully in our places and offices,
according to the measure of gifts and graces bestowed on us, Romans 12. 3, 4, 5 6.

Not striving together for the faith of the Gospel, endeavoring to be of one
heart, judgment, and mind, and to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace, Phil. 1 27. Ephesians. 4. 3.

Against Christians as set in several estates, he sins

That despises one of Christ's little ones, Mat. 18. 6 10. Or lays a
stumbling block in his way.

That judges this strong brother in the use of his Christian liberty, Romans 14.
3.

That mixeth himself and keeps company with lewd and disordered brethren 1
Cor. 5 11. 2 These. 3. 14.

These are the sins against Christians.

3 The third sort of sins against 3 Against Christian graces in us. as
the Gospel, are sins against Christian graces in us, such are, 1 Faith, 2
Hope, 3 The love of the Godly, 4 Repentance, 5 The affections of godliness.

Against Faith he offends; Faith


That believes not in Christ, for his justification and s^luation* Ioh 3. 17.

That examineth not himself whether he be in the faith or no. 2 Cor. 13 5.

That esteem^th not of Christ above all, and of all things else as dro^fe, that
he may be found in him, Phil. 3. 8 9.

That negl^cteth assurance, Col. 2 2. 2 Pet. 1 9, 10.

That wants faith to hold out in Prayer, Luke 18. 1, 8.

That calls in question the love of God in Christ in time of affliction,
fainting in himself, Heb. 12. 2 3. Esa 49. 15. and 40 27.

That bu^ldes not himself on his most holy faith, Jude. 20.

That lives not by his faith on the Son of God, Gal. 2 20.

Against Hope he sins; Hope.


That purifieth not himself as Christ is pure, 1 Ioh. 3. 2.

That abuses the world placing his hopes below, 1 Cor. 7. 30. 31. 2 Cor. 4. 18.

That neglects the study of the promises that concern our happ^nesse in
heaven.

That neglects preparation for death, Psalm. 49 Luke 12. 19. this is the fool.

That casts away his confidence, Heb. 10 35.

That ^ests in the spiders webb of a presumptuous hope, Job 8. 14, 15. he is an
Hypocrite;

That does not his diligence to attain and keep the full assurance of hope
unto the end, Heb. 6. 10.

Against love to the godly, it Love.
is a sin;

To hate the brethren, Caines spot, Ioh. 3. 12, 15.

To mock them, Ishmaels blot, Gal. 4. 29. Genesis 21. 9.

To deride the Infirmities of the Saints: Chams sin, Genesis 9. 22. 25.

To persecute them, though we should think we did God service therein, Ioh.
16. 2.

To have the faith of Christ with respect of persons, Iam. 1. 1. 2.

In doing good, not to prefer the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10.

To neglect the offices of love to Christ in his members, Mat. 25. 41. to. 46.

To offend the weak brother by the use of thy Christian liberty, while it is
left free, Romans 14. 15.

To wound the consciences of the weak 1 Cor. 8. 12.

To have our charity wax cold, Mat. 24. 12.

To seek to help a brother fallen and not with the spirit of meekness, Gal.
6. 1.

To say I have in vain washed my hands in innocence because the wicked prosper
and the godly are plagued every morning, Psalm. 73. 13, 14, 15.

To forsake the public assembly and private fellowship of the Saints, or not
to hold fellowship in the Gospel, though we otherwise have fellowship, not
considering one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works, Heb. 10 24.
25, Phil. 1. 5.

Against Repentance he sins; Repentance.


That con^esseth not his sins without hiding them, Pro. 28. 13. Psalm. 32. 34.

That mourns not for sins, Romans 2. 3.

That forsakes not his sins, Pro. 28. 13.

That repents faignedly, Ier. 3. 10.

That repents desperately, as Cain and Judas.

That repents by holues and in some things only; as Ahab and Herod.

That repents too late as did Esau. Job. 27. 9. Pro. 1. 26. Heb. 12. 17.

That refuses to return,

That will not frame his doings to return, Hos. 5. 4.

That falls into the same sins after repentance, Hos. 14. 1, 4.

That falls away from his repentance quite 2 Pet. 2. 19, 20.

That clo^kes an Impenitent heart, which is done these ways.

By resting on the outward work of religious duties. Mat. 3. 8, 9.

By resting on privileges, John 8. 33. 34.

By resting on a pure profession and association to virgin professors, or
respect unto or with some eminent Minister, Mat. 25. 1. 2. Ioh. 5. 46. and 9 29.

Against the affections of godliness, The affections of godliness.
thus he sins;

That loves not the Lord Jesus in sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24. 1 Cor. 16. 12.

That rests in the name that he is alive, but yet is dead, Rev. 3. 1, 2.

That loses his first love, Rev. 2. 4.

That is neither cold nor hot, Rev. 3. 15.

That presses not forwards but looks back to what he has attained as
sufficient. Phil. 3. 11. 13.

These are the sins against 4 Against men that are not Christians that live
by us.
Christian graces.

4 The fourth sort are against not Christian men that live with us, or men
without, to whom the report of our profession comes; here he sins,

That spends himself in judging of them 1 Cor. 5. 12.

That forgets that gentleness and meekness that should be showed to all,
knowing what once we were, Tit. 3. 2, 3.

That walks not wisely to them that are without, Col. 4. 5.

That walks scandalously or offensiuely, 1 Cor. 10. 32.

That neglects those things that in their eyes are winning, and may adorn
his profession. Tit. 2. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 2.

That neglects the study of those things that will preserve the honor of his
person. Phil 4. 8.

Thus for our obedience in 3 Rules about thy hope.
which we abide with God as Christians.

Moreover, in as much as, in our calling to be Christians, our new birth
entitleth us to the inheritance of heaven when we dye, so that the Lord
knows all such for no less then his sons and heirs in Christ, all the days
of their life; That the Christian may abide with God, he must be rightly
ordered about his hope. And here

1 Thou must study the promises Psalm. 119. 49. and 16. 9. 10.
that concern the glory of heaven, and the resurrection of thy body at the
last day: for hope is of good things to come, which God has promised, and
faith believed. Behold then the salvation promised, and pray that the Lord
would open the eyes of thy understanding, to see the hope of thy calling, Ephesians.
1, 18. so shall thy hope of glory, cause exceeding joys, and admired patience
in greatest miseries, when thou shall upon wise computation conclude, that the
sufferi^gs of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8, 18. I Will give you but a few places for
taste, for the glory of the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15, 42, 43. Phil. 3, 21: for
the glory of heaven, Ioh. 15. 24. Psalm. 16, 11. 1 Ioh. 3. 2.

2 Do all diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end, Heb. 6, 11. in
the labors of love, ministering to the Saints out of that love we bear to
Christ's name, verse 10. and in setting before us the faith, patience, and good
works of those which now inherit the promise of heaven, verse 12. The ground
of a lively and good hope, is Christ in us, Col. 1, 27. and we may be assured
our hope abuses us not, if it press us to purify our selves, as Christ is
pure, 1 Ioh. 3, 3. Desiring further conformity to his image; with, and through
whom, we are heirs of glory: and if it leave us more humble in our selves, and
more diligent in the use of the means of grace.

3 Form in thee, frequent meditations of heaven, the love of Christ's
appearing, and the patient waiting for his coming. To these the Lord direct
all our hearts, 2 These. 3, 4.

In this manner abide with God, all thy life, mourning for thy failings, and
pressing on toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

. XXIX. The order of our lives in the several changes of our fading condition.
NOw for the several changes To abide with God.
of thy mortal condition, the Apostles rule in general is, Therein abide with
God: as,

1 In thy wealth.
1 Remember, that thou neither 1 In wealth
ascribe to thy self the power to get riches, but acknowledge them to come
from God: nor forget God in thy abundance, that therewith thou should make
provision to fulfill the lusts of the flesh; but that thou serve the Lord with
more gladness and cheerfulness of heart for the abundance of things thou
possessest: nor yet trust in thy riches, but in the living God, who gives
richly all things to enjoy; and seeing the vanity and danger of riches, and the
uncertainty of thy life, be humbled in thy self, and carry low thoughts, and
divorced affections in the midst of thy welfare. It is usual with rich men to
be swollen with pride, to think themselves the happiest under Sun, to reckon
they are in Gods favor, because they prosper in the world, and to award all
reproves in the ministry, and checkes of their consciences, and thoughts of
examination of their estate with God, with the view of their large possessions,
and full bags: but that prosperity is a curse which thus affects us, Let the
brother of high degree, rejoice in that he is made low, Deuteronomy. 8. 11. 12. 18.
and 28. 47. Hos. 2. 8. Iam. 1. 10. Take h^ed of pride and carnal confidence.

2 See that thy heart be not set on them; thou may not love them, for the
love of money is the root of all evil: but possess the things of this world,
as if thou possessedst them not, Psalm. 62. 10. 1 Cor. 7. 29. 30. Thou may
both buy and possess, but not forget that thy abiding city is above, nor set
up thy rest in these momentany things, Psalm. 49. 11 So to do, were
covetousness, and does prove us under the power of folly: as was that fool in
the Gospel, that said to his soul, Soul, thou have goods laid up for many a
year, eat, drink, and be merry, Luke 12. 19. 20.

3 Make you friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when ye fail, they may
receive you into everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. How is this done? Be rich
in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate: this is to lay up
in store for our selves, a good foundation against the time to come, that we
may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19. Again, buy the truth, and
sell it not, Pro 23. 23. Advantage thy spiritual estate hereby. That dwelling
is not well situated, that wants the watercourse and rivers of divine
Scripture flowing by it; this is the river that makes glad the city of God,
Psalm. 1. 3. and 46. 4.

2 In afflictions of any sort.
1 Pray and cast out perplexed 2 ^^ afflictions.
cares, role them on God, who cares for thee. The name of the Lord, called
upon, is a strong tower, the righteous flee to it, and are safe, Psalm. 50. 15,
and 55, 22. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Pro. 18. 10. And in There is a voice in every work of
God, whereby God speaks to man.
thy prayer, 1. desire to know the meaning of the rod, and to hear Gods voice
sp^aking in it, Job 34. 31. 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God; I have
borne chastifement, I will not offend any more, that which I see not, ^each
thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more, Mic. 6. 9. The Prophet
teaches, that in every affliction, the Lords voice cries to us, so that our
wisdom is to see his name, and to hear the rod, and who has appointed it.
2. Ask wisdom how to behave thy self under it, Iam. 1. 5.

2 Bear it with patience and subm^ssion, taking in good part the Lords
chastisement, Leu. 26. 41. 1 Pet. 5, 6. Humble thy self under the mighty hand
of God, that he may ex^lt thee in due time: and that patience may have her
perfect work in thee, watch against ^re^ting at God or man, Psalm. 37, 1, 7, 8,
and 39, 9. ^ea^inesse under the chastising hand, Pro. 3, 11. the lifting up of
thy soul to ill means, Esa. 28, 16. The resting on second causes as Asa did
on the Physician, dismayednesse, and dejected thoughts, to say thou shall not
see God and his salvation promised, he will not be so good to thee: or to say,
my way is hid from the Lord, my judgment is passed over of my God, Esa. 40,
27, 31. Job 35. 14, 15. questioning whether he can do for us as he has done
for his people formerly, Psalm. 78, 19. 20. and desperate resolutions; to say
with the stubbor^e Jews, in Ezok 33, 10. If our transgressions and our sins
be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live? Hearken what
God says, as I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn
ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye, O house of Israel? verse 11.

3 Learn righteousness; this is all the fruit God looks aft^r to take away
thy sin, Esa. 26. 11. and 27. His corrections are a wind to fan and to
cl^an^e, Ier. 4 11. which is done

1 If thou search and try thy ways, and avoid carelessness, Pro. 14. 16. Job
36. 8. 9. If he smite, fear and depart from evil: cry, when he binds thee,
l^st like an hypocrite thou heap up wrath, verse 13. Lam. 3. 40.

2 Walk in thy integrity, Pro. 19. 1.

3 Watch against discouragements, Pro. 24. 10. nor questioning Gods love for
the outward distress, nor fainting in thy good way; the way is not to be
judged by the afflictions, but the afflictions by the way.

Trust in carnal Friends, and arm of flesh, Pro. 27. 10

Sudden Fears, Prou. 3. 25. Psalm. 1 12. The righteous is not afraid of any
evil tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.

3 In Po^erty.
1 D^ss^mble not, make not ^ In po(...).
thy self poorer then thou art. Solomon had observed such a disease as this
amongst men: there is, says he, that makes himself rich, and yet has
nothing; and there is that makes himself poor, yet has great riches.

2 But be it so thou art poor indeed, seek to be^ rich in faith, that Christ
may live in thee, who is our riches; and rejoice herein, that thou art exalted
to be hei^e of the kingdom, Iam. 1. 9. and 2. 5.

3 Walk in thy integrity, Pro. 19. 1.

4 Live by faith, Psalm. 34. 5. 6. 10. Mat. 4 4. Feed on the promise, and
depend on Gods allowance.

5 Dwell in the land, and be doing good, Psalm. 37. 3. Abide in thy place, and
remove not without thou can in a lawful way; see the Lord himself thy guide
and leader.

6 By contentation live without couetings, and desire to see therein the gain
of godliness, that thou may learn to have want, and to be hungry, as well
as to abound, and to be full, Phil. 4. 12. Heb. 13. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 6. 7. 8.

4 In Sickness.
1 Seek first to God, and 4 In sickness.
then to the Physician, as the ordinance of God; and in thy seeking to God,
confess against thy self, thy sinne^ to the Lord, imitate Hezekiah, Esa. 38.
1. and do not as did Asa, 2 Chro. 16. lest a disease in the feet sooner cut
off thy days, then a grief at the heart, Psalm. 32. 5:

2 Send for the Elders of the Church, that they may pray for thee, Iam. 5. 14.

3 Set thy soul in order, for faith in the Lord Jesus, repentance toward God,
love to men, hope of heaven: and set thy house in order, that thy last will may
testify all this.

4. Let thy soul s^lace her self in that Psalm of David, the 41. to the
increase of the care of duty, and of the power of comfort, and support of heart.

5 In Persecutions.
1 Let all thy sufferings from 5 In pe^secutions.
hand or tongue of the wicked, be for the name of Christ, and for well-doing,
that thou may suffer as a Christian, not as a malefactor: that if any evil
be spoken of thee, or objected against thee, it may be falsely spoken and
objected, Mat. 5. 11. 1 Pet. 4. 15. And here see thou conscionably for the
Lords sake, reverence dignities, and obey authority in whatsoever is not
repugnant to the word of God, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 15. 16. that it may be said of
thee, as once of Daniel; we shall not find any occasion against this Daniel,
except we find it against him concerning the law of his God, Dan. 6. 5.

2 Remember what it will cost thee to be a Christian; thou must deny thy self,
and thine own life, Lu^. 14. 26. 2 Timothy 3. 12 and therefore think it not
strange, if a fiery try all should happen, as if some strange thing had
happened, 1 Pet. 4. 12.

3 Commit the keeping of thy soul to God in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19.

4 Be not afraid of the terror of the wicked, neither be troubled, but
sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready al ways to give an answer
to every man that asks a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness
and fear, 1 Pet. 3. 14 15. So shall you witness a good confession, and shall
be acknowledged by our Savior, at the last and dreadful day, Mat. 10. 32.
33. Thou shall Heb. 11. 27
not fear the face of a Pharaoh, if thou have seen him that is invisible.

5 Receive the sentence of death in thy self, that thou may not trust in
thy self, but God that raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1. 8. 9.

6 Let thine eyes be set on things that are not seen, which are eternal.
Look out to the better refurrection, that thou may not pass for
deliverance: thy dyings for the Lord Jesus, will be but such light
afflictions, as the heart may run away with 2 Cor. 4. 17. 18. This will also
keep thee from the snares of the world^ enticements, as it did Moses, Heb. 11.
24. 25. 35.

7 Leave not till thou can be in sufferings, as a sheep dumb before the
shearers; yea, let thy heart be filled with such love to God and man, that thou
can pray for thy persecutors, and bless them that curse thee, Mat. 5. 44.
Esa. 5. and 53. 7. and in all, committhy cause to him that judges righteously,
1 Pet. 2. 21. 23.

8 To help thee herein, behold the examples of all the heirs of promise, the
whole cloud of witnesses, which compass thee in this way; the worthies of the
Old Testament, Heb. 11. the Confessors and Martyrs of the New Testament, Reu.
^2. 11. and chiefly the matchless pattern of our Savior, Heb. 12. 2. who
for the glory set before him, despised the shame, and endured the gaine-sayings
of sinners.

9 Add withal, the consolations which are not small; for consider,

We are made conformable to Christ in sufferings and death, and therefore we
shall in glory, 2 Timothy 2. 11. 12.

Christ accounts them the residue of his sufferings, and i^ all our troubles is
troubled with us, Act. 9 4. Col. ^. 24. Esa. 63. 9.

We are sure of the supply of the spirit of Jesus, Phil* ^. 19. 20. who will
also rest upon us, as the spirit of glory and of God, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

He that created, formed, and redeemed thee will be with thee, Esa. 43. 1. 2. 2
Cor. 4. 8. 9. 10. 11. and as the dying of the Lord Jesus is borne in thy body,
so the life also of the Lord Jesus shall be manifest in thee.

Right dear in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 116. 15.
The first man that came to heaven was Abel the just, Crowned with the crown of
Martyrdom.

Digest these and every of these rules, that thou may walk with God in all
changes of thy condition in life.

. XXX. Preparations for death: or how to dye.
THere remains yet one H^^ die
thing of no small moment, that concerns his abode with God in or about his
last work, he has to do in this world, which is the laying down o^ this his
earthly Tabernacle, the change of changes here belo^e, truth it is that an holy
life, such as hitherto has been pourtrayed ever ends in an happy death, and
again, How to die whosoever has learned, has learned also how to live, yet there
are specialties of direction which the Christian, above all before said cannot
well want* and there is a special preparation for the undergoing so terrible a
change. Take them thus; they concern.

1 The curing of the diseases 1 By the curing of diseases.
of our Souls, of which we are all sick to the death and all about this
point of death,

2 The estamping on us the care of necessary duties.

1 The diseases which our hearts are oppressed withal and subject unto are
these five,

1 Forgetfulness of our latter end Deuteronomy. 32 29.

2 Desperate resolutenesse upon the memory of it, 1 Cor. 15. Esa. 22. 14.

3 A Covenant with death and hell, making lies and vanity our refuge, Esa 23.
15.

4 The choosing of death to be rid of the miseries of life, the impatient
desire of death, Ier. 8. 3. Job. 3.

5 The fear of death which brings into bondage, Heb. 2. 1^. 15. The cure of
forgetfulness.


For our forgetfulness, it is cured

1 By information of our selves in these things, the br^u^^y and vanity of life
and of all things in the world: and the certainty and uncertainty of death; of
the breu^^y of life we have three ^estes, Nature, Experience, and Scripture,
but Scripture witnesses it most lively, where the basest things and of least
continuance are taken to as bearing the fittest resemblance thereof, it is a
vapor^ a weauers shuttle, a post, a ship in the Sea; a bubble, a flower of the
field, grass, a shadow, a dream, a thought. Of the vanity of all things under
the Sun, Solomon has sufficiently spoken in his Ecclesiastes, or book of
the Preacher, the certainty of death, depends upon decree and statute Law, it
is appointed that all shall dye, Heb. 9. 27. and we know death has reigned
from Adam to this day: we have three nuntioes sent by death, casuality,
infirmity, and old age: nay death has already seized on us in changes of our
age, in aches, in sorrows in sicknesses, so certain is it, ^et not so
certain to be, as uncertain in what kind, at what time, in what place it
shall be.

2 By watching against the causes of incog^ancy which are cheifely two, the
natural security of our hearts, and surfeiting on earthly things, Luke 12. 19.
and 21, 34. these both must be shaken off,

3 By Prayer, God only can teach this lesson, we must come to his school, and
our prayers must be to him for this thing, Thus did David Psalm. 39. 6. and 90.
12.

For desperate resolutenesse The cure of resolutenesse.
upon the memory of our end, it is a disease which we are subject unto when
the evil corrupt heart forced to the apprehensions of its mortality by the
pursuit of his own thoughts and the daily cry of a faithful Ministry, or the
constant and frequent view of death, griefs face is awakened but not truly
but in a frenzy, as it were, and concludes, die we must, we are all mortal,
Come then, let us eat and drink let us take time while time serve, tomorrow
comes and we are not. This sore and evil disease shall be healed.

1 By considering the greatness of the sin which is fully declared by the
Prophet Esaias, when he says, And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of
hosts; Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, says the
Lord God of hosts, Esa. 22. 13. 14.

2 By discovering the original whence it springs, that that may be lamented
over, namely Atheism and an heart void of the knowledge of God and set upon
evil with a spiritual madness 1 Cor. 15. 34. 3^.

3 By the contrary good, a waking, which is to righteousness, not to sin, 1
Cor. 15. 33 34:

For our Covenant with death m^king lies our refuge, it is the The cure of
security
reasoning of the heart that says, We have done what wise men should do,
because we like politicians and worldlings have fortified our selves with the
best earthly helps for body and state, for our selves, for ours, and yet no
thought of serious provision, How we might be built on the sure foundation
stone Christ Jesus, the Lord directs us in this point in Esa. 28. 16. That we
come as living stones to Christ that corner stone elect and precious, and be
sure we be laid and built on him by believing: for he that believes in him
shall not make have, nor be ashamed of his hope, Or it is the reasoning of the
heart that says, death is a debt we owe to nature: but this must not pass for
good with Christians, for death in its nature is the wages of sin, death in
its change, is a sweet sleep in Jesus, sure of a blessed awaking at the
resurrection of the just: it is then the beginning of eternal woe to him that
dies in his sins, but the door to eternal bliss to all that dye in the
Lord. Or this Covenant is that refuge of lies, we are not likely to dye yet,
strength is in our body, milk in our breasts, marrow in our bones: and age is
for the sad and grave duties of devotion and piety, but let Job speak what
pleasure have thou in thy house after thee, Job. 21. 21. 22 23. 24. 25.
when the number of thy months is cut off in the midst? Shall any teach God
knowledge? Seeing he judges those that are high? One dies in his full
strength being wholly at ease and quiet, his breasts are full of milk and his
bones moistened with marrow: and another dies in the bitterness of his soul,
take not upon thee to instrect God, he can smite thee with death in the
highest of thy pride and midst of thy welfare, and he does it often times, but
say thou live to the gray hair, yet know that is the evil day, ageit self is
a disease disabling to duties of religion, youth is every way fittest, let
Solomon tell thee, Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth before the
evil day come of which thou shall say I have no pleasure in it Eccles. 12. 1.

For the Impatient desire of The cure of the impatient desire of death.
death, it is cooled and tempered 1 ^^ by strength of judgment we know and
knowing resolve that affliction is to be chosen rather then transgression, Job
36. 20. 21. the contrary hereunto made Job impatiently to wish the day of his
death. Job. 3. 2 If we consider that God teaches by his works, and herein none
like him, Job. 36. 22. 3 If we weigh well what Jobs speeches cost him;
humiliation to dust and ashes, though they came out of great extremities which
wrested them from his heart, otherwise full of patience, but now distracted
almost through bitterness, Job. 42. 6.

For the fear of death, it is a The cure of the fear of death.
disease hereditary, derived to all Adams children, yet is, must, and may be
cured: it may be cured, Heb. 2. 14. 15. 2 Cor. 5. 5. it must Luke 14. 26. Rev.
22. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 3. 4. the desire of heaven is a part of the seed which is
cast into the furrows of our hearts in our regeneration. I know there is a
fear of death which is merely natural, a shrinking from it and shunning of
it as of a thing hurtful, because it dissolues the union of soul and body,
for a time: but we speak of that distempered fear which leads into bondage,
abeslauing fear which suffers not a man to think of death or happiness after
it, and leaves the heart impotent and void of all spiritual courage, comfort,
and counsel. Again there are men of two sorts, some that live and dye in
their sins, have cause to fear death, in these a cure can never be wrought,
not that the medicines are unavailable, but because they cannot be brought to
take the receipts, Some that dye to their sins before they dye, in these that
beslauing fear may be cured, and has in such usually heretofore beone cured.

Death is the King of terrors, consider it, in its real nature and hue: Its
vizar assumed.

Its native hu^ is terrible.

1 In the cause, Sin, Gods wrath, Satan the executioner who has the power
of death, Heb. 2. 14.

2 In the nature thereof; in it self, opposite to life a punishment of God, a
destroyer of natures fabric, a dissoluer of this earthly tabernacle,

3 In the effects, which are A deprivation of Friends, pleasures, honors,
riches of this world. The good we might do in Church, Commonwealth, Family. A
deprauation of the state of the body, leaving it a cadauer, a carcass, in the
grave.

4 In the affrighting concomitants, terriculamenta mortis: which are miseries,

Corporal, Painies, Agonies sometimes which do befall Gods children.

The kind of death,

Spiritual Terrors from Satan and from God himself, Temptations, Unquietness
and angor of conscience.

In its vizar it is fearful as it comes into our minds,

As the depriuer of happiness, as if it separated from God.

As if it had no other face then that of wrath and curse from God, and were in
its nature no way corrected.

How shall these darts be quenched? Briefly.

1 The cause of death is to be euacuated

1 By the death of Christ and our assurance of our part therein, whereby the
favor of God is established upon us and the Serpents head crushed, Heb. 2. 15.
Death is a Serpent, the sting is sin, the strength of that sting is the law:
victory over it is by Jesus Christ who satisfies the law. 1 Cor. 15. 55 56. 57.

2 By mortification of our beloved sins and by our study to keep a
conscience void of offense toward God and man.

3 By receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper often, wherein we show forth
the Lords death until his coming again 1 Cor. 11. 26.

2 The nature of death in it self, is terrible indeed, but to the godly it is
changed, Rev. 14, 13. insomuch that their condition is blessed, for they rest
from their labors, their works follow; no loss of any good work that ever
they did, no condemnation to them. Romans 8. 1. it is no other then a sleep 1
These. 4. 14. a day of liberty, Romans 8. 21. our return to our home; to
everlasting habitations, the mansions in our fathers house, our birth day, the
funeral of our vices, the putting off our old clothes, that we might be
clothed upon 2 Cor. 5. 3. 4. the remoouing out of a mudde house where we ^ere
but tenants at will; into the palace of the great king, Lord of heaven and
earth, there to dwell as in our inheritance for ever, the end of our race; the
day of our coronation, no punishment now, there are three degrees of life
eternal, of which death is our entrance into the second, in this life in
regeneration, Ioh. 17. 3. in the day of our departure, in translation to
Paradise 2 Cor. 5. 8. at the last day, in the redemption of our bodies. Romans 8.
23.

3 As for friends whose society thou loosest, oppose thereto the meditation of
that glorious place to which thou go, an inheritance, incorruptible,
undefiled, that fades not, the fellowship of Angels, and the congregation of
the first borne, and the spirits of just men and women made perfect: the
communion with God and with the Lord Jesus, for while thou art present in the
body, in the best condition, thou art absent from the Lord; that Lord, whom
though thou never saw, yet thou love, and beli^uing, reioycest with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory: How then shall thy soul burn with the flames
of love to him, when thou shall see him? 1 Pet. 1. 8.

And when the thought of thy treasures and pleasures meet thee, bethink thy
self of thy calling and profession to be a Christian, that is, o^e conformed
to Christ, whose kingdom is not of this world, whose life was glorious in a
holy contempt of the world. Say then with Paul, God forbid that I should
rejoice, save in the Cross of Christ, whereby the world is crucified to me,
and I unto the world, Gal. 6. 14. What comfort can thou have, that thou art
not a cast* away, if thou beat not down thy body, and bring it not into
subjection, although thou were a Preacher of the Word, and diligent in that
work? 1 Cor. 9. 24. There are two sorts of men, men of this world, men of God;
they differ herein, the men of this world are such as place their happiness in
a belly full of this hid treasure, and wealth and lands enough to leave behind
them to their babes: but the other are men after Gods own heart, carried with
the spirit of David, that in the love of righteousness can say, Deliver me
from these men, for as for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, while
I live here, and when I awake at the resurrection of the just, I shall be
satisfied with thy likeness, Psalm. 17. 14. 15. 16.

4 Oppose to the thoughts of the good thou might do, these s^uory
meditations, that God has set thee thy time, and he knows how long it is fit
for thee to work: that he can provide men endowed with spirit and power to
effect what good he will have wrought: that thou may wound thy soul by
miscarriage of weighty employments, as well as honor God by the well-managing
of them: beware that vainglory, or some unclean affection put not forward
this desire: and know, thy holiness is not hindered, but perfected by going to
heaven.

5 And for thy mis^e in thy family* I beware thou be not guilty of ascribing
ought to thy providence, wit, poines, or hand, but to Gods blessing, which can
by thee, and can without thee, sustain them in t^e^r necessity. 2 see that
thou rest on the promises of God, and refer them to him, the faithful
Creator, 1 Pet. 4. vlt. that heavenly father, who knows we have need of all
these things of life, Mat. 6. 32. That father of the fatherless, and judge of
the widows cause.

6 Oppose to the thoughts of the vileness of thy body, the glory of the
resurrection, when this vile body of thine shall be made like the glorious
body of thy Savior, Phil. 3. 21. whom thou shall be hold, not with other, but
with these same eyes, though now thy reins should be consumed within thee by
some loathsome disease. When this corruptible shall put on incorruption, this
mortal shall put on immortality, this natural be raised spiritual, this
weak body, raised in power* and this body sown in dishonor, raised in
honor, 1 Cor. 15. 43. 53. Job 19. 25. 26. 27.

And to thy lying in the grave, set 1 our Saviors burial, who has by his
own body, laid in the grave, perfumed thine, and turned it from an hole of
contempt, into a garner to reserve the Lords purest grain. 2 The nature of it;
what is it else save a sweet rest in our bed? Esa 57. 2. 3 The union and
communion we have with Christ, is most near and indissoluble, Romans 8. 38 He is
now the God of Abraham. Our very dust is yet in covenant with God, and not
dismembered from Christ's body, Mat. 22. 32.

7 For pains, ag^nies, and the kind of death, 1 Remember that all these were
s^nctified to the Christian in the ignomini us and paine^ull death of the
Cross: there they all lost their sting and poison. 2 All is yours, life death,
by famine, persecution, sword, 1 Cor. 3. 22. 3 God is your God and guide unto
the death, Psalm. 48. 14. 4 Take heed ^hou offend not against the generation of
Gods children: if by prosperity or adversity thou conclude any man; happiness
or misery before God. How goes it with the ungodly? they prosper in the world,
they have no bands in their death, their strength is firm, they are not in
trouble as other men, neither are they plagued like other folk. In the mean
while, what is the estate of a David? let himself te^l: All the day long have
I been plagued, and chastened every morning, Psalm. 73. 4. 6. 14. Being then
settled in this persuasion, that the Lord is thy shepherd, say, yea though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for
thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me, Psalm. 23. 1. 4.

8 For temptations, terrors, and angors: know, 1 That the Anointing abides
with us for ever, 1 Ioh. 2. 27. 2 Now is thy faith proved not to be temporary,
if thou canstrest on the word of promise, when thou have no sense and feeling,
but of terrors, Heb. 11. 1. Job 13. 15. 3 Thou have heard of the patience of
Job: Oh see what an end the Lord gave to his trials: for the Lord is very
pitiful, and of tender mercies, Iam. 5. 11.

9 For the vizar^, if death present it self as the depriuer of happiness, it
is clean contrary: rather is life so to the godly, who while he is present in
the body, is absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8. 9. And all in life is full of
vanity and vexation of spirit: while we live, we are liable to Gods
corrections, to the prevailing of sin, to the bewitching enticements of the
world, to the buffetings of Satan.

But look upon death in Christ, and not in Moses, and it is comfortable, as
the final close of all miseries to soul and body, and as the door and gate
of all heavenly refreshings, 2 Cor. 5. 1. 2.

Thus of the ear to be ^r^ug^t upon us, that we may ^^e happily: the duties
follow.

2 Secondly, when these diseases 2 By the care of duties.
are cured, estampe on thy h^are, the care of these duties, which will keep
thy soul always in an holy temper.

1 Medi^ate seriously and frequently on death, that thou may a^t^ine to that
pitch of perfection to dye daily. This produces six rare effects, 1 The
flight ^f sin, Lam. 1. 9. 2 The contempt of the world, 1 Cor. 7. 30 31. 3
Selfe-denyall, 4 The right guidance of the present li^e. 5 The true moderation
of present joys. 6 The right diuident dijudica^ion of a present and future
life. This should be began in our youth, Eccles. 12. 1. Job 14. 14.

2 Meditate oft^n judgment and hell, and the glory of the heaven of the
blessed.

3 Practice the three theological virtues, as they are called in Schools,
^aith in the premises, hope of good things to come, charity in making you
friends of the unrighteous Mammon.

4 Have always an eye to those three gracious directions given by our Saui^ur,
Luke 12. 35 36.

1 To have your loins girt, ^. corruption of nature, and inward ^u^ls thence
issuing, so striuen against with strength of resolution, that they may not hang
about the feet of our souls in running the race of godliness.

2 To have your lamps in your hands burning, that is, our holy profession
adorned with the shining light of good works.

3 To watch, to prayer, to the opportunities of well-doing, to the seasons of
grace, and against our corruptions.

5 Remember Paul's Ethickes, every day to prac^i^e them, ^^^t. 2. 12.

To deny ungodliness and worldly lusts.

To live godly, righteously, soberly.

Practice them with three duties,

1 Prayer in special for preparation for death, and deliverance from the
former diseases.

2 Almesdee^s.

3 Fastings, as occasions shall be offered.

6 Look to the casting up of thine accounts, and there chiefly order thy
self for these two things,

Forgiveness of wrongs done to thee.

Satisfaction of wrongs done by thee.

When thou art in the very confines of death, death standing before the door,
then see these three duties of special moment.

1 Thy reconciliation to God: and here present the grounds of thy hope to thy
able Pastor, requiring his Ministerial sentence, and testimony concerning thy
estate in Christ. Know the ordinance of the keys is of no small use and
comfort, Ioh. 20. 23.

2 The profligation of temptations, looking with a steadfast eye on the reward,
through the promise.

3 The excitation of that Christian (...), or desire to be dissolved, that thou
may say with good old Jacob: Lord, I have waited for thy salvation, Genesis 49.
18.

In the very agony of death, and deposition or laying down of thy body, how
glorious is it?

To dye in the faith.

To excite our hope and desire of heaven.

To commit our souls into the hands of him that rede^med them the Lord God of
truth, Psalm 31. 6. saying, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Amen, Even so be it.

. XXXI. Peculiar rules applied for the passing every day.
BY Gods assistance, the rules Rules applied for the p^ssing of the day.
of hol^ li^e have hitherto been taught, rules not now and the^ to be looked
unto, but constantly, nor generally, but particularly in all our actions, every
day, and throughout the day, that we might serve the Lord in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life: bless him every day of our life, and
think of him all the day long. But this it may be, (such is our weakness and
the backwardness of our hearts to good) has scarce found a place in our
thoughts as yet: and where it has, yet know they not how to order them
handsomely to a daily direction. To help this also I now apply my self; making
a draught of certain rules out of Gods word, by which you may be enabled every
day to pass the day according to Gods will with sound peace, for this
undoubtedly is required of us, a faithful and constant endeavor to please God
in all things every day of our lives to the peace of our consciences and the
glory of God.

And because some think it The warrant of it.
strange it should be required of them, to be kept in compass every day, some
think the ^abbath is enough to attend to a religious holy conuer^atio^* some
say, I hope we be no children to be appointed what we should do* some think
it is not to be thought the Lord should direct a man to every various action
which meets him in the day, some can be content to receive the thing of the
day in his day from Gods hand, but never thought of doing the duty of the day
in his day to God again: and so never passed a day in all their lives, of
which they could in all actions or ever did depend on God in those particulars
and abide with him by faith, therefore I have selected that place in Pro. 6.
20. 21. 22. to take off all these conceits and to prove the necessity, the
excellency of this course, if every day through the whole day we pass it
according to the warrant of Gods word. The words of the text are these.

Pro. 6. 20. My Son keep thy Fathers Commandment: and forsake not the law
of thy mother.

21 Bind them continually upon thine heart, and ty them about thy neck.

22 When thou go, it shall lead thee: when thou sleep it shall keep
thee; and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee.

1 Here first it is fully charged every day to have the commandments bound
upon our hearts, for continual remembrance, tied about our necks, as Jewels
for esteem and ornament: and for use to lead us in our goings, to keep us in
our sleeping, to talk with us in our awaking, accommodated and fitted in all
to our own particular in every moment of times changes. ver^. 21. 22.

2 Therefore, the Sabbath though it have its more special attendance on Gods
Service in his ordinances and that only: yet, is not all the time God
requires, for an holy conversation: nay all times h^lily, though not all time,
in the duties of reading, hearing, prayer and the like verse. 21.

3 And I hope you will be and are Wisdoms children, who in these words
speaks to you as to children, My Son verse. 20. and offers her self as a
mother, and God a^ your father, yea I hope you will be children to learn of
wisdoms maidens, even your Ministers instructing you from Gods mouth. You
must be appointed, else are you bastards and not sons.

4 And for specialty of direction: the word, if thou remember and price it,
will guide the day and night, awake, asleep, at thy going out, and at thy
coming in, verse. 22.

5 And thus walking thou art sure of sweet communion with God the father, and
with Jesus Christ the wisdom of his father: no father and mother more
tendering their child, the^ the Lord will tender thee while thou seruest him,
verse 20 and thou art sure of preservation in the life of grace and way of
holiness, the C^uenant it self has the power to lead thee, to keep, to
comfort thee, as a friend. Counselor and guide from thy vp^ising to thy
downe-l^ing. Nor i^ the Governing of our lives left in our own hands one day:
nor were it good for us, who are given to change, if it were so: for we were
then no way assured of the protection of our heavenly father and blessed
Savior, nor of a safe footing in any of our ways.

This for the Text; according The copy of it.
to the warrant whereof I beseech you receive the Copy of your ^aily direction
thus:

1 Awake with God, let thy heart sing his power and mercy in the Morning. Psalm.
59. 16. in the Morning direct thy self vnt^ God and look up. Psalm. 5. 3.
prevent him in the morning. Psalm. 88. 13. it matters much upon whom thou
bestowest thy first thoughts.

2 Let thy apparel be such as becomes those that profess godliness,
expressing modesty, shamefastness, and sobriety 1 Timothy 2. 9. 10. Neither
costly beyond ability or to hinder good works; nor garish for the fashion
beyond modesty, nor strange for new-fanglednesse, there is the apparel of good
works: the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit: likewise suffer not more time
then needs to be spent about this trimming of thy carcass.

3 Turn thy self in solemn manner to prayer with confession, Thanksgiving
and petition: acknowledge thy dependence on God, seek of him thy daily bread
and daily forgiveness and renewed strength against temptations: etc. and if
thou have a family, neglect not to call them together at the conuenientest
time, Ier. 10. verse. 25. use it not as a custom, nor as if that one little
space o^ deuo^ion did buy out a pardon for the rest of the day to live as thou
listest, no, it is to enable thee the better to walk in the day with God.

4 Follow thy calling with cheerfulness, diligence and quietness 1 Th^s. 4.
11. do thy labor as a duty, not with the desire to be rich, which is both a
sin and a snare, be content with Gods blessing in the success he gives,
avoiding cares, and abhorring the sins of deceit and fraud.

5 Walk with God, Genesis 5. 22. remembering his all-eying presence, approving thy
heart to him that sees in secret, observing his way in his works, his
blessing on thy works, and providence for thy preservation; that thou may
walk with an enlarged heart in thankfulness, ready pressed to obedience, and
^kept in his fear all the day. Pro. 23. 17.

6 When occasion of speech is, let thy words be gracious always, Col. 4. 6.
witnessing the grace of thy heart, ministering good to the hearer, Bridle thy
tongue, that thou be not guilty of the usual vices thereof, lying, swearing,
filthy spe^ch, foolish talk, jesting, raising, whispering, standering* with
all light unsavory speeches, call to thy mind those two Texts, By thy words
thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned: and again,
of every Idle word that a man shall speak he shall give account at the day of
judgment.

7 For thy company, keep company with the godly, choose them and in other
company when thy calling leads thee^ have with thee the salt of Mortification
and Discretion: and be ready to do or receive some good, abide in such company
no longer then thy calling requires.

8 For thy meals, look up to heaven and give thanks. Mat. 14. 19. be not
oppressed with drunkenness and sur^etting, Luke 21. 34. Forget not the work
of the Lord, the end why he gives us food, that we might live to him. Esa. 5.
12. Gather up that which is left that nothing be lost, Ioh 6. 12. remember the
poor that dwells by thee.

9 And because recreations may be used sometimes and are an honor we owe to
our bodies, See.

1 That thy sports be not only lawful but of good report.

2 That they be not Costly, nor cruel, nor ingrossers of time, nor incroachers
upon heavenly comfort, nor diminishers of our delight in God, or in our
callings, nor deuourers of spi^ituall joy.

10 And because many have much time that may be spared, all some time, Redeem
the time, to holy duties, Ephesians. 5. 16,

11 In thy solitariness spend (...)me well, watching thy thoughts.

12 In prosperity let thy heart grow more cheerful in all duty, and forget
not that God that gives it.

13 In adversity, Consider, prepare for it, ponder thy ways, search thy
heart, turn to the Lord from the sins whereby thou do offend, receive it
m^ekely and patiently, accepting in good worth the chastisement of thy sin.

14 Examine thy self at night and be still, view thy actions and Gods
blessings in the day, let them administer to thee matter of deprecation,
supplication and thanksgiving which do thou offer up to God as thy evening
sacrifice, then thy feeling will make the fervent.

15 Be not given to sleep, think of God in the night watches, desire of him
that thy reins may instruct in the night season, and muse not mischeife upon
thy bed, as the wicked do that fear not God Psalm. 16* 7. and 36. 4.

Then ^et thy heart say: I will bless the Lord, who has given me Counsel.
Psalm. 16. 7.

So far the rules that form us as Christians.

THE THIRD PART.
. 1. The Order and use hereof.
ALl the rules The order
foregoing respect us as Christians, and form us so far forth: but we both as
borne and as borne-againe are placed in conditions and states of respect one to
another, and none of us absolute and of our selves, All men that live on the
earth are made of one blood, propagated from one root, and from thence have
flowen into families, commonweals and Churches: and living in them, are
members of them, and partake necessarily of their wealth or woe, now were thou
fashioned in some measure to the former doctrine, yet there r^maines a further
polishing, that thou may be on all hands prepared to every good work; rules
that may direct in these bonds of relation, are every way necessary: We
therefore shall proceed to these of this nature, they guide a Christian
Magistrate, a Christian subject; a Christian Husband a Christian Wife; a
Christian Parent, Christian Children; a Christian Master, a Christian Servant;
a Christian People to their Pastor* the Pastor of Christ to the flock; to
right Christian demeanor each to other.

Moreover, upon a further in^ent view we shall find some conditions, men are
placed in, not so expressly contained within those forenamed bounds: and of
every of them question will be moved, what shall ye do in this estate? These
conditions are partly of more private state t^^n the former, yet relative, as
neighborhood, friendship, enmity; and partly of more priuacy or lo^enes, as
of the aged, the youth, the maid, the widow, even to these has the Lord
Condescended The use.
in his word, and given some special though brief direction. I desire for my
part to withhold nothing from you willingly: lest you should be left men half
qualified Men of half perfected virtue.
Semiperfecta virtutis hoyes, as Philo calls them, and you should be found in
any respect; Ephraim-like, as a Cake not turned. Hos. 7. 8. Give leave a little
and silence whateuer gain^aying thoughts might arise against this obedience;
know, that Gods law is an absolute rule not only for matters of piety, but
also, for an holy policy, the eternal law giver interposeth, as men's frowa^d
hearts will term it, but in very deed proposes and of right imposes upon us
these following duties: never was O^conomickes Ethickes and Politickes
perfected till the God of order gave Theology. Let this g^ue law to them, and
then Solon, Lycurgus and Numa may lay their hands upon their mouths. I wonder
not at wise king David, who made Gods statutes the men of his counsel. Psalm
119. 24. hereby he became wiser then his enemies. But I cannot but admire the
folly of those that prefer the mean shallow reaches of their own brains,
and let Gods law stand before the door, who fetch the masterpieces of their
policies from Machiauell, and not from the word and mouth of him, who is
wonderful in counsel: yet these dream of a wel-ending loose to those
proceedings that thwart the law of the most high. Such wily foxes how often have
we seen caught in their own craftiness. And what folly is it in masters of
families, in husbands and ministers, to rest in directions of their own, when
they might have rules so clear from Gods word; to press and persuade you, let
me inform you in two things: first that it is not left as arbitrary, but it is
commanded that we obey in these: not fear, nor custom, but conscience must
strike the stroke; as the Apostle Paul tells us in one of these for the rest.
Romans 13. 5. secondly that duties to man perfo^med in obedience to Gods law are
acceptable and well-pleasing services and Sacrifices to God, Heb. 13. 16. Col.
3 24. on the contrary duties to man neglected, or injury done to man, is not
only a trespass against man, but a sin against God himself. Iam. 1. 27.
pure religion and undefiled before God is to visit the fatherless and widow.
This spoken we address our selves to the rules of this nature, and there
first begin with such as concern the Magistrate and Subject.

. II. Of the Magistrate and Subject.
THe Magistrate has his The Magistrates duty.
power of God, Romans 13. 1, Let him not think much to take his direction from
him, the wisdom of God says, counsel is mine and sound wisdom: I am
understanding, I have strength, By me Kings reign and Princes decree justice:
By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the judges of the earth, Pro. 8. 14.
15. 16. Take her advise and she will (...) Phil. de creation^ principis.
lead you in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of
judgment, that the may cause those that love her to inherit substance, and she
will fill their treasu^e. Pro. 8. 20. 21. Large promises and to the heart of
Princes, have they but faith to trust her of her word, sure they shall never
see that time, wherein one man rules over another to his hurt, Eccles. 8. 9.
Oh blessed are they that keep her ways, Pro. 8. 32. Hear then the
Instruction and refuse it not.

God has thus ranked all in Government, they are The King, as supreme: The
Governors sent by him. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.

Accordingly he has ranged his precepts and Counsels to Kings* Inferior
Magistrates.

He has Charged his king for ^ The duty of the King.
His kingdom, His court: both for Piety, Policy.

For Piety in his Government; For his kingdom. le plain ba^ser. Away with
Antichristian pride, it cannot be veiled by that text in Esa. 49. 23. the
ordinary gloss says on that place. L^ngens puluerem pedum tuo^u^, o ecclesia
primitiua, in persona Capitis t^j Jesus Ch^ist^: and Basil on Psalm 36. (...).


1 That he have the book of God with him, to read in it all the days of his
life Deuteronomy. 17. 19. 20 that neither pride may make him outrageous to his
brethren, nor impiety disobedient to God.

2 That he cast his scepter at Christ's feet: and give him the kiss of
subjection. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, offer him your auxiliary hands
and faithful mouth, Psalm. 2. 12. shall ye lose by it? honor him, and for a
recompense, he will honor you. 1 Samuel 2. 30. maintain his King^ome, your
dominion shall ^ee siable, your name shall endure for ever and be continued as
long as the Sun, Psalm 72. 18. 17. be a nursing father to his Church, ( Esa
49. 23.) and thy Cities shall fl^urish like grass of the earth, and here it
belong to kings.

To cut off false Prophets: Heretics and perverse and incorrigible seducers,
and blasphemers, Lev. 24. 16 2 King. 23. 20. Dan. 6. 23. these are the pest of
Church and state.

To throw down the Altar of Baal, and not to suffer Altar against Altar,
Gedeon ^ke erect the Lords Altar, Iehouahshalom, but down with the Altar of
Baal and the grove that is by it, so shall thou purchase that excellent and new
name Ierubbaal, and let Baal plead against thee, and Balaam curse too: Oh that
all Princes would set for their patterns those famous kings, and rulers, the
Lords worthies, fathers in Israel Asa 2 Chro. 15. 8. 12 13. 14. 15. 16.
Hezekiah 2 King. 10. 4. 5. 2 Chro. 31. 1. Josiah 2 Chro. 34. Nehemiah; Neh. 13.

To publish Edictes for the maintenance of true religion and to see that
Christ's doctrine and discipline be preserved 2 Chro. 29. 9 Dan. 3 29.

3 That he prouideable men, such as fear God, to be Governors and judges under
him. Exodus 18 21. The wicked walk on every side, when vilest men are exalted.
Psalm. 12: 8. and Solomon tells us what experience makes good, when the wicked
rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish, the righteous increase, Pro.
28. 28. but who are they; Encroaching Abimelecks, soothing Absaloms, Ambitious
brambles, and flattering Doegs.

For Policy,

1 He must care for the weal Salus populi, summ^ lex esio. Haereditatem
Caelisoli.
of his people, to this must he look as to the Pole star while he guides
the ship of the commonwealth, maintaining their inheritances, liberties,
privileges and persons, to this end it is his part to see that his people may
increase, their multitude is his honor; their decay, his destruction, Pro. 14.
28. and chiefly provide that righteousness may flourish among them, for
righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a shame to any people, Pro. 14.
34.

2 He must see that judgment may flow down, as the rivers, the kings strength
should love judgment, Psalm. 99. 4. hereby shall he establish both the land and
his own throne, Pro. 29. 4. 14. this note was the Swa^ne-song of the sweet
Psalmist of Israel, which the God of Israel, the rock of Israel, spoke to him,
he that (...)th men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. and he shall be
as the light of the morning when the Sun rises; even a morning without
clouds, as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining
after rain. 2 Samuel 23. 1. 3. 4. It is his glory to sit personally on the
throne of judgment, and the fruit is great, he scatters away all evil with
his eyes. Pro. 20. 8. Every king is ^ judge, though every judge be not a king.

3 It is his Glory to search out a matter, Pro. 25. 2. The holy Ghost records
herein the high praise of King Solomon, 1 King. 3 16. to the end, deciding the
case between the two harlots. And Job says of himself, I was a father to the
poor, and the cause which I knew not I searched out. Job 29. 16.

4 He must abominate all wickedness, Pro. 16. 12. This is the Groundsell of
the kingdom of God^ own Son, Psalm. 45. 6. especially 1 Harkeni^g to
flattery and lies. Pro. 29 12. 2 The condemning of the just Pro. 17. 26. 3 To
s^ite Princes for equity Pro. 17. 26. 4 Carn^ll confidence, 5 Covetousness, 6
Polygamie, Deuteronomy. 17. 16, 17. 7 Drunkenness and Gluttony, Eccles. 10 17. Pro.
3. 2. 3. 5. 8 Las^iuiousnesse, Pro. 31. 2. Eccles. 7. 28. 9. Chil^ishnesse,
Eccles. 10. 26. 10 Oppression, Pro 28. 16. 11 Wilful inflexiblenesse, Eccles.
4. 13. 12 Alliance with the open enemies of Gods truth. 2 Chr. 19. 2. and 20.
35. 36 37.

5 He must look to these virtues, mercy and truth, the best court of guard,
Pro. 20. 28. Power over his passions, Pro. 25. 28. and 16 32. Bounty, as the
prolonger of his days, Pro. 28. 16. Wisdom to scatter the wicked and bring
the wheel over them, Pro. 20. 26. Temperance, Valor, Pro. 30. 31 Secrecy or
reservedness, Pro. 25 3.

6 He must bestow his favors on the deserving, Pro. 19 6. and by no means
exalt a servant over Princes, this is one of the four things which the earth
cannot bear, Pro. 30 22. and 19 10.

7 He shall do wisely and safely in peace and war. if he do all by
Counsel, Pro. 24 6.

For his household both for For his Court.
piety and policy, I persume not to deliver ought of mine, as neither durst I
in any of the rest, but shall content my self with what is delivered in the
Psalm 10 1. Which presents all kings of the earth with a perfect draught of
heavenly Government.

He but give the sc^le^ion, or Anatome, which will be found excellent to
behold: but much more amiable, were it covered with flesh and skin. Yet if
any in high place shall chance to look on it, that same God that gave life to
dea^ and d^y bones, that same God I say, breath upon these lineaments, that
life may enter into them.

Here is in this 10 1. Psalm, a Prince taught of God.

For the manner of instruction,

1 In a third person, David, on whose heart was drawn this sacred plat-forme,
that no^e might conceive it to be some Platonicall Idea, and reject it as
vna^taineable, nor any take it for some mean piece, unworthy a royal and
brave spirit.

2 In a Psalm, that while it is sung, and the doctrine with warbling Notes,
suits the heart through the ear, the spirit of government and of God, that
was on David, might fall on him. A Psalm of David.

For the matter taught:

The graces Royal, mercy and judgment, which graces are caracteristicall to a
King, the limits of his proceedings, the glory of government, the qualifiers
of reformation:

The end and aim taken with a single eye, the glory of God, verse 1.

The rules for administration of royal power, whose

ORDER teaches,

1 That the rise must be at his own person and spirit.

An evil man cannot be a good King.

That his sentence may be divine on the throne, Divinity must be engraven on
the door posts of his soul, in the table of his heart,

2 That the next principal care must be for his house, lest from thence
profaneness and wickedness go forth ou^r all the land.

3 Then soon shall he set and see Church and State happy.

Nature respecting,

Integrity, that it be whole, sincerity, that it be in truth.

HIMSELF, that he

Keep piety, a perfect way.

Prudence in a wise behavior.

Uprightness, whose

Seat, the heart.

Nature, integrity that it be whole.

Sincerity, that it be in truth.

Use, walking in it.

Place of exercise, the house, and of entireness, at home, as well as in
foreign dealing, in his house, as well as in Gods house.

All which must be followed, with

Patience, never in ought hasting the Lords decrees, or hasting to ill means.

With prayer, in a lowly dependence upon God for assistance.

With an eye ever to his death, and the time of reckoning, when account must be
given of the stewardship, verse 2.

That he avoid

Presumption,

Idolatry, the thing of Beliall, which has nothing to do with Christ.

Apostasy, verse 3.

Frowardness of heart, wayward against God, and bitter toward man.

Acquaintance with lewd persons, and wicked things verse 4.

2 HIS COURT.

Abandoning

The whispering Slaunderer, verse 5.

The ambi^ious proud man,

The deceitful,

The Liars, verse. 7.

Entertaining

The faithful, the plainehearted,

The godly, the vpright-liued. Of these will he take

1 For counsel,

With great choice, his eye set to the work.

Looking to their fidelity and piety, else wisdom is but emptiness in heart.

Babbling in word.

Folly in deed.

Taking of the Natives, not strangers, who cannot tender so well the good of
the State.

Men experienced in the aff^ires of that State.

Giving them liberty to sit with him in counsel, and to speak their
consciences freely, verse 6.

2 For service, who is so fit as a man of a good conscience, that preferres
uprightness in his ways, before all things in the world.

3 HIS KINGDOM, the civil state, the Church.

Punishing malefactors with diligence, dispatch, constancy, and impartiality.

The end of all is the good of the Church and State, being the Lords rather
then his, verse 8.

Hitherto of the supreme Magistrate: 2 The duty of inferior Magistrates.
all others are Governors sent by him, the specialties of their duty are
contained in these following rules.

1 They must know the power given into their hands, that accordingly they may
execute their office. Some have a greater power, some a less, conferred upon
them, some in peace, some in war, some Counsell^rs, some Senators and Judges,
etc. Some law-keepers, as Justices; what ever the power entrusted to them be,
that must they understand, that he a^rogate not what belongs not to him, and
that he neglect not what he ought to see to.

2 They must remember they are to give account, as to God, so to the King:
whose mouth, eyes, and hands they are.

3 Their characteristicall properties, and the virtues they should press unto,
are these following.

1 Wisdom and understanding, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Government is the feeding and
leading of the people: He that is Governor, must be provided of the
instruments of a Pastor, thou must be experienced in the affairs thou would^st
manage, that thou may lead the people by the discretion of thy hands. This
is the ability to apply the power that is in thy hands to the good of the
State, as the matter shall require. Great is the good may come by such wise
Magistrates: By a man of understanding and knowledge, the state of the land
shall be prolonged, Pro. 28. 2.

2 Courage and zeal, able valiant men must they be, masters over their
passions, and stout in their places, Exodus 18. 21. Masters over their passions,
else rage will transport, favor will bow, and every other passion of the heart
bear sway to the perverting of judgment, and blinding the eye of right reason.

Courage also needful here, if any where, for it is thy part to take the prey
out of the Lions mouth, to rescue the innocent made a prey; to maintain the
right of the fatherless, Job 29. 17. It is thy part, without fear of man's
face; equally to impart justice to all: it is thy part to rise up against the
monsters of the time, Drunkards, Blasphemers, Swearers, Fornicators, Idle
persons, and the like. What heroicke spirit had thou need of, to stand in the
stream, and turn the current of the time? Is it a soft, timorous, sheepish
spirit; is it not an undaunted heart that beseemes you? Stir up thy spirit,
contend for God, for thy Country, for thy King, for thy charges good. Would any
stay the sweet streams of justice from running down in the streets? pray
with Nehemiah, O God, strengthen my hands, Neh. 6. 9. 11. Does any offender
ask, is it peace? answer with that courageous, what peace so long as thy
wickedness remains? and when thou find the mistress of disorder, the
mystery of the knot of wickedness in the place where thou art: if it scorn
thy proceedings, cry who is on my side, who? Let not her painted face allure or
entice, cry throw her down, and then trample her under feet, 2 King. 9. 22.
Do great ones offend, contend even with Nobles, and let them feel the dinte
of thy sword, Neb. 13. do thou think of the trouble; Ease slaies the
foolish, and delicacy is not to be looked for in government, do thou fear
oppositions? Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good, 2 Chr.
19. 11. So shall the wicked fear, the godly love, and all reverence thee, but
if not, thou and thy authority will be contemned, and kicked-against by every
worm.

3 The Fear of God, whose is the judgment, who sits with them in the
judgment; 2 Chro. 9. 6. 7. Exodus 18. 21. What do thou a Ruler in Israel,
without religion? God sits in the assembly of Gods, and fear thou not
him? Thou can not do justice, that carest not for religion; well is the
unjust Judge described by our Savior in the parable, he feared not God,
neither regarded man, Luc. 18. 4. But who is the Magistrate that fears God?

He that fears nothing but Be not like Gallio. Act. 18. 12.
the offense of God, not the face of man.

He whose care is to promote religion, and to do good to the house of God,
Neh. 13. 14.

He whose conscience leads him to the duty he owes, without looking on what
will follow: that he refers to God.

He that dares not justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous, Pro 24. 25.

He that dares not violate the band of his oath.

He that dares not use his power, or rather, abuse it, as an instrument to
wrecke his private revenge, nor despise the poorest under his rule, nor wry for
affection, nor respect a poor man in his cause, nor follow a multitude to do
evil, Exodus 23. 2, 3.

He that rules as one that must give account of his power.

He to whom that is as impossible which he may not do, as that which he cannot
do.

He that thinks nothing impossible to do which his place requires.

4 Lovers of truth they should be, men of truth, sifting out the truth,
standing for the truth, hating tale bearers, prompters, and sycophants, the
false pleadings of unconscionable Counselors, the iugling conueiances of
Atturneyes, and bringing judgment to the balance.

5 Justice which carries an (...), quasi (...), per medium transiens.
equal hand in all causes and cases, it hears causes speak, not persons, it
knows not bribery against, nor for the innocent; it shakes his hands from
such gains, it has both ears open, but never an ear to lies; it dares not
say with Caine, Am I my brothers keeper? It casts out pity and favor, it has
a bended brow on the whisperings of a great neighbor; it fears to be
accessory, by admitting needless suits, protracting just suits, and rash
imposition of oaths; it scorns to look at displeasure, revenge, or
recompense; in a word, as a just law is an hear^ without affection, an eye
without lust, a mind without passion, a treasurer which keeps for every man
what he has, and distributeth to every man what he ought to have: so is a just
Ruler.

6 Hatred of covetousness, as the root of all evil, as the canker of all the
former virtues, a right hand full of bribes, has a left hand full of mischief
for his companion. And is it not abominable, that a slave to Mammon should
Lord it over men? to set your hearts against it, remember what Paul calls it,
filthy lucre.

4 Remember the end of your ordination and mission, which is, for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2.
14. Thus ye carry not the sword in vain, Romans 13. 4.

So far the Magistrates duty: now to the duty of the Subject.

The Subjects duty is contained The sub^ects duty.
in these.

1 Honor, Romans 13. 7. For they are powers, the Sun and Stars shining in
the firmament of the State; they are Gods, both as Gods deputies and Viceroyes;
and as they bear his image in authority and souer^ignty, speak not evil then
of dignities; conserve their actions in the better part, fear and reverence
them, and be thankful ^or them, Eccles. 10. 20.

2 Obedience, Tit. 3. 1. knowing that God is the author of Magistracy, Romans 13.
1. and Magistracy is ever good, even when the Magistrate is evil. Great also
is the good by Magistracy received; public peace and perfection, that we
might enjoy temporal things in safety, and follow our callings in quietness,
and a receptacle for the Church, where she may lodge, as in an Inn; and if
they be Gods that are in power, they are the very nursing fathers, and nursing
mothers of the Church.

3 Loyalty, whereby we resolve and endeavor to the utmost of our power, to
preserve and uphold the persons, rights, prerogatives, crown and dign^ties of
Princes.

4 Maintenance, paying tribute, Romans 13. 7. So did our Savior, giving to
Caesar that which is Caesar's.

5 Subjection and submission, 2 Pet. 2 13. Romans 13. 1.

To their laws, punishments, injuries, as David and Christ, and the Apostles,
submitted to the injurious dealing of Saul, Pilate, and the Tyrants, when
perhaps they could have made resistance.

6 Prayer, 2 Timothy 2. 1.

And all this.

To all sorts of Magistrates; to the King as supreme; to Governors sent by
him, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.

To every of their ordinances, though humane, if not contrary to Gods word, for
there we are to obey God rather then men, and be it his commands be in point
of Gods worship, so far as belongs to the circumstances, How and when, being
in things indifferent in their own nature, and that he also profess to
disclaim all opinion of holiness, worship, merit, and necessity, there must
we be subject.

And all this

For the Lords sake, and for conscience sake, Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. and notonely
for fear, with cheerfulness.

Our bodies and goods at their disposing, not our souls and consciences.

Without suspicion of them, or evil thoughts.

And all this by all subjects: as,

Though we be Christians, and the Magistrates Pagans:

Though we be strangers while we are wi^^ in their gates.

Though Churchmen, Romans 13. 1. even every soul.

And in all, be sure thou meddle not with th^se that are given to change, or
the s^ditious Pro. 24. 22. But fear thou the Lord The Courtier.
and the King, and put not forth thy self in the presence of the Princ^, nor
stand in the place of great men, Pro. 25. 6. 7. But i^ thou be a Courtier, some
particular rules must be added.

1 Look after wisdom, without which, thou will* bring shame even upon the face
of Majesty, Pro. 14. 35. This true wisdom is founded on the true fear of
God, and is attained by meditation in Gods statutes, Ps. 119. 13. This wisdom
will do that which riches and diligence, or remove from his presence, will
not, even pacify the wrath of a King, which is as messengers of death, Pro.
16. 14. Eccles. 8. 3.

2 Let righteousness and grace be in their lips, proceeding from the
unfeigned love thou bear to pureness of heart. These are the delight of
Kings, these draw the love of Kings, Pro. 16. 13. and 22. 11.

3 Diligence in thy business will make room for thee in the Kings presence,
Pro. 22. 29.

4 If thou have by ignorance, or against thy will offended thy Lord and master,
rush not headily to what may enrage him, lest thou sin against thine own
soul: but by long forbearance and soft answers, show thy patience: this has
eloquence to persuade, and a secret force to break the bones, Pro. 20. 2. and
25. 15. Beware how thou stand in an evil thing for he does whatsoever pleases
him, Eccles. 8. 3.

5 Improve thy power, though to hazard of place and life; if the matter so
require, for the good of Gods Church and religion, after the famous examples of
Hoster, chap. 4. 16. and Nehemiah, chap. 1. 11. and 2. 1. 2. 3 4. 5. The
Ambassador.


If thou art an Ambassador, there is requisite,

1 Wisdom and prudence, to know thy place and employment, and how to apply it
to the occasions, and this wisdom guided by piety, He that sends a message
by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the feet, and drinks damage, Pro. 26 6.
Eleazar, Abraham's servant may be the pattern for them in this point, and those
that follow, Genesis 24.

2 Faithfulness in the business committed to him, it is health, and
re^reshing to the soul of him that sent him, Pro. 25. 13. and 13 17.

3 Expedition and speed, when the desire comes, it is a tree of life, but
hope deferred, makes the heart sick, Pro. 13. 12 As vinegar to the teeth, and
as ^moake to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him, Pro. 10. 26.

I^ a Counselor of State, these The Councelcellor of State.
special directions.

1 Let pie^y be at the right hand of policy, never give advice to strengthen
the hands of thy sovereign, by enterprizing any evil action, as did cursed
Achitophel, 2 Samuel 16. 21. 22. Neither advise thou against the public good of
the people, as if a King were not absolute, that tendered their grieuances, as
did R^hoboams greene-headed Statesmen, 2 King. 12. 10. 11.

2 See thou give a right answer, and seasonable, every one then will kiss thy
lips, and thy word fitly spoken, will be like apples of gold with pictures
of silver, Pro. 24. 26. and 25. 11.

3 Be acquainted well with the Histories of the old Testament, and the menaces
of the Prophets which threaten National plague^ against National sins, that
those sins and their spreadings may be wisely discerned and prevented: and
account it the chiefest part of thy wisdom, not proudly or scornefully to
observe those threatenings written in Scriptures, or pressed by Gods Ministers:
Solomon says, scornful men bring a city into a snare, but wise men turn
away wrath, Pro. 29. 8. Sure it is the Lord never brought a sweeping judgment
on a people, that once he has taken for his own by covenant, but the same
might have been foreseen in the warrings of conscionable Ministers, that
ambitiously seek not themselves, if their admonitions had been observed.

4 Seek the good of the op^ressed, and think not of excuses to withdraw thy
helping hand. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn to death, and
those that are ready to be sl^ine; if thou sai^st behold we know not; does not
he that pondreth the heart, consider it? and he that keeps thy soul, does
not he know it? and shall not he render to every man his works? Pro. 24. 11.
12.

5 In all determinations, cast first for compassing the means, readily to
bring them about: Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thy self in
the field, and afterward build thine house, Pro. 24. 27.

These concern the Magistrate and Subject, the essential parts of a
Commonwealth: we descend next to the family, and there first, form the
Husband and Wife.

. III. Of the Husband and Wife.
THe first couple in the family, The duties of the husband and wife.
in order of nature, and in the erection of a family, is the Husband and Wife:
where duties of sour sorts concur to their wel-being. Officia.
Fundamentalia. Mu^ua. Particularia. Resultantia Which are 1 Fundamental.


Fundamental.

Mutual, in which both stand equally charged.

Particular, which both owe a part.

Such as arise of these.

1 The fundamental duties, concern their holy coming together, which ought
primarily to be heeded, for matching together according to Gods ordinance, we
may depend upon him, for a blessing on his own ordinance, whereas a godless
entrance brings necesarily (unless God by an high hand direct it) misery and
m^n^fold inconveniences, together with the wrath of God: what then are these
duties?

1 One man must have but one woman at once, nor one woman more then one man,
thus in the institution of marriage, Genesis 2. 24. Upon which the Prophet
Malachie comments thus: Did he not make one; yet had he the residue of the
spirit^ and wherefore one? that he might seek a godly seed: therefore take
heed to your spirit and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his
youth. For the Lord the God of Israel says that he hates putting away. Mal.
2. 15. 16. and our Savior reads it. They two shall be one flesh: and the
Apostle Paul calls it the Law of the Husband or of the wise. Romans 7. 2.

2 Theremust be observed a sufficient distance in blood, by those that enter
this estate, that the marriage be not inc^stuous, so the degrees forbiden are
set down in Lev. 18.

3 Equality in religion is on both ^ands to be looked to, that we be not
unequally yoked with unbelievers: and equality may be extended also to age,
estate and dispositions, that to the being this latter to the welbeing of
marriage. 2 Cor. 6. 14.

4 Freedom from the law of another husband or wife, as that she be not the
betrothed or unjustly divorced wife of another man.

5 The Consent of parties, that the match be not forced, and of the Parents or
Guardions, that the match be not stoll^n,

6 The avoydance of persons infamous or fowly dis^ased with the Leprosy, the
French Pox or the like:

These rules let all observe that would lay an happy foundation of a holy
family, respecting their own or their posterities good: whereas he that dare
ouer-leape these bounds, and break into holy wedlecke, may expect the curse of
God, without repentance staying his hand lifted up.

2 The mutual duties of 2 Mutual.
husband and wife are

1 Matrimonial fidelity, that he play not the baggage with the wife of his
youth, and that she forsake not the guide of her youth nor forget the Covenant
of her God. Mal. 2. 15. Pro. 2. 17.

2 Matrimonial love,

3 Due benevolence, the one not defrauding the other, unless it be with
consent and that for a time, that they may give themselves to prayer, lest
Satan tempt them for their incontinency, ^ Cor. 7. 3. 4. 5.

3 The particular duties: 3 Particular.
and so the duties of the Husband first, are these,

1 Cohabitation, dwelling The husbands duty.
with her as a man of knowledge: dwell with her, not dwell with drunkards,
whores spend-thrifts gamesters, not spend thy days in tippling houses and
tauernes, no, nor ever or most an end in thy neighbors house. And dwell with
her as a man of knowledge, for prudence beseemes him to whom dominion and rule
is given, neither is it permitted to them, but on condition, that they wisely
govern them: for see thou a man not able to rule himself, how shall he rule
his wife? Where should knowledge reside but in the head? else may we say with
the wolf in the fable O what a head without brains
o quale sine cerebrocaput? Know then, thy authority over thy wife is not
tyrannical, knowledge is opposed to tyranny, passion, testiness, which
distempers of heart it easily suppresses: but that barbarous imprudency which
knows how to define of nothing aright is the cause of arrogance, tyranny and
injurious dealing.

2 Honor to the wife as to the weaker vessel and as one that is or may be
coheire of the grace of life with thee, as the help given thee of God, thy
only like, and now as by creation, so by conjunction in Matrimony, thine own
flesh: not trampling on her because the weaker, but therefore putting on her
the more abundant honor: this is done.

1 By using her as thy companion, thy glory, with all signs of estimation
according to her rank in the family, and her relation to thee, respecting her
as the Lord gave her to be, thy help, thy like, thy companion in life. 1 Cor.
11. 7.

2 By covering her infirmities. in Giving soft Answers in her waiwardnesse, and
showing her her fault afterward. Forbearing to speak to her disgrace before
others.

3 By pleasing her in what ever may be to her edification. I Cor. 7. 33.

4 By suffering thy self to be entreated, admonished and advised by her in
cases reasonable and good, Genesis 21. 12. whose advise would be good, for God
has framed her fearful and thee stout, and resolute, her suspecting all
dangers, and thee looking to thy attempts, not to light objections, which
sometimes not regarded are the greatest over throws to weighty undertakings.

5 By entrusting her with such things as are meet and her gifts are fit for in
the family and in thy estate, not commit^ing them to servants or others before
her. Pro. 31. 11.

6 By yielding her freely all due praises Pro. 31. 28. 29.

And that both these may be performed, hear a third duty.

3 Love, the character of a good husband, chiefly required, wherein the man is
ready soonest to err, that which makes his authority sweet and amiable, and
best framing the wife to a cheerful yielding of her reverend subjection to
her husband. Herein fashion thy heart to all affectionatenesse, err thou in
her love continually says Solomon, Pro. 5. 19. Rejoice with her, all the days
of thy vain life. Eccles. 9. 9. Be not bitter to her in words, quarrellous,
testy, passionate, reproachful for her infirmities or deformities, nor in
deeds in discourteous usage, unjust restraint, and blows. Col. 3. 19. but
nourishing and cherishing her as thine own flesh: and tendering her souls good
by counsel and comfort.

4 Providence in two things (...) vxoria.


1 In maritall protection, Ruth. 3. 9.

2 In procuring necessaries for the wi^e Esa. 28. 3. According to ability, so
laboring in his calling that he may provide for her while he lives, and leave
her somewhat when he dies.

5 Piety, going before her in all holiness and godliness; cheifely.

In prayer in the family, 1 Timothy 2. 8. by which our meats and labors are
sanctified and without which the family is in danger of Gods high displeasure,
Ier. 10. 25. and he himself bears the brand of a profane A theist Psalm. 14.
4. of the lets and hindrances of this duty he must especially beware, 1 Pet.
3. 7.

In family instruction, Genesis 18. 19. Psalm. 78. 2. 3. 4. Deuteronomy. 66. yet not
intruding into the Ministers office, as taking upon him to expound further then
the recital of what he has learnt, and the application of plain texts, to
the necessities of the family, the places before alleged tell wherein this duty
lies.

These are the duties of the Husband more especially, the duties of the wife
are these.

1 Obedience in all things, subjection to her own husband I The wives duty.
Pet. 3. 1. Tit. 2. 5. Ephe. 5. 22. This is the Character of a good wife; to be
wise, prudent, chaste, rich, beautiful, loving, yea religious, without
obedience is not pleasing to God, nor agreeable to nature. This subjection is
due to him, be he poor or rich, if she were a Lady and he an Husbandman,
Vashti the Empress is not exempted in this point, Hest. 1. 12. 20. She must
Submit to his directions, 2 King. 4. 22. Ephesians. 5 23. and to his restraints
about diet, apparel, and company, Genesis 3. 19. so subject that she desire to
please him. 1 Cor. 7. 34.

2 Honor, as to her superior and head, 1 Cor. 11. 3.

In giving reverent titles, 1 Pet. 3. 6.

In being his image or his glory, bearing forth the amiable and praiseworthy
qualityes that are in him, and bearing her self according to his degree and
place at home and abroad. 1 Cor. 11. 7. and representing his authority in the
family in his absence.

In living without suspicion, making the best construction of his doubtful
actions: Michal offended in misinter p^eting David's dancing before the Arc.

In leaving to him the secrets of his public imploiment, keeping her to her
own measure for domesticke affairs, especially if he be a Magistrate or
Minister.

3 Fear: let the wife see that she fear her husband, Ephesians. 5. vlt. this is
showed,

By reverent behavior before him, not rude, bold, and audacious.

By avoiding what may provoke him to anger, dislike and grief.

By giving soft answers when he is angry, Pro. 15. 1.

By forbearing brawling, passion, or frowardness, even with others in his
sight.

By making him her Covering when they are abroad, many women are intemperate
and wilful, Pro. 27. 15. 16. and like oil in the fist.

4 A chaste conversation coupled with the former fear, 2 Pet. 3. 1. rare was
the severity of ancient times, when an heathen could by Isaacs sporting with
Rebecca, Genesis 26. 8. 9.
know they were married.

5 Modesty and sobriety in Quae ad inanem pompam, vel ad i^lecebram ferme
haberi solent, merito reprehensa sunt. Aug. Tom. 2 Ep. 199.
apparel 1 Pet. 3. 2. 1 Timothy 2. 9. and here whateuer makes for vain pomp or
for inticement, are worthily reproved.

6 A meek and quiet spirit. 1 Pet. 3.

7 That she be an help to him, she must do him good and not evil all the
days of her life. Pro. 31. 12. Genesis 2. 18. and so.

1 In the education of children both for nursing them, and for instructing them
under her husband. Pro. 6. 20. and 31. 1. indeed her husbands authority
excludes her from sole instruction in the family, but under him it rests
chiefly on her in their infancy and childhood, then shall her children rise up
and call her blessed, her husband also; and he praises her. Pro. 31. 28.

2 In his temporal estate and the commodities of this present life, and so
there is required of her,

1 That she be diligent in labor, (...).
for him and the good of the family: showed three ways.

In Getting: laboring with her hands, Pro 31. 16. not eating the bread of
Idleness, verse. 27 Sarah kneaded dow, Genesis 18 6: Rebecca skillful in Cookery,
Genesis 27. 14. and Thamar Dauid^ daughter 2 Samuel 13. Much more then ought our
Nobles and Gentlemen be some way Employed, when as the weaker sex is thus
charged. And truly she is deeply charged what ever our dainty dames do
ween, as

1 To seek employment and Prou. 31.
not tarry til employment find her, and som^thing fall out she cold find to
do, verse. 13.

2 To take to any labor fit for her sex: as spinning, verse 13, 19.

3 To do it willingly verse. 13.

4 To rise ea^ly to it verse, 15. 18.

5 To be constant, not changing from work to work, but strengthening her
arms.

6 To spend her time in profitable work, (not in fine work good for nothing,
but to show skill) as Carpets, verse. 22. Sheets, verse. 24. The clothing of her
family, husband, and children, verse. 21. 23. I know not which is better, the
bread of Idleness, or the bread of Curiosity.

In guiding both what she has got and her family: what she has got, not
locking it up in a chest, not laying it out on trifles, but in necessaries: she
considers a field, and buys it, Pro. 31. verse 16. and guiding the family,
giving their portion of meat to the whole household: of work to the Maids,
verse 15. Ouerseeing the ways of her household, verse 27.

In preserving what her husband prouides, so that his heart rests in her, he
shall have no spoil by her, verse 11. She must not be wastfull: this is to
pull down the house with her own hands: and ever the more closely done, the
more sinfully, Pro. 14. 1. She must not spend without consent, much less
entertainment of such as be suspected, or disliked by the Husband.

2 That she be careful to advance her Husbands reputation,

In adorning him in seemly and fit apparel, verse 23.

In seeing to his children and servants, eu^n to the meanest of the house, for
their convenient clothing and handsomnesse, verse 21.

In keeping her feet within her own house, Pro. 7 11.

In covering his infirmities.

3 In his spiritual estate she must be an help, as being an heir with him
of the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. 7. By furthering all good duties, as Prayer,
Thanksgiving, Repetition of Sermons, Conference, by being a comfort to him, in
afflictions, in diseases: By admonishing him wisely and submissiuely, Genesis 21.
12. For she is not bound to conceal his drunkenness, whoredoomes, and the
like.

Thus have you a draught of a Wife, and of an help meet for her Husband: here
may all married women see their duties, and their fails.

These are the particular duties of man and wife.

4 The fourth sort are such as 4 Such a^ a^ise of these.
arise of these, and they are, the honor and love of one another friends,
mutually, which much unites affections, and preuenteth causes of dissentions.

Thus of the first couple in a family: The second relation is that of Parents
and Children.

. IIII. Of Parents and Children.
THe duties of Parents and Parents and childrens duties.
Children are of two sorts, Mutuaell, and Several, and these either the duties
of Parents, both together; and each apart. Or of Children.

The mutual duties of Parents Which are ^ Mutual.
and Children, which both owe one toward the other, are two.

1 Natural affection, called by the Greeks, (...), It is a love which none
can feel, but they. It has in it the yerning of the bowels over the party
lo^ed; it is heathenish, and more then brutish, to be without natural
affections, Romans 1.

2 Prayer, for each other.

The duty of both Parents is, 2 Several. Parents duty.


1 Education both in religion and the true fear of God, Ephesians. 6. 4. And in
some honest trade of life: and for this cause must they observe the inclination
of their children, and accordingly dispose of them, Prou. 20. 11. and 22. 6.

2 Provision for their estates and marriage: for their estates, it is their
parts to lay up for them as God shall bless them, 2 Cor. 12. 14. yet here
remember, that thou withold not thy hand from works of charity, because thou
have many children; nay, for this very cause, let thy hand be more liberal,
thou have the m^re to entreat the Lord for, the more sins to be broken ^ff,
the more consciences to be purged, the more souls to he d^liuered: thus Job
offered sacrifices for his children, and reckoned that as laid up: David
says, the righteous, is ever merciful, and le^d^th, and his seed is blessed,
Psalm. 37. 26. I^ thou study more for an earth^^* then an heavenly patrimony for
them, says Cyprian (which is to commend thy Cyprian de op^re and E^ee^mosynis.
children to the Devil, rather then to Christ) thou art in a double fault,
both that thou prouidest not the succor of God the Father for thy children,
and that thou teach thy children to love their patrimony more then Christ.
Secondly, they must leave them what they have received of their Ancestors, Pro.
19 14. Thirdly, they must set their houses in order by Will, respecting therein
the first borne, unless by some grievous crim^, he has otherwise deserved, as
did Reuben, Genesis 49. 3. 4. Deuteronomy. 21 17. 2 King. 20. 1. 1 Timothy 5 8. If he have
and do deserve disinheritance, the Father or Mother, as I take it, may not do
it in that state which descended from his Ancients; for God has there made him
heir, and to meddle with it for time after their life, is to put forth the
hand to that which is not theirs, but his: and be it that he is like to be the
ruin of the house and family, yet this none knows, and if God will ruin it
thus, who shall let it? the way to uphold it, if any, is prayer, good
instruction, reformation of our selves, and the maintenance of Gods house and
worship, that he may say, as he did of David, I will build thee an house, 2 Samuel 7. 11. In lands of our own purchase, and all other goods th^^ a^e our
own to dispose, as well as to enjoy, we ought to respect the deserving
children. This for their estat^s, their marriage is also to be looked unto by
the Parents, as they see their i^clination and necessity: the want of care
herein, is the cause of mi(...) of many youth.

3 M^d^rate and due correction by word, Pro. 13. 24 and by rod, Pro. 22. 25.
and 19. S^. and 23 13. 14. and 29 25. In giving correction, this must be
obs^ru^d for the manner, 1 We must admo^^sh (...) of Gods word, conuincing them
of their faults, without bitterness of spirit, Col. 3. 21. 2 We must not
provoke them to wrath: which is two ways done: I By words, when we burden
them with unjust things in the whole, or in p^rt, or lade them with unjust and
unmeet, and vnbeseming precepts. True, this latter sort of Commandments ought
to be obeyed by the children, yet through corruption it has in it I know not
what matter of provocation, and Parents should avoid them: or else when we
pursue them with ^epr^chfull words ever chiding and rating them. 2 By d^eds, in
indiscreet and violent passion, while we^ correct: in the kind^ of corre^^ion,
th^r^d is a^ p^inted, and not such as may indang^r health, in the number of
stripes, no^ so long that thy brother should seem vile in t(...) eyes. This
may at the bent enforce, but never teach. And lastly, in partiality,
immoderately loving one above the rest, which does greatly exasperate and
provoke, as we see in Ios^phs brethren: in this S. Ambrose blames Jacob, who
should wisely have concealed his affections, Genesis 37. 3. 4.

The duty of each apart is,

The duty of the Mother to nurse her children if she be able; the barren womb
and dry breast is a heavy curse, Hos. 9. 14. Nature teaches it to all women,
which gives with the fruitful womb, a moistened breast. There are only two
cases wherein she is exempted from this duty: 1 In deficiency of nature, when
she has not milk: 2 In danger of life through weakness. But pride is
usually that which causes them to put off nature.

The duties of children to their Childrens duty.
Parents, are these five.

1 Honor, both inward in an holy esteem of them, tenderness of respect, and
observance toward them. And

Outward in reverend behavior, in speech and gesture.

2 Obedience, in special at some times, as in the choice of their (...)lings.

In the election and disposing of their marriages. Thus did Isaac, Gen: 24.
Thus even Ishmael, Genesis 21. 21. and Jacob, Genesis 27. 46. This power has every
Father over his Virgin, 1 Cor. 7. 36. 37.

More generally at all times, so they must obey for the matter, in all t^ings
that are not si^full, Col. 3. 20. Ephesians. 6. 1. And for the manner, 1 With
readiness to hear and receive instruction, Pro. 1 8 2 With ind^auour to
fulfill their desires by labor, or otherwise. 3 With submission to their
rebukes, Pro. 13. 1. R^stra^nts in dy^t, apparel, and recreations, and to
their corrections. 4 With all meekness, expressed by obeying with ^ut
inquiring, murmuring, or contendi^g. 5 Without respect of profit, else it is
base and mercenary.

3 Fear to displease, Leuit. 19. 3.

4 A covering of their i^firmit^es, ^ulpable or miserable only, as of age,
body, or mi^de. The contrary to this was Chams sin, Genesis 9. 21. 22. which first
brought in the curse of servitude.

5 Thankful requital of their l^ue and care, which is three ways chi^fly
performed.

1 By our good behavior, being a crown to our Pa^ents, and not sons that
cause shame, Pro. 17. 6.

2 By aiding and rel^euing them, if they be in need, 1 Timothy 5. 4. after the
example of Joseph, this is called in Greek, (...), to remunetate and requite a
benefit received, derived of ^^^, Arist. Hist. anim. l. 8. c. 8 pi^ta^is
cultrix.
vicissim, again, and (...), which signifies a Storke: for this instruction
is read us in natures school; the Storke, when her damme is old, and labors
of age that she cannot flee, she bears her on her own wings into the
meadows and places where they feed, and when she has fed, she carries her
back to the nest again.

3 By care for their honor in life, in death, and after their death by
celebration of their funerals, payment of their debts, as far as ability will
reach, and fulfilling their will, in paying legacies or otherwise.

Here note, that the bond of relieuing our Parents, pa^le^h upon the heirs of
the children, or Executors, or Administrators: for this bur^en is joined with
the goods of the child, and therefore is passed over with them, and ^n^a^l^d
to them.

All this thou owe,

Though thou be come to high place, or gifts, so did Joseph to Jacob, and
Solomon to his mother 1 King. 2. 19. and our Savior to his parents, Luke 1. 51.

Though they require things that may discredit thee in the world: Consider Gods
ordination, or be they disordered persons or foolish, pray for them, despise
them not, God that knows what is best for thee, has set thee in this
condition, or be they thy step parents, Ruth obeyed Naomi. Yea be they but thy
tutors or guardians with whom thou art left in trust, Hester obeyed Mordecay.

So far of Parents and Children.

. V. Of the Master and Servant.
THe third relation in the family The duty of Masters
is that of Master and Servant, to form them: it pleases the Holy Ghost to be
at much pains with, great plainness in the New testament, to show that the
subjection of servants is a moral and perpetual ordinance; a servant may be
Christ's freeman, as the freeman is Christ's servant, service of me^ will stand
with liberty of Christians: and to assure both Master and servant that God in
special requires they make conscience of their dealing, as they desire to be
no hypocrites in religion* and to have the family established, Psalm. 101. 2.
Pro. 14. 3.

The Masters duty is.

1 To do that which is just and equal to their servants. Col. 3. 1. justice
is showed, when they require not unjust things of them, when they give just and
due things to them, both in maintenance, giving them the portion of food
convenient for them, Pro. 31. 15. and in wages, Iam. 5. 4.
that it be proportionable to their work, in due time, and with out defrauding
them of any part of it, and if they continue with them long that they send them
not out empty. Equality is showed, in not imposing more work on them then they
have st^ength to do, in keeping them in their sickness, and in not despising
their cause, but hearing their just defense. Job. 31. 13. 14. In giving them
li^^^ty on the Lords d^y for their s^^ules good, and in not giving care to
every word that ^^n say of them, or the (...). Eccle^ 7. 27.

2 To give due correction, for it is an evil which the earth cannot bear, a
Servant when he rules, Pro. 30. 21. 22. nor is it meet to bring up a servant
delicately.

3 To know the ways of their household, not leaving their callings and the
whole care of their business to their servants. Pro. 27. 23. Pro. 31.

4 To provide for their souls, by praying with them daily. Psalm. 127. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 4. 5. Ier. 10. 25. by training them up in Gods fear in private
instruction, by bringing them to the public means of grace, compelling them
thereto Genesis 35 1. 2. 3. by choosing into the family faithful and casting out
lewd servants, as the Haughty of looks, the proud of heart, liars, and
deceivers, Psalm. 101. 5. 6. 7. else by one such the whole family may be
infected. The due^y of Servants.


S^ruants owe,

1 An high account of their Masters, 1 Timothy 6. 1.

2 Obedience for the matter in all things, not simply evil, for the manner, so
as to please them well, Tit. 2. 9. not only doing the work, but doing, it to
their minds and likings, with fear to offend them, 1 Pet. 2. 18 Ephesians. 6. 5.
with fear and trembling, in singleness of heart and with heartinesse,
heartily with good will doing service Ephesians. 6. 6. Col. 7. 23. out of
conscience, as to the Lord Ephesians. 6. 7. as fearing God, Col. 3. 22 which fear
of God is opposed to eye-seruice and man pleasing 2 Samuel 12. 29. and commands
that they look to God whose eye is on them, and will require an account of
them how they have served their Masters, that they pray to God for their
Masters, and the family and the good success of their labors after the
example of Abraham's servant. Genesis 24. 12. that they show the graces of God in
their calling as they are servants* which is the very touchstone of religion
and that that adornes the doctrine of Christ our Savior, Tit. 2. 10.

3 All good fidelity, Tit. 2. 10. not purloining or filching: but thrifty,
careful that nothing be spoiled, or lost, or miscarry by their default, after
the example of Jacob, Genesis 31. 36. not discovering the secrets of the family,
of their Masters, of their calling or trade, not eating the bread of Idleness,
trusty in executing their Masters directions; and speedy in dispatch of business
abroad, a slothful messenger is a provocation and irksome grief to them that
send him.

4 Subjection, 1 Pet. 2. 18. to their corrections by words and blows, 1 Pet.
2. 19. 20. Pro. 29. 19. thoough unjust and above measure; so Hagar was
commanded to submit to Sarah, Genesis 16. 8. 9. not answering again by way of
contradiction, Tit. 2 9.

5 Moderation and contentation, in diet and apparel beseeming servants, in
liberty; not gadding out of their place without leave, much less running
abroad a nights, a sinful and wicked rioting, and in their company not
offending their Master by bringing lewd company into the family, nor keeping
such company abroad.

And this is charged on all servants, hired servants as strictly bound to it as
bond-seruants, old servants are tied to as much duty as those that come now to
serve, religious servants as well as Pagans, men servants as well as women
servants, not birth, office, gifts or means do privilege from the strict
bond of these duties.

And this is due to all Masters without difference of sex, as to the Mistress,
1 Timothy 5. 14. Pro. 31 or of condition, as to the poor as well as the rich, or
of disposition, be they froward or good and gentle, or of religion, be they
unbelievers or believers, 1 Pet. 2. 18. 1 Timothy 6. 1. 2.

Thus do, and thy service is accepted as obedience to God, Ephesians. 6. 6. and the
Lord will pay thee wages as well as thy Master. Ephesians. 6. 8. and before God
there is neither bond nor free, but all are one in Christ, Gal. 3. 28. Col. 31.
11.

Thus far of the several societies that constitute a family. We come now to
the Church, and there see what God faith to the Ministers and the hearers, the
Pastor and flock.

. VI. Of the Pastor and the flock.
THe Pastor and flock are the integrall parts of the body of Christ, both are
fashiond for use and ornament to the body by distinct precepts, that it may not
be justly spoken of them, who is blind as his messengers, who are froward as
his people.

The Minister must be guided The Minist^rs duty.
by these rules,

1 He must have a lawful calling both inward and outward, no man may take
this honor to himself. The son of God glorified not himself to be an
High Priest, but God the father said, thou art my son, this day have I
begotten thee. Heb. 5 4* that this may be understood, I beat it out distinctly.
The calling of the Minister is to be considered as it respects his calling to
the Ministry or to the place where he is to exercise his Ministry. The first
concerns his ordination by the Church, and his mission of God. The latter
concerns his allotting by the Church to a place for the execution of his
Office and performance of his duty. In a lawful calling to the Ministry is
requisite, Election, trial and ordination. Election is either the Lords taking
and mission, or the Churches selecting.

1 The Lords choice and sending is primary and chief in this calling, How can
they preach except they be sent, Romans 10. 14. God is the Author of this
calling, Ephesians 4. 11. 12. he raises up sheepheards, Micha 5. 5. Thrusts
forth laborours Matthew. 9. 37. sends workmen into his Vineyard, Authoritatiue.
Matthew. 20. 1. 1 Cor. 12. 28. I have set thee a watch man, says This man the
Lord has taken to be his mouth to a people.
God, Ezech. 33. 7. Which inward election or mission is known 1 By gifts
wherewith the Lord endoweth, both of Christian sanctity and Ministerial
abilities, that they be (...) apt to teach 2 Timothy 2. 24. 2 By sincerity of
heart whereby the Minister is conscious to him self, that neither Ambition,
nor Coue^uousnesse, nor E^uy and the like corrupt affections but a sincere
desire to Edify the Church, and the true fear of God moo^ed him to desire the
Office of a Bishop: yet may he that Preaches the Gospel look to live of the
Gospel; yet this alone may not cause any to assume the work without the
Churches election.

2 The Churches election, is the outward calling, which examining the gifts of
the calling, which examining the gifts of the called, ratifieth and gratifieth
the Lords Election, and this is done by Trial and ordination.

3 Trial is either of life or abilities: of life, that they have a good report
even of those that are without, and that there be no proceeding to imposition
of hands, suddenly or rashly, 1 Timothy 3. 2. 7. and 5. 21. 22. Or by partiality.
Of abilities also, el^e may not the key of knowledge be committed to an Idiot a
dumb dog that cannot bark, the key of heaven cannot be used without knowledge.

4 Ordination, the rite hereof was (...), the imposition of hands this is the
outward mission, done by the Ministry or presbytery alone, without the people,

The outward calling without the inward may be of force to the Office and
work, but both requisite if the Minister* himself will have any comfort in
the work, yet not the inward of the former force without the outward.

Concerning the Ministers calling to a place or charge, since there now are no
Apostles (a charge I call a portion of people allotted for him to preach unto):
besides all that forespoken there are requi^ed two things.

1 The allot^ing of such a man or men to such a portion of people by the
Governors of the Church.

2 The consent of the people, whose voice is to ^ee Cyprian. ^. 1. Ep 4. ipsa
(seilt plebs) maxim pot^statem habet v^l elig^nd^ dignos sacerdotes vel
indignos recusandi.
looked unto says Saint Cyprian the people have chiefly the power either to
choose worthy Ministers or refuse the unworthy, and the Lord says in Ezech.
33. 2. If the people of the land take a man, this holds unless it be among
infidels, where no church as yet is planted, there the first ^lone is
sufficient: as if one choice Minister were by our Church-Gouernors sent to the
Americans, such a one deservedly bears the name of an Evangelist, as was
Timothy, that such a thing may come into the heart of our governors, let us
all pray.

He then has a lawful calling inward and outward to speak to a particular
congregation, whom God has endowed with Christian graces of sanctity and
Ministerial abilities, and an upright desire to glorify God and edify the
people, and whom the visible Church and Governors there, have upon examination
of abilities and on sufficient testimony of approved life set apart to that
^unction, and ordained to execute the same: and because order is to be kept,
and every one know where he is to teach, this man so furnished inwardly and
outwardly is the watch man to that congr^gation, to which both the Governors of
the Church assign him to teach, and that people have testified their liking by
consenting*

After this, not every dislike, not any dislike without true cause can disanull
that Ministers calling.

Let all Ministers look well to their entrance, that they may with comfort
undergo the temptations, and troubles of their calling.

This is the first rule.

2 He must not neglect the gift given to him, but stire it up and blow the
coals that they may live and glow* 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6.

3 He must bear a tender and fatherly affection toward them for their
salvation, contented to profess himself, and indeed to be, their servant for
Jesus sake: becoming all things to all men by compassion, that he may win
the more, 2 Cor. 4. 5.

4 He must attend on reading privately to himself, 1 Timothy 4. 13.

Exhortation and doctrine among his people, and this in season, and out of
season, publicly and from house to house, day and night, willingly, not by
constraint, of a ready mind, not for filthy lucre, as an ensample to the
flock, taking the oversight thereof, 1 Pet. 5. 2. 3. 4. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2. 3.

5 He must be an ensample to the believers in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Timothy: 4. 12. in word* that is, in
speech, in spirit, that is, in feruency and zeal for God and his glory in the
saving of his hearers.

6 He must hold fast the form of sound words, that he may feed his flock
with sincere milk, and may keep the commandment without spot, unrebukable,
and may be able to convince the gaine-sayer, 2 Timothy 1. 13. 1 Timothy 6. 14. Tit.
1. 9. For as the people must be fed, so must they be preserved from Wolves
and Dogs. The mouths of false teachers must be stopped, Tit. 1. 11.

7 Ecclesiastical discipline must be used and maintained with the strictest
bands of good order.

8 He must care for their good after his death, 2 Pet. 1. 15. And if it lie in
his power, see them delivered to some faithful Pastor, as Augustine saw
Eradius his successor, with joy, Tom. 2. ep. 110.

This is the duty of the Pastor.

The people owe to their Minister,

1 Love for their works sake, The peoples duty.
they must know them which labor among them, and are over them in the Lord,
and admonish them, 1 These. 5. 12. 13. Their very feet should be beautiful,
Romans 10. 15. The Galathians bare such love to the Apostle Paul, that they could
have pulled out their own eyes to have given them to him, Gal. 4. 14. 15.

2 Double honor, they should esteem them highly, as Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit, the Galathians received Paul
as an Angel of God, as Christ Jesus. There is required also a special fear
in us, when we receive the Ministers sent of God, as the Corinthians received
Titus with fear and trembling, 2 Cor. 7. 15.

3 Maintenance convenient for his person and calling, remembering what the
Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the corn, and
the labourer is worthy of his reward, 1 Timothy 5. 18 Gal. 6. 6 To withold
tithes, is to rob God, Mal. 3. 8 9. And to give no more then what we are bound
to by law, testifies an heart void of the fear of God: thou should have
thy first fruits and free will offerings, Deuteronomy. 14. 23. and 12. 17. 18. 19.

4 Obedience to the word taught by them, suffering the words of exhortation,
and willing to embrace wholesome doctrine, Hebr. 13. 17. 22. 2 Timothy 4. 3. Love,
honor, and maintenance, are nothing without obedience, nor do make thy godly
Minister go on with joy in his labors if this be wanting. The greatest
encouragement to thy Minister is submission, and professed subjection to the
Gospel of Christ in all things. Now we live, says the Apostle Paul, if ye
stand fast in the Lord, 1 These. 3. 8. For what is our joy or hope, or crown of
rejoicing. Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his
coming? ye are our glory and joy. Oh happy thing, when the Minister coming
before (...) judgment seat of Christ, the great shepherd of the sheep, can
say, Behold, here am I, and the children which thou have given me. But shall
not your countenance be dashed, when all the account he can make, is this, I
have spoken unto them, and they would not hear. Lord, who has believed our
report? I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in
vain, Esa. 49. 4. Read and peruse that one Text in Esa. 30. 8. 9. 10. 11. Now
go, says the Lord, write it before them in a Table and note it in a Book,
that it may be for the time to come, for ever and ever. That this is a
rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the
Lord; which say to the seers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto
us right things speak unto us smoothe things, prophecy deceits, get ye out of
the way: turn aside out of the path: Cause the Holy one of Israel to cease
from before us.

. VII. Of Neighborhood.
THe most eminent relations The rules for neighborhood.
wherein we stand obliged one to another in societies, have been bandled;
those of more private state follow, and so first that of neighborhood. Here I
take the word neighbor, strictly, as we do ordinarily in our common talk:
and for our direction, I have selected some choice rules, which being taken up
in practice, may make our neighborhood religious and righteous. The rather
should we attend to these rules, because it is an imputation cast upon religion
and preaching, that it spoils all good neighborhood: yet in very deed it
shall appear, that this only forms us hereunto, and destroys nothing. but
that bad* good-fellowship of rude, unmortified men, which is impious, vnciu^ll,
and pernicious.

That thou may be a good neighbor, (besides the rules of duty to men
before delivered in the ninteenth to the 27. Section of the second part.) Some
things must in special be avoided, some things must be done by thee.

For the things to be avoided, they are these.

1 Thou may not remove the ancient Land-marke, nor dare to enter into the
field of the fatherless: their Redeemer is mighty, he shall plead their cause
with thee, Proverbs 23. 10. 11.

2 Thou must not think to lay house to house, and land to land, till thou have
depopulated the place where thou live, that thou may be placed alone in
the midst of the land. Nor be carried with the vanity of stately buildings, so
that thy fair house should devour the timber of thy neighbors house that
dwells by thee. Woe, woe to thee, thou couetest an evil covetousness to thy
house. The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
shall answer it. God shall smite thee with a curse in thine own kind: for of
a truth, many houses shall be desolate; yea, great and fair without
inhabitant; yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield but one bathe, and the
seed of an Homer shall yield an Epha. Barrenness and famine shall be the
scourge of such wickedness, Esa. 5. 8. 9. 10. Heb. 2. 9. 10. 11.

3 Avoid the backbiting tongue, Pro. 25. 23. The talebearer, Pro. 26 10. The
contentious man, Pro. 26. 21.

4 When thou come into his Vineyard or Orchard, put not up into thy vessel,
nor move a sickle to his standing corn, thou ma^est put forth thy hand and
e^te for thy necessity, Deuteronomy. 23. 24 25.

5 Despise him not, nor hate him because he is poor, Pro. 14. 20. 21.

6 Envy him not for a right work, an usual sickness under the Sun, Eccles.
4 4

7 Smite not thy neighbor secretly, lest it be a curse to thee. Deceive him
not, and think to put it off by saying, Am I not in sport? Deuteronomy. 27. 24. Prou.
26. 18. 19.

8 Meddle not with the strife that belongs not to thee, so may thou take a
dog by the ears, Pro. 26. 17.

9 Press not too much upon his kindness, lest thou should seem
burdensome, withdraw thy foot from his house, lest he be weary of thee, Pro.
25. 17.

10 Take not to pledge the instruments or tools of his calling and trade, the
means whereby he must get his living: as the upper and nether millstone. If he
be poor, thou may not sleep with his pledge all night, but deliver it to
him before the sun go down, if it be any thing that appertains to food,
raiment, or lodging, Deuteronomy. 24. 6. 10. 11. 12 13.

11 Thou may not call him to the Alehouse or Taue^ne, to bibbe and drink,
or play the glutton, thou must not put thy bottle to him, and make him drunk.
Woe to thee if thou do it; this is cursed fellowship, which thou call good
fellowship. The Lord has a cup for thee to drink of, the cup of his right
hand, drink thou also, and let thy fore-skinne be uncovered, and shameful
spuing shall be on thy glory, Heb. 2. 15. 16.

For the things to be done, they are these.

1 Exhort and persuade, and call them to the Assemblies and holy duties: the
prophecies foretell such things of Christian neighbors. The inhabitants of one
City shall go to another, saying; Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord,
and to seek the Lord of hosts. I will go also, Zach. 8. 21:

2 In your meetings, let there be the serious consideration of the works of
Gods hands, and the remembrance of the Lords mercies in stead of the Wine, and
Harp, and Tabret, and Pipe, Esa. 5. 11. 12. Break off evil discourse, and
prevent it, and divert it by imitating the example of Sampson, who proposed a
riddle to the Philistimes when they feasted together, Judge. 14. 12. 13.

3 Bring home his stray cattle, and all lost things, if thou find them, and
withold not thy help if his beast be down under his burden, Deuteronomie
22. 1. 2. 3.

4 If there arise any matter of dislike; debate thy cause with thy neighbor
himself, and reveal not thy secrets to another, Pro. 25. 8. 9. 10.

5 Observe the Apostles rule, speak every one truth to his neighbor, Ephesians.
4. 25.

These concern neighborhood, the second relation of more private state, is
that of friendship.

. VIII. Of Friendship.
COncerning friendship, the Rules for friendship.
Lord directs thee in two things.

The choice of thy friend.

The usage of thy friend.

For the choice of thy friend, How to choose thy friend.
he requires,

1 That he be a religious man. What agreement can there be between
righteousness and vnrighteouso^sse? thou m^iest not leave the path to
blessedness set down in Psalm. 1. 1. to walk in the way of friendship

2 That amongst them thou choose not thy friend by his wealth, Pro 19 4.

3 That thou make no friendship with an angry man that cannot rule his spirit,
Prouer. 22. 24 25.

4 That thou make him not thy friend that cannot conceal a secret.

5 That if it be possible, thou retain thy fathers friend to be thine, Pro.
27. 6.

When thou have chosen thy How to vs^ thy friend.
friend, then let thy friendship be thus carried.

1 Learn to cover transgressions, and injuries or trespasses, this is to seek
love, but the repetition of old matters separateth very friends, Pro. 17. 9.

2 Give hearty counsel, this is as oyn^ment and perfume, it sharpens a man's
countenance, Pro. 27. 9. 17. 19. and makes them mutually, the glass where in
they may see one another face.

3 Prefer a rebuke from thy friend, before a kiss from thine enemy. Pro.
27. 5. 6.

4 Use no flattery, as most abhorring to the laws of friendship, affect not
the praising of thy friend study it not, seem not, to do it of set purpose.
Pro. 27. 14.

5 Be true and entire to him, as was Jonathan to David, the prime pair in
Scripture Commended for thy imitation.

6 V^e thy friend in the day of thy calamity, rather then thy brother, a friend
loves at all times, and the day of adversity is prope^ly the time for which he
was made. Pro. 27. 10.

7 And thoug^ it be the chief error in friendship to go far from thy
friend in a straight and in his poverty: and to be wanting to him, when he
pursues thee with words, as is noted by Solomon, Pro. 19. 7. yet this one
particular Solomon himself warnes thee of as a note of a man void of,
understanding, to strike, and become surty in the presence of his friend. Pro.
17 18. rash ^ur^iship, in as much as it overthrows thy estate, house and
posterity, is exceedingly sinful, and may not be undertaken, no not for thy
friend, He that hates such suretiship is sure.

8 He that has a friend must show himself friendly: there is a friend that
sticks closer then a brother, Pro. 18. 24.

Thus far also of friendship* there yet remains a third case contrary
hereunto, that is Enmity, or how we should behave our selves to our enemies.

IX Of Enmity. Rules about enmity.

ABout this necessary point, first thou must be warned, that thou entertain
nothing that may alienate thy heart from any man, if thou be angry, thou must
be angry and not sin, and if a rash anger should take hold of thee, thou
may not let the Sun go down, upon thy wrath, that were to give place to
the Devil, Ephesians. 4. There is an holy Hatred of Gods enemies, but that must be
a perfect hatred: an hatred of the vice, a loving of the man, not hating the
man, as if he were the vice, nor loving of the vice, as if it were the man.
Now be it that thou carry thy self thus fair and religiously, yet thou may
have many an enemy:

In Case thou have enemies, that are enemies to thee, (whether they be enemies
to God or no, for that is not the question now in hand as being decided in the
26. Section of the second part) these are sound and profitable directions.

1 Presently look into thine own heart, epsy all thy ways, to see if thou
have in any fault willingly committed, broken thy peace with God, for this is
usual, we cast off the thing that is good and then the enemy is let loose to
pursue us, This is Gods dealing whether it be with a nation, or with a man
only. H^s. 8. 3. 4. We fall from God, and then man and creature fall from us.
If upon search thou find any such Achan troubler of thy peace, pursue him to
death, let not thine eye spare, set all in order, that thy ways may please the
Lord, for When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be
at peace with him* Pro. 16. 7.

2 Love him, bless though he curse, pray for him; if he ^unger, feed him; if
he thirst, give him drink; for thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head,
and the Lord shall reward thee, Pro. 25. 21. 22. thou may in a glorious
manner be conqueror, if thou hold the rule of the Apostle, overcome evil with
goodness. Romans 12. 21. but it is somewhat dishonorable for a Christian to be
overcome of evil, to fashion thy heart hereunto remember the love of thy Lord
Jesus who Died for thee when thou wast weak, ungodly and wicked, and an enemy,
yea nothing but enmity: Romans 5. 6. 8. 10.

3 Have not Glosing lips and a wicked heart, this is like a pot sheard
Covered with silver dross. Seven abominations will quickly be in thy heart:
and this is thy sentence from God, whose hatred is covered by deceit, his
wickedness shall be showed before the whole congregation. Pro. 26. 23. 25. 26.

4 If he have wronged thee and do trespass thee, forgive him, till seven
times; till seventy times, seven times. If the in^uries be such as ruin thy
credit and state, or endanger thy life, seek the benefit of the Magistrate,
not by way of reue^^e that is always unlawful, but by way of defense,
heartily embracing ever the terms of peace, and readily performing when
occasion is offered, the Offices of love, in the midst of the neat of seeking
redress.

5 Rejoice not at his fall, let not thine heart secretly be glad when he
stumbleth: lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his
wrath from him. Pro. 24. 18.

Hitherto of the Relations of more private state, the estates of mere priuacy
do follow and there first, the aged.

X. Of the aged.
THe choice rules that respect Rules for the aged.
the aged whether men or women we find gathered to our hands by the Apostle
Paul to Titus Chap. 2. verse. 2. 3. 4. those in the second verse respect aged
men, wherein every Nulla aetas ad discendumsera est crubescat senectus q^ae se
crudiri non p^titur. Ambros. ad Symmachum. The men.
word is a rule.

The aged men must be sober, Grave, temperate, found in faith, in charity, in
patience.

1 Whereas it is too common a fault to old age, to be bibbing, they are
charged with sobriety, for aged men conscious of their infirmity, are ready to
seek strength in a more free use of wine and strong drink, needful therefore
is this watch word, and worthy to be set in the front.

2 Gravity is suiteable to their age, an habit, gesture, speech and well
composed manners favoring thereof which may win them respect and keep
authority over the youth; there should shine in old age a certain Maiesticall
dignity, which should cause the youth to hide themselves and bring on them a
kind of bashfulnesse.

3 Temperance, not testiness, Temeritas (...)entis ^s. aeta(...), prudentia
s^neo^tutis. Cic. de senectute.
Dem^alike, nor hastiness, and pettish preuishnesse, not wantonness, which
seen by youth makes them more impudent in Lasciviousness, and what more
odious, then an old man playing the wanton, and expressing an incontinent heart,
when coldness has eneruated his body, nor rashness, but all prudence.

4 Soundness in faith, in charity, and patience, the boary head is a crown,
if it be found in the way of righteousness: old age is a sickness and full
of infirmities which cannot be cured, How should they then seek a sound heart
and soul, and these three graces are the Sum of Vidua est vi^tus, qua^ non
^ui^n ^ia firmal. (...).
Christian perfection, says to God in Christ, Charity to men, and patience to
sustain both, and to be as salt to preserve and relish both.

The aged women must be in The woe(...).
behavior as becomes holiness, not false accusers, nor given to much wine,
teachers of good things, and examples to young women, verse. 3. 4.

1 Their behavior must be as becomes godliness, this sex (...),
in the whole habit of the body and outward carriage expresses a great deal
of leuity and pride even to the grave, and scarce any thing save religion and
grace in the heart can persuade, even when it has persuaded them to put it
off* (well were it, if it could persuade, even when it has persuaded them,)
the Apostle therefore presses this upon them, telling that godliness must be
seen in the behavior, the gate, and countenance, the apparel and fashion of
apparel, the speech, the silence of ancient Matrones, should carry in the face
of them a certain dignity of sacred comeliness: the Grace in the heart and
the godliness taught according to Christ in the Gospel, should be imprinted
in the very speech, eye, face, gesture and garments.

2 They must not be false accusers, Loquacity and babbling is common with the
aged of that sex, and some of them, never think they have been eloquent, but
when they have told some tale to detract from others: hence it is that their
meetings usually spiced with these discourses are the fountain of all discords
and dissentions among neighbors howmuch then should all Matrons suspect
themselves in this point.

3 They may not be given to much wine, which indeed sets the tongue a flote,
makes them forget the former godly behavior, and give examples that lead from
modesty and honesty, this very vice has made many aged women turn bawdes. See
to it, I pray you, Wine is a mocker, strong drink is ^^ging.

4 They must be teachers (...) m^dwiues in most places are greiuously dsieased
in this case.
of good things, not full of old wives tales, dotages of superstitious
observations, stories of miracles, love songs, wanton tales, which is a disease
that most old women are sick of even to death, whereby they inf^ct the younger
sort, and are the cause of most euisls found upon them, Were it not fit for
them to teach the younger women to love their Husbands, to love their children,
to be discree^ and chaste and keeper at home with the like.

5 They must be examples to the young woman in all the following virtues which
are required in them, as love, chastity, discretion, etc.

These concern the Aged, what concerns young men and women follows.

. XI. Of the Youth.
THe remarkable praise of Rules for youth.
young women and young men are delivered in the same place, Tit. 2. 4. 5. 6.

Upon young women should The women.
(...)e found.

I Sobriety and prudence and moderation which chiefly in women should be
showed in their apparel, therein what is and is not ^modest is taught in 1 Timothy 2. 9. 10. Art in hair, gold and pearls unlawful as against sobriety,
modesty, piety and good works. Sobriety with faith sanctifies the pains of
child bearing, verse. 15.

2 Love to their Husband, and children, which prevent and deliver from all
unlawful love, and lust, as the preservative of the young man from ^he bosom
of a stranger, is to be ra^^sht with the love of his wife, and to be satisfied
with her breasts always. Pro. 5.

3 Discretion, the beauty of their beauty: and chastity or conjugal purity,
their chiefest glory, next to Christ and faith in him.

4 Keepers at hom^, not gadders from house to house: their own houses, their
cloisters, and there the true Nuns, or rather g^dly Matrones serving God in
their callings and conscionable discharge of them.

5 Good, i. meek of spirit, gentle, amiable, apt and tendable, not brawling,
bitter, talkatiue, and imperious.

6 Obedient to their Husbands: these things adorn their profession, and are of
a winning and alluring nature.

Young men are especially to The men*
look to Temperance, that they be sober minded. This one virtue works a cure
(together with piety and godliness) upon the hearts of young men: for it
delivers from all excess, in recreations, in meat and drink, in apparel, in
passions of the mind, and in those things that respect continency and
chas^ity: and in these, young men are most faulty. Temperance in recreations,
sees that we sport not our selves with things unlawful; as chambering and
wantonness, nor of ill fame, as Cards and Dice. It moderates the affections,
that the heart be not stolen away by them, and gouernes the passions of anger,
joy, and the like, and requires a stint be put to them for the time, that
recreation be not made a vocation.

Temperance in meat and drink, looks to the quantity, that it oppress not
nature, and the quality, that it be not with excessive variety, and delicious
fare every day, as it was with Dives, and the time, that we sit not at it, as
those that spend their time in Alchouses, and at their meals can sit three
hours often times: and the company, that it be not with wine bibbers and riotous
eaters of flesh, Proverbs 23. 20.

Temperance in apparel, looks to comeliness, shamefastness, thriftinesse,
and godliness.

Temperance in passions of the mind, is when fear, joy, anger, sorrow, keep
measure, guided by reason and religion, and directed to some good end.

Temperance in things appertaining to chastity, respects the purity of
thoughts, affection, words, deeds, in the state of single li^e or marriage: for
there is a threefold chastity.

Of the Virgin. Costitas Coniuga^, virginitotis viduitatis. Ambros.


Of the married person.

Of the Widow.

These respect younger men and women. There follows virginity and widdowhood.

. XII. Of the Virgin and Widow.
COncerning Virgins of both Rules for the Virgin.
sexes, we have received from the Lord, only these two directions.

1 That if any have the gift of continency, either from the womb, borne so, or
by special grace and power over their own will for the kingdom of Gods sake,
he abstain from marriage, and use that estate, as freer from distractions and
trouble in the flesh.

2 That they use the holy remedy of marriage if they have a calling thereto;
that is, if they cannot contain; for it is better to marry, then to burn; 1
Cor. 7. 9. That ye may know what it is to burn, understand there are three
degrees of rentations to lust. The first is, when the assaults of concupiscence
prevail so, as to cast down the will, and carry it captive, so that the heart
is on fire with concupiscence and unclean thoughts; this is the worst kind of
burning. The second is, when the assaults of lust cannot win full consent of
will, yet do strike so forcibly upon the soul, that they amaze it, and hurry
it with a blind violence, and disquiet the heart, and set it so out of frame,
that they are unfit for any holy dut^y. Both these are burnings which must be
quenched by marriage, if they be found with us after the use of watchings,
fastings, and prayer* The third is, when we seele the motions of lust, but can
so valiantly resist, that the true love of chastity and shamefastness is not
thrust out of our hearts, but we abhor all filthy and unclean motions.
These have no calling yet to marry.

Concerning Widows, the Rules for the Widow.
Scripture speaks expressly in one place, 1 Timothy 5. Where they are cast by the
Apostle into two ranks.

1 Into such as were Widows indeed, truly destitute of house, husband,
kindred, able to help them, or to be helped by them, or children, or means,
who had not to trust to but God, and continued in supplications and prayers,
day and night. Who were aged 60. years, the wife of one man, well reported for
good works, even works of service; as lodging strangers, washing the Saints
feet, visiting the sick, etc. These were to be aided and relieved out of the
Churches treasury: and the ministers and Deacons were to have special care of
them for their maintenance.

2 Into younger Widows, and such as had friends to maintain them, these
might not be put to the Church to maintain, lest she should be burdened, and
not have where with to maintain and relieve Widows indeed.

And for the young Widows, the rule is given in verse 14. and the reason of
it in verse 15.

The rule is, that they marry, bring up children, guide the house, and give no
occasion to the adversary to speak reprochfully.

The reason is, for some are already turned aside after Satan.

Here let the Church see on whom to bestow her revenues and relief, and let
Papists for ever be confounded, while they look on their Monasteries and
Nunneries, which feed upon that which belongs not to them.

Thus have I endeavored to lay before all sorts the path which is called Holy.
Let no sluggish Christian say, A Lion is in the way, a fell Lion is in the
path; for, no Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up
thereon, it shall not be found there: but the redeemed shall walk there, and
the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come (in this way) to Zyon with
songs, and ever lasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Even so Amen Lord Jesus. So
be it.

Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness, To thee be glory
for ever.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 15. line 7. for, that God did, read that God that did. p. 50. l. 26. put
out or, p. 141. l. 22. for as, r. and, p. 143. l. 16. for charge, r. change, p.
144. l. 7. for it, r. are, p. 165. l. 4. r. which is the gift, p. 147. l 14. r.
I do not remember, p. 149 l. 5 for and, r. end, p. 174 l 1. for, that he, r.
he that would, p. 175. l. 18. for into the desi^es, r. in the desires, p. 196.
l the last, for word, r. world, p. 204. l. 19 for patience, r. Patient, p. 206.
for ignorant, r ignorance, p. 211. l. 1. put out if, p. 230. l. 21. for rage,
r. range, p. 252. l 4. for praise, r. phrase, and l. 6. for defying, r.
befying, and l. 7, for. descrying, r, decrying, p. 266. l. 17. for will endure,
r. will not endure, p. 272. for wills, r wiles, p. 301. l 19. for of death,
griefs face, r. of deaths grisly face, p. 318. l. 1. for care, r. cure, p.
336. l. 21. for hoyes, r. homines, p 326. l. 16. for the, r. thee, p. 327. l.
2. for covenant, r. Commandment, p. 355. l. 20. put in I^hu, p. 360. l. 22.
for conserve, r. construe, p. 349. put out the 17. and 18 line.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, for Philemon Stephens and Christopher
Meredith and are to be sold at the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard 1630.


