A NEW BOOK Entitled The blasinge of Bawdrie, Daily procured by Beldame B.
Principal Broker of all iniquity.

Given for a Newyeares Gift, as well to all such: in whose charge, the due
punishment thereof is committed: As also to all other that may reap co^modytie
by lothyng their practices, either by readyng, or hearing of the same. (?)

By R. C. Citizen. 1574.

To all preuie Bawdes.

YE deuylysh Drabs, that set your intent,
Youth to beguyle, with your ill counsel
Amend betyme, least that ye be shent,
And for your labors go to the Devil of hell
Look on this book, which does your fauts tell,
All your bawdy revel, and your ill company,
Naught at al can you save, when ye shall di^.
A dialogue between the Printer and the Author.
The Printer. BRother I marvel how that ye,
durst against Bawds make relation:
Seeing ye have none auctorytie,
them to rebuke with reprobation.

The Author Every man by charytte is bound
with words at least those Queanes to reprove
For surely it does so much abound:
That it displeases the Deity above.

The Printer. That is truth, but yet take heed,
truth is not always to be said:
For though that ye know such folks indeed,
yet sclaunder to you shall be laid.

The Author. The more pity, for I name no body
I do it only for to admonish
Officers, and such as have custody,
Over all such folk to punish.

The Printer. As for that say what ye will,
ye shall rather hatred attain:
Spite of your heart they will bide still,
and you small thank for all your pain.

The Author. Foul of you said, ever speak the best,
Officers that thereto be committed:
As the Bedelles and Wardmot quest,
will in no manner take bribes for it.

The Printer. I think the same, but I do marvel,
to my reason they cannot be sparde:
But ever within the Fraunchise they dwell
and be but voyded from ward to ward.

The Author. God help it is the more pitye,
that such folk be vncorrect:
But yet I have seen such within this city
openly punished, and then abject.

The Printer. Ye but not all the whole sect,
there be other that be much wurs:
But if they be any time detect:
they be punished by the Purs.

The Author. In hope to amend they have that suffrance
but I can perceive there amends but few
And under color is their continuance,
would God I could their demeanours show.

The Printer. That hope and favor (me think) is naught
they should if I might, no time borow:
But with shame be openly forth brought
and for ever to be ouoyde with sorrow.

The Auctour. I have much wonder how they can find,
provision still for to abide,
And how they can get any friend,
their noughty doing so for to hide.

The Printer. They make good meals and give gifts,
haunte with the best where they dwell,
From time to time, make hard shifts,
cherish Officers and reward them well.

The Author. By that saying they have bolsterers
to bear them out to their noughtynesse
I believe well, for where be receyuers:
Thieves may the better do their business.

The Printer. Alas (alas) the abomination,
stinketh before the face of God:
Doubtless in many strainge fashion,
he beats with his violent rod.

The Author *No marvel it is, we be so unkind,
like br^^^e beasts, disordinate:
As mad people, clean out of mind,
and that causes God us for to castygate.

The Printer. Does not the Mother lead the daughter,
and be her Bawd too shamfully:
The Brother also to his Sister.
and Sister to Sister, this is seen daily.

The Auctour. Yea, the Husband to his own wife,
and caryeth her from place to place:
The Father to his child uses this life,
alas here is defaut of grace.

The Printer. In heads of Paryshes is great blame,
to suffer them in their company:
But they care not of their name nor fame,
Nor whence they come, make no inquiry,

The Author. So they be gay what shall it need?
boastyng and faceing late and early:
They he taken honest in word and deed,
so they spend out with them largely.

The Printer. But if a poor man lack of his duty,
to the Church, house rent: or expense:
Live he never among them so honestly,
Yet will they be glad to have them thence

The Author. Yea, and be arrested or syted to the law
outlawed, cursed or suspended
Disdayned, punished and kept in awe
and the other by them ever defended.

The Printer. *Thus money makes the difference,
the good to be naught, and naught to be good,
And in them both, is like reverence:
in money it lies, by all likelihood.

The Author. Then I see well there is small charity,
and less wisdom in their circumspect:
It hurts their Neighbourall honesty,
I can no more, but God it direct.
Amen, God grant it, for Christ's sake,
to open the eyes of them in Auctority
To find out these filthes: and such order take
utterly to weed out the seed of iniquitye.

*FINIS.
The Author to his Book.
GO little book unto my masters al
which have ye rule of town or city
Desire ye wardmote quests in special
And eke the Constables to over see:
These bawdi hostries full of iniquity
For better were it to have a bordell
Common, in ye chief place of the city
Than under their noses so manifest to dwell.
And say yt you do wonder inwardly,
that honest me^ ca^ suffer their presence
Or with their wives to haunt company
And among neibors to keep residence
Seeing by the^ such inconvenience
For though ye neighbors dare not,
Reprove such queanes openly:
Yet deem they such of ill reports,
As daily keep their company.
FINIS.
The discovery or blasing of the common practices of beastly Bawdes.
O Wretched world waltring in wickedness
Given all to mischief and unhappiness:
Vicious of living, barren of goodness,
with all vicyousnesse sore infect:
But one thing there is in special,
Which greueth me over all:
That bawdry is so universal:
and so many there be of that sect.
Now a days, what is the cause and why?
Men have their wives in such ielousy:
It is none other save only bawdry:
through ye which vicyous suffraunce
Many young women as daily we see:
Break Matrymony and also Virginity,
And all this comes througe mother B.
called a Bawd of the deuyls alyaunce.
Through whose ungracious counsel,
Much worse then the Devil of Hell
Who so their tale to them does tell:
that many then make to them consent
Both wy^e (...)
Would (...)
But kept the (...)
Were no^ (...)
For he that is disposed viciously,
Huntyng his appetyte to satisfy
In such a place where that conveniently:
Him self may not complain.
Then shall he a bawdy harlot get,
And promise her a Skarfe of Sarcenet
A Velvet Hat, or a Kyrtell of worsted
His purpose to obtain.
Then goes she about full busyly
And handeleth her matter full craftily
Fulfilled all with deuyllyshe polycy:
Of nothing stands she in doubt,
But tell her tale with spirit bold,
Like as a bawdy queen should
That never was good young nor old
To bring her purpose about.
Then will she say to this woman quickly,
Alas good Mistress, it is great pity:
I hear say ye live not merely,
Your Husband to you is unkind,
But if you will do after me?
I warrant you and your honesty:
Ye shall never desteyned be
And also have a daily friend.
Also your Husband is often absent
Wherewith youth is not content.
And makes the Woman often to repent,
As many have done ere this:
Therefore youth desires the company
Of them that be young fresh and lusty:
To pass away the time pleasantly:
Therefore take ye time, when it is.
And one thing I put you in assurance,
There is a Gentleman of mine acqueintance
which in you has put his affiance,
And loves you with all his heart:
Wherefore I beseech you heartily,
Come one day and keep him company,
And we will have a chamber secretly,
And at your pleasure to depart.
And when she has showed her intent,
And sees the will not to her consent:
Then says she to her incontinent:
I would for no worldly treasure:
Do or say that thing that should sownd
To your dishonestly for a thousand pownd
And yet more over I dare be bownd:
It shall never be to your displeasure.
Yet some young woman will al Bawds dei^ye,
And says she loves not the company
Of those Harlots that use such bawdry
for many good women they spill:
O good Mistress, a Bawd not so,
Says this Bawd again her unto:
It is one honest woman for another to do:
In such case their pleasure to fulfill:
For I know well, the course must be had
Of this world: both with good and bad,
And specially, with such as be lad
In the Chain of their flooryshyng youth:
Wherefore, good Maistresse, have no dreede,
For ye shall have me as sure in deed,
As a trusty friend at every need,
I promys you for a truth.
Will ye not see this harlot bawdy?
H^w she calls all this honesty?
^o entice a woman to live viciously,
Is not this a pyteous case?
But if she should have her true hire,
^^^nt should she be in a hot fire,
(...) each all other how they desire
An honest woman to a bawdy place.
Thus will this strumpet, with fair words feed
This good young woman, which is in dreede,
For to consent to any such deed,
Were it not for such Harlots inticement:
Whereby she is brought into this folly,
Regardyng nothing her own honesty,
But makes her a promys firm and faithfully,
To come to her at leisure convenient.
Yet will not this Bawd ieaue her babblyng
Till she have got from her somthyng,
Either her Bracelets, or else a Ryng,
This will she of her be sure:
Then she goes thence, as merry as a Pie,
Home to her Hospytall of Bawdrie,
And shows the man all the matter plainly
How she has brought her to lure.
But who be they that those Bawdes be?
Be they the poor old women (trow ye?)
Nay, nay: they be of a hier degree,
They be of the gorgeous sort:
They be those that can them self paynt,
No man by their cou^tinance can the^ attaint,
For they look as smooth as it were a Saint,
Sad both of countenance and of port.
Yea (perhaps) she wear a Hood of Velvet,
A Kyrttell of Grograyne, or fine Worstet,
Of Satin, Damask, or Chamlet,
Begarded and fringed, as a woman of substance
That no man living, but he would trust,
His wife to go, where ever she lust,
With this Strumpet false and unjust,
In whom is no grace nor affiance.
Whereby oftentimes, men are begylde,
And their Wives honesty clean exylde,
And many young Maidens be get with child
through their subtle ungracious counsel,
But I would every man would consent,
That they might have condign punishment
For if their tongues were from their mouths rent
yet were they served but too well.
O ye Bawdes abominable,
Shameless wretches most miserable:
Amend your lives vituperable:
But sure I think ye be past remedy,
Wherefore except ye do amend
I fear ye shall allow descend:
With the Devil of hell to make your end.
And there to reign perpetually.
The Devil in you has taken such place,
That ye be past all shame and grace:
So that ye may get money apace,
Or else some other reward:
Ye care not how many ye bring to naught
In every corner, ye shall be sought,
For the Devil in you so deep has wrought
That nothing God ye regard.
O ye young women in your youth lusty,
Which have taken upon you matrymony
Whereby ye be bound and that only
Your husband all other above:
To love and please in special
And not to be universal,
Nor have affection to any at all,
But only him to love.
Also beware ye young Maidens, I say,
Ye may se how that every day
Many take leave and ren a way
as great as they may wagge:
Wandrynge abroad, al over the country,
Compelled to steal or run away
Or else to that, the best of three,
To go with a Staff and a Bag.
Wherefore, take heed, ye do not incline
To any of these Bawdes, neither course nor fine
In any wise follow not their line
But let them sit with ill rest,
Stop taste your ears, hear not their tale,
For if ye do: ye set on sale
Good name and honesty, for ever to fail:
Wherefore, trust not to their false behest.
Their words be honey, their counsel is gall,
A great strong poison infernal,
That poysoneth body, soul and all,
Such is their operation:
For, that which the Devil with all his power
May not obtain, (though he conioure)
They will bring it to pass within an hour,
With their sweet co^munycation.
O ye men, the which maintain,
Such bawdy queanes, thus for to reign:
Men said I? nay that I lie plain:
But vile wretches abhomynable?
Ye will not stick to spend quickly
Twenty mark, to do your neighbor injury,
But for Gods sake, to spend an halfpeny,
ye think it is right chargeable.
But what soever your Bawdes will crave,
She need but a^ke, and she shall have
Though other therefore, ye poll and shave
(Me thinks) this thing, full ill does frame:
For body and gooddes, ye consume in waste,
That the Devil, will have ye all at the last,
Without ye take t^me, ere time be past,
For to repent, and amend for shame.
And if ye must needs satisfy,
The Deuyllysh appetite of your body
Take a wife of your own in Matrymonie,
And none other man to beguyle.
But ye regard not what wretched life,
What shame and woe, what daily strife,
Ye make between the man and the wife,
so ye obtain your purpose vile.
And ye that have the Gift, to live chaste,
Look ye spend not your gooddes in waste,
^easte God take vengeance of you in haste,
And withdraw from you his grace:
Relieve the same, and the blind that ye see,
Bestow well your talent, after your degree,
So that your living may not, a stumblyng Block be
To hinder other in this case.
But now for a conclusion final
These Bawdes are the cause of mischiefs all,
That I pray God, foul might they fall,
Except they shortly amend:
For my mind is not able to express,
Half their mischief and unhappiness
That I beseech God of his goodness,
All virtuous people from them defend.
O ye women that virtuous be
Ladies and Gen ill women, of every degree,
I pray you heartily to pardon me,
If I have written, or said amiss,
But all my purpose is only
Your worship to save and honesty,
Wherefore I promys you faithfully,
I have not said, but as it is.
And if I have in any condition
Spoken that, that displeases any good person,
I commyt me to their correction,
Beseechyng God of his infinite grace:
Whereas we have lived viciously,
We may amend through his great mercy,
And with him to reign eternally,
In his celestial place.
Finis.
An Exclamacion of the Auctor, against the secret Bawdes.
O Wicked traitors deceitful as devils
And wurs tha^ devils by very reason
The Devil can never utter his euylles
In this case, but by your encheason:
Promooters of Hell at every season,
Proctors of Pluto, Attornets of Satan,
wtdrawers from god, the perfect soul of man
Most shameful brokers and helpurueiours
Porters of mischief, drabbes damnable
Enquestours of death, of sin Arbytrours,
Odyble cou^sellours, of God reprouable:
Merchants of misery most detestable
Sumners of sorrow, Hostlers infernal:
The devil, death and bell, to (...) are peregal.
Unhappy earth how can you sustain,
These hell hounds fro thy profundytie?
How art you norished with the heavenly rain?
Suffryng on thee, their great enormitie
Why stands ye Walls of Town or city?
Compassing the^: and does not overthrow,
Why does any Food, for them breed or grow*
Margery Curson, ye chief of bawdes all
Which at stewsyde, long time kept reside^c^
A bawd indeed, by right me^ did her cal^
Yet by her came not half thinco^uenienc^
For all openly was done her insolence:
But of preui bawds, no person ca^ bewar^
O cursed spirits, too shameful is your snare
O ribawd thieves, how can ye procur^
To have the favor of honest living me^
How can your Ruffians life be sure?
To haunt the compani of honest women
Your Aplesquiers, do daily trace and ren^
Among fisgigs. and bawdy knaves,
Subiecting the^ in manner as your slave
Al manner states wtin your trap is taken
Your wri^chi^g gins, sca^tly can be wtstan^
No fysh, nor frogs, by you is forsaken.
Goth one and other falls into your hand
Gentleman, serving man: wife and husband
Wydow, Maid, Batcheler and Prentice,
With bawdy council, ye do to lin entice.
Ye mayntaine by your rotten bawdry,
Vices of lechery and detestation,
Incest, rape, sacrilege and aduontery:
Theft, murder, swearing: and defloracion,
Drunkenness, picking, and defamacion
Feightyng, brawling, hordome and shame,
^ll these be Assistantes, to your bawdy name.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, in the upper end of Fleetlane: at the Sign of the
spread Eagle. by Richard Ihones.


