Diatelesma. The Modern History of the World, expressing the principal
Passages of the Christian Countries in these last six Months, whether
Political, or Polemicall brought down from April last to this present.

Wherein is comprised much Variety.

The Contents whereof you shall find in the ensuing Table.

Hunc servare modum semper didicere libelli Parcere personis, gesta refer,
mei. LONDON, Printed by T. Harper for Nathanael Butter, and Nicholas Bourne.
1637.

To the Reader.
HISTORY is but a narration of things done, and needs no Orator to plead for
it, either by word or writing; Truth is able to justify it self, and fears
not the face of any Aristarchus, which will snap at her words, though he
cannot blemish her actions. Her Picture was thus drawn by the pencill of
Apelles; Calumny, attended with Ignorance, Suspicion, Anger, Envy, Fraud,
Treachery, and Fear, were placed in a Table, casting filth and dirt upon the
white garment, the glorious robe of a more glorious Virgin; which she did but
shake, and it appeared again as illustrious as it was formerly. And what needs
an Epistle then, to be prefixed before this Discourse? it is not to make the
Relation more authentical, but the expression more passable. Sint bona, sint
quaedam mediocria, sint mala plura. It is the fate of Writers, who must stand
to your censures; only I would inform you, that if any thing seem Aut
obscura nimis, Anglica sive parum
Non meus est Error, nocuit librarius illis.
An ingenious Reader can amend, an Ingenuous will pardon it; to whom alone, I
dedicate this Discourse. Vale.

N. C.

A Table of the Contents.
THe Seige of Hermenstein renewed. Page 2 Ramsey projects to releeve it, Page 3
His Project. Ibid. Fails, Page 4 Ramsey threatens to be avenged, and puts his
menace in execution, Page 5 The extraordinary Ambassador of Denmark pillaged
by some of John de Werts Soldiers, Page 6 The Commander in Hermenstein begins
to treat, ibid. Capitulates, Page 8 The Articles of agreement, and surrendrie
of the Fort, ibid. Selinginstat besiedged by the Caesarians Page 9 The Govenour
slain, ibid. The Garrison yields upon composition, ibid. But is detained upon
breach of conditions, Page 10 Ramsey pillageth the enemies Country, ibid.
Provideth for a Seige, Page 11 Is blockt up in Hanaw ibid. The Earl of Hanaw
makes his peace with the King of Hungary, Page 12 Ramsey resignes his
government upon honorable terms, Page 13 Strange Prodigies ibid. Part of the
Duke of Bavaria his Palace at Munchen burnt casually, Page 14 The Castle of
Lichtenberge strangely burnt down to the ground Page 15 Duke Bernard of Saxon
Weymar at Browstat. ibid. Advises with his Counsel of War for passage over
the Rhine, Page 16 He passes the River Page 17 Is four times assaulted by
John de Werth, and is still victorious, ibid. Ensisheim taken by Duke Bernhard,
Page 18 Halliers passage over the Rhine, ibid. The Governor of Hagi-now
informed of the state of Chathouse Page 19 Intends to invade it Page 20 Yet
sends out to be better informed of the state thereof, ibid. Undertakes it, Page
21 A Stratageme, ibid. Carries it, ibid. The Imperialists attempt to regaine
it, Page 22 Are repulsed with loss, Page 23 The effects of the victory, ibid.
Drusenheim taken by Duke Bernhard, is attempted by John de Werth, but vainly,
Page 24 Duke Bernhard desirous to try the fortune of a Battle, ibid. Sends out
a Forlorn hope, ibid. That lost, John de Werth hoping of Victory, leaves his
trenches, Page 25 Duke Bernhard encountreth and repelleth him, ibid. A Convoy
of John de Werth defeated by the Rhinegraue, ibid. Duke Bernhard beseigeth
Kentzingen, Page 27 So draws the Bavarian to battle, ibid. By a stratagem,
Page 28 And obtaines a Victory, ibid Forgatz his message to Duke Bernhard of
Weymar, Page 29 And the direful Issue Brandestein a Prisoner at Dresden. Page
32 An assault on Oschitz failing, the Suburbs are fired by the Swedes, ibid. A
Swedish Party surprised at Bitterfield, Page 33 Eylenburg forsaken by the
Swedes, ibid. A noble Act of a Swedish Captain, ibid. Ertford beseiged by
Glyleen Page 34 The Seige suddenly raised, ibid. The Sconce at Wittenberg Page
35 Beseiged and taken by the Imperialists, Page 36 A Convoy of Provision
surprised by Bannier, Page 37 Lucca surrendered to Lesle, ibid. Meissen
surprised by Bannier by a stratagem. ibid. The King of Hungary at Prague. Page
39 In danger to have bin murderd by a Traitor. Page 40 Gordon slain, Lesle and
Anderson dangerously wounded at a feast. ibid. The King of Hungary consults
with Callas, Piccolomini and de Grana. Page 41 Gallas made Generalismo of the
Imperial Army. ibid. Labors to take Bannier at Torgaw. Page 42 Bannier
resolving to discampe from Torgaw. Page 43 Pillageth the City. ibid. Devises a
stratagem to avoid the Imperialists. Page 44 Puts it in practice, deludes the
Generalliss. ibid. Encourages his own men. Page 46 Marches to Landsberg.
Page 47 Marazini defeated by the Swedes at Landsberg. Page 48 Gallas posteth
after him. ibid Intends again to surprise him, again he escapes. Page 49 And
joins with Wrangell at Newstad. ibid. Landsberg surrendered to the
Imperialists. Page 50 Caecilia Renata the Archdutchesse married to the King of
Poland. Page 51 Goes into the Kingdom. ibid. 1500. Polacks entertained by
Bannier. Page 52 Ten companies of Dragoons and 300. horse entirely defeated by
Charles Wrangel. Page 53 One Brandenburgish Regiment of foot defeated by
Schlang. Page 53 Another disbandeth. ibid. A party o^ I^periall horse defeated
by the Poles. Page 54 Ratenaw surrendered by the Imperialists. Page 55 Havelberg
taken by assault. ibid. Werten besieged by Klitzing. Page 56 Surrendered. ibid.
Tholate Commander imprisoned. Page 57 Domitz surrendered to Klitzing upon
composition. ibid. The Swedes at Luneburg compound with the Duke for the City
and the Fort of Winsen. Page 58 The conditions between the Duke of Luneburg
and the Swedes. Page 59 Gallas leads his Army to Ancklam. ibid. Bannier
reuniteth his forces with those under Wrangel. Page 60 Gallas assaults the City
five times and is so often repulsed with loss. ibid. Attempts to pass the River
of Rhine, is beaten by Bannier and discampeth. Page 61 The French Kings
preparations. Page 64 The Cardinal de la Valette marches toward the
Nether-lands. Page 65 Sits down before Landrecey. Page 66 The Castle of Bohain
taken by the Marquess of Milleray. ibid. A rich Convoy surprised by Gassion.
Page 68 A Spanish party defeated by Gassion. Page 69 Two hundred of them slain
and some taken prisoners. Page 70 Diverse Forts and Towns taken by the French
Army. ibid. The Kings Proclamation enjoining the officers to repair to the
Armies. Page 71 An edict against the fugitives. Page 72 Diverse Legois come to
the Camp at Landrecey. Page 73 The manner of the siege of Landrecey. ibid. The
Garrison necessitated Capitulates, and surrenders upon conditions. ibid. The
Articles. ibid. The French take possession of Landrecey. Page 77 The Haven of
Graveling left unperfect. Page 78 An attempt of the Attrebates lost at Desuren.
Page 79 Piccolomini his march. ibid. The Castle Chavancey taken by Chastillion.
Page 80 Piccolominie's arrival at Montz. Page 81 A fortunate Enterprise
undertaken by the French near Montz. Page 82 The Castle of Basigni yields
upon strange Composition. Page 83 By the unadvisednesse of an unskilful
Commander. Page 84 Maubuge surrendered upon Composition. Page 85 Villaune
surrendered to the French upon discretion. ibid. Dinaw yields upon the like
terms, but with an harder fate. Page 86 Diverse places yielded upon
Composition. Page 87 Ivoy besieged, ibid. And surrendered upon ibid. These
Articles ibid. The Forts of Ebuterne Page 91 Ebuterne, Page 92 Surrendered to
the French, ibid. The French Leader protecteth the Women, ibid. Raises the
Citadell. Page 93 The Castle of Flavillien yields to the French, Page 93
Diverse small Forts surrendered to Chastillion in Luxenburg, Page 94 The
Spaniards make an attempt, Page 95 Upon the French Quaetor at Olizy, ibid.
Surprise it, Page 96 Are again surprised, Page 97 With great loss. Page 98
Danvilliers in Luxenburg is blocked up. Page 99 Besieged, ibid. Fair Quarter
granted and confirmed by Chastillon, ibid. And confirmed by Charles Stallin
the Governor. Page 100. An Ambuscado laid for the Master of the Artillery,
ibid. Happily avoided with some loss. Page 101 Beaumont surrendered to the
French. ibid. The Castle of Solre surrendered by the French. Page 102 The Castle
of Solre taken by the D. of Candale. Page 103 La Capelle besieged. Page 104 Don
Marcus de Lima the Governor capitulateth, Page 105 Agrees. ibid. An Alarm in
the French Camp. Page 106 Causes them to march in battle array to Maubeuge.
Page 107 The Cardinal Infant routed, and his loss. Page 107 The Castle of
Leon surrendered to the French. Page 108 Two Companies of the Garrison at
Cambray defeated. ibid. Glaon a Castle taken by the French Field Marshall Ferte
Imbault without blows. Page 109 Trelon a Castle surrendered to Ferte Imbault
upon composition. Page 110 Argon comes in by precedent. Page 111 S. Frevill his
design upon Kirmgnain in Artoyse. Page 112 The carriage of his perfect. Page
112 A breach made in the Wall. Page 113 The Fort taken. Page 114 S. Frevill
prevides to keep it. ibid. An Ambuscadoe laid for the French. Page 115 Is
avoided. Page 116 And the Castle fortified and manned. ibid. Ivoy retaken by
Cantelmo. Page 116 The siege of Danvillers. Page 117 The French Triumphs upon
the Kings birth day. ibid. The night works and their Clue. Page 118 A Half
Moon taken by the French. Page 119 And a Mine sprung effectually. Page 120 The
Garrison Capitulates. ibid. The Articles for surrendry of Danvillers. Page 121
The Town yielded. Page 125 Don Andria Cantelmo seeks to hinder the accord.
ibid. Canten a Captain sent with a strange commission. ibid. Is taken
prisoner. ibid. His instruction and commission. ibid. The Cardinal Infant
encamped at Saint Julians. Page 126 And reinforced resolves to keep the
French Armies from joining. Page 127 Sends Picolomini to Pont de Sambri. Page
128 Where he is entrenched. ibid. And raised again by the Cardinal de
Valette. Page 129 Maubeuge burned casuallie. Page 130 Landrecey revictualled
and fortified a new. ibid. The laborers delivered from four squadrou of
Spanish horse by a stratagem. ibid. The Infant encamped at Quesnoys. ibid. The
Castle of Crevecaeur surprised by the French. Page 131 Interchangeable presents
betwixt Picolomini and the Duke of Candale. ibid.
This Historical Relation may be printed. Hampton Court. 18. October. 1637.

G. R. WECKHERLIN.

Errata.
Page 5. lin. 19. dele (and town.)

Page 102. l. 22. for enrich, read surprise.

Diatelesma: The Modern History of the World continued, and brought down from
April last, till this present.
The Actions and Occurrences in upper GERMANY.
THe Winter and Spring were times of preparation only, Summer and Autumn
yielding forage for the cattle, and meat for the Army, was the season, wherein
the martial men came to action; and then the Austrians and Saxons Confederates,
resolving to clear the Empire of all foreign invaders, and to subdue the
native Princes, which had taken up Arms for conservation of their ancient
Dignities and Liberties, mustered up a greater Army, then ever they had since
their first combination: John de Werth being appointed by the Bavarian to clear
the Rhine, the Baron of Down t^ belieger Hanaw in the Weteraw, the Austrian
Generals, Gallas, Marazini, Hatzfeldt, Goets, and Godfrey Huyn, Baron of
Gehlen, being deputed to succor the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh
against the Swedes and their Allies.

The fortunate success of Ramsey, The siege of Hermanstein renewed.
in relieving the French Garrison in Hermanstein, when the Soldiers more
affrighted with the lean and deformed looks of famine, than the hostile Arms
of the besiegers were ready to capitulate for the present, somewhat appaled the
Bavari^n Commander, and made him stagger in his counsels. But as some few drops
of water sprinkled upon a flaming fire, though for a while they seem to
suppress it, do not extinguish it, the active element recollecting its
strength quickly breaking out with a more impetuous violence; so the Baron
knowing, the place to be almost unpregnable, if victualled and manned, and
seeing it supplied both with men and provision, so unexpectedly, a little
slacked his hostile courses, in forcing the place, but quickly considering of
what consequence the Fort was, how advantageous it might be to his Masters to
recover it, how prejudicial it might be to all his Confederates, if the French
should hold it, and what a disparagement it might be to himself in point of
discredit with his Lord, and dishonor amongst the military men, if that small
supply, (which could not in all probability suffice the Castle long) should
cause him to rise, and leave the siege, resolved in the end to continue it, and
leaving his Army before it, himself posted to Coln, entreated and prevailed
with the Archbishop Elector to furnish him with shipping to secure the Rhine,
that no more relief might be brought to the Fort that way, and speedily
returning blockt it up so close with his own forces by land, fortifying his
Camp with new works and retrenchments, that any attempt for help of the
Garrison that way was bootlesse and desperate. Sir James Ramsey whose great
spirit and dextrous wit, Envy cannot but commend, by the nimbleresse of his
apprehension: all this notwithstanding qui^^^y invented a way for bringing
fresh succor to his Friends, and assisted by the valor of some of his own
Regiment, Ramsey projects to relieve it.
whose hearts he seemed to command as well as their bodies as soon pursued
it; the success whereof though it was not fortunate was not dishonorable. The
glory of such an Enterprise is not to be valued by the issue. A daring man will
make his abilities to appear where danger is, and though Fortune may cross
him in his design, malice cannot blemish him in his honor It was thus. The
Hanovers in the beginning of May had surprised a Convoy of a hundred Malters of
Corn designed for the use of the great Provost, His project.
the Baron of Meternich, then residing at Mentz. This prize the Commander
intended to make use of for the relief of the French Garrison, projecting to
carry it down to the Rhine by amusing the Frankforders, and the other
Imperial Cities and Forts upon the River, with a color of restitution, to the
Dum-Provost, it being the rather credible because there was at that time a
treaty of truce betwixt the Governor and the Electour of Mentz, and Letters
were drawn to that purpose, subscribed with his hand, sealed with his seal,
and directed to the Elector, and Baron; and a Pass for the Bottom, as from
Metternichy. May 15/25, was designed for putting the stratagem forward. A
vessel capacious of that burden, and more was laden, and four Soldiers only
(that there might be no suspicion of fraud appointed to carry the Bark
thither. Toward Evening, the Skippers with their charge, were descryed upon
the Mayn near Frankford, and there being summoned, produced their Pass and
Letters, which being entertained as authentical^ and true, gave them free
liberty to go forward withoul any further questioning them. Hoechst was the
next place where they feared any molestation; and there they found some
trouble, but such as being once over, rather encouraged then disheartened them.
The Commander there suspecting a pad in the straw. -- Et metuens Danaos, and
donaferentes, began to sift them more narrowly, and grounding his resolve
rather upon suppositio^, then any pregnant proofs, instantly disarmed the
soldiers, and stayed them till morning, when thinking these Gibeonites to have
dealt sincerely with him, he restored their Arms, and gave them a free liberty
to proceed. The favor of the stream and wind brought them soon after below
the Castle of Keltzersbach, where, upon a neck of Land covered with sedge, and
made almost for such a design, some other Hanovian troops attended them with
six Wagons laden with Bacon, Fails.
Butter, Grenades, and other Ammunition; and fifty soldiers, whom they took
into the Bark, deeming that this fortunate beginning must needs be crowned with
an happy ending, and happy it might have been, if it had not been discovered
casually. This glorious morning was soon overcast, a small cloud, that seemed
empty, burst out into a storm, a peasant unhappily espied their action, and
hope, and fear, hope of reward from the Commander, and fear of injury by the
Hanovers, adding wings to his speed, made him sly to Hocchst, and acquaint the
Governor with what he had seen. The Commander stayed not to call a counsel to
advise what was to be done, but knowing the cause to require expedition, nor
deliberation, instantly sent Post upon Post to Mentz, Bingen, and other places
to look out and stay these adventurers. The adviso was no sooner come, but a
watch was charged, and sundry Boats disoatched to the Main, and the Rhine,
some to way-lay them, and some to pursue after them. At Bingen, the Scouts
discovered them, and the Austrian soldiers, near the Tower de Rats, or
Mouse-steeple, grappled with them, after a small conflict, in which they slew
six of the Hanouers, mastered the rest, took the ship and burden, detained the
Captain and the rest of the soldiers prisoners, threw the Grenades and other
military instruments into the Rhine, and sent the provision to the Elector of
Mentz, who for a gratification to the Governor of Bingen, bestowed upon him
the prisoners, and their ransomes.

Ramsey, who was rather angry, Ramsey threatens to be avenged, and puts his
menace into execution.
then grieved for this loss, no sooner heard of it, but sent a menacing letter
to the Elector of Mentz, the purport whereof was, that if he did not restore him
the prisoners and town which he had lost before Bingen, in the ship he sent
toward Hermerstein, then he would burn all his towns in the Rhingaw, and to
his word, joined his hand, immediately plundering the Cloister at Selingerstat,
a City properly belonging to the Moguntine, but then under the Hanovers,
carried the Monks into Hanow, detained them as prisoners of war, till they
had satisfied his loss, sent a party toward Frankford, whence it brought back
great store of cattle, and pillaged the country therabouts, and seized
himself of the town of Vrsel, which he fortified, as a place best fitting his
intention for the further proseq^ution of that design, to all which the
Elector like a man of war answered as resolutely, that himself would come in
person, and block him up in Hanaw, if he stood upon those terms, all the
neighboring States being formerly bound, and now in a readiness, to assist
him in that siege, if the Hanawers did not speedily submit. But nothing was
done against him till afterward.

Yet all the vicinage began then to be filled with horror, The extraordinary
Ambassador of Denmark pillaged by some of John de Werths soldiers.
the highways were become unpassable, the Hanovian, or Bavarian soldiers
without respect of persons, pillaging all they met. The Count of Pentz
Ambassador for the King of Denmark, to the King of Hungary, and States of
Germany, had been at Mentz with the Elector, and there received honorably, but
upon his return, thirty horsemen (at first supposed to have been of Ramseys
Regiment, but proved afterward to be Bavarians, and under the command of John
de Werth) without regard either of his own condition, or the dignity of the
persons, from whom and to whom he was sent, after they had slain his Steward,
and wounded some other of his servants, laid violent hands on him, robbed him of
all his money and jewels, and in a miserable plight turned him on the way
toward Aschafemburgh, where his wants were supplied by the Elector of Mentz,
with necessaries for his journey, and a safe conduct toward Wertzburg.

The Garrison in Hermenstein, by this began to see their own, and Ramseys
danger, Ramsey being unable to relieve them any more, or they to hold out long
against the Bavarian, The Comma^der in Hermenstein begins to treat.
who had threatened to surround Hanaw with his Army, as soon as he had taken in
Hermanstein. Hitherto, that City in the Weteraw, had succored the Fort upon
the Rhine, and the Fort been as a strong Bulwark to that City, the forces of
the enemy which menaced the City, being engaged there, and the City though
sometimes blocked up, yet never besieged. The Die was cast, the chance seemed
ill, and the Governor labored to mend it with his play. It is wisdom to
take time by the foretop, and to seek a remedy, before mischief can come, to
extremity. The French Commander, as yet was provided of a months victuals,
and whilst his store lasted, knew that he could keep the Fort, but that once
gone, then he must surrender it; his aim was only how to do it honorably. To
this purpose, about the end of May, he sent his Agents to the Elector of
Colen, off^ring to surrender it into his hands, upon these conditions following.

First, that he might march away freely with those fifteen pieces of Canon,
which the Swedes had brought thither from Mentz.

Secondly, That the Elector should admit no other praesidiary Soldiers there,
save of his own forces only.

Thirdly, that if any change should happen, he should surrender it to no other
but the Elector of Tryer only, and lastly, that the Elector should give a
pledge to the most Christian King for performance of these covenants: But all
these conditions seemed unreasonable to the Elector, who thereupon for that
time dismissed the Deputies, without any further treaty. The Baron of Werth,
who all this time ceased from using his instruments of battery against the
Fort, expecting to have it yielded without such compulsive enforcement, seeing
the French Agents return without testimonials of any pacificous transaction,
prepares to gain it by force of Arms, planted his battery and shot fiercely
against it, fitted his Grenades, and cast them into the Fort upon the new
building, and was answered again by the Garrison in the same Dialect, receiving
far more damage from them, then he did unto them, his great shot being spent
upon mud-wals, which by gentle yielding to the harder body were neither shaken
nor shattered, and his Grenades prevented by the care of the Garrison from
doing the inward buildings any prejudice; whilst the shot from the Castle much
impeached the Camp, and the Grenades, which the Commander caused to be flung
into Confluentia, brought thither a confluence of mischief. Capitulates.
It was too violent a spurt to last long, nor stood it either with the
discretion of the besiegers, to spend their powder, and ammunition so vainly,
nor the ability of the besieged to do more then they had done, though it might
have been done effectually. June 14/4, another parlee was appointed, the
Bavarian General, and the Deputies the Lord of Startzhousen, and the Lord of
Egloy, by the direction of the Elector of Colen, came to another treaty with
the French Commander, which was not concluded of, till eight days following,
it being then determined, upon these subsequent propositions.

First, The Articles of agreement, and surrendry of the Fort.
That the Fort should be delivered up to the Elector of Colen, as a depositum
to an entrusted Feoffee, to be again surrendered by him to the modern Elector of
Tryer, or his lawful successor hereafter.

Secondly, That a salvo Conducto, shall be granted to the Garrison by the
Elector of Colen, the Cardinal Infant, the Duke of Newburgh, and the City of
Colen.

Thirdly, That after the receipt of the said Pass, the Garrison shall depart
within two days, according to the custom of war with bag and baggage, high
and low weapons, two of those pieces of Ordnance, which were brought thither by
the Swedes, and be conducted down the River of Rhine, as far as Orsoy: all
which was observed accordingly, and June 17/^7 the French were carried with a
Convoy, down the Rhine toward Holland, being furnished with sufficient
provision for their journey, from Lintz and Bonne, by command of the Elector of
Colen, and from Monhaimb by direction of the Duke of Newburgh.

During the treaty with Hermenstein, two Imperial Regiments under the command
of Henneberger, and the Earl of Dohna, were sent against Selingenstat,
Selinginstat besieged by the Casareans.
furnished from Frankford, with two pieces of Ordnance, Powder, Lead, a hundred
Musketeers, and two Canoneers. These forces early in the morning, June 11/21,
began to play upon the City, and after a short battery to assault it. Captain
Fisher, who was Commander for Ramsey, had three hundred men prepared to
entertain them, and in the first assault, The Governor slain.
with exchange of his own life, for many of theirs, two whereof were men of
note, Hennebergers Lieutenant Colonel, and an ordinary Lieutenant repulsed
them. The besiegers hearing of the Commanders death, presently renewed the
assault, and were received by the besieged so bravely, that again, with a
greater loss they were forced to retire, the number of the slain Imperialists
in both these Encounters amounting to the number of above a hundred and seventy
men, and now greatly troubled and enraged to be thus beaten off by those
ordinary men, who had no director to advise, or command them, brought up their
whole body, resolving to carry it at the third attempt, or to die in the
enterprise. The presidiaries observing their posture, and moved with the
outcryes of the people, The Garrison yields upon composition.
to whom the gesture of the assaylants presented strange objects of terror,
hung out the Flag, and desired terms of composition. It was granted, and the
Soldiers in conclusion, consenting to depart with unlighted matches, were
conducted some part of the way toward Hanaw, by the Army. The Convoy being
returned, some few of them kindled their matches, and with them the fury of the
Caesarean Cavillary, which returning instantly upon them, put some of them to
the sword, forced others to change their colors, and attend the Roman Eagles,
and carried the rest, that would not serve them prisoners to Bobenhausen. But
is detained upon breach of conditions.
There is no dallying with a victorious enemy; if he list to quarrel, he can
find a cause or make one. Nor is it any point of polity in a Conqueror, to
use the vanquished with extremity. Though they be unable to avenge themselves,
they may perhaps have Allies which are both sensible of their injuries, and
able to repay them. The hard usage of his soldiers, Ramsey pillageth the
enemies Country.
so incensed their Colonel, that he vowed quittance, and instantly sending
out several parties, fetched in a number of great cattle from the Territories
of Mentz and Wertzburg, to enrich his own City with victuals, and impoverish
them, in respect of the hard measure done to his soldiers by the Caesarean
horsemen, and the liberties of Frankford, for assisting them with soldiers and
Ammunition in their late Expedition.

John de Werth upon the composition with the French at Hermanstein, sent the
Avant-guard of his Army before to block up Hanaw, threatening the City to come
with the mayn body of his Army, and engirt it round. But those forces were
suddenly called back, a piece of more difficulty was designed for him, nor was
he alone with his own Regiments able to undertake it. An hideous tempest was
raised in Burgundy, and now began to approach the Rhine, D. Bernhard laden with
the spoils, of the Lorrainer, was coming that way with his victorious Arms,
and the Bavarian assisted with the Sperenterish and Salish Regiments, and the
Crabats under Isolany, was appointed to oppose him; and away he matched toward
Basil, to meet with his own associates, and oppose the French forces under the
Almayn Dukes command, but the success must be referred to its proper place.
Ramsey's History, who all this while had lived like a free Prince, in the midst
of his professed Enemies, and left not his charge at last as by enforcement,
but voluntarily, with the consent, and approbation, and for the use of the
Princes for whom he kept it, and with profit and honor to himself, maugre
the malice of his Enemies, must now be recorded.

Our English-Scottish Colonel, by the departure of the Bavarians, having got a
little time of breathing, was not idle, but spent the few days of respite, he
had in repayring the fortifications, revictualling the City, and abating the
power of his ill affected neighbors. Provideth for a siege.
About June the twentieth, old style, the fields being white with Corn, he
sent forth such harvest-men as could manage their Arms, as well as the Sickle,
and reaping where he never sowed, brought in good store of corn into the
common Granary. June the four and twentieth, another party being abroad, met
with some Wagon of Frankford laden with materials for building of a Sconce to
impeach the City under his command, and guarded with seven Musketeers, beat
the soldiers, broke their Muskets, sent back the hot-shots, and took away
thirteen fair draught-horses, and carried them into the City. It was time that
he should look about him, a new Army was raised suddenly against him, the
Elector of Mentz, the Bishop of Wertzburg, and the Imperial City of Frankford,
joined their forces together, under the Baron of Metternich, and resolved to
compel him to yield and surrender the City. But the fire burns hottest in
coldest weather; and their Armies environing him, made his courage more active.
Is blockt up in H^u^w.
They could not pin him up so straightly, but that he found a way free for him at
pleasure, to sally forth for the endamaging of the Army. Two days amongst the
rest are most remarkable, July 20/30, upon which, he broke into the Generals
own Quarter, slew above a hundred horse, and brought as many prisoners into the
City, and July 27, old style, they broke out as far as Retstat, cut off many of
the Caesareans, and carried away twenty horses. In the midst of these
turmoyles, an unexpected peace was wrought for this City. The Earl of Hanaw,
who had been under the Imperial Band, The Earl of Han^w makes his peace with
the King of Hungary.
and was proscribed amongst other Evangelical Princes by the Triumvirate at
Prague, being entertained at the Hage, by the United States, whither he fled as
to a Sanctuary, from the fury of Ferdinand the Second late Emperor, by the
mediation of friends in the Court at Vienna, had then happily made his peace
with the now King of Hungary, and was readmitted by him to his Earldome.
Himself being then sick, sent an adviso thereof to the Christian King, who had
formerly relieved him in his extremity, and lately during the time of his
sickness at the instance, and upon the intercession of the States, sent him
200000 Florins, desiring his Majesty's consent for his peaceable enjoying his
ancient possessions, and his Letters to Ramsey for the relinquishing of the
City, and resigning it to the Earls use. The King granted his suite, and gave
order to Ramsey to restore the place, but with a proviso of satisfaction for
his care in the conservation of it, and assurance of all this being brought to
the Colonel about the end of July, with order, and Letters Patents from the
Earl, directed to his Brother in Law, the Count of Solms Lawbach, to
administer the Government during the Earls absence, the old Governor made a
cessation of Arms, with the asseegers, with declaration of the cause, for a
time of conference about the sum, which he expected as a requital of the
offices he had done that City, and they as willing to be rid of one, who with
a small power, had often pillaged their Territories, as desirous after the
mischiefs of War, to have a glimpse of the much desired rays of peace, not
only willingly condescended thereunto, but when the Colonel had sent his Agents
to the Eector of Mentz, to treat about his satisfaction, Ramsey resignes his
government upon honorable terms.
the Frank forders sent theirs also to the same effect, and the Marquess of
Darmstat, who had then made a truce with the Colonel, interposed himself, as
an umpire, or at least mediator in that negotiation. Some time was spent, as
it is ordinary in matters of such nature, about the sum to be paid, and the
persons from whom it was to be expected; yet in the end by the earnest
solicitation of the Marquess, both were agreed on, and 50000 Rix Dollers were
appointed the Commander, from the Moguntine, the Bishop of Wirtzburg, and the
Imperial City of Frankford (the sum in our English account is 15000 pound
sterling) and the Commander resigned his authority, to the Count of Solms
Lawbach, with conditions to stay in Hanaw as a private man, till the money was
paid in, and then to have a safe conduct to the Swedish Army, or to what other
place himself upon more deliberation would nominate for his safety. Nunc est
bibendum: nunc pede libero
Pulsanda tellus: --
The Weterauians were now all in jollitie by Ramseys resignation, they feared
no future unhappiness, Strange prodigies.
and the memory of all former calamities was almost extinguished, when suddenly
the hearts of the superstitious people were da^^^ted by strange prodigies (yet
not strange to that Nation, no year since the war first commenced, being ba^^^n
of such portents) the water at Weymar again being ^urned to blood, a strange
Worm in the shape of a man with perfe^^ lineaments, and a golden Crown upon of
head, being found in a Sallad at an Herb-wo^^^^s shop at Coblentz, and (which
if not prestigious) was most terrible, a Woman appearing in a mourning habit,
in Saint Stephens the Cathedral Churchyard at Vienna. June 18/28, which with
an accent of sorrow, as they write from thence having from 11 to 12 at night
yelled out woe unto you, woe unto you, often repeating those words, and nothing
else, the Bells without the help of man rung suddenly to the great affrightment
of the people, which descanted upon the omen, doubting such horrid consequents
would ensue it, as presented themselves to their several fancies.

Now began a new time of trouble, fire and sword raging in many parts of the
Empire, not only casually, but by the arbitrament, and wile of such as used
that devouring element to the damage of those with whom they were at enmity.
Part of the D. of Bavaria his Palace at Munchen burnt casually.
The Duke of Bavaria had some loss at Munchen casually. June 19/29, at the
entertainment of the Extraordinary Ambassador for the King of Denmark, the
Count of Pentz being then arrived at the Bavarian Court, to show his
magnificence, the Duke would have the night to emulate the day. -- atque ex
Cyclope diurno,
Nocturnus tunc Argus erat --
strange fireworks were devised, and used, but one of the Squibs fell
unhappily upon the Tennis Court adjoining to the Palace, and burnt it to ashes,
and thence ranging to the Princes stables burnt them down with the horses in
them, and had done more mischief, had not the people plied their hands, and
fallen close to their water works, A turret of the Dukes place, his jewel-house,
wherein his rarities of great value, were reserved, was suddenly on a flame, but
there the people, with much a do extinguished it, and with that determined
their fear; the Duke could not be unsensible of some loss by that accident;
yet his loss elsewhere was greater, another of his Castles named
Leichtenberg, near Landsberg, about three weeks before was set on fire by
lightning, and in three days all which time the raging Vulcan could not be
appeased, was made an heap of rubbage. The Castle of Lichtenberg^ strangely
burnt to the ground.
But these private and particular accidents were nothing to the common terrors
abroad, in Hessenland, Lusatia, Misnia, and other places of the Empire. The
Card. Infant began to be oppressed in the Netherlands by French Armies in
Artois, and Haynault, and the States forces in Brabant, and for his relief
Picolomini with his Regiments, was called down to Hennegow. Duke Bernhard with
his Almayns, and the French forces were come by this time as far as
Montbeliard toward the Rhine, and Isolany first, and Forgatz after him with
their Brabats, the first with foruteen, and the last with eleven Regiments were
sent to assist John de Werth against him, the highways were filled with bands
of men, and whilst these men of Arms were upon their march, the Cities by
which they were to pass, though they had no reason to fear, or suspect any
injury by such as were their Confederates, durst not be too confident. Colen
especially, which was near the rode of these passengers, where the Magistrate
mustered up 2000 men, and added them to the old Train-band to have them in a
readiness upon all occasions.

The Almayne Duke of Saxon Weymar, whose brave exploits in the French County,
must be referred to their proper head, about the midst of June dividing his
Army for the speedier execution of his designs sent Hallier with the one part,
D. Beruh. of Sax. Weymar at Browstat.
by the way of Porrentruy toward Alsatia, with an injunction to meet him at
Browstat near Mulhausen the first of July new style, the day and place designed
for the common Randevouz, and himself followed by the way of Danne, whither
before, with an able Convoy, he had sent two Wagons laden with money for
payment of his Army. Neither of them failed in the least circumstance, and both
meeting at the time and place appointed a Counsel o^ War was called, and
according to the conclusion there resolved of some few days after, the
Lieutenant General marched toward Basil, with one part of the Army to
confer with the Magistrate there about the present occasions, and his
Highness having stayed a while in the Camp, with Manicampe the
Field-marshall, and Lieutenant Governor General for the King in Alsatia, and
particularly Commander of Colmar, who came to visit him, Advises with his
Counsel of War for passage over the Rhine.
and tender him his service: put forward July 3/13, to besiege Ensisheim, a
town of consequence, and the Parliamentary seat of Alsatia, where he gave order
to the Rhinegrave, his Lieutenant General of the Cavallary to assault it, and
departed thence with Manicampe to Colmar, to advise with him for the passing of
his Army over the river. To this end the next morrow, he drew out six Companies
of Musketeers, commanded them to march night and day directly toward
Benefielt, and himself the 5/15, attended with Manicampe, who carried with him
five hundred old French Soldiers, drawn out of the Garrisons of Colmar,
Schlestat, and Guemar, and his own company of light horse followed them, and
found there certain Boats laid upon the carriages made ready for his service,
by Moquell the Governor resident for the Crown of Sweden there. Here another
Counsel of War was called for prosecution of the Dukes design, and the
Commanders differing in their particular opinions, (it not being disputed what
was to be done, but how) according to their several intelligences of the
posture, and gesture of the Enemy, the Duke commanded the valiant Schonbeck
(the Colonel who had formerly so bravely defended Cazel-outre, with three
hundred men, forty wagons, and forty (...) all Boats to attempt the passage.
His valiant heart could not disobey, though in probability those vessels of so
little bulk could be of as little avayle for the transporting of an Army. The
Colonel had no sooner put his hand to work, but good fortune (seldom a foe to
an hardy man) furnished him with what he wanted. Three great Bottoms laden
with Merchants goods, were tugging up the stream from Strasburg to Basil,
those he seized of, He passes the River.
and with them he transports his forlorn hope to the other side. The Duke had
speedy intelligence of his good success, and posting thither, found the
vessels there at his arrival, and entering into them, with the Marquess of
Dourlach, the Dukes of Wirtemberg, Manicampe, and other Commanders passed over
to the other side: his Army being conducted after him, in the small vessels
which were brought from Benefieldt, and some others which came down the small
Cut, which runs from Schlestat into the Eltzer, and were so brought into the
Rhine for that service.

An happy beginning it was, and almost beyond the Dukes expectation, but
Commencement n'est pas fusee, as it is in the French Proverb, it is not the
first Scene, but the last Act that deserves a plaudite; now began the busy
season, and to come off well, or go forward successively, was the Generals
mayn intention. He had with him but a part of his Army, was landed in the
Enemies Country, was not ignorant of the preparations against him, and as it
behoved him for his better safety, he was bound to fortify his Camp, and to
have a strong place of retyring upon occasion. He provided for both,
entrenching himself till his forces could come in, and fortifying a small Isle
made by the Elster and the Rhine, Is four times assaulted by John de We^th,
and is still victorious.
for his retirement. The Baron of Werth not willing to give him a breathing
time, four several times assaulted him with the strength of his Army, which
consisting at the first of 4000 horse, and as many foot, was then engrossed
with three Companies of horse by Rhinacker Governor of Brissack, but was still
repulsed with loss, and in the end forced to Offenbach, with the loss of
above 1000 men in these Encounters, 500 dead corpses being found dead upon the
place, and many horsemen, carrying away their dead Comerades behind them, and
all the Officers of one whole Regiment slain except one Corporal, and the Duke
with the loss of 130 men got a happy victory.

The Rhinegrave in the mean time was as successefully employed at Ensisheim,
his Ordnance having made a breach on the one side his forces, Ensisheim taken
by D. Bernhard.
broke down the Barricadoes, and the defendants retiring at the unexpected
sight, and flying into the City, the asseegers followed them pell-mell, entered
the City, and slew as many as they found in Arms, some saved themselves from
the fury by taking the Castle, yet they surrendered, August the fifth, new style,
upon discretion with sparing their lives, the Officers were made prisoners, and
the rest came to serve under Duke Bernhards Colors.

Duke Hallier being come to the Territory of Basil, foreslowed no time, for
dispatch of his business, but sent to the Magistrate, and his assistants in
the administration of that State. Immediately desiring them to permit his Army
to cross the Rhine by their Bridge, Halliers passage over the Rhine.
and for his money to supply his soldiers with things necessary, promising to
pass quietly, without offering any offense to their Friends, and directly
without turning to the right hand, or the left, urging withal the covenant of
Alliance betwixt the King his Master and the Helvetian, Cantons, of whom that
City was one, without infringment whereof, they could not but condescend to his
just, and fair propositions. It was disputed a while in the State-house what
was to be done, many objections interposing themselves betwixt their assent,
and his desire, yet in the end his last request was granted, great store of
Biscuit was baked there for his Army, the meat being his own, and brought out
of Burgundy, and he marched away to Rhinaw, to conjoyn with his General the
Duke of Weymar, who had laid a bridge of Boats there, and caused the forces
under the Rhinegrave, to be transported over three leagues below Strasburg, to
the great affrightment of the Country people, who ghessing diversely of the
Dukes design, Some judging his course to be for Swalen, and the Bodensea,
others for Franconia and Bavaria, no man knowing certainly, which way he would
advance the better sort, with the best of their goods fled toward Bavaria, and
the stronger forts to preserve themselves from pillaging.

While these two opposite Armies were incamping, the Bavarian in the
Kentzinguer Valley, taking up his head-quarter in the Marquisate of Baden, to
secure the City of Kentzinguen, upon which he supposed Duke Bernhard would
have an especial eye, it being one of the Keys of Brisgow, and an inlet to
the Dukedom of Wertemberg, and the Aleman Duke at VVitemweir, The Governor of
Haguenaw informed of the state of Chahehouse.
till those forces which he had brought with him out of the French County, and
10000 Irish Soldiers, which he expected daily from France, might come up to
him, an occasion presented it self to Plessis Foumechon Captain of a
Burgundian Regiment, residing then in Haguenaw, and Keeper of the Saurne Port,
to advance the French affairs about the Rhine, and impeach the Bavarian
Commander in his designs. Some Peasants that came thither to Market, informed
him, that John de VVerth, the better to enable himself to oppose Duke
Bernhard, had drawn out of the Isle of Cahehousen, an Island upon the Rhine,
near the Village of Troussenon, 600 old Soldiers, and had left 200 men only to
keep it. The Island though not big, as being but three English miles in
compass, was of no small importance for the French if they could master it,
the Forts there serving as so many Blockhouses to secure their free passage to
and fro, over the River, and yielding liberty of commerce to the Haguenois up
and down the Rhine, the small stream upon which Haguenaw is seated, burying his
water in that famous Flood point blank over against that Island; and moved with
these arguments, he discovered his project to Chalancee, then prime Commander
for the Christian King in that City, desiring him not to slip so fair an
opportunity, which if now neglected, might perhaps be long expected, and never
attained unto, but to send out some forces instantly, and assault the Germans,
Intends to invade it.
which were left to guard it, it being more then probable, that now he might
easily carry it. The Commander heard him willingly, and upon his first report,
inclined to attempt it, but knowing that there is fraud in Generalities, and
fearing that the Peasants either be misinformed, or suborned to seduce him,
would yet be better satisfied of the truth of their relation, before he
undertook that expedition. A Combatant in a single Duel, shows his skill, dum
in arena capit consilium, if when he is in the List he comply to the wards,
and foynes of his Enemy; but a Commander in war ought to be perfectly
instructed of the strength, fortifications, and warlike preparations made by
the adverse party, before he joins battle. To clear all doubts he employed
the Relator to treat with the Officer of Biche, Yet sends out to be better
informed of the state thereof.
whose neighborhood, had procured a kind of familiarity, with some inferior
officers in the Island, and he undermining some of acquaintance there brought
him a certain intelligence of the number of soldiers left in the Garrison, the
Boores speaking only by conjecture, having doubled it, and assured him that the
Bavarian had not left above 100 men to guard it. It was enough: the known
advantage prompted on the forward French Commander, who yet that he might not
lose the substance by snatching at the shadow, Undertakes it.
weaken the City committed to his care, and expose it to the Enemy, for gaining
of the Isle, took out only 100 men, to wit, 80 Musketeers, and 20 Carabins,
which he assigned to several Leaders for the execution of his design. But
knowing that so small a number, could strike no terror into them which therein
equallized him, and had the advantage of a fortified place, he makes up yet in
tale, A stratageme.
what he wanted in weight, arms 50 Boys in white Armor, mounts them upon so
many horses, sends two Trumpets before them, and six Drums after them, and
follows himself immediately with the rest of his forces, that as soon as the
sight of his approach had disheartened those disioyned men, which being but so
few were employed in four several places, he might use his offensive arms
against them.

Nothing was omitted by the Almayns, which might have been for their own
assecuration: such a storm was expected, and they labored to prevent it, the
ways were encombred with trees laid athwart them, and those so impeached his
march, that though he had so laid his gests, that he intended to have been
upon the Island by peep of day, he could not reach thither, till the Sun was
past the South; The redoubt before the Isle, Carries ^t.
was manned by eight Musketeers, and they might (had not fear surprised them)
have mayntained it against his whole band. The two little Forts, the one of the
^ertemberger, the other on Strasburgh side, and the great one in the navell of
the Isle, were proportionably furnished with men, and Ammunition, yet all these
were taken almost without blows, the terrified Soldiers in the redoubt after
one discharge of their Muskets, flying to the lesser Sconces, and the
presidiaries there infected with their fellows timorousness, hasting thence to
the greatest, and all in the end betaking themselves to their heels; the Island
was left to the French invadour, who seized upon the Sconces, and found therein
80 Muskets, 500 Pikes, and great store of match, but no powder, the Germans
having fired it before they fled; and now that he might quickly raise a more
impregnable Fort, by the love of the Inhabitants, which consisting of 200
Families, had their fields stored with Kine, Muttons, Swine, and the like, he
entertains the Islanders, with all courtesy, upon pain of death, forbids the
Soldiers to offer them any injury, and with assurance of their reciprocal
faith, and holding the place, departs the next day, leaving only Garone a
Captain, Le Compte his Lieutenant, Le Mare his Ensign, and the common
Soldiers to keep it, and himself with the Gallants which accompanied him in
this adventure, returns the day following to Hagenaw.

Chalance, by his fair treaty of the Boores, had got a better assurance of
their affections, then his forces had of holding the Island. Violence could not
win the love of the Islanders, but Arms might perhaps force the strong holds
to the Bavarians subjection, who knowing the value of his loss, in the loss
thereof, August 9/19, commanded out the Colonel Werth with 2000 selected men,
chosen out of his whole Army, and forty Trumpets, The (...).
Kettle, and ordinary Drums to re-invade it, enjoining him not to return
without conquest of the Forts, and forbidding him to grant the French any
Quarter. The Colonel, to give his General an assurance of obedience, and
utmost endeavor, though he could not of the victory, without stay marched on,
arrived at the Isle, where finding the two lesser Forts unmanned, he thrust
into each of them 200 men, and with the rest marched in Battle array toward
the midst of the Petite Island. The French were not strong enough to meet him
in Campain, it was honor enough for them, to hold, if they could, possession
of the greater Fort. Thence they would not be persuaded to part, and the
Colonel attempted therefore to constrain them. Are repulsed with loss.
Six hundred men were suddenly drawn out to assault the Port thereof, who having
quickly made themselves masters of the Half Moon, which defended it, applied
the scaling ladders to the Bastion, and mounted up so nimbly, that two of the
hardiest, and forwardest of them were slain at the top thereof, by the French
Defendants, who now bestirring their hands repulsed the rest so valiantly, that
thirty six of the assaylants fell down dead into the Moat, and this ill
success caused the first adventurers to retire; but this did nothing abate the
courage of their Colonel, who thinking to weary out the Defendants, whose
small number, as he deemed, would not be able to hold out many assaults,
against his fresh supplies, renewed the attempt, and that failing, the Germans
finding then as course entertainment as they had done formerly, he assayed it
the third, fourth, The effects of the victory.
and fifth time, still more furiously, but more unhappily, having at these
several times, left some of his men prisoners to the French, amongst which
were two Captains, whereof one died of his wounds within two hours after, and
the other desperately hurt, and one Ensign, who had both his thighs broken,
two hundred and sixteen men slain outright, four hundred wounded, and in the
end, seeing all his endeavor unavayable, in a disorderly flight posted toward
the Dukedom of Wertemberge, being pursued by Garane, who though toyled with
his former service, followed the Rear so close, that he caused them to imbarke
themselves so confusedly, that the Bottom was overturned in the Rhine, and many
of them drowned, whose number may be ghessed at by the hats which were about
threescore, found the next morning in the River.

This stake was drawn by the bie, Duke Bernard nevertheless still put on for
the Mayn. His design was of a higher strein, and though this little piece of
land upon the Rhine, was of some value, yet he tugged hard for a better prize,
Drusenheim taken by Duke Berub. is re-attempted by J. de Werth, but vainly.
nor was it to be achieved otherwise. Drusenheim a place of strength upon the
Rhine, he had taken by assault, and John de Werth thinking to regain it by
Anslat, came before it unexpectedly of a sudden with his Army, but the fortune
of War not favoring him, he was beaten back with the loss of six or seven
hundred men, and forced to look backward toward Wertenberge, whither the Duke
taking advantage of the Bavarians, rising from his fortified Entrenchments, was
hastily advancing.

Both parties began then to show their Masterpieces. The Duke of Saxon Weymar,
August 3/13, desirous to try the fortune of a Battle with the Bavarian
General, as resolved either to advance victoriously, D. ^erub. desirous to try
the fortune of a battle,
or entombe himself in an honorable Sepulcher, sent out a Ritmaster with fifty
horse (as the French relate it) eighty (as the report is delivered from
Bruxels) to descry the number, and posture of his Enemies Army, which falling
unadvisedly upon an Ambuscado, which the Baron of Werth had laid, Sends out a
forlorn hope.
consisting of two Regiments of Dragons, and three of Cuirassiers, seven of his
soldiers, (as the French Discoverer expresses it) were slain outright, and
the rest made prisoners of war; or (as the Dutch has it) sixty of them were
made prisoners, and twenty returned back to the Camp. It is not worth the while
to contend of the number, they that speak most favorably conclude the Bavarian
to have gotten thereby a good omen of victory. Yet this fair beginning as we
may judge by the consequents, was not fortuna munus, but infidiae, That lost I.
de Werth hoping of victory leaves his trenches.
no demonstrative argument of a propitious fortune afterward, but a trick of a
cheating Curtizan, by dalliance leading her fondling to destruction. His
Highness had speedy notice of the Perdues misfortune, and as soon sent out the
Regiments under Roza, and Culembach to skirmish with the Bavarians, D. Berah.
encount^eth and repelleth him.
himself in the mean time drawing out, and following them, with a Squadron of
horse, and meaning to put on to a battle. The Colonels performed their office
carefully, and the Duke seconded them valiantly, fighting a time doubtfully,
till in the end either seemingly, or truly enforced (this particular is related
diversely) in an orderly retreat, nor absolutely flying, nor fighting, he
returned to his Camp, being all the while charged upon hotly by the Bavarian,
who by this more then persuaded of that victory, pursued him to his very
Trenches. But the day was not yet won. The Camp made ready the Canon, and
the Gunners played with the Artillery, upon the Bavarian Army, which perceiving
its error and into what a praecipice of mishap it was fallen, retired again to
its Fortifications, being pursued by the Duke who had another Squadron of horse
in readiness to second him, and cut off five troops of his horse, and forced
him back to his Trenches.

One mishap seldom comes alone. John de Werth was then in want both of
Ammunition for war, and provision of meat for his Army; with the first he was
to be supplied from Vdenheim, and with the last from Brissack, A Convoy of Jo.
de Werth defeated by the Rhinegrave.
yet the last could not be brought unto him without a sufficient Convoy. To
furnish his Camp with victuals. Monday, August 7/17, he addressed one of 600
horse toward the named Magazine. Notice of this was brought by the Scouts, to
the Rhinegrave, who with expedition said an a^nbush on the way, by which these
Cavalliers should pass. All washusht, nor was there any appearance of a rub,
which might offend the Gallanta in their course, when the Avantguard, coming
within reach of the Rhine-graves Muskets, a volley of shot startled the first
adventurers, and put them to a confused flight, and so they escaped better then
the gross body of that small Army, which the Rhinegrave charged, and
discharged upon immediately, putting some to the sword, and bringing sixty
prisoners to Duke Bernhards Camp, amongst were two of the Bavarian Barons,
Pages, which escaped not scot-free, and without wounds in this Encounter.

Forgatz, August 8/18, arrived at the Bavarian Camp, with his Regiments of
Crabats, and the Duke of Lorrain was upon the way to join with him also, but
the news of Bleterans stopd his journey, and deprived the Bavarian of those
long expected and promised Auxiliaries. Notwithstanding the fire which for some
days had been coopt up, in the dark womb of a thick and foggy cloud, began now
to break out impetuously with thunder and lightning. Duke Bernhard by his
Bridge of Boats at Rhinaw, had conveyed over all his Ordnance beyond the Rhine,
and appeared daily in the field, as challenging the Bavarian to set battle,
but his often and many affronts done to the wary Baron not prevayling, he left
the major part of his Infantry in a fortified place, and marched, August 19/29,
with his Cavallary directly toward the Castle of Molberge, and the Towns of
Ettenheim, and Endenguen, places situated betwixt Wittenweir, and Offenburg,
before the last whereof John de Werth, had his head Quarter, his other Regiments
being enquartered along the Kentzinguer Valley, because if he should hap to be
hard put to it by the Duke, D^bernb. besieges Kentz^ng^n.
he intended to retire into the Dukedom of Wirtenberg. At Molberg he stood not
still, but the same night summoned, and afterward assaulted the Castle, which
being taken in the fury, was made so exemplary to the neighbor Cities, that
Ettenheim, and Endingen, fearing to be made a spoil to the Conqueror
voluntarily submitted and accepted fair terms of composition. The Cities were
well stored of provision, and afforded good relief to his Army, which being
well refreshed with the viands there found, he sent a strong party out to
discover the manner of the Bavarians encamping, which happily met with some
troops of Bavarians Cuirassiers, whom they fought withal, vanquished, and
brought sixty of them prisoners to the Dukes Army. The Baron for all this
stirred not, but keeping close in his Earthy Fortifications, rather watched his
own advantage, then ministered occasion of any to his Enemy, and something must
be done to make him rise, or remove he would not. Sundry projects offered
themselves to the Dukes consideration, but which was most likely to take
effect, though he might conjecture, he could not determine. At last his
thoughts were fixed, Keutzingen, the surprisall whereof, must needs intercept
all commerce betwixt the City of Bryssack, and the Bavarians Camp, if
surrounded by his Forces, he conceived, and was not mistaken in his judgment,
would make the Baron move, and thither, Sept. 4. new style, he marched with
600 Foot, and drew his Canon.

John de Werth advertised by his Espials of the Dukes design, So draws the
B^v^r^an (...) battle.
followed him presently with part of his own Forces, and 24 Corners of Crabats,
commanded by Isolani to relieve it. The Duke had planted his battery upon an
Hill against the City before, but now seeing the Bavarian at his back, turned
them from the I own point blank upon the Army, and de Werth, perceiving that if
he went forward, he must needs march against the Canons mouths, partly to
prevent that hazard, and partly to draw the Almayne Duke from his advantage,
changed his station, and encamped in a mown-ground, and severed from the Dukes
Army, by a great and deep River, only 25 foot broad, but having the banks so
high raised, that it could not be passed, but by a bridge of stone, which
adjoining to a Mill which the Baron had seized of, and planted there a battery
of 10 pieces of Ordnance. What will not the earnest desire of performance,
apprehend as easily feasible? The Duke had a longing desire to exchange some
blows with the Bavarian, and now though he should give him odds, he conceived,
he might grapple with him advantageously. This conceit made his Highness
withdraw from the Hill, and pitch down directly over against the Baron, the
River only being betwixt them, though reason still guiding his will, moved and
prevayled with him, to do it cautelously, and without exposing his person and
forces to apparent jeopardy. By a stratagem
The Bavarian seeing his posture, straight beat an alarm, and his Officers
partly to show their readiness to conform their actions to his directions,
but more incited by the looks of the Dukes Soldiers, the true picture of fear,
with her staring and distracted looks, trussing up her trinkets, being
pourtrayed in their faces, ran when he bad them go to make ready against the
united French and German forces. The face is not always the mirror of the
heart, they which judge by the outward appearance, are not seidome mistaken.
The Dukes Soldiers were not possessed with any real fear, but personated
disheartened men, and that so well, that for the time no Pantomime could excel
them. And obtaines a victory.
It was their Generals project, that they should thus counterfeit, and they
acted it to the life, though it cost the lives of many of their adversaries.
The Bavarians promising themselves a glorious victory, came on cheerfully with
their Commander before them, who having brought over the Bridge two Brigades of
his Infantery, all Crabats, and Dragoons, and four Regiments of Cuirassiers,
his excellency concluded that enough of his adversaries were within reach of
his shot, and willing to engage himself, with too great a number least thereby
he should make the battle doubtful, gave the signal to his Army, for
charging upon them, which were come over the Bridge, and to hinder the other
part of the Bavarian forces to follow them. His directions and actions were
like theirs of one birth: the signal was no sooner given, but himself
advanced with his Avant-gard consisting of four Regiments of Horse, and two
Regiments of Foot, and charged the Crabats, which were in the head of the
Bavarians Battalia so furiously, that they scarce endured the first shock, but
fled. The Cuirassiers stood to it something more stiffly, they came on twice
with a great bravery, but in the end were constrained to follow the Crabats
over the Bridge in a tumultuary confusion. The Bridge was too narrow to give
them a free passage, nor could they well reach it, the way being pestered with
men, and horses overthrown: and they which reached it, justled each other into
the torrent, the Baron himself, being shouldred over in that hurly-burly, and
was in danger to have been lost, had he not been quickly drawn out of the mud
by the care and labor of eight of his own Cavaliers. The Duke still pursued
them, but the darkness of the night over-taking him, preserved such as had
escaped for the time present from his fury, the next morning he renewes his
pursuit, and then overtaking the Rear of the Bavarians Army, he slew and
routed 500 of his foot, and three Squadrons of his Cavallary their General who
had regained his trenches at Offenburgh, not offering to come and assist them.
The Duke was there honorably victorious, having slain above 1000 of the
Bavarian soldiers, the most of them Cavalliers, with the loss of less then
100 of his own, yet not secure, the Die of war being subject to several
chances, and for the better managing of the Province which he had undertaken,
sent out September 6 new style, a strong party again to discover his Enemies
actions, which fortunately meeting with 300 Crabats, sent abroad by the Baron,
to have the like eye upon the Duke, whom they encountered, slew a 100 of them,
and brought 50 prisoners back to their General. Forga^z his message to D.
Bernh.
And here I could wish to conclude this Act, but the Scene was not yet full, at
what time the Captives were presented to the Duke, a Trumpet came to his
Highness from Forgatz, croking out this bloody note, that his Master intended
not to give any quarter to what prisoner soever he took hereafter, and that
already de facto, in cold blood, he had slain some of the Almaine Dukes men,
which incited him again to make slaughter of his new prisoners, And the
direful issue.
excepting such only as appertained to another Colonel.

CHAP. II.
PEace, the benefits whereof have not for many late years been sensibly
discovered to the Germans, was the General desire of the people: the Boores
which lived by tillage, and feeding of Cattle, hoped that this year, the swords
would be turned into Plow-shares, and the Pikes into Shepherds Crooks; the
Merchants whose free traffic was stopped by these Military broyls, began to
feel poverty coming upon them, more then the armed men against their Enemies,
and longed for an open trade, and several persons according to our humane
condition, qui facile credimus, quod volumus, upon each slight occasion, gave
out that a truce for time of years, if not a certain and firm peace would now
be concluded betwixt the Crown of Sweden, and its Allies, and the King of
Hungary, and his adherents. Two or three days respite from acts of hostility,
betwixt the opposite Armies severally eneamped at Torgaw, and Meissen made the
Elve Echo to the votes of the common people, about a cessation of Arms, and
the conceit of the Earl Brandestein his commission to treat with the Austrian
in April, was taken by the vulgar as an undeniable argument of a growing
reconciliation, betwixt those high and mighty Princes. But the misery of that
Nation, was not yet come to the height, Brandestein was surprised by the Saxon,
B^ankslein a prisoner at Dresden.
and stayed, and lastly, close imprisoned at Dresden, with his Lady, whose
burden being ready to call for a Midwife for assistance, without prayers or
oratory might have got a fairer respect of an Enemy then she found from the
Elector, though she begd it with an humble language, and that small desistance
from employing their offensive arms, betwixt the hosts, was but a preparation
to a greater expression of their hostility. Each party, enabling it self, with
all its might to endamage, and impeach the other.

Banniere, though oppressed with multitudes (the Saxon and Austrian forces
doubling his numbers) lost nothing of his spirit, but went on as daringly as
ever. A Colossus holds the same dimensions, though placed in a deep pit, and a
right valiant man is ever like himself, undaunted though he be surrounded with
apparent danger. Hall, Eylenburge, and the great Sconce before Wittenberge were
garrisoned still with Swedes, who were enjoined by their General to defend
them against the Saxon and his Allies; himself intending to proceed further in
pursuire of his late victories, and to begin, sent out some troops of horse and
foot against Oshitz, with instructions, to take it by a sudden Onslat, or if
they failed, to return with all speed to the Camp, it being no convenient time
for them to abide in the field, the Enemy then growing stronger daily by a new
access of several Armies, An assault on Oshitz failing, the suburbs are fired
by the Swtdes.
not troops, but Armies under several Commanders, which were upon their march,
and scoured the Country about them. The City had in it a Garrison of 500 horse,
who being informed by their Scouts, that the Swedes were coming, expected, and
prepared for them, yet though by their care they saved the place from
surprizall, they conld not preserve it from damage, the retiring Swedes chafed
to be thus prevented, fired the Suburbs and the Windmils, burnt them to the
ground, and returned.

To have stayed there longer, had been no point of providence, the Austrian and
Saxon Army, was upon their rising from Meysen, Ghleen was already in Thuringen,
with his Army, and the Leipsichers grown confident upon these new approaching
succors, A Swedish party surprised at Bitterfield.
began to send out strong parties to surprise the straggling Swedes, and did it
once fortunately at Bitterfieldt, where a 100 Swedes which had been plundering
and burning the Villages therabouts were assaulted by them unexpectedly, and
with some slaughter rowted.

Hatzfield, and Goetz, were no sooner risen from Meyssen, but they marched
directly toward Eylenburg on both sides the River of Mulda, and their coming
was so formidable to the Swedish presidiaries there, that all of them, one
Captain, Eylenburg forsaken by the Swedes.
and sixty men only excepted, left the City by night, and betook themselves to
flight by their cowardice, besides the brand of ignominy, which attended it,
exposing their lives to more danger, then perhaps they had undergone, if they
had held the place, according to their Generals direction: their departure
being discovered to the Austrian Co^manders, who pursued after them, and made
the hindmost, whom they overtook, before they could reach Torgaw, pay for their
folly, with their lives, and the rest finding a frown from their General, for
leaving a fortified City, to seek safety in his Army. The Captain which
remained, with so small an handful of men to keep the City, withdrew into the
Castle, A noble act of a Sw^thsh Captain.
whence though once summoned, he would not out, till he had given the
Eylenburgers and Hatzfieldt, good testimony of his loyalty to the Crown of
Sweden, and enmity with the Saxon, by casting several fireballs into the
City, and then unable to hold out longer, yielded to the Victors mercy, or
fury, who being thus possessed of this City, consulted for the recovery of
Hall, and the Sconce at Wittenberge first, and then for conquest of the Swedish
Army.

Ghleen who was called out of Westphalia, and Hessen, purposely to assist
Hatzfieldt, and his Colleagues against the Swedes, by the way had an eye at
Ertford, the greatest City in Thuringen, taken by Banniere, the year last past,
Ertford besieged by Ghlein.
and determined to besiege it. The Imperial Council of War had decreed to
recover it, the Elector of Saxony ceased not to incite them to it, and though
all the Princes and neighbour-states of that great City, foreseeing the
inevitable ruin, which attended their own Estates, though they were of the
Imperial party, if that City should be besieged, were earnest suitors to the
Elector that it might not be beleaguered, they could not divert him from that
resolution, no not to forbear it for a season, till harvest was over, and they
had gotten in the fruits of the ground, upon which the hopes of that Province,
almost made desolate by famine then consisted. Ghleen therefore authorized by
him, and the Imperial Council of War, being come within a league and half
of the City in a Bailiwick, properly belonging to Duke Bernhard of Weymar,
near the Cloister of Icterhausen, measured out several quarters to lodge his
Army, fortified his Camp with Retrenchments and lines of communication, able
to receive 15000 men; made hutes for his soldiers, and had prepared for the
siege, when suddenly a Courier came unto him posting from the Electo of Saxony,
who had changed his mind, not upon the entreaty of his neighbor Princes, but a
design upon the Swedes in Misnia, with order to the Baron to rise from thence,
The siege suddenly ray^ed.
and with a speedy march to ha^^e to Eylenburg. Banniere whose provident eye
was not fixed only upon his own Camp at Torgaw, but looked after his
Confederates in all places, had notice of Ghleens design, and to relieve the
City, drew out of his Army five Regiments of Horse, and a 1000 Dragoons,
committed them and the business to the care of the General Lesle, who brought
them as far as Eisleben, but there being certified, that Ghleen had raised
his siege, and was gone toward Saxony, stayed his journey, and marched after
them to observe their posture and intention.

The Baron being joined with the other Imperial Commanders, the desigue
against the great Fort at Wittemberge, was first put into execution. The Sconce
at Wittenberg.
The Fort was guarded by 400 men, who for a time defended themselves bravely,
spent diverse shot upon the Camp, made out sundry sallies, and omitted nothing
that could be expected from besieged resolute men. But the Imperial Army,
which was before it, with its full strength, and the Saxon-vitzdumb, who
commanded in the City, returturning 20 Canonadoes upon the Fortfor one, so
battered it, that May 1^/301 the Garrison was brought to capitulate^, and upon
condition to depart with baggage, and arms: about 10 in the Evening, they
marched out, yet the common men were constrained to take service under
Hatzfield, and the Officers only were dismissed. Colonel Osterling who
commanded there for the Swede, and was a native of Hall, being carried as a
prisoner to Dresden. The Sconce was no sooner surrendered, but a Swedish
Musquetier came with tidings of succors from his General to the late
Governor, the purport whereof was, that 10 Squadrons of horse by Land, and five
ships laden with Musketeers by water, were come to relieve him, and come
indeed they did, though too late to that service, yet time enough to embroyle
the Imperialists in a new adventure. The Imperial General had notice of their
coming, and prepared to receive them, he knew they were come to the black
Elster, planted eight Ordnances against them upon the Elue, kindled great fires
along the way which they were to pass, the better to discover them, commanded
Lieutenant Colonel Wache to expect them in the field, and sent out strong
parties to succor him, yet failing in one particular circumstance, either of
intelligence or direction, Besieged and taken by the Imper.
this Avantguard thus sent out, was no better then a fo^lorn hope, though they
escaped with out that loss to which their General confessed afterward they
had been exposed, upon his better information. The Swedes march was not like
that of an Enemy but a Friend, they met the Imperialists, and saluted them by
the names of fellows in Arms, Friends and Comeradoes, professed themselves to be
Saxons, that they came to tender their respects to the Imperial General to
congratulate his good fortune at Eylenburg, and to assist him against the
Swedes, (the Enemies of their Prince and Country) at Wittemberge, and with
these oily words having deluded the first watch, surprised them suddenly, and
went on in confidence of this auspicious beginning. But Omnia in se redeunt,
fictam personam nemo potest far diu, though this fucus served them as a Gyges
ring to make them invisible to the first, the second watch discovered them, but
they giving notice to Wache by discharging their Muskets of the Swedes
approaching, advertized the Swedes also to make a fair retreat, as they did, and
so escaped the trap which was laid for them.

Wittemberge Sconce was lost, yet Banniere neither lost his judgment, credit,
or fortunes thereby. He accounted it but as a piece of Copper (for besides the
place, which he had made use enough of, for impoverishing the Saxons subjects
about it, he lost there but eight Ensigns and three pieces of Ordnance) and
got a piece of Gold for it, a convoy of wine, A convoy of provision surprised
by Banniere.
and other provision was sent from Dresden to Hatzfields Army, that he
surprised, put the Guard to the sword, and retained the store. It had been a
good purchase if he had wanted it, but his wants were supplied otherwise, and
that more abundantly and more gloriously. Lucka a City of note in the lower
Lusatia, Lucka sutendred to Lesle.
the Magazine of that Province was about the same time surrendered to the
Fieldmarshall Lesle, and the General Pfal, whom his Excellency had sent
thither to make provision for his Army, and there they being furnished with
more then the whole Swedish Camp could well spend in three months, besides
what they got in the Villages, and diverse other Market Towns which they
pillaged and spoiled, and then returned laden with the spoils of their
Enemies.

A well regulated fortune, crowned him with happy success, in another
Enterprise, June 6/16 Meurer Lieutenant Colonel to Sleintz, lying as the
Governor of the Saxon presidiaries in Meyssen, the Metropolis of Misnia, sent
certain Companies of his own Foot-regiments with thirty Wagons abroad on
forraging. Banniere who erst had a design upon the place, was then casually
abroad with 3000 Horse, 600 Musketeers, and 200 Dragoons, and attended with
this retinew, lighted upon those Saxon purveyors, Meyssen surprised by Bannier
by a stratagem
enclosed them with his Army, and put them all to the sword, not leaving one to
carry news of his fellows misfortune. This done, he arrayeth some of his
soldiers in their clothes, and then loading the carriages with hay and corn,
covered some other of his men, and their arms therewith, causing the
metamorphosed people to drive the Wagons to the City. Their disguises
deceiving the Corpse du guard which kept the gate, the port was opened, and the
Carters and their loads let in. It was not required, that the imposture should
be long concealed, nor was it, the Actors expressed themselves to the Guard, and
the Inhabitants near the gate in bloody characters; they which lurked under the
coverlets of hay, discovered themselves, and with their swords imprinted their
minds in the flesh of the Warders, mayntayning the Gate, till Banniere, who
attended close after them, came in with his Cavallary, and six pieces of Canon,
who by this device (not unlike the Turf-boat at Breda, Anno 1590) made himself
master of the City, putting all to the sword, some few only excepted, which
saved themselves in the great Church of humb, and Castle with Mewrer the
Governor.

Banniere left not thus, but prosecuting his new achievement, began to batter
the Castle with his Canon, and thundered upon it, by the space of two hours,
and then hearing, that the Imperial succors were marching against him,
discreetly considering, that it was rashness, not valor to stake his honor
upon unequal terms, or hazard the spoils he had gotten there, which amounted
to the moiety of what he had gotten before at Lucka, marched back to his Camp,
more comforting his soldiers, with sight of his presence, upon whose well
being, the well being of the Army consisted, then his wagons laden with
viands, though the last could not be unwelcome, being the true restaurative of
dejected spirits in time of need.

The Sun and the Swedes glory seemed at once to be both in the Summer Solstice,
the Planet was then looked upon by the Northern Nations, with admiration, the
long days which he brought and short nights, made some ignorant people, which
knew no other, apprehend it for a Deity, but soon afterward declined
Southward, and changed the length of light, and the season; and perhaps the
darkness of the night happening by its annual retrait, might teach them reason:
the Swede was by this success grown terrible to the Commons of the Empire,
some accounted him as an authorized executioner of divine justice, upon the
Saxon, whose juggling dealing had brought this misery upon his Dukedom; others
perceiving the Imperialists growing in strength, and seeing the Swede engaged,
though disadvantageously, conjectured that all this was but a cloud, which
might easily be dispersed or dissolved by the Swedish Sun; others concluded,
(and here rightly) that his fortunes were then declining, and (yet but
conjecturally) that he being so long acquainted with the extrem frosts of the
frozen Islands, and surviving them, a good winter soldier, good because hardy,
would recover all, and return with the Sun, when the Planet had reached his
Winter station; and retire he did, but whether with a mind and power of
returning future time may, this History cannot discover.

The King of Hungary was certified in the interim of the Swedes proceedings,
and how the Dukedom of Saxony, being almost laid desolate by their invasion,
his own Dominions, which were by him challenged as an inheritance, and suffered
to pass with that title, by the Triumvirall Treaty at Prague, the Kingdom of
Bohemia, and Dukedom of Moravia, The King of Hungary at Prague.
were like to be ruined by the same Enemies, if more Forces were not raised,
and employed with all haste to oppose them. The news interrupted his repose in
Austria, where he stayed after his progress toward Gratz, whitherward he went
to conduct his mother the Empress and Widow Dowager of his Father, and removed
his Court from Vienna to Prague, he having assigned that royal City, as a
place of meeting with the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, to advise with
them and his Council of war for a timely and speedy course to be taken
against the Swedes, who notwithstanding the powers of two great Armies were
already employed against them, though they went not on victoriously, were as
yet no losers. And here, whilst he was taking care for the preservation of
his new Confederates estates, In danger to have bin murdered by a traitor.
his own life was endangered, not by an open Enemy, but the Diabolical
practice of a murdering assassinate, an Italian Bandito, who armed with
pistol and sword, had crept secretly into the Kings lodgings where he was
apprehended, with those instruments of death about him, and after several
tortures, many of which he endured with a kind of Stoicall unsensiblenesse, in
the end confessing, that an old woman had given him a draught, which he no
sooner took, but his fancy was troubled with horrid conceits of murder, and
the delusion wrought so powerfully, that he found no rest till he had
undertaken that execrable course for murdering his Majesty, upon which he was
sent to Vienna, to be proceeded against juridically.

Heaven abhorres treason, and will not suffer those miscreants to thrive; nor
does the murder of a private man ever escape the divine justice, though man's
justice perhaps may not punish it. The General Gallas, attending the King at
Prague, his Majesty being gone to Brandys on hunting, made a Feast for the
Commanders, which attended at Prague to know the Kings pleasure, and receive
instructions from him, and amongst the rest invited Gordon, Lesle, Anderson,
and some other of the assasinates, whose hands were dipped in the blood of
Wallenstein at Egra: Their hearts being warmed with wine and stomachs well
filled with meat, the grinders being wearied, Gordon ^^ain, Lesle and Anders^n
dangerously wounded at a Feast.
their tongues began to walk, the table-talke was of Wallenstein, and his
fatal end, where Gordon, Lesle, and Anderson, as proud of that action,
ascribing the glory of it to themselves, after they had well drunk, Gallas and
Gordon first fell to words, and afterward to blows, and in the conflict the
servants of the General coming in, Gordon was slain outright, (as is written)
and parts being taken, Lesle was mortally wounded, and Anderson hurt in two
several places, the people ascribing all this to the Justice of Heaven, the
wisdom whereof had sodisposed of each particular circumstance, that the end of
the assasinates did quadrate with their wicked act, against their late General
to whom they had given an Oath of allegiance and fidelity, they which had slain
him at a feast, perishing by the sword at a feast in the same Territory.

It was no season for the King to proceed in the way of legal justice against
those military men, The King of Hungary consults with Gallas, Picolomini, and
de Grana.
by whose commotion, this effusion of blood was caused, he had need of their
service, both in counsel and action: The Electors though often sent to, nor
did, nor could attend him, and Gallas, Picolomini, and the Marquess de Grana,
were used both for advise and prosequution of the conclusions in the
consultation. Gallas was with all speed, to return to the Rhine, and Dukedom
of VVittenberge, to fetch up his eight Regiments, which had wintered there, and
to add those forces to those under Hatzfield and Goets, and the Saxons in
Misnia, Gallas made Generaliss. of the Imperial army.
to the end that with this great Army, whereof he was made the Generalissimo,
Banniere might be blocked up in his Fortifications at Torgaw.

The Generalissimo winged with desire of atchieving a new conquest, mounted
presently on Horseback, plied his spurs more then his rains, and returned
into Misnia with his auxiliaries, as speedily as could be hoped. The
Confederate Imperial and Saxon Armies had prepared the way before his coming,
it now remained for him only to polish the work, which they had already
scabled. Pomica the Governor in Hall for the Elector, and the Garrison of
Wittemberge undertook the siege of the Fort Morizburg at Hall, and that being
undertaken, there was no impediment there to hinder him. Furstemberg with 3000
Crabats attending him, lay higher upon the Elve to stay the Swede from breaking
out that way: the Ship-bridge which lay before Wittemberge over the Elve, was
presently after the surrendry of the great Sconce, removed higher to Pretch,
though not without strong opposition: Banniere with his Ordnance so playing
upon it, that he sunk a great ship in the day time, and the Imperial Army
being forced to repair that loss in the night, Labors to take Ba^nicre at
Torgaw.
they did it so effectually, that the next day, the Infantery passed the Elue
by the bridge whilst the Cavallary did the like by a Ford, they lay encamped
from Pretch, as far as Leichtenberge, within a league of Torgaw the Swede was
already blockt up, and there wanted nothing but proseqution of what was so
happily begun. And now Pendentem summa capream derupe videbant,
Casuram sperant: decipit illa canes.


The Northern Rat, which like that of Egypt, had shot himself through the jaws
of the Crocodile into his bowels, and there torn the entrails of Germany, was
concluded to be caught in a trap, which could not be avoided; the supposed
captives and their ransomes were staked, and played for upon the Drum heads.
The Almayn Armies were dividing the spoils, of which they had not got
possession, but with a success, not altogether unlike that of Sisera in his
mothers expectation, dividing the prey of the Host of Barak, the Swede neither
flying, nor fighting against them, but playing with them, and in a wise
mediocrity deluding their hopes.

(Ludere cum liceat, currere pigritia est) Keeping his Fortifications which
they durst not attempt, till constrained for want of forage, for his horse the
chief strength of his Army, when his head as full of policy, as his heart was
of valor, found out the means for his safe retreat, Bannier^ resulving to
discamp from Torgaw.
which in fine he put in practice and performed not without victory. It is
related thus: Banniere, who in April had possessed himself of the City, soon
after caused all the Burgesses and inhabitants that he might weaken their hands
and disable them from taking arms against him, to bring their arms to the
Guild Hall, or State-house; and afterward having thus subjected them to his
will extracted from them several sums of money 12000 Rix-dollers, to spare
the City from pillage, 48000 Rix-dollers to maintain his retraits and other
moneys upon several occasions, and in the end determining to leave the place,
gave the wealth thereof as a spoil to his soldiers, Pillageth the City.
who spared not to load themselves with the baggage they had thus gained. But
what availed this largess? what could the goods thus gotten profit them, which
had not assurance to hold them? Banniere provides for all, and though all ways
for his escape were intercepted, Marazini with eight Regiments, keeping the
passage at Landsberg, Klitzing the Brandeburghish Chieftaine preoccupating his
way by the Oder, with 12 of the Electors Regiments, Danben the Saxon with the
Saxon Regiments re-enforced with Swartzemburghs Crabats, cutting off the way
into Thuringen, whilst Hatzfield and Goetz blockt him up on the one side of the
Elue, and Gallas and Ghleene on the other, by a stratageme he made his way,
when his sword could not hew it out, amuzing the Imperial armies, with a
delusive finesse first, and then in a well ordered, and quick march, hasted
toward Wrangell, that by their united forces, he might be better strengthened
against those swarms of Enemies. His process was thus. Two Letters were
indicted by him, and directed to the Governor of Ertford, Deviseth^ strat^gen
to word the Impertal.
the purport whereof was, that he intended to leave Torgaw, and come by the way
of Thuringen, to relieve that City which was daily threatened with a siege, and
that done, to advance into Hessen, and conjoyne his army with the Lantgrave.
These notes of instruction, so expressed, as if they had bin resolved of by the
General Council of War, were sealed up closely, and put into the bellies of
a couple of Ducks, and delivered to two Boores, or rather soldiers in the
habits of Boores, which were sent out three several ways, and from sundry
quarters of his Camp. His device was hitherto something like that of Harpagus
in Iustine, conveying his Epistle to Cyrus in the belly of a garbaged Hare; but
the several intentions made them dislike, Harpagus used that trick to conceal
his papers, Banniers purpose was to have his come into the hands of the
Imperialls, and so disposed his project in each circumstance, that by a
counterfeit privacy, he might be thought desirous, to have them pass
undiscovered, and by their discovery might be supposed by the Adversaries to
have had his plot prevented, yet took such order with his messengers, that they
must needs be surprised by the Imperialists, and their Letters made Patent to
each perfunctory inquisitor, the soldiers, when once apprehended, were taught
to fall down, and beg mercy, and before they could be searched, to offer upon
conditions of sparing their lives, to reveal that secret with which they were
entrusted by their General, Puts it in practice, deludes the Generali^^.
and did their parts so well, that the over-credulous Imperial Commanders
marched presently with the greatest part of their Army toward Thuringen,
thinking to entrap the Swede at his passage over Sala.

Diverse probable reasons induced the Imperial Commanders to undertake that
course, they knew him well fortified, and victualled where he lay, that it was
vain to attempt to raise him by force, that no victory could be expected
there, but by attending upon time, that by long continuance they should spend
themselves, sickness beginning to be rife in their own Camp, and therefore such
an opportunity offering it self to put a final period to this long war, by
a general overthrow given the Swede at one blow, they resolved not to slip it,
yet the last conclusion being grounded upon false premises, they failed in
all, and lost the bird which they had in their hands, to take him again in a
lime bush where he neither did, nor meant to perch. The Swede having thus
fortunately set the wheels of his project agoing, the more to amuse the
Imperialists, and draw them farther off from the Elue, June 18/28, early in the
morning dispatched out 4000 horse, out of several quarters of his Army, as
upon design, with order to take their way toward Eylenburg, and upon
descrying the least motion of the Enemy to return. The old Soldiers, who had
perfectly learned to obey, followed his directions in all, not varying a tittle
from the words of the Commission; and Banniere in the interim first having
furnished his Camp with 2000 tuns of Wine and Beer from the Cellars of the
Citizens, each Soldier with two commisse or provant loaves, out of the store
belonging to the inhabitants, and his Army with pioners drawn out of the City,
two out of each Family, with a pretense that he should use them for the
enlarging of his Trenches, and strengthening his Fortifications, but with a
purpose to entrench himself upon the way, if he should hap to be put to it by
the Enemy, he made a short Oration to his Soldiers, wherein after be had
extolled them generally, for their great fidelity, courage, patience and true
affection to the Crown of Sweden, and himself their General, knowing that his
gross body consisted of diverse Nations, English, Scots, Swedes, and high
Germans he dealt with them severally, as the Macedon did before that fatal
battle with Darius, with his Army, screwing himself further into their
hearts, and kindling their desire with repetition of their former gotten glory
and prizes, Encourages his own men.
the remembrance of their acts, the implacable enmity betwixt them and the
Caesareans, of his late conquest in Pomerania, the desolation they had brought
already upon the Saxons Territory, his hope of advancing farther yet into
Germany, of the French friendly auxiliaries, who being already upon their march
toward the Empire, were resolved to proceed, and that their proceedings must
needs give him breath, and facilitate the way to a future victory, in the end
concluding, that now his intent was to bring them into a Country, where after
their hard labors and dangerous adventures, they might repose themselves
quietly, and get richesenough in a short space, he spoke so effectually, that
Vox diversa sonat populorum, est von tamen una. the several Nations and
Languages which served under his colors, crowned his Oration with a general
acclamation, testifying their loyalty and readiness to do whatsoever he
should please to command them, and the General in a short reply, delivered to
confirm them in their affection, expressing the tokens of true thankfulness,
to their loving respectfull answer, again reattributed to their love, all the
glory of his former achievements.

But it was no season to stand upon complement, his Oration, and the Soldiers
acclamation, was no sooner over, but the same Evening about nine of the clock,
he sent his infantery over the bridge at Torgaw, with 90 pieces of Artillery,
and all his baggage, and the next Morning very early, giving the signal with
two Canons shot to the four Regiments which he had sent abroad to return upon
their coming in, which was immediately after he demolished the greater part
of the Mils belonging to the City, spoiled all which might be useful to the
Enemy (except 1000 sacks of Corn, and some other provisions, of which he
furnished them for their money) burnt the two bridges which lay over the River,
the one made of boats, and the other of timber fastened to Pikes, nailed, and
broke eight pieces of Canon which were in the Fort, and then followed with his
whole Cavallary, after the foot-forces which were gone before, spurring on to
Hertzberg, where he passed the Elster, thence to Lucka in Lusatia, thence to
Luben, where he passed the River of Sprew, thence to Furstenberg, where he
passed the Oder, thence to Brosen, and in the end to Landsberg. Gallas, not
stirring out of his Camp at Pretsch, till 12 full hours after the Swedes
Cavallary was gone from Tongaw, Marches to Landsberg.
the General Banniere having so deluded him, that he knew not of the Swedes
removal sooner. But th^n the Imperial Commander, understanding the Birds he
looked for were flown, to hinder his conjunction with Wrangell, took a shorter
cut, passed the Elster at Iessen, the Sprew at Beskaw, and the Oder at
Castrein, whither he came before Banniere could, and encamped betwixt the two
Swedish Generals, to hinder their conjunction.

At Landsberg a victory rather cast upon him, then gotten, ennobles his
retreat; I^^s the Swedish Colonel was come with the avantguard, consisting of
three Regiments, two of Horse, and one of Dragoons, upon the back of Marazini,
Marazini defeated by the Swed^s at Landsberg.
who then lay before it, ere he was aware; and though he was not ignorant that
the Imperial Commander exceeded him in number, he then commanding eight
Regiments, yet encouraged by his Enemies preparedness to fight, and knowing
that the body of the Swedish Army was not far behind, fell upon him,
defeated him, put the greater part of his forces to the sword, surprised his
baggage, and for the present relieved the besieged City.

But what avayled this small victory? The vigilant Gallas had cut off the
passage betwixt Banniere and his Colleague, besides his own eight Regiments,
Ghleen, Goetz, and Hatzfield, with their Imperial forces, and the Saxons,
Brandenburghers, and the Lantgrave of Darmstadts forces were come up to his
Camp, for the Swede to make his way thorough the^ was in all appearance
impossible, the adverse host being almost 40000 strong, Gallas posteth after him
to go back as disadvantageous, as dishonorable, and to encampe at Landsberge,
could neither profit nor secure him, no way was left but one, to use the Foxes
skin, seeing the Lions would not serve, to effect that by slight, which he
could not by might, and that course he took, and compassed his desire
successefully. To free himself of all encumbrances, which might hinder his
speed, he burnt up the most part of his baggage, nailed, and broke in pieces
four Demicanons, re-enforced the Garrison at Landsberge, and setting face, as
if himself would go into Poland, and sent 400 Wagons toward Bosna. The Earl
of Gallas was informed by his spies of each particular the Swede had done, yet
stirred not till he understood of Banniers discamping, and then imagining that
he had him cock-sure, sent his carriers with Letters of assurance to the King
of Hungary and Elector of Sanony to acquaint them with the Swedes desperate
estate, and then advanced with his Army toward the Coasts of Poland, to
surprise him before he could reach any place of shelter.

Ille animosque tuos, operamque eludit inanem. The Generalissimo's augury
failed him, Intends again to surprise him, and again he escapes,
Banniere had designed to steer another course, and not to touch at Poland,
and whilst the Earl is expecting him upon the Frontiers of that Kingdom, he
returns to the Oder by the way of Drosen, passes the River with his Cavallary,
Artillery, Infantry, and baggage above Custrin, and July 4/14, arrived safely
at Newstadt in the Vekker-mark a small days journey from the Fort of Swhedt,
whither Wrangell was come before July the ninth old style, with 4000 horse, and
8000 foot, and where the two Generals the same day conferred mouth to mouth,
and conjoined their Armies, to the great admiration of the Imperial Commanders
at the prudent carriage of the Swedish General, And joins with Wrangell at
Newstadt.
and the patience and industry of his soldiers, who in so short a space,
without murmr, or mutiny, had marched 270 English miles, and yet their
greater indignation, seeing their hopes thus milked, and expectations
frustrated.

So many dangerous and hard adventures being past, the union of the two
Generals, and happy conjunction, seemed as a festival, and Wrangell in token
of the joy which he felt, by meeting with his fellow Consul in that foreign
Land, presented his Army in battle array, and expressed himself by the loud
throats of 48 pieces of Canon, which in token of a bien-venu to Banniere, he
caused to be oft-times discharged triumphantly.

Worldly prosperity might have some plea for title to our humane happiness,
if it was certainly permanent. But there is a vicissitude of passions and
fortunes, nor was the Swed^s jovissance of long continuance. Gallas returning
from the Polonian Frontiers, L^^^bog surrendered to the Imperialists.
sat down before Landsberg, and the Swedish Garrison there, seeing the
Imperial powers begirting them, though they had lately received a new accreut
of seven Companies of foot, surrendered the place upon composition, and accorded
to serve under his colors.

This loss was not for all that of such consequence, as might make their
fortunes desperate, Towns might be recovered, but lives cannot. The Swedes
though supplied with new forces by the Baltic Sea, which they providently kept
open for their use, were not strong enough to maintain the Cities and Forts
which they were possessed of upon the Elve Southward, but left them to the care
of the presidiaries placed th^rin but for conservation of their men beingthen
24000 strong effective, no care was omitted, no labor thought too much nor
cost spared, and first with indefatigable pains, they fortified themselves near
Custrin, on the one side of the Oder, Gallas doing the like on the other, yet
neither Swede, nor Caesarean, for some few days attempting any thing against
the other, to the astonishment of the inhabitants in the Electorate of
Brandenburg, who seared the like cloud of desolation hanging over their heads,
which fell so lately like a Cataclys^e ^n the Duke dome of Saxony, so many
spoiling bands being at once seared in their Territories.

Austria all this time enjoyed the sweet blessings of peace, no invading Enemy
appeared in the Archdukes Dominion, the Court reassumed its former luster, by
the return of their Prince from Prague, which had bin a little obscured by his
absence, and to make its glory full, a Marriage was concluded betwixt Caecilia
Renata ^^ter to the present Archduke, and daughter to the deceased Emperor.
The gallantry of Poland, July 13/21, came to Vienna, Cacilia R^^a^^, the
Archduchesse married to the King of Pola^d.
to conduct their new Queen into the Kingdom, to the number of 4000 men, and
had not they contended amongst themselves for precedence, the sword had not
been seen there unsheathed; and yet the controversy was rather a brawle then
any serious contestation, the windy ambition of some arrogant Poles, blew the
coal which was kindled, and that was suddenly again extinguished by the
Archdukes care, who sent his Guard for conservationof the public peace, and
so ended the quarrel without drawing blood. The disorderly carriage of these
Poles hindered not Hymen in doing his office betwixt the two Princes, July 30/9,
their nuptial Ceremonies were accomplished in the Augustines Church at Vienna,
Prince Casimire by a proxy supplying the place of his brother the King, when
after Saint Ambrose his Song, and the Canons of the City discharged three
several times, a magnificent Supper was made to attend these Nuptials in the
great Hall belonging to the Imperial Knights for the King of Hungary, the
Polonian Prince Casimire, the Queen of Poland, the Princess Claudia,
Archdutchesse of Tiroll. lately come thither, the Archduke Leopold William of
Austria, and the Polish Ambassadors; and two days after, Goes into the
Kingdom.
the late married Queen attended with her brethren, and Lords of Poland, went
first to visit the Empress Dowager at Lavenbourg, whither she was come from
Gratz in Styria, to take the air, of whom she took her leave. August 12/2,
and set forward for Poland, the King of Hungary accompanying her to Znaim in
Bohemia, the Archduke Leopold William to Nicholasburg in Moravia, and the
Archdutchesse Claudia, into her new Kingdom.

The Alliance betwixt the King of Poland, and the house of Austria was renewed
by this marriage, but the truce betwixt the Pole and the Swedes, was nath^esse
continued, 1500 Pollacks entertained by Banniere.
and whilst the Courtiers were in their gallantry at Vienna, 1500 Poles good
horsemen, and old soldiers offered themselves to Banniere, who entertained
them, and to give them assurance of his true affection, made them of his
lifeguard, and now the military men on both sides began to tread a Pirrhick
measure, after the Music of Drums and Trumpets, each party so ordering it
self, that it neglected nothing which might advantage it self, and offend the
other. The late united Swedish Armies, by consent of their Generals, for
preservation of their Towns about the Elue, and the Oder are again separated,
Wrangell re-enforced with a new Regiment of Swedes under the conduct of Thuro
Oxenstieru, marching to Anclam near Mecklebourg, and Banniere toward Stetin.
Gallas did the like, and sent one part of his Army toward Newstadt, and the
other into the Vekkermark, watching the opportunity to employ them fortunately.

Banniere hoped by time to waste the Imperial Army, whose provisions were
fetched from far, and at first seemed rather to provide for a defensive then
offensive war, demolished the Fort at Swhedt, that it might not be
serviceable for his Enemies, repaired the old Fortifications made by the
deceased King of Sweden at Stetin, yet in fine seeing, that Gallas advanced
toward him, and got ground, he took the weapons of offense too, and used them
not altogether vainly. Neither Army stood any longer idle, all betook
themselves to their Arms, shunned no danger, nor spared no pains to promote
the cause of that several and respective Prince and Country for which they
stood engaged.

August the first, new style, the Swedish Colonel Charles Gustavus Wrangell, a
Kinsman to the Fieldmarshall, being advertised that in the new Brandenburg, lay
ten Companies of Imperial Dragoons, making in all about 700 horse under the
command of their Colonel Debroll, Ten Compa^^es of Dragoo^s, and 300 horse
entirely by Charles W^angell.
and 300 other horse commanded by Winzen, drew out 800 of the most valiant
Cavallieres in the Army at Anclam, marched directly against them, surprised and
slew the major part of them, in the first assault, 300 common men only escaping
with life, but not with liberty, with three Lieutenant Colonels, two
Rit-masters, and three Captains, whom to honor his victory, he brought as
prisoners of war to the Camp, with two Cornets gained in the battle, which
he reserved as monumentall remembrances of that Victory.

Schlang the Swedish Colonel, the day following, was attended with the like
good fortune, notice was given him in the Camp of Banniere by Stetin, that two
Regiments of foot levied in Prussia, One Brand^^burg: Regin (...) of foot
defeated by S^^lang.
for the service of the Brandenburgher, were already upon their journey in the
lower Pomerania, under the conduct of Dobitz or Dorbitzer their Colonel, and
thither he presently marched in the head of his own Regiment, and some other
borrowed troops, with so good speed, that at night having found one of the
Regiments near Schiffelbein, he surprised them suddenly, defeated them
totally, and put them all to the sword, except 100 whom he made captives, and
some few which saved themselves by flight from the fury of the Conqueror. It was
enough which he had done already, for the accomplishment of his design, there
needed no blows to dissipate the there Regiment, the report of the sat which
befell their consorts made them disband, Another d^^band^th.
and the officers taken with the like fear, had not courage to conduct them
further on, but returned with the common men to their dwelling places.

The Pollacks which were so lately entertained by the Swede, A party of
Imperial horse defeated by the Poles.
about the same time began as auspiciously to do him service, a party of the
Imperial Cavallary, then lodged at Stargard in low Pomerland, was by them
encountered and rowted with the loss of 150 men, whom they slew upon the place,
and these happy beginnings, gave life again to the Swedes, but such a life as
is the neutrall state of man, neither in sickness nor in health, the Imperial
Army presently employing all its power to recover these losses, either in
specie with the blood of the Swedes, or in value by surprising the Towns of
which these Northern strangers held the possession in the Empire.

Gallas the Generalissimo, who was then encamped at Angermond, was yet
Commander over a vast and numerous host, many hands were ready for action,
when he but held up his finger of direction, and he intended to set them all to
work in several places at once, that so dividing his own, he might separate the
Swedes which now being so near each other, and so well fortified, were able to
hold him play, though they were far inferior to him in number; only he wanted
victuals for his Army, Banniere in his passage over the Oder, having cut off
many Sutlers which followed his Camp, the Marquisate not able to provide for
him, and himself having no other provision, then what the Imperial Commissary
General, the Baron of Pesh-witz had sent him by shipping down the Oder from
Silesia, yet in this distress he lays all his Irons in the fire at once, and
his industry found out the means to relieve his necessity.

His first design was the repair of the Fort at Swhedt, which though he
attempted first by dispatching Coloredoe thither with 500 common Soldiers,
five pieces of Ordnance, Pioners, Canon-baskets, and other materials required
in such an Expedition, and afterward with the strength of his Army taking up
his head quarter there to that purpose, yet could not effect it. Stalhanse, who
lay in the New mark, with 32. regiments of horse, beating off Coloredoe, and
Banniere, who lay entrenched about Damb and Stetin, st^f^ly opposing the
Generalissimo, and spending some shot, not idly upon the Ship-bridge, which he
would have laid over the Oder there, for the perfecting of his project. His
next design was against Ratenaw, and those places upon the Elve, which yet
held out for the Crown of Sweden, and there he went on thrivingly, both
carrying the places, and furnishing himself from thence, with such provisions
as the Swedes had laid up there in abundance, as in a Magazin, for their own
provision. Kliezing was appointed his Lieutenant General for these
expeditions, who with 13. regiments, came first before Ratenaw, summoned it,
and after one assault, which the garrison beat off, Ratenew surrendered to the
Imperialists. Havelberg taken by assault.
had it surrendered upon fair t^armes of composition. Havelberg was the next,
which he took by assault, put all the Germans he found therein, to the sword,
but gave the Swedes quarter, upon a promise made him by the late Governor, the
Colonel Thomas Thomason, who undertook, that the Commander in Werben being an
officer of his regiment, should surrender upon the first summons, though herein
he failed the Governor there flatly denying the proposition when it was moved,
and affirming that he ought him no obedience, being now a prisoner to the
Caesarcans.

Gentler words, and sharper actions would have done better. His tongue spoke as
loud as his Canon, and did no more harm then a piece of ordnance charged only
with powder, the windy content made a roaring noise: the solid material for
battery was wanting, and the crack might terrify, but no otherwise endammage
his enemy. Werben besieged by Klizing,
The Commander spoke words of defiance, and it was conjectured, that so strong
a piece as Werben was, so well manned, so well victualled, so well guarded, by
an able and valiant society of Presidiaries, so well managed by a daring, and
braving Commander, would have caused a longer step to Klitzings victorious and
hasty (and no less victorious then hasty) proceedings, then attended it: the
braving Governor, whose exploits kept no proportion with his words, after a
short siege, without a breach made without fear of enforcingnecessity, being
sufficiently provided of ammunition, superabundantly of stomachichall
provision, surrendering it to the enemy upon dishonorable terms, (the
condition of his own, and the soldiers liberty, and baggage saved, despicable
trash which he might have preserved longer, with his own honor, respective
love from the Swedish General his Commander, and the approbation of the
Caesarians, who upon his extremity would have condescended to so well a
modified agreement) to the great disadvantage of the Swedes, and emolument of
the Imperialists and Saxons, who by this purchase had advanced their own cause
so far, that Demitz was the only place of importance upon the Elve, which
held out against them, and thither they led their forces, and gotten such a
store of provision for their Army, that now there was an appearance of great
odds betwixt theirs, and the Swedish forces, plenty of food in the Swedes
Army, having given as much courage to the small number of men therein, as the
vastness of the Caesarian camp had ministered to it self upon the conceit of
the strength it had, in their many thousands covering the face of the earth,
(...)
which before necessitated, and wanting this staff of bread, promised it self
in confidence of its massy greatness, a victorious progress: and now
re-animated with this supply, pursued it far more impetuously't then
formerly. All is not gold that glisters, a fraudulens contract is commonly
conceived for valuable, but prove not such; by a covert avoiding one danger, a
gulled hope falls upon another. The bird that escapes the pownces of the Eagle,
may and does often hap to be the Faulcons prey, and the cowardly Swedish
Commander, which in a bravado, cast out -- Ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba,
though he escaped the Caesarians fury, The late Commande^ imprisoned.
avoided not the Swedish Generals justice, but was there apprehended, as a
delinquent, transmitted to the censure of the military counsel, confined to
the straight limits, the provost Marshall would assign him, and reserved to
the judgment of the Counsel of war, whose delay in conclusion, is yet more
terrible then the pronunciation and execution of his sentence.

Werben thus surrendered, Klitzing with his Army reinforced, and increased with
a new supply of men and Artillery, commanded by the Saxon General Major
Vitzthumb, surrounded Domitz, Domitz surrendered to Klitzing upon composition.
which the Swedes then held and kept till the garrison which by many sallies
made not without much slaughter on both sides, reduced to the small number of
80. men, upon evident remonstrance of imminent utter ruin, if they did
otherwise, were forced to capitulate. The City it self was no place of
strength, nor could the garrison defend it against the asseegers, and therefore
the Swedes forsook it as soon as Klitzing was sat down before it, yet left
it not fit to do the Imperialists any service, but burnt it, and betook
themselves to the Citadell. The Fort was a place of strength, land-ward
especially, and though maintained courageously by the space of 14. days,
against the force of the enemy, August 24. Sept. 3. a Mine being sprung under
the principal Cullion head, was surrendered to the beseegers, upon a fair
composition, and the garrison dismissed, without any affront done to it, or
question for burning the City, the Imperialists thinking that loss to be
sufficiently restored, in the great store of provision, which they found in the
Castle, it causing an admiration in the victors to see the large quantity of
corn, 2100. Wispels, which the Swedes had placed there, as in a granary,
besides Bacon, Lings, and other victuals.

Lune-burgh at the same time was blocked up, by the Baron of Reusctenberg, who
came before it with 12. regiments, whereof 8. were raised by George, Duke of
Brunswick, and Lune burgh, and 4. by the Elector of Saxony. The Swedish
Praesidiaries within, made preparation to abide a siege, and expected when the
mounts should be raised for battery. The Swedes at L^^^ burgh compound with the
Duke for the City ^^d the Fort of Win, ex.
But the Duke, at whose instance these forces were employed against the City,
remembering his late alliance with the Crown of Sweden, and unwilling to
impair the beauty of that goodly City, the Metropolis of that Dukedom, came
to the Camp himself in person, and before any expression of acts of
hostility, fell to parlee with the Swedish Commander there, and so far
prevailed, that for a sum of money, the Swede condescended, and upon payment,
performed it, to redeliver him both that City and the Fort of Winsen, to the
satisfaction of both parties, all pretext of further quarrel betwixt them and
the Duke, being by this means taken away, and these Swedes gaining liberty to
assist their friends in Pomerania, to whom they might be more serviceable in
their personal attendance upon the Army, then they could by lying still in
Winson, and Lune-burg. The accord was made thus.

Upon the motion of the Duke, the supplications of the inhabitants of
Lune-burgh, and the intercession of the neighbor Princes and Cities: these
conditions were agreed on betwixt the Swedes in the Cittadell of Kalberg, which
commands the City of Luneburg, The conditions between the Duke of Luneburgh,
and the Swedes.
and in the Fort of Winsen, and the Duke, that the Duke should continue and
hold the City in Neutrality with the Crown of Sweden. That the Duke should
demolish the Fort at Winsen, and pay content, and upon the nail, unto the
Swedish Governor, and the garrison 500000. Rixe-dollers, which done, the City
and Forts were resigned over to the Duke, the Swedes thereby giving a plain
attestation, that the end of their warfare, was principally the welfare and
liberty of the Empire.

One Firmament is not capable of two Suns, nor one Army of two Generals, the
equality of authority, cannot long be continued with amity. Bannier and
Wranghell met at the first lovingly, but soon after they began to squabble,
and the difference was such, that their Armies were again divided, to the
advantage of Gallas the Generalissimo, whose Army being much abated, by the
departure of the Crabats formerly, and now of the Field-Marshall John Goetz,
who was sent by order from the King of Hungary toward the Rhine, might perhaps
have been much endangered, by a set battle, if they had continued in their
union. But now he makes use of their division, and intending to surprise the
Field-marshall Wrangle, about the midst of August, led up his whole Army
toward Anklam, Gallas leads his Army to Anklam.
where the Swede with his forces lay. By the way, he falls upon the Castle of
Veckermund, where the young Lieutenant Colonel Wrangle lay, takes it by
assault, puts the Swedes to the sword, and whiles his men were hot, with this
conquest, marched to Anklam, hoping as easily to vanquish the old
Field-marshall, as he had done his kinsman.

At Anklam, the Generalissimo found a tougher piece of service then he
expected: the old Field-marshall, knew both when he must, and how he ought to
ward, and the manner and time of striking advantageously, and though there was
a great imparity of their strength, the Swede vyed with him in resolution and
military skill, Banniere reuniteth his forces with those under Wrangle.
and held him play. Besides, Banniere who had not lain idle all this time at
Stetin, but reformed his Army, and filled his Regiments with veterane
Soldiers, drawn out of the Garrisons in Pomeren, and put his new accruits
into the Cities, seeing a clowd moving toward Anklam, and fearing lest the
Caesarians should oppress the Field-marshall by their multitude, the fear of
so powerful an adversary (such a terror as the most polite Roman
historiographer observes in the like case, being the firmest bond of concord)
waved all former controversies, with colleagues, and marched thitherwards for
his succor. And now began those hot services, which more resembled so many
pitched fields, then light skirmishes or velitations, wherein though neither
side could boast of an absolute victory, Gallas assaults the City five times,
and is so oft^repulsed with loss.
there appeared a more sensible loss befalling the Caesarians, then the other.
Both parties played their Master-prizes. Gallas at the first onset thought to
have surprised Wrangle, and carried the place, but Wrangle who had a vigilant
eye upon his intentions, knowing the odds which was against him, avoided the
fury of the first conflict, gave way to the ingruent storm, retired with his
forces through the City, wherein he left his Infantry, and encamped on the
other side with his Cavallary, to keep the passage open for the General
Bannieres access unto him, being advertized formerly, that he was marching up
for his relief.

Plato that divine Philosopher, enjoined his Auditors not to add fire to fire,
but what avayle his theoremes? the man of war will not give attention to his
morals. Nature insults there over either Ethics, or Politiques, the spleen
which is warmed only in the first motion by continuated action, begins to
boil, and nothing can extinguish the burning heat, but the opened conduit
pipes of his own, or the enemies blood. Gallas more enraged, then discouraged
by Wrangels retreat, planted his batteries against the Town, made five
several assaults, in all of them was beaten back with notorious loss, the
advisoes from Hamburgh, Stetin, and Berlin, specify a particular number of
six thousand and more men, and having failed of his project there, devises a
new one, to pass the River of Beinah, and to assault the Swede in his trenches.

No pains were spared, no hazard avoided, which might conduce, to effect his
design there, thrice he attempted it, at three several passages, but never
without great loss, at the last especially, at Damine, a place betwixt
Pomerania and Meckleburg, Attempts to pass the River of Behne, is beaten by
Banniere, and discampeth.
where the General Banniere encountered him, and though he had built a Fort
there to secure his passage, and guarded it with four hundred of his ablest
men, yet the circumspect and valiant Swede, as well to be observed for his
circumspection, which would leave nothing behind him, that might do him any
prejudice, as his valor, assaulted it, took it in, put the major part of the
praesidiaries to the sword, made the rest prisoners, their captivity being
graced with the society of a great Spanish Commander, named Don Faelix, to the
great affrightment of the Imperial Army, which suddenly thereupon discamped,
and marched toward the Elve, disheartened by the union of Banniere, and
Wrangell, who then appeared in field together, and made show of readiness, to
deal with Gallas, for decision of the quarrel in a set battle.

CHAP. I. The Actions, Occurrences, and passages Polemicall, and Political in
Picardy, Artoys, Henault, etc.
IT was high time for the neighbor Princes which stood in opposition to the
house of Austria, to look about them, and the Christian King particularly. --
proximus arsit
Vcalegon --
The Swedes fortunes concerned him: the Kings of Spain, and Hungary, when those
his Confederates appeared in probability able to hold them tugge, with several
strong Armies, invaded his Kingdom, put him to much trouble, The Frtuch Kings
preparations.
though his royal heart affecting the good of his subjects, and the people in
a respective obedience, conforming their gestures to his commands with an
unanimous courage, made head against them, and sent them back without any
notable evidence of victory. Some places of strength, pieces of importance,
were then taken by them, and some of them recovered again by the King; and now
to cry quittance with those invadours, he prepares not only for regaining his
own, but by transmitting his Armies into the places under their Dominions, to
draw the stakes from them, and engage his adversaries in a defensive war.
Several Armies were raised at the Kings charge, and committed to several
Generals, to do their service in such places, as his Majesty directed them. The
Prince of Conde was appointed to draw up all the troops which were quartered in
Champagne, Loraine, and Burgundy, and to lead them into the French County, he
being constituted the Generalissimo of those forces, and the Duke de Longeville
his Lieutenant General. The Marshals de la Force, and Chastillon had a joint
Commission for keeping the River of Mosell, and the places thereabouts, but the
old Marshall a true Miles Emeritus, of the age of 72 years, 60 of which he
had spent in the service of his King and Country, was soon after rude donatus,
had his Writ of Ease and Honor too, and in the Parliament of Paris, July 24,
August 3, was received by the honorable title of Duke of Madurant, and Musidan
his Lands of inheritance, The Marquess de la Force made a Duke and Pe^re of
French.
and Peer of France, being presented by the Kings Attorney, Monsieur Ioubert,
in the presence of the Prince of Conde, the young Duke of Anguieus, the Duke of
Montbazon, and Rochefoucault, and other persons of State and Dignity, and
Chastillon alone with 6000 horse, and 12000 foot marched into Luxemburgh, (as
was said) though other did write he had never half so many men) the King having
sent before by Monsieur Daniel de la Rue, a great sum of money to Liege, to
raise some more men there for his service, entertained Ruelles son, whose
memory is still deer to the Liegois in his Court at Paris, and consigned him a
place of Honor, and given a good Pension to the Massacred Burghers Widow, to
confirm the amity betwixt his Majesty and that State. Duke Bernhard of Saxon
Weymar, accompanied with Roderick the young D. of Wertenberg, the Marquess of
Baden, his Lieutenant General Hallier, and many other men of quality, attended
with an Army of about 10000 horse and foot, 2000 horse to carry the Artillery,
and furnished at first with a thirteen hundred thousand Franks to pay his Army,
was assigned to invade the Empire beyond the Rhine, Crequy, with his forces was
ordered to join with the D. of Savoy, for opposall of the Spanish forces in and
about Lumbardy. The Earl of Harecourt was to scowre the Seas, and the
Cardinal de Valetto, and the Duke of Candale his brother, had their Province
assigned them in the Frontiers toward the Spanish Provinces in the
Netherlands, and Hennegow, some places in Picardy being still in the Cardinal
Infants hands, and those to be reduced to the Kings obedience.

About the end of May, the French Cardinal and the Duke his brother set
forward toward Amiens, and blocking up la Capelle marched on to invade
Hainaut, and sat down before Landrecy, whither the grand Master of the
Artillery, The Cardinal de Valette marches toward the Netherlands.
brought up his forces also to hasten their proceedings. The Card. Infant was
not so soon in the field, nor had strength then to oppose them; yethe omitted
nothing that was requisite for preservation of his Country. He sent diverse
expresses to Piccolomini to make haste, and come down with his Regiments,
fortified his Frontiers, and brought down all the strength he had of horse and
foot to Mons in Hainaut, and Mabenge to oppose them; but wanting strength he
thought it fitter to let them spend some time before the City, the siege giving
him liberty to re-enforce himself, then by encountering them with that handful
of men, to endanger his Army, and so expose the Provinces under him to further
ruin.

June 9/13, the French Cardinal took up his headquarter at Faveri, a Village
half a league from the City, Sits down before Landrecay.
before which though he lay, till July 3/13, he lost not his time, a flying
Army under the command of Colonel Gassion and Rambures Governor of Dowlens
doing good service to the Christian King, and giving much offense to the Enemy
and other his Confederates emulating their associates achievements, in a
laudable ambition, affecting and deserving an equal wreath of Ho.

Monsieur the Marquess of Melleray, Kinsman to the Cardinal Richilieu, and
great Master of the French Artillery, marching up to the Cardinal de la
Valette, as he was upon his way, cast his eye upon the Castle and Town of
Bohain situate upon the highway, betwixt Saint Quintin and Chastean,
Cambresie. He saw it, and diverse persuading arguments induced him upon the view
and site thereof to assault it. The King his Master lost it the year, and it
stood with his honor not to leave it in the possession of an Enemy; The Castle
of Iohain taken by the Marq: of Milleray.
it blocked up the way betwixt Saint Quintin and the French Armies, it was a
mote in his eye, and he would assay to remove it. In a word it was lost before
miserably, through want of men to hold it, and fortifications to preserve the
small number within it, and he meant to regain it honorably, encountering with
difficulties, neither disheartened with sight of the new works made by the
Spaniards to defend it, nor the proportionable number of presidiaries which
were left to maintain it. His conceit was actuated without further dispute.
First, to observe the military method, he summoned it, and when his oratory was
not so powerfully persuasive and effectual, as to make the Garrison yield,
without delay he planted and levelled 16 pieces of full Canon against it, and
that sight being terrible to the Spanish Garrison, they which to avoid the
dishonorable title of Cowards before would not hearken to a treaty, began to
crave it, and procured it, and in conclusion, surrendered the Town and Castle,
upon condition merely to depart, with their lives, and to leave behind them
whatever they had gotten by pillage from the poor neighboring Villages, and
so saved themselves from the fury of the Army, though they escaped not the rage
of the Peasants, who having been spoiled by them formerly, hearing of their
departure, and the manner of it, without convoy, or offensive weapons,
assembled together to the number of 400 men, way-layed them, as they were on
their march to Cambray, sell upon them with all their strength, which was then
doubled by their spleen, slew most of them upon the place, some few only
escaping into the Woods, which saved them from the peasants fury, it was a
purchase of good value, and of use, both for the soldiers, and the country
people, the first finding there good store of victuals and Ammunition, and the
last by this prize recovering their moveable goods, beds, linen, pewter,
brass, and other utensils for housekeeping, which had been taken from them by
the plundering Garrison, and were now restored unto them by the Conqueror.

The flying Army under Gassion and Rambure, designed to scour the Country, and
prevent the Enemy, if he should any thing privately either against the Camp at
Landrecey, or the places in the Kings obeisance in Picardy, according to order
given by the General, went abroad with six foot Companies, and eight of horse,
and ranged over that Territory, till within a league of Mons the chief City of
that Province, without any adventure, there they heard of one worth their care,
A rich convoy surprised by G^ssion.
a Convoy of four Companies of Infantry, and as many of Cavallary, attending
some number of Wagons laden with the best things of Cambray and Valenciens,
the inhabitants there fea^ing that the French, after the prize of Landrecey,
would besiege those Cities, transporting the best of their baggage into
Flanders, for its preservation. It was needless to bid the Commanders, or
common men to stir, they were acquainted with each particular, both the way
which the Convoy should pass, the hour of its coming, and the strength which
attended it, and seeing what a booty was offered them, addressed themselves to
receive it. Rambure, with the one moiety of the troops, with as much privacy,
as he could, retires backward to a Wood called by the inhabitants Bois de la
Fournilhire, three leagues from Mons Southward, there he lays an Ambuscadoe,
concealing the greatest part of his forces, but showing the fag-end of his men
to the Convoy, which encouraged by perceiving the smalnesse of their number,
made up to them, and prepared to assault them, when suddenly Gassion, who
lurked behind an Hill to conceal himself, till convenient time, upon the first
Musquetado, spurred up to his Friends succor, and Rambure appeared on the
other side with his men, then risen from the Ambush, and both together charged
the Convoy so furiously, that they slew 500 upon the place, and sorely wounded
diverse others, the rest which were best mounted, saying their lives by their
horses legs, and leaving 24 wagons as a prize to the French, who for all their
Ambuscado, and advantage they had in the fight, came not off shot-free, but
left 17 dead behind them, and had 40 desperately wounded. The wagons were
driven to the Camp at Landrecey, and there the Cardinal de Valette to
encourage his Soldiers for the like adventure, if occasion should so happen
and sweeten the peasants, which gave notice of the Convoy to his Camp volant,
divided the spoil to the common men, whose valors their leaders had
commended, and some the peasants widows whose husbands were slain, or wounded
in the conflict.

A like accident and more glorious, though not so profitable, happened to the
Colonel, June 23. August. 3. whilst according to his Commission, he was
pricking over the field with his own full Regiment of 1400 men attending him,
five Cavalliers were descryed issuing out of the corner of a Wood, and the
Colonel sent speedily as many of his own up to them, to bring him a better
assurance whence, and what they were. They did their errand, and returned with
news, that they were Spaniards, and that those five men were but the Vedettes
Scouts Avantguard, forlorn hope, or of one such a conditioned fortune to some
troops of Horse which followed after them. The tale was delivered in these
Generals, by them which could not, nor had opportunity to be informed certainly
in the particulars. De minimis, nec curat lex, nec grex: The French Colonel
though he knew it not, had a well grounded opinion, that the Cardinal Infant
could not bring an Host into the field, he might advance safely because he
had a free way to retreat safely, A Spanish party defeated by Gassion.
and on he intended to go with a discreet resolution, either to give them
battle, if he should not find them in all postures of number, courage, and
advantage of place his Superionrs, or if otherwise, to march back again in an
orderly recesse to the Camp, his glory consisting either in getting a victory,
without the assistance of his General, or mature discovery of the Enemies
design to preserve his own party from unexpected invasion. He discharged upon
them, and they manfully abode the first shock of his charge, returned him
equal salvoes, shot for shot, blow for blow, and the end of the combat began
to be suspected, 200 of them slain, and so taken prisoners.
either party expecting, both contending for a fortunate issue; Gassion, who
had kept a reserve behind him, to give a fresh charge, while the first
Assaylants wheeled about to prepare for a new assault, brought up his Arreere,
which came on so impetuously, that the Spanish horsemen began to shrink, and
continuing his method, broke their Ranks, rowted them, slew 200 upon the place,
took fifty prisoners, amongst which was a Spanish Don, Alvaro Viveres and
certain Officers; gained three Cornets, of 27 whereof the Spanish Battalia
consisted, forced them to tear seven others into shivers, though not without
some loss, Such adventures are not passed over without some damage, 25 of his
Soldiers being slain in that battle.

This success was not of small esteem, yet the progress of the French
Cardinals activity was crowned with a more glorious issue, the Towns and
Castles of Irsin, Chastean, Cambray, newly conquered, Chastean de Buff and
Bussi, which were guarded with Spanish Garrisons, were the same time reduced to
acknowledge the Christian King, for their Sovereigne, and Catelet and la
Capelle, which still held for the Spaniards were so straightly blocked up, Diverse
Forts and Towns taken by the French Army.
that the Advenues being stopped up by the Kings Armies, that they were out of
all hope of succor, and this happy proceeding would have animated such as
served for honor, not relief of their misery, to have prosecuted their course
more carnestly. But Affluence is the mother of Idleness, when fortune begins
to smile, common souls begin to be luxuriant, it is wisdom which must govern
Fortune, elselike an unmanaged jade, whilst he seems to play upon the bit,
she may cast her Rider. Some of the principal Officers, presuming by this
small beginning that all was theirs returned to Paris, gallantized it in the
City, took their pleasure, considered not that their Lords lay in Tents, and
betook them to their beds of ease, to the danger, not ruin of his Majesty's
affairs, whose wakefull eye attending his own, and his peoples welfare, saw
what might ensue upon their supine negligence, and salved all again by an
Edict which like a mundifying unguent, cleansing the ulcer, restrained their
luxury, the purport whereof is as follows.

The King being advertised, The Kings Proclamation injoyning the officers to
repair to the Armies.
and himself having seen by the extracts of the review of his Armies, that
many Captains and officers of his troops, are absent from their charges,
notwithstanding the commands which he has often given them, to attend upon
their places: and not able to endure their remissness in promoting his
important affairs, of so great consequence, at this present: His Majesty does
again expressly order, and command, all Camp-masters, Colonels, Captains, and
officers of his troops, both horse and foot, Frenchmen and strangers, to
repair to their charges, within eight days after the date of these presents,
without delay: willing and decreeing, that all such as shall then be absent, be
deprived, and casheered from their offices, as his said Majesty does by these
presents, deprive and cashiere them, if they have no letter of license signed
with his own hand, and counter-signed by the Secretary of State, for leaving
his service, not permitting those which shall be deprived, and cashierd for
that offense, never to be restored to their offices, for any cause or occasion
whatsoever which may be alleged, forbidding the Lievtenants-Generals of his
Armies to admit them, or suffer them to be readmitted, after the expiration of
the time limited, and his Commissaries of war, to let them show themselves in
the future musters, and reviewes of his forces: the extracts of all which the
said Generals shall send his Majesty, with the names of all the Captains and
officers, both present and absent, to the end that the rigor of these
presents, may be executed upon them. And this order his Majesty commands to
be published, and affixed to the usual places for his proclamations, that none
may pretend any excuse, by way of ignorance: Dated at the Castle of Madrid,
July 15. 1635. signed Lowis, and a little lower sublet.

This Mandate concerned all his Armies generally, and was well observed of the
better sort, only the rabble: some such members there must not needs be in
such vast bodies, unsensible of their own duty, and respectlesse of the Kings
service, when they came to the test in Henault, disbanded, and ran away
through Picardy and Champagne, and then his Majesty again, to reform that
abuse, which if permitted, might have bin to his great prejudice, gave an
express command to all the Provosts and Marshals of those Provinces, to keep
the ways and passages thereof, for the arresting of such Soldiers and
Officers as came from the Army, An Edict against the fugitives.
without a Passeport from the Lieutenant General, or a lawful discharge, and
required all Mayors, Sheriffs, and inhabitants of the Towns and Villages,
through which those fugitives should pass, to lay hands upon them, and commit
them, that they might be proceeded against, according to the rigor of law; and
this severe decree made at home, kept the soldiers in obedience which were
abroad.

The chief Commanders at Landrecey, had not their hands weakened, nor their
hearts much troubled by the running away of those cowards, they fell close to
their business, knowing the importance of the place for further designs, the
French Armies by surprising it, having an open passage into Henault, and
likelihood of ease in the recovering of Avenne, Barlemont, and Valencynes, and
reducing them to the Kings obedience. The Liegois still took to heart the
murder of their Burgomasters, and hated all those, Diverse Liegois come to the
Camp at Landrecey.
whom they suspected to have but a finger in it, by a plebiscite banished the
Carmelites, as consenting thereunto, and upon Whitsunday (as if it had been the
better deed, for the better day) three hundred of the Citizens well armed,
assaulted the Castle of Oray, distant ten English miles from the City,
belonging to Bokholt the grand Baylie of Liege, pillaged it, and burnt it to
the ground, because they supposed, that he took part with the Elector of
Collen against them, and would impeach them in their liberties, and now having
a full assurance of the Christian Kings affection to their state, were as
forward again to help him on with his work at Landrecey, came to the French
camp by swarms, and did excellent service in laboring about the
circumvallation, traverses, lines of communication, raising of batteries, and
assisting those 2000 men, which were brought by the Count of Quince, Governor
Guise for that purpose in building a Fort, to offend the City. Four great
batteries were planted against the City, before the Marquess of Milleraize,
Master of the ordnance, The manner of the siege of Landrecey.
arrived thither, and were ready to play, at his coming a fifth great one was
made in his Quarter, and two lesser ones, and the great Gunnes were all
thundering eftsoons upon the City. The Pioners were employed to under mine the
four bastions of the Towns, Grenades were thrown into the City, no hand was
idle or wanting means, or will to endamage the besieged. The Garrison, and
inhabitants within, were much busied for their own defense, and doing seath to
the Camp before it. They which could do any thing, without respect of
condition, sex, or age, had their task set them; the Priests, Friars, old
men, women and children, were appointed to carry earth to stop the breaches,
others to carry earth to the tops of the houses, to preserve them from the
force of the Grenades, others were armed and sent out in the sallyes, to
hinder the works of the camp, others employed upon the walls and bulwarks,
to discharge the Artillery, upon the assaylants: a course in all probability
not uneffectuall, yet not so successful as it was preimagined, the Artillery
upon the walls did little hurt, few above 50. perished by that destroying
Engine. Two persons only of quality were flaine, Mesnill Tilly, the Kings
servant in ordinary, in the Duke of Candales quarter, and Montesquiou a
Captain in Vaubecourts regiment, and two hurt, de Ouche Esquire to the
Marquess Milleraye, in his right shoulder, and Colonel Gassion by a Musket
bullet in his neck, the camp being lodged advantageously, and sheltered from
the shot, by those trees, which grow like a thick wood, betwixt the walls of
the City, and the moat. Their labor to prevent the Grenades, was utterly
vain, the next morning after the Governor had provided for his own safety,
and the safety of his family, his dwelling house being beaten down by those
fatal instruments. To what a desperate estate do they seem to be brought
already? a potent enemy lay before them, and fly they could not, to hold out
by their own strength, they were far unable, all hope of relief was lost,
and yet they will not capitulate: One thing there was which still encouraged
them, The garrison necessitated,
the strength and situation of the City, which being placed in the midst of a
Moorasse, could not (as was thought) be kept blockt up, if the weather should
alter, though the present drought had given the French host way to encampe
before it. The French Cardinal foresaw all this, and providing for a rainy
day, made several cawsies upon the Moorasle, with sand, gravel, and flints,
three foot high, and caused above 100 carts laden with planks to be brought
thither from Saint Quintins, la Fere, Guise, and other places to lodge his
soldiers on, in time of necessity. Capitulates and surrenders upon
This sight somewhat daunted the defendants, but the Mines, which by the
diligence of the pioners, were perfected, had their chambers filled with
powder, and were ready to be sprung, affrighted them more, and Tuesday July
12/22 the inhabitants called a counsel to advise what to do in this
extremity. They were not long deliberating, a parlee was resolved of, a flagge
of treaty was hung out, a cessation of Arms was begged by the Citizens, and
granted by the French Generals, and upon assurance given them by the Cardinal
de Valette, the best of the inhabitants, and the officers in the garrison, came
to the camp, and yielded to surrender upon these conditions following.

FIrst, that the Governor, his officers and soldiers, These Articles.
horse and foot, should depart upon Sunday following, by 10. of the clock in
the morning, with their horses, Arms, and baggage, drums beating, flying
colors, bullets in mouth, matches in the cock, sufficient lighted at both
ends.

II That they shall be conducted in safety to Valencyennes, with an able and
sufficient convoy, and for counter security, should leave hostages, which upon
return of the safeguard, shall be set at liberty.

III That they shall have license to carry with them, two pieces of Canon, and
be provided of powder and bullets for six several charges of them.

IV There shall be wagons allowed them to carry their equipage, if they hap to
want them, which shall be returned in safety with the Convoy, and upon the same
conditions of assurance.

V There shall be a Trumpet licensed and authorized with a passeport, to go to
Brussels in behalf of the Governor, to acquaint the Cardinal Infant with the
issue of the siege, and the motives of surrendry.

VI The works for battery and assaults shall presently cease, and for assurance
thereof, the besieged shall have nine sentinels sent out of the camp into
their Bastions, and shall send three of theirs to lie as lieger-hostages in the
Army.

VII The Burgesses and inhabitants of the place, shall have liberty to stay in
the Town, giving an oath of fealty to the Christian King, with a proviso that
they shall hold their ancient privileges which they were never barred of, till
this present. That all such as would depart, shall have free liberty to do so,
and have a months time to sell their goods, and put their estates in order.

VIII The former Article shall extend it self also to all officers both of
policy and justice, who shall continue in their places and offices, giving the
like oath of allegiance to the Christian King.

IX The neighboring Churchmen which retired thither as to a Sanctuary upon
sight of the French Armies, shall have license to return, and power to enjoy
their benefices, giving the same assurance of their loyalty to the French King,
and have a months time to dispose of their estates, if they intend not to make
use of this Article.

X For assurance of performing the above written Articles, the City and
Garrison shall immediately give four hostages, two of the principal Burgesses,
and two Captains, which without more ado, shall be returned without any
pretense of cause to detain them longer, if an Army Royal should appear to
force the Camp, and constrain the French to rise betwixt that day and Sunday
morning at ten of the clock. All which was concluded of in the Camp before
Landrecey, July 13/23, and was signed, Le Cardinal de Valette, and de Hainin.

This last condition closed all up, and gave an assurance to the Governor,
that the Spanish Card, had no cause to complain against him, or to suspect him
of disloyalty who would have kept the place, had there bin any probability of
his relief, and was a good evidence to the French Cardinal, that the place
was his already, there being a sufficient demonstration, that the Spaniard
could not come to relieve it, his Army, as then not having met at the general
Randevouz, nor the Forces mustered up which should oppose him.

Sunday came, but succors came not, The Fr^^^^ take possession of Landrecey.
and Rambures the French Camp-master, with his Regiments of French men and
Switzers, entered the Town, accompanied with Thou, and Laniere, intendants of
justice over the Army, who were sent thither to see that the soldiers should
commit no outrages in the Town, and so win the hearts of the people, and
take away the common calumny laid upon their nation, that after a victory, they
were over-insolent. It was a good remonstrance of discretion, The glory of a
Prince is not in the number of his towns, or amplitude and vastness of his
dominions, but the love of his people. The project took, and after a Te Deum
sung the next morning, the inhabitants came in voluntarily, gave an assurance
by oath, that they would continue the Kings loyal subjects so long as he would
protect them: many of those which had packt up their fardels, as meaning to be
gone, disburthening themselves of their loads, and joining in the tender of
Allegiance to his Majesty of France, induced thereunto by the fair usage of
the French Cardinal, who assigned them a Governor, which that same day entered
the Town with his Regiment, the Marquess de Vaubecour.

A grain turns the Scale, and this prize, though accounted of small consequence
by them which lost it, who like ordinary Gamesters boast of their winnings,
never speak of their losings, quite altered the course of the Infanta's
designs; He had begun a work of great importance, and had he finished it,
had done a thing which might have more avayled him then common men can imagine,
a new Haven was intended for Graveling, fortified, and capable of Vessels of
great burden, The Haven of Graveling left unperfect.
which if effected would have drawn all trade from Calice, and have brought no
small impeachment otherwise to the Kings Frontiere Towns in Picardie. The
French by land, and Dutch under the Dominion of the United States, labored to
hinder it by Sea, the Admiral Dorp brought his Fleet thither, but nether of
them, jointly or severally could do any thing, only the discovery of this Army,
and their success made the Spanish Cardinal dispose otherwise of the
soldiers, who were commanded thither to secure the laborers and the workmen,
when they had almost brought the Forts to defense, and were busy about the
harbor, were forced to desist, being content that they scowred the channel,
and made it fit to receive a vessel of bigger burden.

Many other happy Archievments attended as handmaids upon that more illustrious
Fortune: July the third new style, the Regiments of Navarre and Picardie, being
gone into Boulonnois to refresh themselves, the Garrisons of the Frontiers of
Artois, thinking to make use of the time, had a design upon Desaren, a Town
near Monthulin, and marched thitherwards with 300 horse and 400 foot, hoping to
surprise the Companies of foot, which were garrisond in the town, and to
plunder the neighbor Villages. An attempt of the Atrebates lost at Desu^en.
Villequier Governor of Boulogne, and the adjacent Territory, was advertised
by some peasants of their march, and to catch them in their own trap, commanded
an expert soldier la Mothe Belle Isle, with two Companies of Carabins, one
Company of light horse, and certain Musketeers against them. The Captain had
sure and particular informations of their posture, knew the place where they
lay in Ambuscado to entrap the Garrison, and thither marched directly, fell
upon them withal his might, and after a sharp combat of an hour long, rowted
and defeated them, slew near 300 upon the place, took fifty prisoners whom he
brought into Bouiogne, and chased the rest into Falkembergh, and the Woods
adjoining, getting this conquest only with the loss of forty five men.

Piccolomini, was then upon his march, Piccolomini (...) march.
to assist the Spanish Cardinal; his Avantguard consisted of 400 horse in ten
Companies of Gonzagu's Regiment of 350 horse of his own new Regiment, of
Savelli his Regiment of foot, being 1000 men in ten Companies, Becks Regiment
of 550 men, one of Gallas his Regiments of 2000 men, Tieffenbachs Regiment of
450 men, young Berners Regiment of 600 men, and another Regiment of 450 men. His
Artillery consisting of eight brass Pieces, and 100 wagons laden with
baggage, marched in the middle of Gallas his Regiment. The Arreereguard
consisted of Piccolomini his old Regiment, distributed into 12 Companies, and
making about 430, and the Regiment of Count Rheiberg, which was the hindmost,
and was composed of 300 horse in ten Companies, Chastillon, whose Province lay
about the Mozell in Lorraine, and Luxenburgh, July 16/76, was informed of his
arrival near the River, both by his scouts and some prisoners, which had bin
taken by the Garrison of the Castle at Sancie, as they were straggling from the
Army, amongst which was the Italian Counts Secretary, who was surprised with
his baggage, his Masters papers, and most secret instructions: The French
Field-marshal thus made perfectly acquainted with his way, sent out Bellefons
an expert Commander and valiant Gentleman, to assault the Castle of Chauvancie
with 200 foot, and 150 horse, whilst himself with the rest of his Army took
order to secure the Kings Towns and Castles about the River. The Earl was told
of Bellefons his design, and brought up the Caesarean and Spanish Cavallarie
under his command, as far as Mommedy, and de Marville to raise the siege, and
surprise him: but his hour of victory was not yet come, Chastillon with all
his Army appeared at that Randevouz, and in the sight of the Imperial
General, battered the Castle with seven pieces of Ordnance in three several
places, The Castle (...) taken (...).
and forced the Garrison to surrender upon conditions, that the common men
should depart with white staves, and the Officers with the swords at their
sides, and that only; which was granted, and they marched thence to Mommedy an
half league distant.

The Caesarcan General, had no commission to sight there, he was expected in
the Netherlands, and thither he advanced with such speed and privacy, that he
had brought his Auxiliaries to Mons in Haynalt, two days before the French
Commanders, who were still about the River of Sambre understood it. He carried
it wisely, they expected and lay in wait for him and Chastillon, with two whole
Regiments of French, three Companies of Crabats, which for pay served under his
Colors, though against the Austrian, and three squadrons of horse hearing of
his retreat from Mommedy, pursued after him, to have assaulted the Rear, but
his speed prevented all their designs, the Cardinal de la Valette, never set
eye on him, and Chastillon only overtooke 25 Cavalliers, which loytered behind
the Army, Piccolominie'^ arrival ac Montz.
and were not so well mounted as the other Piccolomini with the rest of his men
that night, July 19/29, reaching to Neufchastell in Ardennesse, and within two
nights after to Mons, where he spent some time to fortify himself, and
refresh his weary Army.

Landrecey being taken in, the Cardinal de Valette first took order to repair
the breaches, to renew the old Fortifications, and to confirm the inhabitants
of that City, and Chasteau Cambresi in their Allegiance to the Crown of France
by gentle usage, demeaning himself so fairly, and managing the business so
discreetly, that most of them who had fled thence into Cambray, Quesnoy,
Valenciennes, and Mons for refuge, sent their Trumpeters with petitions to have
liberty, to return to their habitations. Then July 20/36, he sent Rambures the
Field-marshall, with 2500 horse to visit the Enemies Country about Bavez, Saint
Guillin, and Monts. The party, which went abroad, was dignified with the
society of the Gallantry of the French Army; the Marquess of Preslin
Camp-master for the light horse. Gassion the fortunate and daring Colonel, the
Count of Nause, A fortunate enterprise undertaken by the French near Monts.
Captain of the Gens d'ermes, Arnault, campemaster for the Carabins, S. Agnan,
Captain of the light horse, the Marquess of Pisani, and the Vicount Monthaz,
and returned not to the Camp without the spoils of the enemy, the trophies of
their honor. Notice was given them, that 300 horse were come out of Montz, and
to repulse them, if not vanquish them, they divided their Army into three
parts, passed over at three arms of the River, to encounter them, charged them
so impetuously, that upon the first meeting, the Spanish soldiers were forced
to fly, being pursued to the Barriers of the town, where the Vicount Montbas
was hurt in the face, arm, and belly, but without danger, and this adventure
happened out so successefully to the French, that though they were intermingled
with their enemies in the suburbs, not a man of them was lost, and they slew
thirty Spaniards, who discharged upon them their Canonad o's at random, and
vainlye, because at random from the walls of the City. This fortune, though it
cannot be called a victory, stood them in further stead, then for the present,
it cleared the country, exposed the high ways, and open dorps to pillage, for
ten leagues space, and thence they brought back to the camp, 800. horse of all
sorts, 1500. oxen and kine, 3000. muttons, seven or eight hundred prisoners of
all conditions, (the booty being increased by the Caroaches, in which most of
them were taken) besides the Priests, the religious persons, women and
children, which were sent back in safety, being used all the time of their
captivity, according to their several ranks and quality, nor was the
enterprise merely rewarded with this gain, but ennobled, with honor. The
defeat of two companies of the Train-band of the Province, and one company of
the Spanish Cavallary, both which they met upon their return toward the camp,
the first in the open fields, and the last near a passage over the River,
which being preoccupated by the Cardinal Dukes brigade, sent thither by
Preslin to keep it, were enclosed on the other side by Gassion, and the most
part being put to the sword, the rest became prisoners of war.

Another achievement waited upon the former, the Marquess, Grand Master of
the Artillery, drew out 1500 foot out of his French and Helvetian regiments,
and 200 horse, which under the conduct of the Marquess de la Forte-Imbault the
Field-marshall, he sent to enforce the Tower and Castle of Busigni, Aug. 1. new
style, a place of much importance, and such, as while it was in the Spaniards
hands, hindered all commerce betwixt Saint Quintins and Landrecey. The Marquess
at his first arrival, took up his quarter near the counter-scarpe, whither
having brought also four pieces of Canon, he so astonished the Governor, who
was but soldat de Fortune, a voluntary, and one which served without pay, that
he presently sent to capitulate. His agent was the Licentiate of the place, who
was appointed to confer with one Cyrill a Recollect, The Castle of Basigni
yields upon strange composition.
of the new order of Franciscan Friars, a man as fit to serve in an Army, as at
an Altar: and these two military Priests, having a while conferred together in
the hearing of the Captains of the Camp, Cyrill entered with him into the
Fort, and the Governor presently, unacquainted, and unversed in such
negotiations, came out himself in person unto the Army, to make his
composition. The French Commanders could not but smile at his simplicity, which
before he had made his peace, would entrust himself without caution, with an
adversary: yet they neither used him ignobly, by demanding hard terms, nor
refused those he offered, which were, that he might depart with those 50. men,
which he commanded in the Castle, with his drum beating, their Arms and
baggage. By the unadvisednesse of an unskilful Commander.
It was a place of strength, and sufficiently manned, for the bigness; the
walls were seven foot and four inches high, so fortified with earth, that it
would have spent time to take it by force, the Canon having no power against
them, it was freely offered them, and it had bin vanity to refuse it. The
conditions were granted, when the Governor thinking to return, to acquaint
the Soldiers with the particulars of his transaction, was stayed as a prisoner
by command of the Marquess de la Ferte, who commanded him to be kept under
arrest, till the garrison was departed, and then promised to set him at
liberty, Aug. 3. new style, the presidiaries came forth, with many women which
had then fled thither for safety, which with the Governor, were conducted to
Cambray, three leagues thence. The Marquess upon their departure, entered the
Fort, where finding a large quantity of provisions, brought in by the Country
people, thirty families of the wealthiest Boares, having fled thither for
refuge, and made the Fort a magazine for their store, he carried the victuals
away, put in 60. men of the Vidame of Amiens his regiment to keep it, and
returned to the Army.

Aug. 3. new style, the same day which de la Ferte, returned from Busigni, the
French Cardinal, and the Marquess Melleray, having a design upon Picolomini
in his march, advanced toward Valenciennes, in the mid way, received certain
advisoes that they came too late, the Court being already at Montz, where he
lay strongly fortified, and seeing that labor lost, they marched against
Maubeuge, a town reasonably fortified upon the River of Sambre, yet stronger
by the favor of the Castle, then the walls; there they arrived the same day at
evening, having taken the strong Fort at Esclebe, appertaining to the Prince of
Simay, as they we remarching. Mabeuge surrendered upon composition.
The next morning the Master of the Ordnance, with his avant-guard viewed it
round, perceived where it was best, and where weakliest fortified, sent a
Trumpet to summon it, who bringing for answer a flat denial, the Marquess
with the one half of the Army the next day, went over the River, which divides
the City as our Thames does London, and Southwark, sat down within a quarter
of a league before it, where he knew the wall was weakest, leaving the other
side to the Cardinals care, whom he had informed particularly, where he might
play with his Canon most advantagiously. The besieged after some few days
demanded a parlee, sent their hostages which were received, and surrendered the
place upon conditions, which being like those of Landrecey, we will not here
repeat, enjoyed the town and Castle, and proceeding further the same day, the
Cardinal took in another Fort late appertaining to the Count of Buckquoy, and
the Marquess the Castle of Emerick, seated upon the same River.

Chastillon the Marshall of France, who went to field, July 4. new style, after
he had survaied the frontier towns of the Provinces in his charge, went on to
reduce the places, which held out for Duke Charles and the Catholic King, to
the Christian King his Master. Villaune, a Castle betwixt Verdun and Stenay,
was the first which he attempted, not with his Army, but with 300. foot, and
200. horse, conducted by Bellefons to that service. The Commander presented him
before it, with two Canons, but good ones, of 33 pound ball, and the confidence
of the garrison in the strength of the Castle, Villaune surrendered to the
French upon discretion.
undervaluing those small forces which were against them, made a show of
resolution at first, to hold out till the last man, but seeing more Artillery
brought against them, their courage was quailed, and they desired conditions
for composition. Bellefons moved with a just indignation of the scorn which he
perceived in the looks, at his first coming, heard them, but hearkened not to
their propositions, gave them a peremptory refusal of other terms, then his
own discretion would prescribe them, and advised them to yield to his mercy.
The garrison conceived, that the importance of the place, deserved better
language, yet seeing they could get no other, they submitted upon discretion,
surrendered the Castle, and the soldiers 75. in number, being upon their
departure, were disarmed, and dismounted, and all but such as took service,
sent packing, but the officers were arrested, and sent as prisoners to the
Marshall Chastillon, who had then his head-quarter at Grand-pre, the gross of
his Army being lodged round about him.

Dinaw, a Castle upon the Marse, had the like, or a worse fate. Aiguebonne the
field-marshall, by Chastillons order, Dinaw upon like terms, but with an
harder fate.
July 9/19. surrounded it with four companies of light horse, two companies of
Carabins, and an Artillery of one great Canon, and two Culverings. He observed
the method of war, and summoned it, but the Commander neither observing the
rule of good manners, nor polity, though he had in it but 35. soldiers,
denied to yield, and added that he had courage enough to dispute for his own
life, and his soldiers with the sword: and this answer being returned,
Aiguebonne played upon it so furiously with his Canon, that the next day they
desired to capitulate, and not obtaining it, were forced to submit to the fury
or mercy of the French Marshall, it being in his breast to determine of them,
who entertained as many of the common men, as would serve under his colors,
disarmed and unhorsed the rest, and then sent them to Forte, whither soon after
he followed them, to inform their associats there of the Captains fate, who
for his peremptory reply, unable to make his word good, was delivered over into
the power of the Intendants for justice, and by them to the executioner, who
according to their judgment, trussed him up for his desperate and irregulated
actions. Diverse places yielded upon composition.


The Castles of Loupi, Chavance, and Brovenne, dealt more discreetly, desired
covenants, and obtained them, as did also the Town of Ferte, which yielded
after a few shots from the Canon, upon the like terms as Landrecey, only
they were signed diversely, being subscribed Chastillon, and counter-figned De
le Hay.

From Ferte, a town of some note in the Province of Luxenburgh, the French
hoof advanced against Ivoy, a place of the same territory, but better
fortifyed and manned, the fortifications being after the modern manner,
according to that pattern, which the late King of Sweden had perfected, Jvoy
besieged,
and the Marquess Spinola invented, and guarded with 2000. men soldiers and
inhabitants under the Colonel Bronze, their Governor, an able man, to manage
his charge, as (if not to speak of his other actions, the preservation only,
of the Princess of Psaltsburg, mentioned in our former histories) can
testify. And surrendered upon
The Commander here had some reasons to stand upon terms, and did so without
conceit of injury done by him to the assaylants, who knew his reasons, and came
from words to actions, the Governor by the space of eight days defending the
town bravely, though at last he accepted these 22. honorable propositions,
and surrendered it.

FIrst, that himself and the garrison, Aug. 4/14. at 8. These Articles
in the morning precisely, should depart, with two pieces of canon, which
should be given him at the appointment of Feuquerces, the Lieutenant General
of the French Army: with three Canon bullets, and proportionable powder; horses
to draw the Artillery and his Canoniere.

II. That his wife, family, and household servants, should have liberty to
depart with him in his Caroach, and be furnished with four wagons to transport
his baggage.

III. That the Soldiers of his Regiment, the Imperial troops, Lorrains and
Almayns within the City, should depart with their Arms upon their shoulders,
swords at their sides, knap-sacks upon their backs, bullet in mouth, matches
lightened at both ends, Drums beating, Ensigns displayed, their wives and
children, servants, and their baggage.

IV. There shall no injury be offered to the Officers and Soldiers in the said
troops, which have formerly served his Majesty the Christian King, but they
shall enjoy the same liberty of departure, as is granted the rest; those only
excepted which were Natives of France, and born subjects to his Majesty, who
are not to be comprehended in this Article. A just exception, treason should
find no mercy, and traitors are they will dare to bear Arms against their
natural Prince and Country, they have betrayed their allegiance, what pretext
soever they may find for it, and by the law of Nature and Nations, are
incapable of mercy.

V. All Officers, Majors, and others of his laid Regiment, and of the
Imperial, Loraine, and Germane Forces, shall have liberty to depart with their
Arms, and as much baggage, as they can carry with them, their wives, children,
servants, caroaches, wagons, carts, and horse for service.

VI. All the Captains and other Officers of the said Garrison shall depart,
with their Arms in the accustomed manner, their baggage, wives, children,
fervants, etc. as in the sormer Article.

VII. The Purveyors and Subtlers shall have the same liberty granted them, as
is granted to the Captains, and Officers in the precedent Covenants.

VIII. The Canons, Chaplains, Priests, and Curats, shall depart with their
horses and baggage.

IX. The Nobles in the City shall have a free liberty to depart, with Arms and
Baggage, Coaches, Horses, Grooms, and other Attendants.

X. The Burgesses and Citizens shall have the like liberty, as is granted to
the Nobility.

XI. The Citizens of other Cities which came to Ivoy to secure their persons
and estates, and generally all the inhabitants, and others abiding in the City,
shall have license for themselves to depart with the Garrison, as also for
their wives, children, and families; or if they desire to stay a while for
ordering their estates, a months time shall be granted them, which being once
expired, they shall be gone immediately, and make oath neither by intelligence
or action, to attempt any thing against the King during their time of stay.

XII. The Widows shall have liberty to depart with their children, and
baggage, Grooms, and other servants in company with the Burghesses.

XIII. They which will depart, either presently, or after a month expired,
shall be provided of a safe conduct by the new Governor, that shall be
assigned to command there in behalf of the Christian King, and be secured from
injury, and pillage during their stay in the City.

XIV. The Prior of the Crosiers, Canons, Chaplains, Priests, and Curats, which
will abide there, shall enjoy and hold their Benefices and Revenues, as
peaceably as they have done formerly, both in the City, and the Villages in the
precinct, and jurisdiction thereof, doing their Church-duties, according to the
Roman Catholic and Apostolic manner, without any impeachment, let, hindrance,
or obstacle, upon condition, that they make oath of Loyalty and Allegiance to
the Christian King.

XV. The Ornaments of the Churches, the Altars, Pictures, and other
Church-goods shall not be violated, nor removed, and the clock-bell shall not
be stirred out of its place, the Army being otherwise satisfied for the expense
of their Ammunition.

XVI. The Officers of the Town and jurisdiction thereunto appertaining, shall
hold their Offices and profits thereunto belonging, if they will stay without
being compelled to take out new Patents, only giving an oath of fidelity to the
King, and abstaining from giving intelligence to his adversaries, or doing any
thing to his Majesty's prejudice.

XVII. Such as will continue, and reside in the City, shall be maintained in
the Rights, Franchises, Immunities, and Privileges, which they have anciently
enjoyed, only with condition of taking the Oath of Allegiance, as is before
required.

XVIII. In the 7 Article, the victuallers and purveyors shall be comprised, to
whom it is granted, that they shall have liberty to carry out provision and
wood, to furnish the Garrison upon the march, and attend it whither it goes.

XIX. The prisoners on both sides shall be restored without ransom, or other
charges.

XX. If any thing be found omitted in the former Articles, the Governor shall
have power to enjoy it, as if it had been plainly inserted, and fully expressed.

XXI. The Governor shall be furnished with 15 wagons to carry the sick,
wounded and impotent men to Arlon.

XXII. The Garrison, and as many of the people, as will be gone, shall be
conducted by a French Convoy to Arlon, lodging but one night upon the way in
such a place, as shall be thought most convenient, the Governor leaving three
of his Captains in gage for the safety of the Convoy and Wagons, which shall
be set at liberty, upon their return, and dismissed with all surety.

Made, determined and decreed in the Camp before Ivoy, August 3/13, 1637.
Signed Chastillon: and countersigned, Par Monsigneur, de la Hay.

Count Nantevil Governor of Corbie, a place known by its misery, twice taken
in the space of three months, once by the Cardinal Infant, and again by the
Christian King, moved with the prosperity of the French Armies in the
Netherlands, knowing that the Spaniards hands were full, his Garrisons had more
irons in the fire then they could well wield, and seeing the Forts of Ebuterne
near Arras, and Fouvillier near Bapaume, had not only bin places of retreat
for the Commanders in Atrebatum, and Bapaume the last Winter, when they had
gone a plundering, The Fort of
even to the gates of Amyens, burning down the Kings Villages in Picardie,
with a resolution to subdue them, about the beginning of August, marched from
Corbie, with 200 soldiers of his Garrison, 100 peasants well accoutred, two
companies of Carabins, two pieces of Canon, viz. one Bastard carrying a bullet
of 18 pound weight, and another lesser, and their equipage. The time of his
arrival at Ebuterne, (...).
answered his design, it was midnight, an opacous thick darkness^ had covered
the face of the Earth in our Horizon, the Sun appearing in his Meridian to our
Antipodes, as unwilling to be an eyewitness of the sad Fates which attended
those Forts and Garrisons His purpose was concealed by the silent night, (...)
to (...).
and without let be approached within fifty paces of the walls, th^se planted
his Canons, suddenly sounded 6 trumpets, beat a battle with 12 Drums, cast
Grenadoes into the Fort, discharged all his Muskets, and the volley of shot,
though made without aim, wrought so effectually, The French Leader prosecuteth
the women,
that four of the presidiaries were slain outright, and amongst them a
Sentinel who fell dead to the earth from the top of an high Tower, to the
astonishment of the desendants, who sleeping securely, and suddenly awaked by
this unwelcome inusique, had their thoughts so perplexed, that their distracted
imaginations projected new causes of fear, and concluding generally, that the
assaylants were no mean body, but the whole French Army, sent out the Curate of
the place to capitulate for them, who with all his Oratory, could obtain no
other terms then the lives of the soldiers to be spared, with an express
remonstrance, that they should all without exception be made prisoners of war,
and the preservation of the women's honors, they being to be protected from
ravishment and other violence, which hard conditions, were accepted by the
Garrison, and all the males, the old and diseased persons only excepted, the
Curat in the mean time in toke^ of joy, for his prosperous negotiation in the
women's preservation, making a solemn procession, and clevating the Pix,
attended with the Matrons, married wives and Damsels of the Fort, whom the
Count shut up in a place of safety by themselves, the Count prohibiting his
people to do them any violence, either in their persons, or the wealth they had
about them, whilst himself and men seized of the horses, kine, cattle, and
other wealth which was then in the Fort, and manacled the men whom he intended
to carry captives to Corbie. Miserere jam victor Galle, and parce tandem; Is
not this captivity a sufficient trophee of the Conquerours glory? thus the
Genius of the place did seem to plead in the faces of the disconsolate women,
But rasech the Citadell.
which were not so much revived by their own freedom, as dejected by their
friends bonds, and restraint. But the fate of the place, was not yet come to be
actuated; thirty Musketeers, were laid in by the Count to keep it, till his
return from Fovillier, which he next intended to attempt, the final sentence,
and the execution thereof being reserved, until that Enterprise was brought to
perfection. Thither he came the next morning, and soon forced it, to accept
the same terms, as the other had done, and then the French Commander laden
with spoils enriched with a booty of above 200 kine and horses, and other
baggage, and giving the Law to above 200 prisoners, The Castle o^ Fovillier
yields to the French.
discharged his petite Garrison of 30 Musketeers, which he had left at
Ebuterne, demolished and razed the Forts down to the ground, that they might no
longer be offensive to the Kings subjects in Picardie, and returned to Corbie
with his own retinue, booty, and prisoners.

As in a glass face answers face, or the echo replies to the voice, so the
conquests of the French in Artois and Haynault, were seconded by the victories
of the Marshall Chastillon in the Dukedom of Luxenburgh, the places of note
there which before the war, Anno 1542, betwixt the French and the house of
Austria, were thought impregnable, being so shattered then, that though they
have since bin refortified, yet they never attained to their former strength,
and so facilitated the Marshall's designs. As Soon as Ivoy was taken in, the
French General observing some ^^te directions sent unto him from his Majesty
by Aiguebonne the Field-marshall, for advancement of the Kings Affairs, and
unwilling to omit any advantage, which might further his attempts; August 6/16,
lent his Lieutenant Feuquiers with 2000 horse, and 3000 foot to block up
Danvilliers, and to clear the ways from Metz to Verdun, by taking in some
small Forts, which being Garrisoned by the Enemy, hindered the free commerce
betwixt the two Cities, and the Colonel Bovillon with 300 horse, and 200 foot
to take in the Fort of Cheney, situated upon the River of Semoy, asmall place,
but of good consequence, being new fortified by the Enemy, and guarded with 200
men. Feuquiers did his part happily, Roquepine Lieutenant Governor for the
Cardinal de Valette, having brought the Forts to his hand, and Danvilliers
only left to his care, and so did the Colonel Bovillon too, Diverse small Forts
surrendered to Chastillon in Luxemburgh.
though not with such speed as the other, he finding more opposition, yet with
as much glory. He summoned the Citadell, and was refused, played upon it with
his Ordnance, and was answered from thence in the same Dialect, till the
Garrison supposing that the Marshall was coming in person thitherwards, with
the mayn body of his Army, and Artillery, surrendered it upon these terms, that
the two Captains and their Lievtenants which commanded there, should have
liberty to depart with their swords by their sides, and the soldiers with
white staves only, which done, the Colonel judging the place to be too strong
a piece to be left to the Kings enemies, having occasion to employ these troops
which he had elsewhere, burnt down the houses, and demolished the Fort to make
it unserviceable.

Whilst these Forts were taken in, The Spaniards make an attempt
the gross of the French Army lay encamped along the River of Chier, each
regiment being disposed of in a several quarter. The light horse of
Angoulesme, Polie, and Buzanoye, were lodged at a village, called Olizy, where
having barricadoed up the towns end, to keep the enemy from making any sudden
incursions upon them, they kept a careless watch, neither having any corpse du
guard without, nor any sentinels upon the advenues. A soldier is least secure,
when he is most secure. The Spanish party, by their scouts, were made
acquainted with their negligence, and hasted to them, not as friends to
reprove, or chastise them, but as enemies to surprise them. Four companies of
horse, 300. Arquebusiers, and 200. Musketeers of the Spanish train band in
that Dukedom, Aug. 10/20 set out from Arlon, a place about 30, English miles
from Olizy, and came that night to Mommedye, where they reposed themselves,
whilst 200. other Musketeers were drawn out of that garrison to accompany
them in this expedition, and then marching all night, an hour before day, they
arrived within a Carabins shot of the Village, where the French Cavillary lay
without any discovery: The manner how to carry the business, Upon the French
quarter at Olizy.
was resolved on by the way, as they came, it now remained only to put their
counsel into action. The directions given by the Leaders to the common
Soldiers in private, were as good, and more useful, then any charge could
have been, which was to be given from the longlowd throats of the Trumpets, or
sonorous bellies of the military Pythons the drums; without any alarm they
surrounded the Village, removed the barricadoe, and then having slain some of
the French Cavalliers, they placed the Musketeers in diverse places of the
Village, whose frequent charging and discharging in the street, brought no
small am^^ement to the French Cavallieres, when their thought being as full of
confusion, as the Village was of horror, knew not how to behave themselves, to
stand upon their guard, being surprised so unexpectedly. The Count of Polie was
the first, which mounted on horseback, to rallye up his dispersed squadron,
and something he did by fortune, which assisted him for his own, and some of
his soldiers preservation, though nothing to offend the enemy. One of the
Spanish troops of horse came in by a by lane into the Village, with them he
intermingled his own men, not as an enemy, for thereof he made no show, by
giving one offensive blow, and escaped undiscovered in that hurly-burly,
Surprise it.
with the remnant of his troop, by the blind lane, through which the
Spaniards came in, having only his face besmeered with the powder of their
pistols, when he was in the middle of them. Brosse, Captain of the company of
Angoulesme, and Buzancy, showed themselves braver men, but not so wise, they
mounted too, and stood upon their defense, yet being over-layed with the
unequal number of adversaries, Buzancy was slain in the conflict, and Brosse
dangerously wounded, was made a prisoner to the Spaniards, who by this being
absolute Lords of the Village, broke open the houses, seysed of the baggage,
and equipage of the French Officers, and pillaged them.

Here if these adventurers had stayed, they had done the Catholic King good
service, and gone off honorably: but the action was not well regulated, they
stayed too long in seeking after the spoil, and their deluded covetous eyes
frustrated, what their daring heart had undertaken, and thus far happily
perfected. Some of the furniture which was found in the Officers lodgings, was
rich stuff, and while they stayed to pick out the best, and to fit the horses
which they had gotten from the French, with their caparisons, themselves became
a prey to some other French men, Are again surprised.
which as if they had bin shot out of an Engine, fell upon them unexpectedly.
The Count de Lignon was lodged at Villy, but half a league from Olizy, with
his brigade of light horse, and he receiving some information of his friends
estates there, mounted to horse immediately, and attended with 300 Cavallieres,
and five French Captains, spurred up thither-wards to relieve them. He made
haste, and reached thither by the dawning of the day, yet his speed was not so
good, as to bring him to the whole Spanish party, the greater part was gone
with some luggage and prisoners, some stayed behind, intending to poast after
their fellows, when they had made up their fardels; them he found there, he
put to the sword, and then dividing his troops into two squadrons, himself
with the one, leading on the right hand way, and Sirock, to whom he deputed the
other, the left hand way, and pursued the other party so diligently, that they
overtooke the maine body thereof at a Ford near Moville, and assaulted them so
lively and sprightfully, that after a short conflict, wherein 120. and upwards
of the Spanish forces were slain, the rest were rowted, being pursued to the
foot of the hill whereon Mommedy stands, the sword doing as great slaughter
upon the Spaniards in their flight, as it had done at the battle near
Moville. It was an honorable achievement, whereby, besides that Brosse was
recovered from the clutches of his enemies, the bo^ty regained which the foe
had gotten at Ozily, with a new accruit of 142. horses which were taken from
the Spanish Cavallarie, the ransomes of 22. prisoners, most of them Officers
and men of quality, With great loss.
which were brought to the Camp, the better part of the Cavallary, which the
Catholic King had in the Dukedom, being also slain or dispersed, some men of
note were found amongst them, which fell by the sword: by name, Longuevall, a
Captain of a troop of horse, another Captain of the Cavallary, who was thought
to be Ramee, two Lieutenants of the troops of horse, and some other Officers,
whose faces were so mangled, that their names could not be taken, though their
habits discover their condition.

Feuquieres, according to the Generals order, had in the mean time blocked up
Danvillieres, expecting the time when the Marshall of France would bring up the
body of the Army, Darvillieres in Luxenburgh is blockt up,
and besiege it. The time of his expectation was not long, Aug. 21/32. the
Armies were joined, and Chastillon, Feuquieres, and Aiguebonne, with other of
the French host, went to view the City, and measured out the lines of the
intended circumvallation, in despite of three great Canons which playedupon
them from the Town, though one of them by an unlucky shot had taken off the
head of the Lieutenant Colonel Streife, a valiant and expert German. The
Commander within, a man of a stout and resolved spirit, saw their preparations,
and could not be ignorant of their intentions, yet undauntedly prepared for his
own defense, and preservation of the City committed to his trust, but in
testimonial that he desired fair play on both sides, and that all their
proceedings might be regulated according to the laws of war, Besieged,
he sent to demand quarter for all the prisoners which the French had taken
there already, or might take hereafter, promising to do the like with the
Camp, and this fair proposition being entertained by the French General, it
was confirmed by reciprocal escripts, in the form ensuing.

Fair quarter granted, and confirmed by Chastillon.
The Count of Choligny, Lord of Chastillon, Marshall of France, General of the
Kings Army.

Upon the proposition made by the Governor of Danvilliers, to Monsieur
Feuquieres, Lieutenant general of this Army, for giving quarter to all that
already are, and hereafter may be prisoners on the one side, or the other,
either Officers or Soldiers and for the releasing of them, upon the ransom of
a months pay, according to the stipend they receive in the Armies, each man
according to his several condition and quality. We declare and promise, that
the said rule of quarter shall be kept, and observed unviolably of our part,
and not be declined in any sort, or upon any pretense whatsoever. In testimony
whereof, we have signed these presents, with our own hand, sealed them with
our seal of Arms, and cansed them to be contresigned by one of our
Secretaries. Given at the Camp, before Danvillieres, Sept. 1. new style, 1637.

Signed Chastillon, and contresigned de la Hay.


The writing was short, and full, resembling the Majesty from whom the
Marshall had received his Authority, and was entertained respectfully by the
Governor, who replied,

Charles de Stassin, Lord of Brandenburg, Esche, Gaerlang, Counselor of
war, and Field marshall to the King of Spain, and Governor in Danvillieres.

V^on the resolution of Monsieur de Chastillon, General of the Army of France,
for granting quarter to the prisoners, which the fortune of war shall put
into the enemies, and releasing them, each man according to his several
condition and quality, following the assurance which we have received from him
this day. We promise, that on our part, the said order shall be kept
inviolably, without doing any thing to the contrary. Jn testimony whereof, we
have signed this writing, at Danvilliers, the first of September. 1637.

Signed Charles de Stassin. And Charle, Stassin the Governor.



This siege began with a martial complement, and was continued with plying the
instruments of war to their proper end; the assiegeants, and the besieged,
both striving for nonour, and summoning up their forces to advance the Princes
affairs, for whom they stood engaged, without any remonstrance of malice
either national or personal. In Artoys and Haynault, the French and Spanish
Armies treated not so fairly: the Cardinal of Spain was by this upon his
march, to join with Piccolomini, who that he might be thought to have done
some thing before the Infant was come, An Ambuscadoe laid for the Master of
the Artillery.
laid an Ambuscadoe of 1200. men to entrap the Grand Master of the Artillery,
who was gone from Maubeuge to the Court at Paris, at his return toward
Land^ecey. But that design took not, the Grand master was then taking a view
of La Capelle, the only place the Spaniard then held in Picardie, and by his
stay there avoided the danger. Happily avoided with some loss.
Two of his Captains fell into the snare, Beauregard and Hamell, and though
there was a great disparity of numbers, betwixt them, and the Enemy, he being
six to one, yet by their care, they came off with the loss of 50 men, flying
not confusedly, but in a well compacted close body, making their way to
Chasteau Cambresi, where they were entertained, and preserved from the fury of
the pursuers.

An expert Wrastler sometimes receives a foil, and in lieu thereof gives a flat
fall; the French thought themselves blurred in honor by this little loss, and
labored to regain it. The Duke of Candale a joint Commissioner with his
brother the Cardinal, for managing this war, was then in his Quarter about
Maubeuge, and as well to be avenged for the slaughter of his friends, as to
possess himself of some places about Montz, which being Garrisoned by the
Enemy, did much impeachment to his Cavallarie, when they went to get forage for
their beasts; went from the Camp, August 11/^^, with four foot Regiments,
2000 horse, and six pieces of Canon, and the same day pitched before Beaumont,
a Town belonging to the Prince of Chimay, about the bigness of ^aint Denis in
France, or our Warwick in England, Beaumont surrendered to the French.
well walled, fortified with an half moon, and flan^ered with many demy-towres,
and kept by 300. Almayns. The Garrison was summoned to surrender, but denied to
yield, and words not avayling to expedite the conquest, he made his approches,
planted three batteries against it, played upon the Town from nine in the
morning, until three in the afternoon the next day, at which time a breach
being made sufficient to receive 20 men abreast, the besieged desired to
parlee, were heard graciously, Commissioners were appointed them, Gassion the
Colonel, and de Leschelle, who had the office of an Aid de Camp, son to
the Governor of Sedan, who accorded with them upon these terms, That the men
of war should depart immediately with their Arms, baggage, and Ensigns, and
be conducted with a Convoy to Montz, and that the inhabitants should be
permitted to continue there, giving an oath of Allegiance to the King, or to
depart, not transporting, or carrying any thing out of the City. All was
performed the next day, August 13/23, betimes in the morning, when the Duke
entered the Town to see it, cleared of the Spanish Garrison, and laid in for
presidiaries as many of his Regiment.

But what avayles it to have a Town in an enemies Territory? unless the ways
be open to succor it, famine or the sword, or both must probably fall upon it.
To prevent all dangers which threatened it, the same day it was surrendered, the
Duke sent the Vicount of Thurenne, with the Avant-guard of his Army to enrich
Solre, a great Borough town, two leagues distant from that of Beaumont,
fortified by a strong Castle, wherein besides the Garrison betwixt five and six
hundred peasants, had taken their residence, and by discipline being long
trained up in the martial postures, were become able soldiers, and knowing
the How, used to go out in parties, and often scuffled with the French for
agers. The Roman soldiers under the command of Caius Marius in the Cimbrian
war were affrighted at the first, The Castle of Solre surrounded by the
French.
with the loud ejaculations and black Sauntz of the Germans when they heard
them, and fearing to deal with such a dreadful enemy, declined the battle,
thewise Consul who both knew that the balling noise which the Germans made,
was more ex consuetudine, quam feritate, out of the custom of the Nation, then
the courage of the untrained Swains which were engaged in the war, kept his
trenches, accustomed his legions to hear them daily, and the frequent noise
still bearing upon the ears of his Army became not formidable unto the
Soldiers. These peasants when they first came to Solre, startled at the
beating of a Drum, the crack of a Carabin was far more dreadful to them then a
thunderclap, and every man in Arms, friend or foe, appeared to them like an
executioner, with the fatal Axe, armed and authorized for their deaths. But
now they began to be acquainted with the practices of martial men, their
custom had dispossessed them of fear, and were grown so bold and hardy, that
upon the first report: of the Viscounts march, they undertook to defeat him,
and forsaking the Town which they might have held for three or four days
came into the field under the shelter of the thick hedges upon the way
skirmished with the forerunners of the Army, and slew some of them which were
within the reach of their Musketshot. The Viscount perceiving the course
resolved to assault them with the small number of men which he had in the
Avantguard without attending the forces which were to be brought up after him
by the Duke of Candale, and did it so roundly that in a short space he
dislodged them, made them forsake the thickets, and fly into the Town and
Castle: whither they were pursued by the French who entered pell mell with the
runawayes, and slew about 30 of them, the rest taking the Castle for a place of
safety, whence they began to shoot against the Assaylants. The Castle of Solre
taken by the Duke of Candale.
The Duke in the mean time being upon his march from Beaumont, arrived at
Solre, with the rest of his Army about Noon, where he found the Avantguard at
knocks with the inhabitants, which made a show of much resolution to stand out
though it was but a lightning before death, and scarce of half an hours
continuance. They saw the town pillaged before their eyes, their goods and
families abandoned, and to save the remaynder after they had slain three
Captains which approached too near the Castle, one Ensign, one Sergeant and
certain soldiers wounded, the Marquess of Varennes and some other Chieftaines
yielded to the Duke upon discretion, who to restrain the disorders which
frequently follow such rough encounters, and to save the town from fire, it
being a handsome one, and of more then 500 families, gave strict order to his
Army to refrain from those violences, and to preserve the honor of eight or
nine hundred women and damsels inhabitants there, he placed them in the Church
and the Castle whilst he took order to dispose of the old Garrison, whom he
dismissed unarmed, yet hung up the Captain by one of his own soldiers whom
he commanded to execute that base office to redeem himself from the same
punishment which he had deserved justly, and then leaving a Garrison in the
Castle, he returned the next day to the Camp at Maubeuge.

A Counsel was called there to advise for the next design, La Catelle
besieged.
and the Fortress of la Capella, a place upon the Frontiers of Picardie and
Artoys, four leagues from Guize, surrendered to the Spaniard, July 6/16, the
year last past. The Cardinal de la Valet, and the grand Master of the
Artillery, upon the conclusion arose from Maubeuge, with one part of the French
troops, and arrived September 1 new style, before the town which they
surrounded the same day, and the next day the Citadell, their soldiers being
then raised of a half moon, which they found abandoned by the besieged. Then
they began to entrench themselves, the Count of Quinse Governor of Guize, and
other Commanders in the neighbor towns, having sent thither above 2000
peasants with mattocks and spades to work in the circumvallation. The pioners
spared no pains to bring their work to perfection, and followed it with such
diligence that by the ninth at night the Army was entrenched, when also they
labored in their traverses so earnestly, that by the fifteenth of the same
month, the assaylants became masters of the Counterscarpe. The siege was laid
in two Camps, the one commanded by the Cardinal, and the other by the
Marquess, in which were raised two batteries, the one of six Canons which
battered the curtain above that place which they determined to undermine, the
other of three Canons from the counterscarpe which played upon the flank of the
Bastion, which the Cardinal was to assault, who had in his own Camp four
other batteries raised, the one of four pieces, and the other three, each of
three all great Canon, the least whereof carried a bullet of 36 pound weight.
Don Marcus de Lima the Governor capitulates.
The batteries made some breaches upon the walls, but the Bastions stood firm,
and to abbreviate the work, the Generals resolved to attempt it by myning. The
pioners were again employed, and then the Commanders seeing how resolved they
were to take it in about midnight the 21 of the same month desired to
capitulate, and sent one of their Captains as an hostage into the Army. There
was not much difference about the terms, neither did the besieged demand any
thing of the Generals which might have been to the impeachment of their honor,
nor did they again prescribe to the Commander any thing that was unreasonable.
It was concluded on in all points but one, Agrees.
and that they agreed unto, which was that the Garrison might carry with them
two Canons mar^ed with the ^rmes of Spain, which were promised them, (...) not
performed, the French pretending that the year last past, when the town was
surrendered, the Cardinal Infant conditioned with the Commander to let him
march away with two pieces marked with the Arms of France, yet kept not his
covenant, and therefore they would retain those two Spanish Guns till their own
were restored. It was no time for the Commander to stand and argue the case
with the French Generals, betwixt twelve and one the Garrison was come out of
the town, consisting of seven or eight hundred men, to wit, one company of
Almayns, two of Spaniards, two of Italians, two of Walloons, and one of
Burgundians, under the command of Don Marcus de Lima, the Governor there for
the King of Spain, and now upon their march they must be content to yield it,
being reputed sufficient that they carried away their Arms and baggage,
marched out with Drum beating, and lighted matches with their wives and
children, their sick and wounded men were furnished with wagons to transport
them, and had a safe conduct to Avennes.

The Garrison thus departed, the Generals took order the next day for repairing
of the breaches, which their Canons had made, filling up the trenches, and
stopping up the mines wherein they had employed the laborers, one under the
Bastion, which should have bin assaulted by the Cardinal, the other under the
curtain, which was reserved for the grand Master of the Artillery, and then
took order for the entertainment of Chavigny Secretary of State, and Chancellor
to the Duke of Orleans, who being sent to the Camp from the King was invited
by the Marquess to dinner, feasted, and in the midst of their jollity, An
alarm in the Fr. Camp.
their mirth was spoiled by the report of a Currier, that came to them with
news of the Cardinal Infants joining with Piccolomini, and how that with 18000
men, they lay upon advantage, to fight with the Duke of Candale, who still lay
about Maubeuge, which place they had battered by the space of two days with 30
pieces of Ordnance, and that both the place, and the French General there
wanted their aid, which caused a sudden alarm, and the Generals rose suddenly
from dinner, intending (as they did) to make up what was wanting with a new
archievement of honor. The story is thus delivered from Rissell. Sept. 11/21,
the Cardinal Infant having the little town of Amiens, marched thence to
Maubeuge, Causes them to march in battle array to Mu^^beage.
made their approches, planted their batteries, and in fine though the Garrison
within defended it self stoutly, beat the presidiaries from the one part of
the town to the other beyond the River, where the French planted some pieces of
Ordnance expecting the sudden coming of the Spaniard thither, who being entered
and seeing the Western part clear, marched to the Eastern, but there found what
he expected not, the Ordnance playing upon his Army; And whilst he stands
amazed at this unexpected blow, another object of fear presented it self unto
him: the French Army of 10000 foot, and almost as many horse came marching up
in battle array from la Capella, with a full resolution to fight. The Cardinal
Jnfant found himself too weak, and had not time to make an orderly retreat, a
speedy one, though with some confusion he deemed better then to stay and wait
upon a certain destruction, The Cardinal Infant rowted and his loss.
and so he did retire leaving behind him 400 wagons laden with baggage, 16
pieces of Ordnance, betwixt 2000 and 1500 dead soldiers, and many prisoners,
the number of the dead being graced with one of the chief Commanders, the
Lieutenant to Piccolomini.

Victory still hovered over the French Camp, and besides the fortunes which
attended the Generals in the mayn bodies of their Armies, their parties which
went abroad to scowre the Country seldom returned without good purchase. The
Castle of Leon furrendred to the French.
Lenoncourt a Captain under the Marquess of Milleray, being sent out to that
purpose, Sept 14/24, encountered betwixt Quesnoy and Aimaries, with 300 Spanish
horsemen well armed, and employed as a Convoy to 260 wagons laden with corn,
beer, and cheese for the use of the Infante's Army, charged upon them, and
assaulted them so furiously that they slew upon the place 42 of the best
soldiers, the Captain and his Lieutenant, wounded above 60 dangerously, took
many prisoners, and routing the rest got possession of that prize. It was too
great for them to carry away, they seized on the best, corrupted the rest, and
broke their wagons in pieces, carrying away a great and rich booty of 300
horsloads, besides the gold and silver which they found there, with which they
supplied their Confederates, whom they met ranging abroad to the same purpose,
as they had done, and brought into the Camp above 200 Pistolets.

Another party, the day following, hearing that the Cardinal Infant had sent
another company to the Castle of Aymaries, went to field with three companies
of soldiers amounting to about 120 men at Arms, Two Companies of the Gatrison
at C^mbray defeated.
with an intention to surprise it, but that being brought into the Castle,
before they could overtake it, that they might not return without some
testimony of their activity, they marched up toward Cambray, and there to
tempt the Garrison to come abroad, they sent some few vant Curriers toward the
City, hiding themselves in an ambuscado for their better advantage. The bait
took, the Commander seeing the French colors in the field, so near his walls,
and the small number of men that g^a^ded them with an intention to chastise
their insolency, drew out a few of his soldiers, and sent them in two
Companies under Maugray his Lieutenant Colonel against them: the number of the
Spanish adventurers was not above 150, besides some officers of foot, which
thrust themselves into the action: their imagination had already presented
these French Cavaliers unto them as a prey, and toward them they posted
speedily, the French knew how to tread their measure, and paced according to
the Music that played: they had their cue, and observing a proportionable
distance from the enemy, they fled before him, adding more wings to their
speed, when they came near the Ambuscado, whither and where the Spaniards
pursuing them, were so violently assaulted by the French, that rose from their
lurking places, that 100 of them were slain upon the place, among which was
found one Lieutenant of the Infantery, and all the rest wounded, except certain
few men, which were taken prisoners. It was a fortunate exploit, and both
advantageous, and honorable for the undertakers, who besides their captives,
returned to their garrisons of Ham, and Saint Quintin, with a booty of above 50
horse gotten in this enterprise.

Ferte-Imbault the Field-marshall, the same day that La Capelle was surrounded
by the French Army, was commanded by the Great Master of the Artillery with 500
horsemen in 10 Companies, Gleon a Castle taken by the Fr. Freldmar.
Ferte-Imbault. without blows.
drawn out of the Regiments of the Vidame of Amiens, and de la Marine, and 3
Canons to lay siege against two Castles distant from La Capelle about six
English miles. The one of them called Glaon, appertained to the Countess of
Isanguin, and without blows upon the bare sight of the French Army, yielded;
but the other named Trelon, situated in a Borough of 400 Families, being
guarded by 300 men, and 14 pieces of Ordnance well mounted, though not well
levelled for offense, would not surrender, though it was summoned to the ruin
of the village, their care for keeping the Castle, bringing the Dorp to a
quick destruction, without any advantage to the more hardy, then discreet
defendants. The town was not fortified at all, but lay open to the mercy of
the Master of the field, who enraged with the affront done him by the
Governor, in denying to yield, first burnt the Village to the ground, and then
planted his three great Gunnes point blanke against the Castle. His shot was
returned from the Citadell, with the advantage of 10. for one. He spent but
thirty volees against the Fort, the garrison let fly with the 14 pieces, above
200 several times upon the Army, but neither was the camp much endammaged
thereby, nor the Castle. The Field-marshall intended not to make much more use
of his Canon, seeing he had spent so many bullets, to so small purpose, and
applied himself to his Bombards, and great Grenades, which wrought so
effectually, their shivers flying, and bounding in the lodging chambers, that
the Mar quesse de Trelon, who commanded in person within the Castle, which
properly appertained unto him, sent out his Almner with a semblance of desiring
to treat, but in truth, only to descry the French forces, and he at his
coming, entreated terms of composition, Trelon, a Castle surrendered to Ferle
Imbaul, upon composition.
but his eye being noted by the Field-marshall, to have been more busy in
viewing the French postures, and preparations, then his tongue in propounding
the conditions required by the besieged, or his ears in attending to the
French Commanders offers, and in the end, desirous to return, without
concluding any thing, concluded the project was discovered, though he
personated a Commissioner, he was apprehended as a spy, and Ferte Imbault sent
a trumpeter to the besieged, with this express, that if they made one shot
more against the Camp, he would cause him to be trussed up before their eyes.
The Almner was a man beloved by the Marquess, and he to preserve his faithful
and endeared servant, from such an ignominious death, like himself, an
honorable minded man, wisely preferring the life of a discreet and faithful
Counselor (so he reputed him) who had formerly done him good service, both by
directions and actions, before that pile of earth and stone, the Castle, which
in all probability he could not hold above eight or ten days longer,
capitulated, and upon conditions of life saved, and departing with his baggage,
surrendered the Fort to the Field-marshall, who found in it, besides the 14
pieces, the least whereof carried a bullet of eight pounds, 40 Harquebusses
with firelocks, 1200 pounds of powder, six Muids of bread corn (each Muid
contains 5 quarters and 5 bushels of London measure) thirty Muids of Oats,
with other commodities: and because it was a place of some importance, distant
but two leagues from Vervin, sited in the middle of a wood, he put in the
Vidames regiment, to garrison it.

For these two Forts he had express commission, another there was which
offered it self to his eye, Argon comes in by president.
the Castle of Argon, within half a league of Trelon, and that he resolved to
take in too, though it might seem a work of supererogation, he was not long
about it, the presidiaries there were few in number, and not well provided for
defense, they surrendered upon the summons, with the conditions granted, to the
Castle at Trelon. He put in 60. of his own men to keep it, and then returned
to the Camp before la Capelle.

Never did Merchant with a fair trade-wind, make his voyage with more
expedition then attended the French forces under the Cardinal de Valette, and
his confederates in Picardie, in their conquests of Cities and Citadels, and
bringing the towns in subjection to the Christian King. S. Previll his design
upon Rumingnan in Artoys.
The design of Saint Previll, Governor of Ardres, upon the Castle of
Rumingnan in Artoys, had some time of hammering, but was soon polished and
perfected, when it came to the file d'espee, it was of long projection, but
speedy execution. The Castle is situated upon the River which comes from
Bourbourg to S. Omer; it was a place of some consequence, being a means to
restrain and bridle up all the principal Forts of the frontiers of Flanders,
without the assistance whereof, S. Omers could not subsist, and the French
being possessed thereof, might truly say, that they had gotten one of the
principal keys and in-lets to Flanders. The French Commander therefore for
many a day past, had used all means possible, both by private intelligence,
and otherwise, to be surety at all times of the state thereof, that he might
either get it by assault, onslat, or some other way, or if he failed in the
attempt, The carriage of his project.
to come fairly off, and without damage of dishonor. The expected hour was
come, news, and certain too, at last was brought him, that one part of the
wall was so weak, that he might easily surprise it thereby: there needed no
more, he resolved to assay it, and providing himself of workmen, Masons, and
bars of iron, intended if he could, to dig through the wall, it being but
of brick, knowing that if he could carry that one piece of the Mure, he might
easily command the Citadell. The business was managed, as discreetly, as
valiantly, the project before the conquest, being carried with all secrecy, his
copa^tners and fellow adventurers in the design, not knowing what he intended,
and all things necessary for the work being carried with him, even to two
vessels, intended to transport his men over the River, if it was not wadeable,
which he laid upon two wagons, and covered with their sails, that they might
not be discovered by the enemy, and his care for keeping the place after the
conquest appearing so manifestly, that his wisdom therein, was to be seen as
plainly as his valor in the archievement, He beat up the drum in Ardres, Sept.
10/20. called the garrison together, told them, that his intent was to go
abroad, and see what straggling parties of the enemy were abroad; wished them
which were willing to accompany ^im, to arm, and attend him, but never
mentioned the intended enterprise. His speech done, the gallantry of the
garrison, de Riviere, Licutenant Colonel of the regiment, de Estrees, Revoule,
Mafor of the same regiment, Cassale, chief Captain of the regiment, de
Miossens, Largenterie, Larre, de Tower, and Saint Laurent, all Captains, and
diverse other officers, offered him their service. He accepts them, and then
taking out his own company of light horse, and 100. Musketeers, with the
Masons, whom he had deputed to this service, sending before him the
forerunners of this little army, himself and his) associates marched away
immediately after, and forrunately arrived within a Musket shot of the Castle,
at 11, the same night, neither being re-encountred upon the way, nor discovered
by any enemy. There was no need of the boats, the River was then wadeable, and
through the water he dispatched four Masons to dig through the brick wall,
if it was f^asible. It was no work of difficulty, the workmen undertook it, and
in short space made so large an hole in the wall, that first ten men under the
conduct of Largenterie, entered thereby, A breach made in the wall.
then twenty others under Lorre, and last, forty Musketeers, under La Toure,
and Saint Laurent. In they were, and on they would, but the way they knew not,
some guess they had of it, by the general notions of their intelligence, but
no certain remonstrance, Fortune helps a daring spirit, and conducted them
right to the corpse du guard, which they fell upon courageously, their
Musketeers doing them no mean service in this adventure. S. Previll who had an
open ear, and listened after the reports of his Muskets, was still with the
rest of his Army, which he ordeted to surround the Castle, that neither the
soldiers, nor the peasants which lodged there, being more in number then the
soldiers, might escape, and upon the first crack of the Muskets, flew into
the Castle, came up to his men, enlivened them to the work, both by word and
exemplary actions, put to the sword as many as made resistance, which were
about 30 in number, The Fort taken.
the place being guarded with 60 soldiers, and more peasants, to the great
terror of the rest, who hearing his name, cast down their Arms, and begged
quarter: quarter he gave them, but it was for life, not liberty, for he took
them as prisoners of war, and the next morning sent them away to Ardres, with
an Alferes which commanded them in the absence of the Captain, whom they found
securely sleeping in his bed.

This was his project, S. Previll provided to keep it.
and thus it was performed. But his discretion was more conspicuous in the
Forts conservation, then the acquisition. One hundred of Musketeers he placed
therein, under the command of an expert soldier, de la Tour, a Captain of the
regiment de Estrees, to keep it, a guard sufficient for the Fort, had not the
spaniards an eye over it, to regaine it, orif they had, it was but sufficiently
fortified. He concluded, that as sure as the Sun would return again from
the West, where it set at night, to the East in the morning, so certainly, the
enemy would re-visit it: and to secure the garrison from any injury by the
adversary, resolved to appear in the field the next day with such a
proportionable number of men, as might be able to deal with the neighbor
garrisons, (there was no Army thereabouts) if they should offer to enforce it.
His conjecture fa^led not, the Spaniards from Graveling, and the neighbor
garrisons, hearing of this loss, assembled the next day, and marched toward
the Castle, thinking to recover it, but S. Previll, whose working brain would
not permit him to sleep, or slip his advantage, by his care prevented their
design, the victory achieved, he went to the Count of Charrost, Governor of
Callice, acquainted him with each particular, in the name of the Christian
King, commanded his assistance, and they jointly endeavoring themselves in the
business, brought into the Fort the same day, an host more able then the
adverse party, upon that short warning, could raise conveniently.

Mars and Mercury, An Ambuscadoe laid for the French.
appeared together in the Spanish Camp, not as in opposition, but conjunction,
they neither wanted offensive Arms, nor art to manage them, they would not
adventure for a victory in open Champania, but assayed to get it by a
stratagem. An hundred horse were sent out to brave the French Cavalliers, some
peasants were enquartered upon a bridge, near a Church, and both these were
but laid as a bait for the French, who if they had come to battle, had found
(as we say) John Drums entertainment, though invited to a feast, they had him
beaten with the spit, the sword, and Muskets of the enemy, who had hid his
maine body behind the hedges, strongly entrenched himself, and expected only,
that the French, according to their custom, fiery in the first conflict,
should have made an assault upon these Batteurs d' Estrade, this forlorn hope,
so they esteemed it, and have bin caught in the trap which was laid for them.

But this slight was of no more value, then their might: the French Leaders,
old and expert soldiers, were informed by their scouts of each particular, and
to delude one finen^sse with another, (...),
seemed to decline all combats, though desiring to grapple with the enemy in
open field, inarched toward the Fort, thinking the Spaniards would follow
them, but perceiving that with a wary slynesse, they avoided them, in an
ordered retreat going back toward Graveling, and their garrisons, they went
on directy toward Rumingnan, where the maine business lay, repaired the
breaches, renewed the old fortifications, and added to them, removed the
garrison, which was laid in before, put in a lesser number, And the Castle
fortified and manned.
but of more expert men, sixty for an hundred, it being a proportionable number
to defend that small Citadell, (more might have bin a burden) under the command
of S. Lawrent, Captain de Bellefons, of whose valor and faithfulness, they
had already a good and sufficient testimony, returned to their charges, one to
Callice, and the other to Ardres, without interruption, or opposition.

Fortune waits upon pro^idence, industry gets the purchase, but prudence makes
the assurance. Ivoy was taken in b^ the Marshall Chastillon, (...) by Cautelmo.
Aug. ^/13. but retaken by the Spanish men of Arms, within a month after, not
by siege (though Cautelmo the prime Spanish Commander in that Dukedom, had
mustered up all his forces, it had bin vain for him to have sat down before
it, and raised a bank against it) but by scaladoe and onslat, the Governors
negligence in keeping a strict watch, animating the Spanish Commander to take
that course, who made the Governor again to pay for his improvidence, by the
slaughter of many of his men, and the captivity of himself, and all his
principal officers, and rest of his soldiers. The Spaniard being again
possessed of the town, took care how to keep it, sent out his purveyors to
provide all things necessary to victual it.

Chastillon, was then in the height of his business before Damvillieres, The
siege of Damvil^^ers.
which though it began with a kind of complement, the Commanders on both sides
striving to outvie each other in courtesy, was continued with all manner of
harshnesse and extremity, the soldiers within often sallying out upon the
Camp, and the army again furiously battering the City with the Ordnance, and
beating down the houses with Grenadoes. A fortnight was spent before the French
General had perfected his works, He began too early, September the first, new
style, but had not raised his ba^teries till the fourteenth, the rain which
fell then in abundance hindering his pioners from doing it with more
expedition* The approches of the Camp went on but slowly, the Garrison often
sallying out upon the Pioners, and undoing what they had done, yet was neither
the General, nor the Camp disheartened, they continued their course, and often
cu^ off the adventurers which again often returned into the City almost tired
with the slaughter of their En^^^es. N^ kind of hostile effence was omitted of
either side, the very occasional triumphs of joy, which happened two days
together one Sept. 26, new style in the City, for the honor of Saint Mau^ice,
the tutelary Saint th^reof, The French triumphs upon the Kings birthday.
the other in the Camp the day following for the congratulation of the
Christian Kings Nativity, were spent to the mutual offenses of their
adversaries. On the first night the bon-fires being made round about their
Fortifications, the Defendants made 30 Canonado's, and above 2000 Musquetadors
against the Camp, and the next day, the time when the great battery of
fourteen Canons began to play, many vollies being made out of the trenches the
great Ordnance was discharged eight or nine hundre^ ^imes out of all quarters
against the City, and that so effectually, that thereby the Parapets which
stood against them were ruined, the defenses of the two Bastions which look
toward Verdum, upon which the great battery played, were beaten down, the
Ordnance of the town was for the most part dismou^ted, and the only sleeple of
the town was utterly demolished, 120 Canon-shot being spent against it, because
it served as a mount of battery against the Camp, and the Army was much
annoyed thereby in their trenches.

The night works were as prejudicial to the besieged as those of the day; The
nightworks and their issue.
at evening order was given for bonfires and fireworks through all the Camp,
the Canons placed upon the advenues, were levelled against the town, and when
they had done, the Bombards and Morterers were employed till break of day,
which though they did not much endamage the Fortifications, brought no small
prejudice to the besieged; the Garrison and inhabitants stood all this while
like amazed men, conjecturing of the issue of these actions, and what might be
the mayn design of the French General, and whilst they were in this maze, the
laborers were set to work, who so plied their hands all night, that they much
advanced the approaches of the army. Don Andrea Cantelmo had sent 120 men to
attempt a way into the town for the relief of the Garrison, promising to follow
with an army, and raise the siege if it were possible, the men conducted by
Captains, being come within two Musquers reach of the French quarters,
affrighted with the loud cracks of the Ordnance and strange fireworks,
disbanded and fled in such a confusion, that the Leaders which conducted them,
could not upon any terms reassemble them; in a word, that night the General
so strongly fortified himself in his trenches, that Cantelmo thought it vain
to attempt to raise him, and himself began to be so confident of his success,
that he concluded himself able to win the town, within a fortnight in
despite of all resistance, the Garrison within, or their Confederates without
could make, and therefore that his own forces alone without any coadjutors,
might have the glory of the prize, sent back some troops which the Cardinal de
Valette had sent him to be assistant to him, in that enterprise which was
desired, might be done with expedition.

It is no small thing that can dishearten a resolved man, Stassin the Commander
within, for all this lost not his courage, nor abated any title of his first
resolve afterward, though he plainly saw that the French got ground daily, so
much that by the last of September old style, the Marshall had raised two new
batteries upon the very brinke of the moat, besides the other great one of 14
pieces of Ordnance. An half moon there was betwixt the two Bastions, An half
moon taken by the French.
upon which the batteries played, from whence three nights together, the
Garrison sallied out upon the Camp, and did it much impeachment, both by
slaughter of men, and spoiling the traversers. To remedy the inconveniences
which accrewed to his Army thereby, the General called a Counsel of War,
and it was concluded to assault it, and to carry the place by force, what ever
it might cost, notwithstanding all objections to the contrary, though it was
defended with a large ditch of 20 foot broad, and eight foot deep, at the least
where it was shallowest, and was guarded with 120 men, the choicest and best
soldiers of the Garrison, and the conclusion was brought into action. The
order of the assault was thus, one Lieutenant and an Ensign, two Sergeants and
30 common men, seconded with a Captain, and Ensign, and fifty other old
Soldiers, were commanded to assault it on the left hand, and as many others,
both in number and quality, each party having 12 scaling Ladders, to go down
into the Moat, and climb up to the par^pet of the half moon, and each
Sergeant leaden with balls of wildfire, with order to cast them into the mi^st
of the Enemies, as s^on as they did appear, that their eyes being daz^led with
the flame and smo^k they might have the easier access to the Parapet. The
directions were observed so punctually, and executed so spirightfully, that in
a short space the Spanish soldiers were driven out of that Fortification, but
not a yet beaten, they returned again with more fury then was showed in the
first encounter, And a mi^e sprung ^ff^ctually.
renewed their fig^^t, and continued it ^ountfully by the space of four
^oures, at which time the victory falling to the French, they became masters of
the half moon, till then in controversy. The battle ended not without blood,
some of the defendants were slain upon the place, and the rest thinking to
escape by flight, fell into the hands of Balagny a Captain of the Regiment of
Turenne, who placed there by order from the General to that purpose, The
Garrison capitulates.
and he encountering them sl^e some, took others prisoners, and forced the
remaynder into the Moat, where they were drowned, it being there 12 foot deep
of water, the French using the dead corpse as bavins to go over the Moate there
to their Associates.

The loss of this Fortification much abated the edge of the Garrison in the
town, who begged a short time of truce to bury their dead, and taking the
grant for a favor, showed some remissness of their courage already, but a
inyne under the Counterscarpe of a chamber ten foot square sprung so
effectually, October. 14/24. that it made a breach in the wall where 40 men might
march a breast, discouraged them more, though they did something still in their
defense, two great trenches which they had made within giving them a little
spirit, yet in the end seeing how unable they were to make good the breach
against the assaylants, they capitulated and accorded upon these conditions.

The Articles for surrendry of Damvilliers.
I.
THe Governor, Officers and soldiers of the Garrison in Damvilliers, shall
depart upon Tuesday next, Oct. 17/^^, with their arms, horses, and baggage,
Drums beating, displayed Ensigns, bullet in mouth, and lighted matches.

II.
They shall carry with them two pieces of Canon, of six pound bullet, with all
their attirall, and Ammunition for two discharges.

III.
The King shall allow them as many wagons, as shall be necessary for
transportation of the equipage of the Officers and Soldiers, their sick and
wounded men, with good draught-horses to carry them to Virton.

IV.
There shall be given them a French Convoy for their Conduct, for security
whereof good Hostages shall be left by the Governor, till the return of the
Convoy, at which time they shall be dismissed with a passe-port in safety.

V.
All persons Ecclesiastiques and Politiques, the Officers of the Duke Charles,
and the Prince Francis shall have libertty to depart with the Garrison of
Damvilliers, and to go whither it shall best like them without any affront or
injury done them by the Garrison.

VI.
The Citizens which will continue in the City, shall enjoy their ancient
privileges, which they have long since enjoyed, according to their use and
custom, giving an oath of Loyalty to the most Christian King.

VII.
All the Franchises and Liberties of the City shall be still maintained without
any innovation.

VIII.
The Citizens, the stangers which came thither for ^^^^tie, the widows and
their children shall have liberty to stay in the Town, and no wrong shall be
done unto them, either in their persons or estates.

IX.
All Ecclesiastical persons of the Town, jurisdiction and neighbor Villages,
giving an oath of Loyalty to the King, as is above required, shall have
liberty to stay and enjoy their Benefices peaceably, without any deprivation,
but what shall be sued out legally, and determined by Law.

X.
All the Citizens, soldiers and people which came thither for safety, if they
will not stay, shall have liberty to carry away their goods and movables, of
what quality, or value soever.

XI.
The Commander amongst his own Implements. movables and baggage, shall be
authorized to carry away one chest, one piece of caske, and one pack of
Tapistry, the proper goods of the Prince Francis, but left in the Governors
custody, dealing faithfully in leaving the remainder where these movables were
stored.

XII.
As concerning what is passed by the Law of War, either concerning
contributions or otherwise no man shall be sifted or examined of either party,
or by any person whatsoever.

XIII.
No man shall be vexed or molested for serving on either side.

XIV.
The prisoners of both sides shall be delivered, without any ransom.

XV.
The movables which the Officers, Soldiers and the Country people which came
thither for safety shall leave there, may be sold by such as will there to
that purpose without impeachment, within the term of six weeks, and the
immoveables within a year.

XVI.
The wives of the Officers, Soldiers and others, which for any occasions
cannot conveniently depart with their husbands may stay one month in the town,
and their houses, which being expired, they shall be compelled to depart, and
go seek their husbands, having a safe conduct given them to that end.

XVII.
The wounded Soldiers which are not able to depart with the Garrison, shall
have license to abide there till they be perfectly whole, and then they shall
have a pasport to go where ever they shall please.

XVIII.
For assurance of this accord, and that it shall be faithfully p^rformed of
both sides; there shall be two Copies drawn, the one to be signed by the
Marshall Chastillon, the other by the Governor Stassin.

Made at the Camp before Damvilliers, The Town yielded.
October. 25 Signed Chastillon: and countersigned, de la Hay.

This was the Capitulation, which the Garrison in the end faithfully observed,
Don Andrea Cantelmo seeks to hinder the Accord.
though it was much opposed by Cantelmo, who knowing of what consequence the
place was, though the accord was concluded betwixt the Assaylants and
defendants, endeavored all he could to break it, and Monday the 16/26, sent
Canton a Captain of Brony'es Regiment from Luxemburg, with express order to
releeve the City upon what terms or price soever. This bond of Auxiliaries
presented themselves before the City next morning by the dawning of the day;
They were seen both by the Camp and Garrison at once, but with different eyes
and aspects, the Garrison hopefully thinking that Cantelmo had followed him,
with the long expected succors, and began to retire into the town hoping of
relief, the other with distracted and divided looks betwixt anger and scorn,
angry to think themselves deluded of their covenants, and scorning the small
number of forces which appeared against them, Canton a Captain sent with a
strange comm^ssion,
and therefore encircling them put some few to the sword, and took all the rest
prisoners, to the grief of the Garrison which surrendered the place thereupon
according to the Articles. The Captain being one of the captives was searched
and a Commission was found about him, the worst clause whereof he put into
execution, Is taken prisoner.
and no other. It ran thus (as the French write)

Captain Canton of the Regiment belonging to Bronze the Camp-master is to
march this day Monday, October. 16/26, with the men already appointed for him,
and shall go toward Damvilliers, His instructions and Commission.
into which he shall conduct all his men, or so many of them as he can, and
though any of them shall think it improbable that he should perform this
design, and shall thereon resolve to return: Yet the said Canton, obeying no
person, but conforming to this present order, shall lead on toward the City,
and either carry his forces into the town, or be taken prisoner by the enemy,
or loose his life: if he fail or do otherwise, he shall be punished
irremissibly, even with his life, which he shall lose ignominiously, as being
the loss of the said Damvilliers, a place of so great importance, for the
service of his Catholic Majesty. But executing this order, he shall gain
honor and reputation for performing so excellent a piece of service, with his
said Majesty, and his Highness shall have notice of, and will reward.

Given at Virton the said ^5/^6. of October. 1637. Signed Cantelmo.

It is a certain evidence of true magnanimity, neither to complain of fate,
nor grieve for misfortune, but to comply with the first, and labor to amend
the other by endeavor. The Cardinal Infant did both, he saw the French
Lillies planted, and sprouting in those gardens of the Netherlands, which were
committed to his keeping, and though he endeavored to weed them out, but could
not, now he meant to use all his art to eradicate them. His late defeat at
Maubeuge, made him not heartlesse, The Cardinal Infant encamped at S. Iulians.
nor heedlesse: to Bolen, and Saint Iulians, he then conducted the remainder of
his dispersed forces, where he rallyed them, fortified himself, and lay
encamped, till a new supply of old soldiers was brought unto him from the
garrisons of Flanders, and the other adjoining Provinces, with which as soon
as he was re-enforced, he marched again toward the River of Schambre. The
French Armies were then again divided, the Duke of Candales forces lay about
Maubeuge, under the command of the Marquess de Turenne, and the Cardinal his
brothers at Long-Faurill, where the Duke himself was also, by reason of the
indisposition of his body, a fit of sickness, which surprised him there about
the end of September, when he went thither to advise with the Cardinal about
the joining of their two Armies. It was concluded that their forces should be
no longer divided, the Cardinal of Spain beginning to appear so strong, that
it was conjectred, neither of their forces singly could stand before him,
though they needed not to fear him, being reunited. The Infant had a
suspicion at first of what they intended, but was afterward assured thereof by
some prisoners taken in an Ambuscadoe, addressed for Gassion, who was often
employed as an internuncius betwixt the Duke and the Marquess of Turenne: to
prevent it, October. 7. new style, And re-enforced, resolves to keep the French
Armies from joining.
Piccolomini and Don John de Viveros, Lieutenant General of the Spanish horse,
were sent with 4000 horse, and as many foot, the most tried and choyeest men of
the Spanish Army, to encampe at Pont-Sur-Sambre, and Pont de Vaux, two Villages
upon the River, distant each from other almost an English mile, in the mid way
betwixt the two Er^uch Armies, purposing to famish the French ^orces at
Maubeuge, by cutting off the convoyes of victuals, which should be transported
to them from Landracy. Their coming was not unknown to the inhabitants of the
Neighbor-villages, which more affecting the Spanish, the French Cardinal
(there is no trust in new friends) though they had taken an (...) to be
faithful to the Christian King, concealed it till they were so strongly
entrenched, that it was an hard adventure to remove them, and then they sent to
Long-f^^^^^^, to inform the General thereof. The news startled the French
Cardinal, and the Duke his brother, who though scarce recovered, Sends
Piccolomini to Pont de Sambre.
betook himself to Arms, as well as the Cardinal, and that they might not
give the Spanish troops a longer time to fortify themselves, October. 8. new
style, at midnight marched from the Quarter at Long-faurill, against the enemy
at Pont-Sur-Sambre, having sent the Count de Guiche, the Field-Marshall, two
hours before, with the avantguard, consisting of 500 horse and 2000
Musketeers, to assail the Spanish Quarter, at Pont de Vaux. The next day about
4. in the evening, the combat began, which was well fought, and lasted
doubtful at Pont-Sur-Sambre, by the space of five hours, the Spaniards having
set up their rest to hinder the conjoyning of the two French Armies, and the
French being resolved to ^eleeve their associates at Maubeuge, which must needs
be famished otherwise. But at Pont de Vaux, the assaylants found most
resistance, the other combat was ended before night. The Spaniards there gave
ground, and retreated to these their confederates: the darkness only parted
this last fight, which was to be renewed the next morning, had the Spanish
Commanders stood to it, and not left their station. Both parties were weary,
but could not sleep, danger stood before them, and kept their eyes waking.
Where he is entrenched.
The Cardinal Valette had his head working the most par of the night, how to
manage the next days fight most advantageously, sent a Currier to Maubenge, to
advise the Marquess of his purpose, and to require him upon the signal given
him, by two Canons, to bring his forces into the field, and assault the Spanish
trenches on that side next him, commanded Gassion to view their works, and to
inform him where they were weakest. S. Cirque who was employed to Manbeuge,
did his office, yet the Marquess came not in, nor could he have come to fight
with the adversary, the employment of his forces in breaking down the Bridges,
Milles, and gates of the town, and the neighboring Abbey d' Aumont, hindering
him a while, and the enemy already weakened by the loss of 400 men, fearing
the fall of the ingruent storm, retreating to avoid it. The occasion was thus.

Gassion had performed his charge carefully by the break of the day, he had
surrounded the adversaries Camp, found a place where it might be fitly
assaulted, acquainted the General with it, and he to lose no time, instantly
with all his forces ranged in battalia, save only so many as he thought
sufficient to guard the places which were already gained, marched toward it:
which the Spanish Commanders observing, and fearing to be assailed both before
and behind at once, rose, And raised again by the Cardinal de Valette.
and retreated thence toward Barleimont, and Aimeries. They retreated, but not
without some blows: the Marquess of Thurenne was then upon his march, and
flanking them with his ordnance, whilst the Cardinal pursued them at the
heels, slew about 400 of them upon the place, and made others run headlong
into the River, where they were drowned, to the apparent loss (as the French
report it, of betwixt eight and nine hundred men, though the Spanish letters
from Bavay do much abate of that number) the French not scaping scot-free,
their loss amounting to more then 80 men, amongst which were some persons of
quality.

Yet this victory did neither puff up the French, and make him secure, nor
deject the Spanish Cardinal, who is yet providing (if he can) to recover
Landrecey, and has already sent much ammunition to Bavay for that purpose,
whilst the French, who have forsaken Maubeuge, (the town being casually burnt
at their departure, by a fire which happening in a Court of guard, Maubeuge
bur^ed casually.
increased by the negligence of the inhabitants, who made no baste to remove
the straw, and seyzed of the greatest part of the town) and marched the next
day with their joined Armies to Chasteau Cambrisis, are as careful to
maintain it, and what else they have gotten this summer in his territories.
The late Abbot of S. Mars, by the translation of the late Bishop there to
Meaux, was made about a month before, Bishop of Auxerre, and thus advanced,
first revictualled the Castle Cambresis, with a sufficient store of provision,
and October. 7/17. with the assistance of the Count of Quinze, sent a convoy of
180. wagons laden with corn, into Landrecey, which being added to their
former store, is deemed sufficient to maintain a longer siege, then (as the
French believe) it is like to endure. To fortify it thoroughly, his Majesty the
Christian King, drew a platform, and sent it to the Count of Quinze, with
order, Lan^recey revictualled and fortified anew.
that he should take up workmen out of his government, which by that pattern
should work before the City. As he was bringing them to their labor, there
appeared four squadrons of the enemies horse ready to surprise both him and
them, and he had no way to avoid them but by this stratagem.

He drew his Peasants into a ranged battle, The Labourors delivered from four
squadrons of Spanish horse by a stratagem.
placed them at the corner of a wood, made them stand in the posture of
Musketeers, with their shovels and spades, whilst 200. real shot, and one
company of light horse, (which he had sent for) were brought from the City,
which discharging upon the Spanish squadrons, made them fly, not daring to
adventure further for fear of an Ambuscadoe, and then employed his laborers
for the perfecting of his fortifications. The Infant encamped at Q^esnoy.


The Infanta's Army, though sensible of the late loss which was somewhat
aggravated at the general muster, by the loss of four Spanish, and two
Italian Captains, they removed presently to Quesnoy, within nine English miles
of the French camp, where they re-entrenched: and the French imagining that
they meant to give them battle, appeared often in a full battalia, in the
plain between Casteau Cambresis and Apremont: yet they stirred not from their
trenches, nor as yet was there any hostile actions commenced betwixt these two
potent enemies, equally ambitious of victory, save only, The Castle of
Crevecaeur surprised by the French.
that a French Commander, assaulted and took the Castle of Creveceur, half a
league from Cambray, the garrison left there, not being able to maintain it,
though they did the best they could, being themselves enforced to lay down
their weapons, crave quarter, and withal, the inhabitants become prisoners of
war. Some complements were passed betwixt Piccolomini and the Duke of
Candale, upon which, because hostility and courtesy are incompatible, the
people and the wiser sort descanted diversely. Presents were sent
interchangeably, the Italian Count presented the Duke with two Pistols
garnished with Ebony, and the Duke reciprocally sent him a Sword and Belt,
Interdiangeable presents betwixt Piccelomini and the Duke of Candale.
embroidered with gold, silver, and pearl, some from those mutual fatal
gifts of Hector and Ajax, prognosticating that some sad issue would attend this
palliated amity, and others divining that these exchanged tokens, were certain
and prognosticke signs, that their summers actions were already come to the
height and perfection, and prognostickes of future reconciliation.

But a most probable argument of the future tranquillity of the Provinces under
the Christian King, may be concluded from the unexpected return of the Spanish
forces, which lay fortified in Guyenne, into their own land. The last year
they invaded that Province with all their might, got into their possession
Bordegain, Ciboure, Saint John de Luz, and some other small places, fortified
them with retrenchments, horn-works, halfmoons, Cullion-heads, and other like
works of that nature; all which were manifest evidences, that they intended to
hold what they had gotten by the sword, and fortune of war; yet this year,
September 15/25, no man assaulting them, no Army appearing in field against
them, (as the French do relate) upon a bare report, that the Duke de Valette,
following the Kings direction, was coming against them with all his troops,
the Duke of Nocera their General, caused them to leave their places of
strength, and to return with him homeward. The causes of this their sudden
departure are related diversely, some ascribe it to the frequent incursions of
the Bayonnois, into Spain, and the Frontiers of Navarre, from whence they never
returned empty of pillage, horses, beefs, and such other booty, the inhabitants
there being unable to make any head against them. Others to the necessity of
the Catholic Kings Dominions, which by the rage of plague and pestilence, had
their Garrisons so abated, that the remaynder of the presidiaries therein, was
not able to mayntain them: especially in Navarre and Pampelona, which were so
depopulated by these maledies (especially by the purple) that these Conquerours
could not expect any succors thence, were they never so distressed: other to a
Panick fear, caused by a three days continued fight of two Eagles in the
Air, which being not determined without the death of one of them, made the
superstitious people entertain horrid conceits of direful and terrible
consequents. But this of all the rest is most improbable, and so far from
having any semblances with truth, that it cannot be thought a concurrent, much
less the adequate cause of the Spanish Dukes sudden departure. An heroic
heart is not affrighted with prodigies, and yet the fight of the Eagles, birds
of prey cannot be accounted such, Doves supposed by antiquity to be made up
without gall, upon the choice of a mate have done the like, and then it is not
to be wondered if these royal inhabitants of the air, shall entertain so sharp
a conflict. The most likely causes were these two, first fear of impendent
want of victuals, which though they yet felt not, leaving two houses filled
with biscuit at Ciboure, yet they had cause to imagine, must necessary soon
over take them, their friends were not able to relieve them; nor could they get
them in the King in France his Dominion, the Duke of Valette, having by order
from his Majesty raised three strong Forts upon the adventues of their inrodes,
the one at Espelette, the second at Saint Pe. and the third at Biariz upon the
Sea side betwixt them and Bayonne, which secured that Province from their
incursions. Secondly an Epidemicall disease, called by them in their own
languages Tavardillos, i. a pestilent spotted Fever, so raging amongst them,
that it had swept away already 8000 men of the Dukes Army, by both which they
were made sensible of that loss, which made them relinquish their holds in
Guienne, whereof they had four within one league, viz. and Bordegain, and la
Carriere (where they had raised a Fort-royall) Socova and Ciboure, and their
Fortifications about Orogne and Handaye, where not without great expense, they
had made a circumvallation, able to contain two thousand men: much regret and
unwillingnesse, as may be more then collected, by those three Escripts, left
(as the French say) behind them, and found after their departure.

The first was found upon the Altar at Orogne, and contained these words.

Adios Sen^ores Franceses, Dios os bendize, mil maldiciones os echamos, y nos
bolvemos en nuestra tierra. In English thus: Adieu you French Monsieurs, God
bless you, we give you 1000 curses, and are now returning into our own
Country.

The second was found in the Fort of Bordegain, in these words.

Nuestra miseria haze en Guyenna, lo que vuestro valor ha hecho en Languedora.
which is, Our misery has done in Guienne what
Your valor has done in Languedock.


The third was expressed in these terms.

Si nosotros es^^vier amos tan savios como se suena, y vosotros tan locos que
lo estuvistes, nuestros negocios serian los vuestros, y los vuestros, los
nuestros. That is, If we were as wise as the World esteems us, and you as
foolish, as you have bin at other times, our success had bin yours, and yours
had bin ours.

Indeed the business of Languedock struck deep, it was a great blow which the
Spaniards received there, and should be now related, but I must adjourne the
Reader for 14 days, till the second Part of this History, containing besides
Languedock the Actions in Italy, Piemont, Lorraine, the Dukedom of Burgundy,
the French County, Holland, the West Indies, and the Marine Occurrences, with
some passages in Turkey be published, which shall be within the prefixed time.

FINIS.

