Numb. 1.

THE PRINCIPAL PASSAGES OF GERMANY, ITALY, FRANCE, and other places for these
last six Months past, Historically reduced to time, place, and action, till
the end of the year 1636, according to the Foreign Computation.

In which short space you will find much variety of matter, and no small
alteration amongst Princes.

All faithfully taken out of good originals by an English Mercury.

LONDON. Printed for Nath. Butter, and Nicholas Bourne, February the sixth. 1636.

To the Readers.
READERS; I here present you not with News snatched from the mouths of every
prattling Athenian, but History confirmed by authentical persons of good
credit; and that too, not spunne out to a volume, but digested into a
compendious form, that it might serve as a conditure to your more serious
employments, and neither hinder them, nor cloy your attentions in the pervsing;
Scrinia de magnis me manus una capit.

I have not studied to please any particular persons, Martial. lib. ^ epig. 4.
by complying with the fancies of such, as desire to have every action of that
party which they affect best varnished over with glaring colors of
commendations; and the designs of the other, slubbered with ignominy: what
you read here are, resfactae, non fictae, and where any thing is doubtful, or
relisheth of untruth, I have not spared to note the first Inventors. The Papers
were first intended for your use, and now come to tender you their personal
service. Let me obtain for them a favorable entertainment, without any
mis-construction or malignant interpretation. (Improbe facit, qui in libro
alieno ingeniosus est.) So shall you encourage me to go on to a new discovery
of what is not yet come to your public knowledge, and that speedily. Farewell.

N. C.

The Contents.
THE principal passages of Upper Germany, Chap. 1. The passages of Italy and
Provence. Chap. 2. The passages of Picardy, and of the Card. Infanta there.
Chap. 3. The passages of Burgundy, and the French County. Chap. 4. The
passages of the Nether-lands. Chap. 5.
The Passages in upper GERMANY.
Natural reason, though it may apprehend much by way of composition and
division, yet in contingent Futures, such as are the issues of war, it can
only conclude probably, never demonstrate scientifically. The sword, a
faithful Minister to it is supreme Commander, will not return to sheath it
self (what ever man can project to hinder it) till recalled from making
slaughter by him which first gave it Commission. The Elector of Saxony having
concluded a Peace with Caesar the year last past, conceived withal, that both
his Dukedom and the whole Empire should enjoy a firm universal Peace, and be
no longer plundered by any, either intestine or foreign Broils. But this hope
was of no continuance, the Conditions of the Treaty were distasted by the
Crown of Sweden, the Lantgrave of Hessen Cassell, Duke Bernhard of Saxon
Weymer, and some other Princes of the Empire, and the Electors confederacy,
with the house of Austria was the Procreatresse of the Swedes hostility with
him.

The Marquess Elector of Brandenburg, and the Duke of Lunenburg stood a while
as Neutralls, ceasing from doing offense, either to the Imperial or Swedish
party, till by the instigation of the Duke of Saxon, they at last came in and
bore Arms against their late friends and confederates, whose powerful
alliance had preserved these three Princes especially from utter ruin by the
Caesarean Armies. Magdenburg, a City famous of late by her miseries, was the
first city of importance or note, against which the Saxons and Imperialists
marched: The city was defended valiantly by the Swedes within it, Magdenburg
surrendered by the Swedes to the Saxons.
for the space of six months siege, and then their expected succors out of
Swedland failing, being hindered by a contrary wind, after that by diverse
sallyes they had slain many of their enemies, much weakened the two puissent
armies which besieged it, fortified their Fort at Werben for their more
convenient continuance of the war in Saxony, and the march. Brandenburg, upon
the supplications of the distressed inhabitants rendered it to the Saxons July
4/14 upon good terms and advantageous conditions, and marched out with their
arms and baggage, and two pieces of great Ordnance. The Swedish garrison was
conducted to Werben, and three Saxon Regiments were immediately laid into the
city, the inhabitants utterly refusing to admit any Imperial Praesidiaries.

The loss of this city was some prejudice to the Swedish proceedings, yet
their stout Commanders, who were resolved to forge out their own fortunes, or
perish with their armies, held on play still, sometimes getting, and sometimes
loosing, till the the maine Rest at Witstock being won, again advanced their
cause more then this loss had slackned it. The Lantgrave of Hessen, who
always before suspected the Treaty of Prague, and preferred a just war before
a perilous and dishonorable Peace: at this time giving care to terms of
Peace, lost almost his whole country before he was aware of it. The Imperial
army under Goetz, Grava, Gleere, and other Chieftaines, did not do him so much
damage when he stood upon his guard, as did his own security: He had been
often persuaded by the Elector of Saxony, the Duke of Brunswicke, and the
Marquess of Dormstat, to entertain the Articles concluded at Prague, yet
could not be induced thereunto; The Bishop of Witzburg in the end sent his
Agent to the same effect, who not prevailing for the Maine, put in for the Bye,
a cessation from Arms for the space of three weeks betwixt his and the
Imperial Forces, whilst the Emperor might be wrought to condescend to such
propositions as he desired.

During the time which he appeared in the Field with his armies, he not only
preserved the Lantgrave from the fury of the Caesareans, but joining his Forces
with those Swedish troops under our brave Countreyman, the Field-Marshall
Lesle (whose merit and memory, for that, and other his valiant atchieuements,
will live to after ages, though the circumstances of that particular come not
within the verge of this concise History) sheltered also his friends and
confederates from the storm which threatened them.

Hanaw, a city in the Weterawe and nursery of the Evangelicall Religion, Hanaw
relieved by the Lantgraue and the Field-Marshall Lesle and the siege raised.
was straightly beleaguerd by four several Imperial armies, and he, by the
military skill of Ramsey the Governor, (a man of whom we may glory, in that
his actions there spoke him a true Brittane, and no stranger to our English
Orb) defended from the insulting Enemy which breathed out threatenings against
it, and had promised himself a glorious victory, till the contagion within had
deprived him of the one half and more of his fellow defendants, and the
Imperial armies without, supplied daily with fresh men, made him not despair
of relief, but expect it from abroad.

In the height of this necessity, the Lantgrave having joined his forces, with
the Field-Marshal Lesle put in to succor him; and by the prowess of the
Commander within, and their happy success without, performed their intent so
wishfully, that the Imperial armies, without expectation of gaining the city
rose from the siege, and dispersing themselves sundry ways, left it more free
then they found it. The Governor, an expert soldier, made use of his liberty,
complied immediately with the neighboring city Frankford, and so prevailed
there, by tendering it all observant respects of Vitinage, that he made it, if
not a friend, no enemy, though formerly they had stood at terms of hostility:
But thriving men seek as much to enlarge their estates, by a new addition, as
to enjoy their old ones. To stand in a fair correspondence with that Imperial
city, and to do no more, Ramsey brings the neighbor countries to contribution.
Ramsey thought it not sufficient; want of victuals during the siege, made him
know how necessary they were, and having engaged the Frankforders, not to
oppose him in his course, he then by Arms brought the bordering villages to be
his Contributaries.

The Marquess of Crana and the Lord Lamboy, which had formerly besieged the
city, were countermanded by Caesar to attend the Imperial General Gallas,;
the Country near him was not pestered with hostile Arms, and the Governor
apprehending quickly how a fortune was cast upon him, if he would follow it,
invaded the Archbishopric of Mentz, the Bishopric of Wertzburg, and the
Territories of the Lantgrave of Dormstat, extorting from them (what they would
not have given him willingly) victuals and money. His procedings with the
boores were complained to the Count of Donaw, who thereupon sent his Secretary
to Hanaw, to desire a cessation of Arms, with those near States, for the
space of three months, who offered that if he might obtain his conditions,
that the Garrison in Steinheim, belonging to the Archbishop of Mintz, and that
in Fridberg also should be cashiered; some few only reserved for the
maintenance of Tillage, the fruit whereof should be lawful prize to the
Masters of the Field, whether Swedes or Caesareans, on the Northside of the
Maine, yet this proposition was not only refused, the Governor perceiving the
hostility brought in more profit than quiet, but he proceeded further, took
the Imperialls prisoners wheresoever he found them, dismissed them not without
Ransom, and about the midst of July, And intereeps a Convoy going f o^
Brusfield to Lamboy.
some of his Soldiers meeting with the Governor of the Fort at Brunsfield
(taken the year past from the Imperialists, by the Count Nassaw Dillingberg,
and restored them again, when he accepted the Saxons peace) carrying eleven
Ensigns made for the General Lamboy, with this Motto: Tandem bona causa
triumphat.

They set upon the Conduct, slew some of the soldiers that guarded them, and
carried away the Colors, saying, That of right they belonged to them in
respect of their inscription.

If that Maxim of the School be true, that the first cause is the cause of
all the Products in the same kind: the Lantgrave must share in the Governors
honor, his then victorious Arms, giving Ramsey the opportunity thus to
compass his desires: Nothing does man more disparagement, than ungrounded
confidence. The Prince in the end, overcome with the Rhetoric of the Bishops
agent, The Lantg: loses most part of his Country.
a Cineas that did more with his words, than the Imperial forces had done with
their swords, that he might not appear the singular man, which did oppose the
peace, laid by his Arms, and marched into the Bishopric of Paderborne,
expecting that this small time of truce, might secure his country for the
present, and establish his tranquillity afterward. His absence from home was
quickly reported to the Field-Marshall Goetz, wose Army being in a manner
dis-banded, at the raising of the siege of Hanaw, and himself gone into
Westphalia, was rallyed suddenly upon the report, and appointed for the spoil
of Hassia. The Poles which came down the former year under the Prince
Cassimire, had accepted service under him, and were the chief strength of his
Army. These men, of which there were 44. Cornets, when Hanaw was relieved,
mutined upon the rising of the Imperial Army, and one part taking the way of
Binghen, the other of Oppenheim to pass over the Rhyne, plundered both their
friends and foes, without respect of any thing but Pillage. Their journey home
again was long, and oft-times they got nothing by their outrages but knocks:
With these desperate reysters, the Imperial Commander (seeing the Lantgraves
confidence) complied suddenly, promised a months pays which they accepting,
returned again to their colors, and joined with him in the invasion of
Hessen-land, which, no Army appearing to resist them; they were soon Lords of
Cassell, Zigenheim and Humburg only accepted.

A Tempest tries the Pilot, and apparent danger proves the metal of a
Soldier. The Prince informed of his loss, despaired not, but first resolved,
with the few forces he had, to give them battle, and put his fortunes to a
day; yet better advising with himself, in the end, concluded to go in person
to the united States of the Netherlands, and desire their assistance, And goes
to the States for auxiliary Forces.
for Auxiliaries, and till his return, to commit the care of his Country to
his trusty servant, the Lieutenant General Melander, and he, though his men
were far unequal in number to the enemies, and could not therefore deal
with them in open field, yet casting about to surprise them at advantages, made
head against them, kept them at a stand, and about the midst of August, having
drawn out the Garrison of Cassell, and mustered up some of the Boores,
surprised and defeated four thousand of the Field-Marshall Goetz his horse at
Hirshfield, slew above one thousand upon the place, got sixeteene Standards,
and brought in diverse prisoners into Cassel.

Est aliquid prodice tenus -- It could not be expected that he should recover
what was lost, it was glory enough for him to preserve the remainer. Goetz with
his maine Army was yet in that Country where he beleagured the Fort of
Homburg, Goetz marches toward Paderborne.
a strong place, by the situation upon the top of a mountain, before which
having lost the Lieutenant Major his brother, the Colonel Stemaker, and many
of his Soldiers, to the number of six hundred, he raised his siege, marched
toward Freslar, near Cassel, where leaving three thousand men to make good his
conquest himself, with the rest of the Army marched into the Bishopric of
Paderborne, Septem. 2. old style.

The Swedes were not ignorant of the calamities which had befalne the
Lantgrave, their confederate, so, unexpectedly, and sympathizing with him for
his sufferings, would have come in willingly to succor him, but that a storm
threatened them at the same time, and forced them to call home the
Field-Marshall Lesle toward the Elve to re-enforce themselves against the
approaching enemies. The Treaty at Lubeck comes to no effect.
The gesture of the Caesareans confirmed it self to the season of the weather.
The beginning of this Summer was attended with a clear sky, and no clouds
appeared to promise an after rain, yet suddenly the surface of the Aerie
element was changed, and water distilled more plentifully from above than was
expected, and sometimes so impetuously, that the people made it a question,
whether was more prejudicial to the fruits of the earth, the late long
drought, or those violent currents of water which fell from above. His Majesty
of Denmark had labored much to establish a peace in the Empire, and no enemy
appearing so openly against the Imperial party, as the Crown of Sweden, by
consent of Caesar; a supposed Commission was delivered to the Elector of
Saxony, to treat with that Nation at Lubeck in the particular: The opening of
the sealed Escript discovered, what the Swedes had before conjectured: July
5/15. The agents for both parties met, and the Letters then broken up,
restrained the Electour from attempting any thing which might prejudice the
Empire, or the Imperial dignity, but to search out all ways and means, how
by force, the Swedes might be compelled to depart from Germany.

Oxenstierne, the Grand Chancellor of Sweden stood awhile aghast at this
unlooked for amazement, Oxensterne embarkes for Sweden.
and first complaining to his Majesty of Denmark, of the affront offered to
the Queen his Lady their Sovereign, resolved in the end, to post homeward,
that he might advise with the Diet then assembled at Stockholme, for a farther
course of pursuing, or ceasing from the war, leaving order in the interim,
with the General Banniere, to maintain the glory of the Swedish Nation, and
to stand in defierce of Caesar and his adherents, It is no small advantage to be
aforehand, the gaining of a place of importance, from a professed foe, may
stumble him in the way, though not divert him from his dissigne. Vltzen, a City
of no great compass, Vltzen taken by the General Banniere,
but of some consequence, did first present it self to his fancy: the
Imperial Allies held it, and the Swedes intending to take it in the beginning
of August, sat down before it, and upon the 9/10 of the same month, brought
it to yield upon composition. Thence he marched to Lumenburg, accompanied and
re-enforced by the Field-Marshall Lesle, summoned it, and his conditions being
rejected by the Senate, and the same night made his aproaches to the very Moate
of the city, though with some loss of his officers and soldiers, and
constrained it to an unwelcome Composition; the terms were these: That the
Gattenberg should be delivered to the Swedes, and that the City should receive
a garrison and Commander.

Both which particulars were obtained, and the Swedish Goetz was accepted the
next day after for their Governor. Thence the General Banniere conducted his
Armies to the Fort of Winsen seated upon the Elve, and took it the next day by
a stratagem, And the Fort at Winsen.
intending first to clear the river, as being more convenient for his de
signs then the firm land (this Relation is written from Lunenberg, the Scene
of this design, and the particulars expressed so precisely, make the story
credible) and this Fort he being master of immediately, rather by policy then
power, marched thence toward Havelberg and Werben, to prevent the Saxon and
Imperial Armies which were then laying of Bridges over the Elve, intending to
make an invasion into the Dukedom of Meckleburg.

The time to decide the controversy betwixt them with the sword was not yet
come. Near Werben the Swedish Army was encamped, where not expecting an Enemy
so suddenly, the Swedes. kept not the strict watch they used to do, the
General himself taking his recreation, and his absence, though not
authorizing the Officers to leave their places of charge, yet ministering
occasion of a perfunctory care, was near to have brought the Swedes to
confusion. The Duke of Saxony having received a Commission from the Emperor,
though limited was many Conditions; the 13. 23. of the same month was at
Magdenburg in person, taking an oath of allegiance from the Magistrate there to
himself, as to the Generalissimo, at which time being certified by his spies,
of the Swedes posture, he immediately sent the Colonel Vnger against them with
two Regiments, One of the Swedes quarters raised at Werben by the Col. Vngar
and Banniere like to have been surprised.
who arriving at the Camp before the Swedes could well Arm, raised one of the
quarters, slew some few of the Soldiers, and had near surprised Banniere
himself, who was abroad at hunting with his late married wife: But the Swedes
were soon armed, and in the end chased away the Saxon Commander, and the same
day encountried with a company of Imperial Bragoones, whom they took
prisoners, and convayed them to Brandenburg.

Goetz, the Caesarean Field-Marshall, in the time of this preparation, had
leisure to pursue his Conquests in Hessen-land, and marched thence into
Westphalia, where Paderborn, a City yerst in the Imperial, now in the Hasseans
hands, presented it self as an object, either of his Conquest or disgrace, if
he took it not in. It was a Bishops See, and a good one too; the King of
Sweden gloried, that he had brought it under his government, and the Imperial
Commander in fine, esteemed it as a piece worthy of a siege. He summoned it,
and the Hassean Garrison, fifteen companies strong, returned shot for words,
to the great vexation of the Field-Marshall, who instantly rounded it with his
Army, and after nine hundred Canons shot, and four assaults, compelled the
Garrison to yield upon his mercy: Paderborne surrendered to Goetz.
And the Garrison consisted of eight hundred men, under the command of the
Colonel Girse, Colonel of the white Regiment, who was detained Prisoner, the
Captains set at liberty, and the inferior Officers and Soldiers compelled to
attend the victorious Field-Marshals colors. Melander, and General major
Beckerman were then at Hamme, with eight hundred Horse, but unable to relieve
their confederates, stood rather as spectators and attendants upon the issue,
than forward assistants to relieve them; and hearing of the fate of the City,
dismarched thence to Dorstmund, in Westphalia, giving way to their enemies to
march on toward Osnabrug, where they expected, but found not the like success.

Osnabrug was both well manned and fortified, and Goetz fearing, that if he
should besiege it, Goetz only appearing before Osnabrugge and dis-marcheth
presently to Zoest. which is fired and surrendered.
he should lose time and waste his Army, only looked upon it, and returned
toward Hessen-land, and in the beginning of September, summoned Zoest, a small
City upon the River Lip, which refusing to yield to his words, the eighth of
the same month, by his Army, was besieged, and the 9.19. almost hurnt to the
ground by the Grenades cast out of the Camp, the Wild fire taking hold of
some thatched houses, whereof there were many in the town, and their
contiguity to the others, dispersing the devouring flame, to the terror and
astonishment of the Garrison and inhabitants, who in this confusion knew no
other way to preserve their own lives, and some small remnant of their goods,
than by exposing their estates and persons to the mercy of the Conqueror, who
received the Garrison with condition to serve under him, and caused his
soldiers to assist the Citizens in the extinguishment of the consuming fire.

The Garrison of Osnabrugge after the departure of this Field-Marshall, and
assurance that he was passed the Weser sent to Minden, advises of a design
they had conceived against Lemgaw, a City kept by four companies of Imperial
horse, and 300 foot, under the General Major Sperrheuter, The Garrisons of
Osnabrug and Minden take Lemgaw by Onslat
and desired their assistance for the prosecution of it. Help was sent them,
and about the midst of Septem. they surprised the City, put the most part of
the Cavallary and Infantry to the sword, apprehended Sperrheuter (who had hid
himself in a dry Fat, but was found out by diligent search) not as a Prisoner
of War, but as a traitor to the Crown of Sweden, a fugative from his
natural Prince, and complotter and public practizer with the professed
enemies of his Sovereign, And apprehend the fugitive Sperrheuter.
and sent him with a Guard, first to Minden, then to Nyenberg, where this
degenerous spirit, dyed of a sullen grief, fore-casting the just punishment,
which might be inflicted upon him by the Swedish General for his treason, and
the taunts of the ordinary Soldiers, who detesting his persideousnesse, ceased
not to reproach him with the memory of his unjust dealing, and unthankfulness
toward the deceased King, who had raised him from a common man to bear an
Office of eminence in his Army: For the King during the time of his war in
Poland, meeting him, as he came from fight, and seeing his body struck through
with a Spear, or Partizan, gave him the name of Sperrheuter, and afterward so
favored him, that he raised him to be a General. No Obligation can be a
sufficient tie to a Canckred-corrupt rotten-hearted man: An Achitophel will
prove false to his Master, though he becrowned each day with new favors, yet
in the end the Divine Justice will overreach him, the terrors of a guilty
conscience will afright, and bring him to a desperate end.

Goetz, after the prize of Zoest undertook new expeditions against Lunen and
Dortmund, which he easily became Master of, the Hassian forces under Melander
and Eppen, being unable to withstand him. Dortmund was better manned than the
other, Dortmund taken by Goetz.
and held out the better. There lay one thousand Hassen foot, and two
companyes of horse, which behaved themselves so stoutly, that they hindered the
Imperial Field-marshall two whole days from raising a Battery: The night
only favored his proceedings, and the darkness concealing his movements from
the Garrison, by the benefit thereof, whilst he deluded the besieged with false
fires on the oneside of the City, he raised a mount on the other side, whence
he played the next day with his Canon upon the Town, and by the succor of
them made his approaches to the Moate about the walls, where, omitting no time,
he cast his fire-workes into the City, which took effect, set the houses on
fire, affrighted the Women and Children, whose outcryes wrought so upon the
hearts of the Soldiers, that they surrendered the place to the Besieger, and
submitted to his descretion. Thence he drew his Army toward Hamme, Lipstat,
and Coesfield, not yetresolved where to pitch first, all these places being
well guarded, yet before one of these he resolved to set down, and Hamme in
the end was concluded to be the next object of his Arms: This City in the time
of the last siege being made a prison for two great Lords of Munster, and the
Rit-master Danekel, which September 12.22. were encountered by some of Epens
soldiers, which flew their Convoy with the sword, and sent these persons
prisoners thither. Hamme put the period to his conquests there, though it
suffered the common fate of the neighbor towns, and was compelled in sine to
yield to the Conqueror; for the Lantgrave by the end of that siege was
returned from the Neatherlands, and rallying up his own Forces, strengthened
with 4000. Auxiliaries, made head against him: and a cloud was risen in the
North part of Germany, attended with thunder and lightning, threatened a feil
upon the Saxon and Imperial Armies, who called to him for succor, and by an
especial mandate from Caesar, commanded him toward the Lower Saxony, to stop
the victorious progress of the Swedes.

It was a general time of horror and tumultuary confusion in Almaine, where
ever the Scene of War lay, each party preferring their own private ends
before the public good, deprived the general state of the ordinary blessings
from heaven: The French Garrison at Coblentz denied leave to all Traffiquers to
carry Wine down the Rhyne. The miseries about Franckford, etc.
The Imperial at Andernach permitted no Corn to be brought up the river,
though their friends in Germany wanted more that necessary provision for their
lively hood as being the staff of life, then the strangers abroad did the
fruit of the grape, more esteemed perhaps, A lamentable story.
but not so needful. The Divine providence had forbidden the earth there to
give her increase to the Natives (for the Franckforders write it with tears,
and every word of the Letter is noted with an accent of sorrow (that their
Corne-fields were fair to the eye, in the beginning of the spring, yet when it
was bladed, as if a Curse had been laid upon the ground, an uncouth generation
of Vermin, Mice of strange forms, dimensions and colors, appeared and
devovred it before it was fit for the Sickle) yet the Governor at Andernach
hindered the Merchants from importation of any. In Westphalia and about the
Weser, and Hessen-land, the Drums sounded nothing but blood and slaughter,
the Boores and Citizens made a prey to all soldiers, not able to distinguish
friends from enemies, nor knowing to whom they should adhere, the Evangelicall
or Imperial Party. There, and in the Dukedomes of Brunswick, Lunenburg and
Mecklenburg, the Marquisate of Brandenburg, and generally the whole Lower
Saxony, the swarms of military men covered the earth; nothing was seen, but
taking and retaking of Towns, Forts and Cities, and that without hope of a
speedy cessation, Famine and the Pest not being enough to curb their madness,
which daily raised war, and noy sed rumors of future wars.

In the midst of this confusion, An Electorall Diet called at Regerspurg.
the Emperor called an Electorall Diet at Ratisbone, which was long before it
began, the Electors delaying their coming thither beyond the appointed time,
pretending several excuses upon their sundry engagements. The Emperor
himself was the first that appeared at the place of meeting August 7. new
style, about 7. in the evening he arrived at Regenspurg and was received at the
gate of the city by the Magistrate, under a Canopy, the people present falling
upon their knees, where he was entertained with an Oration made by the Syndicke
of the city, and then rode away in his Coach to the Cathedral, at the entry
whereof the Bishop met him, did him the like obeisance which the people had
done at the gate, presented him with his Crosier, which he kissed; conducting
him first into the Church singing Saint Ambrose his Hymn, and afterward to
the Episcopal Palace the place where his Majesty intended to reside during the
first Sessions of the Diet, finding his spirits decayed and his strength of
body to be abated, though no evident cause of his weakness could be assigned.
Two days after, the Duke of Bavaeria, pretended the Title of Elector by
donation from the Emperor and right of succession, The meeting of the Princes
came thither also accompanted with his Duchess, and attended with 500.
horse, to give his Vote in the Electorall affembly; and was lodged as near the
Emperor as might be. The Elector of Mentz appeared in person the day
following; and the Elector of Colen by his deputies the Counts of Meternick and
Romseck: The Elector of Mentz took up his lodging in an house appointed for
the Archbishop Elector of Triers, who being under guard at Namur, was conducted
like a prisoner, not a free Prince, toward Regenspurg about one month
afterward, by a Convoy of some hundred horse, commanded by an Imperial
Colonel called Gonzaga; And being arrived at Donawerth, as he was upon his
journey, he there fled into a Cloister called Saint Cross, otherwise Saint
John's Hill, in hope in that place, of particular privileges to remain free as
in a Sanctuary; Upon Letters received from the Emperor (to whom Colonel
Gonzago had sent word thereof) the said Commander did attempt to neglect those
privileges, and would have drawn the Elector out by force: But upon better
thoughts and counsel, the Popes Nuncio was employed unto him, who with fair
words and promises persuaded him to come out voluntarily, and so he was again
taken and carried on his journey to Passaw: Passing near Ratisbone, or
Regenspurg, he desired much to be suffered to come in, and to be admitted into
the presence of the Electors and the Electorall College, but all in vain.
From Passau he has bin carried further to Lintz, where he yet remains; His
cause having lately bin discussed, and himself condemned to be diskeyed from
his Electorall dignity and Bishopric, and to be kept betwixt 4 walls in prison
all the rest of his life. What from diverse places was written concerning this
Prince, and particularly that he had sent his Vote in writing to the College,
is all a fiction: For knowing that all his Papers and Letters, with his
Chancery, were in his enemies hands; whereby did sufficiently appear, what he
had treated with foreign Princes in prejudice of the Empire, and specially of
the house of Austria: He did not stand upon high terms of his justification,
but rather in all humility offer and promise his Vote and himself to the
Emperors command and pleasure.

The Marquess of Brandenburgh appeared by the Count of Swartzenburgh his
assign, and the Duke of Saxony his by Frederick Lebselder, his Chamberlain
both by Agents, but not authorized by any commission, as his Deputy in the
Electorall negotiation. The absence of the Saxon somewhat displeased the
Emperor, who sent Duke Henry Julius of Saxon Lawenberg to the Elector, to
require his personal appearance, and that speedily, but was returned by the
Elector, with an excuse for himself, and a commission to his Agents, to give
his vote in that Parliament: The King of Bohemia was only wanting, he had
been visiting the Army under Gallas, upon its march to ward Burgundy, and
after his labor reposed himself somefew days in Brissach, and thither a
Currier was dispatched, August 13.23. with letters, requiring his speedy, and
personal presence, which he received, and posted thence to Ratisbone.

Some prodigies, as it is related from Ratisbone, happening in sundry places of
the Empire, before the meeting of the Princes, had dis-heartned the common
people, and made them despair of any good issue by that treaty: One was at
Wels, the sudden uncovering of the Emperors house of pleasure, there where
he was lodged, (it being seated in the midst of a Moorasse) by a violent
tempest, and this was accompanied with two others at Lintz, the first whereof,
was the sudden fall of an Arch of the Bridge made over the Danuby, Some
fearful accidents before the Diet, esteemed prodigious.
which his Imperial Majesty had no sooner passed over, but it tumbled into
the River; The other this; Three carved Eagles, placed upon the house of a
Burgess of Lintz, being broken down by the fury of the Tempest; were mounted
by the same violent blast into the Air, scattered three sundry ways, and the
one in the end fell upon the house appointed for the assembly of the Province,
the other upon the State-house, and the third upon a Public Aquae-duct.

Distracted wits, upon every light occasion, project terrible things. These
conceits were fond, and Superstitious, not rational and sound. The harsh
beginning of the first Session, was more to be feared as a fatal Prognosticke
of no happy conelusion, then those antecedent accidents. Some days were spent
in private visites, Complements and conferences, each of the Princes fathoming
the others breasts in their retiring Chambers, before they met at the public
place.

September the 15.5. The first Sessions of the Diet began, though somewhat
inauspiciously, A difference falling out between the Saxon Deputies, and the
Elecctor of Mentz.
the Saxon Deputies being much discontented with the Elector of Mentz, who had
summoned the Princes to meet, pretending that Office to belong to the Duke of
Saxony, and his Deputies, in the absence of the Marshall of the Empire. The
Controversy, like all others in point of honor, was not so soon appeased, as
raised. The Emperout to quiet them, Is composed by Caesar.
in Person heard their differences in his Privy Chamber, and in a short
Oration, declaring that the intent of that mecting was for the public good of
the Empire which might suffer more by such civil dissensions, then foreign
Enemies, desired the Saxons to complie with the Times, and gave his notes
openly to the Archbishop of Mentz. containing the Propositions Considerable in
that Parliament; His Majesty's authority siding with the Archbishop, did not
extinguish the flame at the first, but make it break out more fiercely; the
Archbishop followed Caesar's directions, and began to propound his desires; The
Saxons for the time broke off his discourse, and as jealous that they were not
equally interessed with him in the Imperial Grace, The Archbishop of Mentz
makes the propositions in the Diet.
protested against him, that he incroached upon the Electorall privileges,
and engrossed the grace of the Diet to himself; Yet afterward somewhat cooled
by his Oratory, and a president in the last Diet at Mulhausen, wherein, as
Chancell or of the Empire, he was the speaker to the Electorall assembly, they
heard him, and he spoke to this purport.

His Speech.
MAY our meeting tend and end, to, and in a blessing to the Church, and the
Empire, whereof we are Guardians, and Feo sees, entrusted for its
preservation. I must acknowledge my self much honored by Caesar, in apointing
me to be the Prolocutor in this Senate of Princes, and yet could have wished
to have lost this honor, that I might have been delivered of the burdon. The
charge is heavy to me to deliver, and may be tedious to your cares to hear it,
so many Propositions as could be well couched in 9. Folioes of paper,
containing the heads only of what I should deliver, and we jointly advise of:
But his Majesty unwilling to tire or me in speaking, or you in hearing, and
concluding, desires only for the present, your resolutions and determinations,
first upon your votes for the Election and nomination of a King of the Romans:
Secondly, your counsels in his proceedings with the Elector of Tryers; Thirdly
your sage judgments for the restablishing of the Empire, and restoring it to
its ancient splendour, and peaceable estate, or how to arm against foreign
enemies, reserring the rest to a Diet the next year, to be held at Norimberg
or Collen; of all which I shall for my own particular, give mine opinion,
desiring your Highnesses to hear me patiently, and then to speak unpartially.

How happily the Government of the Sacred Roman Empire has been administered
by his Majesty that now reigns, I need not show you, who have been
witnesses of his justice and policy, which though my self, or you should
seem to forget, this our happy meeting would testify, and remonstrate unto
us. Other Princes have been blessed in peace; this present, glorious in the
Trophies of War? War not unjustly grounded, to the vexation of foreign
Princes, but necessarily undertaken for the safety of the states under his
protection. The Goths and Vandalis under Alarick their King, were not so
formidable to Italy, in the reigns of Arcadius and Honorius, or under Totiles
afterward, as they have been under the King of Sweden lately, to the Prinoes
of Germany to oppose them, Caesar neither spared his purse, nor forces, and in
the end, when I my self was forced to forsake my Metropolitan City of Mentz,
and to give way to the Invaders, when the Elector of Cologne was scarce safe in
his own Palace, the Bishop of this See made their Prisoner; the Bishop of
Wirtzburge deptived of his dignity by their Conquests, and the better half of
Germary, either by force was constrained, or willingly yielded them obedience.
His Imperial Majesty raised a puissant Army to resist them, sending out his
own Son, the King of Hungary as his General, who begun auspiciously at this
City in which we are now met peaceably, and within three months after, so
scattered their Army, by a glorious victory near Nordlinguen, that he
delivered us from fear of their arming afterward. Non ignota loquor --. But
the Olive which upon our election, vouchsafed to become the Prince of the
Forest, and communicate his fatness to us, begins now to wither the days
of this Pater-patniae are now declining, and yer though the weakness, which
is the attendant of old age, has made him less active in body, his Wisdom
and Piety appear in him Illustrious through the wrinkles of his body; and now,
that this Sacred Empire, may not like a fatherless Orphan, want a Governor,
if his Sun should set unexpectedly, he has summoned this assembly, for the
Election, and nomination of a King of Romans, who lawfully ordained, and
called thereunto according to the Municipall Laws, and constitutions of the
Empire, and the priviled ges of the Electors ordained by Gregory, the great
Bishop, the fifth of that name, (though Caesar himself intends to hold the
dignity during his life) may succeed him immediately in going in and out before
this great people, and there may be no vacancy in the Empire.

The proposition cannot be but plausible, tending to the peace of the state, if
there arise no Controversy about the person to be elected to this Office, of
highest honor, and trust. I will not presume to counsel you, nor is it in the
power of man to prescribe you, where your votes shall fall. Only me thinks it
would relish of unthankfulness, if not injustice if we should pitch upon any
other then the King of Hungary, the Austrian Family, by a long continued
succession, by the space of 198 years, ever since Albert the Fifth, having
discharged this high Office, so graciously, and gloriously, and his Majesty
himself, as the Liberator patriae, having power, if not to challenge it, yet
to expect it deservedly. To him I freely give my Vote, and will not open the
other propositions, till I have received your determinate answer in this
particular.

The Deputies of the Elector of Collen were silent, and neither assented, nor
opposed the proposition, the Archbishop himself being then in person upon his
way toward Regenspurgh, and having commanded his assigned Committees, to
prepare the business only against his coming, The votes of the Electors for
nomination of a King of Romans.
and not to meddle further. The Committees for the Elector of Saxony and
Brandenburg, and the Duke of Bavaria, showed a willingness to condescend to
the Motion, but demurred upon it for a time, the Ambassadors in the behalf of
the Electorss desiring, that first the Lutheran Religion might have a free
passage without opposition, as it had done formerly in the Empire, and that an
Act may be drawn up, and made to confirm the liberty thereof: and the Duke of
Bavaria propounding for himself, first a confirmation of the Electorall
dignity, by the whole Electorall College, as also desiring, that the Country
of the upper Ems should first, as it was promised, be surrendered to him by
Caesar, and then these three Electors would be ready to give their voices for
Ferdinand King of Hungary.

Triers was still absent, and it was questioned, whether he should appear in
that assembly, as a free Prince to give his vote, or as a Prisoner at the
Bar, (for the Emperor had commanded to force him from Donawerth, and to
bring him prisoner to Steir, a village near Regenspurgh, and it had been
done, if the Electorall College, and the Popes Nuntius, had not strongly
opposed it) yet not dejected with his present state, nor fearing what might
follow, Tryers gives his voice to the King of France.
he sent his vote in writing to Regenspurgh, which was read in the open
Session, and was for Jews, the most Christian King, not for any private
respect to his person, but the public good of the Empire, which he said,
having been swayed so long by the Austrians, whose polity in their life, was
to make the Rex Romanorum of one of the same family, was like to suffer by this
continuated succession, and in time might be claymed by succession and
inheritance, not election: the Princes at this day being rather called for
form, than otherwise, and preseribed to whom they should suffragate before
they appear in Parliament. He omitted not to set forth the power of the
Christian King, which being united to the strength of the Empire, need fear
no foreign invaders, nor did he slightly pass over the happy condition of
the State under Charelemaigne, Jews the Debonaire his son, Lotharius, Jews
the second, Charles le chance, Jews le begne, Charles le gross, the French
Kings suecessively, whom, he said, it was no doubt, but that this present King
would imitate in the administration of the Empire, not refusing the counsels of
the Princes, and not compel them in the end to put the scepter into the hands
of any of his friends or favorites, but leave it to their free arbitration,
according to their wisdom. Though this had been a true relation, these
remonstrances were of no effect, the Diet being inclined to the King of
Hungary, though they deferred the day of his nomination till November the
fourth, new style.

The Duke of Bavaria could not attend the Diet longer than the beginning of
October, the Duchess big with child, being to depart to Munchen to be
dis-burthened of her carriage, and his desire to see the issue of his body,
drawing him to accompany her, made him get license to absent himself for two
months, A young son borne to the Duke of Bavaria.
in which space, a son, and apparent to the Dukedom, was borne at Munchen,
and christened October 22. old style, by the name of Firdinandus, Maria,
Franciscus, Ignatius, Wolfgangus, by the Bishop of Frysing, to the great joy of
the Court and City, expressed by the ringing of Bells from five in the morning
till night, and the bonefires blazing before every private door.

Whilst the Princes of the Empire were thus busied in counsel about the
Danuby, the Elver and adjacent Territories, were filled with the sound of
Drums and Trumpets, speaking not peace but hostility. Bauditz, Bauditz gives
over his Generalate.
the late famous General; had resigned his office, pretending his wounds
received at the siege of Magdenburgh, had dis-abled him for future service, and
many other prime Officers following his example, did the like, which moved the
Elector of Saxony, whose late confederacy with the Swedes was changed to open
enmity, to go himself in person, as Generalissimo of his army, Marazini the
smperiall General in Pomerania united his army to the Saxons, and with the
Imperial army, commanded by the Field-Marshall Hatzfield, and Bannier the
Swede. wasre-enforced with the powers of the Field-Marshall Leslec, and the
General Major Stalhaus. Bannier prepares to give the Saxons battle.
These puissant armies thus prepared for Battle, each sought their advantages,
and yet neither started far from the other, both parties intending to put
their fortunes to a day of trial. Bannier was instructed by letters from
Stockholme, and directed by order from the Crown of Sweden, to force the
Saxons to a fight, the issue whereof, might either be an encouragement to the
Swedes, for their further proceedings in War, if it proved fortunate, or the
withdrawing of their Armies, if otherwise, yet this avisoe was added withal,
that he should make good Stralzund fora place of retreat, if the day did not
fall out favorably, He followed the direction, and causing his Soldiers first
to store up the best part of their baggage in fortified places, marched against
the united armies under Elector Hatzfield, and Marazini, only with such
utensells as were absolutely necessary: The Elector presuming of a victory went
to the Camp, furnished as for a progress, his plate, bedding, and other
things, as if he had been still at Dresden, cumbring many Wagons with his
carriage: Et inter turpe signa militaria sol aspicit coropeum. So confident was
he in defeating his enemy.

The game was played cunningly on both sides: the Saxon Colonel Klitzing, was
sent abroad with a flying army, and he, September 4.14. first took in Ratenaw
by assault, putting one hundred Finlanders, which were garrisoned therein to the
sword, Ratenaw and Banderburg taken by Klitzing.
and afterward marched against Brandenbergh, wherein lay eight hundred Swedish
Dragoones, whom he forced to surrender upon composition of departing with their
high and low weapons. The Field-Marshall Wrangell was dispatched abroad with
another flying army on the Swedish side, and he, first securing the Oder, and
breaking down the bridges which the Saxons had laid over it for their more
convenient passages upon all occasions, marched thence, first against
Pritzwald, which he plundered, then against the little City of Swedt, which he
found abandoned by the Imperialists, before his coming, and afterward
directly against Gertz, a City in Pomerania, the Imperial Soldiers whereof
did much spoil upon the bordering places, under the Swedes protection,
straggling oft-times to the very gates of Stetin, and returning laden with
booty. To deliver the Country from these Boote-halers, September 24. old, he
brought his army before it, Swedt and Gertz surrendered by Wrangel.
raised up three Batteries against it, and played upon it the two next days so
furiously, that the Imperial Commander within it, Don Foelix or Philips, (the
French call him by the first name, the Germans by the second) sent out a
Trumpet about nine at night, with covenants of surrendering, which, as being too
advantageous for the Garrison, were rejected by the Field-Marshall, who renewed
his battery, played incessantly upon the City with his Canon till the next
morning, and then having made his approaches to the very Walls, and ready to
give an assault, the Flagge of Parley was hung out, and the Garrison consisting
at that hour, of above twelve thousand able men, was dismissed peaceably upon
these conditions.

1. THat the City, with all the Canons, Ammunition, victuals, and fugitives,
should that present afternoon by four of the Clock, be dellvered up to the
Swedish General Bannier. 2. That the Prisoners on both sides should be set at
liberty, and the impotent Soldiers of the Garrison should be furnished with
Wagons for their transportation. 3. That as many as were willing to serve under
the Swedes, should not as much as be dissuaded from it by the Imperial
Commanders, and that the inhabitants should not be molested by the Victorious
Swedes. 4. Lastly, That the Imperial Garrison should march out with flying
Colors, Drums beating, Bullers in mouth, all their Baggage, two pieces of
Canon which they brought thither, and have a Convoy to Custrin or Landsbergen.
All which was prescribed at the Camp by the Impersall Commanders, and
observed by the Field-Marshall Wrangell faithfully. And yet the Swedes
remembering the proceeding of the Imperialists at Franckford, the year last
passed, and mentioned in that History, played trick for trick with them,
spared the Persons and estates of the Citizens but demolished the Walls which
rounded the City, and slighted their fortifications, that it might no longer be
a shelter to the Imperial spoiling bands.

-- Sic Ars deluditur art. This purchase was but the attendant to Banniers
glorious victory; if the beginning of the day of battle, and the defeat of
the Saxons armies might terminate his Conquest but a concomitant, and of no
younger birth, if we take the Swedish Generals glory not in the blossom, but
full perfection. The Field-Marshall ended his design upon Gertz, Preperations
for a battle.
September 30. October 10. upon which day the General Major Stalhause returned
to the Swedish camp at Witstocke, if not overburthened, yet laden with the
spoils of the flying enemy. An happy day it was to the Swedes, and to be
recorded to the remembrance of them of that Nation which are to come.

The Proscaenia of the Play was skilfully and; subtly laid on both sides, the
Imperial and Saxon Armies took all before them, Bannier giving the storm
leave to spend it self, yet omitting no opportunity which might be for his
advantage. Havelsberg taken by the Saxons. And Werben surrendered by the Swedes.
The City of Havelsberg, sited where the Havel loses his name, in the more
famous stream of the Elve, and the Castle too, were taken by the united
Imperial and Saxon armies, from the Swedes, upon their March; the strong Fort
of Werben on the other side of the River, became theirs also by right of
conquest, yet neither of these was assured them for terms of years, nor
scarce of days, a short lived conquest it was, and soon extorted from them by
the Swedes. The story is deliverered from all hands thus.

The Swedish Generalll Bannier re-enforced with the bands of men, under the
Field-Marshall Lesle, the General Majors, Stalhanse, and Vitzthumb, who the
last year commanded in Franckford upon the Maine, according to the order from
Stockholme before mentioned, intending to draw the Imperial and Saxon Armies
to a pitched battle; to omit other his several ineampings, and discampings,
remooved from Parcheim, September 13.23. attended with his whole army, and came
to Perlerberg, where the united forces of his enemies were well and strongly
entrenched, Bannnier martcheth after the Saxon Army.
thinking that their late victories gotten by them on both sides the Elve,
would have encouraged them to have put their Armies in Battle array against him,
who ceased not to out-brave them too, by many affronts and offers of skirmishes
to the same intention. But the wary Hatzfield, Morazini, and the Saxon Armies,
not being to be allured out of their hold, by hopes of uncertain glory, by a
doubtful fight in open field, lay still, and would not permit their Soldiers
to stir out of their works, commanding only that they should stand ready
within their earthen walls, to entertain the Swedes if they should assault
them. Bannier seeing this project faild, ranged his Forces into an orderly
body, Retaketh Havelsberg.
and marched in the sight of his enemies toward Havelberg, and Werben, the
first of which, by the indiscretion of the Garrison, was forced to submit to
his discretion; for mistaking the Sweds for their confederates, and not
supposing them to have had the way open for their march thitherward, they let
them come to the very Walls of the City and Castle, where at once, the Garrison
having discovered their persons and their strength, found it vain to stand
out, and surrendered the Town and Fort to their mercy.

Havelsberg thus surprised, the Swedish General plied Werben so close with his
approaches and batteries, that by the judgment of his Counsel of War, it
was not to be questioned, but that he had carried it within the space of 24
hours, Besieges Werben, but leaves the siege upon new Avisoes.
had he continued his siege, which left for the present not unadvisedly, nor
doubting of suecesse, but upon a wise deliberation, projecting a better gain,
and more glory elsewhere, than could be got by that petit victory, deferring
only in the mean time that pursuit, and concluding to perfect it afterward.

Advisoes, and certain too, were brought him, that the Elector of Saxony,
Marazini and Hartzfield were risen from their trenches at Perlerberg, September.
19.29. and marched toward Pritzwald, with an intention to go to Witstocke,
and thence to go over the Havel at Zedenick: And the Swede to give them as
little rest as might be, thereon left the siege at Werben, and pursuing the
enemy at the heels, made head toward the Camp of the Imperialists and Saxons,
by the way of Westerhousen. That which is apparently evil to the eye of humane
reason, by the wisdom of Divine providence often proves a blessing, and of
happy consequence: Such was the prize of Brandenburg, by the Saxon Klitzing;
the Swedes esteemed it no small loss, the Saxons no little advantage, but the
loss of the Town was gain to the Swedish army, and the prize thereof by
Klitzing was in probability the ruin of the Imperial and Saxon armies. The
passage of Zedenick secured.
The passage at Zedenick might have served as a posterne for Klitzing to have
come with his forces upon the back of the Swedes, had it been left open for
him; so much was Bannier accquainted with, by the late Commander in
Brandenburg, who was instantly commanded by the General to-make good that
passage with those old soldiers which were conducted from Brandenburg to
Rupin, against the excursions of the Camp at Witstocke, or in roads of
Klitzings Army, which he did accordingly.

How many several changes are there in one Military Dance? All these
preparations were to meet with the Electors, and Hatzfields armies in open
field upon their Martch, and now suddenly a Currier poasted to the Swedish
Camp with new avisoes, that the enemies were strongly encamped near Witstock,
having the City on the one side to defend them, the Cloister or Monastery
called the Holy Sepulcher, situate upon a Mountain, called Sherpen Hill
fortified, 16. redoubts on the other side, under which stood their Battaglie,
ranged for fight, and a Forest behind them, serving as a Countermure for
their safety. The news somewhat perplexed the Swede, as falling out contrary
to his expectation, yet altered not his resolution. A purpose he had to give
them battle, and though the misfortune of his confederates at Nordlingen,
fighting against the Imperial Army upon the like disadvantage, A Counsel of
war called.
and common reason did dissuade him from it, yet all this could not change his
determination, he had engaged himself so far by his faith to the Crown of
Sweden, that he would not now recede one title from the resolve. Valor is most
apparent when the Danger is imminent, either an honorable grave or glorious
conquest, were the things he aimed at; neither of these were in his own
election, and he referred him self to the fortune of the day for either. And
yet, as his great heart could not entertain timidity, so his fore-casting
spirit avoided temerity, he would not presume upon his own wisdom, though
the commands of a General be not to be controverted by the inferior
Officers, but called first a counsel of War, where he discovered the state
of his own army, and conjectured at that of the enemy, whose often avoydings
and tergiuersations from proffered Battle, were tokens, said he of timorous
souls, or weak bodies, unable to grapple with his forces, and the covnsaile,
as one man crying out, Let us go on, and assault them in their trenches, he
put his project into practice. One impediment there was, which might have
stopped him in his speedy March, if it had not been remooved, a narrow way at
Fresdorpe, through which the Army and the luggage must necessarily pass, and
that guarded too by some Imperial companies: The enemy was not so terrible as
the straightness of the way, for he beat the guard away immediately upon his
first arrival, and cleared it of them, but both the sides of it being
Moorasse, The passage at Fresdorpe eleared.
he was constrained to guard it from the Sunne-setting of the third of October,
new style, with one thousand Musketeers under the leading of Colonel Gunne
and two Regiments of Horse, whilst the maine body of his Army was passed
through it, till about noone the next day ensuing. That day he appeared in the
view of the Imperial and Saxon armies, and his appearance caused them to
change their postures, the Intantry being drawn up to the Hill top, near
the Artillery, and their Cavallary placed on both sides of it, the out most
skirt of it being fortified with the Wagons. Bannier ordered his army for
assault accordingly, the form whereof, may be evidently seen in the Map
annexed, and leaving the avantguard of his right wing, The Swedish army
appears before the Sax ons at Witstock.
consisting of six hundred Musketeers, Life-landers, and Curlanders, and six
squadrons of reformed troops drawn out of the Regiments of Duke Henry,
Francis of Saxon Lawenberg, the Colonels, Crakaw and Slang, and the Sarjeant
Major Giese, under the command of Collonell Gun: he himself followed in person
to charge the left wing of the Imperial and Saxon armies with his battalia,
consisting of eight Brigads, Pikes, and Musketeers, whilst the left Wing of
his Army, under the commands of the Field-marshall Lesle, and Stalhans wheeled
about through the Forest, to assault the right wing of the enemy. Both parts
prepared to fight, their soldiers were made discernable to the ear and eye of
their friends and foes by private instructions. The Swedes word of Battle
being, The battles join.
God with us, and the Imperialls and Saxons God willing, and several colors,
as remonstrances under whom they fought; the Swedes wearing green Ribbands
about their arms, and the Saxons white Ribbands, some with hand-kerchtrs upon
their hats. The Swedish Cavallery was lyned with Musketeers, and that devise
was of no small effect to the obtaining of the victory.

Gun came on bravely, and with his avantguard maintained the battle in an
equal balance by the space of two hours, beating off eight several charges
made upon him by the enemy in that short space, and then himself wound, and
his Troops wearied began to recoyle, to the great joy of the Saxons, who
assured themselves instantly of Victory, and proclaimed it by two Trumpets,
through the Army; But the fight was as yet scarce begun; The General
Banniere, The order of the fight.
having placed his Canon with all advantages to play upon the Camp, came in to
the rescue of his weary avant-Guard, with his Brigades, and after some charges
given, began to make them break their rancks, the Field-Marshall Lose and
Stalhans, having brought about the left wing through the Forest in the mean
time, Long doubtful.
and therewith at the same time so charging Hatzfeldt, who led the right wing
of the Saxon Army, that the scale began to turn, and the silver wings of
Victory might be discerned to hover over the Swedish Army. It was hard fought
on both sides, the Elector of Saxony using all the Rhetoric he could to
encourage his Soldiers, with remembrance of the condition of those men,
against whom they fought, and the fair advantages, which they had gotten in
his short time of Battle; the Ordnance on both sides, vomiting out their fiery
bullets, whilst the Generals were speaking and the swords of the Military
men, being brandished as nimbly as the Commanders words.

By this a Swedish Reserve of 4. Brigades, under the Command of the General
Major Verdun, The victory falls to the Swedes.
which served as the Arneri gnard to the left wing, was joined to the
Rield-Marshall Lesle, and Stalhans, and their apparition proved so formidable
to the Saxons, which feared a co^tinuail sipply of fresh enemies, that they
betook themselves insta tly to a consused flight, though the Elector with
tears, in vain dissuaded them from it, and that confusion concluded the
battle; almost the whole Camp being thereby exposed to the fury of the Swedes,
to be put to the sword, or mercy, in sparing of life, and making them Prisoners
of war.

It was a glorious victory, but purchased dearly with the lives of 1000
Swedes, The victory was got with blood.
and up wards, amongst which were many men well deserving, but some offpeciall
note, by name the Colonells Berghawer and Conigham, the Lieutenant Colonel to
Francis Henry of Saxon Lawenburg, and three others of that order here unnamed,
and sundry Ritt-masters, Captains and under Officers. The Colonelle Crakaw,
Linse, and Gun were wounded, but not mortally, and either the joyful news of
victory made them less sensible of their wounds then they should have been
otherwise, or they were not wounded dangerously. The Sweedish Generals escaped
shot-free, but 2 of the Imperialls chiese Commanders were slain outright. The
two General Majors, Wilsdorp, and Goltz, and Marazini himself, was said,
deadly wounded, and 5. Colonells slain, whereof three are particularized by
name, Wildberger, young Hottzfeldt, and Kunigell; besides Rit-Masters,
Captains, and Officers, who were accompanied in their deaths by 7000 of their
partners in Arms, Common men slain upon the place of battle, and attended
with many other, The numbers of the slain.
which fell by the swords of the Swedes in the prosecution. The present loss,
was it not expressed particularly, as it is, could not be accounted less then
6 whole Regiments, viz. Coloredoes, Wendensales, Walsteins, the Goltz, Eracts
and Pappenheims being totally ruined, and the forces under the General Major
Dehne, the two Countts of Talkenstein, Will Be, Winse, and Wilbrecht, being not
to be supposed to have escaped their share of that misfortune, their Commanders
being desperately wounded.

The principal Check fell upon the Insantry, the horsemen following the Example
of the Elector (who seeing the battle lost, The victory prosecuted.
spurred away to Werben, accompanied only with 50 Cavalieres, and there
passing the Elve, made haste toward Wittenberg) to save themselves by flight,
and yet slaughter overtooke them as they were flying: Stalhanse was sent to
pursue them with 6000 horse, and he returned not from execution till 3 days
after, and then naving left the way strewed with dead Corpse from Witstocke,
even to Werben (almost as many being slain upon the way of the flight, as upon
the place of battle) he came back to the Camp with 1500 prisoners, and 30
Coronets, and 5 Ensigns of Dragoones, which being added to the Ensigns gamed
in the field, made up the number of 143 Coronets and Enngnes, besides those
which still remained in the hands of private men, and were not then brought in
to the General, who proclaimed a reward to every one that should bring in his
private attchievement, to make his conquest more ilustrious. The Elector,
Hasfeldt, and they which escaped, saved their persons only, but left their
Canon, The spoils taken from the Saxons by the Swedes.
41 in number, and their baggage to the Conqueror: the Electors own Wagons
laden with the glorious title, and rich movables of his Chancery (the titles
not recorded by the quill in partehment; buting raven in rich metals) his
instruments of hunting his plate, in general, and that famous great silver
Bowl, wherein he used to carouse to his best friends, and the baggage of the
whole army became lawful prize to the Swedes, with 8000 Wagons, whereon it
was mounted, to the enuching not of the soldiers only but the very boys of
the Swedish army.

Three days were spent by the Swede after hisvictory, partly in piety, partly
in polity, yet piety proceeded, and polity followedas the Handmaid. First he
assembled his companies to give thanks to him, who had covered their heads in
the day of battle, Thanksgiving for the victory
and blessed the enterprise with so good and great success, singing te Deum
after their manner, and supplying the want of Organs, and other Church music,
with Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, Canonadoes and Musqutadoes intermingled, not to
the disturbing of the fouldiers devotion, but the raising of their spirits, who
rejoiced that they had now opportunity to spend their powder in triumph, not in
an uncertain fight against the enemy.

Thanksgiving done, The dead buried.
he took order for the burial of the dead, as well for foes as friends, a
work of difficulty, their bodies being scattered in sundry places, in great
multitudes, and the Boores, which should have assisted to their interment,
being fled for fear, not knowing how either party, if he proved victor, might
deal with them; yet this task was performed too. And then the General taking
a view of his Army, not so much decreased in number by the fight, as increased
by thousands of prisoners, who offered themselves to his service he found 1500
yet which were not come in to his party, amongst which were 170 Officers, And a
new muster made of the Army, with some expressions of Court-ship to the
prisoners.
and 146 women of quality, wives to the Caeserean and Saxon Colonels, and their
officers. The dejected countenances of the women expressing sorrow, partly in
regard of their present estates, and partly for the loss or imprisonment of
their bosom friends, moved him to compassion; and he to sweeten their
captivite, and the rigor of his Arms, and to cheer up these disconsolate
spirits, made them a feast near Witstock, in the middle of a great plain, for
the distinction of the services intermitting three several vollies of
Canonadoes from the great Artillery, which he had gotten in the battle. And
the feast ended, he first disposed of his prisoners males and females, sent the
gained artillery down the Elve by shipping, Bannier takes Werben upon
discretion
with the Electors plate, which fell to his share, as the baggage lately
belonging to Hazfeld, was then in Lisles possession, and Maracinies in the
hands of Stalhanse, as a present to the Queen of Sweden, and afterward marched
first with his Army against the Fort at Werben, intending to go forward, but
first to have all safe behind him. And this Fort he took October 13.23.
forcing the Garrison to submit upon discretion. And after having fortified it
for the Crown of Sweden, drew his Army over the Elve, on that side toward
Halberstadt: amusing for a short time, the Saxons and their confederates,
sometimes seeming to look toward Saltzwedell, as if he intended toward the
country of Lunengburgh. Sometimes toward the Earldome of Mansfieldt, always
intending to go to Misuda and Thuringen, which in fine he did, and thither
though the history now cannot, it shall follow him hereafter.

The Sconce at Werben being thus possessed again by the Swedes, the Saxon
Garrisons at Ratenaw, and Brandenburg, seeing their late copartners forced to
serve under Bannier, Brandenburgh and Ratenaw forsaken by the Saxons and
Garrisond by the Swedes.
and knowing themselves too weak to make any resistance if he should cast a
bank against them and without hope of succor, though they might be able to
hold out for a season, willingly forsook the places of which they were
appointed guardians, and left them to the Swedes administration, who furnished
Brandenburg with 600 presidiaries, and Ratenaw with 250. whilst the Swedish
Colonel Geyse, marched toward Berlin, happened first upon three hundred
Brandenburgish soldiers on the way, surprised them, and put as many of them as
would not serve the Swede to the sword.

At Wolgast and Gripstald, in the mean time arived 3500 fresh men out of
Sweden, able men to the eye, and yet they proved better soldiers than was
expected, being joined to Wrangels flying army, which with this accrewt
supplied from Sweden with Armor, Canon, Wrangel souldereth the Vekker-marke.
Powder, Match, and the like materials of War, being now grown 12000 strong by
the end of October, cleared the Oder from Frankford downward (to the joy of
the Stetineers, who saw the adjacent Country encumbered no more with the
Imperialists, and found the ways open again to Da^tzick and Rostocke, the
chiefest Cities of their Commerce) invaded the mark Brandenburg, enforced the
Town of Barlen to a contribution of 30000. Rix-Dollers, which was paid part
in ready money part in merchants wares, brought the whole Veker-mark to the
Swedes obedience, and drew from thence 26000 Rix-dollers, to preserve it from
pillage, confiscated lands, the goods belonging to the Count of Stwarzenburgh,
took an oath of fealty of the subjects in his own name, affirming the
Country to be given him by the Crown of Sweden, and thence marched against
Land. bergen to surround it with his army, projecting a future design in
Silesia, where some of the peers falling off from the Saxon, and weary of the
Caesareans, waited for his coming, not as enemies to oppose him, but friends
to assist him, so fearful were the neighboring principalities of the Swedes
power, and ready to comply with the Conqueror.

The Elector of Saxony, who October 7.17. was come to Lipsech, and Hazfeld, who
arrived about the same time at Halsberstadt, prepared in the mean time to
rally their forces, but were not so quick it as they supposed they might have
been. Of all their late army, 3000 men only, The Elector prepares to form a
new army.
or thereabouts, were found, and to form a new one, required more time for
preparing new Artillery, raising new men and money, and this could not be done
neither without much regret and heart-burning of his subjects, to feel the
burdens of new impositions, and weakening of Some his Town, being constrained
to take down the Ordnance, which was appointed for the defense of his Cities,
and to bring them into the field. The last of these were complained of by the
Lipsickers, and the first had like to have made a mutiny amongst the people. In
this destration, Hazfeld advanced now to the Imperial Generalate, sends unto
Goetz the Field-marshall, to bring his forces, and to conjoyne with him against
the Swedes, which he did accordingly. The Elector drew out three regiments from
the Garrison Silecia, ^^nds for Auxiliaries.
and they both jointly sent to the Marquess of Dormstat, and George Duke of
Lunenberg to the same purpose, the last of which was then besieging Minden, but
hearing of the Swedes attchivenrents left it, whether for fear of the Swedes,
and care to preserve his own Country, or affection to the Saxon, it is yet
uncertain, for yet I find him not come into his aid, and the other, though
afterward he yielded to their desires, for the present would have excused
himself by letters, which because the contain a brief expression of the
State of the Swedes, and the Empire, I have here set down, as the conclusin of
this history. The letters bare date October 14. old style, and run thus:

Your Electoral highness cannot be ignorant, withwhat affeection I have
always implored my self to the avancement of your affairs, A Letter written
to the Elector of Sax. by (...) M. of Dorm^ declaring estate of the Empire.
to which I have not spared to contribute al means possible; yet because I know
the strength of the Swedes which are already in the Empire, is concealed from
you, and extenuated too much by some near your highness. I shall succinctly
describe unto you the estate of their affairs in Almaigne, that the truth
being known, some better way may be devised for the public good, than by
continuation of this War.

The Swedes had an Army lately in Pomerania, under the Field-Marshall Wrangel,
which being re-enforced with 600 lately come out of Sweden, having possessed
themselves of Gartz and Swedt, 2 principal passages upon the Oder, subjected
the whole Vetter-marke, and pillaged Barlin, have now, as it is reported, a
dangerous design up on Silesia. I need not speak of the other army under
Banniere, the puissance thereof is too fresh, and of bleeding memory.

But I would not have your excellency ignorant, that besides their forces in
open field, the Swedes have yet in garriso^, near 20000 men, in those places
which they hold: In the higher Germany they hold only the Fort of Benefeldt,
and their lie 1000 men. For the lower Germ. they have in Pomerania, Colberg,
Stalsundt, the Isle of Rugen, Stetin, and Griffenhagen, in the Dukedom of
Mekelberg, Wismar, which is the best port of the Baltike sea and Demitz upon
the Elve, which City alone they raise every year, 50000 Rix-dallers for
custom. Rostock stands in neatrelity by consent of both parties, but in the
March they have Havelsberg, Werben, Bra^denberg, Ratenaw, Tangermund, and the 2
famous passages of Ferberlin and Crenis, all which, they have upon a sudden
snatched out of the hands of your highness, and Allies in the Dutch Lunenberg,
they hold the Cities Luneburg, Winsen, and Vltzen, in Brunswick-land, and upon
the Weser, the Forts Newburg and Stoltenaw, with the Cities of Minden, and
Hamellen; in Westphalia, upon the River of Ems, the Cities of Meppen, and
Osnabrugge, with the Fort of Petersburg, and many other places of this side of
Ems yet in possession of the Lantgrave their friend and Alley. To which if you
please to ad the succors of foreign Princes and estates, who have already
declared themselves their confederates, and of others who are about to make
their like league with them (his Majesty of great Britt, being reported to have
recalled Lesle and Redwin his subjects to no other end than the recovery of the
Palatinates by war) they will appear no despicable enemy. I need not speak
what small hope of succors you can expect from G. D. of Huneburg or the
Elector of Brandenburg, Caesar having testified, that he know th not whether
they be his friends or enemies, I shall conclude briefly, there will not be
found in all Silesia, Bohemia, Austria, Franconia, and Swaben, one Imperial
soldier to assist you, if you should receive a new defeat, therefore I
beseech you, rather to labor for a settled peace, than a continued War, that
so these miseries, which have befalne the Empire by this permitious war, may
be removed, Germany may again reiovce to see their former tranquillity, the
Princes and estates of the Empire may be maintained in their rights and
privileges, and no misprision (as at this present is) laid upon the Electoral
dignity.

It was good advice, but the Elector desired not his Counsel but present
assistance, nor were the Swedes to be dealt withal by persuasions, the Spanish
agent had before offered them 250000 Rix-dollers to depart the Empire, but they
refused it, and resolve to continue the war, what condition soever shall be
offered them, unless all their Allies, the Princes of the Empire, the
neighboring estates, and the Christian K. particularly, might be included in
the treaty with whom they had made an especial offensive and defensive league,
and who had already received as much benefit by their late victory, as
themselves had gotten glory; that being supposed one means to recall the
Imperial armies from theinvasion of France, whither they were advanced by the
way of Burgundy.

CHAP. II. The several passages of Italy and Provence this last Summer past.
1636.
TT is a question yet controverted betwixt the French and Spanish Statists,
Italy and Provence.
and was canvased in the Consistory of Cardinals, by the comprotectors of both
Kingdoms, whether the Allies and Subjects of the Christian King, or the
confederates and subjects of Caesar, and the Catholic King, were most to be
blamed for the broils lately commenced in Italy. The Cardinal of Savoy, a man
powerful in speech and somewhat surmounting the Cardinal of Burghese,
Comprotector of Almaygne and the house of Austria, in the favor of the
Conclave by reason of his high birth, being brother to the Duke of Savoy (who
is dignified by Patent, by the Title of the Administrator of the fiefes in the
Italian Empire, in the vacancy, as the most Illustrious Prince, the Electour
Palatine, is in Germany) from the first beginning of the war till the end of
this present summer, stood stiffely in Justification of the Christian King,
against the Catholic Kings favorites, and so far prevailed with the Pope
himself, that he procured especial letters from that Bishop, to the Duke of
Medina, the Marquess of Leganez the Spanish General, and the Cardinal
Trivultio principal procurator for the Imperial and Spanish Armies, to
forbear and cease committing such outrages, as they daily did in the Dukedom
of Parma, though the Prince had joined with the Christian King, The Cardinal of
Savoy relinquisheth the Comprotection of France and adhereth to Caesar.
his Country being a Fee appendant to the Church of which (said he) I have the
tuition. But in fine the French Advocate, the Savoyard Cardinal, won with
large promises, (the King of Spain offering to confirm unto him, 40000.
crowns of yearly revenew in Church living, and a pension of twenty five
thousand Crowns, if he would relinquish the King of France, and adhere to
Caesar) he accepted the proposition to the incredible joy of the Spanish, and
displeasure of the French, not so much for his loss as his disloyalty. A
golden cosseway pleases the eye, though the pavement is not of sure footing.
Philip of Macedon by this false light bleared the sight of the Graecians, and
the Iberian King Philip, made the same Mineral Sun to dazell the eyes of
this great Cardinal, who (as the French both at home and abroad at Rome relate
it) not regarding the sleights which the Spaniard put upon the deceased
Cardinal O^sino, once Comprotectour of France, but taken off in the end by the
like allurements from the Christian King to serve the Catholic) turned away
his principal servants, best acquainted with his French negotiations, his late
Secretary, and Auditor, ceised upon their writings and accounts, whilst they
were walking upon the banks of Tyber for their recreation, forbad them his
house, and as quite eloigned from the King of France pulled down the Flower
de-Luces, which the day before, garnished his gates, and at night set up in
their stead, the Arms of the Pope, the Emperor, the Kings of Spain and
Hungary: This project was intended further, then the gaining only of the
Cardinal, who might promote the French affairs in the Consistory, and could
do no more, the Duke of Savoyes Arms in the field, joined with Criqui, and
the Parmesan; were more to be suspected, then the Cardinal of Savoyes words in
the Counsel, and the maine aim of the devise was to take off the Duke by the
means of his brother the Cardinal, The Spanish polity in gaining the
Cardinal.
but the Spanish Artillery, could not reach so far, the shaft fell some bows
short, the Ambassador of Savoy then at Rome, received the Secretary and
Auditour into his house, though the Cardinal had casheered them, and the Duke
of Savoy himself, with as much zeal as ever, does yet prosecute the war in
Italy, neither sparing his own personal pains, as being Generallissimo of
the confederate Armies, nor purse in making necessary provisions of war, to
secure his own men, and offend the enemy.

Had the Cardinal stood firm to France, yet his negotiation in the consistory
could not have proved so prejudicious to the Imperial and Spanish States, as
the mutiny of some malcontents, and the appearance of the Galleys of Bizerta
(a port town of the Kingdom of Tunis) upon the coast of Italy, were
formidable to the Catholic Kings subjects in his Kingdom of Naples. The
Histories are thus reported. The Count of Monterey Viceroy of Naples, A mutiny
in the kingdom of Naples.
zealous for preservation of his authority, and the dignity whereunto he was
advanced, offended with an Ensign of his Guard, which let fall his colors
upon the arrival of the Duke of Medina de las Torres, who came to visit the
Viceroy at his Palace, July 6. new style (that ceremony of honorable
observance being usually exhibited to none, but the Kings Vicegerent)
imprisoned the Ensign, with his Sergeant Major, and casheerd the Captain of
the company. The Duke conceiving that the Viceroys sentence against those
officers of his guard, trencht on his honor, and his esteem of the people
might suffer some prejudice, if he did not bear up and carry himself like a
Grandee, immediately thereupon, provided his Caroch to be drawn with 6 Horses,
and rode in the state of a Viceroy through the streets of Naples, to the
discontent of the Count, (that being the proper garb of the prorex and
permitted to no other) who first sent his monitory letters to the Duke,
forbidding him to appear so magnificently, and those not prevailing, commanded
him immediately to depart the Kingdom, and return to Spain. His order was
obeyed by the Duke, whose dismission wrought severally on the fancies of the
Friends and Allies of the young Princess of Stigliano lately married to the
Spanish Duke: each of them according to the capacity of their judgments,
projecting how to be avenged of the Viceroy. The old Princess, Mother to the
Duchess, in melancholy betook her to a Cloister, and bequeathed all her
goods, money, plate, and Jewels, after her decease, to the Church of S. Peter
at Rome. The young Gallants of the Dutchesses Family took up Arms, drew many
of the Commons (already offended with the Count, for his government, which they
supposed to be somewhat tyrannical, and the heavy impositions, which by reason
of the present occasion, were not unnecessarily laid upon them) to their party,
elected the Duke of Matalona, one of the Peers of the Kingdom, for their
Chieftaine, and had gone further, to the plundering of the Spanish Families
dispersed in the Kingdom, had not the Cardinal Aldobrandino a popular man,
Appeased by the Cardinal Aldobrandino.
and Uncle to the Duchess by the Mothers side, interposed himself, and
dissuaded the hot-spurrs from such a rebellious insurrection, promising to
write to the King of Spain, in the behalf of his grieved Niece and the State,
and giving them an assurance of a gracious answer, prevailed so far that they
laid down their arms: and write he did, but received this only summary
answer from his Majesty, that he was ignorant of the marriage of the Princess
with the Duke: and that the necessity of his affairs so requiring it, He could
not alter the courses of his Viceroy, in that Realm: Yet in the end, the
Catholic K. moved with the importunate complaints of the Friends and Allies of
the Princes, and willing to compose the differences which the Dukes absence had
caused, returns the Duke to Naples in the beginning of September, with letters
to the Viceroy, to permit him his state, and dispatched soon after him, the
Marquess D Alcaniza with a commission to establish the Duke of Medina Viceroy
of Sicilie. The Duke thus authorized, showed his state, Quite settled by the
King of Spain.
riding to the Court at Naples in a Caroch of black Velvet imbroydered with
gold, and drawn with six Horses, and the Princess his Wife, being carried in
a stately Sedan, in the like equipage, yet with this devise, in thankfulness
to his Majesty, Philippi Quarti Munificentia.

Before the return of the Kings answer, the Mutineers grew cold, laid down
their Arms, and returned to their several dwellings, to the joy of the
Neapolitane Court, as being past fear of that seditious commotion. The Pirates
were the only people they feared, The Galleys of Bizerta were seconded with an
accreut from Argiers, and first roaving about the coasts of Calabria, they
landed at the Cape of Palinudo a great number of Turks, which ransacked the
Country adjacent, and carrying away 700. Christians prisoners, returned to
their Ships, fearing least the Viceroy, who was mustering of his Forces to
secure the Maritine Towns, should come upon them with his Army, and surprise
them: But their going from land, The Gallyes of Bizerta cause great fear in
the Kingdom of Naples.
and launching could not remove the fear of the people, the cloud still
hovered about the Seacoasts, and where it might fall was uncertain; The Mart
at Messina was drawing on, the customs whereof by the frequent recourse of
Merchants thither, and the great trade, were of no small consequence, the
Viceroy therefore sent in the end of July to the Great Master of Malta for his
Galleys, for the securing of the Seacoasts of Naples and Sicilie against the
incursions of the Turks during the time of the Fair. But before the Maltezan
Gallyes could be dispatched, the Turkish Pirates understanding that the Prince
of Bisignano was sent by the Viceroy, with some Cavalliers and many
Foote-souldiers to Putzoli and Pausilippo, to defend the sea-townes
thereabouts, hoysed sail, and with 10 Gallyes, and 2 Brigantines rode before
Vico, a town just opposite to Naples, on the other side of the Baye, and began
to land some of their Rovers, to the great affrightment of the inhabitants,
which instantly left the town and their goods, fled to the Mountains to save
their persons, and had been ransacked by the Mahometans, An excellent and
valiant act of an English Merchant.
had not an unexpected accident fallen in fortunately for their succor. An
English Merchant coming from Sicilie laden with powder, and other Ammunition
having past the Islands of Vulcan was discovered by the Turks, who presently
deferring their former design, though meaning to prosecute it afterward,
haled the Merchant, who perceiving the condition of those whith whom he was to
deal, He is reported by our Seamen, to be the younger Ellis.
Infidells and robbers, prepared to fight, and was quickly rounded with the
Turkish Gallyes. The fight was fore for the time, 50 Canons shot in a small
space were discharged by our brave country man, the last of which cutting off
the Turkish Admirals poope, made the rest retire, to the glory of the English
Master, who wrought out his own way with shot and powder, and cleared the
coast thereabouts, of that enemy, deserving better of the Spanish Viceroy for
this service, then he found his requital being only a Court-smile, and a cup
of voydance. His name is worthy to he recorded, but I find it not expressed in
the letters from Naples, in which I find this history Aug. 5/13. Soon after
this the expected Gallyes from Malta put to sea, and abode there the space of
50. The Gallyes of Malta scour the Levant of Turkish pirates.
days, scouring the Levant, and sailing up and down by the coast of Barbary,
and in the beginning of September, returned to their own Island, carrying along
with them two Gallyes, and two other bottomes, taken at Negrepont with 150.
Turks prisoners, and other booty esteemed at 100000. Crowns.

The Neapolitans, thus happily delivered from their Mahometane enemies by sea,
prepared for the Catholic Kings service, against the Christian by land. The
Viceroy, The Neapolitans taxed by the Viceroy.
that there might neither be want of men, money, nor ammunition, laid an hard
tax upon the officers of his Courts of Law, and Justice. Bills were sent to
all the Tribunalls, charging every prime Regent of the Courts, to set forth 8.
soldiers, every President, Counselor, and Judge, either civil, or criminal
4. every Procurator to the Fiske, or Auditor 2. each Register, Advocate, or
Doctor one, or 40. crowns twelve pound sterling English, in stead of a
soldier, and that he might not seem partial in his impositions, gave
commandment to all the Nobles and Gentry of the Realm, to bring him a true
particular of their horses and plate, that they might be employed in his
Majest, service, if the necessity of his affairs should require it. This done,
he appointed the Prince of Botero Grandchild to the Constable Colonna to be
General for the Camp, and Cavallary of the Kingdom, and the Marquess of
Terra-zana for the Infantery, and sent Melchior Borgia General of the Gallyes
of the Squadron of Naples, with the Galleys of Ligourn to releeve the Islands
Margarita and Honoria, whilst the Gallions, and other vessels for war, were
made ready, and brought to Portolongo, in the I Will of Elbe, that place being
designed for their general Randevouz.

The French Navy under the command of the Earl of Harcourt and the Archbishop
of Bordeaux, was under sail long before the Neapolitane Fleet could be ready
to encounter them. The 16. of June New Style, they put forth from Saint Martins
road, yet reached not Marselleis till August 24. September being often becalmed,
and constrained to hull in stead of sailing, their way being long about the
coasts of Spain and Portugal, and sometimes forced to slack sail upon
several occasions. The 7/17 of the same month the Fleet arrived at the rode
of Belle-Isle, where a particular muster was made of the Matiners, Provisions,
and Ammunition, and it was listed as follows. The Squadron of Bretaigne,
consisted of 16. The list of the French Navy.
vessels for service. The Admiral of 1000. tun, under the command of Goutes,
a man of eminent authority under the Earl of Harcourt, who was in person
aboard that Ship with the Archbishop of Bordeaux, their Families and
Volunteers, and carried 54. pieces of Cannon. The Reere-Admirall commanded by
Poincy of 550. tun, carried 34. pieces. The Swanne, the Unicorn, the 3
Kings, the Coral, the Cook, the Saint Michael, the Saint Guinever, the
Pearl, the Margarite, each of 500 tun: the Hermine of 300. tun: the Saint
Marie of 200. tun: the Rose of 120. tun: the Petit Saint John of 60. tun:
and the Aigrette of 120. tun, made up that number. The squadron of Normandy
consisted of 17. vessels for service, besides 10. great ships, and as many
laden with victuals, and serving as a Magazine for maintenance of the Army, in
which were also transported 28. companies of the Islanders, each Company
consisting of 120. men, under Saint Estienne, a Limosin Gentleman, and
Lieutenant Colonel to de la Port. The Magdalene of Haure du grace, of 300.
tun: the Saint Anne of 200. tun, the Margarite of 100. tons, the Eagle,
the Leveret, and the Neptune, each of 150. tons, the Griffon of 200. tons:
six vessels of fire-workes, (two whereof were each of 200. tons, two of 150.
and two of 100) and four great Flemish Floytes, provided of 60. beds for the
sick and wounded men, Physicians, Apothecaries, Chirurgians, necessary
attendants, and medicines, and viands, made up that number. The squadron of
Normandy consisted of 14. bottomes. The Vice Admiral of 500. tons, carrying
40. pieces of Ordnance, and commanded by Manty the Vice Admiral, the Lowis of
Saint John de Luz, of 500. tons, the golden Lion, the Saint John, the Lowis
of Holland, and the Lieutenant, each of 300. tun, the Hope, the Lion of
Houfleur, each of 250. tons. The Saint Francis, the Salamander, each of 200.
tons, the Margarite, the Cardinal, the Frigate of Gascoigne, each of 150.
tons, and the Angel of 300. tons, made up that number.

It was a gallant Navy, furnished with Artillery in a fit geometrical
equipage, the vessels of 500. tuns, carried each of them 32. pieces of Canon,
those of 300. 20 pieces, those of 150. and 200. 6 pieces each. The two Frigates
of 200. tons, each 12 pieces, the ten Flemish Floytes, each 14 pieces, and
the eye of France was fixed upon the good success of these Argonauts. The
Admirals Commission extended no farther, than the scowring of the Seas from
Pirates, the recovery of as many Christians as stood not enemies to the Crown
of France, from the Mahometans and Turks (if they met with any such) the
securing of the coast of Provence, and the landing of some Auxiliarie land-men,
for the service of the Duke of Parma, and the confederate Armies in Italy.

An Hollander a renegado, habited like a Sallyman, was the first Pyrate they
met with. He was discovered, An Holland renegado taken in the habit of a
Sallyman.
July the first, new style, by one of the Frigates, chased, and forced to yield
with conditions to save his ship of 200. tons burden, and to yield the
Christian slaves, which he had taken, to wit, 29. English, and 4. French men.
This happened at Cape-Ortigall, thence the Fleet put forward, sometimes with a
fair wind, and sometimes becalmed, without opposition or discovery of any
enemy till the end of August, at which time the Navies of the great Duke of
Florence, and the Duke of Tursy, sent from Ligorne under the command of
Melchior Borgia, to vittaile the Islands Honoria and Margarita, with their
perspectives beholding the gallantry of the French Fleet, and in have hoysed up
sail, as knowing how unable they were to grapple with so puissant and well
furnished Navy, and retired to the port of Alagon.

Some pillaging rovers appeared behind when the French Fleet was gone, and
those such only, as might damage a Merchant, not encounter with a man of
war: one of which being a Spanish Pinnace, well provided both of men and
ammunition, A Spanish Parate taken by Saint Nazare.
and warranted by letters of Marque from the Catholic King to pillage the
Coast of Bretagne, after a sharp conflict with a French Merchant, and the
death of the Captain of the Pirates, and some of his accomplices was taken near
8. Nazare, and brought up the Laire into the harbor at Nantes, (the prime City
of that Dukedom) with 12: surviving Spaniards, his whole Artillery, and a
pavilion, enriched with the Arms of Spain, that eing the only wealth which
the vessel (ordained for spoil, not traffic) carried. And the ill success
of these adventures disheartened their copartners from attending longer
thereabouts.

The Fleet as it sailed along the coast of Provence, was fortified daily by a
new supply of Soldiers and Mariners, 100. Tartanes vessels, of the burden of
500. each carrying 8. land men, and 5. Pirates, men, vessels, and Ordnance,
which they took by the way, being added thereunto by the Sea towns, The Fleet
increases.
Marseilles and the rest, and by the help of their small Barks, the Admiral
first landed 5000. men at Nissa, an harbor and City under the Duke of Savoy,
for the aid of the Prince, sent some shipping to Marselleis for 8000. others,
which he dispatched after the first 5000. to the same intent, and then put to
sea again toward the Principality of Norgues, The inhabitants of Menton and
Roquebrane, flee for fear, and are recalled by the French Admiral.
where the inhabitants of Menton and Roquebrane affrighted with their coming,
forsook their houses generally, and fled to save their lives: the religious
persons, whose more ingenuous education made them conceive well of the Admirals
goodness, only excepted. Six of these Capuchins by their order, came in all
submission to the Count, offering him the keys of those places which the
amazed people had abandoned, and wrought by this voluntary humility so far
upon the General, that he not only assured them of all gentle usage, but
restored them the keys, and charged them to seek out and recall the lost
inhabitants, promising to secure them from any manner of violence, which they
could expect, or fear might be offered them by his Army.

The fair promise of the French Admiral, Monaco is the usual name, it is in
Liguria.
wrought effectually with the poor inhabitants of the Country: they returned
quickly upon the credit given to his word, to their several dwellings. But the
strong Port of Morgnes, or Monaco, stood in defiance of his power, and showed
all testimonies of hostility with him. The weather then was calm, and the Navy
could not put forth to Sea, and the Count partly to avoid idleness, and partly
with desire to be avenged of the Turk, drew out of the ships six Pieces for
battery, and a convenient number of Pioners to make way for his approches
thitherward, promising himself to win the place, before any other urgent
occasion might call him thence, or the cessation of the calm might serve the
Fleet to undertake an expedition by Sea. The Spanish Galleys, (38. in number,)
which at that present were in the Bay of Savona, in the Signiorie of Genoa,
apprehending that the still face of Neptune would be favorable to their
Galleys, which moved better upon the water by the strength of the Oars, then
the breath of wind, the next day appeared near the French Fleet, and began
with some volees of Canon-shot to play upon the French Gallions riding at
anchor near Menton. This unexpected offer of combat altered the Counts design
against Monaco, his desire was then to put to Sea, but the ordinary shipping
was winde-bound, and the Galleyes embarred by the Spanish and Florentine Fleet
within the Harbor. Three Sea. fights betwixt the French and Spanish Fleets.
An unexpected help came in this extremity, some French Galleyes taking
advantage of the calm, made haste from Ville-Franche, a Sea-towne in Liguria,
but under the command of the Duke of Savoy, to the French Armado, carried out
the Admirals Gallion, who having got sea-rome, and attended still with these
newcome friends, spread all his sails to recover the little wind that then
blew, and in fine, having got the advantage of a breathing air, made up to the
Spanish Galleyes, and discharged upon them so furiously, that one of three,
which had gotten nearest the French Navy, was so shattered, that her two other
attendants were constrained to relinquish their intended fight with the French
men in the Bay, and to wait upon their companion, which was only busied in
discharging her burden of Seamen and Soldiers, into the other bottomes,
fearing lest they should perish with the vessel.

And now the fight began betwixt the two Navies, The first.
those in the Baye, though unable to stir, were not altogether unserviceable
to their confederates abroad at Sea; the Spanish Fleet was betwixt both, and
did both gall them both, and was galled on both sides. Three hours the combat
lasted doubtful, till at the last the Patron of Florence a galley of 1200
tun, being sunk by the French Artillery, the Spanish Navy in an orderly
retreat, made way toward Genoa, the French by reason they wanted those
Daedalian wings, oars, being for the present unable to pursue them.

The Spanish loss, was not great by this battle, nor the French achievements
of much consequence, yet the news thereof being speedily brought to Naples,
the Viceroy, sent the Prince D'Ascoli to fortine Gaeta, and Baia, who at the
last place, because it might the more easily command the Sea, levelled a great
hill, which interposed it self betwixt the City, and the sait water, and with
the earth choked up the Harbor called Mari-Morto, that so he might hinder the
French from coming thither. And for the security of the other coasts built
sundry Forts from the Baye of Saint Mary Magdalene, till the Tower of the
Annuntiate, and the Castle a Mare.

Two hours after the fight near Monaco was ended, a fair gale of wind blew
from West-South-West, and then the French hoysed up sails to follow the Duke
of Ferandina, Admiral of the Spanish Gallyes, who rowed by the shore toward
Genoa, often sounding for fear of splitting the crazed vessels. Toward
evening, the wind fell, and the Spanish Gallyes ancred at Saint Rheme,
perceiving the French Fleet, which was seven leagues from them, was not able
to reach them for lack of wind; A council was then held by the Earl, The
second.
the Archbishop, and the chief Captains what was to be done; they considered,
that they were unable to bring up the whole Navy against the enemy, some part
of the Fleet being carried backward toward Monaco by violence of the current,
yet unwilling to give the Spanish Seamen time to breath, they concluded to make
up to them with 24 Gallyes, which they had in the Navy, from Marselles, and
Villa-Franca, and with those to play with them, whilst the rest of the Fleet
might conveniently come in to give them battle. It was speedily put in
practice, and their intent as soon discovered by the Spanish General, who to
welcome the French, placed some of his bigger Gallyes behinding the Cape de
Bordiguere, out of the sight of the Frenchmen, intending by force of his oars
to overrunne some of their smaller vessels, and so facilitate his victory. But
the devise took not, the Alarm was given to the whole French Fleet too
suddenly, and at his first appearance, they so saluted him with their shot,
that they severed his Gallyes, the Captain of Sicilie being forced to take the
Baye of Savona for safeguard, and the Royal of Spain, in danger to have been
surprised, had not the brawne of the Rowers been better, then the force of the
Soldiers and Mariners. This victory, though it was not very honorable, as
being got without much opposition, was of good consequence to the French. The
Levant was cleared of their enemies, and the Navy was as still and quiet as the
becalmed sea, till the 27. of September, old style, at which time 14. of the
best ships, were commanded to attend the enemy, who at that time lay in Vado,
with 35. Gallyes. That night they loosed from Arasse, The third.
where they had rode at Anchor all day, 11 launching into the maine, and the
other 3. making up toward the Vay, to discover the posture of the enemy. These
3 were the Reere-Admirall of the Squadron of Bretaigne commanded by Poincy, the
Vice Admiral of the Squadron of Gwienne commanded by Mantye, and the Lewis of
Saint John de Luz commanded by Gyron. The sentinel upon the tower of Genoa,
perceived their sails, and to give a signal to the Gallyes, kindled 3 fires,
and discharged 3 several Canonadoes. The Gallyes mistaking the signal,
prepared not to fight, but fly, thinking that the whole power of the French
Navy, was coming upon them, and fly they did so confusedly to the very walls
of Savona, to save themselves, and their shipping under the protection of that
Canon, that the French overreached some of the slowest ships with their
Ordnance, and slew above 300 men. This is the last passage, betwixt these two
great Armadoes: winter grew on, and the Seas being unfit to ride longer in,
both the Navyes were recalled home, by their several Princes, the Spaniards
thinking themselves honored enough by releeving the Islands, and the French by
preserving Provence from invasion.

Both Navies hovered about the Levant till toward the end of October, without
attempting any further upon one another, and then they seemed to repair to
their winter roads, The Navyes leave the Sea, and retire to Harbor.
those of Naples, to Naples, those of Genoa, to Savona, those belonging to the
great Duke to Ligorne, and the French to Marseilles, where they reported, the
retirement of the Spanish Fleet, to the great joy of the Maritine towns, and
the neighborhood of Provence, who with alacrity, of the Nobility, and
peasants, considering the weakness of the enemies in the Isles, joined
themselves to ten Regiments, which the Christian King had sent, to recover
Honoria, and Margarita, promising an happy issue to their design, but how it
prospered, it is not to be expected in this 4. months History.

The Confederate Armies by land found more trouble in their enterprises, then
the seamen did in their expeditions. Famine and pestilence diminished their
forces daily, and dis-heartned their soldiers, to the advantage of the
Caesarean and Spanish Armies, which were better supplied both with men and
necessaries, then their enemies. The Duke of Rohan, who should have come in to
their succors, was first stopped in his passage at the River of Ticino, about
the beginning of August, in returning into the Veltoline, fell sick himself
of a double Tertian, which though it kept the ordinary paroxysmes, The Duke of
Rohan desperately sick; recovereth unexpectedly.
by the violence of the fits caused a kind of Lethargy; and not himself
only, but the prime Commanders of his Army, to wit Laniere intendant to the
Justice and Policy, the Marshalls of the Camp, and many other Officers were
affected in like manner, to the discouragement of the French forces both in the
Veltoline, and in Millanois. The Imperial and Spanish Armies, received the
news of his sickness speedily, and soon after of his death, (which though
false was not improbable nor incredible, the same relation being brought to the
French Court at Paris by an ordinary Carrier) and prepared for the winning of
the Fort of Riva, And frustrates the design upon Riva.
judging the design to be easily feasible, by reason of the Dukes weakness.
But his recovery frustrated that attempt, that happening upon the 17th. day of
his sickness by a Fortunate Crisis which put a period to his malady, and
enabled him to hold what he had got in the Veltoline, though not to join with
the confederate Armies in Italy.

The Scene of war by land had diverse changes. The forces under the Duke of
Savoy and Crequi by the end of June had gotten sundry places of strength in
Lombardie, and the third of July old style, Varese taken by assault, by the
Confederate Armies.
having taken by assault the City of Varese in the Signiory of Genoa (betwixt
Savona and Volti) and put the German garrison in it to the sword by reason of
the infection, left those parts and marched toward Castelleto and Sesto, where
they demolished Trino, the house of pleasure to the Count Cerbellone: But then
the dye turned, and it was enough for them to keep, what they had gotten, no
time to adventure upon further Conquests. The Spanish Army had received no
small loss the month passed in the battle at Navile, but then was reenforced
by some Regiments newly come out of Germany, the Neapolitane forces, and many
Milanois, for the Marquess of Leganez Governor of Milan, Leganez ralli eth
his forces.
and Generalissimo of that Army, July 16/26 had mustered up the Inhabitants of
that great City, from 20. years old to 60. and drawn out as many as he
thought necessary for the present service, under the command of 6. Field
Marshalls, viz: the Prince Triultio, the Marq- Gro. Maria Visconti, Don Philip
Sfondrato, Alessandro, and Marcellino Visconti, and Giacomo Fugani, and the
Generalate of Don Francisco Mautiques, and with this Army confisting of 14000.
Foot, and 5000. Horse, made head against the French forces, which then
consisted only of 8000. Foot at most, and 2000. Cavalliers (the pestilence
having destroyed almost the one half of the confederate Host) he marched
toward them. The combined Armies were at that present enquartered by
Bourguemenier upon the river of Ticino, intending there to unite their troops,
part whereof were lodged upon the way, by which their victuals were brought
from Piemont, to secure the convoy upon their passage, The Confederate Army
enquartereth at Romagnano.
and the Spanish Army, marched directly toward Romagnano, to seize of that
quarter, and intending to cut off the provisions from the French Armies, lodged
themselves betwixt that and Piemont. Though money be the Sinews, yet victuals
are the vital spirits of war, and the Duke of Savoy the General, with the
Lieutenant General Crequy, understanding the Spanish design, to prevent it,
rose speedily, and by a quick march arrived at Romagnano, where they
entrenched themselves to wait upon the enemies proceedings, The Spanish at
Carpignano.
who lay from them about 8 English miles upon the banks of Sesia, in a place
called Carpignano.

The French expected that the Spanish forces would advance toward them, and
set upon them in their Quarter, and to that purpose kept a careful watch,
sometime showing themselves before theenemy, which stirred not from his
Quarter, as if they meant to outbrave him, but moved not thence till they were
certified that the Field-Marshall, The French remove to the Lomeline.
the Count du Plessis Praslin, whom the General had sent to the Castle de
Fontana, with 1000. horse, and as many Musketeers, to fetch sour great Canons
which be had left there for his more speedy march, was returned to Romagnano,
and then because the whole territory thereabouts was wasted by the pressure of
his and the Spanish Armies, himself resolved to take up his Quarter in the
Lomeline by Candy, near the Fort of Breme, and the Spanish Commander for want
of forage, removed his Camp into the center of Millanez: all the Country
thereabouts, to wit, that part from Alexandria to the principality of Piemont,
on both sides the River Taner, (the Lomeline only excepted whether the French
Army was marching) all the Novarois from the valley of Sesia, The Spanish to
Millanez.
and the river of Ticino, till within four leagues of Milan, and all the high
Country betwixt Ticino and the River of Ada, being already forrag'd by the
means of this war, which like a Basiliske burnt up the grass and corn where
it crawled, and like an Army of Locusts, devoured all the fruit of the earth.

Three several inducements moved the Duke of Savoy to entrench himself in the
Lomeline: the first was the vicinitie of the royal Fort of Breme, which was
built by him, at that place, The royal Fort of Breme built by the Duke of Savoy
where the river of Sesia disgorgeth himself into Poe, betwixt Casall and
Valentia, and the security he received thereby for his Army, the Fort
commanding both the Rivers generally, and the Poe particularly, and more
especially; and so yielding the Army a liberty of free commerce upon both the
streams, maugre the forces of the enemy, the second was to hinder the inroades
of the Spaniards upon the Villages and Frontier Towns of Piemont, where they
had formerly practiced all manner of hostility, burning the Towns, putting to
the sword both old and young, women and infants, especially at Gatinara, where
neither the professed orders of religion, nor the Sanctuaries could secure such
as retired to those places of refuge, from the enemies fury; and lastly the
vicinity of Piemont, from whence he might speedily and conveniently be
relieved with men and victuals upon all occasions. So now the French and
Savoyards Armies were rather employed in a defensive then offensive war.

The Caesarian and Spanish forces perceiving how things stood, omitted no
opportunity, nor left any stone unmoved which might serve to advance their
designs. A treasonable purpose upon Villa-Franca discovered and prevented.
It was not questioned by the enemy, whether was more lawful, power or policy,
open war, or private practices to attain their ends. Both were practiced,
and the last though most dishonorable, was not refused. yet the issue was
fatal to the instrument, and no way advantageous to the abetters or approvers.
A male-contented traitorous heart, forgetting the duty and loyalty which he
ought his natural Lord, and seduced by the golden promises of the Spanish
General, undertook to deliver him Villa Francha, a Sea port, where there
stands a Town and Castle appertaining to his highness of Savoy, in his Estate
of Nissa, chalked him out the way by which his forces might come privately and
without suspicion, if discovered, and promised an easy admittance into the
Town and Citadell. But his treason being discovered, and confessed by himself
upon the wrack, the Marquess of Bagnasck, Governor of that state, assisted
with some French Soldiers, made good the passage first to prevent the
dangerous consequences of that enterprise, and afterward by a Court of
justice, put the perfidious traitor to a deserved shameful death. He was a
gangrenated member of the Commonwealth, and providence called upon lustice to
use her sword for his rescission, who otherwise had exposed the whole body to
putrefaction.

It is counted a masterpiece in the Science of Defense, to beat another at
his own weapon, and in war, to blow up the Miner by his own work, or to
make use of a like project or stratagem, to the ruin of the first deviser. The
Duke of Savoy received intelligence in the Camp of the Spanish design, and
posted thence to Turin, to give order for the defense of Nissa, and the
territory about, The Garrison of Spaniards in Crevecaeur driven out, and no blow
given.
where being informed of the arrival of the French Fleet, and conjecturing by
probable arguments, that the state of his Sea-townes was now secure, he
returned with as much speed to the Camp at Candie, for performance of his
charge, having stayed but two days only at his Courtat Turin. In the time of
his neutrality, he had laid a Spanish Garrison in Crevecaeur, a Town in Gallia
Cisalpina, to defend it against all foreign invadors, but now not without
cause jealous of the presidiarie Soldiers fidelity, which at first were
brought in to prevent a feared mischief, which by this overture was taken
away: He sent to the Prince of Masseran to avoid them, not by violence, but
subtlety, unwilling to expose his Subjects to the danger of intestine broils,
if it might be effected otherwise. The project was not traiterous, but
delusive, the Spanish Soldiers were not amuzed to betray any of their
Sovereigns Forts into the hand of a stranger, but to relinquish their forcible
possession, and resign it quietly to the right owner. The Prince followed the
Dukes directions, and whilst one part of the Spanish Garrison was abroad
without the Castle, sporting after the condition of mad young blades, the Prince
privately brought in some hundreds of his men, whom he prepared for his turn,
who caused the remainder of the old Garrison to quit the place with a still
silence, glad that they could keep in their tongues when noise and clamor
might have been prejudicial to their lives. And thus the Duke of Savoy got an
assurance of one of the principal Frontiers of his dominion.

Leganez the Spanish General, to regaine the loss of Creuecaeur, Rotofredi
taken in by the Spanish Army.
or to equalize it with a parallel achievement, first attempted upon the Fort
of Breme, and failing thereupon the first adventure, unwilling to spend the
remainder of the summer without action, turned toward the Fort of Rotofredi
sited upon the Poe, distant from Piacenza, about 6 English, or Italian miles,
under the Dominion of the Duke of Parma, and took it by composition in the
space of three days.

The Duke was then gone to Mantua to crave 4000. men of the Mantoese, and sent
to the state of Venice, to desire as many voluntary auxiliaries to help him in
his extremity. His voyage was not altogether fruitless; the Duke of Medina by
mediation of friends laid down arms, the Mantuan and the Venetians granted his
desire, and at his return finding Rotofredi yielded to the Spaniards, and
Valditaro surrendered to the Prince Don John d'Auria, he first chopped of the
heads off both the Governors, and then divided his Army into two bands, with
the first intending to avenge himself of D'Auria, by the siege of Saint
Stephano, Valditaro taken by John d'Auria.
and with the latter to recover Rotofredi (if it were possible) out of the hand
of the enemy, the place being the Key of his Country, and fit to yield no small
succor to Piacenza, if that City should happen to be attempted by the enemy.

Saint Stephano was taken in by his forces, St. Stephano taken by the Du. of
Parma.
and the Prince d'Auria, and the Duke stood upon equal terms, in point of
martial honor, and military gain, yet not without an hostile emulation, and
to reconcile them, the state of Genoa sent first Alessandro Santy, a man of
note in that City, to mediate a peace, the Prince being a Citizen and free
Burgess of Genoa, and he not prevailing, the Pope sent out a Patent Edict,
thereby commanding the Prince to restore Valditaro to the Duke, and the Duke to
restore Saint Stephano to the Prince, but whether their swords were blunted by
his Keys, it is yet uncertain.

Rotofredi was well manned both for number of the men and resolution, Rotofredi
rebesieged by the Parmesans.
and though there wanted not remonstrances of difficulty, and danger, to
dissuade the Duke from besieging it, yet he knowing of what perilous
consequence it was to have the Spaniards to hold it, resolved to beleaguer it,
and if possible to recover it. The Garrison within spared no cost to fortify
it, and if art could do it, to make it impregnable. The Army without resolved
to relieve it, and (if their accomplices in the Fort were necessitated) to
succor the Garrisons. And yet the Duke changed not his first counsel, on he
went, and about July 17/27. sat down before it, planted his batteries, blockt
up the passages, by which the Spanish succors should pass, and played upon
the Citadell with his Artillery, hoping in the end to carry it. The Garrison
answered him by their Canonadoes, and the shot failing, to endammage his well
entrenched Army, the Soldiers took up their lesser Arms, and frequently
sallied out upon the Camp, still returning with some tokens of gain, and
though in one which happened August 4. new style, they were chased back to
their very walls, by the Marquess Hannibal, third son to the Count Fabiano
Scoti, an hopeful young Gentleman, not above 18. years of age, yet they shot
him then with a Spingarde, (a kind of Musket charged with many bullets) and
slew him; and in another fally afterward killed the horse under one of the
Marquesses brethren, who desiring to avenge his brothers blood, was ranging his
forces to encounter them, and somewhat too boldly pressed upon the fleshed
enemy. Six weeks the Dukes Forces lay before the Fort, enduring many shockes
by the Spanish Garrison, which then beginning to be in extremity, was
fortunately relieved in the beginning of September, by their confederates in
the Camp of Leganez, who first sent the Colonel Geldas with 2000. Relieved by
the Spanish Army.
horse, to discover the Parmesans posture, and afterward followed himself
with the maine body of the Army, to raise the siege, and relieve the Citadell.
It was a piece of hot service, and the Spanish General showed himself to be
both a discreet and valiant Commander. His way was to be cut out with the
sword, or he could get no passage. The Parmesan however inferior to him in
number, yet had the advantage of place, and that notwithstanding Leganez
assaulted him at once in all his Quarters, and by the help of the
presidiaries, who acted their parts well in the prosecution of the adventure,
that they killed 600. of the Parmesans common men, and six Commanders, took
300. prisoners, put the rest of the bsieegers to a confused flight, releeved
the Fort, and that they might neither lose time nor opportunity, marched
speedily into the Camporemotto, in the territory of Piacenza, and there took
the Forts of Fircuzola, Borgo, Saint Domino, Buseto, Monticella, Diverse Forts
taken from the Parmesan.
Rivalgar, and the salt pannes of Sassio, some by asfault, and some by
composition, the country paying down 50000. Rixe-dollers to be spared from
pillage.

The Parmesan was now, reduced to a wonderful straight, his territory wasted,
his Forts surprised, and Piacenza the only City he had of note upon the Poe
first blockt up, and then straightly besieged by the enemy. Had that place
yielded slightly, nothing almost had been left him but Parma, and that too had
been exposed to the mercy or fury of the adverse party. The Prince to add
Spirit to the Citizens and presidiarie souldiets there whilst the Spanish Army
was in Campo remoto, The City of Piaceusa is, besieged.
knowing it to be a pleasing morsel, and that Leganez would not spare either
labor or cost to get it, went thither in person, and not concealing the danger
which might, and was to be expected to ensue, desired the Soldiers and
Citizens to stand firm, and to follow his example, in withstanding the
assaylants, assuring them that succors would come from the King of France, and
timely too to deliver both that City and the adjacent territory from the
Eagles talons. His words gave some comfort to the Citizens and his exemplarie
actions in his own person, more, it was resolved to attend the good hour of
relief, and to endure all extremities before they would surrender. The Spanish
General knowing the strength of the place to be such as either he must take it
by famine, or not at all, and how easily it might be releeved from Parma, at
least by the benefit of the Poe, if not by land, at once caused a royal Fort
to be built at Longina, upon the River, and fortified the Castle of Sartanino,
betwixt the two sister Cities, that no su^pplies either of men or victuals
might be brought from Parma thither by land or water, and in the space of five
or six weeks, reduced it to such want, that though the Magazin within was
sufficiently stored with corn, yet there wanted milles to grind it, and the
besieged could get no other meal, than what the hand-mils could afford them;
yet still remained they constant to the Duke, expecting the French succors,
which came up happily: Septem. 21. October. 1. though not to their present
delivery, yet to the qualification of their misery.

Besides the 8000 auxiliaries landed at Nissa, as is before related, Sundry
auxiliaries sent to the Duke of Parma.
the Christian King dispatched some thousands of men, by the way of the
Dolphinate, and Provenze, and made over a good sum of money to the Marshall
Crequy for the payment of his Soldiers, and these new Soldiers added to the
small forces the Duke of Parma had abroad, made an invasion into Montferat,
forced Fontanetto and Percerola, two strong Forts belonging to the King of
Spain, to yield, and took up the winter Quarter for their horse in that
dominion. The Generalissimo of the confederate Army about the same time, being
advertised that the Fort of Breme was much annoyed by 200 Spanish presidiaries
which lay in the Town and Fort of Castell-novetto, Make an inroade into
Montferrat.
three leagues distant from Mortara, gave order to Montgalliard, Commander of
the royal Fort of Breme, to attempt if he could take it by onslat, and he
attended with 150. Musketeers, drawn out of his own regiment, and 100,
others selected out Ferons, 50. Corflets, 2 companies of horse, and one of
Dragoons, undertaking the adventure, October. 12. two hours before day, marched
thither, applied his Petards to the gates, (which answering his entendments)
entered immediately, put 80. of the Garrison Soldiers to the sword, took some
prisoners, constrained the rest to fly, and giving his soldiers first time to
pillage it, soon after burnt it to the ground, and returned to Breme the same
day with his prisoners and booty. And these two fortunate attempts, and the
sacking of the Fort Ottobiano soon after by the same Montgalliard, meeting
together, moved the Spanish General to rise with a good part of his Army from
the siege, and to leave the City slenderly blocked up, taking his head Quarter
at Pavye, nearer home, least the French and Parmesan forces should make a fresh
in-roade into Millanez, to the joy of the Piacenzans, who conceived that they
themselves alone, were then able to hew out a way for their liberty, though
their friends abroad should not come in to assist them. But whether their
hopes, grew up to fruit, or were nipt in the blossom, it is yet unknown, and
we must refer it to our next discovery.

Whether it was the jealousy of the Genoois, a people suspicious by nature,
and more by reason of their treasure, which is commonly kept with fear, and
lost with sorrow, or the thing endeavored truly by the Spaniards, it is not
worth the dispute, yet soon after the Spanish General was remooved to Pavye,
he rose from thence, and went to Noni, Icalousie betwixt the Genoeses and
Spaniards.
with 4000. Foot, and 2000. Dragoons, and the Duke of Ferandina at the same
time, viz. November. 2/12. would have brought in the Spanish Fleet into the
harbor of Genoa. Curriers sent from Venice and other parts to the same intent,
certified the Genoeses, that the Generals by Land and Sea, meant to surprise
the City, that Leganez intended to lay these soldiers in the town, whilst
the Admiral having made all sure by sea, might secure him of holding it, to
the use of the Catholic King his Master, and the state taking notice first of
the Land-Armies secret march thither-ward, and afterward of the arrival of
the Fleet at the same time, chained up their Haven, mustered up their
Land-men, and to the old train band, added 49. new Companies consisting each
of 90. soldiers, and 10. Gentlemen, under several Captains to defend the
City, from the violence of the Spanish Armadoes, which they concluded, must
speedily be effected. The Admiral was the first, and only Commander which
appeared, and he finding the Haven barred against his Gallyes, went in person
to the States assembled in their Towne-house, The Spanish Fleet forbid den the
harbor of Genoa
desired them to give entrance for the Fleet into the Harbor, it being driven
thither by contrary winds, and if forced to abide at Sea in danger to be
re-encountred by the French, who had not yet left the coast of Italy. His
Oratory could not prevail, but in stead of an expected grant, they gave him an
absolute denial, yet seasoned with this cold excuse, that it was not the
custom of that Commonwealth, to admit any armed vessels into their Harbor.
Ferrandina not taking this for a full answer, began to be instant, and urgent,
showing the affection of the King his Master, to that state, and how ill, he
might take it, to be denied, such an ordinary courtesy. The chief Magistrate
answered, that the state was not behind him, in mutual offices of love, that
he had been supplied out of their chamber yearly with great sums of money,
and this present year assisted with their Gallyes; and that now in stead of a
friendly requital, it was more then suspected, he meant to spoil them of
their liberties, adding in fine, that if the Fleet did not retire quickly,
they would sink his Gallyes, beginning with the Admiral, the bottom wherein
the Duke commanded, presently giving order to the prime Canoneere, to levy the
Ordnance, point-blanke upon the Spanish Fleet, and discharge upon it, The
friends of Carlo d'Auria arrested.
if the Mariners retired not speedily. It was no time to stay. The Duke
departed immediately, returned to the Fleet, and sought an harbor elsewhere,
and Leganez unwilling to provoke the Genoois any further, marched back again.
The Genoeses, delivered from their present fear, inquired further into the
business, and Don Carlo d'Auria being accused that he favored the conspiracy;
they sent to Savona, to arrest his parents, friends, and servants to discover
the truth, commanded Lucas Giustiniani, Commissary of the Port, and the other
lodge in their Gallyes, and to keep a careful watch, concluding with the
Historian, quod sanctius antiquitus gerebantur bella quam nunc coluntur
Amicitiae.

The Pompeiopolitanes, or Pampelonois, subjects to the King of Spain, in that
part of Navarre, which he at this day holds, in October, had a design upon
the Territory of Bearne, The Viceroy of Navarre his design upon Bearne
prevented.
which still remains under the Crown of France, though it lie in Navarre: The
Marquess of Val-Paraiso the Spanish Viceroy, levied as many men, and as
secretly as he could in the month of September, to that purpose, but his
Musters being not to be concealed, by reason of the violences done by the
Chiefetaines to the common soldiers, who still more affect the Government of
the Christian, then the Catholic King, he gave out, that the forces were
raised for the defense of Dunkerke, Genoa, and other places, which stood in a
friendly relation to Spain. But the first Sun in October discovered his
purpose, news was brought to the Bearnois, that the Viceroy was ready to march
through the Valley of Roncevall, and thence to pass into the valley of
Barentons, to surprise, pillage, and burn the towns of Saint Mary, and Oleron
which lay not above two hours going from the Spanish Randevouz. Hereupon the
Baron of Mesples without delay, beat up an Alarm, armed 200. Musketeers of
his own Companies, and drew 300. others out of the two towns, and marched
directly to the passage by which the Viceroy should come, and at the first
sight discharged upon them, which by nature, being a warlike people, for all
that started not, but prepared for their defense. The French Commander seeing
their resolution charged, and discharged again upon them, and in the end
having slain some few, and wounded many, forced them to return homewards, it
being in vain to attempt further, the whole Militia of Bearne, as many as
could bear Arms, being by this time, ready to entertain them.

The Viceroy seeing this enterprise fail, He takes and pillageth John de Luz.
wheeled about to Guiapuscoa, a Province in the North-East of Spain, and
thence, by the river of Hendaye, and artiued at Saint. John de Luz a port town
in Guienne with 2000 horse and about 8000 Infanterie. The town is unfortified,
though it be near the Frontiers of Spain, save only by a bridge over which
they must necessarily pass that come into it. This place, his Army assaulted,
and was five times beaten off the bridge by the inhabitants; yet in the end,
they carried it, and having plundered it, marched toward Bayonne, a City of
strength, and consequence, thinking to surprise that also. But they were met
upon their march, by the old Duke d'Espernone, Is forced to retreat.
the Duke de Valette, the Count of Grammont, and the Marquess of Duras; and by
their forces were forced to retreat toward Spain, yet not without doing some
damage to the French, for they burnt the town of Ascaine upon their return,
as they had done Rogne, at their arrival. And thither we must leave Grammont
pursuing them, for here this present relation has a full period.

THE PASSAGES in Picardie, etc.
CHAP. III.
THE fable of Achclous, as it is moralized by that sublimed wit of the late
viscount Verulam, in part lively represents the state of France in the late
Invasion, though the issue be not altogether answerable. The vaince Cardinal,
corrivall for honor with the Christian King, brings a great Army into his
dominions, takes some of his towns, and appears in field, as if by battle he
meant to put the Kings armies to flight, and so get the Amalthapan horn his
Country. The King to suppress the growing storm, musters up his forces,
fortifies the passages, gives sundry directions to his several Commanders; and
in the end himself appears in field in person to stop the progress of his
professed enemy.

The Infant Cardinal, to avoid the calumny of an unjust quarrel, and
vexatious war, first published the cause of his invasion by D'ensuing
declaration.

The Cardinal Infants his Manifesto for his War in France.
Ferdinandus by the Grace of God, Infant of Spain, Lieutenant, Governor, and
Captain General of the Low Country, and of Burgundy.

UNTO all those to whom these present Writings shall come Greeting, France
against all reason and Justice, having moved and maintained war upon the
States of the Emperor, and of my Lord the King, given extraordinary succou
both of men and money, their rebellious subjects procured the Swedes to invade
the Empire, received and bought of them the towns of Alsatia, and of other
hereditary Countries appendant to Our most royal houses, not sparing the
Catholic League it self, which had taken Arms for none other end, but for
the good of Religion: And it being notorious that the same France, (after all
these public and manifest controventions to the treaty of Peace) has finally
proceeded to a breach thereof, whereas we rather had cause to denounce the war,
That she has sent for her army to over run the Low Countries, the duchy of
Millaine, and other free fees of the Empire in Italy, and now lately the
Country of Burgundy, (contrary to the laws of neutrality) contrary to the
public Faith, and contrary to the express promises of the Prince of Conde,
disguising in the mean time those attempts and breaches of Faith before the
face of all Christendom, with certain weak precepts, and false surmises
contained in diverse Declarations approved in the Parliaments of France, and
accompanying all those unjust proceedings, with sundry insolences, calumnies,
and contempt of sacred persons; and having also observed, that this Our so long
connivence at so manifest injury, has served for no other end but to make our
enemies more audacious and insolent; and that the compassion which we have had
toward France, has drawn on the ruin of those whom God has put under the
obedience of their Majesty's: For those considerations, according to the power
which we have received from His Imperial Majesty, we have commanded our joined
Armies, to enter into France, for no other purpose, then to obliege the King of
France to enter into firm Covenants of a good and sure Peace, and to remove
those impediments which may hinder this so great a good: And forasmuch as it
principally concerns France,, as weary of such tumults to hearken to this
proposition; we cannot but believe, that all the States of that Kingdom, will
not only set forth their demonstrance, but also if need be assist us with
their Forces, that the King convinced, either by arguments or arms, may be
induced to chastise those which have been the authors of all those wars
which these 7 or 8 years past have been in Christendom. And which when they
had provoked, and assailed, all their neighbors have brought upon France all
these evils which she suffers at this present, and all those which do at
this time threaten her: And although we are well informed of the weakness and
division into which those great disorders, and evil councels have cast that
Kingdom, yet we declare that the intentions of their Majesty's, are not to
serve themselves of this occasion to ruin it, or to draw from thence any other
profit, then by that means to work a peace in Christendom, which may be
stable and perminent for these reasons, and withal, to show what estimation
their Majesty's do make of the Prayers of the Queen Mother of the most
Christian King, we give them to understand, that we will protect and use as
friends, all those of the French nation, who either jointly, or severally,
shall second these our designs, and have given order, that neutrallity shall
be held with those of the Nobility, and with the Towns that shall desire it,
and which shall refuse to resist them who shall oppose good of Christendom, and
their own safety, against whom shall be used all manner of hostility, without
giving quarter to their persons, or sparing either their houses or goods.

And our further will is, that all men should take notice, that it is the
resolution of their Majesty's, not to lay down arms, till the Queen e-Mother
of the Most Christian King, be satified and contented, and till the Princes
uniustly expulsed from their estates be restored, and until the peace be fully
ratyfied that they may not fear to be disturbed by him who has violated the
treaties of Only a pretended treaty (say the French) where in Father Joseph the
Capuchine, being employed by the Cardinal Richelew, as agent for the Christian
K. after a negotiation of 3. years to no purpose, finding himself deluded by
the Austrians and Spaniards returned into France revealed what he had
discovered, which caused the French King to take up Arms.
Ratisbon, and others made before and since he has had the mannagement of the
affairs of France, neither do we pretend to draw any other damage from the
good success, which it shall please God to give unto our just persecutions,
then to preserve and augment the Catholic Religion, to pacify Europe, to
relieve the oppressed, and to restore unto every one, that which of right
belongs unto him.

Given at Mentz this fifth of July, 1636.
And then leaving a flying Army with the Count de Feria, for the safeguard of
the Provinces under him, immediately, as if he would not give time to his
Majesty to arm himself against his fury, viz. about the end of July
appeared before Roy, a small piece in Picardie, with 14000 horse, 10000 foot
for service, and 3000 others which were to be employed to bring in forage for
the Cattle, and bread for the Army. A prodigious Comet never appeared more
formidable; a sudden fear of his power so surprised both the Citizens and
Peasants generally, that not only the inhabitants of those Frontiers abandoned
their habitations, but some pieces of strength, La Capella and Catelet
delivered up traitorously.
as la Capelle a Catelet (the Commanders more ready disloyally to take part
with the foreign Invader, then to hazard a blow for their Liege Sovereign)
yielded to the Spanish Prince, and so facilitated his enterprise against
Corbie, a City of some importance upon the river Soame; which being commanded
by as false a man as either of the other, and followed their example, and
surrendered it before the French Army could come to secure it.

His Majesty in this confusion, knowing himself to be the man, to whom the
care of so many people was committed, slept not, but advising with his Council
in the beginning of August, raised a puissant Army for the recovery of his
Country, and expulsion of his enemies. His goodness to the inhabitants of his
Frontiers in Picardie, Champaigne, and Burgundy, in releasing so many from
their taxes, and contributions for the space of three years, as should
voluntarily serve in this expedition; and his wisdom in commanding those
Gallants which ruffled it in the streets of Paris, when they should have been
before the face of the enemy; whether Commanders or ordinary Gentlemen, to
repair to their colors within four and twenty hours, the one upon the
penalty of the loss of their places, the other upon forfeit of their Gentry,
and loss of their goods to be employed to his Majesty's necessary use, and
charging the superfluity of unnecessarie Artificers to attend his service, by
his Edicts published August 15/5, speedily supplied him with a puissant Army
of fifty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand horse, well mounted to hinder
the Cardinals progress.

And yet before the Army should march forth, his Majesty not relying merely
upon the multitude of his host, nor the strength of his horses, proclaimed a
solemn Fast: whereupon the Romanists, the Archbishop of Paris, the Sorbonne,
and the Curates of the several parishes, made prayers for the good success of
his Majesty's Armies in the City: and the Protestants met together at
Charenton in faithful devotion for their Sovereign. Where after supplications
made for his Majesty and the Kingdom, Drelincourt, the Protestant Preacher,
made a Sermon to admonish his auditors of their faithfulness and duty to their
Sovereign.

This being past, Du Beck and S. Ledger. Governors of La Capelle, and Catelet.
to strike terror into all treacherous hearts, which might by the impunity of
perfidious disloyal men, take courage in after time to conspire with the enemy
against their Sovereign and the public State, his Majesty in a full Council
of war, proceeded against du Beck, late Governor of la Capelle, and St.
Ledger, Commander in Catelet, for their base Cowardice and treason (a coward is
seldom loyal) in surrendering their places of charge to his Majesty's and the
kingdoms adversaries. Their several crimes were first published, and upon
examination Du Beck was found to have delivered up La Capelle within seven
days after it was first surrounded by the Spanish Army, the Moates and Ditches
about it being then full of water, and himself not constrained thereunto by
any private sedition, as he had falsely rumoured it, that on the contrary, the
Officers and inhabitants were zealous to preserve the City for the Kings use,
Arraigned.
and that he had compelled them to sign the written capitulation which he had
published for his own justification, threatening them, that if they refused to
subscribe, he would deliver them into the hands of the Spaniards, without
quartier. That he had not brought one handful of earth to fortify the City
since the siege began, and that he kept two Flemings privately in the
Citadell. Catelet was found to have been delivered up within three days after
the enemy appeared before it. That the Governor kept but one Canonier in the
City. That he was able and provided sufficiently, having fifty Carabins,
three hundred men in Garrison, and sixty pays in his hand to have maintained
the place good for the King. That he alone made the Capitulation, and in fine
both these Commanders being proved to have been negligent in walking their
rounds, and doing the other offices belonging to their charge, and having
sufficient Ammunition for their defense, and yet to have surrendered their Cities
without a breach made in the walls, had this horrid sentence pronounced
against them following. Sentenced.
That the bodies of the said Du Beck and S. Ledger should be bound to four
horses in the Grive, and drawn into four pieces, that their quarters should
be planted upon several posts in the way to Picardie, their heads set upon
Poles upon the Port St. Denis: All which they should suffer in person if they
could be apprehended, or otherwise in effigy. And because the said Du Beck,
and S. Ledger, in stead of repairing to his Majesty to give an account of their
fact, as finding themselves guilty of so capital a treason, have absented
themselves from the justice of the King, His Majesty ordered further, that
whosoever should bring in either of their heads, should have for a reward
sixty thousand Livers. That the said Du Beck and S. Ledger, and their
posterity, should for ever be degraded from their Nobility. That the Arms of
their families should be defaced, their principal houses razed, and for a
perpetual memory of their detestable treason, And executed in effigy.
in the place where their principal houses stood, a pillar should be erected,
with a brazen table appendant thereunto, wherein this sentence should be
engraven, That all their goods should be confiscate, That not only those,
which should after this sentence give them any relief, should be accounted
Traitors, and so proceeded against, But that whosoever should make any
proposition for revocation of this Confiscation, should be held as a
Conspirator against his royal Majesty. And in fine, this judgment was put in
execution Monday Aug. 18. the Commanders being executed upon the place of the
Grive in picture, and their Arms razed.

This decree against these his disloyal subjects, was seconded by another
careful Ordinance for the welfare of his faithful people the Merchants, the
Merchants adventuring upon the Rivers of Aisne and Oyse, who were enjoined
under pain of the loss of their bottomes and merchandise, to have their boats
well manned, and armed against the straggling enemies. And that decree being
past, The Queen made Regent of France, during the kings absence
the King himself having left the politic government to the Queen, and some
selected Counselors, during his absence, September 15 marched with this Army
Royal toward the enemy, the Avantguard being led by the Cardinal Duke, and
the Marshall Chastillion, the Battle by his Majesty, and the Monsieur his
brother, The Kings Army marches forward.
herre apparent to the Crown; and the Rere-guard by the old Marquess de la
Force, an old Soldier of singular experience, and known fidelity.

This somewhat abated the fear of the Natives, who now began to gather heart
upon discovery of the Kings care over them, and inverted the designs of the
Cardinal Infant, who though he had taken Corby before, with as much ease as he
had done la Capella and Catelet, by the corruption or cowardice of the
Governor and inhabitants (for though the Lord of Premi August 16. having got
secretly into the town, omitted neither entreaties nor good Remonstrances to
persuade him and the Burgesses from rendering it, and the Soldiers both Swedes
and French therein, vowed their constancy to the King, yet neither of these
could alter their resolution from giving up the place) though the Prince had
formerly dared the Count of Soissons to a set battle, which he wisely,
contrary to the fiery nature of the French, avoided, expecting his Majesty's
succors; yet upon the appearance of his Majesty's Armies, yet he now attempted
no designs, but fell to fortifying the towns he had taken, as intending
only to keep what he had gotten, and not adventure further to enlarge his
victories.

And yet now began the time of action, for the Infant Prince Cardinal seeing
himself in a strange Territory, and his numbers unequal to those of the
Christian King, imployes his Crabats to spoil the country, sent for two new
Regiments to the Duke of Feria, employed his spies to discover the woods and
passages, how they were guarded, and where the river was passable. But the
Crabats found it not so easy now as they had done formerly to rove about that
Province, the Garrisons of Amiens, Abiville and Peronne, who before had enough
to do to defend themselves, now secured by the Kings near Army, being at
leisure to attend these voleurs, and the spies being watched, taken and hanged,
seldom returned to give an answer of their message. The French Army
encouraged by the Infant Cardinals not pressing forward, began now to expect
his retrait backward, and in that confidence were divided, the one part under
the Monsieur, whom his Majesty returning for a short space to Chantiley, had
made his Lieutenant General for the siege of Roy, another for Corby, under de
la Force, and the third under the command of the Count Soissons, to attend the
Infant, whose numbers were now much abated, partly by pest and famine, and
partly by their separation for the fortification of Roy, La Capelle, Catelet
and Corby, of which they were yet masters.

The Monsieur appeared before Roy, September 8. 18. Roy taken by the Monsieur.
when and where the Gentry of the kingdom in an honorable emulation began
first to show their valor, and to express that there was nothing they would
not dare to do for their Sovereign, in the view of the Son of France. The
place being but a little one, could not long hold out; yet such was the
fidelity of the Spanish Garrison to their Prince, that they endured a whole
days battery by a dozen Canons, and would not surrender it till they perceived
a breach in the walls, nor then neither, but upon these honorable conditions,
That the Captain and the Soldiers should march out with the arms and baggage
which they brought into the town, and be conducted with a safe convoy to
their army; which being granted, Weslaus Kaye, governor there for the
Emperor, surrendered one of the Ports that night, and the town next morning.
The Soldiers had their conditions truly kept; but the Magistrate of the
place, being a new created one, and one that received his place from the
Spaniards, was hanged the 10. 20. of the same month, and some other of the
inhabitants accused and arrested for having had correspondence with the enemy.
This was the first advantage the French had gotten against the Cardinal
Infant, since his first entry into the kingdom: which though it was not
glorious in respect of the place, yet was of good consequence in respect of the
issue. For there was found corn enough to supply the whole Army for many
days, and the Spaniards were deprived of that sustenance, which might have
relieved their pressing necessities.

The King, who during the short time of his retirement from the army, had given
order by a counsel of state, to his Mint-masters, to enhaunce the price of
moneys, after the rate of gold, The price of money raised in France.
from 320 livers to 384, and silver from 23 livers and ten souses to 25 livers
for the better payment of his Soldiers. Being certified of the success at Roy
by Poitrincourt an esquire of his body, September 10.20. within two days
following returned to his Army at Roy; where, having given direction for the
establishing of all things there, himself and the Monsieur marched toward
Corby, to bring that place again to his obedience.

Corby being now in the Infants power, was strongly fortified, as being
reserved for a winter quarter, for such Spanish Soldiers, who were both able
and willing to sally abroad sometimes for pillage, and molest the inhabitants
of Picardie. One thing only was wanting, convenient hand-mills for grinding of
their corn, which neither the Garrison could make, for want of materials, nor
their friends abroad supply them with, by reason of the circumvallations made
about it, though yet far off by the Kings forces. The only help the
Garrison and town had, was the Mill at Fovilloy, upon the side of the
Moorasse, near the City. Hereupon Beaufort, a Dauphinois, a Gentleman
belonging to the Cardinal Duke, then employed upon the Kings service at
Amiens, A bold and prosperous adventure upon the Mill at Corby.
September 16. intending to deprive his Majesty's enemies of that advantage,
with a chosen company of an hundred men, about nine at night, took six Boats,
and therein imbarqued his friends, who about two in the morning arrived at
Dours, a village upon the Soame, a league and half from Corby, where they
landed, and leaving eighteen of their company, to guard the Barks, the rest
were conducted by three Peasants over a great plain; on the right hand whereof
in a Village named Vigni, were lodged seven hundred of the enemies horse, and
on the left hand in an hamlet near Dours, the Corpse du guard of his Infantery.
The beginning of the adventure was full of hazard, yet the issue was
prosperous. They passed on over the two bridges at Corby, and came to the half
Moon without any encounter by the enemy. Good fortune attended the hardy
Gentleman, the Spaniards were then upon their watch, and the French Soldiers
espying the several fires made by the enemy upon their Corpse du guards, grew
timorous, and would have retired, had not the valor of their commander, and
forwardness of seven volunteers, which engaged themselves with him in the
action, been a whetstone to sharpen those spirits which fear had dulled. But
he enjoining the rest to follow his example, in a discreet silence led on to
the Barricadoe at the head of Caus-way, where he broke the chain with Axes,
fell furiously upon the Corpse du guard, and put them all to the sword, and
thence marched to the Mill, where they found another Corpse du guard, the
Commissary for provisions, and sixty Soldiers which were come to bring meal
to the Army; all which in one quarter of an hour they out in pieces, and then
burnt the Mill, and wagons provided for the Portage of the grists, with four
thousand crowns worth of corn and meal; and then making a bravado before the
town of Corby, distant from the Mill about two hundred paces, returned safe to
Amiens.

The Duke de Chaunes, Commander for the King in Amiens, before the design of
Beaufort, had conceived a like project for the recovery of the Fort at
Morevill, from the Spaniards fingers, a place strong for situation, and a
convenient hold for the invaders, who sallying from thence, plundered the
circumjacent country, even to Cleremont, and hindered the traffic up the
River of Morevel to Amiens, The Fort of Morevil taken by Onslat.
and now esteeming it more feasible, by the success of Beaufort at Corby, then
he had done formerly, resolved to put it in execution. The Trophies of
Miltiades rowsed up the sluggish spirits of Themistocles and Previl, a young
gentleman, and Captain in Amiens, not envying the former Cavilaries glory, but
desirous to share in his honor, with 120 musketeers selected out of the
Garrison, and commanded by chosen officers, and one company of light horse, and
another of the Dukes Carabins, Sept. 7. 17. undertook the adventure. The
speech concerning the enterprise, and the prosecution, were almost
contemporaries, the Embryo was not long in forming, but as soon produced,
almost, as conceived. Preuil had his desire, and the 8.18. he arrived with his
followers at the Mill near the Fort, where he encontred a Corpse du guard of
the enemy, and put them all to the Sword. Thence the forlorn hope conducted by
a Sergeant (who was slain by a Musket shot from the Castle) passed the
Ditches, though in water up to the Armepits, and a Petardior amongst them fixed
his engine of devastation to one of the gates, which being fired, made no
bigger a breach, than for two men to enter in Front: The Garrison who had
discovered the French, using their best art and means to abate the force if
they could not altogether prevent and hinder its opperation.

But the rest of the adventurers perceiving now this small gap open for their
admittance, ran through the waters to assist their companions, Bel-castle, and
Souland, 2 Gentlemen and Captains, the first of De Breze his regiment, the
other of Vigans, being the first that entered, met happily with the Lorraine
Captain, the prime commander there, who demanding Quarter, had it given him,
but Preuil entering immediately with the rest of the forces fell upon the
Garrison, slew 50 of the 120 Soldiers, which kept the place for the Spaniard,
and took the rest prisoners, not refusing to give Quarter to any that begged
it: Thus far he went by commission which could not limit him, who being
encouraged by his fortune, marched to another Mill, guarded by some of John de
Werth his Cavellary, whom he slew, and took their provisions for his own use,
depriving the Caesarean Commander by that means of part of the sustenance
ordained for his retinue.

News of both these last attempts and the consequences, was sent to the King
by special Curriers, and came ere looked for to the Infants Camp, who
considering the strength of the Kings army, and the necessities to, which he
was liable in a foreign land, in an orderly retreat took the way of
Peromud, toward Bapaume, for the refreshing of his forces, and better
convenience. His Majesty of France, now in a manner quit of that enemy, gave
instant order for the strait siege of Corby, which being held by a strong
Garrison, much annoyed all Picardy, and upon friday, September, 16. 26. being his
Birthday, by his order given to the Marquess de la Force, to whose care he
trusted, and of whose fortunes by the prefedent actions he had more than a
good expectation. The outworkes at Corby taken by La Force.
The Marshall observed the Kings orderance, and happily executed what was
enjoined him. A good director, who is neither Foole-hardy, nor nicely timevous,
hammers out the way for himself and his dependants. And such was this old
Commander, who in person viewed the enemies guards, observed their
intrenchments, which work was best secured, which more easily mastered, where
the Sentinels were vigilant, where negligent, and having not without hazard
thus begun his round, the same night beat his enemy from his Horn works,
made (...) with the sword upon the greater part of the soldiers attending in
the out-workes, and forced the rest to retire within the walls of the city.

This his Majesty's birthday was crowned with a victory, and this victory
might have been an Omen of perpetual success to the Kings enterprises, had
not the Raven croaked from the hollow Oak, and this honey been mingled with
bitter Myrrh and Aloes, But the wisest men are sometimes caught in a snare,
and though the eye of providence would be ever watchful, yet there wants not a
Mercury to charm this Argus to sleep security, or on overweaning opinion of
each man's several abilities, deluding the ablest understandings to their own
ruin. A fortunate attempt a-against the French, by John de Werth
The French army being now masters of the Spaniards works, without the city,
were so far from fear of being assaulted by the Prince Cardinals forces, that
they intended to make an attempt upon them, and to this purpose, September 23.
Stilo novo, sent out a party to descry the Quarter of John de Werth, which they
meant to surprise the next day ensuing. But the strange vicissitude of fortune,
which misled the Conductors of the Werth out of his way, when he was going
with 1800 horse to make adventure upon the French Camp, brought him directly
upon the French espyals, who mistaking him, for a party of their own, revealed
to him their purpose, whither, and to what end they came abroad. The Baron
heard their discourse, and being as well versed in the Poleticks, as the
Polomicks, hid his Lions skin, and showed the Foxes, told them, he could give
them a particular information of the state of things there, and desired them to
conduct them to the French Quarters, whither he was going, though
misfortunately he had mistaken his way. The spies, whom otherwise he would
have forced to obey him willingly, brought him to Montign, a village betwixt
Corby and Dours, where lay 3 Regiments of horse, 2 Regiments of foot, and 5
companies of Dragoones. There needed then no exhortation to encourage his
Soldiers, the present condition of the French soldiers cried out against
themselves, though their tongues were locked up in silence. They were generally
at rest, not suspecting an enemy, and severed in three several Quarters, as
confident of their own ability, to defend themselves singly if occasion should
require it. The Almaine General stayed not to bid them arm, but fell upon
them as he found them, slew many which were not able to defend themselves,
took 800 prisoners, carried away 1500 horses for service, and might have been
possessed of their Baggage too, had not the devouring fire which he cast
amongst them prevented him. The young Duke of Wirtenberg who was lod ged in
that Quarter escaped miraculously, taken he was, but mistaken.

How welcome the report of this pety conquest (not gotten by a manly fight, but
cast upon the Caesarean Commander by fortune, as himself told the Infant
Cardinal) was to the Spaniards, it is to be judged by the Bone-fires which
were hereupon made in Flanders, and the reward of 6000 Crowns, which the
Infant sent the Baron the next day for this service, by Charoletto his
Secretary. The Christian King accounted it as a scratch, not as a wound, and
with a countenance showing anger, more than sorrow proceeded, to the strait
blocking up of the City. To this purpose, his Majesty the 28 of the same
month, went to Amiens, whither he had caused some of his principal Commanders
to repair, and there consulting with the Count of Soissons, the Duke of
Angoulesme, the Marshalls Chastillon, and La Force, Hallier, and young La Force
Marshal of the Camp; Corby straightly beleagured.
the manner of it was thus concluded, and put into execution speedily. Fontenay
Marivil one of the Fielde-Marshall, with 1000 foot, and 2000 horse were to
incampe in a wood, on that side toward Bargoyne. The Marquess de la Force, and
the Field Marshall Lambert to guard the works on that side toward Paris, and
the rest of the Army to be under the command of Monsieur, and the Count of
Soissons, who were to be inquartered at Buicy, and Lon-villey a league and
half from Corby, on that side toward Dours: All which was done accordingly the
same day: His Majesty took up his quarter at Demvin, a village upon the River
of Soame, and distant from the City one league, not being able to come nearer,
the village in the valley upon the Soame, being burnt up by the Spanish army,
and those upon the hills, not only inconvenient to reside in for want of Water,
but infected with the Pest also, increased by the Corpse of dead men and
Carrion, which were left there uninterred, the Spaniarde having filled up most
of the pits, with the bodies of dead horses and other nastinesse.

It is almost beyond belief to admit the reports which are given out of his
Majesty's vigilance in this occasion; yet it is sure, that he performed the
part of a right. General, and Father of his Country, without giving or
admitting the least opportunity for them within to make any dangerous sallyes
forth, or those without, his enemies and their confederates, The King of France
his vigilance.
to relieve them, October the 9. new style, himself took horse to discover
the Spaniards order in his Camp near Bapaume, and the country of Artois, and
to see what passages were left open for the forces to bring relief to the
besieged. He was attended by his brother the Mounseur, the Count Soissons, the
D. of Angolesme, the Marshall de la Force, the D. of Beaufort, and others, who
after 12 hours travail held a Counsel on Horseback, wherein it was
concluded to give the Infant Cardinal battle in open field, if he should
return to succor those in Corby. The tenth, himself surveyed the works, and
caused 200 Canon shot to be discharged against the City: The twelfth, made a
Muster of his army, to see the number of his people, how many were slain, how
many sick, how many departed without license, and thus continued in his
unwearied pains, till he had so straightened them within the City, that they were
hopeless to avoyde him, the P. Cardinal being gone to Cambray, Prince Thomas,
and John de Werth abiding at Arras, every one taking order for his
Winter-quarter, and then his Majesty, who had all this time behaved himself
like Catoes Gardener, Cujus vestigia, whose presence alone was able to expel
all offensive vermin, at the special supplication of the Cardinal, returned
to Chantilly to breathe a better and more wholesome air for the space of some
few days, his own quarter being infected with the contagious Pestilence,
giving first order to the Marshals de la Force, and Chastillon, to prosecute
the enterprise.

These Chieftaines performed their trust faithfully, and omitting nothing that
might be advantageous for his Majesty's service, that the besieged, straightened
for victuals, hopeless for succor, and seeing the French prepared for an
assault, the last of October, old style, they sent a Drum to desire terms of
Capitulation, and their Commanders putting forth a flagge of Truce, appeared
upon the walls, desiring Commissaries with whom they might enter into treaty.

The Couut of Soissons, The Garrison in Corby capitulates.
who at this time was come to the Camp, gave a willing and gentle ear to
their propositions, which were briefly couched in these few words, that they
desired a cessation of arms till November 4.14. at ten in the morning, at
which time, if they were not relieved by the Infant of Spain, they would
surrender upon fair quarter for themselves, and the loan of 100 wagons to
carry away their luggage. Many inducements there were, which moved the Count to
assent to their desires, the goodness of the place, and special care of the
lives of the Kings subjects, which must have been endangered, if he should
attempt the assault. Assent he did, and employing both his eyes, the one to
look behind him, to prevent their expected succors: the other before him,
for a continual watch upon the town, expected the day and hour appointed.
The measurer of time, the Sun, had run his course, and yet no relief
appeared. But then the wise Commander sent an officer to remember them of their
conditions, and the besieged returned an answer, that they were ready to
perform their covenants. An hour lost cannot be recalled. The Count
instantly dispatched the grand master of the Artillery, with the wagons, which
were admitted in, and loaded by 2 in the afternoon. Then the Count advanced
with his Forces to one of the ports: the garrison in the interim departing the
same way, they came in by the Ancre-port.

The garrison consisted of diverse nations, Spaniards, Italians, Wallons,
Lorraines and Almanes, and observed a kind of state in their going out. First
the horse, whereof there were 3 Companies. Next them followed the wagons,
laden with 600 sick men, and 400 women. Then 2 Canons and 3 wagons filled with
ammunition. After all these came the foot, the Walloones and Germans, with their
Commanders before them; Corby surrendered to the Swedes.
the Italians after them, but without their chieftaines, because they would not
assent to the surrender; and lasty the Lorraines and Spaniards, who were all
safely conducted to Behancourt 2. leagues from Corby, that night; and had a
stronger convoy the next day (upon giving of hostages) to bring them into
Artoys, for fear of the Pesants, which being enraged against them for their
cruelties, would otherwise have taken a sharp revenge upon their persons.

Tidings of this achievement were dispersed abroad speedily, and came to the
King at Chantilly, November. 5. 15. by 4. in the morning, who instantly went to
church to give thanks for this conquest, and directed his Letters to the Duke
of Moubazon, one of the Peers, Governor and Lieutenant-generall for the King
in Paris, and in the Isle of France, to the same effect, the tenor whereof was
as follows.

Cousin, having received power and mercy from God, The Kings letter to the Duke
of Moubezon.
to recover the Town of Corby, late possessed by the enemy of this State, and
to force them to depart from Bourgoyne, whither they were entered with a
puissant Army; I thought fit to give you notice of this happy news, and to
desire you to inform my Subjects, under your charge, thereof also; and would
have you give order that Te Deum may be sung in the Church of Nostre Dame, to
which purport also I have written to the Archbishop of Paris, whom I would have
you to assist therein as is accustomed, that we may praise God fon this happy
success, in which I will not have you fail to give me satisfaction.

Shantilly, November. 5. 15. Signed Lewis, Delomine.


Corbye, being thus recovered by the King, and the formidable Spanish Army
(consisting of 45 Regiments of horse, 6 Regiments of Dragoons, 29 Regiments of
Infantry, with the fresh supplies, and as well provided of Artilery) being
retired homeward, His Majesty put his Anrmie into several garrisons, to
secure his frontiers, providing sufficiently for the presidiarie Horsemen and
injoyning them, not to exceed the proportions. The allowance for each Gindarme
by the day, was 4. pounds of bread, betwixt white and brown, well baked and
wholesome, 3 pounds of flesh, Beef, Veale, or Mutton; two pints of Wine Paris
measure, growing upon the place, or in liew thereof; 4 Pints of Beete or Cider;
40. pounds of Hay; and 7 Pecks of Oats; The Captain to have 6 shares, the
Lieutenant 4. the Ensign 3. the Quartermaster 2. the Farriets, and
underofficers each as one Man at Arms. Each Light Horse was allowed 3 pounds
of bread conditioned like the former: 2 pounds of flesh Beef, Veale, or
Mutton. 3 Chopines of Wine, or 3 pints of Beef, or Cider, 30 pounds of Hay,
and 5. pecks of Oats. The Captain to have 6 shares, the Lieutenant 4 the
Cornet 3. the Quartermaster 2. and the Farriers, and underofficers, each for a
man and half. Each Carabin, and Dragoon was permitted to share the moyetie of
a light horse, the Captain to have 6 shares, the Lieutenant 4. the Cornet 3.
the Farriers and underofficers, each the proportion allotted to a Carabin, or
Dragoone. All which was to be delivered presently, and really upon the Muster
of the Troops, and their entrance into their assigned Garrrisons, in the
presence of the Governors, Majors, and Sheriffs, which should take a list of
the Soldiers, and renew their Muster every 10. days. This provision to be
paid in specie, and not to be exchanged into money upon any pretense
whatsoever. It was ordered also, that the Soldiers receiving these provisions,
should exact nothing else of their Hosts, save only customary Vtensels as a
Bed, Table-linnen, a Pot, a Gridiron, a Spit, a Chimney, and a Candle-stick;
and he which would be better accommodated, should pay for it out of his purse,
upon pain of exemplary punnishment. To which Conditions, all the Captains and
Officers were to subscribe their hands, upon pain to answer for their
defaults in their own persons.

This Decree, was made at the Camp of Demvin. October. 28. 18. 1636. Signed
Lovis, SUBLET.

The Passages in BURGUNDY, LORRAIN, and ALSATIA.
CHAP. IV.
MVltiplicity of Business cannot be effected without many hands, much expense,
and diligence. The Christian King was at once employed in sundry occasions:
there was not a postern Gate whereby an Enemy might enter into his Kingdom,
but the opening thereof was attended either with the Imperial or Spanish
Armies, which were ready upon the least opportunity to make their entrance
thereby. The Imperial Forces under the Earl of Gallas and Lamboy, were ready
to take their way into France through Alsatia, Lorrain, and Burgundy: the
Neapolitans and Spaniards prepared to do like by the way of Provenze, and to
that purpose furnished out a Fleet to Sea: the Pampelonois and other Navarrois
subject to the Catholic King, would not be behind therest, but addressed
themselves to make an inroad into Guiene, and the Country about Bayon; and
either to repel them which had entered into his Kingdom, or prevent them which
intended it, required both a full Magazin of Ammunition, and multitudes of men:
To supply his necessities with Ammunition, his Christian Majesty though he had
formerly restrained the making of Gnn-powder in his Dominions, The Patent given
by his Majesty to some peculiar Powder-makers reversed.
and committed the care for that to some peculiar Patentees, yet now Aug. 1/11
by a public Proclamation signed by himself, and Sublet his principal
Commissary for open Edicts, and sealed with the great seal of the Kingdom, he
not only permitted, but enjoined all Saltpeter men, and those which had been
sellers, or makers of Powder throughout the Realm formerly, to use their former
Mystery; and the Powder-makers especially to repair their Engines, and make as
much store of that sort of provision as they could possibly, forbidding
expressly the Patentees to molest them in their work, his designs both for the
present and to come, being such as should require not their hands only to
furnish him sufficiently, but the help also of all such like Artists, under his
obedience: and for men he raised diverse armies, and disposed them severally
under sundry Commanders. The Earl of Harecourt, and the Archbishop of Bordeaux
being designed Generals of his Navy for the defense of Provenze by Sea, and
offense of the Neapolitan and Spanish Navy: the Duke of Valette entrusted with
the care of Gascogne and Guien; and the P. of Conde, D. Bernhard of Saxen
Weymar, and the Cardinal Valette, second son to the D. d' Espernon, being
engaged jointly and severally, as occasion served, to attend his affairs in
the County of Burgundy, Lorrain, and Alsatia.

The P. of Conde in the beginning of May had laid a strait siege to Dole a City
upon the Ledan, Dole beseeged by the Prince of Conde.
strong by situation, but more fortified by Art; and so plied his business,
that though it was built upon a Rock of incredible hardness, Aug. 4. new
style, he had brought a Mine therein to such perfection, that upon the twelfth
of the same month he gave an assurance to his Army it should be sprung to the
purpose, and admonished his fouldiers to prepare for the Assault.

In this extremity the besieged sent their Agent first to the Catholic Cantons
in the King of Spaine's name, to desire their succors. The Agent discharged
his office faithfully, neither his labor in traveling from one place to
another, to speak with those States severally, nor not prosecuting any
remonstrance (as their confederation made with Spain in the year, 1634.
Sends to the Cantons for succor, but is denied.
nor the puissance of the King of Spain, as able, or his known justice, which
would spur him on to stand for them if they stood in need) to move them to
condescend to his desires. The Helvetians besides their private answer given to
the Garrisons Agent, willing to give them what satisfaction they possibly
could, without giving offense to the French, dispatched speedily a Colonel to
Dole, who coming as an Ambassador from the Swisse, was permitted to pass
through the Camp peaceably and admitted into the Town, where he declared the
causes why the States of Helvetia, could not assist the City against the King,
and was heard patiently; and dismissed quietly, but before he could go out of
the reach of Musket Shot, a bullet shot from the City, whether at random or
by aim, it is uncertain, her him in the neck and slew him. The French
soldiers took up the body, and buried it with their Millitarie Ceremonies at
Auxonne a City upon the Some, distant from Dole five French miles, the Prince
of Conde himself attending upon the Hearse to honor his Funerals.

The besieged thus deprived of their hopes, grew desperately valiant, and
resolving not to quit the place, but with loss of their lives, made diverse
fallies upon the Camp, though with manifest hazard in the attempt, and loss
in the execution, assayed to burn the French Galeries made of wood, and though
the issue did not answer their expectation, concluded to stand upon their
defense to the utmost, Is releeved by the Duke of Lorrain.
without admitting a thought of agreement with the assaylants. The Events of
war are probable and no more. The French conceived already a certain victory,
but the Dye turned, an unexpected relief came to help the Garrison, and they
who were formerly confined to the precinct of their walls, got liberty not only
for their recreation and refreshment, but for enlargement also of their spoils
and victories.

Charles Duke of Lorrain, a tributary Prince to the Crown of France,
dispossessed of his Country by the Christian King, and succored by Caesar,
being now the Commander of an Army of 12000 men, came before he was looked for,
to visit the Camp, and sending first 2000 Crabats, all horsemen, for discovery
of their enquartering, about the end of July, by them alone, surprised first
Pontalier and Castelein belonging to the P. of Conde, which he burnt to the
ground, and slew both women and children with the edge of the sword, and in
fine did the like to Marcilly, Vouge, and La March, villages which were not
able to resist them. The Crabats thus fleshed with blood, return immediately to
their Leader, inform him of their success, and he with his whole Army
marched strait forward to Dole, where he assaulted the trenches, and by a
bloody and doubtful battle, beat the French from their Earth-burroughs, raised
the seege, and caused the Prince to retire toward Auxonne; and S. John de
Loone, leaving behind him some of his Canon, and amongst the rest, a Piece
called by the name of the King Lowis, carrying a bullet of 45 pound weight, 500
loaves of bread, 200 hogsheads of wine, Verdun taken by D. Charles, is retaken
by Gassion.
and having raised the siege, marched to Verdun a town then unfortified, which
he took in, and might have kept to the use of Caesar, had not Gassion a French
Colonel appeared before it, before it could be prepared to make resistance:
but his sudden coming made the Lorrainers forsake it, and yet it is under the
Kings command.

No flying Bird has so nimble wings as Fame, the Valleys suddenly reported
this Conquest to the near Mountain Vosogus, and that transferd it again to the
nigh bordering Dales with such swiftness, that the next day after the news
arrived at Cambray distant thence about one hundred English miles, to the joy
of the Walloons, and Spaniards there, who for testimony of their great content
in this happy adventure at Dole, made Bon-fires, and spent their Gunpowder in
triumph, discharging all the Canons upon the Walls, as if that day had not been
the beginning, but Period of their victories: And the Period it was indeed, for
though this Army being within few days after re-enforced by the Troops of the
Imperial Lieutenant General, the Earl of Gallas, who was accompanied with
the old Earl of Coloredo, and the Earl of Ritbergen, was thirty thousand
strong horse and foot, and well furnished with Artillery, carrying with them
forty pieces of Canon, the least whereof shot a Bullet of twenty three pounds,
and in this bravery had resolved to pass through Besanson, or the Province of
Bessigin against Bresse and Lionnoys: yet their jollity was stopped in the full
careere by the vigilance of Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weymar, and the Cardinal
Valette, who attended them at the heels, and raised them from the Siege when
they were set down before Iean-de-Lonc, whither this Narration must follow
them.

Saverne a town in Alsatia near Hagenaw the Magazin of the Imperial Army
thereabout for victual, being taken in by Duke Bernhard about the midst of
July, Saverne taken by D. Bernhard and the Cardinal Valette.
upon Composition one part of the provision there found was presently reserved
for relief of the Army, and another for the revictualling of those places in
the Country, as Strasburg, Colmar, Hagenaw, and the Fort of Benefeld, which
sided with the Christian King, and Crown of Sweden; The Camp removed the next
day to Onfelet intending to visit the Imperial General who was entrenched at
Drusenheim, and if it were possible to draw him out to battle before he could
strengthen himself with a new retreat, the French, and Germans, being superior
to the Caesareans, both in number and spirit, the Imperial Army consisting
only of five thousand foot, and eight thousand horse, and those miserably
necessitated by Famine and Pest, the other amounting to thirteen thousand foot,
and seven thousand horse, lusty, and prepared to fight: Duke Bernhard, and the
Cardinal Valette conceived their project to be more feasible because the King
of Hungary was supposed to be in the Camp, whose presence might addecourage to
the Caesareans, The French provoke Gallas to fight, but he avoyds them.
and spur them up to any dangerous adventure. But the King was gone four days
before to Brissack, and the wary General would not appear in Campania, but
kept close in his trenches, though the French Cavaliers by the space of eight
hours together, (two thousand first appearing, then one thousand five hundred,
and lastly one thousand only) braved him, and dared him to the Combat. It was
bootlesse for the two united Armies to attend him any longer; and partly to
draw him from his hold, and partly to assist the Prince of Conde, they marched
in a fair Equipage toward the Frontiers of France, giving order for
transporting of the aforenamed provisions to Culembach, and Podebus, two German
Colonels, who not without danger and opposition, discharged their Offices
faithfully and happily.

Culembach followed the Army with his Wagons, Three Companies of Crabats
defeated by Culembach.
and though the neerenesse of the French Bands might have secured him from any
attempt against him by the Caesareans, yet three Companies of Crabats watching
opportunity, set upon the Convoy, and had surprised it, if he had not behaved
himself both wisely and valiantly against them; but their coming being
discovered by his Scouts, he prepared to entertain them, and in the first
conflict slew 100. of them upon the place, forcing the rest to fly for their
safety to the Camp at Drusenheim, where they found more content in their
security, though without gain, than in their late design for pillage.

The other Convoy wherein Podebus, the Count de Guiche and Aiguebourne
Governor of Hagenaw, were engaged jointly, the two Generals forecasting to
what hazards they might be exposed, was in more danger, but came off as happily
as the former. These three Commanders by order from their Excellencies, being
to march from Haguenaw Aug. 4/14 with an hundred and fifty Wagons laden with
Corn, were manned with five hundred Musketeers, the Company of light horse
belonging to the Governor, and two German Regiments of horse for relief of
the confederate places in Alsatia, were encountered upon their way by 1500
Caesarean foot and horse, part of Gallas his Army, who lay still encamped at
Drusenheim, their necessity pricking them forward to gain so good a booty. The
Curriers which marched in the head of Podebus his vantguard, met at first with
sixty Crabats, which appeared alone to the first view, but were seconded with
the body of this Imperial partee, in which were three hundred Cuirassiers, who
kept a narrow passage by which the Convoy must necessarily go. This report
being noysed abroad in the Army, certain Officers and voluntary Swedes ran
without any order given to assault them, but were repulsed though without loss
of their lives, yet to the prejudice of their discretion. The Colonel Podebus
thereupon sent a Quartermaster with forty horsemen to discover the posture of
the Enemy, but he coming too near, was slain, and the rest forced to retire
to the Convoy. In the mean time, whilst this small partee was absent, a
Council was held by the Count de Guiche and the two Colonels, what was to be
done, and in what manner they should fight with the Caesareans; and in the end
it was concluded, that the Count should pass on with the wagons, whilst the
Colonels gave them battle. Five hundred German Reysters or Horsemen of Podebus
his Regiment were assigned for the conflict, and the rest to attend the
carriages. 1500 Caesareans rowted by Podebus in Alsatia
The two Colonels shaking hands, put forward immediately in the head of the
Cavallary, and commanding twelve Trumpets to sound a charge, fell so furiously
upon the Caesareans, that they put them to a disorderly flight, slew many upon
the place, the number is uncertain, took 24 prisoners, amonst whom was the
Captain of the Crabats, with his Commission, and letters of instruction for
this occasion. But they gained more in the pursuit, than in the fight, the high
ways being strewed with Curasses, which the flying Enemy had cast away in his
haste, and one hundred Barbed horses gained, which were sent afterward to his
Excellency, Duke Bernhard, who was yet encamped at Brompt (expecting that the
Imperial General would rise) as a Monument of this victory.

The joint Armies under the Generals Saxon Weymar, The French armies march from
Alsatia.
and Valette, began their march from Alsatia, Aug. 2/15 and put forward Marsar
a Town in the Frontiers of Lorrain, whence the Cardinals Army four days
after, under the conduct of the Vicount of Turenne, marched toward Luneville,
the Cardinal himself going the same day to Metz: the Army under Duke Bernhard
abode at Marsar till Aug. 6/16, which day the Duke himself led one part of his
forces toward Luneville, and committed the charge of the other part to
Colonel Ohem, who according to the direction given him, went went toward
Blamont a small City, manned only with sixty Snaphanses, yet much troubling
the French in Lorrain, being commanded by a vowed Enemy to the Kings
government, and being one of the retiring places for those Boutifeaus the
Crabats, after they had roved abroad to pillage and plunder the Country. The
Colonel, first summoned the place by a Trumpet, but could obtain no fairer an
answer, than that he must expect nothing there but powder and shot, and not
staying to reply with words, he charged them with the same materials, battered
the Town and Castle with the Canon, made a breach in the wall by the afternoon
to the terror of the Governor, who with his Garrison retired to the Castle,
leaving the Town not to the spoil of the Dukes Army, Blamond taken by D.
Bernh. and the Governor hanged.
himself a worse Enemy to the place, than could be expected from abroad,
having strowed the ground of the City with loose powder, which taking fire,
according to his malicious desire, destroyed a goodly Church, devoured the
goods of the Inhabitants, and turned all the houses in the City, (which were
generally stored with Corn and provision, six only being saved) to heaps of
Ashes. The report of this wicked Act, was by a nimble Currier, carried to the
D. at Luneville, who incensed thereat, took horse speedily, posted to the Camp
at Blamont, and prepared to assault the Castle, but changed his design, seeing
a flag of treaty hung out, being more willing to spare the lives of his Enemies
in the Garrison, than the Commander was to save the substance of his late
friends, the Citizens. The Garrison at first began to stand upon terms of
agreement, as unwilling to submit themselves to the Duke, or leave the Fort,
without an assurance of mercy signed by himself; but the Duke perceiving the
weakness of the place, would not stand to indent with them, and again prepared
for the assault, the conclusion whereof ministering just occasion of fear to
the Enemy, the Garrison yielded upon discretion, and the soldiers were
permitted to depart with white staves, but the Governor being a Major, was
justly hanged for his detestable treachery.

Thence the Duke himself, Ramberville taken by Duke Bernhard.
with those forces marched to Ramberville, where another of the Enemies
Garrisons lay, and having summoned it also uneffectually, Aug. 21. September 1.
he presently skaled it in four several places, and by four the next morning
took it. The Commander within, and the Garrison retreated to the Castle, and
stayed not thereto expect a summons, but yielded presently upon discretion, and
had this mercy showed them; liberty to depart with their low weapons, but sans
baggage, or any other accommodation. The Town was given for pillage to the
soldiers, yet with this special charge given by the General, that the
religiours houses should be spared, and the honors of the Women be preserved;
the Queen of France entreating this respect to be given to those in Orders, and
the weaker sex, at his departing thence, and his promise being past to her
Majesty to observe it.

The rising of the Confederate Armies from the Camp at Brompt, The Imperial
Army reenforced, marches toward Burgundy.
gave opportunity to the Imperial forces under the Croatian Commanders,
Isolani, and Forgats, the Germans Lamboy and Muse, the Spaniard, the Marquess
of Grana, and Charles Duke of Lorrain to repair to Gallas his Army, who
expecting the Irish Butler, but not waiting his coming; marched speedily
toward the Dukedom of Burgundy, and the Frank County, being followed close by
the Cardinal, and Duke Bernhard, which reenforced their Armies with the forces
of the Prince of Conde, and six thousand fresh soldiers under the command of
the Fieldmarshall Ranzaw, all ready in battle array, to fight with the
Caesareans upon the first opportunity: The Imperial Army made on to their
journies end, with all the haste they could, they passed by Montbelyard, and
Beffort, and yet but only summoned them, threatening the Inhabitants (as Gideon
did Succoth and Penuell) but not with the like success, upon their return
from France, to visit them. But their haste was not with that good speed it was
pretended, for the Count of Suze, Governor of the Country thereabouts, stopped
the Crabats under Isolani, which marched in the rear, cutting off the Bridges
by which they should pass, and skirmishing with him by the space of four
days together, though with the loss of his Sarjeant Rennovill, and
Montplaisier, one of his Guard, (which were slain by the Crabats) yet with
gain of two hundred and fifty prisoners, one hundred horse, and many Wagons
laden with ammunition.

Whilst the Cardinal Valette was attending with his Army upon the designs of
Gallas, Marange a rich Town in Lorrain, taken by Roquespine Lievetenat General
to the Cardinal Valette.
Roquespine his Lieutenant, Governor in the Town and Cittadell of Metz, and
the Country adjacent, seeing that the Inhabitants of Marange (a Town then
subject to the Spaniards, situate betwixt Metz and Theonvelle,) did not only
much oppress the neighboring Villages, but that also; part of the Garrison of
Theonvelle in a discontent were gone thither also, intending to plunder the
Country, he resolved to prevent them, esteeming it better to deal with an
Enemy at his own home, than to expect his coming abroad. To this purpose,
about the midst of September he mustered up a convenient Army, about nine
hundred horse and foot, consisting of one half of Bovillons, and Bussy's whole
Company, which was left by the Cardinal for defense of the Country, two
companies of light horse, one drawn out of the Garrison, and another raised by
the Citizens of Metz, three hundred other foot, part of his own soldiers, and
part Citizens, and with these he appeared before the Town at noone day,
striking such a terror into the presidiary soldiers, that they instantly left
their outworks, and retreated into the Town, the one part using the Church
which was strongly built, the other a strong house in the Town, as Citadels to
secure them from the Assailants. Men in danger of drowning, catch at every
Bulrush, and are like Beasts in a storm, which run to a rotten hedge for
shelter, yet find none. These timorous Soul apprehended some hope of safety
by those stone Walls, yet were plied so close by the French soldiers, that
before the night, in both places, they hung out a white Flag, and yielded to
the discretion of the Conqueror, who sent the most part packing away without
ransom, but reserved twenty eight of the principal, whom he sent prisoners
to Metz. It was an atcheivement; though not of a glorious appearance, yet of
special consequence, the Villages about it being, secured from further spoil,
by two French Companies, which were laid in Garrison there immediately after it
was taken, and the Town it self being a wealthy one, affording to the
Soldiers, besides much rich pillage, five hundred Hogsheads of Wine, and great
quantity of Corn for provision.

Culembach the Alman Colonel, Two regiments of Crabats surprised by Col.
Culembach
whom Duke Bernhard left behind him, to guard the passages betwixt Saverne,
and Hagenaw, about the same time surprised two Regiments of Crabats, which
Gallas had left near Weissem-burg with Commission and charge to use all the
means they could, to disturb the garrison and Inhabitants of Hagenaw. Egger
the Croatian Colonel commanded both the Regiments, and to deal with him in
plain field, the Alman selected one thousand Musketeers out of the Garrison
which he joined with his own Regiment, and then gave him battle, the issue
whereof was crowned with conquest, the gain of seven hundred horses, many
Wagons laden with baggage, and other good booties; all which were transported
by the Victor to Hagenaw.

Montalont Governor for the Christian King in Barroys, about the same time (as
if that time had been fatal to the Grabats, and fortunate to the French)
happened upon the like adventure. 300 Crabats surprised by Montalont in Barroys.
Advice was brought him of three hundred Crabats which were met in a wood, to
strengthen their bands with such straglers as they should meet withal of their
own nation, and afterward were to have their Randevouz at Momplome a village
two leagues from Bar. To surprise this crew, himself attended with eighty
foot, partly French, and partly Helvetians; and fifty horsemen of his own band,
and accompanied with the Baron of Angluce, Captain of the Hungarian horse
under the Regiment of the grand Master of the Artillery, marched all night to
discover the Enemy, yet heard no news of them, till the next night (these
Reysters not using to continue above four in place) and then understanding
that they were retired to Montior upon Saut, thither he poasted, caused his
Infantery to enter the village, and assault the Crabats in their lodgings
(himself with the horsemen guarding the back-lanes and outgoings of the
village) which they did so suddenly, that their enemies being unarmed, could
not defend themselves, and so furiously, that as many as could, betook them to
their heels, thinking to save themselves by flight, which did but bring them
from the talons of the Hawk to the Vulture; the French horsemen making
slaughter upon all the fugitives, whilst the footmen gave quarter to them which
begged it submissively: eighty of these Crabats were slain by the Cavallary
upon the place, and besides the slain, ten made prisoners of war by the
Infantery, amongst which was the Lieutenant, and Cornet of the Company, which
were carried captives to Bar, and esteemed as good prize, as a hundred and od
horses, which were gained by the French at the same time, from that Enemy. In
this attempt, a French Ensign was slain from a window, as he was pursuing the
Captain of the Company, though he escaped for the present, and got off with a
kind or victory, carrying with him as a captive, a young gentleman of Barroys,
yet he was taken the next day by the Sieur de Mihell, father to the youth,
whose former grief for the loss of the child, was sweetened with a double
comfort; the surprizall of such an Enemy as was rallying up the small number
which escaped, meaning with them to plunder the Country, and the recovery of
his darling son.

The Caesarean and French Armies about the same time, The French and Caesarians
several Quarters
had taken up their several quarters about the Frank County, and the County
and Duchy of Burgundy, each about one league from the other; Gallas and his
retinue near Champlite, Duke Charles about Gray, the Duke of Weymar at
Monsavion, the Cardinal Valette at Cussey, and the Troops of the Prince of
Conde, commanded by the Feeld-Marshall Ranzaw, were enquartered, betwix the
Quarters of Duke Bernhard, and the Cardinal. The Imperial General in person
lodged in the Priory of Champelite, two leagues from Channite, where
Picolomint's horse were lodged, his own foot being placed about the Mountains
betwixt Champelite and Montelot, and his Cavallery at Rigin, and thereabouts:
Isolani and Forgats with their Crabats lay at Leffons and Ponyssons, Lamboy at
Iussey, Colonel Meuz at Mons, and the Marquess de Grana at Meure; both the
Armies observing their several advantages for attempting upon the other,
either by surprizall, or raising of their Camps, but neither of them putting
any thing as yet to the hazard. The Caesareans were expected to have made the
first attempt, as coming not only to secure the Dukedom of Burgundy, and the
Frank County, from the French, but to invade the Kingdom, yet stirred not,
till he was spurred to it by the confederate Generals, who fell first foul
upon, and provoked him to seek revenge. The Cardinal Valette October 9, new
style, fell upon Isolani's Quarter at Lessons, a great Town in the Frank
County, choosing the silence and obscurity of the night to conceal his march
thitherward, and commanding the Fieldmarshall Ranzaw to charge the one part of
the Crabats Quarter, whilst himself did the like to the other. Night was
secret, and their Guides expert and faithful, which brought them a little
before daylight to the place designed, Isolani's Quarter raised by D. Berwh.
and the Cardinal de Valette.
and then they gave such a furious Camisado to the whole Quarter, that it was
raised speedily, the tents burnt, three hundred Crabats slain upon the place,
and the most part which escaped were wounded, and put to their heels; one
thousand two hundred horses, the Wagons for the Luggage, and the Officers
Caroaches being taken from them, and amongst the rest Isolani his own Caroach,
in which was found his chain of gold, and his Ladies Monkey. Thus I find this
History delivered in a French Extraordinary, though nor with that probability
of truth as is expressed in a Letter from Duke Bernhards Camp at Monsavion, the
contents whereof follow thus briefly:

The two Generals having framed a design for the raising of the Crabats
Quarter at Lessons, the Cardinal de Valette, attended with the Count of Guiche
conducted thitherwards one thousand five hundred horse, and as many
Musketeers, all which were laid in an Ambuscado by the way. The D. of Weymar,
who had that afternoon been skirmishing with the Enemy, to no other end but to
make him not suspect the design, returned at Evening, and marched in the head
of 3000 horse, of his own, on the side of the French, which were laid in
Ambuscado, and the Field marshall Ranzaw, with the Prince of Conde his
Cavallary marched on the other; the Ambush then rising, and putting forward
toward Lessons: the three French partees marched several ways, yet all met
about one minute at the Enemies Quarter, October 10, new style, at the point of
day, and charged upon it at once in three several places. The Crabats were
then on horseback, having had some notice of the French design, gave an alarm
to Gallas his Camp, and were answered thence with three Canon shot, as a
signal to the whole Army, to stand upon their guard, and keep good order. But
the French prosecuting this beginning, charged the Crabats again more roughly
than before, forced them to a disorderly flight, pursued them to the gates of
Champelite, which being kept shut against the fag-end of these run-awaies, for
fear lest the French should enter pell-mell with them, exposed above 100 of
them to the sword, and many to the mercy of the pursuers, who by this time were
engaged with the Avantguard of the Imperial Army, consisting of eight hundred
horse, and beat these Caesareans to their very Palizadoes, with some slaughter,
but more affrightment, many of the Cavaliers leaving their horses to save
themselves, upon the Mountain, where the Infantery, and Ordinance was placed,
others posting to their trenches, to avoid the blows which they met withal in
open field. The greatest loss fell upon the Crabats, of whom three hundred
were slain, as many taken prisons, which lost all their baggage, even to their
very Tents, and Huts, and two thousand horses, to the great advantage of the
French Army, and damage of theirs, who living ordinarily by roving and
pillaging, were deprived of their horses, which were of principal use in those
expeditions. The whole loss was valued at more than one hundred thousand
crowns, befides the ransomes of the Women, amongst which was Isolani's
Mistress, who with her Caroach and six horses, and Plate, became a prize to
the Ritmaster Schomborn.

This was a glorious design, being against an Enemy in open field, A Convoy of
25 Wagons taken by Manicamp Governor of Colmar
and Manicamps happy adventure about the same time, against a Convoy carrying
twenty five Wagons laden with Powder and Bullets, and fifty Cowes, to an
Enemy-Garrison at Brissack, was not despicable. A Company of light horse
belonging to the Baron of Reinack, Governor of Brissack, and sixty Musketeers
drawn out of the Garrison at Ensisheim were appointed to guard this carriage
from the Abbey of Lure (the siege whereof was left by the Imperialists about
ten days before) to Brissack: To surprise this booty, six Companies of light
horse, and Dragoons, a Company of Carabins, and four hundred and fity foot
were drawn out of Colmar, by this French Commander, who ordered the light
horse, and twenty Masters, with some sew others to assault the Conduct, and
they behaved themselves so bravely, that after the slaughter of six, and
captivating ten others, they chased the rest into a Wood betwixt Solse and
Ensisheim upon Manicamp and his soldiers, which lay in Ambush for them, who
beat them, pursued them to the gates of Ensisheim, and carried the booty to
Colmar.

Gallas the Imperial General thus provoked to action and his Army strengthened
by a new retreat under the Irish Colonel Butler, resolved to repair his
honor, and to put something in practice against the confederate Armies, and
some places under the Kings obedience. And yet like a wise Commander, that
would not adventure desperately, he watched his time, causing diverse reports
of his return to Alsatia to be scattered abroad, loading withal some Wagons
with baggage, as if he was instantly dismarching, to amuse the Duke and
Cardinal, and intending to fall upon such places as were least able to hold
out, that he might do something before his departure out of the Dukedom. The
united Commanders supposing his purpose did not suit with the pretense,
commanded the Armies to double the guards, and to have special eye upon the
Imperials progress. Gallas seeming to be about to dismarch.
The Officers followed the supreme directors instructions; kept a careful and
strong watch, and the first night Oct. 19. new style, encountered with some of
Duke Bernhards Almans, whom the French taking for Enemies because of their
language, The French army doubleth their watch, and mistake some of their
friends for enemies.
assaulted, and slew fifteen of them upon the place, as many others of the
company not escaping unwounded. The conflict endured the space of half an
hour, and might have lasted longer, if they had not then happily discovered
them to be their friends, but then the fight ended with sorrow to both
parties, for their mistakes, and mutual complements for their (at last)
successful meeting.

This misadventure was paraleld with another in Alsatia about the same time;
The Swedes of Benefeld mistaken for enemies by the French Garrison in Schlestadt
a party of the Swedes in the Fort of Benefeld, had been abroad for Salt,
which they having gotten in a great quantity, at their return lodged in
Ketenholt a Village near Schlestadt whither some malicious peasants ran
presently, telling the French presidiaries there, that an Imperial Convoy
lodged in that Village with good Booty; hereupon the French soldiers betook
them to their Arms, surprised their friends for enemies, flew some, wounded
the Ritmaster, and carried away some horses. But in the morning perceiving
their error, sent to excuse the fact, and restored the Booty, not omitting to
enquire out those false informers that they might punish them according to
their merit.

The Imperial General perceiving the wariness of the Duke, and Cardinal,
Mirchaw a weak place in the County of Burgoyne taken by Gallas.
being neither able to surprise them in their several Quarters, nor draw out
any part of the Armies to an unequal fight, October. 23.13. pursued his second
design, and brought his Army before Mirebeau a Town a little fortified by the
Inhabitants, and two companies of the Ttrain-band of the County then in the
Town, since his first appearing in those parts, but not of strength to make any
resistance, having no ditch nor Drawbridge, nor Parapet to the Walls, which in
sight were rather like the Mound to a Garden, than defenced Walls of a City,
this place he at once besieged, and assaulted, and the defendants trusting
more to their swords and valors, than their trenches, came to handy-strokes
immediately with one part of his Army, whilst the other part (as they might
with ease) broke down the Palizadoes, burnt the Gate, and addressed the scaling
ladders to the Walls.

The Combat lasted doubtful for the space of twelve hours, and then the
defendants oppressed with numbers of the assaylants, were forced to retire to
the Castle, a place fortified only with a small Moat, being not flankered, and
after a whole days battery with many hundreds of Canon shot, were constrained
to capitulate and surrender it with conditions of saving their lives and
livelihoods.

Secrecy is of as much avail in an Army, as valor. The confederate Armies as
yet were ignorant of the Enemies design, Saint John de Loone besieged by Gallas
and remained in their own Quarters, till the loss of Mirebeaw (and that was
not till three days afterward) was reported to the Cardinal, and then the
Imperialists being upon a new design against St. John de Loone, a small town
upon the Some, consisting of about three hundred families, and distant from
Chaloon about five French, ten English miles, the united Armies made after them.

A strong suspicion the French and their Allies had, that Saint Iean de Loone
was the next place, Before it was known to the French armies
at which the Caesareans aimed, being induced hereunto by the menaces which the
Imperial forces had given out against it, but were not assured of it till
October 31, new style, at which time a general report of the siege arrived at
the Camp, and that being seconded by a particular relation of the day, and
manner of the siege, confirmed them to believe that which before they only
suspected. A Soldier of the Trainband of the County, having scowted about the
Imperial Army, was sent that day by Machant his Captain to inform the Generals
with the sum of his discovery. The heads of his report were these: That
October 12/28 in the morning the enemies had surrounded Saint John de Loone.
That the Garrison in two sallyes had slain threescore of the asseegers and
brought ten prisoners into the Town (amongst which was the Lieutenant of the
Horse, which with threats affrighted the Town with a strong and strait siege)
and had beaten the Imperialists from their Quarter at Saint Usage. That the
Garrison at the first consisting of eight Companies of the Trainband belonging
to the County, was diminished by the Pest to the one half, Saint Point the
Commander being also extremely sick of the disease, and yet were resolved to
stand it out to the last man: the inhabitants able to bear Arms (being about
the number of two hundred) first decreeing that whosoever should talk of
capitulation, should be cast into the River, and then concluding, rather to
fire the Town, if they could not keep it, than render it upon any terms to
the Caesareans, that so they might prevent his spoils, and keep the viands
therein from him. Each word was truth. The Imperial Army marching from
Mirebeau October 15/25 16/26 17/27, passed the Rivers of Beze, Tilly, and
Ousche, with much hazard and inconvenience, and the next day appeared before
the Town, The Town summoned.
sommoning it with a Trumpet to yield to the Earl of Gallas, as the Imperial
General, the King of Spayn, and the Duke of Lorrain, a Cavalier seconding the
Trumpet, and telling the Officers upon the wall, that unless they showed their
obedience speedily, they should be beleaguerd with an Army of forty thousand
men, and batterd with twenty six pieces of Canon. The Garrison returned no
answer, but prepared for defense, and the Caesareans for battery. Three days
were spent by the beseegers in raising of mounts and preparation for battery,
without any show of open hostility, save only that daily summons were sent by
Drums and Trumpets for their surrendering; and November 1, new style, the
Imperial Canons were discharged against the city, Battered.
that violent thunder being thought more availeable for the conquest, than
verbal Rhetoric.

A Consultation was held in the mean time by the Prince of Conde, Duke
Bernhard, and the Cardinal, for relief of the Town, and in fine Ranzaw the
Fieldmarshall with the men at Arms belonging to the Duke of Anguyen, the
Light Horse under the Prince of Conde his command, seven other Companies of
Light Horse drawn out of the Regiment of the Cavallery of Anguyen his own
Horsemen, and seven or eight hundred Musketeers, was sent to succor it. His
Expedition commenced the same day the Enemy began his batteries, and (though
with much hardiness the foot wading in water up to the neck, and some loss,
ten of his Cavalliers being drowned) he past that day over the Tille, arrived
the next morning by seven of the clock to Auxonne a city upon the Sone, distant
from Saint John de Loone ten leagues, where he was furnished with victuals for
his army, and boats to ferry down his men, and thence he sent a little Barge
with six Oars to inform the beseeged of his auxiliary forces. Danger and hope
presented themselves together to the beseeged. The Imperial Army hearing of
Ranzaw's approach, November 3, new style, played upon the Town incessantly with
eight Pieces of Canon, from break of day till three in the afternoon, and then
drew out two main Battalions into the meadow, the one whereof was sent against
a small breach which their Canon had made in the wall; the other against the
Terras at the Dijon Gate, a weak piece, defended only by one Horn-work, and
without other fortification.

Sixty Musketeers were brought into the Town the day before from Bellegarde,
Releeved, and the siege raised.
and the Townsmen and Garrison animated with these small succors, resolved to
meet the Caesareans at the several places, and to adventure their lives for
defense of the Burgh. The assaylants at the breach came on courageously, and
the defendants stood to their tacklings as manfully; the very women with a
masculine spirit coming in to releeve the wearied men, bringing materials to
repair the breach, and hurling stones and whatever came next to hand, fury
supplying them with weapons to offend the Enemy. The valor of the defendants
and the unfitness of the gap for an assault, the wall yet standing firm
twelve foot high, made the assaulters recoyle, who seeing their attempt if not
desperate, extremely dangerous, could not be induced by the words and strokes
of their Commanders to renew their adventure, and go on again. The Terras was
in more danger, and thither upon the retreat of the Imperialists, the most part
of them which were designed to make good the gap, hasted to help their
copartners, and their coming was so happy, that the Battalion there seeing a
new accrue of opposers certified, and their loss already in both places of
above four hundred men slain outright, besides those which were wounded,
turned tail too, and gave over the Enterprise.

Gallas who all this while had stood as a spectator to the play, Gallas his
disorderly retreat and great loss
gave the signal to his army to prepare for a general assault, but Ranzaw
entering in the mean time, about ten aclock at night, and his coming made
known to the Imperial General, altered the design. The French Colonel the
same night sallyed forth and slew as many more of the besiegers as the Garrison
had done in the day, and then the Caesarean General either doubting of a long
winter siege, or recalled by the Emperor to attend the Swedes, which began to
triumph in Pomerania and lower Saxony, since their victory at Wistock, or both,
for both these reasons are assigned, the same night raised his siege, and
retreating disorderly, encouraged the besieged and the confederate Armies, who
were soon informed thereof, to pursue him, which fell upon his reere-guard, and
in diverse conflicts, especially at the passage of Vigenne, cut off six hundred
of his men, took from him some Ordnance, and so much baggage, that his loss
since his first encamping at Champlite being summed up, amounted to nine Pieces
of Canon, four hundred wagons laden with ammunition, eight thousand men
slain and drowned, besides the defection of eight hundred of his Horse, who
forsook the service and enrolled themselves under Duke Benrhard.

The passages in the Netherlands (this last Summer) betwixt the Infanta and the
States United.
THe State of the United Provinces, Chap. 5.
was almost brought ad Triarios, by the loss of Skenken-sconce the last
Summer, but that being regained from the Cardinal Infant upon Easter Tuesday
last, by the vigilance, and great expense of this industrious people, which
endured all injury of weather, the frosts, snowes, and raines of Winter to
that intent, they found more rest this last year, then they expected, being
usually engaged in war with the Catholic King, and the Lieutenant Governors
under him. No bank was raised against any of their towns, no spoiling bands
of enemies invaded their Country; The Duke of Feria only appeared with a
flying Army in Brabant and Flanders, to secure those parts in the absence or
the Cardinal Infanta, raised diverse Sconces upon sundry passages, and blocked
up the ways with timber, by which the Armies of the States might come upon
him, intending more the preservation of the people under the Spanish
Government, then the disturbance of the people under the Aristocratie of the
Siates; and the Prince of Orange General for the States mustered up a like
number of soldiers to the same intent, both the Commanders, rather by starts,
and parties sent abroad upon several occasions, seeking an advantage of petty
gain, then by battle in the open field, or beleaguering any place of
strength, or note, getting the glory of a victory.

August 20. the Prince of Orange marched with his land forces, 122. Companies
of foot from Heusden to the Hecken-sea, and thence Aug. 28. Sept. 8. removed
his Camp toward the Long-straten, the Horsemen under the General
Stacken-brocke being already met at their Randevouz in the Hog-straten. The
order of his March was this: The Princes Lifeguard marched in the front, his
Excellency himself following, attended with the English, Scots, and French,
the Frieslanders, High-Germans and Switzers, which made up the Avant-guard; the
Rear consisting of English and Wallons, was followed first by the Wagons,
which carried ammunition, then by the Victuallers and Subtlers of the Camp,
and their carriages, and lastly by the Gunners, and the fieldpeeces, the
greater Guns, being still aboard the shipping before Heusden, Alburgh, and
below Hemmert. The Count de Feria was in the field above a fortnight before,
Aug. 6.16. with his Army of about 8000. horse and foot, departed from Antwerpen
toward Liar, and thence took their way by Geel, Voorst and Merhault plundered
by the Count de Feria.
Bael, and Moll, where he mustered his Army, called a Counsel of war, and
thence advanced to Voorst and Merhault two small towns, belonging to the
Prince of Orange, which though John de Nassaw desired him to spare, yet were
plundered by the Spaniards, who had the absolute command in that expedition.

The day was somewhat omminous to both sides; a selected Company of the States
garrison in Bergenop-zome made out toward Herentals for pillage, and without an
encounter of an armed enemy, took 90. great beasts and drove them toward
Bergen, when suddenly the cry of the Boores, whose livelihood depended upon the
profit of their cattle, overtooke them, and then the soldiers which more
respected their coin then their beasts, suffered the poor people to redeem
them for a sum of money. This was but a small thing, and of no comparison
with the better fortunes with which 15. soldiers of the Sconse Frederick
Henry were crowned the same day; To get a purchase by boote-haling, may be
profitable, but it cannot be glorious, especially, when the booty is rather
stolen surreptitiously, then gotten manfully; But to encounter an armed
Enemy, to deal with him upon unequal terms, and vanquish him; this is
honorable, true valor being seen most apparently, where danger shows it
self most hideously. Such was the happy fate of these 15. adventurors;
Mecheln, a Captain of one Company of Presidiarie soldiers in Sant-vliat,
Mecheln a Spanish Captain taken by the Garrison of Fred. Henry.
had a design upon the little Sconse of Sluisken, and to effect it, drew out
20. Musketeers out of his Garrison, and conveyed them thitherward with as much
secrecy and silence, as was possible; but by the way, the fifteen mentioned
soldiers, met with him and his retinew, fought with them in plain field, and
by the slaughter of five of his soldiers, by the first volley of their shot,
and the wounding of some others, forced him to yield, and brought him his
Sergeant, and fifteen of his men prisoners to the Fort.

Honor admits a magis and minus and private undertakings, how fortunate soever
the issues be, come not off with such a luster as those which are commenced by
public authority. The Ritmaster Anthony Crock Sept. 3/11 had order from the
Prince of Orange to take some troops of expert, and valiant Horsemen to
discover the posture of the Spanish Camp, to clear the Country of such
rovers as he should find abroad, A Spanish Convoy of 600 Horse defeated;
and if it might stand with probability of success, to make head against such
troops of the Enemy as he should meet withal upon the way. An opportunity
to declare both his loyalty and valor offered it self, before it was sought
for. A Spanish Convoy of 600. Horsemen under the command of four several
Leaders, men of quality and rank by birth and note in the Army by their
places, the Earl and Colonel Ritzbergen Son to the Earl of East
Vrieslands, the Baron of Wesmaell Son to Grobendonck, who once commanded in
the Bosch the Cornet Be, and the revolted Captain Herwerden, who had lately
served under the States, And 4 Commanders of note taken by the States
Rit-master Crook.
and upon the discovery of a traitorous practice he had, to deliver up the
strong town of Venlo to the Count of Feria, fled, and was entertained by him;
was sent from Antwerpe, to carry a months pay to the Garrison in Breda, and to
re-enforce the Praesidiaries, it being rumoured (though only upon cojecture)
that the States forces intended to besiege that City. The Ritt-masters Scouts
discovered them as they were marching over the Plain, and instantly returned
to the Commander, reporting both the order of their march, and the number of
the men as near as they could guess. Crock upon the relation sends out 300.
Horse, with instructions first to skirmish with the Convoy, and then by a kind
of orderly confusion, betwixt plain flight, and a well ordered retreat, to
seem to fly, that the Enemy pursuing them, might fall into an Ambuscadoe,
which himself with the remainder of his troops had laid for them. The
Cavaliers transgrest not an hairs breadth from his direction, after a bravadoe
or two, and the discharging of their Pistolls upon the front of the Convoy,
they hasted toward their fellows, being followed by the Spanish Commanders,
with an assurance of a victory. But the haste the Spaniards made after them was
to their own loss, they were suddenly so far engaged, that they could not
return; The Cavaliers which seemed to fly, made a stand, gave a signal to
the Ambuscadoe, to rise, and they appearing presently upon the backs of the
Enemy, rowted the Convoy, got 200. Horses fit for service, their Riders being
slain; took the four Commanders as Prisoners of war, and carried them and
their moneys, ordained for the Soldiers of Breda, to the Camp in the
Long-straten: glorying not so much in their conquest over the other three, as
in the apprehension of Herwerden; the Divine Justice, which never suffers
treason to go unpunished, having made them the Instruments to apprehend this
perfidious traitor.

Vlyssingen was in some danger, in the former month by the false practices of
another Cattline, Lamott plotteth to deliver Vlissingen to the Spaniard.
a bird of the same feather with Herwerden, by name La Motte a Walloon, and
Captain of a Fregate under the States, who being taken by the Dunkerks, and
clapped in prison, plotted a way to betray the town to the Spaniard, and
promised to perform it, upon condition of his enlargement. His project was
thus carried. The Fregate, in which he commanded formerly, being restored to
him, and armed with a 100 men, he sailed toward Calais, where another Fregate
of Dunkerke charged only with four great pieces, but well furnished with
Pistols, and engines for fireworkes, was to attend him, according to his own
direction. The treason had been too palpable, if these Bottomes appertained to
professed enemies, at the first should have greeted each other friendly, and
the States seamen which were in the vessel being restored with him to
liberty, might have discerned his juggling, if there a mist had not been cast
before their eyes, to conceal his Leger-demaine. To carry it therefore
clearly, he made some appearance of hostility, haled the Dunkerker, which
making a show as if he meant to fight, Prepares to execute his design.
put up his wast-cloathes, and having made small or no resistance, yielded to
the Vlissinguer, (yet he was so reputed) immediately. This done, he writes to
his friends at Vlissingen of his prize, tells them that he expected two other
Frigates which were coming from Dunkerke laden with the like charge of Arms,
and that he hoped very speedily, to bring them all in triumph into that harbor.
The Statish Seamen began presently after the supposed prize, to resent the
action. Dunkerkers whom he had taken by his feigned fight, were taken into his
own vessel, and used not as prisoners, but friends and confederates, engaged
in the same action; The Zealanders which were still aboard that Fregate (the
major part being removed into the Dunkerker) began to whisper to each other,
that their Captains words, and actions did not resemble each other, and the
Captain whose jealous ear, was listening to their private conferences,
perceiving that his plot was revealed, caused the Dunkerkers to fall upon those
with the sword whom he suspected to have smelt out his design, and being by
their assistance cleared of that society, and assured of the rest, he returns
to the Port of Dunkerke, his own ship being covered with the sails, that it
might not be discovered whence it was. Here, he loaded his own ship with
Dunkerkish soldiers, and sailed thence to Ostend, where 2000. other Spanish
soldiers, were embarked in six several Bottomes to attend him, two days
before his coming thither, the harbor, and the gates of the City, having
been kept locked up, by that space of time, to keep the adventure private. All
this while the irons were but heating, now was the time when they must be
formed upon the Anvlle; The maine of the design was hitherto concealed from
his confederates; the Admiral Colart knew not of it, but in generals, but now
being engaged in the action, he was made acquainted with the particulars, which
were, that he would bring in two of his Frigates into the old Port and send the
other two into the new one at Vlissingen, and by these vessels, keep them
open, till the Admiral was entered with the rest, by whose united forces, And
suspected by Colart of a double treason is imprisoned at Dunkerke.
he doubted not to bring the secure City to the Spaniards command. The Admiral
listened to his story, and seeming not to apprehend him fully, desired him to
go into Ostend with him, and that there they would confer further upon the
design. But the Admiralls intendment was otherwise, he suspected all the
Captains discourse to be like Sinons tale, and that he meant not to deliver
the City to the hand of the Dunkerkers, but that he meant to deliver the
Dunkerkers into the power of the Vlushingers, and having got him to shore,
arrested him of a double treason, sent him to Dunkerk, and clapped him in irons,
wisely considering, that the Protean condition of a traitor will conform it
self to all advantages, and that he which will make no bones to play false
with his old friends, can give no assurance of remaining firm to his new
alliance.

Thus the linkes of this project falling in pieces of themselves, the
Vlushingers were rid of that present danger before they knew it, yet soon
after it came to their notice, and then they doubled their guards, and kept a
strong watch upon their harbors, to secure the City against such kinds of
unkind undertakers.

The Spanish Army in the field, was the only thing the United States were now
jealous of, but the vigilance of the Prince of Orange, The Armies return to
their Winter Quarters
removing his Camp, when the Count dislodged, and keeping a watchful eye upon
him, cleared all doubts, the Spanish Commander, from the midst of September,
till November. following, at which time both the Armies went to their Winter
Quarters, attempting nothing further against the United Provinces, nor the
Prince of Orange against them.

But whilst their forces were in the field to preserve their Native Country
in quiet, Count Maurice of Nassaw Elected Governor or Brazill.
and from spoil by war. The States at home met in counsel, how they should
order their dominions in Brazill, and reduce them to that form of Government,
used in the Netherlands; and at last it was concluded, that the Count Maurice
of Nassaw, should be declared, and received by the Company of the West-Jndian
Merchants as Governor of Brazil, but with a restriction of Conditions, and
such limitations as might restrain him from any absolute authority, some
selected Commissioners being appointed to attend and advise with him in cases
of material consequence, and he to proceed according to their Votes, and
advisoes. The Conditions were offered by the Merchants, and accepted by the
Count Aug. 4. new style, and they run in this tenor.

1. By the Commission of the States General, the Prince of Orang, and the
West-Indian Company, the name and quality of Governor, Captain, and Admiral
General of the places already conquered in Brazill, and which shall be
conquered hereafter by the said Company, shall be conferred upon the said
Count, as also the Command of the forces both by sea and land, which the said
Company, has there already, or may have hereafter. II. The said Count shall
sit in the quality of a Governor, in the assembly of the Counselors of
State, Is bound to the West-Indian Company by Articles.
which shall receive a joint commission with the said Count, to consult with
him concerning the ordering of the common affairs, the finances, and what ever
else may depend upon the public Government, which Counselors shall resolve,
and conclude with the said Count about all exploits to be done by sea or land,
the raising of new fortifications, or demolishing of the old, provided always
that if the votes of the assembly be found equal, the Count shall have a
double voice. III. The dlace of residence for the Counsel and the College,
shall be at Samarica or in some other such place, as the said Count, and the
Counselors shall think more convenient for that purpose. IV. The said Count
and the Counselors, shall take special care to procure the common quiet, of
all the subjects to the state of the United Provinces there, whether they be
such as are employed in any public offices, or such as follow their own
peculiar negotiations; They shall be careful to rectify all abuses, neglects
or disorders, which have privily crept in already, and what ever else may be
discovered hereafter, to be against the good of the Country and the
Inhabitants there, following the instructions, rules and ordinances, concluded
of in this present Senate, and the Customs already used in the Country,
provided always, that they thwart not the private instructions, now given to
our Counselors of state. V. The said Count shall absolutely dispose of all
Military offices, and charges which shall be vacant, while the Army is in the
field, even to the Ensign inclusive, the under offices remaining in the
disposition and donation of the Captains, but if any office shall fall,
whilst the soldiers be in garrison, then the said Counselors shall have the
nomination of three persons, out of which the Count shall choose one, except
that when there shall be an election of a Captain, Lieutenant, or Ensign, by
reason of a place vacant, their votes shall not be given at random, to elect
strangers to that Company, but they shall be bound to proceed according to the
custom of the country.

VI. All public offices both by Sea and Land, shall be disposed of by the said
Count, and the Privy Counselors jointly; or in the absence of the said
Count, (the affairs of State admitting no delay) by the said Counselors
only: except only the office of Vice Admiral, which if it happen to be
vacant, either by the decease, or dismission of the Antecessour, shall be given
by the Count alone, with the approbation and allowance of the nineteen; and
that upon the treaty formerly ordered, or to be ordered afterward in the
Assembly of the nineteen. VII. The said Count shall have no power to erect any
new offices, to the charge of the said Company, whether they be Military,
Politic, or Maritine; nor shall He augment the ordinary Salarie of any
Officers, which are there already, without the advice and oversight of the
said nineteen, except it be by the ordinary preferment of the persons, from
an inferior, to a superior office, according to the military ordinances.
VIII. Nevertheless as concerning the Brazilians, and Inhabitants of the
Country, it shall be free for the Count, and the said Counselors, to reward
them after their own discretions, according to their several employments;
Provided always, that it be done to the remarkable advantage of the Company,
and not contrary to the customs now used. Lastly, the said Count shall do all
things, which a Governor, Captain and Admiral ought, and is to do. And yet
the Company reserveth to it self, the donation of the places of Privy
Counselors, ordinary Magistrates, and charges of that condition, which shall
receive their Commissions and instructions in the Nether-lands. Notwithstanding
the said Count shall have power to dispose of the high Military Offices, by the
consent and approbation of the nineteen: And in case, that if it happen, that
one, or more of the nineteen Counselors of State shall decease, then the
said Count shall have power to take unto him so many others, and place them in
their stead, that the said number may be still kept full.

By these conditions,

I. And the West-Indian Company to the Count.
The said Companies shall at their own proper charges maintain one Minister,
one Doctor of physic, and one Secretary for the Count; and pay to each of his
household servants for salarie, which is allowed to each of his life guard. II.
The Company shall give him for his aequipage, and furniture for this expedition
6000. livers, which is 600. pounds sterling, and 1500. livers monthly, besides
diet for himself and his retinew, which two last allowances shall then begin
to be due, as soon as he is imbarqued for the journey. III. As soon as the
Count shall arrive at Brazill, he shall have two out of hundred, which the
people under that Government, shall gain from the enemy, by land or water in
the extent of that dominion, as soon as the prize shall be valewed, according
to the Military ordinances, and the order hitherto used in that Country. To
the performance of all which Conditions, stipulations, and promises, the said
Count was bound to the West-Indian Company, and they again reciprocally to
him for the space of five years, to begin at his arrival thither, and his
beginning of the execution of his office of Governor, Captain, and Admiral
General of the Territories, and places already conquered by the said Company,
and which hereafter may be conquered by the mutual signing, and subscribing to
these Articles; The Deputies for the nineteen for the one part, promising that
they would maintain, and make good the conditions above written. In testimony
whereof, the Articles were signed at the Hage, Aug. 4. 1636. Maurice de Nassaw.
Ioannes de Laet, and Pr. I. Dwelland.

These Conditions thus agreed upon, the Count prepared for the voyage, The
Count puts to Sea for Brazill.
and October. 9. 19. went from the Hage, toward the Texell to attend the
Brazilian Fleet; and thence October. 15. 26. (taking with him 1500. Land-men) he
put to Sea with the Ships, Zutphen, Farnambuck, the Nassaw, the Adam and Eve,
the rest of the Fleet being to follow him with the first fair wind. And thus
far our present discovery reaches, there is yet much Terra incognita
remaining, which we shall within few weeks describe topegraphically.

FINIS.

