THE RVLES OF A HOLY LIFE. OR A Treatise containing the holy order of our
lives, prescribed in the Scripture, concerning our carriage: Toward God,
Toward men, Toward our selves.
With general Rules of Preparation, that concern either the helps, or the
manner of a holy Conversation. By N. BIFIELD Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth
in Middlesex.

PSALM. 50. vlt. To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the
salvation of God. LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Ralph Rounthwaite, and are to
be sold at the Flower de-luce and Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1619.

TO THE NOBLE AND Religious Lady, the Lady MARIE VERE, increase of joy and
peace in Believing.
MADAM,
IT was most truly said by the Apostle of the Gentiles: godliness is great
gain; Importing thereby, that if man would be incited to the care to get any
thing, for the profit might come thereby, it should be godliness: No skill in
the world being c^oparable to that skill of being able to lead a godly life,
for the sure, and speedy, and matchless gain it will bring unto a man: for
besides that it only has the promise of a better life, godliness were to be
desired, and with all possible diligence to be sought after, for the very
gain of it in this life: For to omit the consideration of the favor it breeds
with God, and the unspeakable treasures of the grace of Christ, which always
go with it, it were to be desired for the immediate effects it works upon men
in it self. For if men love themselves, what should they desire more then that
which tends to make themselves perfect? What should it advantage a man to have
all things good about him, if himself be ill and vile? If men, that were
only guided by the light of Nature, could (some of them) see clearly, that
nothing was so good for a man as to live well (when yet they knew no other
living well, then what was prescribed in their naked and natural Ethickes)
then how much more happy must it be for a man to live a religious life, by
which he is brought more nearer to God, himself, and far above the condition
of any natural man? Yea, if there were no more to be had by it, but the peace
and rest it brings unto a man's heart, it were above all outward things to be
desired: for no man walks safely, that walks not religiously, nor can any
actions of men produce any sound tranquillity and rest of heart, but such
actions as are prescribed by true Religion. What shall I say? If for none of
these, yet for it self were a godly life to be had in singular request: for if
men, with much expense of outward things, seek but the skill of diverse,
natural, and artificial knowledges, and think it worth their cost but to be
able to attain these Skils? how much more ought man to be at the pains, yea
and cost too (if it were required) to get this admirable skill to live a
religious life? This most gainefull Subject is entreated of in this little
Volume; I may truly say, that almost every sentence in this little Treatise,
leads us to much and rich treasure, if the promises belonging to each duty were
annexed thereunto: and therefore no Christian that loves his own soul, should
think much of the pains of learning, or practicing these Rules.

I shall not need to exhort your Ladyship to the hearty care of those things
you have been taught of God (long since) to profit, and have learned Jesus
Christ as the truth is in him: your sincere profession and practice has many
Witnesses: and since you believed the Gospel of salvation, and were sealed by
the Spirit of promise, you have a Witness within your self, which will not
fail in life or death to plead your abundant consolation. When I entreat of
piety, righteousness, mercy and temperance, I entreat of things you have
above many profited in.

I have presumed to dedicate these Directions to your Ladyship, and not without
reason: you have heard the preaching of them with special attention, and have
been a principal perswader to have them published for the common good, being
many ways bound to acknowledge your Ladyship amongst my best Hearers and
Friends. I cannot but beseech your Ladyship to accept of this small testimony
of my unfeigned observance of your many praises in the Gospel, and as a pledge
of my thankfulness for all your works of love to me and mine. The God of
glory, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, make you abound yet more and more,
in all the riches of his grace in this life, and fill you with the comforts of
the blessed hope of the appearing of Jesus Christ.

Your Ladyships in the service of Jesus Christ, to be ever commanded, N.
BIFIELD.

The Contents of the whole Book.
Chapter 1. page 1. to the 12.
THE Scope of the whole Book is, to show briefly the choysest Rules of life of
all sorts. Some objections against this course answered, and the warrant and
profit of it showed. The easiness of the course, with some general Direction.
Cha. 2. p. 12. to 48.
THe Rules are either general or particular. The general Rules concern,
either the helps to a holy life, or the manner of weldoing. He that would
prepare himself to an holy course of life, must do diverse things, and avoid
diverse things. The things he must do are these: 1. He must be sure he has
repented, and does believe. 2. He must get knowledge how to do well, and that
he may attain knowledge: 1. He must esteem it. 2. He must not consult with
flesh and blood. 3. He must redeem the time. 4. He must be wise for himself.
5. He must be swift to hear. 6. He must study only profitable things. 7. He
must strive to increase in knowledge. 8. He must propound his doubts. 9. He
must be rightly ordered toward his Pastor, to pray for him, and obey him, and
not discourage him.
3. He must avoid ill company. 4. He must resolve to practice these Rules. 5.
He must order his outward calling so, as he be freed from all needless
encumbrances. 6. He must keep company with such as do live well. 7. He must
not be a servant of man. 8. He must accustom himself to the thoughts of the
coming of Christ. 9. He must not regard what the multitude does. 10. He must
carefully remember to be in all things thankful to God. 11. He must study to
be quiet. 12. He must be careful to go on in a direct course. 13. He must
read the Scriptures daily. 14. He must be careful to preserve his first
love. 15. He must especially strive for such good things as would make him most
excel in his Place and Calling. 16. He must be often in the duties of
mortification. 17. He must observe the opportunities of well doing. 18. He
must be careful of keeping the Sabbath. 19. He must often meditate of the
examples of the godly that excel in holiness. 20. He must daily pray God to
direct him.

Chap. 3. P. 48. to 56.
THus of what he must do, what he must avoid follows; and so he must take
heed, 1. Of carelesenesse. 2. Of rashness. 3. Of carnal confidence. 4. Of
hasting to be rich. 5. Of distrustful fears. 6. Of adding to, or taking from
the Word of God. 7. Of contempt of reproof. 8. Of beholding of vanity. 9. Of
the beginnings of sin.

Chap. 4. p. 56. to 81.
NIne things to be ever in our minds, that in general concern the manner of
all well-doing, for in all good works we must show: 1 -- 1. Zeal. 2 -- 2.
Sincerity, which has in it: Truth, Respect to all Gods commandments, A right
end, Obedience, without obiecting, Obedience in all companies.
3. Constancy, when we do good, Without weariness. Without discouragement.
Without resistance. Without wavering. Without declining.
4. Fear. 5. Simplicity, which is, To rest upon the Word for the form of
holiness and happiness. To be harmless. To be simple concerning evil. To
love goodness for it self. To be meek and lowlyminded. So to fear God, as
not to envy the wicked.
6. Circumspection, which has in it, A respect of lesser Commandments,
Abstaining from appearance of evil, Observation of the circumstances of
things, Vnrebukeablenesse, Avoiding evil when good might come of it.
7. Growth, which has in it, Abounding in goodness, Finishing of holiness.
Progress.
8. Moderation, to be neither just nor wicked overmuch, which is expounded at
large.

Chap. 5. p. 81. to 95.
THVS of the general Rules; the particular Rules concern either God, or other
men, or our selves. Our whole duty to God concerns either his love, or his
service. The love of God must be considered, either in the foundation of it, or
in the exercise of it. The foundation of the love of God, is the knowledge of
God. The Rules about the knowledge of God, concern either the right conceiving
of his Nature, or our acquaintance with God. That we may conceive aright of the
Nature of God: 1. We must cast out all likenesses. 2. We must strive to
conceive of him according to his special praises in his Word. 3. We must bring
with us the faith of the Trinity. 4. We may help our selves by thinking of the
Godhead in the Humane Nature of Christ. 5. We must get cure for Atheistical
thoughts,
That we may be acquainted with God. 1. We must prepare our hearts. 2. We must
beg acquaintance by prayer, praying with all our hearts, and early and
constantly. 3. We must give our selves to God.

Chap. 6. p. 95. to 121.
THVS of the foundation of the love of God: the Rules that concern the
exercise of our love to God, either show us how to manifest our love to God, or
how to preserve it. We manifest our love to God: 1. By auouching him to be our
God. 2. By providing him a place to dwell with us. 3. By loving Jesus Christ.
4. By walking with him, which has five things in it. 5. By honoring God: and
we honor him; By seeking his Kingdom first. By open profession of his Truth.
By grieuing for his dishonor. By directing all our actions to his glory. By
suffering for his sake. By honoring such as fear him. By hating his enemies.
By speaking of his Truth with all reverence. By free-will-offerings. By
praising him: where diverse Rules.
6. By trusting in him: and this trust in God we show: By relying upon his
mercy for our salvation. By committing all our works to his blessing. By
believing what he says By staying upon him in all distresses, praying to him,
and casting our care upon him, and relying upon his help, Without leaning to
our understanding: Without murmuring, Without fear, Without care, Without
using ill means.
7. By obeying him. In the manner also of our manifesting our love to God, we
must do it, 1. With feruency. 2. With fear: and our fear of God we show, By
awful thoughts of God. By departing from evil. By all reverence of mind. By
not fearing men. By remembering his presence. By trembling at his judgments. By
humility in the use of his Ordinances. By the reverend use of his very Titles.




Chap. 7. p. 121.
THus of the manifestation of our love to God, for the preservation of our love
to God. 1. We must separate our selves from all others to be his. 2. We must
beware that we forget not God. 3. We must edify our selves in our holy faith.
4. We must pray in the holy Ghost. 5. We must wait for the coming of Christ.
6. We must seek his special presence in his Ordinances. 7. We must preserve
the Truth he has delivered to us. 8. We must study his praises. 9. We must
study to rejoice in God, which contains in it 4. things: where eight rules to
obtain this ioying in God.

Cha. 8. p. 121. to 138.
THus of our love to God: his service follows, and the rules about the service
of God, concern either the parts of his service, or the time of it. The Rules
that concern the parts of Gods worship, are either general to all parts, or
special. Nine things to be remembered in all parts of Gods worship: 1.
Preparation. 2. Godly fear. 3. Penitency. 4. Grief that others serve not God.
5. That all be done in the name of Christ. 6. Precedence before other
businesses. 7. That we serve with all our hearts. 8. Desire to please him. 9.
Detestation of what might draw us from his service.

Chap. 9. p. 138. to 147.
THe special Rules concern either his public service, or the particular
parts of his service: Unto the public service, All must come, With special
reverence And zeal: and this zeal to be showed six ways. And with our
consent, With special gladness before God, And trust in his mercy, And
thankefulnes for all successes.

Chap. 10. p. 147. to 156.
THE special parts of Gods worship, are, 1. Hearing: where the rules concern
us. 1. Before hearing. A resolution to deny our own wits and affections. A
meek and humble spirit.
2. In the time of hearing. Special attention. Proving of the doctrine.
3. After Hearing: 1. Meditation. 2. Practice.

Chap. 11. p. 156. to 166.
2. THE Sacraments which are either Baptism or the Lords Supper. Concerning
Baptism we have diverse things to do: 1. About our children to present them
to Baptism, In due time. In faith. With Thankfulness.
2. About our selves, to make use of our own Baptism, In case of doubting, In
the case of temptation to sin, where our Baptism serves for use three ways:
In the case of doubting of our perseverance.
3. About others, to acknowledge the Baptized.

Chap. 12. p. 166. to 171.
COncerning the Lords Supper we are charged with, 1. Examination. 2. The
discerning of the Lords Body. 3. The showing forth of the death of Christ. 4.
The vows of loving the godly. 5. Reconciliation. 6. Vows of holy life.

Chap. 13. p. 171. to 178.
3. PRayer, about which the Rules are, 1. Thy words must be few. 2. Thy heart
must be lifted up, which has three things in it; understanding, freedom from
distractions, and feruency. 3. Thou must use all manner of prayer. 4. Thou must
persevere in prayer. 5. Thou must be instant without fainting or discouragement.
6. With supplications for all sorts. 7. In all things thou must give thanks.

Cha. 14. p. 178. to 184.
4. REading the Scripture, the Rules are: 1. Read daily. 2. Meditate of what
thou read 3. Confer upon it. 4. Resolve to obey.

Chap. 15. pa. 184. to 186.
5. SInging of P^^lmes, the rules are: 1. Teach one another by Psalms. 2. Sing
with the heart. 3. Sing with grace. 4. Make melody to the Lord.

Chap. 16. p. 186. to 190.
6. Vows: the rules are: 1. Before thou vow, consider. 2. When thou have
vowed, defer not to pay.
7. Swearing: the rules are, 1. Swear not by any thing which is not God. 2.
Swear in Truth. 3. Swear in Judgment. 4. Swear in righteousness.

Chap. 17. p. 190. to 193.
8. FAsting, rules concern 1. The strictness of the abstinen^^ 2. The
humbling of the soul.

Chap. 18. p. 193. to 204.
HItherto of the parts of Gods worship: the time follows, which chiefly is the
Sabbath, and the rules about the Sabbath concern^ 1. The preparation to it: End
thy work. Avoid domestical unquietness. Cleanse thy self.
2. The celebration of it, where is prescribed: 1. Rest from all work. 2.
Readiness and delight. 3. Care and watchfulness. 4. Sincerity to be showed:
By doing Gods works with as much care as our own. By observing the whole day.
By avoiding the lesser violations of the Sabbath.
5. Faith, by trusting upon his blessing. 6. Discretion.

Chap. 19. p. 204. to 209.
HItherto of the rules that concern our carriage toward God: Toward man
follows; and so either toward all men, or toward some men. The rules that
order us in our carriage toward all men, concern either righteousness, or
mercy. The rules that concern righteousnesie, either order in company, or out
of company. In company we must be ordered, either in respect of Religion, or
the sin of others, or the way how to carry our selves inoffensiuely: For matter
of Religion look to it: 1. That thou take not up the name of God in vain. 2.
That thou avoid vain ianglings, about doubtful disputations, or curious
questions, or unprofitable reasonings. 3. If thou be asked a reason of thy
hope, answer with all reverence and meekness. 4. Let thy communication be
yea, yea, and nay, nay.

Chap. 20. p. 209. to 216.
AS for the faults of others, 1. Justify not the wicked, nor condemn the
righteous. 2. Converse, without judging. 3. Walk not about with tales. 4.
Reprove, but hate not. 5. Pass by mere frailties. 6. Give soft answers.

Chap. 21. p. 216. to 229.
THat thou may converse inoffensiuely, thou must look to three things,
humility, discretion, and purity. Unto the humility of thy conversation belong
these rules. 1. Be soft, show all meekness to all men. 2. Hearken to the
words of those that are wise. 3. Stand not in the place of great men.
Unto the discretion of thy conversation belong these rules. 1. Speak what is
acceptable. 2. Avoid those that cause divisions. 3. Make no friendship with
the angry man. 4. In the evil time be silent. 5. And communicate not thy
secrets. 6. Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house. 7. Restrain thy
passions. 8. Bless not thy friend with a loud voice.
Unto the purity of thy conversation belong these rules: 1. Refrain thy tongue
from evil. 2. Especially avoid filthy speaking, foolish talking and jesting,
3. Avoid reuelling and drinking.

Chap. 22. pa. 229. to 233.
OVT of company: 1. Conceive love to all men. 2. Pray for all sorts of men; 3.
Provide to live, Honestly, without Scandal. Justly, without Deceit. Peaceably,
without Strife.


Chap. 23. pa. 233. to 245.
THus of righteousness: mercy follows; and unto mercy is requisite, 1.
Willingness, 2. Labor. 3. Liberality. 4. Humility to be showed five ways. 5.
Faith, in two respects 6. Discretion in four respects. 7. Sympathy. 8.
Sincerity in five things.

Chap. 24. pa. 245. to 260.
THus of the Rules that order our carriage toward all men: toward some men
follows, as they are either wicked, or godly: As for the wicked, 1. Hold no
needless society with them. 2. When thou must needs come into their company,
carry thy self wisely, that thou may, if it be possible, win them: and to
this end show 1. Thy mortification. 2. Reverend speech in matter of God and
Religion. 3. Meekness of wisdom. 4. Reservedness in 8. things. 5. Mercy.
6. Vndauntednesse in a good cause. 7. Patience. 8. Love to thy enemies.



Chap. 25. p. 260. to 271.
THus of our carriage toward wicked men: In our carriage toward the godly,
the sum of all is, Walk in love: and the particular rules concern, either the
manifestation of our love unto them, or the preservation of love to the^. Six
ways to manifest our love to the godly 1. By courtesy. 2. By receiving them.
3. By bearing their burdens. 4. By provoking them to good duties. 5. By
faithfulness in their business. 6. By employing our gifts for their good.

Chap. 26. pa. 271. to 279.
FOR the preservation of our love to the godly, some things are to be done, and
other things to be avoided. The things to be done, are: 1. Labor to be
like-minded. 2. Follow peace. 3. Cover their nakednesses. 4. Confess your
faults one to another.

Chap. 27. page 279. to 288.
TEN things to be avoided. 1. Suits in Law. 2. Dissimulation. 3.
Conceitednesse. 4. Rejoicing in iniquity. 5. The minding of our own things. 6.
Fickleness. 7. Vainglory. 8. Judging. 9. Evil words, and complaining. 10.
The forsaking of their fellowship.

Chap. 28. p. 288. to 294.
OTher Rules which concern only some of the godly. 1. Such as are fallen. 2.
Such as are weak. 3. Such as are strong. 4. Such as are especially kuit unto
us in friendship.
1. Those that are fallen, are either fallen from God, or from thee: from God,
either grossly or by infirmity; and so are guilty of foul vices, or extreme
omissions. 1. Warn them, and reprove them. 2. If they mend not, avoid them.
3. If they repent, forgive them.
Toward such as are fallen from thee, by trespassing against thee, observe these
rules: 1. Either speak not of it, or so, as thou vex not at it. 2. In great
wrongs two things are to be done: First, when the trespass is secret,
reprove him privately: if he mend not, reprove him before witness: if he yet
mend not, make the Church acquainted with it: if he will not then amend, hold
him as a Heathen, or a Publican. Secondly, if he repent, forgive him, as often
as he says, It repents him.



Chap. 29. pa. 294. to 298.
2. Toward such as are weak, 1. We must not entangle them with doubtful
disputations concerning Ceremonies, or things indifferent. 2. We must bear
with their weaknesses. 3. We must not offend them. 4. We must encourage and
comfort them. 5. In things indifferent, we must suffer a little restraint of
our own liberty to please them.
3. Toward strong Christians: First, we must acknowledge them. Secondly, we
must set their practice before us, as examples of imitation. Thirdly, we must
submitour selves to them, to have their judgments in all doubtful things.
Fourthly, how we must carry our selves toward our special friend.
1. Never forsake him. 2. Give him hearty counsel. 3. Be friendly to him. 4.
Communicate thy secrets to him. 5. Love him with a special love: First, as
thine own soul. Secondly, at all times. Thirdly, it must be a sincere love,
that looks not for bribes. Fourthly, it must be such a love as will reach to
his posterity, if need be.


Chap. 30. p. 298. to 308.
RVles that concern our selves, are of two sorts. 1. Either our General, or
Particular Calling. Concerning our general Calling, 1. Our Faith. 2. Our
Repentance. 3. Our Hope.
1. Concerning our Faith, we must be expert in the Catalogue of promises, that
concern infirmities, mentioned in the third Treatise. Our judgment must be
established particularly in the doctrine of the Principles, expressed in the
fifth Treatise. 2. Concerning our Repentance, one Rule is of singular use, and
that concerns the Catalogue of present sins, mentioned in the first
Treatise. 3. Concerning our Hope, 4 things: 1. We must pray earnestly, for the
knowledge of the great glory is provided for us. 2. We must use all diligence to
perfect our assurance of Heaven, when we die. 3. We must accustom our thoughts
to the daily contemplation of heaven, that our conversation may be in heaven.
4. We must strive to enable our selves for the expectation of the coming of
Jesus Christ, and to be able to wait for his coming.

Chap. 31. pa. 308. to 317.
Seven things to be avoided in our particular Calling: 1. Slothfulness. 2.
Unfaithfulness. 3. Rashness. 4. Passion, or perturbation. 5. The Temptations
of our Calling. 6. Worldliness. 7. Profaneness.

Chap. 32. pa. 317. to 323.
HOw we must carry our selves in affliction Eight things to be avoided: 1.
Dissembling. 2. Shame: 3. Impatience. 4. Discouragement. 5. Trust in carnal
friends. 6. Perplexed cares. 7. Sudden fears. 8. Carelessenesse of thy ways.
Five things to be done in the time of affliction: 1. We must pray, and call
upon the Name of the Lord. 2. We must bear our cross with patiience and
contentation. 3. We must use all good means for our deliverance. 4. We must be
sure to show our trust in God, and cast our burden on the Lord 5. We must show
our obedience to God. four ways: First, by submitting our selves to Gods
will. Secondly, if we judge our selves, and acknowledge our sins to God.
Thirdly, if we be constant in the good ways of godliness. Fourthly, if we
learn more righteousness, and are made by our crosses to do holy duties with
better affections.


CHAP. I.
Containing the Preface, which shows the drift, warrant, profit, and use of
the ensuing Treatise.
THE only thing intended in this Treatise is, The scope
to collect for thy use (Christian Reader) those directions scattered here and
there in the Scriptures, which may, through out the whole course of thy life,
tell thee, what thou must do in the right order of thy conversation: How thou
should behave thy self toward God, and how thou should carry thy self
toward men, in all the occasions of thy life: In company, out of company: In
all duties either of righteousness or mercy: and how thou should dispose of
thy self in affliction, and out of affliction, at all times.

And thou may be the more encouraged to study and practice these rules, Thy
warrant.
because thou have the most express and apparent word of God to warrant and
require thy obedience herein.

Be not so profane, as to think, that here is more to do then needs, or that
I burden the lives of Christians with a multitude of unnecessary Precepts, and
so make the way harder then it is: For I require thy obedience in nothing, thou
have not reason to be persuaded to be enjoined thee by the pure word of God;
And thou must know, to the confusion of thy security; that he that will walk
safely, must walk by rule, Gal. 6. 16. He is yet in darkness, and walks on
in darkness, and sees not what he does, or whither he goes, that does not
make the Word of God the light unto his feet, and the Lantern unto his paths:
Psalm. 119. There is a holy order of life commended in the godly, Col. 2. 5. and
Gods promises are made to such as will dispose of their ways aright. A loose
conversation is an ill conversation; and if ever we would see the salvation of
God, we must be at the pains to dispose of our ways, and to see to it, that
we dispose of our ways aright, Psalm, 50. vlt.

The benefit thou may reap by this Treatise, The profit of the course.
is much every way, if the fault be not in thy self: for here thou may
briefly behold the substance of a godly life; thou may in a short time
inform thy knowledge in that great doctrine of practical Divinity: But
especially thou may, by the help of this Treatise see a sound way, how to
beautify thy own conversation, with the addition of diverse rules, which,
perhaps, hitherto thou have not taken notice of: God has promised much peace,
and comfort unto such as will walk according unto rule, Gal. 6. 16. Yea, he
has promised, that they shall see the salvation of God, that dispose their way
aright, Psalm. 50. vlt. It is true, it is a greater labor to travail in the
way, then to show it; but yet it is a great benefit to be showed the way.
Howsoever, it may not be denied, but it is a greater glory to observe these
rules, then to know them, or prescribe them.

It may be thou will object, The easines of the course.
that the rules are so many, thou can never remember them, and so not profit
by them. I answer:

If I have made the rules no more in number then God has made them in his
Word, thou may not find fault with me.

Secondly, no man that is to learn any Trade, or Science, but he meets with
more directions, then he can on the sudden reach to, or practice, and yet
he reiects not his Trade or Science, because in time he hopes to learn it
all. Would we put on a resolution to serve a Prentiship to Religion, and to
work hard one whole seven years: oh, what work would we dispatch! How many
Rules and Knowledges would we grow skillful in! But alas, after many years
profession of Christianity, the most of us, if all were put together, have not
done the work, that might have been done in few days.

Thirdly, Mark this direction.
I answer, that it is not necessary thou should lay all these Rules before
thee at once, but mark out certain choice Rules, so many as thou can well
remember, and strive, by daily practice, to bring thy self to some kind of
dexterity in observing them. There be some rules of each kind, which, if thou
be a true Christian, thou know and obseruest already: These thou may
continue to observe still, without loading thy memory about them. Now if those
be omitted, then consider of the rest that remain, which of them do most
concern thee, or would most adorn thy practice and profession, or are such as
thou never hitherto did make conscience of: Extract or mark out so many of
those at a time, as thou would in daily practice strive to attain, and when
thou have learned them, then go on, and prescribe to thy self new Lessons. To
a carnal mind, all the way of godliness is impossible, but to a godly and
willing mind all things, through the power and assistance of God, are
possible: God will accept thy desire and endeavor, and will add strength and
might, and encourage thee in all his ways. By prayer thou may form any
grace in thee, by reason of the power the Lord Jesus has to prevail for any
thing thou do ask the Father in his name.

The last benefit may come to thee, if thou daily read these directions, is,
that they will quicken thee to a great care of weldoing, and give thee cause to
walk humbly with thy God, and abase thy self for thine own insufficiency:
The Lord give thee understanding in all things, and unite thy heart unto his
fear always, that thou may observe to do, as he commands thee, and not
turn from the good way all the days of thy life.

CHAP. II.
Containing such Rules as in general men must take notice of, as preparations
and furtherances to a godly life.
THE Rules of holy life may be cast into two ranks: The rules of life are
either general or particular.
the first containing such rules as are General: and the other, such as are
Particular. The general rules concern either, The helps to a godly life*


The general rules are likewise of two sorts: some of them concern certain
general preparations, helps, or furtherances to a holy life, without which
men in vain begin the cares, or endeavors of a reformed life: And some of
them comprehend those necessary rules which are to be observed in the manner of
doing all holy duties, Or secondly, the manner of well-doing
and so are of singular use to be always remembered, when we go about any
service.

Of the first sort there are many rules; Whosoever will address himself to a holy
course of life.
for they that will address themselves to order their conversation aright,
must be soundly careful in the observation of these directions following.

1 He must examine himself about his faith and repentance; he must be sure
he is reconciled to God, and has truly repented himself of his sins, 2.
Cor. 13. 5. For unless he be a new creature, he is no creature, but a dead
man, and so utterly unable for the practice of these rules following: And
without God we can do nothing; and without God we are, till we live by faith:
Besides, the pollution of our hearts or lives drawn upon us by the custom of
sin past and present, will so infect all we do, that it will be abominable
to God, and so lost labor.

This is the first Rule.

2 His next care must be to learn the knowledge of the rules of life; we can
never practice what we know not, and therefore our next care and pains must be
to get the knowledge of Gods ways distinctly, and effectually, into our heads
and hearts; Our direction must not be in our books, but in our heads; and a
Christian must have his rules always before him, that so he may walk
circumspectly by line and leuel, Ephesians. 5. 15. understanding the will of God in
what he is to do. He is in the way of life, that has and keeps
instruction, how to live, Prou. 10. 17. whereas he that will not be at the
pains of getting instruction, erreth, as Solomon says: And therefore we must
take fast hold of instruction, and not let her go, but keep her: for she is
our life, Prou. 4. 13. Knowledge then, of necessity must be had, or in vain we
go about to live well. Now this is such a rule, as must not slightly be passed
over, and it is not enough thus in general to require knowledge, but withal,
I would show certain choice rules to be observed by us, And he that would
prosper in seeking knowledge must observe nine Rules.
if we would take a sound course to attain knowledge. He then that would
prosperously seek sound knowledge, must remember these directions.

First, 1. He must esteem knowledge.
he must esteem knowledge, and labor to frame his heart to a high estimation
of it, accounting it as great treasure, accounting the getting of wisdom above
all gettings, Pro. 4. 7. We must seek for knowledge, as for silver, and search
for her, as for treasure, and then with wonderful success shall we
understand the right fear of the Lord, Prou. 2. 4. else our labor will be
blasted and fruitless, if we bring mean thoughts to the exercise of
directions for the attaining of knowledge.

Secondly, 2. He must not consult with flesh and blood.
he must take heed that he consult not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. 16 He
must not regard other men's opinions, or his own carnal reason, but resolve to
give glory to God and his Word, as willing to believe or do whatsoever the
Lord says unto him.

3. 3. He must redeem the time.
Thirdly, he must redeem the time, Ephesians. 5. 16. Inasmuch as he has lost so
much time past, he must now provide to allow himself convenient and certain
time to be spent this way for the attaining of knowledge, else to study by
snatches and uncertainly, will be to little or no purpose. To complain of
ignorance, will not serve the turn, nor will the pretense of worldly business
excuse us: and therefore we must buy so much time of our occasions, as may be
competent for the supply of our wants in knowledge.

4. 4. He must be wise for himself.
Fourthly, in seeking knowledge, he must be wise for himself, Prou. 9. 12. He
must strive to understand his own way, so to be careful to know the generals
about religion, as his special care be in all things to refer what he
reads or hears, to the particular directions of his own soul. This is a
rule of singular Use, if it could be beaten into men's heads, and for want of
this, many Christians, after long pains, and much time spent, have bin found
exceeding ignorant.

5. 5. He must be swift to hear.
He must be swift to hear, Iam. 1. 19. with all frequency and attention,
making use of the public Ministry, striving with his own heart against
deadness, and drowsinesse, and removing al impediments might be cast in his
way from the world, or his worldly occasions, observing all opportunities for
hearing, especially when he sees the heart of his Teacher enlarged, and the
power of Doctrine more then at other times, or in other things.

6. 6. He must study only profitable things.
Sixthly, he must avoid vain questions, and fruitles contemplations, Titus. 3.
9. 1. Tim. 6. 20. 2. Tim. 2. 23. When the light of doctrine was so great in the
Primitive times, this was one practice of Satan, to draw aside the studies of
Christians from necessary and solid truths, to Genealogies or quarrels about
words or vain controversies, falsely called oppositions of science: We must
therefore be warned of this method of Satan, and till we know clearly the ways
of life, allow our selves no time for more remote studies, or fruitless
Controversies. What riches of knowledge might some Christians have attained to,
if they had spent the time (they have employed about con^rouersies,
genealogies, and general knowledge) in the ^ound building of themselves up in
such things, as their souls apparently stand in need of?

Seventhly, 7. He must strive to increase in knowledge.
he must not ^est satisfied with a small measure of understanding; he must
not give over when he has gotten a little knowledge more then he had: he must
desire to increase in knowledge, and never be well pleased with himself, while
he is but a Child in understanding, 1. Cor. 14. 20.

8. 8. He must propound his doubts
Eighthly, He must inquire and take counsel, he must propound his doubts daily
and carefully. He that would know much, must ask much, he must break off
that wretched silence he is prone to, and provide, if it be possible, to enjoy
the favor of some one or more, that are able to resolve his doubts from time to
time. This rule has incredible profit in it, if it be rightly practiced,
Prou. 15. 12. and 20. 17, 18. and 27. 9.

Ninthly, 9. He must be rightly ordered toward his Pastor.
and lastly: He must be rightly ordered in respect of his Pastor. For the
principal means of knowledge is assigned of God to be in the Ministry of his
servants: and therefore if we would attain knowledge, we must dispose our
selves aright toward our Teachers, and to this end we must look to it,

First, 1. To pray for him.
that we pray for them, that their word may run and have free passage, and
that God would make them able to open unto us the mysteries of his will, 2.
These. 3. 1. 2. Colos. 4. 3. Ephesians. 6. 19.

Secondly, 2. To obey him.
we must keep their directions, and make conscience of it to be careful to
obey them, in what they command us in the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. 2.

Thirdly, we must take heed of discouraging them. For this is not profitable
for us. For the more cheerful and comfortable their hearts are, the more apt
they are to find out profitable things for us, Heb. 13. 18. 1. Cor. 16. 10, 11.

And thus of the first and second rule.

Thirdly, he that would redress his ways aright, The third rule.
must get out of the way of wicked men: He must get out of evil company.
He must give over evil company, and sequester himself from the counsel and
society of carnal and profane persons. The necessity of this rule is both
proved and urged in these and many other Scriptures, Prou. 4. 14. Psalm. 1. 1.
2. Cor. 6. 17. Epb. 5. 7, 8.

Fourthly, 4. He must resolve to practice.
he must bring a mind full of care and desire, and resolution to practice the
rules, when he has learned them: he must as the phrase is, observe to do
Gods will, Deuteronomy. 5. 32. He must be watchful and diligent, he must ponder
upon the ways of God, bewaring lest he either neglect or forget to do them,
Deuteronomy. 6. 17. and 31. 46. and 8. 11. 1. Corin. 16. 13. Prou. 4. 26. we must
follow after righteousness, 1. Tim. 6. 11. and bind directions as signs upon
our hands, etc. Deuteronomy. 8. 28. If we could be thus awakened, this rule would
breed us unspeakable good in our conversation.

Fifthly, 5. He must settle his outward estate.
he must endeavor to settle his head and his estate in respect of his worldly
affairs. It is a singular help to godliness, to reduce our outward callings
into order, and every days experience shows, that confusions in worldly
business breed miserable neglect in Gods service. And therefore he that
would profit in an orderly course of life, must provide to use the world so,
as he may serve the Lord without distraction: He, that would run a race,
abstaineth from all things, that might encumber him. No man, that warreth,
intangleth himself with the affairs of life, that he may please him, who
has chosen him to be a soldier: And therefore we may not think it much, if in
our spiritual course God lay some restraint upon us, in respect of the cares
and encumbrances in our outward Callings, 1. Cor. 7. 29. 35. etc. 2. Tim. 2. 4.
1. Cor. 9. 28.

Sixthly, 6. He must keep company with the godly.
He must walk in the way of good men, both setting before him their practice,
as patterns of imitation, as also by conuersing with them, that thereby he may
gather encouragement, and help in well-doing. He is deceived, that thinks to
go alone, and yet go prosperously in the course of a godly life: He may
profit, and learn by many things he hears, receives, and sees among the
godly. Prou. 2. 20. Phil. 4. 8, 9.

Seventhly, 7. He must not be the servant of men.
He must not be the servant of men, 1. Cor. 7. 23. other men's humors must
not be the direction of this practice: He must so depend upon persons he hopes
to get any thing by in this world, as he be not thereby hindered in works of
Religion, knowing, that he is Christ's Freeman.

He must haste to, 8. He must look for the coming of Christ.
and look for the coming of Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 3. 12. He must often
remember his latter end, and daily set before his eyes the coming of Christ,
striving to stir up in his heart the desire after Chrst, praying for it, and
dispatching those works, that may prepare him thereunto: The remembrance of
our accounts in the day of Christ will wonderfully quicken men to the care of
well, doing, and the cause of the viciousness, and miserable neglect, and
procrastinations of many is, their forgetting of their latter end: A great
reason, why the directions about godliness are not entertained, is, because
men put far away from them the day of the Lord: whereas the remembrance of
the revelation of Jesus Christ, would put Spirit and Life into us. He dares
not say from his heart, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, that is not resolved
diligently to work the works of Christ.

9 He must not stay for company, 9 He must notregard what the multitude does.
but rather choose to run alone; or with a few, then hazard the loss of the
Crown. Our life is a Race, and as in a race men stay not for company, but
strive who may run foremost: so it is in the race of godliness: He must so
run, as he may obtain: He must set out with the first, and run as it were
for his life: As he must make use of the society of the godly, so he must not
stay, till his carnal friends, and acquaintance will set out with him: He
must be of Joshua's mind, that if the whole world will live in wickedness
and profaneness, yet he and his house will serve the Lord, 1. Cor. 9. 24. and
14. 12. Josh. 24. 15.

Tenthly, 10. He must in all things give thanks.
he must in all things give thanks; when God gives him success in any thing,
or prospers the means to him, and helps him with victory over any sin, or
strength to perform any duty, or bestows upon him any spiritual blessing,
he must remember to praise God in the name of Jesus Christ. This will quicken
him: Daily thankfulness will breed daily alacrity in well-doing: He that will
not be thankful for beginnings of success in the practice of holy duties,
will not hold out: This is the special will of Christ, that we should in all
things give thanks, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.

He must study to be quiet, 11. He must study to be quiet.
and follow peace with all men, meddling with his own business, and avoiding
all occasion of contention, that might distract him in his own course: A
busybody is as good as no body in respect of sound progress in sanctification:
It is an excellent skill to be able to avoid the intanglements of discord;
especially he must provide to have perfect peace with the godly. Though GOD
be able to sanctify the oppositions of unreasonable men, yet we must take
heed of drawing needless troubles upon our selves; for that makes us neither
to be, nor to be accounted the more holy, but contrariwise. The Apostle could
not speak unto the Corinthians, as unto spiritual men, but as unto carnal;
at the best, but Babes in Christ; and the reason was, because there was strife
and envy, and division amongst them, Romans 9. 19. Hebrews 12. 14. Mark 9.
vlt. I. Cor. 3. 3.

His eyes must look straight, 12. He must keep a strict course in following
only profitable things.
and his eye-liddes right before him, Prou. 4. 25. He must take heed of going
about, and fetching of compase in Religion, Ier. 31. 32. He must be still
aiming at the mark of the high prize of his calling: being sure that the
things he employeth himself in, tend directly to the furtherance of his
salvation, and not lose his time in unprofitable studies, or practices,
proceeding from one degree to another, till he come to a ripe age in Christ.

13. 13. He must be conversant daily in the reading of the holy Scriptures
He must be conuersanrt in the Scriptures, and be familiarly acquainted with
them, that they may dwell plenteously in him: For those good words of God have
not only light in them to direct us, but power also to assist us to do what
they require, and by the daily reading and hearing of them, we shall be
excited to more care of well-doing: we must exercise our selves in the Word day
and night, and never let them depart out of our hearts, but keep our hearts
still warm, with the heat that comes from them, never suffering the warmth to
go out through our long forbearance of the use of them, Col. 3. 16. Psalm. 1. 2.
Josh. 8. Isaiah. 8. 16, 20.

14. 14. He must keep his first love.
He must carefully persevere in his first love, Reu, 2. 4. The Lord is wont at
some times or other, about the first conversion of a sinner, to show himself
with such power in his ordinances, and to reveal unto him such glories in the
merits and gifts of Jesus Christ, and the happiness of his estate in him, that
his heart is thereby fired to a cheerful liking of the means of salvation, and
of godly persons, and to a wonderful desire after God, and care to please God.
Now he that would prosper in a Christian course, must be wonderfully careful
to preserve affection, and this spiritual love in his heart, and watch,
against, and resist the first beginnings of decay, or coldness, or declining
in his heart, and take heed of suffering his heart to be drawn away by the
deceitfulness of sin, or the inticements of the world.

15. 15. He must covet the best gifts.
He must covet earnestly the best gifts, 1. Cor. 12 vlt. There are some duties
in Piety or Mercy, or righteousness, which in respect of our places do most
concern us, and would in a more special manner adorn our particular
profession: so are there some gifts which do advance our communion with God,
and do make us more profitable amongst men. Now these things we should study,
and earnestly labor to frame our selves to, and to express them more
effectually in our conversation. This no doubt is the reason why the holy Ghost
does in Scripture make Catalogues of certain special duties, or graces singled
out from the rest, and fitted to the conditions of the people who are written
to: and this would be a singular advantage to us, if we also would single out
to our use some few of the chiefest virtues or duties which we would daily set
before us, and strive by prayer and all holy endeavor to fashion them to life in
our hearts of lives.

16. 16. He must often humble his soul before God.
He must renew often his mortification; man's heart is like fallow ground, which
is not to receive seed, till it be broken up, and at best it is like a garden
which will often need weeding. If we do not at some times in special manner
humble our souls before God, worldly cares, or carnal delights will ouer-grow
our desires and our practice, and choke the seed of the Word received by us;
we must keep under our bodies, and bring them in subjection, and be often
dragging our lusts to the cross of Christ, there to crucify them. Our
practice is like to sowing, which presupposes plowing before, Ier. 4. 34.
Hosh. 10. 12. 1. Cor. 9. 27.

17. 17. He must watch for the opportunities of well-doing
He must watch for the opportunities of well-doing, and take heed of
procrastination: he must seek righteousness, and haste to it, he must not put
it off, till to morrow, Esaias 16. 5. Pro. 3. 28. and 23. 26. Amos 5. 14.

18. 18. He must be careful of sa^ctifying the Sabbath.
He must remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it: The commandment concerning
the keeping of the Sabbath, to sanctify it, is placed in the midst between
the two Tables, of purpose to show that the keeping of the Sabbath is a
singular help to all piety and righteousness, and God has promised a
special blessing to the obseruers of the Sabbath, and gives strength by the
rest of that day, the better to perform holy duties all the week after,
Commandment 4. Esaias 58. 13.

19. 19. He must often think of the example of the godly that have excelled.
He must meditate much on the example of the godly of all ages, and strive
diligently to learn their ways, and to quicken himself by the thought of
their care, zeal, and sincerity. And thus he may also profitably set before
him the examples of some of his own acquaintance, as excel in the gifts of
Christ, and fruits of well-doing. The example of good men should be as
forcible to draw us to good, as the example of evil men is to incline others
to evil: we have bin compassed about with a cloud of witnesses, who have lived
in all ages of the Church: we must therefore stand in the ways and see, and
ask for the old way to walk in it, and with all gladness follow any that
are fit to be guides to us therein, Hebr. 12. 1. Ierem. 12. 16. and 6. 16.

20. 20. He must daily seek a way of God.
He must go daily to him that teaches to profit, begging of God to show him
away, and to lead him by his Spirit unto the right practice of every holy duty,
even to guide him in the plain path, Esaias 48. 17. Psalm. 27. 11.

Thus I have set down those rules which are general helps unto godliness,
and must be attended by a godly Christian.

CHAP. III.
Showing the things that are to be avoided by such as would order their
conversation aright.
NOw before I proceed unto the rules that concern the manner of well-doing. I
will add unto the former directions, nine Cautions, He must avoid,
or nine things which a Christian must take heed of in his practice of holy
duties: As

1. First, he must take heed of wretchlesnesse, 1. Carelessness.
or a scornful carelessness of his own ways, he must not despise his ways:
as if he cared not how he lived, or rested satisfied to be still, as he was:
This carelessness proves the bane of many a soul, whereas He that keeps his
soul, keeps his way, Pro. 19. 16. and 21. 5.

2. He must take heed of precipitation, 2. Rashness
or rashness, or too much haste: this is the ground of much false zeal, and
the cause of strange evils in the practice of some Christians: but the godly
Christian must learn of Solomon, to prepare his work in the field, and then
build his house: he must get sound knowledge of the warrant of his actions, and
guide his affairs by advice, and with serious preparation fit himself to the
doing of what he is sure is good. He that hastes with his feet, sins: what
is done rashly, cannot he done well: Prou. 19. 2. As procrastination is a great
vice; so praecipitation is no virtue, Prou. 24. 27* and 28. 2^.

3 He must have no confidence in the flesh, 3. Carnal confidence.
he must not rely upon his own wit, memory, reason, desires, virtues,
praises, or power; but all his comfort and affiance must be in the merits,
intercession, virtue, presence, and assistance of Jesus Christ his Savior,
Phil. 3. 3.

4 He must not haste to be rich, 4. Haste to be rich.
for the desire of money is the root of all evil; and they cannot be at
leisure for good duties, that are so eager to compass great things in the
world, Prou. 23. 4. and 28. 20.

5 He must take heed of the snares that arise from distrustful fears: 5.
Distrustful fears.
There is a snare in fear, Prou. 29. 25. There are many fears will assault a
man, that resolves to live well; As the fear that he cannot do good duties;
The fear that God will not accept what he does; The fear left men should
scorn him, or contemn him, or lest he should lose the favor of his friends,
or such like. Now against all these must the godly mind be armed, and take
heed that those fears prove not great hindrances to him; and especially take
heed of that unbelief, or counterfeit humility, in disabling himself, or
mistrusting God contrary to his nature and promises.

6 He must take heed of adding to, 6. Adding to, or taking from the word of
God.
or detracting from the Word of God: He must not imagine more sins, then God
has made; that is, not trouble himself with fear of offending in such
things, as God has not in his Word forbidden: and so likewise he must not
impose upon his own conscience, or other men's, the necessity of observing such
rules of practice, as God never prescribed. This caution would case the hearts
of many Christians, if it were discreetely observed and applied, Prou. 30. 6.

7 He must take heed of hardening his neck against reproofs: 7. Contempt of
reproof.
Pro. 29. 1. He must needs* run into headlong evils, that is so proud as not to
hear advice, or to reject reproves; and it will be a singular furtherance to
a holy life, to be easy to be entreated to leave his offenses, and to mend
his errors.

8 He must take heed of beholding vanity: 8. Beholding vanity.
David prays, that God would turn away his eyes from beholding vanity: He that
would forsake vanity, must avoid the presence of vain persons, and the too
much contemplation of vanity, shunning the reading and discourse of the
inticements of others unto any sin, Psalm. 119. 37.

9 And lastly, 9. The beginning of sin.
he must take heed of the beginning of evils in his own heart: he must keep
his heart with all diligence, for thereout comes life: His practice will be
easy to him, if he resist sin in the beginning, and drive out Satan from
his holds within his soul, whereas he cannot but be much entangled and
encumbred, that allows himself in the secret entertainment of contemplative
wickedness; he must watch his heart, and strive for inward purity, Prou. 4. 23.

CHAP. IIII.
Containing the general Rules to be remembered in the manner of doing all good
duties.
HItherto of the first sort of general Rules: The second sort concern the
manner of well-doing: There are 9. things to be still reme^ bred, which
concern the manner of well-doing
There are diverse things in the general, which are to be observed of the godly
Christian in all good duties, which he ought to have perfect in his memory,
and such as he might bring with him at all times to form his heart in respect
of them, to beget in him that holy manner of carrying himself, which is
requisite unto the acceptance of the good things he employeth himself in: and
the rather should he be moved to the care of learning and expressing of these
things, because the matter of good duties may be done by wicked men, as they
were by the Pharisees, and yet all abomination to the Lord: That therefore he
may not lose what he works, he must strive in every good action to express
these nine things following in the manner of his behavior.

The first thing required in the manner of every holy duty, 1. Zeal, with
continual willingness and feruencie.
is Zeal: It is not enough that he do the duty, but he must do it
affectionately, bringing with him the stirring of the desires of his heart
answerable, and agreeable to the duty he would perform: Zeal has in it two
distinct things, willingness and feruencie; It must not seem evil to him to
do Gods work, and in doing it, he must lift up his heart, so as he perform it
with all his might, and with all his soul; and this he does, when either he
brings a heart delighting in good works, or when he judges himself for what
deadness, or distraction, or unwillingness he finds in himself: He is
accounted zealous, when he strives for it, and lifts up his soul against the
impediments which burden him: This zeal is necessary; Christ died to redeem
a people unto himself, not only that would do good works, but that would be
zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14.

2 The second thing required in the manner of good duties, 2. Sincerity, which
has in it 5. things.
is sincerity, all his actions must be done in the sincerity of his heart. The
life of a Christian is like a continual Passe-ouer; Now this Feast he must
keep always with the unleavened bread of sincerity, 1. Cor. 5. 8.

Now this sincerity he must show diverse ways, as,

1 By the truth of his heart, 1. Truth.
as it stands opposed to hypocrisy; he must not talk of well-doing, or seem
to do it, but he must do it indeed.

2 By his respect to all Gods commandments, 2. Respect to al Gods
commandments.
when he can say with David, I esteem all thy precepts, concerning all things
to be right, and I hate every false way. He that is truly sincere, accounts
that every word of God is good, and desires to yield obedience in all things.
He has not his reseruations, or exceptions: He does not with Herod give
himself liberty to lie in the wilful breach of one commandment, resting
satisfied to have reformed himself in other things. As he would have God to
forgive him all his sins, so his heart desires to forsake all sin, and so
he desires also to do every part of Gods work.

3. By propounding the glory of God, 3. Right end.
as the chief end of all his actions: His praise must not be of men, nor must
he do good duties for carnal ends, 1. Cor. 10. 31.

4. By obeying without expostulating, 4. Obedience without expostulation.
though God give no apparent reason of his commandment. Thus Abraham showed
his sincerity, when God bade him go out of his own country, though he knew
not whither he should go, Hebr. 11. 8. This is to obey simply, because God
has commanded it.

5 By obeying absent as well as present, 5. Obedience in all places.
in all companies as well as one. This praised the sincerity of the Obedience
of the Philippians, Phil. 2. 12.

Thus of sincerity, which is the second thing required in the manner of
welldoing.

3. The third thing is Constancy: The third thing required in the manner of
well-doing, is Consta^cy.
He is blessed that does righteousness always. Doing righteousness will not
serve the turn, but it must be at all times, Psalm. 106. 3. Our righteousness
must not be like the morning dew. It is not sufficient to do good by fits; we
are no day laborers, but Gods hired servants: He that is righteous, must be
righteous still, Romans 6 19. Revel. 22. 11. There must be continuance in
well-doing, Romans 2. 7, 8.

Now to be constant in well-doing, And he is constant, that does good duties,
is to do good duties,

1. Without weariness: 1. Without wearines.
It is required as a thing necessary to the manner of well-doing, that we be
not weary of it, and that we faint not, Gal. 6. 9. This we must strive for by
prayer.

2. Without discouragement: 2. Without discouragement.
we must lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, and make
straight steps to our feet. How much hinderance to well-doing,
discouragement is, may appear by the similitude: feeble knees will dispatch
but a little space of the journey, and hands that hang down, are not fit for
work: great is the hinderance comes to many by their discouragements and
aptness thereunto, which arises usually from pride, and the dregs of worldly
sorrow, and ought much to be resisted by true Christians, Hebr. 12. 12, 13.
Josh. 1. 6, 7.

3. Without impediment: 3. Notwithstanding impedime^ts.
That is, notwithstanding all the impediments may be cast in the way; Judgment
should run down as waters, and righteousness as a flowing stream: we
should overcome all difficulties: you cannot stop the flowing stream, though
you cast in great logs or stones, yea though you would go about to damme it
up; and such should be the resolution of a godly Christian, Amos 3. 24.

4. Without wavering or uncertainty. 4. Without wavering.
It is uncertain running the Apostle implyedly forbids, 1. Cor. 9. 25. Our
life is like a race: Now in a race it is not enough that a man run now and
then, though he run fiercely for the time: He must not trifle and look
behind, and stand still at his pleasure, and then run again, but he must be
always running: so ought it to be with us in the race of godliness. It will
not serve the turn to be good by fits, and to be forward in good things
only at some times, and then be careless, and off the hooks, as we say, at
other times.

5. Without declining or going back. 5. Without declining.
Job comforts himself against the aspersion of hypocrifie by this, that his
foot had held on his steps, and Gods ways he had kept, and not declined, nor
had he gone back from Gods Commandments, Job 23. 11, 12. Though he had not
made such Progress as he desired, yet this was his comfort, he had not
backeslided by Apostasy.

And thus of the third thing also required in the manner of well-doing, which
is Constancy.

4. 4. Fear.
The fourth thing required is fear: thus Pro. 28. 14. The man is blessed that
fears always. And 1. Pet. 1. 17. and 3. 2. Our conversation must be with
fear: This fear excludes rudeness, carelessness, conceitednesse, pride, and
the like, and includes Reverence, awful regard of Gods holiness, or holy
presence (whom we should set always before us) and the fear of the
deceitfulness of sin, and our own corrupt dispositions, and the care to
avoid all occasions of offending God or men.

The fifth thing is simplicity. Simplicity
This is so necessary, as the Apostle mistrusted most the subtilty of the
Devil, in beguiling Christians of this simplicity, which they had in Jesus
Christ, 2. Cor. 11. 3.

Now this simplicity contains in it distinctly diverse things.

1. Which is, 1. To rest upon the Word for the forms of holiness and happiness.
A resting in those forms of holiness and happiness which God has
prescribed, when a man desires no more to make him happy, then what God has
offered and given in Jesus Christ, 2. Corin. 11. 3. and when he accounts
nothing to defile him, but what God has forbidden, and nothing needful to be
done by him, but what God has in his Word required.

2. A Doue-like innocence, 2. To be harmless.
and harmlesnesse, when the Christian shows a desire to be injurious to no
man, but rather to seek the good of others, as well as his own, 1. Cor. 10. 24.

3. An ignorance of the depths of Satan, 3. To be simple concerning evil.
and the methods of sin, when he is not cunning in sinning, out simple
concerning evil, no way desirous to get subtle excuses, or arguments ^o
defend himself in evil, Romans. 16. 19.

4. 4. To love goodness for it self
A love of goodness for it self, and hatred of sin, as it is sin.

5. 5. To be meek and lowlyminded.
Meekness of wisdom, I am. 3. 13. which is showed three ways. 1. By
lowliness of mind, when a man is not conceited, or wise in himself, but
retains a sense of his own unfitness, and unworthiness, Job 37. 24. 2. By
silence from his own praises, Prou. 27. 2. 3. By avoiding vain ianglings,
which arise out of Envy, or contempt of others.

6. 6. Fear God, and not envy the wicked
The preserving of himself in the fear of God, notwithstanding the prosperity
of evil doers, not envying the wicked, that has success in his way, Prou.
23. 27.

The sixth thing required in the manner of well-doing, The sixth is
circumspection, which has five things in it.
is Circumspection, Ephesians. 5. 15.

Now he walks circumspectly or exactly:

1. That makes conscience to observe the lesser commandment as well as the
greater, Mat. 5. 19.

2. That abstains from the very appearance of evil, 1. These. 5. 22.

3. That with discretion looks to the circumstances of things to be done, as
time, place, persons, order, and the like: that does not only do good, but is
wise to do good, Romans 16. 19.

4. That lives without rebuke, and is unspotted of the world, Phil. 2. 15. I
am. 1. vlt. that is not guilty of any scandal, and gives no just cause to the
wicked to blaspheme, but prouides for things honest in the sight of all men, 2.
Cor. 8. 21.

5. That will not do evil, though good might come of it, Romans 3.

The seventh thing required in the manner of well-doing, The 7. is, growth or
increase.
is growth and increase: We must not only get grace and knowledge, and do
good, but we must grow in the grace and knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 3.
18. Which has three things in it.
and this growth should have in it distinctly three things:

1. 1. Abounding in goodness.
Abounding in good works, or a more frequent practice of all sorts of duties,
that we have opportunity and power to practice, 1. Cor. 15. 58. Col. 1. 10.

2. 2. Perfecting of holiness.
The perfecting of holiness, 2. Cor. 7. 1. or the ripening of our gifts, and
finishing of the good things we begin, not leaving off till we have
accomplished them in some good measure and manner.

3. 3. Progress
Progress, so as our works be more at last, then at first.

And all this we should strive for, both thth so our profiting might appear,
1. Tim. 4. 15. and we may be fit to be an example to others, 2. Tim. 4. 12.
1. Th. 1. 7.

The eighth thing required in the manner of well-doing, 8. Faith.
is Faith: we must walk by faith in all our actions, 2. Cor. 5. 7. Now faith
is employed partly in taking notice of Gods will, as the warrant of our
actions, and partly in ouercomming the difficulties of well-doing, making us
hold out, though we be scorned, or disgraced, or opposed in the world, and
raising up our hearts to believe Gods assistance, notwithstanding our own
weaknesses, and partly in trusting God for the success, believing Gods
promises.

The ninth and last thing required in the manner of well-doing, The last is
moderation
is Moderation. This rule is expressed in these words, The place in Eccl. 7.
16. expounded.
Eccles. 7. 16. Be not just overmuch, neither be thou wicked overmuch: Now
for the sense of these words, we must know in the negative, that this place is
most profanely alleged by such as produce it as a reproof of strictness of
life, and the refusal of the excesses of the time.

There are many things said to give a sense of those words.

1. Some refer these words to Justice, either Distributive, or Commutatiue,
and that either in the case of a private person, or of a Magistrate. A private
man must neither stand too much upon his right, nor yet suffer his innocence to
be too much wronged. A Magistrate must not be too severe in a selfe-conceited
Justice, nor yet too remiss in sparing or favoring wickedness.

2. Some think it restraines curiosity and carelesnes, as if the sense were,
Be not curious to pry or search into secret things, that are not revealed: for
he that will be searching into Gods majesty, may be oppressed by his glory:
nor yet be so careless, as not to take notice of the truth revealed.

3. Some thus exceed not by too much preciseness on the right hand, or by too
much prophanenes on the left hand. On the right hand they go out, that bring
in works of supererogation, and such as worship God after the precepts of men,
and such as tie men's consciences to observe or avoid things without warrant of
Scripture, and such as say they have no sin, and need not the grace of God.

4. Lastly, the fittest interpretation is theirs, that expound the words in
this sense, Be not just overmuch, that is, think not too highly of thy self
in any thing thou do well, nor yet be wicked overmuch, that is, account not
too vilely of thy self, denying Gods gifts in thee, and refusing the just
comforts thou should take to thy self; aggrauate not against thy own soul
thy weakness above reason and measure.

CHAP. V.
Entreating of the rules that concern our carriage toward God, and in
particular about the knowledge of God.
HItherto of the general rules: The division of the particular rules.
The particular rules that concern the right ordering of our conversation, may
be cast into three heads, as they direct us in our carriage, 1. Toward God. 2.
Toward men. 3. Toward our selves. The subdiuision.



All the rules that concern our duties to GOD, may be cast into two heads: 1.
For they concern either the love of God, or 2. the service of God. This is an
exact division; for all we owe to God, is fitly comprehended in these two,
Love and Service: and the Scripture so diuides in these and the like places,
Commandment 2. Deuteronomy. 11. 23. and 30. 16. Josh. 22. 5. Esaias 56. 6.

Now that we may be rightly ordered in respect of our love to God, we must
consider of his love, either in the foundation of it, or in the exercise of it.
The foundation of our love to God, is the true knowledge of God, 2. Chron. 28.
6. So that in the first place we must soundly inform our selves concerning
this knowledge of God. The rules that concern the right knowledge of God of 2.
sorts.
Now the rules that concern the right knowledge of God, concern either the
right conceiving of his nature, or our aoquaintance with God, when we do
aright conceive of him. That we may conceive aright of Gods nature.
That we may conceive aright of Gods nature,

1. 1. We must cast out all likenesses.
We must exclude out of our thoughts all likenesses, so as men do not think
of God, representing him by the similitude of any creature: He that forbids
Images of him in Churches, forbids it also in our heads, Commandment 2. Esaias
40. Deuteronomy. 4.

2. We must strive to conceive of him according to his praises declared by his
works, 2. We must conceive of him according t^ his praises.
or in his Word. This is an excellent, and easy way to think of God. Since
our hearts cannot conceive his Nature, we should fill them with the impression
of his praises, and according to them direct our affection, and service to him:
As I would bring this mind to prayer, or any other service of God, I cannot
make any resemblance of the Divine Substance, whom I am about to serve: yet
this will I do, I will remember that he that I pray unto, is most wise, most
omnipote^t, most just, most gracious, etc. Thus God proclaims himself by his
praises, Exodus 34. 6. where God himself shows us a way how to conceive of him.

3 3. We must believe the Trinity of Persons.
Thou must then silence thy reason, and exalt thy faith in the point of the
Trinity, which must be conceived of necessity, because all service is due to
the whole Trinity: Now thou needst not strive to resemble the Trinity in any
likeness in thy mind, but only bring faith to believe that thy God is three
in one.

4. 4. Thou may conceive of God in the Humane Nature of Christ.
It may yet help thy understanding to conceive, that God is in Christ, and the
fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily: and therefore when thou come
to worship, thou may set before thy mind the Humane Nature of Christ,
adoring the Godhead in him, as conceiving of God in that humane Nature thou
think of, Col. 2. 9. Ioh. 17. 3.

5 5. Thou must resist Atheistical thoughts.
That this may be the more clearly and comfortably done, thou must labor by
sound advice and direction, to expel out of thy head those secret and
rebellious Atheistical thoughts, which arise in thee about his Nature, Decree,
Attributes, or Works: Men must take heed of smothering these Objections, but
seek help against them in time.

Thus of the knowledge of God, as it concerns the right conceiving of his
Nature.

There is required further such a knowledge, 2. Of acquaintance with God.
as brings us acquainted with God: we are commanded to acquaint our selves
with God, Job. 22. 21, 22.

Now, because it is an exceeding hard way for a mortal man to find out God,
That thou may be acquainted with God.
so as to enjoy familiarity with him: Therefore I will add some directions
about it: For if thou would acquaint thy self with God,

1. Thou must prepare thy heart.
Thou must prepare thy heart for this Vision of God, by driving out filthy and
unholy thoughts, and affections, For without holiness no man can see God. The
pure in heart shall see God, Math. 5. 7. Hebr. 12. 14. 1. Chro. 19. 3. God
delights to show himself familiarly in a clean heart.

2. 2. Thou must beg it by prayer.
Thou must beg this acquaintance by prayer: if thou seek it of him earnestly,
though God be in himself invisible to mortal eyes, yet he will show himself
to the eyes of thy mind: pray for his acquaintance, and he will be acquainted
with thee: This is to ask after the Lord, and to seek God: if we seek him,
he will be found, Psalm. 105. Three things in seeking aright.
3, 4. But then we must remember three things;

1 To seek him with we must pray with great earnestness and desire.

2 To seek him early, 10. and while he may be found, God offers acquaintance
in his Ordinances, and sometimes comes near, and knocks at men's hearts, and
works greater impressions upon them: Now if thou would call upon God
heartily, he would show thee his presence.

3 To seek him constantly; his face continnally: both till we find it, and
after we have had acquaintance with him, it must be continued: we must not
think much, if we be put to pray often and long, before we attain such an
incomparable benefit.

3 3. Thou must give thy self to God.
Thou must give thy self, soul and body, to God, seriously, and from thy
heart, deuoting and promising to spend thy days in his service, and then he
will reveal himself unto thee, Romans 12. 1, 2.

4 Thou must wait upon his Ordinances, and watch, how the Lord speaks unto
thee, either by his Word, or by his Spirit. For in them he shows himself to
men, and conuerseth with them.

5 It is a great furtherance to our acquaintance with God, to keep company
with his Household; for with them he dwells, and by conuersing with them we
may-occasionally often see God, 1. Ioh. 3. 6, 7, 8, 12.

Thus of acquaintance with God.

There are other things to be further noted concerning our knowledge of Other
things about our knowledge
God, such as these:

That when we attain unto any acquaintance with God, we must never rest, till
we know him to be our God, Col. 2. 2.

That it must be our daily care to increase in the knowledge of God, laboring
to plant in our hearts a more large and affectionate contemplation of the
glories of Gods Nature and Love.

That above all earthly things we should glory in it, if we attain some happy
admission into Gods presence, and ability to conceive of God, and to be
acquainted with him, Ier. 9. 24.

CHAP. VI.
Rules, that order is about the manifestation of our love to God.
HItherto of the Rules that concern the knowledge of God, as the foundation of
our love to God: The rules that should order us in the exercise of our love to
God, Rules about the exercise of our love to God.
follow; and those are of two sorts: 1. for either they concern the
manifestation of our love: 2. or our preservation in the love of God; we must
show our love to God, and we must keep our selves in the love of God, Jude 21.

In our manifestation of love to God, we must look to both the matter, (as the
things whereby) and also the manner how we should express our love to God.

For the first, Seven ways to manifest our love to God.
there be diverse excellent Rules to be heeded of us in our practice, in
observing whereof we may soundly prove the truth of our love to God: if we
say we love God, we must show it by these things following.

1. 1. By auouching him to be our God.
We must avouch God to be our God, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. and so we do, if we do not
only make choice of God above all things to set our hearts upon him, but also
maintain our choice by a constant refusal of all idols in the world, even all
things which might entice us to love them in stead of God, by sound affection
and practice declaring our resolution to cleave to God, as our sufficient
happiness, though all the world follow their profits, or pleasures, etc.

2. 2. By providing him a place to dwell where we dwell.
We must provide and prepare a place for God, that he may dwell with us,
wheresoever we dwell, Exo. 15. 2. It is a sign of our true love to God, when
we cannot live without him: He that can be content to live in any place, where
he is not powerfully present in his ordinances, shows no love to God: It
should be our chief care to seat our selves so in the world, as the Lord and
his presence may be provided for, that he may reign amongst us by the
Scepter of his Word.

3. 3. By showing our love to Jesus Christ.
We shall show our love to God, by our love to the Lord Jesus the Son of God:
we must kiss the Sun, Psalm. 2. vlt. And if any man love not the Lord Jesus,
he has not the Father, 1. Cor. 16. 22. We show that we love God, when we
highly esteem Jesus Christ, and make much of him in our hearts, and strive to
fire our affections toward him; and this must be our care through the passages
of our life, to form in us the love of the Lord Jesus, that we may long after
him, and have the desires of our souls after him, and his coming.

4. 4. By walking with God.
We must show our love to GOD by walking with him, Genes. 17. 1. Mica. 6. 8.
The Lord does not account it a sign of love to offer to him a thousand Rams,
or rivers of oil. But this is it that pleases him, To humble our selves to
walk before him.

Now we walk with God diverse ways.

1. When we set the Lord always before us, Men walk with God 5. ways.
remembering his holy presence, and not daring to go long without thinking of
God, Psalm. 16. 18.

2. When we nourish the motions of the Spirit, and retire our selves of
purpose to entertain them.

3. When we daily have recourse to those means by which the Lord is pleased to
converse with men, and not rest in the bare use of the means, but strive to
find out the Lord in his holy presence, in every ordinance of his, Psalm. 63.
1, 2.

4. When we use our selves to Soliloquies with God, taking all occasions to
speak to God by prayer and private meditation of things offered to us, out of
which we could extract matter for frequent Ciaculations, lifting up our hearts
upon the very first motions of good unto God, Psalm. 63. 5, 6.

5. When our hearts are fired with longing desires after his presence of glory
in heaven, 2. Cor. 5. 8.

Thus of our walking with God.

5. 5. By honoring God.
We should manifest our love to God by honoring him: For this is one special
way by which God requires to have our love showed to him, Malac. 1. 6. Now
there are many ways by which in our conversation we may declare our desire to
honor our God: 10. Ways of honoring God.
As,

1. By performing the care of businesses that concern his kingdom, above al
other businesses, and showing our respect of the duties of the first table,
that concern God, before the duties that concern men in the second table: we
honoring him by seeking his kingdom first: First (I say) in the precedence of
time, and first, in respect of the measure of our affections, Math. 6. showing
a desire to please him rather then all the world.

2. By making a bold and open profession of GODS truth upon all occasions,
without fear of oppositions or snares of the world.

3. By grieuing heartily for his dishonours done unto him, by the blasphemies
or profaneness of his enemies, Psalm. 42. 3.

4. By directing all our actions to his glory, striving in all the things to
order them so, that some way God may be praised by us, or others, 1. Cor. 10.
31.

5. By our willingness to suffer any thing for his sake, though it were
extremities, even the loss of all worldly things, yea and life it self, if
we were called to it.

6. By honoring them that fear his name, and are begotten of him, and bear
his Image, receiving them, and making much of them, and defending them for the
love we bear to God himself, Psalm. 15. 1. Ioh. 5. 1.

7. By hating them that are his enemies, as if they were our own, conceiving
more dislike of them for dishonouring God, then for any wrongs they could do
unto us, Psalm. 139. 21, 22.

8. We honor God, when we speak of the Oracles of God with alreuerence as may
become the nature and glory of them, Commandment 3. 1. Pet. 4. 11.

9. We honor him by gifts bestowed upon him, when we bring to him our
free will offerings, such as are the first fruits of all our increase, when
out of all things wherein God has prospered us, we with gladness consecrate a
part for the furtherance of his worship, or the maintenance of his poor: Prou.
3. 6. Esaias 60. 6.

10. We honor him, when we praise him. One usual way by which we honor
great persons in the world, is by taking all occasions to magnify them, by
commending their virtues, or their worthy Acts: And this is likewise one great
way of honoring God: and therefore with sorrow for our neglects herein, we
should study his praises for the time to come, and strive for language to be
able readily to do so.

Now God is praised diverse ways. Rules about the praise of God.
Some of them belong not properly to this place, and therefore I will but touch
them.

We praise God.

1. When we keep and observe carefully the solemnities set apart for his
praise, as when we celebrate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is
therefore called the Eucharist, because it is to be performed as a thanksgiving,
and praising of God.

2. When daily we take all occasions in private to bless God for his daily
mercies: but let these and such like pass, as not proper to this place. We
must praise him in our discourse to others: When we commend God, diverse things
are to be obscued.
This is required of us in many Scriptures, Psa. 33. 1. Job 36. 24. Psalm. 96.
4. But because this must not be done cursorily, diverse rules are to be
observed: As,

1. That we may praise him effectually, we must wisely consider of his works,
and so of his nature to extract from thence sound arguments of praise, Psalm.
64. 9.

2. We should do well for this purpose to keep Records, and Register up the
special glorious works of God, Job. 36. 24. and 37. 14. Psalm. 78. 7.

3. When we do praise him, it must be done with our whole heart, speaking of
his praises with all possible affection, and not as if we spoke of ordinary
things, Psalm. 9. 1.

4. We must thus praise him, not once, or for one work of his, but we must
praise him for all his works, especially his wondrous works, Psalm. 9. 1. and
105. 1, 2. and 106. 2.

5. We must praise him from day to day, and continue to do it, while we
live, Psalm. 63. 4. and 96. 3.

6. This is a duty, that all the kindreds of the people are bound to: All the
people must praise him, Psalm. 148. 12, 13. and 96. 6, 7, 8.

Thus of the fifth way of showing our love to God, and that is by honoring him.

The sixth way by which we must show our love to God, 6. By trusting in him.
is, by trusting in him; As men show, whom they love most, by relying most upon
them, and their favor and help; Now there are diverse cases, in which we must
show our trust in God.

1 By relying upon his mercy for our justification and salvation: How we must
show it that we trust God.
and in this we should most use our trust, as being in a business that most
highly concerns us, Esaias 45. 24, 25.

2 By committing all our works to him, for assistance in them* or success of
them: This is to commit our way to God to be careful to seek his assistance
to help us, to do our duty, and then to leave the success of all to his
blessing, Psalm. 37. 3, 5. Prou. 16. 3.

3 By believing all that he says is true, whether he promise, threaten, or
comfort by his Word, upon all occasions believing his Prophets, 2. Chro. 20. 20.

4 By staying our hearts upon him in all our distresses: How we may prove that
we trust God in distress
Now in the time of distress we may prove, that we trust in God diverse ways:
-- As

1 By running to him, and pouring out our hearts before him, making our moan
unto him, Psa. 18. 2. and 62. 10. Look amongst men, to whom we first run to
make our moan in our distress, and that person is he whom we most love, and
trust: so is it toward God.

2 By casting our cares and burdens upon him, Psalm. 55. 22.

3 By not respecting the proud, and such as turn aside to lies, Psalm. 40. 4.

4 By relying upon his help, Joel 3. 16. Esaias 50. 11. but then we must observe
how we must rely upon Gods help: For there are many things we must cast out
of our hearts in affliction: In relying upon God in affliction, we must avoid
five things.
When we have been with the Lord and committed our selves to him, we must
rely upon him,

1 Without leaning to our own under standing, or wilful inclination to follow
our own courses, and proiects, Prou. 3. 5.

2 Without murmuring or repining at our condition, or vexing our selves at the
providence of God toward us, Psalm. 37. 7.

3 Without fear, that is, without mistrustfull fears, and servile
perturbations, imagining evils, which the Lord has not brought upon us, Psalm.
3. 6. and 27. 1.

4 Without using ill means to get out of distress, Amos 5. 4, 6.

5 Yea, lastly, without care, that is, without distrustful carking cares,
Phil. 4. 6.

Thus of the sixth way of showing our love to God, and that is by trusting in
him.

The seventh and last way, 7. By obeying him.
by which we must show our love to God, is, To obey him: For this is the love
of God, that we keep his commandments: Neither is the sign in this, that
we do what God requires for the matter, but that his commandments are not
grievous unto us: We love God, if we love to do his work, and if we lift
up our hearts in his ways, setting upon his work with a special readiness,
and strength of desire, and more then ordinary care, 1. Ioh. 5. 2. 2. Chron.
17. 6. and 19. 2.

Thus of the matter, that is, the things by which we must show our love to God;
The manner also is to be considered: For in all those things which we would do
at any time to prove our love to God, we must look to the manner how we do
them, as was a little touched before: 2. Things in the manner of showing our
love to God.
Now distinctly we must bring to the declaration of our love to God, two
things; 1 Feruencie. 2 Fear.


For the first, 1. Feruencie.
we must love God, and show it in all the fruits of our love; How? Even with
all our hearts, and all our souls, and all our might, and all our
understanding. Our hearts must be more inflamed then they are, in showing love
to wife, children, friends, parents, etc. We must love God above all, Deuteronomy. 6.
3. and 30. 6.

For the second, 2. Fear.
we must love God and show it too, but it must be with fear. Howsoever with
men true love casts our fear: yet God being so infinite in Glory and Majesty,
we must love him, but yet with fear. Now that this may not be mistaken, I
will set down the particulars of this fear.

We must show our fear: Eight ways by which we show our fear of God.


1 By entertaining awful thoughts of his dreadful Majesty, casting out all
vile, mean, and vain thoughts of him, Dan. 6. 26.

2 By departing from evil, that might any way displease him, being tender in
this point, not daring to presume, or plead impunity, or freedom from danger,
but in all things desire to avoid what might anger him, Prou. 3. 7.

3 By using all terms of hearty abasement of our selves, when we come before
him: Thus Abraham calls himself dust and ashes; and thus we should humble our
selves under the mighty hand of God, 1. Pet. 5. 9.

4 By doing his will, without fearing man, or any other creature, Esaias 8. 12,
13.

5 By a daily and reverent remembrance of his continual holy presence.

6 By trembling at his judgments, Psa. 4. 4. Hab. 2. vlt.

7 By the humble using of all the means of communion with God, using his
Ordinances with all convenient reverence, attention, and abasement of our
selves. Mal. 2. 5.

8. Lastly, By the reverend use of his very Titles, fearing that great, and
fearful Name of the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.

CHAP. VII.
Rules, that concern the preservation of our love to God.
HItherto of the Rules that concern the manifestation of our love to God: The
rest of the Rules serve to teach us, how to preserve in us this love to God.
What we must do to preserve the love of God in us.
Now that we may continue in our love to God, we must observe these Rules.

1 We must separate our selves from all others to be his, Leu. 20. 26.
avoiding fellowship with the servants of a strange God, that might any way
entice us from the love of God; yea, we should so much alienate our hearts
from all Idols, that we should not make mention of their names, and therefore
daily confirm our hearts in that purpose to cleave to God alone, Leu. 20. 26.
Mal. 2. 11. Exodus 34. 11. 14, 15. Exodus 23. 13. Act. 11. 23. Josh. 23. 8.

2 We must beware, that we forget not God, nor go too long without effectual
remembrance of him. They that can live whole days and weeks without any care
to think of God, may be snre their hearts are void of the love of God: and
as ever we would continue to love God, we must be careful every day to
remember him, and think upon him, Deuteronomy. 6. 12. and 32. 18.

3 We must labor to edify our selves in our most holy faith; we must build up
our hearts in the assurance of that wonderful love God has showed to us: and
this will preserve and keep us in our love to him again, Jude. 20.

4. We must pray in the holy Ghost, as is showed in the same place: prayer
preserues acquaintance with God, and exceedingly quickens the heart; and
besides, draws from God new pledges of his love to us, which may serve to
kindle our affections toward him.

5. In the same place another rule is imported; and that is the daily
expectation of the Coming of Christ: for the terror of that Day will move us
to show all possible love to God, and so will that singular Glory we are
assured to receive in that Day.

6. In the use of all Gods Ordinances, we must be careful to seek out the
face of God, which is that special presence of his grace. For the love of God
will decay in us, if once we come to use the means only for form, and an
outward show, Ps. 105. 4. And if we miss of God in his Ordinances, we must
never be quiet, till we find him whom our soul loves, Cant. 3. 1. Psalm. 63.
1.

7 We must preserve the truth he has delivered to us; yea, we must contend
for it: for sound doctrine laid up in our hearts, will preserve in us
soundness of affection to God, Jude 3.

8. We must get Catalogues of Gods praises in particular, and fill our hearts
with the knowledge and contemplation of them.

9 If we would be preserved in the love of God, we must labor to attain to
the ability to rejoice in God, and delight our selves in God. A wife that would
increase her love to her husband, must strive to solace her self often with
her husband, and to form in her heart a special delight in him: So must we
do to God. This is miserably neglected, and yet exceeding necessary: Nor is it
an ordinary joy we should take in God, but we should joy in him, first, with
all our hearts: 2. not for a time, but always, every day; nor with common, but
with exceeding joys, Phi. 4. 4. Ps. 37. 4. and 68. ^, 4. and 105. 3. About
rejoicing in God.
Now that this point may be the better understood, I will consider of two
things: first, what it is to delight and ^oy in God: secondly, what we should
do that might delight, and take pleasure in God.

1. For the first, What it is to rejoice or delight our selves in God.
this delight in God has in it four things distinctly.

1 First, a spiritual satisfaction, or contentment arising from the assurance
of Gods love to us, as having enough that he regards us; thus David says, his
soul was satisfied as with marrow, Psalm. 63. 5. and 149. 2.

2. Secondly, a joyful entertainment of all passages of love between God and
us; especially in the use of his Ordinances.

3. Thirdly, a delightful contemplation of God and his mercies.

4. Fourthly, a glorying in God, and extolling of his praises, as by discourse,
so by singing of Psalms, 1. Cor. 1. 31. Psalm. 33. 1. and 105. 3. and 68. 3, 4.

Now for the attainement of the ioying in God.

1. We must mourn often for our disabilities herein, What we must do that
we might be able to joy in God.
and pray to God to form this delight in us.

2. We must restrain carnal joys, and cares: for the excess of both does
exceedingly dull the heart, and with-drawes it from care of delight in God,
Ioh. 2. 8. Phil. 4. 4, 5, 6.

3. We must exercise our selves with all the joy we can in the Word of God,
Psalm. 119. 14, 16.

4. We must take heed of listening to Objections against the love of God to
us, whether they arise from Satan, or our own flesh.

5. We must often observe the miseries of the wicked in comparison of our
happy estate in Christ, Hab. 3. 17, 18.

6 We must seek a delightful conversation with the godly.

7 We must take heed of domestical evils, our home sins, the corruptions
that would daily prevail in us, Job 22. 23, 26.

8 We must restrain our own unbelief about the acceptance of the good
duties we perform, and to this end we must take heed, that we be neither just
overmuch, by attributing too much to our selves: nor yet wicked overmuch, in
condemning all we do, as hateful to God. For this last does maruellously
hinder us from ioying in God.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing general rules about Gods service.
HItherto of the first sort of Rules, that concern our carriage toward God,
namely, those that concern our love to God. Now the second sort of Rules
follow, and that is, Rules about the s^ruice of God.
those that concern the service of God, and these may be cast into two ranks:
1. for they either concern the parts of Gods worship: 2. or the time of Gods
worship.

The Rules that concern the parts of Gods worship, 1. are either general,
which bind us to the good behavior in all parts of Gods worship: 2. or else
certain specialties of Direction, that concern some part of Gods worship
only.

Now for the general rules, we should know and remember, that there are nine
things to be looked to, and brought to the practice of every part of Gods
worship. Nine things to be remembered in every part of Gods worship.


1. The first is preparction; we must in some sort confer with our own
hearts, and prepare them, before we go before God to do any service, Job 11.
13. Psalm. 4. 4. Ezech. 7. 10.

2. Secondly, we must come with all reverence and godly fear, Hebr. 12. 28.
Psalm. 2. 11.

3. Thirdly, we must perform the service in repentance for our sins: we
must not come before God in the love of any sin: if we do, we lose our
labor, and God will loath our works, Isai. 1. Job. 11. 14. We must have
clean hands, and a pure heart, or else no service of God will be accepted,
Psalm. 119. 11. and 24. 4.

4. Fourthly, it must grieve us, that others will not serve God, Psalm. 119.
139.

5. Fifthly, we must perform every service in the name of Christ, or else it
cannot be accepted, by reason of that evil that cleaues to our best works,
whether we pray or give thanks, or Whatsoever we do, we must do it in the
name of Christ, Col. 3. 17.

6. Sixthly, in every service of God we must so near as it may be, give God the
first place, preferring the respects of God and his worship, before our selves,
or the regard of others: we must serve him betimes, seeking God in the first
place, Job 8. 5. Math. 6. 34. Psalm. 5. 3.

7. Seventhly, when we do any service to God, we must do it with all our
hearts, with as much willingness as may be, so as it may appear, that we love
to be his servants, as the Prophets phrase is, 1. Sam. 12. 10. 1. Chron. 28. 9.
Esaias 56. 6.

8. Eighthly, in all service we must strive so to serve God, that we may
please him, not only careful to do the duty, but careful of Gods
acceptance. In good duties being cheefely careful to see Gods approbation,
not caring so much for the praise of men, as the praise of God. In every part
of Gods worship, our praise must be of God, and not of men, Heb. 12. 28. Romans
2. 26.

9. Ninthly, we must cleave to God with detestation of all things, or persons,
that might any way draw us away from his service, Deuteronomy. 13. 4, 5.

CHAP. IX.
Showing how we should carry our selves in Gods House.
HItherto of the rules to be observed in all parts of Gods worship generally.

The special rules concern 1. either, Rules about the public worship of God.
Gods public worship in his House: 2. or else the particular parts of Gods
worship each by themselves.

The godly Christian ought with all care to lay before him the rules that bind
him to the good behavior in Gods House, and to strive to fashion his nature
and practice, as may become the glory of Gods public service and presence, and
so there be diverse things which in a special manner he must look to in
performing Gods public service.

For concerning these public duties, these rules must be observed.

First, 1. All must come.
that all sorts and degrees of men must appear before God publicly to do him
homage and service. None must be spared or freed, men, women, and children
must all take notice of it, that they are bound hereunto, Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12.

Secondly, 2. With all possible reverence
we must come our selves with all possible reverence, and look to our feet
when we enter into the house of God, and strive to show before all men our most
careful respect of God and his holy ordinances: For God will be sanctified in
them that come nigh him, and he looks for it at our hands by our reverend
behavior, to be glorified before all the people, Leuit. 10. 3. Eccl. 5. 4.
We should then show a most holy fear of Gods name, and presence, Psalm. 5. 7.

Thirdly, 3. And zeal.
in public duties, that of the Prophet David should be true of us: The zeal
of Gods house should eat us up, And this zeal we should show six ways.
Psalm. 69. 9. and this special zeal we should show:

1. By loving Gods house above all the places in the world, our hearts should
be fired in us in that we respect, that we may truly say with David, O how I
love thy house! Psalm. 26. 8.

2. By confirming our own hearts in a resolution to resort to Gods house with
all joy and gladness, notwithstanding the scorns and oppositions of worldly
men and persons.

3. By stirring up others with all importunity to go up with them to worship
God in Sion, Esaias 2. 2.

4. By making haste to Gods worship, going to the house of God with the first,
and with willing hearts, with a holy thirst after the means, flocking and
flying thither as the clouds, or as so many doves to their windows, Zach. 8.
21. Psalm. 110. 3. Esaias 35. 1. and 60. 8.

5. By forwardnes and cheerfulness in contributing toward the maintenance of
Gods House, and service in the means thereof, Isaiah 60. 8, 9.

6. By grieuing heartily, because other men neglect or contemn the House of
God, and have no more mind to keep Gods Law, Psalm. 119. 136.

Thus of that special zeal we should show about Gods public worship.

4. Fourthly, 4. With one consent.
we should in all public duties serve God with one consent and one heart.
There should appear in Gods servants a wonderful desire of Unanimity and
concord. They should serve the Lord with one shoulder, that when they speak
to God, it may be as the voice of one man, when the Lord speaks to them, they
should hear with one heart. It is a marvelous glory in Religion, when people
can come once to this, to serve the Lord with one shoulder, Zephan. 3. 9.

Lastly, in the 52. Psalm. v. 8, 9. Three other rules gathered out of Psalm. 52.
8, 9.
we may gather three other rules, which in a special manner fit us for a
right behavior in Gods house.

1. First, we should always be as green Olive trees in the house of the Lord.
Howsoever it go with men in the world, yet when we come before the Lord, our
hearts should rejoice and revive, and our spirits be fresh and cheerful, and
our affections should be healed of all the cares or distempers were before in
them. Gods ordinances should have such a power over us, as to make a sudden
fresh spring of desires, and holy thoughts in us. There is this power in the
ordinances of God to effect this, if the fault be not in us, I mean, when
these ordinances are exercised in the power and life of the^.

2. Secondly, we must trust on the mercy of GOD, bringing a heart ready to
believe every good word of God, resolving, that if the Lord will speak
comfortably to his servants, we will not dishonor his co^solations through
carelesnes, or unbelief: but receive them with all our hearts, and establish
our selves in the safe keeping of his good word.

3. Thirdly, we must resolve to be thankful, with all tenderness for all
experiences of Gods presence and goodness toward us in the means, vowing with
David, to praise him for ever for them. And if the Lord do withold his power
and presence for a time, so as we feel not the effectualnesse of his
ordinances: yet we should resolve without distemper, to wait upon the Lord, and
observe him according to the seasons of his grace.

CHAP. X.
Rules that order us about hearing of the Word.
THus of the rules that we must observe in all public service of God. Now
there be certain special rules which must be particularly headed in each part
of Gods worship by it self. Rules that order us in hearing the word of God.
And first I will begin with those rules, which we must more specially
observe in hearing the Word of God, and these are of three sorts.

1. Some bind us to the good behauior, before we come to hear.

2. Some at the time of hearing.

3. Some after we have heard.

1. Before we come to hear, we must bring with us two things.

1. 1. Before we come.
A resolution to deny our own wits, reasons, opinions, and conceits, and empty
our heads of al persuasion of our own skill, to judge in the things of the
kingdom of God, being ready to believe and think in all things, as God shall
teach us out of his Word. We must be fools, that we may be wise, 1. Cor. 3.
18. humbling our selves at his very feet to receive his Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 3.

2. We must bring with us a meek and quiet spirit, a mind quieted from
passions, lusts, and perturbations, and at rest from the turmoyling cares of
this world. The world is able to do great things in our hearts, if we receive
it with meekness, Iam. 1. 19.

Secondly, 2. In the time of hearing.
at the time of hearing, we must look to two rules.

First, we must hearken without distraction: we must hear, as it were for
our lives, we must incline our ears, and shake off all impediments arising
from our own drowsinesse, prejudice, or vain thoughts, or distracting
objects, Esaias 55. 3. Psalm. 119. 113.

Secondly, we must prove all things, and keep that which is good. We must
hear with judgment, and hearken for our selves, having special care to look
to that doctrine which in particular concerns us to lay it up in our hearts,
and apply it effectually. This is a rule of singular thrift in godliness. If
we did mark what sin in us the Lord reprooues, or what comfort is specially
fitted to our hearts: or what direction does specially concern us: He has an
honest memory that will be sure to keep these things, Note.
though he forget all the rest, and he has a wretched memory, and heart too,
that forgets these things, though he could r^peat all the Sermon verbatim.

Thirdly, 3. After we have heard.
after we have heard, two things also must be further done.

First, we must by meditation labor to make those things we have heard, which
concern us, fast, that they run not out of our minds, and we must take
heed that neither the Devil steal away the good seed, nor our own heart
through negligence forget it. Neither is this a work for an hour after, to
keep these things till we may repeat them to others, but ought to be our
daily work, especially the week after to think so often of them, till there
be a sure impression of the Word in our hearts, Hebr. 2. 1, 2.

Secondly, we must yet further see to it, that we be doers of the Word, yea
we must observe to do: as the phrase of the holy Ghost is. It is the wisdom
of God so to dispose of his ordinances, that we receive our directions by
parcels, and there is a time of interim between Sabbath and Sabbath, Sermon and
Sermon, that we might in that space learn to frame our selves to the obedience
of the truths received, that so we might be ready to receive new lessons from
the Lord. The surest way for the husbandman to keep his seed, is not to lay it
up in his barn, but to cast it into the ground. For what is sowed, he may
receive again with advantage; or if he might fail of a harvest from his
seed in nature, yet godly men shall never fail to receive what they sow by
practice, with increase. So much of the Truth, as is put into practice, is sure
for ever: The rest may be lost: and it is a singular help to a Christian, if
he set upon his obedience, while the doctrine is yet fresh in his mind; for
delay will compass him about with many difficulties, and he will want those
inward incitations, that might stir up his heart with power and strength to
obey.

CHAP. XI.
Rules about the Sacrament of Baptism.
THus of the rules of our carriage about hearing: Next we are to consider, how
we are to order our selves in respect of the Sacraments: The Sacraments are
two: Baptism, Rules about Baptism.
and the Lords Supper.

The duties we are bound to in respect of Baptism, concern either 1. Our
children. 2. Our selves. 3. Others.


For our children, 1. About our children.
it is our duty to present them unto Baptism, but withal we must look to it,
that it be done in due time, and with faith and thankfulness to God: In due
time, so as thereby we signify our great estimation of Gods mercy to our
seed, and our great desire to have the Covenant sealed, even unto them. We must
also bring them to Baptism with faith in Gods Covenant. The Lord has bound
himself to be our God, and the God of our seed: Now it is our parts to give
glory to God, and to declare before the Lord our persuasion of his goodness
and claim to that part of his Covenant. By faith we plead our right, whereas
by unbelief we give God occasion to neglect our seed. I add also with
thankfulness, because we ought with great joy and acknowledgement of the free
grace of God, to behold our seed admitted in the sure covenant of mercy and
salvation with our selves, and ought to think that God has done more for our
children, to admit them into Covenant by Baptism, then if the greatest person
on earth had made upon them the assurance of some great estate of maintenance
or preferment.

Secondly, 2. About our selves.
for our selves, we must make conscience of it, to make use of our own
Baptism, and that throughout the whole course of our life: It is given us as a
seal of Gods promises, and as a vow of our obedience, and so we must make use
of it all the days of our life, especially in three cases: In three cases.


First, in the case of doubting and fear of the forgiveness of our sins, or
of the salvation of our souls: for Baptism saves us, that is, effectually
assures us of our salvation; and we do not offend in trusting Gods promise
made in his Word, and signed and sealed in Baptism. As certainly does it save
our souls, as the Arc saved the bodies of Noah and his household; so as we
cannot miscarry, if we leap not out of the Arc into the Seas of waters. Let
us stick to our Baptism, and then we are safe: The washing in Baptism did
assure the washing of our souls by the Blood of Christ for our sins. If I be
tempted to doubt of my salvation, I must say to my own soul, Has not the Lord
provided me the Arc of Baptism to preserve me from the seas of his wrath? And
if I doubt the forgiveness of sins, I must say, Has not the Lord washed me
from my sins by the blood of his Son? Did he not show me so much in
Baptism? We sin shamefully, in that we do not make this use, but neglect
the confidence Baptism should work in us, as if the Lord had but dallied with
us, or that Baptism were but some idle Ceremony, 1. Pet. 3. 21. 1. Cor. 15.
29. Act. 22. 16.

2. Secondly, How Baptism may help us against sin.
in the case of temptation to commit sin: we ought to fight against sin by
his mighty weapon of our Baptism, and so we may do by diverse arguments: As

First, in my Baptism I have made a vow to God, that I would cleave to him in
Jesus Christ, and renounce the world, the devil and sin: and shall I break
my vow to God, that would be ashamed to break my promise to men?

Secondly, my Baptism was the Baptism of repentance: and shall I yet live in
sin? My body was washed: and shall my soul be still impure? Math. 3. 11.
Mark. 1. 4. Acts 13. 24.

Thirdly, by Baptism I was assured of the virtue of the death of Christ to
kill sin in me: And shall I not believe the operation of God, that he can
deliver me from the power, or powerful temptations, or inclinations to any
sin? Shall I not seek strength of Christ? or shall I betray my self to the
devil and the flesh? In Christ I am dead to sin, and shall I yet live
therein? Romans 6. 1, 3. Col. 2. 12.

Thirdly, our Baptism must be used against the doubts of perseuering, or
whether we shall be kept unto salvation, and whether our bodies shall be
raised again at the last Day: for God has assured all this unto us in our
Baptism, that we have our part not only in the death of Christ, but also in
the resurrection of Christ: and if Christ be raised in us, Christ can die no
more, either in himself, or in our hearts, and the same power, that raised him
out of the grave, will also raise up our bodies at the last Day, as is pleaded,
Romans 6. 10, etc. Galath. 3. 27, 28. 1. Cor. 15. 29. 1. Pet. 3. 21. If we be
baptized, and believe, we shall certainly be saved, Mark. 16. 16.

Thus as it concerns our selves.

3. In respect of others, 3. In respect of others.
we are bound to the good behavior in Baptism, as to acknowledge the
communion of Saints: so are we tied to preserve our selves in all brotherly
love with the godly, who wear the same Livery with us, and are Soldiers pressed
to the same war, and have taken upon them the same holy Vow with us: we are
bound in Baptism to love them, to stand for them above all other people, and
to live with them in all holy love, to our lives end, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5. 1.
Cor. 12. 13. and 1. 13. Gal. 3. 27, 28.

CHAP. XII.
Rules about the Lords Supper.
HItherto concerning Baptism: The Rules that concern the Lords Supper, follow.

Now concerning this Sacrament, Rules about the Lords Supper.
we are charged with these things:

1. First, 1. We must examine our selves.
Examination, 1. Cor. 11. we must examine our selves, and so eat and drink:
Examine our selves, so as we be sure there be no sin in our hearts and
lives, which we have committed, but we are desirous to forsake, and do
unfeignedly judge our selves for it, being as desirous to forsake it, as we
desire God should in the Sacrament forgive it.

2. Secondly, The discerning of the Lords Body and Blood: 2. We must discern
the Lords Body.
so coming to partake of these outward signs of Bread and Wine, as we withal
know and believe the presence of Christ; and that God does as effectually give
Christ to the soul of the believer, as he gives Bread and Wine to his body:
yea, we must thus discern and believe, that he is there offered and given
unto us also, and that God does not delude us, but as truly gives us the Body
and blood of Christ, as he does by the Minister give us the bread and wine, 1.
Cor. 11.

Thirdly, 3. We must show forth Christ's death.
The showing forth of the death of Christ: This is a solemnity, where we must
intend to make a solemn remembrance of the Passion and Death of our Savior,
not only in being present at the breaking of the Bread, and pouring out of the
Wine, but in raising up in our hearts a thankful remembrance of his grievous
sufferings and death for our sins, Math. 26. 1. Cor. 11.

Fourthly, 4. We vow to cleave to the godly.
Fellowship and loving communion with the godly, which we both signify, and
vow in the Sacraments, and testify before God and men, that we will cleave
unto them above all the people in the world, as being the same bread with us,
even members of the same Mystical Body of Christ, 1. Cor. 10.

Fifthly, 5. We must be reconciled.
special reconciliation with such as we have offended, bearing malice to no
man, and desiring and seeking peace with all sorts of men, Math. 5. Romans 12.

Sixthly, 6. We vow a holy life.
and lastly, The vows of sincerity, resolving to keep this feast all our
life in the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, even to spend. our days
in all uprightness of heart, and unfeigned hatred of all sin and hypocrisy,
1. Cor. 5. 8.

CHAP. XIII.
Rules about prayer.
THVS of the Sacraments.

The Rules concerning prayer follow; Rules about prayer.
where besides the general Rules, that belong to all worship, these things in
special must be heeded concerning prayer.

1. Thy words must be few, Thy words must be few.
Eccles. 5. 1, 2. and the reason is, because God is in heaven, and thou art in
earth: He is full of Majesty and Wisdom, and thou art an infirm and
sinful creature: Length of it self does not commend prayer; we must speak as
becomes the Majesty of God, without vain repetitions and babblings, pattering
over of the same things is not pleasing to God: As affectation is ill in any
thing, so much more ill in prayer. This Rule may be unsavory in the taste of
some that are transported with rash zeal: But let them take heed of
will worship: the words are so plain in the Text, as they must inform
themselves about them: The Lord knew what was fittest for us, when he gave us
this charge.

2. Thy heart must be lifted up in the performance of this duty; 2. The heart
must be lifted up.
This is often imported in diverse Scriptures, and this lifting up of the heart
has diverse things in it.

1. Understanding: thou must be advised what thou prayest for, and know thy
warrant, that what thou ask is according to Gods will. 1. Cor. 14. 15. 1.
Ioh. 5. 14

2. Freedom from distractions: Thy heart must be cleansed from passions and
lusts: Thy prayer must be without wrath, 1. Tim. 3. 8. And as the distractions
arising from passion must be avoided, so must a^l other distractions.

3. Feruency, or the stretching out of the affections according to the matter
of prayer; thou must express the affections of prayer: for God looks at the
prayer of thy heart, not at the prayer of thy lips only.

3. Thou must pray with all manner of prayer, 3. Use all manner of prayer.
according to the occasions of prayer: Thou must pray at thy set times daily,
and thou must pray also with eiaculations (as Divines call them) that is, those
sudden and short speeches to God, when thy heart is moved upon special
occasion: Thou must use Supplications, Deprecations, Intercessions,
Confessions, giving of Thanks, or the like, according to thy necessities, or
the other occasions of thy life: Thou must strive to get a fitness and
language to speak unto God for thy self in thine own words, as may best
express the desires of thine heart, Ephesians. 6. 18

4. Thou must continue and persevere in prayer without ceasing: 4. Thou must
persevere in prayer.
prayer must be the work of thy whole life, not an exercise for a fit, for a
day or two, or a week or two, or a month or two: thou must make conscience of
prayer always, Ephesians. 6. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 17.

5. When thy prayer is grounded upon Gods will, 5. Thou must be instant,
without fainting or discouragement.
thou must be instant, and not faint, or be discouraged: Thou must pray without
doubting and wavering, as resolved never to cease praying, till God hear and
show mercy. It Is baseness of mind, not humility, to be quickly discouraged:
if God entertain us not according to our expectation, or liking, we must not
be weary of seeking to God, but set upon prayer, with a resolution to take no
nay, Luke 18. 1. Iam. 1. 6.

6. Thou must remember supplication for all Saints, 6. With supplication for
all Saints.
especially to pray heartily for Magistrates and Ministers; especially those
under whose charge thou art, Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. 1. Tim. 2. 1.

7. Thou must look to it, 7. In all things give thanks.
that in all things thou give thanks: Let the Lord see the truth of thy heart
herein, that what thou obtainest from God, especially by prayer, thou will with
all gladness remember and acknowledge: This Rule must by no means be
forgotten, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. Colos. 4. 2.

CHAP. XIIII.
Rules about reading the Scriptures.
THus of the Rules that concern prayer: There remains the reading of
Scripture, and singing of Psalms, as the other parts of the ordinary worship
of God.

Concerning the reading of the Scriptures, Rules about reading the Scripture.
I will instance in one place of Scripture only, which contains the charge
given to Joshua, chap. 1. 8, 9. which comprehends the substance of the
necessary directions about private reading. I say necessary; for godly men may,
and have advised diverse courses for reading of Scripture, which are not
absolutely necessary, but arbitrary, as may stand with the leisure and capacity
of the person that will read: such are those directions, that show how many
chapters may be read in a day, and what things may be observed in reading,
etc. which, as they may be profitable to many Christians, and expedient too,
yet they must not be understood so, as that those persons sin, which read
not so often, or so many chapters, or the like. The things therefore that must
necessarily be observed by such as can read the Bible, I take to be these:

First, 1. R^ade daily.
they must exercise themselves therein daily, they must constantly be employed
therein, and if their occasions interrupt the^ at some time, they must redeem
it at other times: This is the praise of the blessed man, That he exercises
himself in Gods Law day and night; that is, constantly, Psalm. 1. 2.

Secondly, 2. Meditate of what thou read.
in reading they must meditate therein, that is, they must observe profitable
things, as they read, attending to reading, and marking what the Lord says
unto them by that part of the Word which they read: This is that meditation,
which is chiefly required of a Christian, to get into their hearts good thoughts
from the matter they read of, so as they may the better be enabled to employ
their thoughts all the day after.

Thirdly, 3. Confer upon it.
The Word of God must not depart out of their mouth; they must make the best
use of it they can, in conference to speak of it to others, for the edification
of themselves and others.

Fourthly, 4. Resolve to obey.
They must observe in their reading, what the Lord says unto them, that
concerns their practice: They must observe to do according to those holy
directions they read of: They must bring a mind desirous, and resolved to let
the Word of God both inform them, and reform them, making conscience of it,
to let God direct them by his holy Word read, and not only by the Word
preached to them: Their lives must be bettered by their reading, and to that
end they must observe the chiefest things they can, out of their reading, to
remember them in their practice.

CHAP. XV.
Rules about singing of Psalms.
THe rules, Rules about singing of Psalms.
that concern the singing of Psalms, are summarily comprehended in that place,
Col. 3. 16. and they are these:

1. First, they must teach one another by their Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual songs. They must learn to profit, and make good use of the holy
matter contained in the Psalms they sing.

2. Secondly, they must sing with their hearts, they must attend to the matter
they sing of, and lift up their hearts, as well as their voices.

3. Thirdly, they must sing with grace in their hearts, they must employ the
graces of the holy Spirit, or Gods Spirit in singing of Psalms, as well as in
prayer, or any other ordinance of God.

4. Fourthly, they must make melody to the Lord: They must direct their songs
to God, and to his glory, and not use them as mere civil imploiments, but as
parts of Gods service.

CHAP. XVI.
Rules about Vowing and Swearing.
HItherto of the Rules, that concern the most usual parts of Gods service:
There are other parts of Gods service, which are to be used, but at certain
times, and upon special occasions, and these are Vows, and Oaths, and
Fasting.

The rules about Vowing are briefly comprehended in that place, The Rules
about vowing.
Eccl^s. 5. 3, 4. and they are chiefly two.

1. First, Before thou vowest, consider: consider, I say, thine own strength,
whether thou be able to do it: and consider also the end, that it be to Gods
glory; and consider the matter, that thou vow not things unlawful: and
consider what may be the events of thy Vow, for all Vows being made before the
Angel, that takes notice of all Covenants, it will be in vain afterward to
plead, it was an error, thou wast mistaken: God may be angry at thy voice,
and destroy the work of thy hands: Be not rash therefore, to cause thy flesh
to sin therein.

2. Secondly, when thou have vowed thy vow to God, defer not to pay it, be
sure thou perform it: it is a grievous offense to break a lawful vow: Better
it is thou should not vow, then that thou should vow, and not pay.

Thus of Vowing.

Concerning the Oath, Rules about Swearing.
when thou art called to swear, thou must observe these Rules:

First, that thou swear not by any thing which is not God, Ier. 5. 7.

Secondly, that thou swear in truth, that is, that thy conscience know, what
thou swearest is true.

Thirdly, that thou swear in judgment, that is, with due consideration of the
nature of God, and with sound deliberation, not rashly, and diligently weighing
of all things, that belong to the matter thou swearest about.

Fourthly, that thou swear in righteousness, that is about lawful things,
and just matters: Thou must not swear to do unjust things, as David swear to
kill Nabal: nor must thou swear about impossible things, or about things that
are doubtful and uncertain: Nor in the form of thy oath must thou use such
words, as be contumelious to God, or express not sufficient reverence to the
Divine Majesty, as they that wickedly swear by any part of Christ, or such
like.

CHAP. XVII.
Rules about Fasting.
THus of Vows and Swearing; Fasting follows: Now if we would keep a religious
Fast unto God, we must observe these two Rules.

First, The Rules about a religious Fast.
we must look to the strictness of the abstinence in the day of our Fast;
for we must abstain from all sorts of meat as well as one, and from all
labor also, and from our costliest apparel, and from recreations and usual
delights: We must keep the day, as we keep the Sabbath, in forbearing our
own works, Ion. 3. 6, 7. 1. Cor. 7. 5. Joel 1. and 2. Leuit. 16.

Secondly, the time must be spent in religious duties, as a Sabbath,
especially in the exercises that concern the humiliation of the soul, in
renewing of our repentance, for the obtaining of pardon of sin, or some
special blessing of God, or the preventing, or removing of some great
judgment of God.

The former rule concerns only the ceremony, or outward exercise of the
body: but this rule contains the substance of the duty, without which a
religious fast is not kept unto God, who regards not the hanging down of the
head like a bull-rush, if the soul be not humbled before God for sin: Leu.
16. 29. Joel 1. 14. and 2. 16, 17.

CHAP. XVIII.
Rules about the Sabbath.
HItherto of the Rules, that concern the parts of Gods worship: The rules,
that concern the time of Gods worship, follow, and this time especially is the
Sabbath day.

Now the rules, Rules about the Sabbath.
that bind us to the good behavior concerning the Sabbath, co^cern either the
preparation to the Sabbath, or the manner of performing holy duties on the
Sabbath.

The preparation to the Sabbath, 1. The preparation to it.
contains in it these things.

First, the ending of all our works on the six days, as God did his: Genesis 2.
2.

This example of God is set down, not only to show what he did, but to
prescribe unto us, what we should do, as is manifest by urging this example in
the reason of the commandment: We must then take order to finish the works of
the week days with such discretion, that neither our heads be troubled with
the cares of them, nor our hands tempted to work about them on the Sabbath day.

Secondly, the preventing of domestical grieuances, and perturbations, Leuit.
19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father, and keep my
Sabbath. Discords and contentions, and heart-burnings in the members of the
family, extend their infection, and hurt, even to the profaning of Gods
Sabbath. The Lord looks not to be served aright in his House, if people live
not quietly, and lovingly, and dutifully in their own houses.

Thirdly, we must cleanse our selves, that we may keep the Sabbath, Nehem. 13.
22. Which place, though it speak of Legal cleansing, yet it shadows out that
Moral and perpetual care of cleansing our selves, that ought even to be found
in us. And thus we do cleanse our selves, when we humble our selves, that we
may walk with God, confessing our sins, even the sins of the week past,
and making our peace with God, through the name of Jesus Christ.

Thus of the duties of preparation: 2. Of the celebration of the Sabbath.
Now for the manner of keeping the Sabbath, the rules prescribe unto us these
things:

1. Rest from all our works, whether they be works of labor, or works of
pleasure. Works of labor the Scripture instanceth in such, as are selling of
victuals: Nehem. 13. 15. Carrying of burdens: Ierem. 17. Iournying from our
places, Exodus 16. 29. The business of our callings done by our selves, our
children, servants, or cattle, which the words of the Commandment forbid. And
as works of labor, so also works of pleasure are forbidden, Esaias 58. 13.

2. Readiness and delight. We should love to be Gods servants on this day,
Esaias 56. and consecrate it with joy, as a glorious privilege to us, Esaias 58.
13. abhorring weariness, or a desire to have the Sabbath gone, and ended, Amos
8.

3. Care and Watchfulness. We must observe to keep it: Exodus 31. 16. we must
take heed to our selves, that no duty be omitted, and that we no way
profane it, tending our hearts, and our words, Ier. 17. 21.

4. Sincerity, and this sincerity we should show diverse ways.

First, by doing Gods work with as much care, as we would do our own, or
rather showing more care for the service of GOD. They had their double
sacrifices on the Sabbath, in the time of the Law, and we should study, how
we might please GOD in especial manner on that day, choosing out the things
that might delight him: God has taken but one day of seven for his work; and
shall we not do it willingly? Further, if we respect our selves, shall we
not be as careful to provide for our souls on the Sabbath, as for our bodies
on the week days?

2. By observing the whole day, as well as a part, and keeping the Sabbath in
our dwellings, as well as in Gods house: God requires the whole day, and not a
part. As we would not be contented our servants should work for us only an
hour, or two in the six days: so neither should we yield less unto God,
then we require for our selves. Nor will it suffice to serve God by public
duties in his House, unless we serve him also by private duties in our own
dwellings, Commandment 4. Leuit. 23. 3.

3. By avoiding the lesser violations of the Sabbath, as well as the greater,
especially not transgressing of contempt, or wilfulness in the least things we
know to be forbidden. The Prophet instanceth: Isaiah 58. 13. We must not
speak our own words. Thus of sincerity.

5. The fifth thing required of us, is Faith: we must glorify GOD by believing,
that he will make it a day of blessing unto us, and perform that blessing he
has promised, accepting our desire to walk before him in the uprightness of
our hearts, and passing by our infirmities, and fraileties. We many times
disturb the rest and Sabbath of our souls by unbelief, Commandment 4.
Genes. 2. 2. Exodus 31. 13. Ezech. 20. 20. and 46. 2, 5.

6. The last thing is Deprecation: we must beseech God, when we have done our
best, to show us mercy, and spare us for our defects and weaknesses. Thus we
must end the day, and reconcile our selves to GOD, that the Rest of Jesus
Christ may be established in our hearts, Nehem. 13. 22. And thus of the rules,
that bind us to the good behavior, in respect of the time of Gods worship.

CHAP. XIX.
Rules that show us how to carry our selves, when we come into company, in
respect of Religion.
HItherto of the rules, that concern our carriage toward God? Rules that
direct our carriage toward men.


Now it follows, that I break open those directions, that should bring our
lives into order in respect of men: And these rules are of two sorts, for
either they are such, as bind us to the good behavior toward all men, 1.
Toward all men.
or such, as order our conversation toward some men only, as they are
considered to be either wicked or godly.

The rules that concern all men, may be cast into two heads, as they belong
either to righteousness, or to mercy.

The rules that belong to righteousness, And so 1. in company.
order us either in company, or out of company.

The rules which we are to observe in company, concern either, 1. Religion, or
2. The sins, and faults of others: or 3. Our own inoffensiue behavior
toward all men.


1. For the first, With due respect of Religion.
when we come in company, we must be careful to be that which may become the
glory of Gods truth, and the Religion we profess, that we take not up the
name of God in vain: And thus we shall rightly order our selves, if we
observe these Rules:

First, to be soundly advised, before we fall into discourse of Religion, not
doing it, till God may be glorified by it; A wise man concealeth knowledge,
but the heart of fools will publish foolishness: It is as great a discretion
to know how to conceal knowledge, as it is to know how to use knowledge.

Secondly, avoid vain ianglings, Avoiding vain ianglings in 3. things.
and contradiction of words, such as are

1. Doubtful disputations about Ceremonies, and things indifferent, which may
entangle the weak, and keep them from more necessary cares and knowledge,
Romans 14. 1.

2. Curious Questions, about things that are not revealed in the Word, Romans
12. 3. Be wise to sobriety.

3. Unprofitable reasonings, such as were those about Genealogies, in the
Apostles time, 1. Tim. 1.

Thirdly, If thou be asked a reason of the hope that is in thee, by such as
have authority to require it, or need to seek it, then answer: But be sure to
remember two things; namely, that thou answer with all reverence, as may show
how much thou art affected with the Majesty of Gods truth, and withal with
meekness, that is, without passion or frowardness: and without affectation,
or conceitednesse, or wilfulnes in thine own opinions, 1. Pet. 3. 15.

Fourthly, let thy communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay: otherwise,
customary and vain swearing, is a most damned sin, and such as God will
surely plague.

CHAP. XX.
Rules that show us how to carry our selves in company, in respect of the
faults of others.
THus of our carriage in company in respect of Religion. How we must behave
our selves in company concerning the faults of others.
Now concerning the faults of others, we must observe these Rules:

First, we must never in our discourse justify the wicked, or condemn the
righteous; all excess in words is evil, but this is an abomination to the
Lord: We must ever honor those that fear the Lord, and as for vile persons,
they are to be contemned, Psalm. 15. 4. Amos 5. 15. Prou* 17. 15.

Secondly, let thy conversation and discourse be without judging, Math. 7. 1.
lam. 3. 17. It is time exceeding ill-spent, that is spent in censuring of
others. And the rather should we take heed of judging, if we consider how the
holy Ghost has matched that sin in that place of James, we must be without
judging, without hypocrisy: as if he would signify, that great Censurers are
commonly great Hypocrites; and as any are more wise, they are more sparing of
their Censures.

Thirdly, thou must not walk about with tales; take heed of Tale-bearing: He
goes about as a slanderer, that reuealeth a secret, though it be true he
speaks. It is a marvelous evil custom, that many have to fill up their
discourse with the report of the frailties of others, which they by some means
or other, come underhand to know: This is an evil frequently condemned in
Scripture, and yet most usually practiced; as if it were lawful to speak of
any thing which they know to be true: Thou shall not walk about with Tales,
nor stand against the blood of thy neighbor: A strange connection, by which the
Lord imports, that this Tale-bearing is a kind of murder; and it is true in
the case of many a man; thou were as good lay violent hands upon him, as with
that licentiousness of words to diuulge tales concerning him, Prou. 20. 19.
and 11. 13. Leuit. 19. 16. And for the better strengthening of this rule, thou
art yet charged to look to thy ears too, as well as thy tongue; Thou must not
receive evil reports against thy neighbor, but make it appear, thou art not
pleased with such Tales, Psalm. 15. 3. Yea, thou art forbidden the society of
such persons, as carry Tales; Thou must not meddle with Talebearers, nor with
such as flatter with their lips; Certainly such creatures commonly flatter
the present, and reproach the absent, Prou. 20. 19.

Fourthly, if thou do know an offense in any, with whom thou conuersest, thou
shall not hate him in thy heart, Reprove, but hate not.
but rather reprove him plainly: For, he that rebukes a man, shall afterward
find more favor then he that flattereth with his tongue, Leu. 19. 17. Prou.
28. 23.

Fifthly, Pass by mere frailties.
as for the mere frailty of others, hold thy tongue, pass by them: A fool
despises his neighbor, but a man of understanding will hold his peace, Prou.
11. 12. Commonly they that have most defects themselves, are aprest to contemn
others for their weaknesses: but a wise man must so distinguish of the faults
of others, that he cover mere frailties, and learn of God to pass by the
infirmities of his servants: The Antithesis shows, that a wise man does not'
only hold his tongue, but restrain his thoughts from thinking the worse of
others for such infirmities.

Sixthly, against the passions and wrongs of others thou must arm thy self
with a soft answer, and be sure thou render not evil for evil, Prou. 15. 1.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 15. or rebuke for rebuke, 1. Pet. 3. 9.

CHAP. XXI.
Rules that show us how to carry our selves in company, and not give offense.
THus of our carriage toward others in company, as it respects their faults:
Now follows the third sort of rules, Rules that concern the in-offensiuenes
of our carriage in company.
which orderour behauior toward others in company in respect of
in-offensiuenesse. It ought to be our principal care to carry our selves so,
as no body may take offense at us.

Now these rules may be directed to their heads, as they concern, of our
behauior toward others.
1. The humility, 2. The discretion, 3. The purity,


We must carry our selves humbly, discreetly, and honestly in our conversation
with others, so shall we converse with much amiablenesse, and reputation:

First, A humble behauiou^ has three thing in it.
unto the humility of our conversation belong these Rules:

1. First, be soft, show all meekness to all men, restraining the
inordination of thy heart, endeavoring to show thy self gentle, and peaceable,
and harmless, and easy to be entreated, Tit. 3. 1, 2. Prou. 8. 13. Iam. 3.
13.

2. Secondly, thou must bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise,
and apply thine heart to get knowledge, and profit thy self by others, Pro.
23. 17. This is the same with that of James, Be swift to hear, and slow to
speak, I am. 3. 19.

3. Thirdly, put not forth thy self, nor stand in the place of great men, till
thou be called, Prou. 25. 6.

In general, concerning humility, the Apostle Peter's phrase is much to be
noted, he says, we should cloth our selves with humility: which notes both
the great measure of it, it should cover all our actions, and also the
continuance of it: When we go amongst men, we should stir up our hearts,
and fashion our selves to express this grace, and not dare to be seen
without humility, no more then we would be seen without our clothes.
Humility hides our nakedness, and pride and passion lay it open to the view
and contempt of others.

2. Secondly, neither is humility all that is required to make our conversation
without offense, Eight rules that concern discretion in our behavior.
or provocation; but we must also carry our selves discretely, and to this end
there are these excellent Rules:

First, thou must consider to speak what is acceptable, and avoid what may
irritate; there is singular use of this rule, if it were followed, Prou. 10.
32, 13. and 13. 23.

Secondly, thou must mark those that cause division and offenses, and avoid
them, and shun the society of such, Romans 16. 17, 18. This will breed thee
much peace, and deliver thee from much suspicion in others.

Thirdly, thou must make no friendship with the angry man; for either by much
conuersing with him, thou may learn his ways, or else it will be a snare
to thee, that thou shall neither know how to keep his favor, nor yet how to
break off from him, without much unrest and inconveniences, Prou. 22. 24, 25.

Fourthly, it is a great discretion in evil time to be silent. In things
wherein thou may endanger thy self, and not profit others, it is thy best
way, and a wise course, to forbear speech of such things, Amos 5. 13.

Fifthly, so likewise it is thy discretion in matters of danger to forbear the
communioating of thy secrets to any, though thou might be tempted to a
persuasion of trust in those, to whom thou would reveal them: It may often
repent thee to have spoken, but seldom to have held thy peace, Micah 7. 5.

Sixthly, withdraw thy feet from thy neighbors house, left he be weary of
thee and hate thee: This is an excellent rule given by Solomon, Pro. 25. 17. If
thou would converse with reputation, take heed of idle gadding from house to
house, when thou have no occasion or employment: Thou may draw hereby much
secret contempt, and loathing of thee, when thy emptiness and vanity shall be
thereby discovered. An empty conversation, that has in it no exercise of piety
or virtue, if it be frequent, occasioneth secret, and unutterable scorn.

7. Restrain thine own passions in conuersing. There are none so wise, but if
they show their passions of immoderate anger, fear, grief; yea, or joy, but
they discover much weaknesses in their disposition, which would be covered if
thou did bridle the excess of thy passions. A wise man covers shame, when
a fool is presently known: It is the best praise not to have such
weaknesses; but the next to this, is by discretion to bridle our selves, so as
we may hide our weaknesses from breaking out.

Lastly, thou may make good use of that direction of Solomon about thy
friend, Bless not thy friend with a loud voyee, rising early in the morning;
for it may be accounted a curse to thee: Take heed of flattery, which in stead
of effecting thine own ends, may bring thee out of all respect. He does not
forbid the just praise, and encouragement of friends, but the intending of
praise of purpose to the uttermost notice of thy friend (this is to praise him
with a loud voice) and the affectation of preventing others in praising; and of
doing it in such things as are not yet sufficiently known to be
praiseworthy, and to set ones self so to praise, as if he studied to do
nothing else, but humor his friends, especially if it be but once perceived,
that thou do it but for thy own ends. It is a great part of wisdom, to know
how to speak of the praise of others, so as neither sinister ends be intended,
nor the humoring of those we praise: to do it sparingly and seasonably, is a
great discretion.

And thus of the Rules, that make our conversation amiable, in respect of
discretion.

3. Thirdly, Three Rules that concern the purity of our conversation.
that our conversation may not be hurtful and offensive, we must look to the
purity of it, and so these Rules following are of singular use:

First, in general, Refrain thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they
speak not guile, Psalm. 34. 13. For he that keeps his mouth, keeps his
soul, Pro. 22. 23. Take heed of the usual vices of the tongue: for thereout
may come much mischief, and discontent to thy self and others.

Secondly, in particular look to thy self carefully, that thou avoid those
three evils mentioned by the Apostle: Ephesians. 3. 4. viz. Filthy speaking,
Foolish talking and jesting. By jesting he means those biting jests, that
under pretense of showing wittiness, or conceit, do secretly leave disgrace
upon the persons whom they concern.

Thirdly, avoid with detestation the excess^ in drinking and reuelling, and
suffer thy self upon no pretense, to be drawn to give way to thine own
practice in them, 1. Pet. 4. 3.

CHAP. XXII.
How we must carry our selves out of company.
THus of thy carryage in general in company. Now out of company thou must
look to these things:

1. First, thou must fashion thy heart, The rules that order us out of company.
by the use of all good means, to the love of all sorts of men. This (...),
love of me^, is a virtue little thought on: yet greatly necessary, as a
foundation of all practices in conuersing with others, and we should labor to
abound in love toward all men, 1. These. 3. 12.

Secondly, remember to pray for all sorts of men: This is a precept given us in
charge by the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2. 1. and belongs to this place, and we ought
to make conscience of it according to the occasions of our callings, or
acquaintance with other men: we should even in secret seek to profit our
neighbors by praying for them.

Thirdly, we should provide, even out of company to order our affairs so, as
that we may live,

1. Honestly without scandal, 1. Cor. 10. 32. Phil. 1. 10.

2. Justly, without deceit or fraudulent dealing, Leu. 19. 35. 36. 1. These. 4.
16.

3. Peaceably without strise with any, if it be possible, Prou. 3. 29, 30.
Zach. 7. 10. Hebr. 12. 14.

CHAP. XXIII.
Rules about works of Mercy.
HItherto of the rules, that concern righteousness.

Mercy follows. Now in showing mercy, diverse things are charged upon us.

First, 8. Things required in showing mercy. 1. Willingness.
Willingness. We must give cheerfully: For the Lord loves a cheerful
giver. We must love mercy, as well as show mercy. Our hearts should be ever
answerable to our power. We must be ready, and prepared to show mercy,
abhorring delays, and putting off of time, or seeking excuses: Our ears
should be open to the cries of the poor, rather then be behind hand; we
should sell, that we might give alms, Mich. 6. 8. 1. Tim. 6. 18. 2. Cor. 9.
4, 5, 6, 7. Pro. 22. 23, 13. Luke 12. 33. Pro. 3. 27, 28.

Secondly, 2. Labor.
Labor and Diligence. We should take pains, and work hard according to all
the occasions of mercy. This is the Apostles phrase: God will not forget your
work, and labor of love, Heb. 6. 10. We must be forward to do those works
of mercy, that require our pains and travail about them, as well as those we
may do and sit still, 2. Cor. 8. 16, 22.

Thirdly, 3. Liberality.
Liberality: We must open our hands wide, Deuteronomy. 15. 8. we must be rich in
those good works, 1. Tim. 6. 18. we must no^ give sparingly, 2. Cor. 9. 6. we
must give to our power, and sometimes beyond our power: 2. Cor. 8. 2. we
should desire to answer the expectation had of our bounty, especially the
expectation of our teachers that know us and our estates, 2. Cor. 8. 24. we
should strive to abound in this grace also, as well as in other graces of the
Spirit, 2. Cor. 8. 9. we should give to seven, and also to eight, Eccles. 11.
2. we must make good measure, yea and pressed down, Luke 6. 8.

Fourthly, 4. Humility. Humility showed five ways in doing works of mercy.
Humility. There is great use of humility, in showing mercy. Now we should show
our humility diverse ways about mercy: As

First, in helping others, without exalting our selves, and dominiering over
them. The rich must not think to rule the poor, and to command them, as if
they were their vassals: we should so show mercy, as not to stand upon terms
of their beholdingness, to whom we show mercy, Prou. 22. 7.

Secondly, in not despising the poor; we must no^ think of them meanly, and
contemptuously, because they stand in need of our help, whether it be in body
or mind, Prou. 14. 21.

Thirdly, in accepting exhortation, showing our selves willing to be called
upon, and stirred up to mercy, 2. Cor. 8. 17.

4. By our penitencie, when we go to God, after we have done our best, and
confess the corruption that cleaues unto us, even when we have showed our best
desires to communicate to others, and withal striving to plow up the fallow
ground of our hard hearts, that they may be more fit to express the bowels of
mercy, Hos. 10. 12.

Fifthly, the Macedonians showed their humility in this, that they prayed the
Apostle to accept their gifts, giving themselves also to be disposed of to the
Lord, and unto them by the will of God, 2. Cor. 8. 5.

Thus of the humility to be showed in doing works of mercy.

A fifth thing required in showing mercy, 5. Faith in two respects.
is Faith; and faith is needful in two respects.

First, to believe Gods acceptance of the mercy showed. For a godly Christian,
that is not vainglorious, has so mean an opinion of his best works, that
he finds need to fly to Gods promises, and dares not trust upon his own
goodness. Now God has promised to accept of that we do, if there be a willing
mind: The will is accepted for the deed, 2. Cor. 8. 12.

Secondly, to believe the success and reward from God, and that we shall not
lose, by what is so expe^ded. Though the persons to whom we show mercy, should
be so ungrateful, that it were as bread cast on the waters: yet we ought to
believe, that our seed cast on the waters, shall bring us a plentiful
harvest, Eccles. 11. 1. And it is certain, whatsoever the persons be, yet what
is given, is sowed. And if the Husbandman do not think his come spoiled, that
he casts upon his land, no more ought a Christian to think that to be lost,
that is given to the poor. Nature may disappoint the hope of the Husbandman,
but in works of mercy, there is no venture, but a sure increase from the Lord,
2. Cor. 9. 9, 10. and therefore our faith should make us get bags to put up the
certain treasure we shall gain by mercy from the Lord, Luke 12. 33.

A sixth thing required in showing mercy, 6. Discretion in four^ things.
is discretion, and discretion should show it self

First, by distributing our alms in the fittest course we can, having a
principal respect to godly poor. He that shows mercy, ought to have a good
eye, Prou. 22. 9.

Secondly, by observing our own ability, so to ease others, that we burden
not our selves, 1. Cor. 9. 14, 15.

Thirdly, by taking heed that we spend not upon the rich by needless
entertainments, what ought to be bestowed upon the poor, Prou. 22. 16. Luke
14. 13.

Fourthly, by avoiding scandal, or giving offense, that none blame us in our
abundance, but providing things honest in the sight of God and men, 2. Cor. 8.
20, 21. yet so as we endeavor in an holy and discreet manner to provoke others
by our zeal, 2. Cor. 9. 2.

A seventh thing required in showing mercy, is Sympathy, 7. Sympathy.
Pity, a Fellow-feeling of the distresses of others, being like affectioned
and laying their miseries to heart, Heb. 13. 3. Col. 3. 12. Romans 12. 16. Job
30. 25. There should be bowels in our mercy.

The last thing is Sincerity. 8. Sincerity in five things.
Now this sincerity should be showed diverse ways, As:

1. In the matter of our alms. It must be of goods well gotten. For God hates
robbery, though it were for burnt offerings, Esaias 61. 8.

2. In the manner we must show mercy, without wicked thoughts, or grief of
heart, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. to 12. and without hiding our selves from the poor, Esaias
58. 7. and without excuse to shift off the doing of it, Prou. 24. 11, 12.

3. In the ends. That we do not our works to be seen of men, or to merit of
God: but with an unfeigned desire to glorify God, and make our profession to be
well spoken of, and show the true love and pity we bear to the creature in
distress, Math. 6. 2. Cor. 9. 19.

4. In continuing our mercy; not forgetting to distribute, but still remembering
the poor, Heb. 13. 16. Galat. 2. soundly performing the mercy with constancy,
which we have purposed, willed, or promised. It were an excellent order, if
Christians would follow the Apostles rule, every week, as God has prospered
them, to lay aside for the poor, 1. Cor. 1. 16. 2. 2. Cor. 8. 11.

5. In the kinds of mercy, that we be ready to show spiritual mercy, as
well as corporal, and in corporal mercy to do good all the ways we can, as
well as one way: As by lending, protecting, releasing, visiting, and giving;
and thus to the poor, to such as are fallen into decay, and to the strangers
also: as many Scriptures require.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Rules that show us how to carry our selves toward wicked men.
HItherto of the rules that concern al men: Now the particular rules direct
our carriage either toward wicked men, or toward godly men.

Our conversation toward wicked men may be ordered by these rules:

First, Needless society with them must be avoided.
we must avoid all needless society with them, and shun their infectious
fellowship, especially we must take heed of any special familiarity with
them, or unequal yoaking our selves with them, by marriage, friendship, or
leagues of amity, Psalm. 1. 1. 1. Cor. 6. 17. Ephesians. 5. 7, 11. Prou. 23. 20. and
4. 14, etc.

Secondly, Great wisdom required in co^uersing with them.
when we have occasion to converse with them, we must study how to walk
wisely toward them, so as we may be so far from giving scandal, as if it
be possible, we may win them to glorify God and his truth in our
profession. It requires much skill to order our selves aright in those things
that are to be done in the presence of wicked men, or in such things, as must
come by report unto them, and their scanning. Now there are diverse things of
admirable use in our carriage to put them to silence, Diverse things that affect
the hearts even of the worst men, are
and to make them in their consciences at least to think well of us: Such as
are:

1. Mortification. 1. A mortified life.
A sound care to reform our ways, and true hatred and grief for our own
sins, will cause many times wicked wretches to say of us, that we are the
people of the Lord, Esaias 61. 3, 8. I say, a sound care of reformation for to
profess a mortified life, and yet in any thing to show, that we can live in
any fault without repentance, this prouokes them exceedingly to speak evil of
the good way of God. Therefore the first care of a Christian, that would be
rightly ordered toward wicked men, must be to live without offense, and to
discover a true mortified mind, and a heart broken for sin.

Secondly, 2. Reverend speech of Religion.
to speak with all reverence, and fear, when we entreat of matters of
Religion, much amazeth the profane conscience of a wicked man. Whereas
cursorie discourses of such grand mysteries, and empty and vain ianglings do
exceedingly occasion a confirmed wilfulness, and profaneness in such men, 1.
Pet. 3. 16. and Prou. 24. 26.

Thirdly, 3. Meekness of wisdom.
it is a most winning quality in all our carriage, to show meekness of
wisdom to express a mind well governed, free from passions, and also from
conceitednesse, frowardness, affectation, and the vain show of what we have
not in us in substance. For each of these have in them singular matter of
irritation, and provoke wicked men to scorn, and hatred, and reuiling.

Fourthly, 4. Reservedness in four things.
there is a holy kind of Reservedness, which may adorn the life of a
Christian in his carriage among wicked men: And this Reservedness is to be
showed:

1. In not trusting our selves too far with them, not believing every word,
not bearing our selves upon every show of favor from them. For as too much
suspicion of them breeds extreme alienation, if they perceive it: so
credulity is no way safe: Pro. 14. 15. John 2. 24.

2. By abstaining from judging of them that are without. It is a most
intemperate zeal, that spends it self in the vain and bootelesse censure of
the estate of those that are without. Those censures have in them matter of
provocation, and nothing of edification. It were happy for some Christians, if
they could with the Apostle say often to their own souls, What have I to do
to judge them, that are without? 1. Cor. 5. 12, 13.

3. By studying to be quiet, and meddle with our own business, casting
about, how to cut off all occasions, by which we might be entangled with any
discord, or contentions, or much business with them. It is a godly ambition to
thirst after this quietness of life, 1. These. 4. 12.

4. By our silence in evil times, always avoiding all such discourses, as
might bring us into danger, without any calling for our own edification, or
the edification of others. Many a man has smarted sorely for want of this
bridle for his tongue, when his words could do no good to others, and much
hurt to himself, Amos 5. 13. David held his peace while the wicked were
present, Psalm. 39. 1.

5. In forbearing to reprove scorners, Prou. 9. 7, 8. and 23. 9.

6. In seasoning the words with salt, so as they discover not vanity,
lightness, vainglory, malice, or desire of revenge, or the like faults in
their speeches.

7. In answering the fool, but not according to his folly, that is, not in
such pride, passion, or reuiling fashion, as the fool objects in, Prou. 26. 4,
5.

8. In getting out of their company, when we perceive not in them the words of
wisdom: If we see they grow once to be perverse, outrageous, or wilful in
any notorious offense of words or works, we must get from amongst them.

Thus of the eight ways wherein we should show reservedness: they are of
excellent use, if men would study them, and practice them.

5. Mercy 5. Mercy.
is amiable even in the eyes of wicked men: and merciful Christians, that are
full of good works, do bring a great deal of honor to Religion: It is true
Religion, and undefiled, to visit the fatherless, and widows, and to be
unspotted of the world: A conversation, that is unrebukable, and full of mercy
also, cannot but be very honorable: whereas Religion it self, when it is
seated in the breasts of such Christians, as have forgotten to show mercy, and
do not study how to be doing good to others, is exceedingly darkened in the
glory of it, and many times extremely ill spoken of: A true Christian should
hold it a great disparagement, that any Papist, or carnal man in the world (in
equal comparison) should put them down, for either the tenderness, or the
abundance of works of mercy, 1. Pet. 2. 12. Math. 15. Iam. 3. 25.

6. When we have cause, 6. Vndauntednesse in a good cause.
and a calling to speak for the truth, or to reprove sin, it is an excellent
grace to be undaunted, and free from servile fears, flattery: To give place
to wicked men in Gods cause, or to fear their faces in the quarrel of
Religion, or to show a mind that would repent of well-doing, or that basely
would stoop some way to honor ungodly persons for our own ends, is so far
from gaining true favor with evil minded men, that it makes them to scorn
and hate us, and Religion so much the more: whereas a godly man, that is
immovable, and refuses to praise the wicked, or justify the ungodly, and
when he has cause, will contend with them, as Salomons phrase is, and not be
like a troubled fountain, or a corrupt spring: he may for the time receive ill
words from the wicked, but his heart is afraid of him, and his conscience does
admire him, Pro. 24. 25. and 28. 4. and 25. 26. 1. Cor. 16. 22.

7. The like advantage is brought to the conversation 7. Patience in affliction.
of a godly man, when he can show like patience, and firmness of mind, in
bearing all sorts of afflictions, and crosses. Patience in affliction makes a
great show before a wicked man, that well knows how unable he is so to carry
himself, 1. Pet. 3. 14.

8. Lastly, to love our enemies, and show it by our fruits in forgiving them,
or being ready heartily to pleasure them, and overcome their evil with
goodness: To pray for them, when they revile and persecute us, is a
transcendent virtue; evil men themselves being Judges, Luke 6. 27. to 31.
Prou. 20. 22.

CHAP. XXV.
Rules that show us how to carry our selves toward godly men.
THus of our carriage toward the wicked: how we should carry our selves toward
the godly, follows to be considered of:

The sum of all is, that we must walk in love: If we can soundly discharge
our duty to the godly, in respect of loving them unfeignedly and heartily, and
constantly, we perform all that is required of us toward them: And this love
to the godly is so necessary, as that it is imposed upon us, as the only
Commandment given by Christ, who in one word tells us the substance of our
duties, Ioh. 13. 34. Ephe. 5. 2. 1. Pet. 2. 17. 1. Cor. 16. 14.

Now the Rules which in particular bind us to the good behavior in respect of
our love to the godly, concern either the manifestation of our love to them:
or the preservation of our love to them.

We must show our love to the godly diverse ways: Six ways of manifesting our
love to the godly.


First, 1. By courtesy.
by courtesy and kindness toward them, and that in a special manner, being
affectioned toward them with a brotherly love and kindness. No brethren in
nature should show more kindness one to another, then Christians should, Ephesians.
4. 33. Romans 12. 10.

Secondly, 2. By receiving them.
by receiving and entertaining them: we must receive one another, and be
harberous one to another; and this with entireness of affection: Negatiuely,
it must be without grudging, 1. Pet. 4. 9. Affirmatively, we must receive one
another, as Christ received us into glory, that is: First, without respect of
desert; We have done nothing to deserve heaven; yet Christ has received us to
glory: so, though the godly have not pleasured us any way greatly, yet because
they are the children of God, we should make much of them, and entertain them
gladly. Secondly, not thinking any thing too dear for them: Christ has not
envied us the very glory of heaven, and therefore what can we do to the
brethren, that should answer the example of Christ? Romans 15. 7.

Thirdly, by bearing their burdens; 3. By bearing their burdens.
for so we should fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. There are two sorts of
burdens press the godly: One inward, such as are temptations, and their own
corruptions; the other outward, such as are afflictions of all sorts: Now in
both these, this rule holds; for when we see a godly Christian mourn and
lament his distress in respect of his infirmities or temptations, we must
bear his burden, not by soothing him in his sin, as if it were no sin,
but by laying his grief to our own hearts, and striving to comfort him with
the promises of God. This is not to make our selves guilty of their sins, or
to bear with their sins, but to help them out of their grief by
consolation, out of their sin by direction. Note, Note.
that this is charged upon us, when sin is a burden to them, not before; for
till then we are rather to reprove them, or admonish them: But then we are to
take notice of this Rule, when they confess their sins, and are weary of
them, and sorry for them: And thus also in their outward burdens we must bear
them by comforting them, and aduising them, and helping them, and showing our
affection to them, as if it were our own case, so far as we have a calling,
and power to help them.

Fourthly, 4. By provoking them to good duties.
by considering one another, to provoke unto love, and good works, Heb 10. 24.
Note the duty and the manner how it is to be done: The duty is, to stir up
others all we can to the increase of love and abundance of all good works:
the manner is showed two ways; First, we must provoke them to it, both by
example, and by exhortation, and all good ways, that might fire in them the
desire of well-doing. Secondly, we must consider one another, we must study
the estates of others, their wants, impediments, means, gifts, callings, etc.
and accordingly apply our selves for the best advantage to help them forward.
It is not enough to do it occasionally, but we must meditate of it, and cast
about, how, where, and when we must yield this help, and encouragement, and
furtherance.

Fifthly, 5. By faithfulness in all their business.
by doing whatsoever we do for the godly, heartily, and with all
faithfulness, as if it were for our selves, or our own brethren, or kindred in
nature, not being slothful in service; or such as disappoint the trust reposed
in us: we should do all things we undertake for. them, with all fidelity and
care, 3. Ioh. 5. Romans 12. 6, 7, 8, 11. Yea, we should care for their good and
profit, as we would care for the good of the members of our own body: for
such are they to us in the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ, as the former place
to the Romans shows.

Lastly, 6. By employing our gifts for their good.
we should show our love to the godly, by employing the gifts of our mind, as
may be best for their good: As every man has received the gift, he must so
minister the same, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God. There are
diversity of gifts in the godly, as knowledge, utterance, prayer, and the like*
Now these are given to profit withal, 1. Pet. 4. 10. 1. Cor. 12. As for
example, The lips of the wise must disperse knowledge, Pro. 15. 7. So when
Christians meet together, as any have received a Doctrine, or a Psalm, or an
Interpretation: so must he minister it for the profit of others, 1. Cor. 14.
26. and so must we help one another by prayer, either absent, or present, 2.
Cor. 1. 11.

CHAP. XXVI.
How we should preserve our love to the godly.
THus of the Rules that concern the manifestation of our love to the godly:
Now there are further diverse things to be observed for the preservation of our
love to them: and these may be cast into two heads: for, they are either such
things as we must do; or, such things as we must avoid.

The things that we must do to preserve love are these. What we must do to
preseru^ our love to the godly. We must labor to be of one judgment with them


First, we must strive to be like minded in matters of opinion; many discords
or abatements of affection grow among Christians for their differences of
opinion in diverse things. It is true, that difference of Judgment should not
cause difference in affection: If we cannot be of one mind, yet we should
be of one heart; yet we see the contrary, and therefore every Christian
should make conscience of it, to be so wary and so humble in his opinions,
especially in things doubtful, or not so necessary, as to take heed of
admitting, who might show dissent from the godly; or if he must needs dissent,
yet to be very wary how he discover it to the vexation, or entanglement of
others. Now because this is very hard to persuade Christians unto, mark how
vehemently the Apostle speaks of it, Romans 15. 5, 6. Now the God of patience
and consolation grant you to be like minded, that ye may with one mouth and
one mind glorify God. We must learn of the Apostle to pray fervently for
this, that our natures, and the natures of others, with whom we converse, may
be fitted hereunto: and 1. Cor. 1. 10. the Apostle adiures them by the name of
Jesus: I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions amongst you, but that
ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.
And in the Epistle to the Philippians cha. 2. ver. 1, 2, 3. He urges them
with strange vehemence to import the necessity of this duty: If, says he,
there be any consolation in Christ, or any fellowship of the Spirit, or any
bowels of mercy, be like minded, having the same love, being of one mind. And
certainly, this earnestness in requiring this duty, imports, that some
perverse Christians will smoke one day, for their presumption and waywardness,
and pride of opinions.

2. We must follow the things, 2. We must follow peace.
which may make for outward peace; and to this end we must labor to show all
meekness in our carriage, and long-suffering in for-bearing one another, and
forgiving one another, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3, 4.

3. We must strive to heat our affections to such a degree, 3. We must cover
their weakness
as that it may be able to cover the infirmaties of others: He must get a
covering love, that will live constantly in the love of the godly: A love, that
will cover a multitude of faults, 1. Pet. 4. 8. Prou. 10. 12.

4. We must confess our faults one to another, We must confess our faults one
to another.
I am. 5. 16. It does exceedingly preserve love, if men, when they have
offended, or wronged others, would quickly, and easily, and heartily
acknowledge their offenses: Nor does this rule hold in case of trespass only,
but when we have not wronged others, yet discreetly to complain of the
corruption of nature that cleaues to us, and the infirmities which daily
trouble us: This does work not only compassion, but great increase of
affection in others toward us: For acknowledgement preuents their secret
loathing of us for such frailties, if they should discover them. And besides,
it makes them the willinger to give us leave to reprove their faults, when they
see we are as willing to reprove our own; Besides the ease it brings to our
own hearts many times to make our moan to others, when our consciences are
troubled.

CHAP. XXVII.
What we must avoid, that our love may be preserved.
THus of what we must do to preserve love; 10. Things to be avoided.
Now further, that love may be preserved amongst the godly, these things
following are to be avoided.

First, 1. Suits in Law.
Suites in Law; A Christian must have many considerations of his cause, before
it can be lawful for him to go to law with his brother; These kinds of
contentions are most unnatural amongst Christians, and prove not only
scandalous in respect of others, but extremely grievous and poisonous to
themselves, 1. Cor. 6. 1, 4.

Secondly, 2. Dissimulation.
Dissimulatition: our love must be without faining, in deed, and in truth, not
in show, or in words, Romans 12. 9. 1. John 3. 18.

Thirdly, Conceitednesse. 3. Conceitednesse.
This is a vice, that extremely vexes others, and alienateth affection: we
must not be wise in our selves, but rather in lowliness of mind esteem
another better then our selves, and show it both by making our selves equal to
them of the lower sort, and by going before others in giving Honor and Praise,
Romans 12. 10, 16. Phil 2. 4. Pro. 12. 15.

Fourthly, reioicing in iniquity. Our love must be holy and pure, if we would
have it preserved. It must have nothing in it, that is unseemly, nor must it
be an affection, that will take pleasure in the vices, or faults of those,
with whom we converse, 1. Cor. 13. 5, 6.

Fifthly, 5. Worldliness and self-love.
The minding of our own things: we must not study for our selves, and our
own ends only in conuersing, 1. Cor 13. 5. The meaning is not, that we
should leave our callings, and our houses, to spend the greatest part of our
time in our neighbors houses, but he prohibits, First, Worldliness, and
excessive cares about our business, and the things of this life, which hinders
needful society with the godly: and secondly, he forbids self-love in
conuersing, when men in all things aim at their own profit, or pleasure, or
credit, and do not as well seek the good of others: we may mind our own
things, but not only.

6. Sixthly, 6. Fickleness.
Fickleness and Inconstancy: we must look to it, that brotherly love
continue, Heb. 13. 1. and to this end we must look to the leuitie of our own
natures, and strive to make good, by continuance, the affection we have
conceived and professed to others. Some are of such unconstant dispositions,
that they will love vehemently for a fit, and suddenly fall off without reason,
but not without singular shame, and blemishing of their reputations. For such
tempers are hardly fit for any society. Now this must be repented of, and
refonned.

Seventhly, 7. Vaineglory.
we must take heed of vainglory, and an ouer-eager desire of credit and
estimation above others. For this is the cause of much unrest in our own
hearts, and of much interruption in brotherly love. And why would thou be
so highly esteemed of? Thou considerest not the hard task thou layest upon thy
self, to be ever careful to answer that great praise, or estimation thou
desire: Nor markest thou, how thereby thou art made to offend against thy
brother: by envying him, by backbiting; or other ways of provocation, nor yet
how little this commends thee to God, Gal. 5. 26.

Eighthly, 8. Judging.
take heed of judging thy brethren, not but that thou may say, that sin is
sin, but look to thy self in two things:

First, that thou censure not thy brother about things indifferent, or
doubtful: such as ceremonies were and are. This is flatly forbidden, Romans 14.
3, 13.

Secondly, that thy suspicions transport thee not to condemn thy brother for
hidden things, the things of darkness and counsels of the heart: till thou be
sure of the fault, or offense, thou may not judge, or censure, 2. Cor. 4. 5.

Ninthly, if there be any occasion of grieuance that love may be renewed, or
preserved, look to two things:

First, 9. Evil words and complaining.
that thou render not reuiling for reuiling, 1. Pet. 3. 9.

Secondly, that thou grudge not against thy brother, or by whispering deprave
his actions, or backbiting, or complain against him to his disgrace in things,
where the right is not apparently discovered, Iam. 5. 9.

Lastly, 10. Forsake not their assembly.
if thou would preserve thy self in the love of the godly, then thou must
take heed of forsaking the assembling together of the Saints: Thou must
preserve all vvayes of exercising the Communion of Saints, and hold fellowship
with them in Gods House, and in your own dwelling. Profaneness must not draw
thee from the Temple, nor worldliness from society, and loving, and
profitable conversation with thy godly friends and acquaintance, Heb. 10. 25.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How we must carry our selves toward such as are fallen.
HItherto of such rules of conversation, as direct us in our carriage toward
the godly considered in general. Now there are other rules, which concern
only some of the godly: Namely: 1. Such as are fallen. 2. Such as are weak.
3. Such as are strong. 4. Such as are especially knit unto us in friendship.


For the first, those that are fallen, are either fallen from God, or fallen
from thee. Such as are fallen from God, are either fallen grosely, and of
habit, or by infirmity, and suddenly.

Those, that are fallen grosely, are either guilty of foul vices, or else of
extreme omissions, such as that, which the Apostle instanceth in of Idleness,
and the general neglect of their callings.

Now toward both these thou must be thus ordered: How we must carry our
selves toward such as are fallen fro God.


First, warn them in the beginning, and reprove them sharply, 1. These. 5. 14.

Secondly, if they mend not, avoid them, withdraw thy self from them,
converse not familiarly with them, let them not be the companions of thy life,
1. Cor. 5. 11. 2. These. 3. 6, 14.

Thirdly, if they repent, forgive them, and comfort-them, lest they be
swallowed up of grief, 2. Cor. 7. 2, 8.

Now if they be fallen by infirmity, either they are likely to offend again,
or not. If they be likely to fall further, save them with fear, pulling them
out of the fire, Jude 23. but if not, then restore such a one with the spirit
of meekness, comfort him, deal gently with him, Gal. 6. 1.

This of thy carriage to such as are fallen from God.

As for those, How we must carry our selves toward such as trespass against
us.
that are fallen from thee, by trespassing against thee, thou must observe
these rules of carriage toward them.

First, in slighter wrongs do all things without reasonings, or murmurings:
either speak not of it, or so, as thou show no repining, or vexation about it,
Phil. 2. 14. Secondly, in great wrongs, thou must do two things:

First, observe the method of our Savior Christ: when the trespass is
secret, go and tell him of it between thee and him: If he mend not, then take
two or three other discreet godly persons with thee, and tell him of it again:
if he yet mend not, then diuulge it, and acquaint the Church with it: Either
seek a public sentence upon him from authority, or acquaint the godly
generally with it: and if these courses will not amend him, then abandon his
society, as if he were a Heathen, or a Publican, Matthew 18. 15.

Secondly, if by any of these courses he repent, forgive him, yea, and that as
often as he says, it repents him, if he should do thee many injuries, Luke
17. 3, 4.

CHAP. XXIX.
How we must carry our selves: toward the weak Christian, etc.
THus of thy carriage toward them that are fallen.

Toward weak Christians we must be thus ordered: How we must carry our
selves toward weak Christians


First, we must take heed, that we entangle them not with, doubtful
disputations in matters of ceremonies, or things indifferent, Romans 14. 1.

Secondly, we must get the skill to bear with their weaknesses, and mere
fraileties, Romans 15. 1.

Thirdly, we must be wonderful careful, that we do not offend them, or
cast any stumbling blocks in their way, Math. 18. 1. Cor. 10. 32.

Fourthly, we must encourage them, and comfort them, and support them all we
can, 1. These. 5. 14.

Fifthly, in things indifferent, we must not think it much to cross our
selves to please them, and to suffer a little bondage in the restraint of our
liberty, rather then vex them; especially for the furtherance of their souls
in the means of their salvation, we should become all things to all men, Gal.
5. 13. 1. Cor. 9. 20, 21, 22.

3. Toward strong Christians we must be thus ordered: How we must carry our
selves toward the strong.


1. First, we must acknowledge such, 1. Cor. 16. 18.

2. We should set them and their practice before us, as paterns, and examples
of imitation, 1. Cor. 5. 17. Phil. 3. 17.

3. We should submit our selves to such, to let them advise us, and admonish
us, and with all should submit our judgments in things doubtful to theirs, 1.
Cor. 16. 16. 1. Pet. 5. 5.

4. Toward thy friend thou must be thus ordered. How we must carry our selves
toward our special friend.


1. Never forsake him, Prou. 27. 10.

2. Give him hearty counsel, Prou. 27. 9.

3. Be friendly to him, Prou. 28. vlt.

4. Communicate thy secrets to him, John 15. 15.

5. Love him with a special love.

1. As thine own soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 6.

2. Let thy love be at all times, even in adversity, Prou. 17. 17.

3. It must be a sincere love, that looks not for gifts, or rewards, Pro.
19. 6.

4. It must be such a love, as will reach to his posterity also, if need be,
2. Chro. 20. 7

CHAP. XXX.
Rules that concern our selves: and so first in our general calling.
HItherto of the rules of order in respect of God, or our neighbors. Now
follow the rules that concern our selves:

And these are of two sorts. For they are either such, as order us at al times,
or such as order us in the times of affliction.

The first sort concern either our general, or particular calling.

The rules that concern our general calling, How we must carry our selves in
our general calling.
as in this place they are to be considered of, concern either: 1. our Faith:
2. or our repentance: 3. or our hope.

1. The rules, 1. In matters of faith.
that concern our Faith (supposing the Christian to be informed in the things
contained in the former Treatises) are only these two:

First, thou must be expert in the Catalogue of promises, that concern
infirmities, mentioned in the third Treatise. For those will preserve thy faith
in Gods favor, against the daily experience of frailetie, and infirmity in
thy self. For thou may by them see, that thou have no reason to doubt of the
continuance of Gods love to thee only, because of thy many weaknesses. For in
those promises, he has and does declare, how graciously he is inclined to his
servants, and passes by their frailty, and accepts their desires and
endeavors, etc. This rule will prove a maine support of the contentment of thy
life: and therefore let not Satan make thee either despise, or neglect it.

Secondly, thou shall do well to establish thy judgment particularly in the
doctrine of the principles expressed in the fifth Treatise; and by sound
learning of them settle thy self, so as thou be no more carried about with
the wind of any contrary doctrine: It should be the labor and care of all
good Christians to keep the pattern of wholesome words, 2. Tim. 3. 13.

Concerning thy repentance, 2. About thy repentance.
as now it is to be urged upon thee; after thy assurance one rule is of
singular use, and that concerns the Catalogue of present sins: By the
directions in the first Treatise, I suppose thou have delivered thy self from
the body of sins, so as the most of those evils mentioned in thy first and
great Catalogue, are shaken off, never to be committed again, and so thou
have no more to do about them, but give God thanks for thy deliverance from
them through Jesus Christ: Now because after thy first repentance, there will
remain some corruptions, which as yet are not rooted out; thy course for thy
whole life, for these remainders of sin, would be this: Make thee a Catalogue
of thy present sins, even of such evils as thou find thy self yet daily
prone unto. Examine thy self seriously to this end: it may be thou will find
6. or 8. or 10. or more, or fewer evils, which yet hang upon thy nature and
life: Thy course for the use of this Catalogue may be this: I suppose thou art
instructed so far, as to know the profit of daily calling upon God: Now
whereas inprayer thou do; or oughtst to make confession of thy sins, in
stead of a more general confession, use still thy Catalogue, that is, labor
every day to judge thy self distinctly for those sins that do presently annoy
thee: Hold on this course constantly; till thou have gotten power against all,
or any of them, and as thou find virtue against any of them, so alter thy
Catalogue, giving thanks for the sins thou gettest head against, and putting
them out of thy Catalogue. The pains is little, it is once done for a long
time, and thy memory will easily carry thy special present faults: Besides,
this distinct daily remembrance of thy present sins, will make thee more
watchful against those sins; and thou may once a year, or once a quarter, or
before every Communion, examine thy self anew, and mend thy Catalogue, by
putting in any corruption, which thou discouerest then, or at any time, to
arise anew in thee, and putting out such evils, as by prayer thou have gotten
victory against: Thus may thou see the state of thy soul distinctly all the
days of thy life, discerning when thou go forward or backward: Besides,
this course of daily judging thy self, keeps thee out of the danger of any
wrath from God.

Concerning thy hope, 3. About thy hope.
there are four things for thee to do.

First, pray constantly and earnestly, for the knowledge of the great glory is
provided for thee: Thou must form the admiration of heaven in thee, by prayer:
for naturally it is not in us, Ephesians. 1. 18, etc.

Secondly, thou must use all diligence to perfect thy assurance of heaven, when
thou die, Heb. 6. 12. 1. Pet. 1. 13.

Thirdly, thou must strive to accustom thy thoughts to the daily contemplation
of heaven, that thy conversation may be in heaven, Phil. 3. 20,

Fourthly, thou must strive to direct thy heart, and enable thy self to the
expectation of the coming of Jesus Christ; thou must labor for that skill
distinctly, to be able to wait for the coming of Jesus Christ, and to show
that thou love his appearing, 1. These. 1. 10. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 5. Gal. 5. 5
2. Tim. 4. 8.

CHAP. XXXI.
Rules that order us in our particular Calling.
THus of the Rules that concern thy General Calling: 7. Things to be avoided
in our particular Calling.
in thy Particular Calling there are seven things to be avoided.

The first is slothfulness, and thou art guilty of this sin, both when thou
do not the labors of thy calling, and when thou obseruest not the seasons,
and opportunities of thy Calling, Prou. 10. 4, 5. And that thou may be free
from this sin, thou must avoid together with it the occasions of it: And so
thou must avoid 1. The love of sleep, Pro. 20. 13. 2. Good fellowship, and
haunting of Alehouses, and Tauernes, and keeping company with dissolute
persons, Prou. 21. 17. 3. Wandering from thine own house, even that unnecessary
going from house to house, though it be not to places of ill fame. Fourthly,
thou must take heed of pertinacious entertainment of doubts and objections
about thy Calling, thou should be afraid of excuses for idleness,
especially to be so self willed, as to be glad of any thing may seem to
patronize thy slouthfulnes, Prou. 20. 4. and 15. 19. and 26. 16. And therefore
to conclude this Rule, when thou art about thy calling, what thou do, do with
all thy power, Eccles. 9. 10. and rest not in words or prattling: He is not
diligent, that brags much of what work he can or will do, but he that does it
indeed, Prou. 14. 23.

The second sin to be avoided in thy particular calling, 2. Unfaithfulness.
is Unfaithfulness, Prou. 20. 6. and so thou must take heed of breach of thy
promise in thy dealings with men, Psalm. 15. 6. and also thou must take heed of
all deceitful courses, all ways of fraud and couzenage. It is a hateful
thing in men, when they are such as cannot be trusted, either because they make
not conscience of keeping their words, or because they will use so much cunning
and deceit, and dissimulation, and lying in their dealings.

The third sin to be avoided, 3. Rashness.
is Praecipitation, hastiness, and unadvised rashness arising out of the
leuity of men's minds, or their wilfulness. Providence and wise Diligence is
wonderful requisite unto a right ordering of our selves in our Callings, Pro.
21. 5.

The fourth sin to be avoided, 4. Passion.
is Passion or perturbation; and that has in it both vncheerefulnesse and
unquietness: vncheere. fullness, when men are not content with their Callings,
or Gifts, or Estates, 1. Cor. 7. 17. unquietness, when men are froward, and
carry themselves peeuishly, or cholerickly with those that are about them. This
sin of frowardness is vehemently censured and condemned in Scripture, Prou.
11. 29. Psalm. 37. 8. Pro. 16. 32. and 19. 11. and 25. 28. whereas God requires
a quiet, contented, and merry heart, Pro. 17. 22. Eccles. 9. 7, 8.

The fifth thing to be avoided and shunned, 5. The temptations of thy calling.
is the Temptations of thy Calling; every Calling in the world is assaulted
with certain temptations, and they are usually of two sorts; For first in all
Callings there are certain unlawful courses held for gain by wicked men,
which we call the sins of such a Calling. These unjust courses thou must
learn to avoid, and abhor, and so exercise thy Calling, as thou shun those
sinful courses used by wicked men in that Calling: secondly, every Calling is
assaulted with crosses, and afflictions: Now in these afflictions the devil is
wont to tender ill counsel, to persuade to sin, or the use of unlawful
means, or other sins of distrust in God: All these thou must avoid.

Sixthly, 6. Worldliness.
thou must take heed of Worldliness, or setting thy heart upon these earthly
things thou art to deal with in thy Calling: Thou must ever be ready to
confess, and show it by thy practice, that thou accountest thy self to be but
a stranger and Pilgrim in this world, Heb. 11. 13. and if riches increase,
thou must look to it, that thou set not thy heart upon them, Psalm. 62. 10. Thou
must use the world, but not love the world, 1. Ioh. 2. 15. Thou may and
ought to be careful to do the duties of thy Calling; but thou must in
nothing be careful about the success, but submit thy self in all things to
God, Math. 6. 1. Cor. 7. 32. Thou must behave thy self like a weaned child,
Psalm. 131. 1, 2. Take heed of eating too much honey, Prou. 25. 16, 17. and 27.
1, 2.

The seventh, and last thing thou must avoid, is profaneness, 7. Prophanenes.
which is to use the works of thy Calling without exercising thy self in the
Word of God, and daily prayer for Gods blessing upon thy labors, and the
creatures thou art to use, Psalm. 90. 1. Tim. 4. 3, 4. Genesis 24. 11, 12, 26, 27.

CHAP. XXXII.
How we should carry our selves in the time of affliction.
THus of the Rules of carriage which concern thy self at all times: How we
must carry our selves in affliction.
Now follow the Rules that show thee how to behave thy self in the time of
affliction and adversity. When thou art in affliction, thou must consider what
thou must avoid, and what thou must do.

Thou must avoid eight things. 8 Things to be avoided. 1. Dissembling.


First, Dissembling: Make not thy self poor when thou art rich; nor sick when
thou art well, Prou. 13. 7.

Secondly, 2. Shame.
Shame; Be not ashamed of that condition God brings thee into: bear thy
crosses with spiritual magnanimity, account not thy self dishonored by Gods
hand, who does all for the best, 1. Pet. 4. 16.

Thirdly, 3. Impatience.
Impatience: grieve not at Gods works: sorrow not after the world: Fret not at
God or man; Refuse not Gods chastening, but with patience bear what is laid
upon thee: It is the Lord, let him do whatsoever he will with thee, Prou. 3.
11.

Fourthly, 4. Discouragement.
Fainting, or discouragement of heart: Live by faith; call not Gods love into
question: keep thee in the good way, Prou. 24. 10.

Fifthly, 5. Trust in carnal friends.
Trust upon carnal friends; Rely not vpon-man, but upon God: Trust not in the
arm of flesh, Prou. 27. 10.

Sixthly, 6. Perplexed ears.
Too much Carfulness for the means how to get out of affliction: Commit thy
way to God, and put thy trust in him; use all lawful means, but distress not
thy heart with bootlesse cares: Cast thy care upon God, for he cares for
thee, phil. 4. 6. Iam. 4. 10.

Seventhly, Sudden fears; 7. Sudden fears.
Be not so amazed with the first tidings, or beginnings of any affliction,
discover not such want of faith, as to be guilty of those violent passions of
fear; Gods love is unchangeable: and though heaven and earth should go
together, yet God will be with thee; He will not leave thee, nor forsake thee,
Prou. 3. 25.

Eighthly and lastly, 8. Carelessness of thy ways.
Carelessness of thy ways; be not secure in sinning, but let thy crosses melt
off some of thy dross, and draw thee near to God: Go not on boldly to sin
without regard; if the Lord have any quarrel against thee, humble thy self
and depart from iniquity, Prou. 14. 16.

The things then thou must do on the contrary side, 5. Things to be done in
the time of affliction.
are these: When thou art in affliction, thou must do these things:

First, thou must pray, and call upon the name of the Lord; as these express
Scriptures require, Iam. 5. 13. Psalm. 50. 15. 1. Cor. 4. 12, 13.

Secondly, thou must bear thy cross with patience, and contentation, Iam. 1.
4. 1. Pet. 3. 15. Esaias 5. Phil. 4. 6. 2. Cor. 6. 8. Prou. 12. 9.

Thirdly, thou must labor for wisdom to know how to carry thy self
discreetly, and to use all good means for thy deliverance, Iam. 1. 5.

Fourthly, thou must be sure to show thy trust in God, and cast thy burden on
the Lord, Iam. 5. 7, 8. Nahum. 1. 7. Psalm. 27. vlt. and 37. 7. and 55. 22.

Fifthly, thou must show thy obedience to God; and that thou do,

1. If thou submit thy self to Gods will, Heb. 5. 8.

2. If thou judge thy self, and acknowledge thy sins to God, Hosh. 5. vlt.
Job 36. 8.

3. If thou be constant in the good ways of godliness, Psalm. 37. 34.

4. If thou learn more righteousness, and art made by thy crosses to do holy
duties with better affections, Esaias 26. 11.

FINIS.

