Concerning the true Belief of a Christian man, a most excellent and
profitable Dialogue, By S. C.

Hereunto, besides the Marginall Notes, declaring the chief points of
Doctrines, there is added a godly and lightsome prayer, which in certain
brief petitions, comprehends the very contents of the whole work:
written in Latin, By ABRAHAM FLEMING Londoner borne.

To the right Reverend Father in Christ, JOHN Bishop of London.

Translated out of Latin, by Arthur Golding.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop over
against S. Sepulchers Church.

To the right reverend Father in Christ, John by the blessing of God, Bishop of
London, grace and peace from the Lord.
THERE is no man (right reverend Father) but he may imagine at the first
sight, that this pretty Book written Dialogwise, easy to be borne for the
smalenes of the volume, soon to be ouerhandled for the fewness of the leaves,
and very good cheap for the ouerlittlenes of the price, is worthy of no
praise, or else of very little. But if he search and ransacke the bowels of
it, so as he read it not in post, or as one half asleep, ne lightly give as
it were a glaunce at it, but consider well the excellency of the matter, the
orderly teaching thereof, and the fit knitting of all things together: he
shall willingly confess (and that of very good right) that it chale^geth no
small co^me^datio^. For the case stands not with this Book, as with vvares,
which the Marchantme^ are wont to thrust upon their Chapmen that are not
aware of their vviles, by setting a certain procured bewty upon them, vvherof
when the trial comes, their Chapmen are so far off from gaining any whit
by them, that they do rather complain of wrong done unto them, and being
overtaken with loss unlooked for, are feign to come short of the commodity
which they hoped after. For here the faith of a christian man is plainly
portraied out, whereof it bears in deed the notable title in the forfront of
it, not to pretend one thing in show, and another thing in deed, after the
manner of flatterers, but to the intent that the readers being allured with the
rarenes of the Title, marking the ground, and considering the Authors
unaccustomed manner of proceeding, should become the more skilful and desirous of
so great and so heavenly a mystery, and by that mean, with lively voice bear
record that this little Book is most worthy of their co^me^ndation.

I grant that many Books do daily come forth (the more pity) vvherof some,
yea an infinite sum, in the parts beyond the seas, and other some on this side
the seas have been hatched out of men's teeming and childbearing heads, by the
midwifeship of the devil. By the force of which Books, bewtified with
glorious foretitles, these trim and cunning discoursers, allure, or rather
infect, yea and utterly kill men's souls through the present poiso^ of their
opinions and doctrins. Much like unto common harlots, whose daily custom and
ordinary trade it is, to besmere themselves outwardly with ointments and
sweet powders, to the end they might the more tickle and stir up, as it were
with certain pricks, their mates set all upon love, to the cooling of the
heat of their lust, having no regard in the mean while, to vvash away the
filth grown together within them even in a heap.

Of this stamp are all the books of the Romish route, glittering with
glorious titles, prete^ding the doctrins of greatest mystery, yea and of
greatest importance also, and (to say briefly what I think) chalenging and
behighting any thing, whereas besides their stately words, their Thrasolike
speeches, their scornful scoffs, and their other childish trifles, and old
vviues tales, they contain not any thing that is vvorthie to be vveied or
considered, but rather to be laughed at and hissed out. Insomuche that this
saying of the Poet may well be applied unto them, The mountains labor of
child, and out there creepes a silly mouse.

To these, you among the rest of the Bishops of this renowned Realm, which are
in many respects to be reverenced, have bin a very sore enemy: and though
not at hand, yet a far of you have so vvounded that misshapen Monster of the
world, which leaves nothing unattempted to bring all Princes in subjection
to him, partly by vexing of his members diverse vvayes, howbeit not with any
kind of torment, as their willful stubbornes requires, but by urging them
with wholsome counsel and weighty exhortation, to turn away from their
crooked paths which lead to destruction, partly in burning their books
which were stuffed with all kind of filthy railings and reproaches, and
finally in attempting all means to pinche in his kingdom, and to disperse
and utterly abolish that pestilent Seminary of his, vvherby he goes about to
bevvitch all the coasts of the world. That these things are so, all me^
confess with one mouth, and even the Papists themselves (unless they will lie
most shamefully) will not deny the^. For as much therefore, right reverend
Father, as you are greatly busied about these things, and (besides the time
which you spend in the study of Divinity) the matters of greatest weight lie
daily upon your back, how fitly may this saying of S. Paul's be applied unto
you, vvherwith he closes up his sentence, after a long reckoning up of his
labors, saying. Besides all the other things that daily distress me, the care
of all congregations lies upon me.

Now, were there the like mind and endeavor in the Pope, the gazing stock of
the world, and in the residue of the Papists, the^ should not so many hundred
thousand souls be thrust down into Hell, neither should so great darkness be
cast upon the true worship of God, nor Christ's, church be so miserably and
vvofully assaulted, nor Christ himself the lively Image of his Father, be
mangled with so many darts of reproach, nor the light of the Gospel be dimmed
with so many mists of men's imaginations, nor so many firebrands of dissension
tossed among Christian Princes, nor Common weals be torn in pieces with so
many tempests of insurrections, nor Gods glory be abated with so great
carelessness and negligence, nor finally, the Devil so triumph and rejoice.

But I will call my self back again, and with as much shortness of speech as
I can, I will touch the things that are nerer to the matter which we have in
hand. I have declared already what an old heart grudge and deadly hatred you
bear to the Pope of Rome and all Papists: Also I have showed, though not
cu^ningly, yet truly, what means you have used to call them back from their
pernicious opinion, with how great zeal you have burned to further the pure
religion, and to put away heresies, and the sovvers abroad of heresies, by
any kind of mean, that Christ's church being called away from all blind
serving and colorable misvvorshipping of God, may love her Christ from her
heart, with open arms embrace him, and unseparably stick to him alone.

And yet by the way, I will let pass that chief and entire care of yours,
wherewith you be often touched, namelye of preferring the books of learned
men to light, by the reading and considering whereof, your Fatherhoode
knovveth, that so many as study them, as becomes them, being stayed up and
enlightened with right reason and found judgment, do gather most plentiful
fruit. For these resemble not those which in setting forth Book^s, do play
the poysoners, who into their slubbersauces do put liquerice, or of the
choysest sugar beaten into poulder, that they may with the less lothsomnesse
and misliking be conuayed into the stomach, and afterward shead themselves
into all the conueiaunces of the body* so as the veins at length may swel,
the bowels burst, and finally the whole man be killed.

Nay, they be much more hurtful then the poysoners which destroy but only
the frame of the body: for they infect the very soul, killing it utterly, and
throvving it headlong into the torments of Hell, which shall never die nor
cease. Contrariwise, the works of the right believers, (be they little, or
be they great) yield such profit to the Readers, that they grow ever better,
but never vvoorse, ever skilfuller, holyer, purer, perfecter, and acceptabler
to God.

The reason whereof has led your Fatherhood so to favor the written Copy
of this little Book, which treats lightsomly of the true faith of a
Christian man, that among other Books whereof the number is infinite, with
the superscription of your own hand, you have authorized the same to be
printed, that it may go abroad and be common in the hands of all such as desire
to have the trial of their faith.

The which now coming forth with a new outward show, if your reverend
Fatherhoode shall vouchsafe to accept, with the accustomed favor of your good
countenance, and to suffer it to rest under the shadow of your defense, yelding
your self to be as Patron of it, considering that the book is commended
enough of it self, and the writer thereof was notably learned, and has
deserved very well of the true Religion, which we now embrace, or as I may
well say, that it shall be the better vvelcome to all such as love the
Christian faith, so am I well assured, that it shall turn to the great
benefit of many, and besides that, though I be sore hindered with the great
weight almost of daily business, you shall stir me up to take in hand the
Translating thereof into English, and to make an end of it even out of hand.

GOD most gracious and almightye grant you abundaunce of his heavenly grace,
shead upon you the most sweet Oil of his hol^ spirit, daily increase your
Honor, and lengthen the time of your life, that having put the enemies of
the Gospel to flight, set forth his glory, enlarged his Church, and happily
ended your last day, you may live for ever blessedly, placed at the right hand
of Christ, the unspotted Lamb, and first begotten of the Father. So be it.

Most addicted to your Honor, ABRAHAM FLEMING, Londoner borne.

The Argument of this Dialogue.
WHat it is to believe in God, and what wonders are wrought by the power of
belief, be it worldly or divine: and what things do hinder belief.

Also how a man may hate himself, and by faith forsake himself, and kill the
deeds of the flesh. The effect of the talk is this: That he which believes
in God, and in his son Jesus Christ, is able by the power of that belief, to
mortify his flesh with the lusts thereof, through the holy Ghost, and to serve
God in spirit and truth.

A most excellent and profitable little Book, concerning the true christian
faith.
The Persons that talk together are Lewis and Frederike. Lewis. GLadly in good
sooth Friend Frederike, He begins at the dif^ficultnes of obaying gods
healthful commandments.
have I heard your talk both yesterday and to day, and thereby I have learned
many things which I knew not before, and this is one thing which has chiefly
moved me, that you have showed that our Lord commands not any thing which
is impossible to be done. For, I was of belief before, that (as it is commonly
heard and taught) Gods commandments are impossible to be obayed. Which
persuasion, (to tell you the truth) has made me slow to obey, so as I never
strayned my self to obey with my whole power.


Fred. The like has befalne unto me also, and I could never yield my self
truly and earnestly to obaying, before I believed that it was possible to
obey. The effe^tuall po^er and ^orce of ^eleefe.
And truly hereby I have learned the force of Belief, which Belief makes a
man desirous and willing to obaye: And desire being afterward matched with
power given of GOD, brings to pass that a man does the things which he has
believed himself to be able to do, and so he is saved by obaying, as he was
earste undone by disobeying. And so being led by the spirit of Christ he
fulfilleth the righteousness of the law, The righ^uousnes of the law and why
^t bea^eth that ^ame*
not walking after the flesh, but living after the spirit, which
righteousness is therefore called the righteousness of the law, not for that it
makes the believer righteous, but because the law requires it. For the whole
performaunce thereof is Christ's, because it is brought to pass by his power
and spirit, living and working in those that are his. The Law then
commands, and Christ fulfilleth, and so the praise is due, not to the
commander, but to the performer. Nevertheless it were to small purpose to
believe that it is possible to obey God, Belief without obedience is dead.
unless a man do also know the way how god may be obayed, without the which
obedience faith is dead, and without faith no man can be saved. But this I
would have you to be persuaded of, my Lewis, that the discourses both of us
and of al others are (to say no worse of them) unprofitable if they train us
not to obedience, and to the renewing of the man.


Lew. These things are true Frederike. Therefore that I may fare somewhat the
better by your communication, I pray you show me by what mean I may attain
to obey God. For inasmuche as you have showed me by your talk, that it is
possible to be done, I have conceived a desire of obeying.


Fred. A godly and christian wish concerning obedience.
O my Lewis, would God that I my self were rightly obedient, to the intent I
might lead thee as it were by the hand, to obedience. As now it is impossible
for me to lead you further, then I myself have attained unto.


Lew. Yet notwithstanding, I believe you have proceeded further forward then I
have done, and therefore I beseech you show me but as far as you your self
are gone.


Fred. Willingly will I do that Lewis: but I am afraid the hardness and
roughness of the way will scare you from it.


Lew. Fear not: I hope I am ready to all things, be they never so hard, so I
may attain to the end that I desire.


Fred. I pray God to stablishe this willingness of yours, and to bring it
throughout to the end. And therefore to go in hand with the matter, you know
how the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews has written, that without faith
it is impossible to please God.


Lew. I know it well.


Fred. First of all then you must believe in God, Belief in God is most
necessary to the obteining of salvation.
if you will be saved.


Levv. Proceed on then to other things my Frederike, for as concerning belief,
I have ever from my childhood believed in God, and truly I am of opinion, that
there are very few (if there be any at al) which believe not in God.


Fred. In deed it is very easy to be said, and so are men commonly persuaded.
Many things are easy to be said which are hard to be done.
But I fear me it is said rather rashly and of custom, than upon truth, for
the time has been, that even I also have believed the same, both of my self,
and of others, but when it came to the trial, then I saw how far off I was.


Lewis. Think you then that I have no faith?


Fred. I am not of opinion that you have no faith Lewis, but I think you have
so slender a faith, as it cannot rightly be said to be faith, or save you. And
I pray you be not offended with me, for in as much as you have said that you
are ready to al things, be they never so hard, it is meet before all things
that you should suffer to have it shewde, that you want the thing, which you
ween you have abundantly, The first^ way to the kno^^ledge of the truth
and soothly the first enteraunce to the knowledge of truth, is to unlearn the
untruth, or else there will be no room for seed, where all is ouergrowne with
weed. Come on therefore: let us examine your belief. I pray you Lewis, when
you were a child did you believe in your father.


Lewis. What mean you by believing in my father? What it is to bee^leeue in
the fath^^ is shewe^ by the g^^thering togethe^ of certai^ circumstaunce.



Fred. That you took him for your father, and depended wholly upon him.


Lew. Yea that I did.


Fred. Then if you wanted any thing, as shoes, apparel, or meat, you resorted
to none but him, neither doubted you any whitte his good will toward you.


Lew. Surely no more then of mine own.


Fred. Again, if any mishappe befell you, you had your eye upon him only.


Levv. Yea verily.


Fred. Also if he promised you any thing, you doubted not of his performance.


Levv. No more the^ if I had had the thing already in my hand.


Fred. Then took you no thought for his behavior toward you, but only of
your own toward him.


Levv. You say truly.


Fred. Moreover, if he either commanded you any thing, or did any thing himself
whereof you being a child knew not ye reason, or which seemed to you against
reason: yet notwithstanding you did it, How ^eedefull ^bedie^ce ^o the father
is, is ^hewed ^y ex^mples.
and stood not skanning doubtfully upon his doings.


Le. So is it. For upon a time, when new grapes were brought in, and he bad me
tread upon them with my feet, surely me thought it was a fond thing to tread
upon so good and fair grapes, which I had lever should have bin saved to eat.
But because he was my father, I thought he commanded me not without cause, and
therefore I obeyed him. Also at another time, when he shredded his vines, and
greffed trees, to my seeming was against reason to cut of the boughs which
nature had brought forth, and which were likely to have brought forth fruit. But
yet this thought ran alwais in my mind, Unles this were good, my father would
not do it.


Fr. Now let us come unto god. You say you believe in god the father, and by
that name you call upon him, saying, Our father which art in heaven, and so
forth. Surely it is meet therefore that you should depend upon him no less
then you depended upon your father when you were a child.


Lew. Yea.


Fred. Then if you want any thing you fly unto God alone, and you doubt not
at all, but that he will give you all things bountifullye. What? Fleshlye
fear, and what it works where it bears ^way.
Doubt ye? Why answer you not my Lewis? Confess the truth, and let not
fleshlye fear restrain you, which is wont to withholde men from being known
of their vices, because they are afraid, least ^e to whom they be to be
uttered, should mislike of them as of sinful folk, or make the less account
of them. But there is no such perrill toward you at my hand, for I cannot
find in my heart to mislike of any man for those things, which I both see and
bewail in my self not long ago, and I doubt not but are in others also,
unless they be come already to their ways end, which certesse we two (that
is to say, you and I) have not yet attaind unto, neither will I make the less
accounte of you for confessing the things with your mouth to your Friend, which
I am sure you acknowledge already in your heart.


Levv. O my Frederike I am ashamed to be acknowne of it. Uerilye I am (yea even
very sore) afraid least I should want bread and drink and such other
things, specially when I see I have but a little money left, and no likelye
mean at hand whereby to get new money.


Fred What if you have your purse full, or some mean in a readiness whereby
to come by Money, then you take no thought at all, or at least wise your
thought is the less.


Levv. It is so.


Fred. Ergo, you trust to your money, or to your own policy, more then to
God.


Levv. How be^^efe in God is ^eglected ^y tru^ing too ^uche to ^hese tra^^tory
and ^ightfull things.
Truly it is even so.


Fre. But when you were a child, you trusted only to your father.


Levv. Yea.


Fred. Nowthen you see how you believe not in God, but in your money and in your
own policy. Uerily I believe these things seem boystous unto you, in yt you
be not able to deny them, and yet are either doutful or ashamed to confess
the^ so soon. But enforce your self Lewis. Many things ar to be sifted out
which lie lurking in our hearts, and the very root must be gone unto, without
ye plucking up whereof we cannot be saved. Let us go on. What say you to
adversity Lewis? Is your mind nothing troubled at it?


Levv. Yes very sore. I can very ill away with it, and besides that, I seek
all the corners of my wit for worldly help^s.


Fr. What do you concerning Gods promises? That Gods pro^mises deceive no^ the
belie^uers.
He has promised to give all things needful for your life, if you first seek
his kingdom and righteousness. Do you certainly believe y^ promise, so as you
dout no more of his faithfulness, the^ you did of your fathers when you were a
child?


Le. Alas, I am far from it.


Fr. But if your neighbor Henry Rottenfeeld, a rich man, and (in account of
the world) a man of good credit, had promised you three hundred crowns, I am
of opinion you were rid of that care for a good sort of years.


Levv. Yea that I were.


Fred. Now God has promised, not three hundred crowns, but all things that
you have need of, and yet you distrust him.


Levv. O how truly you say.


Fred. Less therefore do you believe in God, I say not tha^ in your own
Father, but than in Henrye Rottenfielde.


Levv. I am compelled to confess the truth.


Fred. ^wo thin^^es may ^t men ^^om per^orming their pro^ises.
And yet men may starte from their promises, either through vntrustines or for
want: whereof none of both can befall unto God. You therefore by this distruste
of yours, do falsely accuse God, either of vntrustines, or of want.


Levv. I do so in deed.


Fred. Now if you do thus distrust of God in the sustenaunce of your body,
which notwithstanding you have never wanted to this hour, can you trust to
him for the blessed and endless life which you never yet tasted of? For
consider the matter after this sort with your self: If a King should now send
an Ambassador unto you to adopte you to his son, and you believed him, how
would you behave your self?


Levv. Truly what substance soever I have, I would make no reckoning at all
of it, and being here as a Wayfarer in body, I should have my mind running
upon ye court: for a much like thing happened to me when I was a stripling.
For whereas I lived in very slender state, I was called into the household of a
certain Gentleman of great worship and wealth, Honors change manners, as the
common proverb says.
whereupon I felt my mind so altered, that I thought of none of the things
which I had thought of before, neither was I pincht with any further care.
Inso much that when my father and my mother were about to have sent me a
little money, I sent them word again that thenceforth I should need no
money. What need many words? I imagined aforehande in my mind, a kind of
fashion of the buyldings, and of the place, and of the persons among whom I was
to dwell, and yet had I never seen them.


Fred. I believe you Lewis. For I myself also have had experience of the like.
But what if you had not believed that message?


Levv. Surely I had continued in mine old state still.


Fred. And what if a man had seen you abiding in your former state, might he
not well have auowed that you believed not the message?


Levv. Yes, very well.


Fred. How bou^tifull God is to the^ that ^oue him.
Now let us come to the matter. To them that love God, God has promised such
good things, as another eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart of man
conceived. Let us confess ye truth herealso my Lewis. If we believed this
promise thoroughly, should not our minds be ravished up into heaven, so as no
earthly care might touch us, and much less trouble us?


Lew. Yes verily.


Fred. But now when we be glad of gain, Proofs or tokens of distrust in God.
sorry for loss, greatly grieved and cast down with reproach, hoyssed up with
honor, and ouerioyed with pleasure, all which things are earthly: is it not
an apparent proof that we believe not Gods promises, but stick still to ye
earthly inheritance?


Lew. Yes that it is.


Fred. What if God should promise us some thing that might seem impossible,
as when he promised old Abraham a son by Sara being old and barren too? Or
what if he should command us a thing that might seem unreasonable, as when he
willed the said Abraham to offer up his son in Sacrifice, by which son he
had promised him an offspring without number


Lew Surely I am afraid we would not believe him.


Fred. Abraha^s says is of necessity to salvation.
And yet was Abraham ye father of the faithful, so as if we will be saved, we
must have the faith of Abraham. And thus much concerning belief in the
father.

This (as I take it) is that which they call the historical faith.
Now if we come to the son, I fear me we much less believe in him. For I
take not faith (as a number think it) to be a believing that Christ has done
and suffered the things which are written of him: for as for that faith or
belief, the very devils have it. But I speak of the true, lively, and
mightfull faith, which is able even to remove mountains, whereof the Lord
speaks thus, The signs that shall follow those which believe, The signs that
are peculiar to the beleuers.
are these: In my name they shall cast out devils, speak with new tungs, and
drive away serpents: if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt the^.
When they lay their hands upon sick folks, the sick folks shall recover. Do
these tokens follow your faith Lewis?


Lew. No verily.


Fred. Then have you not faith.


Levv. Why? They deny yt there is now any need of miracles.


Fred. Another do I now require any such, another were they at that time wrought
by all believers. For Paul writes, Do all work miracles? Have all the gifts
of healing? Do all speak with toungs? The thing that I require, is the same
that Peter requires: Get you strength to your faith, says he. For needs
must the faith of any man or of any time have strength, if it be matched with
love. ^he force ^f world^^ faith, and how ^onder^ully it ^noueth ^^en.
Which thing that you may the easier understand, consider the force of worldly
belief. A man believes that riches are good, and that it is possible for him
to atteine to them by marchaundise. Heerevpon, leaving oftentimes a very fair
and dear beloved wife, and young children at home, he undertakes the
unmeasurable perils of robbers, of ways, and of seas, and indureth
intolerable payns, to fetch the riches whereon he has set his belief and
love, even from Taprobane and the Isles of Canarie which are the uttermost
parts of the world: and it is his belief that purchases him this stoutnesse.
For unless he believed it, he would not do it. And therefore it may be said
that this man is enriched by belief.

What shall we say of Learning, Lewis? The child believes that learning and
humane arts are a very goodly thing, and to be sought with all his power. And
therevppon applying him self to them day and night, he indureth poverty,
cold, and whatsoever else, in seeking them with all his might, to the intent
he may attain to the thing which he believes to be good.

Also what do soldiers? He proceeds i^ showing the stren^gth of the worl^^ly
belef^^
What kind of calamity is there which they undertake not, to obtain either
victory or reward? How often watch they all ye night long: How often are they
pinched with hunger? Insomuche that sometimes they eat Mice, Rattes, Horses,
yea and even their own shoes, and afterward make their boast thereof. Whence
have they so great strength? Whence but of belief? For they believe the thing
which they covet, to be good.

Again, what do Hunters? do they not spend oftentimes the whole winter
nights abroad, when the cold is so great that it riueth even the flintes?

Yea and what do lovers? what inconveniences do they not most gladly endure, to
ye intent to please the party whom they be in love withal? And still they
deem the^ selves happy that they have suffered those things for her sake.

^ow ^ret force ^orldly ^eleefe ^ath even among ^^me ^hole ^ations.
And this force of belief is seen, not only in several persons, but also
even in whole Nations. For whereof comes it that our Italians do so easily
abstain from drunkenness, or that the Swissers are so resolute in battle, that
they will rather be slain, then flee? Even of this, that they are persuaded in
themselves, that so they ought to do. And surely if they persuaded themselves
alike in all other virtues, they should excel alyke in all other virtues. Many
other things of the same sort may be gathered: so great is the power of the
belief that works in them. Therefore let us examine our faith, that we may
see whether Christ's spirit do dwell in us or no.

Christ tells us that they be blessed which do hunger and thyrst after
righteousness: and he commands us to hoorde up treasure in heaven. Come
on. Do you feel as great thyrst of righteousness; as ever you have felt at
any time of water? A trial o^ Christian faith most wo^^thy to b^ observe
Or as great desire of Gods kingdom, as the covetous man feels desire of
money? Do you watch day and night to please GOD? Have you ever spent a whole
year or twain in the study of godlynes?


Levv. Nothing less.


Fred. Well: what strength have you in suffering of wrongs? If a man strike you
on the right cheke, can you turn to him ye left? Can you bless him that
curses you? Can you wish well to him that reuileth you? Can you pray for him
that rayleth upon you? Can you seek his welfare which practices your death?


Lew. Soothly I am very far of from these things.


Fred. Where obedience ^s not, ^here is not faith.
Then do you not believe in Christ. For if you did you would obey his
commandments.


Levv. But I never referred belief to this obedience.


Fred. What manner of thing then did you take faith to be?


Levv. I took it to be a trust of Gods freebestowed mercy, offered unto us in
Christ.


Fred. To what purpose then deem you Christ's commandments to serve?


Levv. To put us in mind of our infirmity, in that we be not able to perform
the things which we ought to do, and so to make us hang wholly upon Christ,
who has performed them for us, and imparteth them unto us.


Fred. Even the Apostles them selves trusted to Gods freebestowed mercy, and
yet they obeyed Christ's commandments. The mar^ whereat man's sal^uation
shooteth^
Another do I set salvation in our own obedience, but in Gods free mercy. But
this I say, that whosoever believes Gods free mercy aright, obeys Christ's
commandments. And if a man do believe but Gods free mercy only, and not
also all his commandments, threatenings, What things our forefathers attained
to by their faith.
promises, and sayings whatsoever: I say his faith is maimed and vnauaylable.
For the full and mighty faith or belief, is that whereby the Saints have
subdued kingdoms, wroght righteousness, obtained the promises, and done such
other things as any man may wonder to think of them. For that man does not
rightly believe in God, The fond and idle belief of the Jews.
which upon a rashness does but only behight himself salvation by his free
mercy, (after which manner the Jews do believe still yet at this day:) but he
which does so flatly yield credit and assent, not to some one piece of Gods
sayings and doings but to al of them: as you have reported your self to have
believed your father when you were a child: or as we spoke of the covetous and
lecherous persons, which have such a faith or belief, as is not dead and idle,
but effectual and workful, counterfetting the spirit of Christ, and never
resting til it have obtained the thing that it desired. The workfulnes of
Christian faith appears in charity.
Such a one is the true Christian faith, which works through love: and
whosoever has not such a one, does falsely boast him self of faith. Therefore
whereas men do commonly challenge faith to themselves, and yet live in all kind
of wickedness: they lie, and have not the true faith, but a dead one, which is
no more worthy of the name of faith, then a dead man is worthy of the name of a
man. That this is not faith in deed, Christ himself shows sufficiently when
he says, that at his coming he shall not find faith upon the earth. And
also when unto these which say, Lord, Lord, have we not cast out devils in
thy name? Have we not wroughte wonders in thy name? and haste thou not taught
in our streets? He shall say, I know you not, get you hence ye workers of
wickedness. Ye see he will admit none for faithful, but only the weldoers and
the obeyers. For they be the only persons which have the true faith: Who they
be which have the true christian faith.
of who^ it is written thus, These are they which have mainteyned Gods
commandments, and the faith of Jesus. Now if you have not the faith which
may make you righteous, (that is to say, chaste, lowly, gentle, liberal, and
endued with such other of the virtues:) see how far you be of from being
able to work the miracles which Christ has told us should be the signs of
faith. To what purpose bodily miracles are wrought.
I require not here bodily miracles, which were appointed to the first
trayning of the Church unto faith: But the thing that I require, is, that he
which believes in Christ should breed the same virtues in other men, which
God has bred in him: that is to wit, that of drunkards, he should make them
sober: of lecherous, chaste: of yreful, meeld: and at a word, of unrighteous,
righteous. For, to cast out devils, The devils that lurk with in us: and what
is meant by speaking with new tungs.
is to cast out the vices of lechery, covetousness, wrathfulnes, and such
other. Also to speak with new tongs, is to speak with fyrie and burning
speech, such as no man can withstand: of which sort theirs is, which speak
the things, not which they have hard, but which they have seen with their
eyes, heard with their ears, and felt with their hands: that is to say, which
they have printed thoroughly in their hearts, and which they do as verily
believe, as you do verily believe that it is now day, The works of such as
speak with new tungs.
or that anon it shall be night. With such toungs they be able, truly and
effectually to comfort the afflicted, to harten the weak-minded, to relieve
them that are in despair, to strengthen the feeble, to counsel the fearful,
and to perform such other things: which I make far greater account of, then
of the working of outward miracles, and of such as belong but only to the body.
If a man have not these things himself, ne can convey them into others: I see
not by what right he ca^ claim faith, unless it be the faith which the devils
have, who do believe that there is a God, and do quake at him. Of the true and
justifying faith, and how mighty it is in working.
But I speak of the true and justifying faith, which makes a man partaker of
ye nature of God, and causes all things to be possible to him. I have showed
before, how great force belief has in matters of this world: and the same is
to be seen even in Religion, be it false or true. The Turks believe that wine
is not to be drunk, and therefore they can forbear wine. The Jews believe
that a man ought to abstain from the things which the Law forbids: and
therefore they abstain. There are to be found which do pyne them selves to
death with long ouerfasting: some whippe them selves, I say not greeuouslye,
but even cruelly, till the blood follow: other some for Religions sake do
take upon them long pilgrimages, No man doubts but that all these things ar
spoken of the wicked belief.
wherein they endure beggerie and many other inconveniences and perils. What
shall I say of those which have gelded them selves? What shall I say of the
Circumcellions, who (as the report goes of them) to the intent to become Martyrs
themselves and to make otherfolkes Martyrs with them, fordid themselves by
sundry sorts of death, as drowning, burning, and leaping from high places, and
persuaded other men to do the like: all which things they did thoroughly
believe. For unless they had believed yt those things were to be done, they
would not have done them. By an argument from the lesser to the greater, he
shows the force of the true faith.
To be short, whatsoever thing men believe is to be done, they can [indeuer
to] do it. Now if their belief being false, and not only not grounded upon
Gods commandment, but also clean contrary thereunto, have notwithstanding
such strength: I pray you what is not that faith or belief able to do, which
is both commanded and also procured and strengthened by him? shall Gods spirit
have less power in man, then the spirit of Satan? Shall light be of less
force then darkness? Ye see what force Paul's faith had: Unto this hour
(says he) we be hungry and thyrstie, naked, and buffeted, we be tossed and
turmoyled, we labor and work with our own hands. Being rayled at, we
wish well: being vexed, we suffer it, being reuyled, we take comfort at it.
Paul's faith warranted by his own record.
If they be ministers of Christ, much more am I: In labor I exceed them, In
taking strypes I go beyond them, In being imprisoned I pass them, In death I
have often bin: Of the Jews I have five times received fortye strypes save
one, Thrice have I bin whipped, Once have I bin stoned, Thrice have I suffered
shipwreck, Day and night have I spent in the deep seas, Often have I
iourneyed, Often have I bin in danger of Rivers, of Robbers, of mine own
Countreimen, of straung^rs, in the City, in the wilderness, on the sea, and
among false br^thren: Often have I bin tired with traveling and with watching:
often have I feinted for hunger and thyrst in fasting: often have I bin a cold
for want of clothes. What thing held Paul occupied chiefly and ^boue all other
things.
And besides all the other things which daily distress me, verily the care of
all Churches lies upon me. Who is weakened and I am not the wors at ^ase for
it? who is offended and I am not gr^eued at it? This is the almighty strength
of faith, Lewis, wherewith he being armed, was enabled to do al things by him
which strengt^ned him. And if we have ye same strength, then surely th^r^ is
cause for us to think ou^s^lues to have ye same faith: if not then let us not
bear our selves in hand, yt we have the thing which we want, least it befall
unto us at it does to yt man which dreameth yt he has found a treasure, and
when he awaketh he has not a halfepeny?


Levv. O my Frederike, The true faith has scarce any place in the world.
my imagination that I abounded in faith is but a dream: but now being
wakened by your words, I see plainly that I am quite and clean without it, as
the rest of ye world is. For as for this effectual power of faith, I another
find it in myself, nor perceive it in the world.


Fred. That you be faithless, Lewis, it is to be lamented: but that being so,
you see yourself to be so, yt is not only not to be lamented, but also to be
rejoiced at, like as a sickness is it self to be misliked, but the knowledge
of the sickness is to be well lyked.


Levv. By what mean then, or by what medicine may this my disease of
unbelief be cured?


Fred. By taking away the impedimentes of unbelief.


Lew. Which are those?


Fred. You have heard them of me already in my former talks. Howbeit forasmuch
as you have scantly conceived them as things that your ears have not herd of:
for our manner is not to be ouerhastie in bearing words or things away which we
have not heard of before, The impedimentes of faith showed by an argument taken
from the court bar, or from a case in Law.
I will tell you them more plainly. Give good heed. What think you to be the
cause why no man in matters of justice is admitted too be a witness in his
own case?


Levv. Because all men do love them selves, and therefore will ever speak for
themselves, or at leastwise never against themselves.


Fred. You say rightly. And if they be not willing to speak against
themselves, another are they willing to hear any thing against themselves. For
the truth that is against them, misliketh them less out of another man's mouth,
then out of their own.


Levv. It does so.


Fred. And if they be unwilling to hear those things, truly they be not
willing to believe them. For no man will willingly believe ye things which he is
loath to hear of: but all men do easily believe the things which they like of.
As for example. An example by the use of things in common.
If a man should say that ye goods of Christians ought to be common among them,
whether sort would eazlyest believe it, the rich or the poor?


Levv. The poor.


Fred. Why so?


Levv. Because that by yt match they should not lose, but rather win.


Fred. What would the rich folk do?


Lew. Hardly, or not at all rather, would they believe it, because they should
thereby become the poorer, which thing they mislike of.


Fred. Another example by the delivering of men's souls* etc.
What if a man should deny that men's souls are delivered out of Purgatory by
Masses? whether would ye Clergy, or the Laytie soonest believe it?


Lew. Not the Clergy, because that that opinion would be a diminishing of
their revenues.


Fred. What if it should be said that Usury were unlawful for Christians: were
it possible to make those believe it, which live upon Usury, and become rich
by it?


Levv. The last example by the persecution for religion sake.
Scarsly.


Fred. What if one should teach that men ought not to be put to death ^or
religion: whether would they soonest believe it which are in credit with the
Magistrates, and are divines themselves, and yet are p^r^e^u^er^ of other me^,
or atleastwise willing to persecute them, or the contrary sort?


Levv. The contrary sort. For I know some divines, who as long as they wanted
that authority* and were troubled for religions sake, taught that men ought
not to be molested for religion. And yet the self same persons having gotten
wealth and authority, have both taught and done the contra^ie.


F^ed. You see then how faith is hindered by s^lfloue, Selfelou^ is the
hi^derer of faith.
so as men do not easily believe the things that are contrary to their lyking.


Levv. I see it plainly.


Fred. Let us consider then whether the same cause be not an impediment to our
belief in Christ. In the doctrine of Christ are histories, promises, and
commandments. As for the histories and promises, almost all men believe
them, because that in them no duty on man's behalf is required. Another is
there any controversy among Christians, There is ^o doubt among Christians
^o^cerning ^he doo^ngs of christ.
whither Christ have done the things which are reported of him in the holy
Scriptures, or whether he have promised the things that are contained there.
But what is the cause that so few believe his commandments?


Levv. Do f^wer folk believe his commandments, then do believe his doings
and promises?


Fred. Doubt you of that? First as touching Gods commandments, whereas our
masters universally be wont to teach, that they be not set down to the intent
we should obey them, but to make us acknowledge our infirmities* what else is
it then a ^iscrediting of Gods commandments? For seeing our Lord has said,
that all things are possible to him that believes: and Paul says he is able
to do all things through him that strengthens him: What is the cause that so
few believe gods commandments.
surely that man which not only obeys not Gods commandments, but also
believes that it is impossible to obey them, does not believe the
commandments aright. Whereupon it follows, that look how few folk obey
the commandments, so few do believe them.


Levv. But this saying which you allege, namely, that al things are possible
to the beleuer, seems to be spoken of miracles, and not of obedience.


Fred. It is spoken generally of all the works of faith which I spoke of in
alleging that place of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Thorough faith the Saints
conquered kingdoms, wrought righteousness, etc. For surely, to work
righteousness is a deed of faith. Besides this, Not miracles but belief is
neede^ull to salvation.
if Gods will be that men should through faith be able to work miracles, which
notwithstanding are not of the necessity of their salvation: much more is it
his will that they should by the same faith be able to obey his
commandments, seeing that without obedience a man can not be saved, and that
to obey is not a harder matter then to work miracles, and yet that to obey
belongs to all believers, whereas to work miracles belongs not to all, as I
have showed before.


Levv. In deed these things are true Frederike, but yet there remains one
thing which I would ^ayne have opened unto me. You said even now that all men
believe Christ's hystories, but not his commandments likewise. The believing
Christ's resurrec^tion, ma^keth all the rest o^ his sayings and doings credible*
But if they believed the whole story of Christ, and specially his
resurrection: in my opinion they should believe all the other things also. For
no doubt but if they believed that Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, in so
doing they should both believe that he is the very son of God in deed, and
moreover give credit to all his sayings. In which respect John said, These
things are written to the intent ye might believe that Jesus is the
anointed son of God, and that through believing it ye should obtain lite by
his nam^.


Fred. Whereas I deny that they believe his commandments, I would not have it
so taken, What is ^ent by ^ot be^euing of Christ's ^o^maun^ements, and who ^hey
be that offend ^n that ^ehalfe.
as though they believed not that his commanding of those things was well,
and as became ye son of God to do: but that forasmuch as they believe not that
the things which he commanded to be done are either possible or needful to
be done, misconstering them after their own fancy, and not according to his
mind: I say they believe them not aright. For your better understanding whereof,
I will give you an example. When God having brought the children of Israel out
of Egypt, commanded them to enter into the land of Canaan, did they believe
that god commanded it?


Lew. Yea verily. Or else they would never have sent Spies into the land of
Canaan.


Fred. Why then did they not obey him?


Lew. Because they were of opinion that the Chananites could not be overcome,
How the Israelites believed not God in that they believed no^ his commandment.
and that God had brought them out of Egypt, not to conquer Canaan, but to
perish wretchedly in the wilderness.


Fred. Then did they not believe Gods commandment according to Gods meaning,
forasmuch as his meaning was that they should have invaded Canaan, and subdued
the Chanaanites.


Lew. You say the truth.


Fred. Then did they not believe aright.


Levv. No, not aright.


Fred. Whether then are they to be called beleuers or unbelievers?


Levv. Truly by this reason they should be called unbelievers.


Fred. And soothly so be they (Lewis) in very deed. For in the very same
place God calls them unbelievers in these words. How long will this people
spite me? How long will it be ere they will believe me, for all ye miracles
which I have wrought among them? Now, if these be justly called unbelievers,
the same reason leads us to call the others unbelievers and distrusters of
Christ's commandments, forasmuch as they do no less misconster the
precepts of Christ, than the Israelites did the commandments of God. For
Christ has not wrought fewer miracles to us, then Moses did to them. Another
does Christ command us less earnestly to subdue sin, then God commanded
them to subdue the Cananites. Another are we less spiteful and distristful
toward him, if we deny that sin may be subdued, when as he both commands
us and promises us strength, then they were spiteful and distrustful toward
God, in denying it to be possible to ou^rcome the Cananites. Another do we
offend less against the meaning of Christ, when we deny that it is either
possible for us, or meant by Christ, that we should do the things which he has
commanded us to do, then the Israelites offended against the meaning of God,
when they wrested it another way then his open words imported. And therefore
in denying them to believe Christ's commandments, I do them no wrong. How
the place taken out of John is to be understood.
As touching the place of John by you alleged, it is too be taken as if a man
should have said at that time to the Israelites, God has wrought these
miracles for your sakes in Egypt, to the intent you should believe and by
believing enter into the r^stingplace of Chanaan. But the cause why all of the^
came not there, was not Gods purpose, but their own hardening of their hearts
against him: which thing would God were not done in Christ also. But we see
it is so, Howbeit the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews warns us, not to
do it, citing this saying out of a certain Psalm, Psalm. 95.8
To day if ye hear his voice, harden not your hearts as your forefathers did
harden theirs. Therefore to return again to the matter, Selfeloue dazeleth
men's eyes that they can not see to believe the truth.
Whereas these men are wont so diligently to pick out the things to believe,
which belong to the office of God, and to refuse the things that perteine to
the duty of man, I pray you what a dealing is it? Gods gracious goodness has
yielded salvation to all men: O how gladly is this admitted. But as for that
which follows, namely, to teach us to forsake ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and to live thriftily, righteously, and godlily in this world, that is a seed
which few men receive. Many believe that Christ has so performed yt point, as
that we need not to perform the same. Again, that the man is blessed to whom
the Lord imputes no sin, is easily believed of all men: but as for that
which is annexed to it, namely, and in whose heart there is no guyle, that they
believe to be impossible. Likewise it is commonly vaunted with full mouth, that
they which are in Christ Jesus are not subject to any condemnation, for it is
a very sweet saying: but as for this, Which walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit, it is bitter, and of very few believed. And (to make few
words) men do easily believe that they shall reap with joy: but if you tell them
that they must sow with tears, that is ^he cause ^hy false ^rophets ^oe easi^^
find ^redite.
they put that sentence over unto Christ. Hereupon it comes to pass, that
the false prophets because they teach delectable things, and blaze abroad Gods
pleasant promises with open mouth do easily find credit: whereas the true
prophets, because they urge men and make them afraid with threats, and teach
the truth severely, do bear sway among very few, according as Esaias cries
out, Lord who has believed our preaching? Hereby it appears plainly my
Lewis, that selfloue is the let that men believe not the truth. And if
selfeloue were done away, they would believe nothing so easily as the truth,
as who are borne unto truth, and do by and by fall in acquayntaunce with it as
a thing of their own kin, if there be no impediment to let it. Therefore if
you will rightlye believe the truth, (that is to say, God,) you must needs
put away selfeloue, or rather conceive a hatred toward your self.


Levv. Truly Frederik, We must of necessity have our selves and not love our
selves.
you win me to be of your mind in these things: but it is no small matter for a
man to hate himself. Another do I see how I may attain unto it, or yet perceive
whether it be possible for me to attain thereto, I am so far in love with my
self.


Fred. I know Lewis, Al things be they else never so impossible, are possible
to the power of God.
that it is a very hard thing, and passing the strength of man: but in this
case we must bear in mind, how that when Sara believed not yt she might breed
child, our Lord said of her: Is there any thing which god can not do? The
things yt are impossible to man, are possible to God, and where god is our
guide, nothing is to be despayred of.


Lew. How pernicious selfloue is, is showed by certain familiar examples.
I beseech you then show me the way to attain thereunto.


Fred. By Gods leave I will do it: give ear unto me. If I had a Servant in
whom I very much delighted, fayrespoken and seruisable, which should prepare
me some meats that best liked mine appetite, and with the same meats should
mingle poison to bereeue me of my life, and you who love me should have
knowledge thereof, what would you do?


Levv. Surely, I would spedily and earnestly give you warning, that you should
not taste of those meats, nor love that servant, for that he lay in wait for
your life.


Fred. What if I should say that I am delighted with the seruisable behavior
of that servant, and with ye sweetness of his cooquerie?


Lew. I would counsel you that you should not make so great account of your
present pleasure, as to loose your life for it.


Fred. What if some friend of yours were in love with a flattering and a
peinted harlot, which were diseased with the French pockes, and you knew of
it: what would you do?


Levv. I would make him privy to her disease, and (to the uttermost that I
could) I would dissuade him from her company.


Fred. What if he said he were delighted with her?


Lew. I would tell him that Fishes also are delited with baytes: Men are caught
with pleasure as fishes are with an Angle and a bayt, to their undoing.
but yet that it were folly to purchase so small pleasure with so great
sorrows, or rather with death.


Fred. What if he should say that he can not but like well of the pleasure?


Levv. I would counsel him, that if he could not yet restrain the desire of
his mind, he should at leastwise resist it, and not yield to obey it.


Fred. But what if he obeyed it for all that?


Lew. Then would I think him foolisher then the brute beasts, and worthy of any
mischief. For fishes wolves, foxes, puttocks, and such other, be they never so
hungry, will nevertheless forbear the bayte, if they spy or mistrust any
snare, or any thing wherewith they may be caught.


Fred. You say truth Lewis. Thus then stands ye case. Every man's own
flesh is a Harlot, of whom he warns men to take ve^ry good heed.
Every man's own flesh is as a Harlot (as Judas terms it in his Epistle,) yea
and a peinted harlot, which with her inticements and fayrefawnings, does
allure, delight, and egg the man to sin, and hold him down in sin, and at
length throw him headlong into death of the soul. And man being ignorant of
the poison, imbraceth the pleasures and yields himself over to them. Now
comes in truth as a friend unto him, and warns him that ye wages of sin
is death, declaring unto him that his flesh whom he took to have bin his
friend, is his deadly enemy. Most wholso^ counsai^ and wo^^thy to b^ followe^
Therefore if thou desire to be saved, thou must believe that thou have not a
more noisome enemy to thee then thy self, that is to say, the^ thy flesh, or
thy lustfulnes, and that as thou have hitherto loved it, thou must henceforth
hate it and resist it, because it is noisome and deadly. And although thou
can not rid away her allurements out of hand, as in deed thou can not,
for they stick fast to thee: the truth will say unto thee, as it said in
old time unto Moses, Go thy way into Egypt (for it lies in thee to do
that,) and I will be with thy mouth, and I will enable thee to do that which
thou can not do. Even so Lewis, the truth says unto thee as now: Do thou
what thou a^t able, and God will enable thee to do that which thou can not
do. A very fit example, and not ^o be pas^ed light^y over.
As for examples sake. Thou sit at a well furnished table, and have eaten
enough already to refresh thy powers and to staunch hunger. Now there is
brought in some delicate dishe, made to provoke gluttony withal. By and by thy
flesh is tempted with it, and puts such an imagination as this in thy head:
This is a fine dish, if I eat of it I shall receive pleasure by it. But the
spirit strives against the flesh, and warns thee thus: beware Lewis that
thou yield not unto voluptuousnes, for voluptuousnes is a poysoner. The
incomparable harms that co^^ of pleasure.
For first it calls away thy mind from God, than the which there can be no
greater mischief. For seeing that no man can serve two masters, thou can not
serve both voluptuousnes and god, because voluptuousnes ouerwhelmeth the mind,
bears it down to the ground, and separateth it from God. Besides this, it
also hurts the body with surfeiting, insomuche that although thou had no
soul, yet ought thou to abstain from superfluity, even for thy bodies
sake. I require not now that you should not be tempted with the inticements of
the flesh, but that you should not obey them. And whereas you allege that you
can not but obey them, you be easily disproued. For if a man would give you a
floren to abstain from the said dishe, would you not abstain? [Yes.] And
will you not abstain by reason of the truth? Do you not hereby bewray, that
the truth bears less sway with you then one floren? Or if some man should
threaten that he would give you a blow on the ear if you refrayned not: surely
you would refrain. Behold God threatens a blow unto your soul, and yet you
refrain not. The like I say of all other things. The preposterous preferring
of the fear of worldly punishment before the fear of Gods wrath and
vengeance.
You be minded to have to do with a whore* but because a boy is by, you do
it not. Behold, God is present, and yet you be not ashamed to do it. Do you
not now make less account of Gods presence then of the presence of a boy? Or
if you forbear for fear of punishment at man's hand, and not as well for
fear of Gods punishmente: do you not prefer man before God? You are angrye
with a man, and you would feign cudgel him, but you forbear for fear of the
Magistrate: Why forbear you not as well for fear of God? I pray you, if you
make as great reckoning of God, as you do of men, why does the fear of God
bear less swaye with you then the fear of men? You slander your neighbor:
God sees the slander, and yet you do it nevertheless. But if men saw it,
you would not do it. The conclusion gathered of the things going a^ore.
Run through all things after the same sort Lewis, and you shall see that
whosoever does more for the love or fear of men, then of God, does believe in
men, rather then in God.


Levv. O my Frederike, my conscience bears me witness, that the things
which you say, be true and rightful: but thereof springs a grief in my heart.


Fred. Why so? did you feel any such grief when we treated of Predestination
or of Freewill?


Levv. No, none at all.


Fred. I believe you Lewis. For knowledge brings no greef, but rather
gladness, as which leaves the old man vnappayred. The knowing of many, yea or
of all things is no let but that men may serve the Devil.
For although you could skill of al manner of mysteries, yet might you serve the
devil ever still. But now when we deal with ye foresaking of our selves, the
flesh perceiving that she must go to wrake for it, plays as Harlots are wont
to do when young men give them over. They vex them with the desire of them,
and try all means to hold them still. Even so that Harlot the flesh, which
betwitcheth all men with the cup of her uncleanness, as soon as she
perceives that a man minds to give her the slip, does vex him with the
desire of her still, and leaves nothing unattempted, that she may hold him
still. Hereof breeds great grief, according to the greatness of ye love
toward the flesh, like as if you were to forsake your Country, look how
much you were in love with your Country, so much would it grieve you to forgo
it. Sin be^ing our native Countri^ cannot be forsaken without grief to us.
And surely sin is our Country, (for in sin have our mothers conceived us)
which cannot be forsaken without greef. Here is yt Cross of Christ, whereof he
him self says, If any man be minded to come after me, let him take up his
Cross and follow me. And if any man come unto me and hate not his father and
mother, wife and children, brethren and systers, yea and even his own life, so
as he be contented to bear his cross and to follow me, he cannot be my
disciple. ^e will ^arne to ^e our ^^es, we ^ust me^re it by ^re ha^^ng of
o^^er men.
And to the intent you may understand what the hating of a man's self is, and
what cross it brings with it, consider it thoroughly by the hating of another
man. If you hated a man deadly, how would you be minded toward him? or what
would you do to him?


Lew. I would wish him al evil even from my heart, and likewise envy him any
good, I would be sorry for his welfare, and glad of his adversity. If a man
brought me word of any mischance of his, I would rejoice at it, and both ge^tly
intertein and liberally reward the messenger with some gift. To be short, I
would love mine enemies foes and do them good, and I would hate his friends and
do them harm if I could. All his sayings and doings would I prye at, and take
advantage of them, and by all means possible (yea diverse times even to mine
own harm) would I hurt him. Finally, I would kill him if I could, and that
not by any common manner, but with the gree^ousest death that could be: and I
would do what I could to wype the very remembrance of him out of the world.


Fred. Now turn this your hatred Lewis, toward your self: for you are a
deadly enemy to your self, Every man is a deadly enemy to himself: and how
such an enemy is to be dealt with.
and ought to hate your self deadly, and not other men, who cannot kill you,
that is to say, your soul. And therefore you must take pains to wish all
manner of evil, yea and even death, to your self, that is to wit, to your
flesh, and to envy her all good things, and to be sorry for her prosperity,
and to be glad of her adversity. And that if any man tell you any thing amiss
of your self, you may rejoice thereat in spirit, and liberally reward the
reporter thereof: and (to be short) that you may devise and do all things
against your self, as men are wont to do against those with whom they be at
deadly food, and that you never rest till you have killed your self. The
flesh and the spirit are clean contraries and f^ght full but one against
another.
And forasmuch as no man has ever yet hated his own flesh, (as says S.
Paul.) You must first and foremost be divorced from your flesh, that she may
no longer be your flesh, but strange flesh: and in her steed you must place
the spirit, between whom and the flesh there can never be any more concord or
agreement, then between fire and water.


Levv. O my Frederike, to tell you the truth, me thinks ye things that you
speak of are as hard as stone.


Fred. I believe you Lewis, and so must it needs be. But be of good chere, and
begin even now to love me in spirit, because I am an adversary to your flesh.
For it is for your benefit, and you can not be saved so long as your flesh is
alive. Wherefore if you will be saved, see that ye hate your self, and forsake
your self. A famili^ar exa^pl^ whereby he goes about to teach a man ho^ to
forsake him self.
And I will tell you an example of this forsaking. If a servant give over
himself in bondage to you, he abandoneth him self, that is to say, his own
liberty and will, thenceforth to follow your will and not his own. Oftentimes
when he would sleep, he must watch if his master command him: when he would
go abroad, he must tarry at home: when he would play, he must work: and (at a
word) he so forgoeth his own freedom, that if he be asked what he will do,
or what he minds to do, he must answer, what his master lists, at whose
appointment he is. So we (if we belong to Christ, who has bought us at a great
price,) are not at our own disposition or appointment, but at Christ's: and
therefore we must do, not what we l^st, but what he lists, and worthily. For
if he, being the way and the truth, did notwithstanding so submit his will
to the will of his father, that he said, Not my will be done, but thine: what
becomes it us to do, A triacle against the devilish lusts of the flesh* and
the instigatio^s of the ^icked will, to res^rain the^ withal.
which are ouer-couered with errors and leasings? Therefore when you be about
to be angrye without cause, you must restrain your anger at the appointment of
Christ. When you would give your self to voluptuousnes, you must abstain, and
give your self to sorrowing. When you would be aduenged of any body, you must
forgive him. When you would do a man harm, you must do him good. When you
would laughe, you must weep. When you would sew for honor, you must endure
shame. When you would seek riches, you must suffer pouertye. And (to be
short) you must in such wise depart from your own will: as if you b^e asked
what you would, you may answer, nothing but what Christ lists. That to the
beleuer all things seem they never so high, hard, or above our power, are
notwithstanding eas^ to be done.
And all these things shall you do through faith. For unless you believed, you
would not do them. But it is necessary to be understood what is meant by this
saying of S. Paul's, that we must proceed from faith to faith. There is a
certain first and imperfect belief, whereby a man is moved to renounce him
self. This being once kindled, becomes daily greater by a man's holding on,
until at length he be come so far, that he does as certainly believe all Gods
sayings commandments, promises, and threatni^gs: as you believe that the day
shall succeed ye night. Hence springs that almighty power of faith,
wherthrough it is able to remove mountains, so as there is no pride, no
covetousness, no lechery, nor (to be short) no vice so huge and great, which
that faith is not able to put away, and to pluck up by the ^oote. Howbeit, ere
ever a man attain to that strength, he is to endure many hard things in the
way of his forsaking of him self, and without such hardness, there is no
access to be had to that strength, like as a fig or a grape can not become
sweet, except it be first sour. And because I my self have not yet obtained
the victory, but do yet still sweat in the encounter of forsaking my self,
and as yet am far of from the garlande: I will say no more concerning the
victory, that is to say, concerning the thing that is unknown unto me: but
yet as much as I can I will help you (by Gods grace) in ye encounter, if you
will be my companion.


Lew. Truly for my part, although my self do shudder and start back at it,
yet am I carried with my spirit and mind to follow you. For I see no other way
for a man to be saved, There is but only one right way to the atteinment of
salvation
but by departing out of his own nature, that he may put upon him the nature
of Christ, and by caring, studying, striving, and taking pains to repair the
image wherafter we were created. And therefore beseeching God that it may be to
his glory and mine own salvation, henceforth I yield my self into this way as a
follower of Christ, taking god for my guide.


Fred. And I thank God for this willingness which he has given you, beseeching
him to finishe his work which he has begone in you, and to bring you to that
point, that ye may at length serve righteousness as you have seru^d
unrighteousness, which thin he will undoubtedly do, except you grieve his spirit
and cast it out through your disobedience. Me^ must ^ot con^eiue p^rely and
^iga^dly, (...) ^^rge^y and a^undant^y o^ gods ^^acious goodness.
Finally of this I will warney ^n, that you must have a rich faith, because
you believe in him that is rich in doing good. For men have ever sinned in
believing untowardly, and more nigardly of Gods gracious goodness, then they
ought to do. Abraham and Sara were rebuked for laughing, as though it had but a
matter to be laughed at, that God promised them issue when they were both old,
and Sara moreou^r bar. in. Zacharias the father of John Baptist was stricken
dumb for a time, because he believed not the Angels words. We be commonly more
forward in following the weak belief (or if I may so term it) the unbelief
of the godly, then in following their full and rich belief. Why do we not
rather follow those which durst believe all things? Eliseus durst crave double
the spirit of Elias, We can not ask^ so largely at God hand, bu^ that his
bounty will surmou^t it.
(which soothly was a great thing even by the record of Elias him self) and
yet he obtained it: so impossible is it for any faith to be so great, but that
Gods gracious goodness and power do surmount the same. All things (says he)
are possible to the believer. Again, Whatsoever ye ask, believe that you
shall obtain it, and ye shall have it in deed. Remember (I say) the saying
of Elizeus, speaking after this manner to the poor woman: Borrow oyle-vessels
of thy neighbors, yea borrow a great sort, and the Lord will fill them al
full. Even so Lewis, let us do our endeavor that we may have such a faith, as
may be able to receive the greatest good things, and let us be bold to
believe that God both can and will bring to pass, that we shall love him alone
with our whole heart, soul, power, and strength. ^od will ^^aunt us ^ good
^^ings for ^hristes ^^ke.
And he of his own gracious goodness will bestow all things upon us, much more
largely then we can even think, for his son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake,
to whom be honor, glory, and dominion for ever. Amen.


FINIS.
A godly and fruteful prayer, which being gathered out of the whole Dialogue,
does briefly comprehend the chief things that are to be observed therein, and
are there more largely opened. Made by Abraham Flemming Londoner borne.
Almighty and everlasting God, which upon us wretched sinners, have heaped up
many or rather infinite benefits, and upon us untamed Hekfars despising the
healthful words of thy commandments, have bestowed most singular ornaments,
even the riches of thy grace: behold our lowlynes, and see how we cast our
selves down in coming to make suit at the throne of thy Majesty, crying for
help from heaven, that we may be bold to bring those things to pass, which
of our own power we be scarsely or rather utterly unable to attempt.

Let thy son Christ the bright light and full wisdom of the father, shine
unto us: Let him be our guide and directer: let him inlighten our dim hearts:
Let him soften the thing that is hard, scour the thing that is filthy, sweeten
the thing yt stinketh, righten the thing that is crooked, lighten the thing
that is dark, hallowe the thing that is unholy, and finally make whole and
perfect in all points, the thing that is maimed and imperfect, that by that
means we may at length become the forewarder to perform those things which
thy divine word inioyneth us, and to leave the things undone which we be
forbidden to meddle withal.

Grant O merciful God, such light of true knowledge, as may lead us forth
right, and make us to walk without stumbling, in the ways of thy word. Let
the true obedience take deep root in us, which is wont to be more
acceptable and pleasant to thee, then any sacrifice. Increace in us that
faith, without which we can not please thee. Let that faith be effectual and
mighty in us, that having shaken off all distrust, and put away all
disobedience, we may not only begin, but also proceed and persevere after
such a sort in believing, as we may become worthy of the name whereby we be
called.

And forasmuch as the nature of faith and obedience is such, that the one
follows the other as inseperable companions, insomuch that faith without
obedience is dead, and obedience without faith is liuelesse: bestow both of
them upon us most gracious father. Give us minds desirous to know the truth,
and able to conceive the secrets of thy word: that all our sayings and
doings may yield to the gouernmente of right reason. Good God we beseech
thee give us not over in bondage to our own blind and unsavory judgment,
whereby we being led, or rather carried away may neglect our whole duty
toward thee.

Bring to pass we beseech thee almighty Father, that unto thee which haste
raised us out of nothing, shaped us of clay, fashioned us after thine own
image, endued us with the light of reason, and finallye enriched us with many
gifts, unto thee, I say, we may think our selves beholden for all things
which we have, commending thee for them, and setting forth thy praise. Let us
yield our selves seruiseable and obediente, first unto thee O most high God,
and secondly to our parents, and to all others which love us, and seek our
welfare.

Drive from us all fleshly fear, which lets us to acknowledge our sins,
and makes us rather to conceal them. Let the conscience of our misdeedes
sting us, let that sharp and pearcing spade of thine (I mean heart grief
according to the will of God) cut up the sandye, dry, and droughtie soil of
our hearts, that bewayling our sins and repenting us of our life forespent,
we may give over our selves wholly to thy haeuenly will, resort unto thy holy
Tabernacle, give our selves earnestly to prayer, delight in vncorruptnesse of
behavior, and finally shun all manner of words and deede^ from which the word
of life disswadeth us.

Grant O Lord we beseech thee, that we cooping up our wa^dring lusts into a
corner, may worship thee sincerely, and offering up our bodies a lively
sacrifice unto thee, may fasten our faith on thee alone, sticking fast to thy
promises, and depending a^l wholly upon thee. Grant we beseech thee O
merciful father, that we may acknowledge thine unsearchable goodness, make
our songs thereof, and have it in admiration. Pluck out of our hearts all the
roots of unbelief, that we may truly, devoutly, and vndoutingly believe in
thee.

Let Abraham the father of the faithful teach us what manner of belief we
ought to embrace, namely that which leads to salvation, all counterfeit and
idle faith being, put to slight. A substantial and sound judgment power
into us, O everlasting God, that having taken our last leave of worldly
belief, we may cherishe in us that true faith sent down from heaven, whereby
we take hold of Christ Jesus, through whose power and working we may be able
to perform the things which may best beseem the faithful: and that being
moystened in our minds with the deawe of thy heavenly wisdom, we may labor
to attain to the heavenly things.

Grant O most merciful father, that we may be faithful and obedient, first
unto thee, and then to all others under whose government thou haste put us,
that by this means our consciences may be eased of most heavy burdens, and we
at length have whereof to rejoice and be glad. We know O everlasting God, that
our salvation comes of thy free bestowed mercy, whereof there is none other
way for us to take hold, then by true and vndoubting faith, through which
faith our forefathers became most highly renowned, and by furtheraunce thereof
wrought things to be wondered at. Uouchsafe O loving father, of thine infinite
goodness to enriche us with this faith, that being thoroughly indewed
therewith, we may perform the works of Charity, without the which all
faith or belief whatsoever it be, as filthye and unworthy of so much as the
bare name of faith. But unto us which strive to please thy divine majesty,
grant O merciful God that we may foster, cherishe, and show forth that
justifying and quickening faith, wherewith Paul being furnished and armed at
all points, became a most patient indurer of very many perils, even which were
deadly: insomuch that he did set more store by the love of thy Gospel, then by
his own life, then the which there is not any thing in ye world more dear.
Not without cause do we complain, most merciful father, that this faith is
nowhere to be found among men: for all kind of naughtiness is crepte into the
whole world, and there is not any corner so secret, which is not most
shamefully disgraced and filthily defiled with the uncleanness thereof. O
lamentable age. Among the other impediments of faith (which are many, as thou
know O thou inhabiter of the highest heavens) there steppeth forth self
love, who calls us back from the true worshipping of thee, and by tickling
us in the ear with I wot not what, is wholly occupied in persuading us to set
our minds upon the things that are here beneath, and to leave the care of the
things that are above, to them that are above. Good God cast out this devil,
that we may no more serve the flesh, but that the spirit may at length
ouerrule us. Without whose stay, forasmuch as man's mind being slippery and
turning to every opinion, is oftentimes snarled in such snares of errors, as
he can never get out of: we beseech thee bereeue us not utterly of the light
of thy heavenly grace, least as some have boldly denied the rising again of
thy son, so we also do fall into the same dungeon never to get out again:
but rather grant that by believing we may become partners of the unspeakable
glory, which thou will show forth in the last day.

Sort us out O almighty God, from the company of those which believe not
Christ's commandments whosoever they be, and suffer us not to become like the
unbelieving people of Israel, who being ouercouered with the multitude and
hugeness of thy benefits, wallowed themselves in the puddle of their own
wickedness, not even then departing from their shameful lewdnes, when they
perceived thy love turned into hatred, thy patience into fury, and thy long
sufferance into revenge.

Finally O most merciful father, to the intent we may heartily believe, drive
all self love far from us, make us deaf at the persuasions of false
prophets: let us rather hate then love our selves: let us acknowledge that all
things lie open to thy power. Let us discern how deadly a poison selfeloue is,
let us despise the pleasures of this world, let us beware of the whorish
deceires of our own flesh, let us shun the spiteful delights of this
world, let us be afraid to stand in less awe of thy wrath and vengeance,
then of men's threatenings and punishments, let us abhor the serving of the
devil, let us be desirous to forsake our own native country, that is to
say, sin, let us learn to hate our selves by the hatred of others.

Let us have skill how to deny our selves, let us beat down the devilish
lusts of the flesh, being fenced with the sheelde of faith as with a bank,
let us set our selves against all dangers, let us reap thence a most
plentiful croppe and store of fruits, and being guarded therewith, let us
encounter with out enemies both at hand and aloof, march on the right and
ready way to the attaynement of salvation, and have the best opinion that may
be concerning thy heavenly gracious goodness, acknowledging that it is able to
perform more then we can either crave or devise.

Let us consecrate our selves wholly unto thee, leading a holy and vncorrupt
life, that by that means, after the breathing out of our Ghost, and the
buryall of our body, we may rest at length most happily in thy lap. All
these things, and whatsoever else both this flightfull life of ours craves,
and also the endless world to come requires, vouchsafe most bountiful and
merciful father, to bestow upon us abundauntly, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. So be it.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Poorfoote: And are to be sold at his shop
ouer-agaynst S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate.


