A PLEASANT COMEDY, Called THE TWO MERRY MILKE-MAIDS. Or, THE BEST WORDS WEAR
THE GARLAND. As it was Acted before the King, with general Approbation, by the
Company of the Revels. By I. C.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop for Lawrence Chapman, and are to be sold at
his shop in Holborne over against (...) ple Inn hard by the Bars. 1620.

The Names of the Persons.
JOHN EARNEST, Duke of Saxony. Lord RAYMOND, A Politician. LODWICKE, Father to
Dorigen. GVIDO, Father to Bernard. BERNARD, Son to Guido, and Student at
Wittemberg. FREDERICK, Son to Lodwicke, and Brother to Dorigene. DORILVS,
Brother to Iulia. LANDOFFE, Tutor to Bernard. CALLOWE, A foolish Lord. RANOFF,
A Knight, and Traveler. FERDINAND, CORNELIO, CAROLVS,
Courtiers, and Servants to Lord Raymond. IVDGES. SMIRKE, the Clown. HOST.
DORIGENE, the Duchess. IVLIA, a Lady familiar with the Duchess.
THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
EVery Writer must govern his Pen according to the Capacity of the Stage he
writes too, both in the Actor and the Auditor. This had the happiness to
please, as it was means, the greater part, and of them not the worst. If there
be discovery made of the Coniuring Words, you will find the Witchcraft: no true
Spirit will be stirred with 'hem; happily, a malicious. It was made more for the
Eye, then the Ear; less for the Hand, then either: and had not false Copies
trauail'd abroad (even to su^bating) this had kept in; for so far the Author
was from seeking fame in the publishing, that he could have wished it bound
about with the King. Some good words here you shall find for your Money, else
it keeps not touch with the Title. Receive it well, and though in this he give
you no ill, yet hereafter he has promised you better Language.

THE PROLOGVE.
THis Day we entreat All that are hither come,
To expect no noise of Guns, Trumpets, nor Drum,
Nor Sword and Targuet; but to hear Sense and Words,
Fitting the Matter that the Scene affords.
So that the Stage being reformed, and free
From the loud Clamors it was wont to be,
Turmoyl'd with Battles; you I hope will cease
Your daily Tumults, and with us wish Peace.
We stand a hazard now: yet being prepared,
We hope, for your own good, you in the Yard
Will lend your Ears, attentively to hear
Things that shall flow so smoothly to your ear;
That you returning home, t'your Friends shall say,
How ere you vnderstand't, It Is a fine Play:
For we have in it a Coniurer, a Devil,
And a Clown too; but I fear the evil,
In which perhaps un wisely we may fail,
Of wanting Squibs and Crackers at their tail.
But howsoever, Gentlemen I swear,
You shall have Good Words for your Money here;
Stuff that will last, we hope, and died in grain:
And as ye liked, pray know the House again.
A PLEASANT COMEDY OF THE MERRY MILK-MAIDS.
ACTVS PRIMVS.
Scena Prima.
Enter Bernard in his Study, Candle and Books about him. Enchantments pluck
out of the Sky
The Moon, though she be placed on hie.
Dame Circes, with her Charms so fine.
Ulysses Mates did turn to Swine:
The Snakes with Charm is burst in twain,
In Meadows where she does remain.
And here again,
She plucks each Star out of his seat,
And turns back the raging Waves;
With Charms she makes the Earth to sweat,
And rayseth Souls out of their Graves:
She burns men's bones as with a fire,
And pulls down the Lights of Heaven,
And makes it snow at her desire,
Even in the midst of Summer season;
And what is it cannot be done
By art of the Magician?
It Is true, things most incredible are to be done,
And I believe thee gentle Book in it.
Never before my wary Tutor did
Leave this door open, which he well might call
His private Study; for here Secrets lie
Were worth man's labor to arrive to 'hem:
Here are the Names, Shapes, Powers, and Government
Of every several Spirit, their Degrees,
Their great Effects, particular Seigniories;
And amongst them I have found one, if I had
But skill to raise him for my purposes,
And here is the form of it set down at large:
But stay, what is this?
Amaymon King of the East, Gorson King of the South, Zimimar King of the North,
Goap King and Prince of the West, may be bound from the third hour till Noone,
Dukes may be bound from the first hour till Noone. Pish, this is naught to me.
Asmody; a great King, strong and mighty, he is seen with three heads;
whereof the first is like a Bull, the second a Man, the third a Ram: he has a
Serpents tail, he belcheth Flames out of his Mouth, he sits on an Infernal
Dragon, he carries a Lance and a Flag in his hand, he goes before others
which are under the power of Amaymon, he gives the Ring of Virtues, he
teaches Geometry, Arithmetic, Astronomy; to all demands he answers fully
and truly: he makes a man invisible. I, this.
He shows the places where Treasure lie. I donnot care for Treasure.
He makes a man invisible. This, this is it: Great Asmody, thou art the Spirit
whom
I would converse with, And I will fetch thee, if this
Charm will do it. --
Now I have laid my Circle, fear assaults me: So says my grave Instructor all
men do when they begin this Business; but bids me here be resolute, and dread
not: for bound in this Circle, and by these words constrained, they cannot hurt
me.

I do conjure thee by these potent Names:
Panthon, Adonay, Algramay, Planaboth, Muriton, Bisecognaton, Siston, Diaton,
Maton, Tetragrammaton, Agla, Agarion, Tegra, Pentessaron, Tendicata, Sorthie,
Sorthia, Sorthios, Milia, Achilia, Sibylia, You the three Faierie sisters of
the Ring come and appear to me, or send your faithful servant Asmody, or I
will call the five Kings of the North. Enter Landoffe his Tutor like a Spirit.
Land. For what thou daring Mortal? what wut thou do with Asmody, now thou
have brought him hither?


Ber. I do command thee that thou help me to the invisible Ring.


Lan. Ho, ho, ho, Thou foolish Thing without Art, and
less Wit, Do think it does require no more but so?
It is thy Masters Masterpiece to do it,
And thou do call for nothing but thy Ruin.
Thou art now in my power, and I can tear thee
As small as Atomies, and throw thee off
Like dust before a wind: yet for I know thou art
Pupil unto my Master, and his Minion,
And may hereafter with a word release me,
Here vncoustrayn'd, I vow my self thy servant,
And will (acquaint me with thy purposes)
Effect them to the utmost of my power.

Ber. Do thou not this in subtlety, to draw me out of my Circle, and then
ruin me?


Lan. I dare as well run on the sierie Sword that wounds Malantha, Thama, or
Sitrami.


Ber. I do believe thee:
Then be gone; yet stay, a word more:
Thinks thou my Tutor; if I should conceal this Act of mine from him, that he
would know it?


Lan. I think not: for he has given me liberty these five days.


Ber. Thanks Asmody: now leave me.

Lan. I am gone.

Ber. I will get leave of him to return back unto my Fathers house, where I
will live, if Asmody can do it, invisible.

Not far off is a Damsel whom I love,
But never yet durst tell her, nor did know it
So feelingly, as now I am removed.
It Is almost day I wished, though not for fear,
For love has made me a bold Coniurer.
Exit.
Lan. And thou were bold indeed: but youth is des-
Respects not dangers, howsoe'r they look. (perat;
I came my self unto this Art with trembling,
And when I first had raised a Spirit up,
My flesh me thought ran like my blood about me,
And I sat bathed in a cold faint swear.
But he was far from raising any Spirit:
He ran'hem so disordered, that no Devil,
Though he had heard him, wud have known his name.
But it was my device, seeing him grow
To extreme Melancholy and Discontent,
To let him view these scatt'red papers thus,
That I might sound his grief, knowing how apt
And covetous youth is of every knowledge,
If he might learn it with a little babbling:
But this is not an Art so to be gained.
I Will follow him, attending still upon him,
As if I were the Spirit he guesses me:
And if there shall be cause, I Will play my part
So well, that men shall praise the Magic Art.

Scena secunda.
Enter Dorigene and Dorilus.
Dor. Good Seignior no more irruptions, I tell you what you shall trust to: I
am not like a Mill, to be turned with wind and water; not all your sighs and
tears can alter me, keep 'hem for Custard-eating Dames in the City, there
they may prosper.

Thou art a handsome fellow, I confess it,
Have good parts too, I know it; Living sufficient
To keep house in the Country, and inuisie
Every good Time thy Neighbors, and at Christmas'
Distribute amongst the poor six pence apeece,
And a brown Loaf: Good Country virtues these,
And may perhaps serve for a Doctors daughter,
Though she have read Orlando Furioso.
But for me, that have looked higher into Poetry,
And for a need can couple of my self,
Have talked with Montaigne and with Machiuel,
And can make use of them; note him in this
Place shallow, here profound: and be the only Star
Whereto all Wits advance their Jacobs Staff,
And the Supreme cry me out Excellent.
What wud three hundred pound a year do here?
Twill keep a blew Coat and a side Saddle,
But not maintain my Coach-Horses in Prouander.

Doril. Most excellent of Women, that you are worthy
All that your hopes can lodge in you, I grant:
But Fortune and the Graces were at ods
When you were gotten, else you had bin made
As great as Dignity can make a Woman.
But yet you know (I pray forgive my plainness)
That in Estate you donnot equal me,
If that were it I looked at.

Dor. It Is true:
I think my Portion is some seven score pound,
And hardly that byrlady: what it is I know not,
It lies above in the Garret in old rusty Armor.
But what is that to th'purpose: there is a Spirit
(Good or bad, I know not) whispers unto me;
Be an Empress Wench, a Queen, or Duchess,
Countess, or Marquess at least, for those are trifles.
Now I Will tell thee Dorilus, because thou art a handsome Fellow, as I told thee
before; when I am any one of these, thou shall enjoy me, in plain terms, lie
with me, and make a Cuckold: for my Ambition is to advance Greatness. Look,
here is thy Sister.

Enter Iulia.
Iul. Come in a time I doubt to make you blush.
Why what mad conference are you two in?

Dor. For my Ambition is to advance Greatness.

Iul. As how?

Dor. Why as a Woman may do; the manner is not to be shown now. I am glad
thou art come to take off thy Brother.


Iul. Take him off, why he is not so fierce, me thinks:
What, do you weep Brother?

Dor. Like a Watring-Pot; he wud make an excellent
Fountain in the midst of a Garden.

Iul. A moist Milke-sop Lover, hang him, on whom Love has no more operation
then an Oynion: Why, did not I tell you this was the wrong way, and taught you
the right; Lectur'd unto you according to my own heart, and my heart is made
of the same stuff that other Women's are: for shame leave, it is both an ill
sight and an ill sign to see a man drop at the Nose.


Doril. Why you mistake me, if you think I weep.

Iul. No; what use then of your hand-kercher?

Doril. Something has touched my eye, that does offend it.

Iul. Some Feather like a Woman.

Doril. Not so good Shuttle-cocke, your pointed wit stabbes desperately at all
times. Look you, it is thus: If you can love me, fair one, so; if not --


Iul. So.

Doril. Yes.

Iul. So, so: For he did but so, so, For he did but so, so, and so let her go.


Dor. Ha, ha, ha, Thou art a mad Wench, and have mercy upon no man, far worse
then I.

Exit Dorilus.
Iul. Not worse; much about one, as the Collier to the Devil: but what shall
we do, shall we not see the Duke?


Dor. Yes faith, and thou say the word, and laugh him out of his Dominions:
for to laugh him and all his train out of countenance, is nothing; I have a
great mind to icere the Courtiers.


Iul. Prythe let us, there requires not much wit about it.

Dor. Is It done?

Iul. If my consent will do it, it is.

Dor. Why then it is done, and dun's the Mouse, and undone all the Courtiers: my
Father's gone before to meet him.


Iul. Yes, I saw him very spruce.

Dor. Through out Ground he must come, the hour just at milking time.


Iul. Y faith 'twere good -- ha, ha.

Dor. Why do thou laugh?

Iul. Why I Will tell thee sirrah.

Dor. No sirrah, you shannot tell me, I wonnot lose the glory of the invention,
for I know you have found it.


Iul. To go like Milke-maids.

Dor. I knew it must out, or thy tongue had burnt else,
To go like Milk maids, And like Milk-maids will we go,
To make sport with the Courtiers, and triumph.
Enter Frederick.
Fre. The Maids they went a milking
All in a mystie morning,
Down went their milking Pales,
Up went their Terrie diddle Dales,
And all was but a milking,
And all was but a milking.
Y faith Wenches, are you for employment?

Dor. I wud my Father had bound thee Prentice seven years ago to a Scriuener,
by this time thou had lost thy Ears: What make you eues-dropping here? I
thought this had not bin a sober time of day with you.


Fre. Faith want of money Sister is guilty of the sin.
Come, supply, supply, or out goes all, I Will spoil your milking business.


Iul. By this light if thou do, thou shall starve for want of Butter.


Fre. Come, the Purse gingles, I hear it,
For Music with his Silver Knell
Rings us all in at the blew Bell.

Dor. I must give him some.

Iul. Give him all to be rid of him.

Dor. What, you donnot mean to go see the Duke, Brother?


Fre. Not I in faith Sister, I have a Ducke of mine own, that I must visit --
The Other shilling --


Dor. I have no more, believe it.

Fre. Pish, I cannot endure this platring and patching between Sister and
Brother -- -- So, now go your ways and milk, but take heed of churning; our
Dayrie maid got the toothache with --


Dor. Your mouth's stopped, is it not?

Fre. Vmh.

Dor. Why so then, pray God the Wenches have clean Wastcoats.


Iul. You are resolved then.

Dor. Resolved! Thou art a Fool Iulia, thou shall see
I will do things beyond credulity.
Exeunt.
Fre. This money should have bought Tiffenie and Cobweb Lawne, And what a sin
had that bin, to nurse Pride, when it may purchase necessary Claret?

My Father allows me too little, I find that: And it were not for this good
natured Pagan, my Sister, I knew not what to do, unless I should run my head
into a commodity of Hemp, and that I must take up at the Gallows too, or
else they wonnot trust me: yet I might have a Bargain of Crock-Butter, if I
could get an Heir to be bound for it, your Country Gentlemen have no maw
to it; but your Cockney were the only man, for he wud take it up, and 'twere
but to make Tosts of.

Exit.
Scena tertia.
Enter Lord Raymond, Lodwick, Bernards Father, Smirke the Clown, with
Attendants.
Ray. Gentlemen all I thank you, your good wills
To me (as well as to the Duke your loyalty)
Is shown in this your Readiness and Love.
He cannot be far off: Pray let your men
Keep off the Country People, that do swarm
As thick as do the City multitude
At sight of any rare Solemnity.

Smirke. Keep back there, keep back, or I Will make your Leather Pelches cry
twango else: for some of them I am sure I made 'hem smoke so, that I feared I
had set 'hem a fire. Foh, some of them have drunk sour Butter milk this
morning, mingled with Garlic, which crudden together, makes but a rank
smell: and then they have their Christmas Shoes on, their old dancing Pumpes,
up to the middle Calfe, keeps 'hem so warm, that here'le be a Perfume for the
Dukes own nosthrills.

Enter Ferdinand and Ranoff.
Ferd. Seignior Ranoff, you are well arrived.

Ran. And you sweet Seignior -- It Is very precious hot,
I protest I have bin cooler under the Line.

Fer. A Halter you have.

Ran. I wud we might command some Drink here.

Fer. Nay, and we could entreat it, we were happy: for the Seruingmen that were
wont to be all Mouths, are now all Eyes, they have no other member useful
about them.


Ran. This Lord has a most dulcid situation, pleasant, and profitable, I have
seldom seen in Venice a sweeter.


Fer. Did you not see Sir a swarm of Bees as you past by?


Ran. I cannot tell indeed, I did not mark 'hem.

Fer. Me thought they looked Sir like your people of Hybla.


Ran. I cannot tell, I never had much conversation with your people of Hybla,
my noble Lord.

Enter Lord Callowe.
Fer. Here Is another, a Bird of the same, but a more tame one, something more
quiet. Now to hear this Iay chatter, and this Owlet hold his peace, but answer
him with motion, may serve for a Morrisdance.


Ran. Your Lordships Iennet in my conceit is a most understanding Beast.


Call. Hum.

Ran. I saw the Adlantatho of Domingo mounted upon such another, not much
different, nay surely nothing at all; and I donnot think but they were
twins, only I think your Lordships the better.


Call. Hum.

Ran. Your Lordship keeps the Saddle admirable,

Call. Hum.

Ran. I wud your Lordship had bin with me at Iapon, I speak it for Horses
sake, and H^semanship together; I protest they are the best Ryders, if I said
the Rankest, I did not lie: for believe it, I hold your Rank Ryder a good
Ryder, take him always, and at all times: As your Frenchman, in Christendom I
donnot know a ranker Ryder, unless it be some part North, there they are
Scourers. Your Lordship has a most neat Ruff, and becomes you most elegantly.


Call. Hum.
Enter Cornelius, with Dorigene and Iulia, like Milke-maids.
Fer. Is not this a fine Dialogue? How now? Who come these to milk? my Lord
and's Compeere?


Cor. No, believe it Sir, they are taken up for the Dukes own tooth.


Fer. I Would as live thou had told me a Tale: yet beshrew me they are a couple
of handsome Calves with white Faces; but the degrees of this how come about?


Cor. Why the Duke passing by, cast his eye upon them, and with it, I believe,
his fancy: for upon some consideration, he sent back, to give command, they
should be brought hither to my Lords House.


Fer. It Is not amiss, he does well to begin wholesome.

Ran. Will your Lordship conduct?

Cor. I, this will be good, stand aside, and give 'he^ law.

Ran. Fair gentle Milk maid.

Dor. Sweet courteous Squire.

Ran. Good; a Wench of Language: by this hand I love thee.


Dor. Love me Sir, why you have scarce looked on me.

Ran. That Is all one, I protest I love thee,

Dor. I am sorry for it.

Ran. How whi^ one? sorry for it? sorry-that I, whom Ladies languish for,
repine, and die?


Dor. Surely Sir, those Ladies are not sound, that die of such a scuruie
disease.


Ran. You now betray your rudeness; I am angry.

Dor. You show your self an Ass, and I not care for it.

Ran. Vdfoot, and my Dagger had not bin rustie, that I might have drawn it
with credit, I Would a stuck it in the middle of your Milk Pale, foolish, scuruy,
course-kersie, durty-tayl'd, dangling dug Cow: A Gentleman Courtier and
Traveler, whose feet has measured the Alps, and be disgraced in a piece of
vnplow'd Pasture.

I have lighted upon one of the Egyptian Idols, taught Callowe stroking up his
hair, complements with Faces and Legs. with some Engine to put off his Hat,
and screw his Face a little: I cannot speak to it like a man, yet I will talk
to it as if it were one. How came you hither Sir, pray did you ride, or were
you drawn in a Cart?


Call. Hum

Ran. Nay, believe it my Lord, they are a brace of the rudest Baubees that ever
drew or sucked the Milk of Innocence.


Iul. Why, but he is not a Lord, I hope, Sir?

Ran. Foolish Wench I tell thee he is a Lord, and I am little less my self,
if I were in place where: what do thou know, but I may be the Duke?


Dor. Marry God forbid, Sir.

Ran. Why, it had bin all one to thee, thou had called me Ass.


Dor. Ass unawares may prove a wise man, better considered of.


Ran. Ah, she begins to balance me.

Dor. I do indeed Sir.

Ran. And how do you find me now?

Dor. Full weight Sir.

Ran. O, in good time, we shall agree anon. --
The Duke --
Enter Duke, with Raymond and the Train.
Duke. Through the general love our subjects bear to
We find my Lord your loyalty to us: (you,
Which rellisheth more sweeter to our ears,
In their Applauses told, then by your own.
And Gentlemen I thank you every one;
You have took much pains t'see a growing Prince,
Not seasoned yet with Time to your desires:
But crowned with your loves in the Diadem,
I steadily shall hold the Scepter out,
While lustice shall stand by me, and direct it.
I hope you will not look that I shall reign
In my first year, as your last Duke my Father
In his last: but give my Youth some liberty
To play the wanton Prince, though not the wild one.
I have I know possessed all you that know it,
With that Conceit, when I gave command,
Upon the first sight of a pair of Lasses,
That have Looks like the place where they were bred,
Cheerful and innocent to be brought to me,
That I may see their pleasing eyes again;
For me thought on the sudden they were fair ones.

Ray. I wonnot cross your Grace, but if my counsel --


Duke. I prithee keep it, I have no need of it,
Donnot confine me, though I be your guest:
I know it may breed laughter, perhaps sorrow
Unto some grave ones, but I shall deceive 'hem;
I will see 'hem, and have parley with 'hem:
There Is no hurt mea^ if you mean not any,
Nor shall this wrong your House; therefore produce the^.

Ray. They are here my Lord.

Fer. Vdfoot, what will the young Duke do trow?
Shall we have it set down in our Chronicles,
Inprimis, a brace of Milkemaids? very good.
Where are our Ladies now? they are to seek,
And must begin again to learn short Curt'sies,
And dance after the Country Horne-pipe*
Short Curtsies.
Duke. Can there be any loss of Royalty,
To bid these welcome? If here be any Rudeness,
Let me be taskt with it, that like such Rudeness?
If Blood or Beauty ever made a Lady,
Why are not these so? I profess that man
A Traitor, does not think it: yet they are still
Themselves, and so am I. Are you not Sisters?
Short Curtsies.
Dor. In Quality, and't shall please you;
Yet there may be a doubt the the other way,
For our Fathers were next Neighbors.

Fer. That Is a plaguie Wench; she has not milk'd so many Kine for nothing, she
knows the danger of the Horn.


Iul. I beseech your Majesty let us depart, these fine men flowt us.


Cor. Well said Innocence, thou art at home, and play'st within doors, the to
there is more open.


Dor. We mean no harm, and't please you: if my Lord will spare us a little of
his sour Beer, we will make you a dainty Sillibub; that is our Quality.


Iul. Vdfoot, we shall be whipped anon for this Abuse.

Dor. I warrant thee Wench, hold up, I Will take too lashes for thy one.


Iul. Indeed you are better able (...) bear it.

Fer. What Is the Dukes purpose tro? how he does eye 'hem. They Would be good
merchandise for some of us, now we are far from our Mistresses.


Cor. And may be so when he has done with 'hem,
That Is my comfort.

Duke. What was your Father?

Dor. A Swineheard if it please you.

Duke. What yours?

Iul. A Ditcher and't shall like you.

Cor. She Is the better descended of the two.
VVhat'le all this come to?

Duke. If thou had bin my Sister,
And thou Daughter unto some bordering Prince,
As Florence, Padua, Verona, or some farther place.
What Prince wud not have sought and su'd to you?
But go and make the Habitation
Where you were borne, and dwell, a Paradise,
And let all Courts be wild and desolate.

Dor. Excellent: my fortune's come about,
And I will venture, though my life lie on it.

Iul. My life lies on it too.

Dor. Hold thy tongue, thou art a sharer,
As I give thee example, follow. Pardon, pardon,
Great Prince, If we have through our Ignorance,
Or Folly, give it what name you please,
VVrong'd this fair Presence, wronged you the Light.
That came but as the Egyptians, to adore
The rising Sun, and to fall down before it.

Cor. What whirle's this?

Dor. We are poor Gentlewomen of this Country.
Neighbors unto this place, that took upon us
This Habit, to be freer and more bold.
And yet more har^lesse, fearing to be pressed
With the Court Complement, that plays so thick
In a young Damsels ears, it often bears
And batters down poor Virgins Chastity.
We did presume upon our strength, t'withstand
The Pages, Footmen, and the Scullerie:
But when a Lord should take us unto task,
Or others of your brave embroydred Train,
Alas we had bin like the silly Foul
Under the towering Hawke, laid flat before 'hem,
Upon the very shaking of their Feathers.

Fer. A good Wench in faith, she flowts them to their faces.


Cor. But what is this intended for trow; a Pastoral, or a Comedy?


Fer. A Comedy sure, there is so much Wit in it.
It Is your daughter --

Lod. Yes: but pray be silent, let us see the effect,
I dare not own her yet.

Duke. I let ye kneel thus long, to hear again
That most harmonious voice, And ere thou risest,
Ask something of me, fit for thee to crave,
And me to give, And thou art Mistress of it.

Dor. I shall my gracious Lord, I crave your pardon.

Duke. Pish, that is needless, for thou'st not offended;
Or if thou had, it were a poor one, that,
For I do giu't to Thieves and Murderers:
Ask me a Gift, that Time may talk of it,
Being my first Bounty, which I wud confer
Bravely and worthily, and thou art borne for it.
Had thou Birth equal unto Wit and Beauty,
Thou were a Wife for any Prince in Europe,
And I my self wud take thee to my Bed:
But rise, and think, consider what thou ask'st;
Yet thou art wise enough, I need not teach thee.
Enter a Messenger.
Ray. How now -- Your haste?

Mess. Where is my Lord the Duke?

Duke. Your business?

Mess. The good old Earl of -- is deceased,
And the Earldom now conferred unto your Crown.

Duke. It Is some Addition; but wud he still had lived
To have kept it still, he was so true a friend. --
Have thou Thought yet?
He speaks to Dorig.
Dor. Yes my Lord, I thank this Messenger.
There is an Earldom now fallen to your Crown.

Duke. There is.

Dor. Then that it is I crave, for him I owe
All duty, all respect, and life unto.

Duke. What Is he?

Dor. One not far off; my Father.

Duke. Is he thy Father?
Pointing to Lod.
Lod. Yes my dread Soueraign; I beseech your pardon,
The Wench I think is frantike.
Lod. kneeles.
Duke. Had not thou bin her Father, thou had bin so,
To have vtter'd such a thought. Rise up Earl of --
Thou have thy Princes word for it.

Ray. Have I broke my brains, As these white hairs
Do witness, for the safety of you,
And of your Father before you, and the State,
To have a private Gentleman, my Neighbor,
Merely for getting of a handsome VVench,
Raised above me -- it will not be digested,
For I will break the neck of these new Fortunes,
Or they shall mine, and crush me, into nothing.

Duke. Not any one beside my self beholds
The Beauty of this Face, where two Suns move,
Kindling new Fires to the God of Love.
The Title of a Queen much better wud
Become thee, then a Beggar. Why did not ask
To be what Nature did intend thee for,
And I wud consummate, had not Fortune set thee
So many steps below me in thy Birth?

Dor. If I might not offend my gracious Prince,
I wud make bold to speak.

Duke. I did and do entreat thee.

Dor. And speak freely?

Duke. With all liberty.

Dor. I may I hope, without your Courtiers scorn,
Pronounce my self a Lady; and before
This Honor was conferred upon me by you,
There did run generous blood within these veins,
And if not noble: but say there did not,
And I had bin borne the last of the last
Rank of basest people; yet you have made me
(Such is the power of Princes) truly noble:
I am the daughter of an Earl, which is a Prince,
And by that Title challenge Alliance
With every other Prince of higher blood.
And if the Emperor himself were here,
He now wud own me for his Kinswoman,
For I stand in the Line of Royalty:
And who denies it, knows not Heraldrie.

Ray. Here Is a Wench knows how to blaze a Coat.

Dor. Therefore my Lord, my Blood can be no let,
(If I fail not in other parts) to make
A Duchess, or a Queen, and may become
(If you be pleased to make me so) your Wife,
Ambitious of your Love, not of the Title.

Duke. Famine and Wars plague my Dominions,
And strike at my own Person, but I love thee,
Infinitely love thee, love thee beyond the Word,
Beyond all Action that expresses it.
To call thee Fair, Sweet, Loving, and my Wife,
Are but poor Attributes: Thou art my Soul,
The better Part, that gouernes my best Thoughts,
And bids me think on Heaven, and view thee.
Thy Freeness and thy Wit, for such as do
Respect a Dower, are sufficient.
What are Towns, Countries, that may be destroyed
By Sword or Fire, comparable to thee,
That bear about thee in one Limb the Beauty
Of twenty thousand Cities, and their Wealth?
Thou art all the World to me, for I can live
And sit down by thee with content of mind,
Without Ambition how to conquer fatther,
And think I have enough; And so shall All,
All of you here, that will be counted Subjects,
And wish the quiet of your Sovereign:
For him that does not, let him leave me now,
And I will curse him back again a Traitor;
And she herself shall curse him, and so damn him.

Fer. Nay, And't be come to that pass, I am silent.

Cor. It Is best so, when the Tongue may forfeit the Head: I have a con'd Speech
already; Long live the Duchess.


Ran. I am glad my Lord was mealy-mouthed when she was a Milke-maid, I am sure
he gave her no ill language.


Duke. What Princes of the East, or of the World,
When they shall see thy Picture, and me by thee,
Circkling thee thus, and thy Arms so with mine, The Duke embraces Dorigene.

To show consent in our Affections,
But will consider with himself, how poor
(Although he have the Indies in his reach)
He is to me, and sigh himself to death?
Father be merry, And my Lord be you so;
For now your House is happy, and shall look
More glorious then our Palaces: Although
You left the Walls as naked as your Roof,
Let every Room be decked with Countenances
Cheerful, as at the hour I was borne,
When as I heard my Father was here with you,
And had the glad news brought him. Wast not so?

Ray. Yes, my good Lord.

Duke. Why so then: Music, and some Wine,
That I may drink a Health to her I love,
Deep as my Affections.
A flourish of Cornets.
Cor. You shall see he will be drunk with Wine
As well as with Love.

Duke. First you shall pledge me, then it shall go round,
Unless it stop at any discontent,
Whom out of all this number I would note.

Ran. And't be good Wine, it shall never stick at me, what ere the Health be.


Fer. No, Seignior; I thought you had had a Small-Beere stomach.


Ran. Never but in the Morning.

Dor. My Lord -- Drinks to Raymond.


Iul. The Courtiers begin to melt, and my mighty Madame knows how to command:
I wonder what I shall be? The Dice went equally once in my own opinion for
Duchess; but Duchess Mate, that is my comfort.


Duk. What eye now looks on thee, that not contemnes
The Colors of the Lilly and the Rose,
Which come as short of Beauty as of Sweetness?
Lend me thy hand my Joy, for I will yet
But borrow it, till with thy heart I take it
At the Temple, and make it mine for ever;
That Fame may through the world my mind discover,
Less happy being a Duke, then being a Lover.
Exeunt.
Scena quarta.
Enter Bernard disguised like a Doctor, Landoff his Tutor like a Seruingman.
Ber. Come Asmody, thou see I am ruled by thee, I take thy advice; and how
do thou like me in this Doctors Habit?


Land. Why very well Sir, and handsome, you look as if you had trauell'd for
your Degree: but it is the better, for no experience is gotten without travail.


Ber. But what shall I do, when they bring me their brittle Pispots? I cannot
cast 'hem.


Land. No: then g^e them me, I can.

Ber. Why, art thou skillful in Physic?

Land. Enough to cast away an Vrinall, or two.

Ber. Cast it away; I marry Asmody, so can I.

Land. Why and that is sufficient. If it be troubled water, let 'hem carry it
home again to make Lie with, 'twill save Soap: But you must know Sir you must
be reserved, and not a public Professor, like your Tutor.


Ber. As little as thou will, Asmody.

Land. If it please you Sir, you may take away the first part of my Name, it
does not sound so well in a Seruingman, because he is always at the heels of
his Master.


Ber. What, thou wudst have As taken away, and be called Modie?


Land. For your good Sir I wish it, and for breuity sake: besides Sir, you
hannot one Scholar amongst twenty, but knows what Asmody is.


Ber. Thou say well: then henceforward Moody, let As go to the Spirit.


Land. I Sir, for I am now you know your Familiar.

Ber. And a witty one, me thinks.

Land. I must be so for I should have a sad Master of you else. And look you
Sir, because you shannot prove me a Liar, here is your sweet-hearts Brother (in
time of yore your Chamber-fellow) in a worser pickle then you, for he is in
love Auriumtenus, you are but up to the middle.

Enter Frederick and Dorilus.
Fre. Why, I tell thee my Sister is such a Wild Cat, there is not her fellow
again in all Germany, and yet thy Sister follows well after; they are a
Couple, and so is the Devil and the Hangman, and as good Company: they will
flowt any man under the Cope; they wud laugh at me, but that they know I care
not for it, and put 'hem out with an excellent Trick that I have, called
borrowing of Money. Come, bear up man, and drink, look you, here is mine Host
come to bid us welcome.

Enter Host. How now mine Host, what time of day is it with you, ha?


Host. Full Tide Gentlemen, full Tide. But you are welcome; I am your Servant,
your Slave, your Cat, or your Dog, or any thing in Rerum natura.


Fre. Hah mine Host, is it come to that Point?
Go thy ways, go sleep, and send thy Dromedaries in with Wine, and Glasses
clear as Crystal.


Host. As clear as Claridiana, my brave Bullyes.

Fre. What in History, mine Host?

Host. And in Poetry too, when I am pleased to couple -- Some Wine you Knaves,
some Wine.


Fre. Your legs couple ill-fauouredly, mine Host.

Host. My legs were not brought up to it.
Enter Bernard.
Ber. By your leave mine Host.

Host. VVelcome of this side too my man of Knowledge, I am thy Slave, thy
Servant, Dog, or Cat, or any thing in Rerum natura.


Ber. By your leave Gentlemen.

Fre. You are welcome Sir.

Ber. I am a Stranger here, and understand
You are Gentlemen of this Country, well descended,
And I do want such good Acquaintances,
Therefore make bold to press into your Company.

Fre. An Italian Sir, I take it.

Ber. Yes Sir, and a small practiser in Physic.

Fre. O Sir, let not your modesty wrong you,
I wud you had a Pill to purge Melancholy,
Here Is a Gentleman much offended with it;
Give him a Glass of Claret, you are a Stranger,
And he will not refuse you.

Ber. That I will Sir. -- Fellow, some Wine. --
Sir --

Doril. I cry you mercy.

Ber. I drink this to your Health, and I have brought it.

Doril. How Sir?

Fre. Let him drink off his Wine, and he will tell you more.


Doril. You spoke something like comfort, Sir.

Ber. I did, and will persevere.

Doril. You are a welcome man, pray show how.

Fre. Drink off your Wine, and heel show you how.

Doril. Prythy away.

Ber. Pray Sir pledge me.

Doril. I will pledge you.

Fre. Did you not drink two, Sir?

Host. Yes marry did he, if I have two eyes, he drunk two.


Fre. Prythy mine Host stand aside, thou have never an eye.


Host. How, never an eye? that goes hard, if I have drunk out two eyes in
three hours.


Doril. Now Sir will you speak?

Ber. Yes Sir, and tell you what I know, although a stranger, and till this
hour never saw your face.


Land. O Villain, they were Bedfellowes together for a Twelue-month.


Ber. You are in love with fair Dorigene, Sister unto this Gentleman.


Doril. You amaze me.

Ber. It Is true, Sir.

Doril. Yes very true I find it: but for the cure of this?

Fre. Why it is ordinary, get her good will, and lie with her. How think Sir,
is not that the Cure?


Ber. A better cannot be applied, I Will assure you.

Doril. Wud thou were gone.

Fre. How do you mean, in drink? give me some Wine, I had forgot my self.
Mine Host, I wud drink to thee, but thou art not able to pledge me: Therefore
here is to thee honest Blew-coat.


Land. I thank you Sir.
Enter Smirke with Baggs.
Smirke. By your leave Gentlemen.

Fred. What Smirke? welcome, what wind drove thee hither?


Smirke. The best in the four Quarters: Look you, here is Cash, Gold and
Silver, you must pay your Debts, purchase new Clothes, and come to Court
instantly. Your Father is made an Earl, your Sister a Duchess, and you are a
Count, or I know not what; and I am an Esquire: my Boy is a Gentleman, when I
have him, as I am laying about for one.


Fre. The fellow has broken open some Goldsmiths house, and will be hanged:
Do thou know what thou do?


Smi. My Lord, as IN am a Gentleman and an Esquire, I do renerence the very
invention of your Honors next Suit: I Will help you to a Draper shall give you
all your Men-Liueries, to make it of Cloth; my Haberdasher has a new Block,
and will find me and all my Generation in Beuers as long as we last, for the
first hansell.


Fre. The fellow is mad.

Smi. Mad, or mad not, it is all one, I speak truth; your Father's an Earl,
your Sister's a Duchess, you are a Count, or I know not what, I am an Esquire,
and my Boy is a Gentleman, when I have him.


Doril. What does this fellow talk?

Smir. This fellow talks as he thinks, and thinks as he talks, and talks
what he knows. I wonnot repeat it over again, for the disparagement of my
Wit: but what I say, I will maintain, what I maintain, I will say; and the
very Bells themselves shall ring it out Probatum.


Drawer. It Is true indeed my Lord, your Sister's made Duchess of -- and shall be
married unto the Duke. The News does come to Town with every Man, and no man
disagrees, but constantly affirms it for a Truth.


Doril. O that it were so; by my Fathers Soul
I wud be free as that is, and as happy,
For I wud laugh this Woman from my heart,
And she should be no more to me, then her I know not,
I wud be so much Man, and something more:
For I wud wish to enjoy her as a Man,
Lose her in mind, and find her in my blood,
And I do feel such turnings in my thoughts.

Fre. Why now you are your self: Yet I Would advise you to go to Court, and see
her.


Doril. See her, I and speak to her, and call her Woman,
There were no Treason in it, were it?

Fre. Not any.

Doril. Good; then let us go: for what I Will do till I come there, I know not,
or if I did, I wud not utter it.


Ber. Why Asmody, will you be found an ignorant Spirit? how hap I knew not this?


Land. You employed not me to enquire of it.

Fre. Gentlemen, as I understand my self, I am a Lord,
I donnot know, I may be an abused Coxcombe;
But howsoever, here are good Tokens of it.
Mine Host, what have I chalkt in sundry and several times?


Host. Chalk is but Chalk, a Rundle makes a shilling, but that is nothing.


Fre. I Will come to you mine Host when you are sober.
Gentlemen, you are for the Court,
I am for the Tailors: When next we meet,
We will bring hearts as sound as our Clothes, sweet.

ACTVS SECVNDVS.
Scena Prima.
Enter Ferdinand and Cornelius.
Fer. What, is the Duke martyed?

Cor. Questionless, by this time; they were at To have and to hold when I
left'hem. Look you, here come the Feathers, the inseparable Coxcombs of the
Court.

Enter Callowe and Ranof.
Ran. By the life-bloud which danceth on her Lip,
She is all Paradise; Divine, Angelical,
The Duchess me thinks looks like a Dowdie to her.

Cor. O for an Informer -- Capital Treason.

Call. If my Tailor had not bin a Knave --

Fer. He had bin an honest man.

Call. But --

Fer. O there is a stop, I thought the brazen Image wud have spoke.

Enter Bernard, Landoff, Dorilus.
Ber. Asmody, you were best stay behind,
There Is no place for Spirits in the Court.

Land. O Sir, all your brave Spirits keep at Court,
And I know my distance.

Ber. If you donnot, here be those will teach you.
What comfort man? there is no fitter place
To attend their coming out, then here,
Here you may have full sight, and perhaps speech.

Doril. Nay I will have speech with her, and tell her roundly
How she has played the Murdresse with a man
That would have died most willingly for her.

Ber. What, in the passionate vain again?

Doril. No, but somewhat vehement.
Enter the Duke, Duchess, a Bishop, Lord Raymond.
Duke. The Diadem that crowned my Head, brought
Cares along with Dignity: But thou my Sweet
Have crowned my Heart with Joys perpetual,
Love, that did lead thee to the Church a Maid,
Has brought thee back again a perfect Wife,
And made thee fit to be as thou do promise,
Mother of many Princes.
Dorilus kneeles as the Duchess passes by, she beckens one to bring him to
her.
Cor. Pray Heaven the Duke be in his right senses,
He talks all Raptures, studied Poetry.

Fer. As every outrageous Lover does. If I were weary of my life, I have an
Adagie wud hang me instantly.


Cor. What Is that?
The Duchess and Doril. talk privately.
Fer. Why the old one, Hot love's soon cold.

Cor. To require you, That breath were better kept, to cool your Porredge.


Fer. You say very right, Sir.

Ber. This is the Face that wud not let me rest,
But visit me in Dreams: Look this way still,
And burn me with thy comfortable Beams.

Dor. I must confess, I ever had a wild,
Wanton, and untamed Tongue, but still the Heart
Of such a Matron as my Mother was:
I did and do still love thee, and I protest
Purposed to have married thee, but that I think
Thy self wud not have wished me to have lost
A Fortune such as this -- Little did I imagine,
When I did jest those words, to have bin a Duchess.

Doril. I donnot come to task you to your word,
But to behold the Riches I have lost,
That must confess my self unworthy of you.
Hither I came resolved, to let you know
That I durst look upon you, and could lose you
Without sigh or tear: but having seen you,
You have afresh kindled the fire again,
And I must die a Martyr in your love.

Dor. What shall we do Iulia? Do thou see
The sad and downe-cast countenance of thy Brother?
I love him for his own sake, and for thine,
And wud not have him perish; which I fear.

Iul. Troth Madame I doubt him too: but if the worst come to the worst, it is
but a foolish Lover cast away.


Dor. There are some flattering ways yet to restore him, if we could light on
'hem. Alas good Dorilus.

I never yet had other Testimony
Of your strong love, then that which all you Men
Unto your Ends can feign better then Women,
Sighs and sad words, mingled with some Tears.

Doril. If those had not bin witnesses sufficient,
Why did you not enjoin me to a Task,
Harder then ever Cruelty did yet?
You should have said; I dare thee Dorilus
To die: or do but say so yet,
That I may be assured you can love
Dorilus dead, whom living you despised,
And I will at your feet yield my lat'st breath.

Dor. I prithee think me not a Murderesse,
To take delight in blood: no, my dear Dorilus,
Live, and live long, that I may love thee so.
Yet if thy love be, as thou do profess,
No danger, travail, nothing that Art. can do,
Obtained with much loss, greater difficulty,
Will be left unattempted: therefore, to try
What strength it holds in thee, and make it gained,
Better esteemed of, being hardly got,
I shall enjoin thee to a strange Design.

Doril. Let it be dangerous, and it is the better,
And I shall easilier accomplish it.

Dor. It is not dangerous, nor impossible,
For I have read even in effect the like
To have bin obtained for a -- Queen.

Doril. Pray speak it.

Dor. A Garland of the rarest Flowers on Earth,
The choicest to the Eye, and to the Sent,
Set with such Fruits the season of the year
Affoords not in this Clyme, And it must have
The virtue of continuing ever fresh,
As long as you remain constant in love.
This is the Task, which if you can obtain.
By all the Faith in Woman, and that Justice
Which punishes all Periurers, I vow
Thou shall embrace all thy desires in me.

Doril. A Garland of all Flowers?

Dor. Of all the Earth produces, that are choice:
If I, or any one that sees it, can
Call any Flower by a Name, not there,
You not perform your Enterprise.

Doril. This is a Task indeed.

Iul. She has sent you a picking.

Doril. But it is nothing, when the Prize is thought of that it shall purchase.


Dor. Will you undertake it?

Dor. I will not move in any other labor,
It shall be both my Business and my Pleasures:
With my best duty let me kiss your hands.
I shall not need to doubt, to enjoy your love
When I have done it?

Dor. May that Beauty which you adore in me,
Be blasted, but --

Doril. I believe you: Fair farewell.

Dor. My Lord, your pardon.

Duke. For what my Duchess? Though this day alone
Should be reserved only to our selves,
Yet if thou please to lend thy Patience
To any one that is a Suitor to thee,
It shall give no dislike but rather please us.

Fer. Here Is a Duke now will make all his Subjects kind Husbands.


Cor. If he continue as he begins, I Will give my Wife the Breeches; for Women
will reign, that is certain.


Fer. Reign, I and thunder and lighten too, I Will warrant thee.

Exeunt Duke with his Train.
Land. A pretty dumb show, this.

Doril. How do you Sir? you appear to me more troubled then my self.


Ber. No, I am well: Pray what is the news?

Doril. I must go travail.

Ber. Travail, what to do?

Doril. To gather Flowers, Strawberries --

Land. And Cream.

Ber. Why how now Sirrah?

Land. Something bold Sir, for Affinities sake.

Ber. But pray be serious with me: by that friendship, which for the time we
have bin acquainted, has bin as much as ever was made up in so few hours; I
do conjure you tell me, and tell me faithfully, all the whole passage.


Doril. I was a telling you: She has enioyn'd me to bring her a fair Garland,
of all Flowers that can be named, which must continue fresh as long as I
remain constant to her.


Ber. This is not in the power of Man to do.

Doril. This is her imposition.

Ber. Asmodie, what think you of this?

Land. Why I say Sir, comfort your Friend, For ere
The Sun shall twice to th'Sea decline his golden beams
I Will bring a Garland hither, made of all Flowers
That every corner of the World contains,
And with that Charm too, that it shall remain
Beautiously flourishing, while he continues
Warmed in the strength of his Affections.

Ber. Do this my gentle Spirit, and thou shall
Make him, who is thy Master, bound unto thee,
He shall release thee, I will buy thy years,
Although it cost me half of my Estate.

Lan. No more, some few hours hence expect me.
Exit.
Ber. Sir, will you take the counsel of a Friend,
And thrust these Sorrows from you? what wud you give
To purchase such a Garland as you speak of?

Doril. I thought you Sir of more humanity,
And better breeding, then to mock misery.

Ber. I donnot mock you, and may accuse you now
For having me in such suspicion:
We are but young in our Acquaintances,
And that begets these doubts: will you impart
Half your Estate to him should bring you this?

Doril. All, and become in debt to pay that Man.

Ber. What do you judge your Estate to be, Sir?

Doril. Better then three hundred pound a year.

Ber. Why that shall do it. Pardon me Sir, I am poor,
And such an Accident as this perhaps,
To make a Fortune, will not in all my Age
Befall again: nor can you lose by it,
For in her favors you shall be advanced.

Doril. Without those wise Considerations,
You instantly shall have it made to you,
Not in words only, but in deeds,
If you perform what you propose to me.

Ber. Why you say well Sir, will you now to the Scriueners?

Doril. Most joyfully, and with what speed you please.

Ber. Lead Sir, I Will follow: Is it not strange to see,
That a man should, as has bin often shown,
Cure others griefs, yet cannot help his own.
Exeunt.
Scena secunda.
Enter Lodwick, father to Dorigene; Frederick, a Lady, and Smirke.
Lod. Now Sir, you are so died in the Grape, and so deboisht
With Tavern Quarrels, that here your carriage
Amongst the inferior sort will prove ridiculous:
For we shall have you down in the Wine-cellar,
Or at the Beer amongst the Guard carowsing,
And after, fall to Cuffes; your Band and Doublet
Torn from your Neck and Back, and your brave Breeches
Stained with the variation of each soil.

Fre. Nay good Sir donnot aggrauate a Fault:
I know I have bin often in the dirt,
(And so has many a better man then I)
Before I was the Dukes Brother; but now
I will give no man place at Wall or Kennell.

Smi. My young Lord is in my mind to a thread for that.

Lod. I know thou have matter enough in thee,
And parts sufficient to make a Courtier;
But this same Drink, and Country Liberty,
Has spoiled thee irrecouerably.

Fre. Why Sir, what wud you have me do? you shall find I will be capable.


Lod. Why you must bend your self unto the Ladies.

Smi. Bend to the Ladies: Alas poor old man, he talks --

Lod. I mean, apply your self, converse with 'hem,
And still be tendering your service to 'hem;
They will look for it: Look you, here come Presidents;
There Is a young Lord now, a Knight follows him,
Mark but how they endeavor in the business.

Fre. Vdsfoot, I think my Father thinks I am an Ass:
Cannot I lead a Lady by the Arm,
Hold off my Hat, and dance my Cinque a pace;
And after a long story of my silence,
Ask how she does? I will satisfy him,
He shannot find me to degenerate --
By your leave Lady.

Lady. What Is he tro? he has reasonable handsome Clothes, but they become him
not.


Smir. The dumb Lord's frighted, his hair stands an end.


Ran. My Noble Lord; the Duchess Brother.

Call. Your pardon my good Lord.

Fre. What Masculine Baboone's this -- Lady, I honor you.


Lady. O my good Lord, there are better Faces in the Court for you to honor.


Fre. By that all-killing Eye, that murdring Lip --

Lady. Fie, fie, my Lord, you make me blush.

Fre. O Madame, donnot so, you will spoil your painting.

Smi. Look you my Lord, my Lord your Son is at ir.

Lod. A shrewd Boy: I thought, because my self
Have bin bred up a Soldier, and unfit,
And ever was, to these Court Complements;
He, having not bin exercised, wud be so:
I Will leave him now, and take no more charge of him.

Smi. No, no, let the Surgion look to him.
Enter Iulia.
Iulia. Wud I were in the Country again, I shall run mad here: your tumultuous
Courtiers wonnot let me rest; Visitants early and late, and all come about one
business, to tell me I am fair, which I know well enough, yet can be well
content to let them swear it. I have the Prayers of all the Mercers, Tailors,
Haberdashers, in the whole City, and their Wives Curses; for not a Man looks
that way: I am the Bird, at which each welldrawne Courtier shoots his Bolt.
Look you, I am spyed already: They leave all Companies, all Places; upon
Service times, the Chapel, if I be not there.

Now my tongue-tyed Lord, whose Language is in the Motion of his Neck, I wonder
he is not troubled with the Cricke: What does your Lordship say? I donnot hear
you.


Call. Hum.

Iul. Wud the World believe there were such a Man?
Pray my Lord tell me your meaning?

Call. Hum.

Iul. Sure your Honor had a silent Nurse.

Ran. He wud have proved the Miracle of the World, if he had bin a Woman.


Iul. He wud indeed Seignior: I donnot think, but if his Tongue were clipped, he
wud talk yet; what think you?


Ran. I think as you think, Lady.

Iul. Take heed of that, so you may wrong your self.
I wud my Lord that I could understand you,
I do persuade my self then I could love you.

Call. O sweet Lady.

Iul. Why this is well my Lord, can you go on?

Call. I had a hard heart else.

Iul. Admirable; good my Lord go forward,
Talk, and I Will love you infinitely, that is, beyond talk.

Call. Silence Lady is the best part of Wisdom.

Iul. Let Wisdom go to grave ones, give us Talk,
It is Youth's Music, and does stir Affection,
As Motion, Heat. Good my Lord talk.

Call. Why Lady, I can talk.

Iul. O my Lord.

Call. What ayle you, Lady?

Iul. You will ravish me.

Call. Not I, I Will assure you I come not of the kind.

Iul. I mean you will overcome me: And if you talk much, I shall entreat you
you will hold your peace.


Call. Nay, believe it Lady, I will not talk much: but if I list to talk, I
have a Tongue that can talk much, and loud, as another Man.


Ran. I was afraid he wud have said, Woman.

Call. But talke's but talk, therefore I use it not: but for your sake, sweet
Lady, it may be that I will find a Tongue to talk of something; and that same
something must be of you, or else it is nothing.


Iul. Away my Lord, I am bound to stop mine ears; the Sirens sing in you.


Call. Why let 'hem sing, Song is but Song, no more then Talke's but Talk;
yet Talk does well, where Talk is well regarded, otherwise it is lost: And I
have bin a Talker in my time, and will be so again, to give content to such a
Lady as does love to talk, or knows what talk is, and can talk her self;
else it is much better for to hold ones peace: For I have heretofore bin a great
Talker, and foolish Ladies that understood me not, have prayed me hold my
peace, and they wud love me; just as you now, on the contrary, pray me to
talk, and not to hold my peace, and then you would love me.


Iul. I will maintain this in him, to make him talk his Lungs our. -- Oh, --
Oh.


Call. What is the matter?

Iul. VVud I had never heard this Tongue of yours:
But I was cursed to hear it, more to provoke it.

Call. Why do you say so? For this Tongue of mine shall be pulled out, and
thrown unto the Dogs, or to the Hawks, before it shall offend your dainty
Ears, that love to hear a Tongue talk as a Tongue should do, of Wit and
Beauty, and Beauty and Wit, which do abound in you.


Iul. Fie, fie, fie, this is not to be endured.

Call. Believe it Lady, but it is; it is fit that you should hear, and I should
talk, the Subject being You, and I the Talker. Wherefore have Ladies Beauty,
and Men Eyes and Tongues, but to behold that Beauty, and then talk of it. I
do proclayme him here a Dunce, a Sot, that has a Tongue, and cannot talk of
you: nay, though he had never a Tongue, yet he might think a talk; and that,
though not as good, might serve for talk.

Enter Lord Raymond and the Duchess.
Iul. The Duchess; good my Lord leave until another time.


Call. I, another time, and then we will talk four or five hours together.


Fre. By this hand Wench I Will keep touch.

Lady. Touch and take my Lord, else no meddling.

Fre. Go, you are a Fool, Farewell; Expect me.
Sister Duchess, how do? I thank thee for my Lordship. I knew thou were
borne to make us all, advance us to the third Region. How does my Brother Duke
deal with thee? Do thou Burgeon? Shall we have Bonfires, and the Bells rung
out, for joy thou have made an Uncle? How now Iulia? what is thy Title? Lady of
Honor, and Principal Secretary to my Sister, is it not? who breaks the best
Jests now?


Iul. My Lord.

Fre. My Lord; no, my Lady by all means.

Dor. Fie Brother, understand your self; and as you have taken on Dignity, so
put on Gravity, or you will prove ridiculous.


Fre. Let me prove what I will Sister, I Will have all the Court to imitate me: if
I had bin borne a Fool, I wonder what is he wud have bin wise? Come VVench, be
thy self still, and thou shall be the Miracle of Princes,

Have all the wit thy Subjects utter, thine,
And drawn together in a Volume, called,
The Duchess of Saxony her Apothegmes;
Which shall put down the Tales of other Nations.
Thy Birthday shall be made a Holy Day,
And crowned with full Cups, and with deep ones too,
And I my self will first begin the Health,
And bring it up in Germany a Fashion,
Often to salute the Cup, and kiss it sweetly.
But where is the Duke my Brother? tired and retired?

Dor. Pray my Lord do you speak to him, happily he will endure reproof from
you.


Ray. My Lord.

^re. I have sworn not to grant any Suits this week, therefore prythy donnot
trouble me -- -- O, my Lord, I cry you mercy.


Ray. The Duchess wud be private.

^re. Neat and private she shall be, it is fit,
Let you and I shake hands, Wisdom and Wit.

Dor. Thou art all wildness, that nothing I think will tame, but a long
Voyage, and unfortunate.

O Iulia, I do think upon thy poor afflicted Brother, Good Gentleman, that
he should place his love so disastrously. I wonder how he does?


Iul. He is as great a stranger unto me as to you Madame, I never saw him since.


Dor. I hope he did not spend his time so ill
In the University at Wittemberg,
But he has learnt so much Philosophy,
To tame those headstrong Passions.

Iul. You may pray rather he has not spent his time
As Faustus did, and many that are there,
In Negromancie, so to perform the Task
You have laid on him.

Dor. Alas poor VVench, do thou believe there can be such an Art?


Iul. Why, have we it not recorded, Faustus did
Fetch Bruno's Wife, Duchess of Saxoni^
In the dead time of Winter, Grapes she longed for?

Dor. Such a Report there goes, but I hold fabulous.

Iul. Well, had I bin as you, I Would not have laid so deep an Oath upon it.


Dor. Wud that were my worst fear. Enter Doril. Look where he comes. Iulia
leave me, I Will hold conference with him, and by delays seek to wear out his
Sorrow.


Iul. I obey you Madame.

Dor. Why kneel you Dorilus?

Doril. Duty has taught me, though you were not her
Fortune has made you: Every thing delights
To be commanded by you; under your wish
Lies all things upon Earth, and grows for you,
Prospers for your sake, strives to be lovely,
In emulation of your Excellence.
Here is a Garland of those Flowers you spoke of,
Which Nature put forth, and Art fetched for you;
Place it upon your Head, and it shall dim
The glorious splendour of your other Crown:
Lasting it is, as it; for it shall flourish
According to your wishes, till I alter
And change the course of my Affection.

Dor. Thou do astonish me: wud I coud call
This any thing but Truth, a Dream, a Vision,
With Terrors following it, enough to sink me
Deeper in Earth then I am now above it.
When Flora strives to deck the Earth with Flowers,
She never showed half such variety.
Good Dorilus leave me a while to think,
And to collect my self, and then return.

Doril. I shall.
Exit.
Dor. Why did these Flowers grow? to blush for me?
Or do they blush, because they have wrought my shame?
Why did not Storms and North winds nip your Buds,
And killed ye, ere you showed the Sun your Leaves?
Why did not Lightnings blast ye? Beasts or Worms
Pluck up your Roots, and make you fit for Fire?
There you had showed more glorious then here:
For here you bring, under so many Colors,
A show of Sweetness, that will breed the Plague,
And run infectiously into our Bloods.
For if I fall, what Woman will be honest?
Or being so, what is he that will believe it?
Enter the Duke.
Duke. How now my Duchess? talking to thy self?
What Is that? Why do thou hide it from me?
It is rich unto the eye, but much more rarer:
Flowers so plentiful, and at this time,
It wonders me? Prythy let me see it,
I never saw so many rarious Forms
Knit up so curious: believe me, it is a Present
Fit for the Queen of Nations, and for thee;
He well deserved, that did bestow it on thee.

Dor. It Is not to be bestowed Sir, it is to be bought,
And at a dear Rate too.

Duke. Why, and thou do, no matter,
For trust me it is a very pretty Toy.

Dor. A pretty Toy must buy it.

Duke. If it wud not fade.

Dor. It will not fade Sir, it will keep too long I fear, for you to like it.


Duke. Why do thou think so? it is like thy self,
Full of Variety, and choice Delights,
And th'longer I behold it, the more it likes me.

Dor. O, there are Serpents in it, and ugly Toad^s,
That burst and shed their poison; not a Flower,
But bears a sting in it, that wounds my heart:
Foul Lust and Murder, that does follow it,
Lies hid amongst the Leaves. O throw me Sir,
Throw me from your Embraces, as far as the wild winds
Does drive the Dust before it, and destroy me.
Like it to nothing: Purge your Land, by making
Bonfires of it and me upon some Hill,
That the black Smoke may vanish into Air.
And not infect your Turrets.

Duke. Why do thou talk thus?

Dor. First kill me Sir, it will be Charity,
Then rip my Bosom up, and in my Heart
There you shall find what my Tongue loathes to utter.

Duke. I thought, dear Dorigene, I never should
Have bin a stranger to your Thoughts, till now:
I pry thy speak, what is it troubles thee?

Dor. If I were sure that breath should be my last,
You should not then entreat me; but receive it,
Hoping you will be merciful, and kill me.
There is a Gentleman, named Dorilus,
That loved me before you saw me, and I him,
Although I never gave him any hope:
Upon the Wedding day he met me here,
And looked so like a man that meant to perish,
That I was willing to restore some comfort;
VVhereon I wished him get me such a Garland,
Made of all Flowers that the World contaynes,
Not thinking such a thing could have bin done,
And for Requital promised him -- I cannot
Utter no more, nor should have thought so much.

Duke. Is this all?

Dor. All? wud you more? wud you we should proceed?
Grow impudent in sin, till Thunder rent us?

Duke. Why, but such promises may be dispensed with.
Though you had sealed it with a Vow.

Doril. I did Sir, and a great one: nor left there,
But added two or three to that; the least was,
The blasting of this Beauty he adored.

Duke. I know not how to doubt, yet this may be
A Cunning; I will try her. Let it not trouble thee,
Dear Dorigene; thou shall perform thy Vow;
I Will be the Sufferer, and take the sin on me.

Dor. But the damnation must be mine, my Lord,
And if I pull it on me, t'shalbe this way,
Offers to stab her self. Rather then wronging you.

Duke. Why so thou wrong'st me worst,
And wut deprive me of all the joys in this World.
Thou will teach me by ill example, how to follow thee.
Sweet, let me kiss thee, I will beg for that,
Which all men else do labor to avoid;
It is but one hours loss of thee, I prythy
Make no more scruple often then other Women:
It is a Crime, that not one Night in the year,
But some where or other such a Fault is made,
Nor looks the Wife the next day worse for it.

Dor. No more Sir.

Duke. Thou will consent?

Dor. I will.

Duke. Why I thank thee. I have bestowed some pains to beg my self into an
Order. O Dorigene, if thou be false, the Serpent parted with his Subtletie,
and closed it in the Fruit he gave thy Sex.

Exit.
Dor. I know not whether I am greater blessed*
Or cursed in such a Husband: Fate thou have thy ends,
And I have mine. Come Dorilus, and take me
Now whilst I have Obedience:
Give me not respite, to enter into Considerations,
Lest I do* worser then perform my Vow.
Enter Dorilus. He comes -- Welcome my Dorilus, be merry man,
And look upon me as a Lover should,
That has obtained his Mistress: I am thine,
And for the time free, as I am the Dukes.
Be bold man in approaching, there is no fear
Of Spies upon us; we are free, as people
That know no Laws, or do command the Laws:
I have the Dukes consent for what I do,
Nay, his entreatie: he does like to have
A Ryuall in the thing he loves, and is
Not different from the common sort of men,
That do esteem them most, that most abuse 'hem.

Doril. How many ways do you desire to kill me?

Dor. Why Dorilus?

Doril. You say the Duke's acquainted --

Dor. With our Loves, it is true:
But there is no harm in that, for heel be secret,
As I have Life, he will.

Doril. Why do you abuse me thus?

Dor. I donnot: for as I have a Soul, I Am serious,
He bid me keep my Vow; and said, the Man
That did bestow this Garland, did deserve --

Doril. What? to enjoy you?

Dor. I, to enjoy me.

Doril. He did it then to give us leave to sin,
That he might punish.

Dor. O no; he did it for my quiet: he will sooner
Strike his own eye, to offend it, nay, his heart,
Rather then mine.

Doril. What do we then contriuing Lust together?
That Rebel Blood, which rages against him,
Had better bin bestowed upon rude Beasts,
Wilder then Wolves or Tygres; we are worse:
They that wud wrong this truly Royal Prince,
This Prince of his own Passions, as of Men,
Deserve to see no day, to taste no food,
No clothes to shield him from the rage of winter,
But live more wretched then the last of Beggars,
Die without tears or prayers, and want a grave.
Take your vows back again, and place 'hem better,
For here I make a general release
Of all debts twixt us, be a free woman,
And set up anew, with caution, that you never
Prove banker-out again, deal not so largely,
Nor trust so prodigally, lest you do meet
With such as will take the full forfeiture;
So Virtue guard you and your goodness Crown,
Your thoughts and actions with true chastity.

Ray. This is not as I look for, nor do wish.

Dor. O stay, let me not be so wretched, but to pay
The alms of a true heart, thanks for your bounty,
Which has been greater then I can requite.
Now I do love thee Dorilus as dear
As thy own mistress virtue. And I beseech thee
Deprive us not thy presence at the Court,
For I will live to study a reqitall,
And the Duke with me, that shall know thy worth,
And find it in thy deeds, shall entertain thee,
And in his bosom fix thee a true friend:
Thou shall not go unless thou promise me,
I may receive and welcome thee at Court,

Dori. Since you command me, I Will not fail to offer,
My service to my Sovereign and you.

Dor. With tears of joy I love thee.
Exit.
Ray. What blood have these two creatures? Cold as I am
My aged head wrapped like the Alps in Snow,
Yet if the Devil lust, had warmed me on,
Respects should never quench the heat in me.
There is a spark already in my bosom,
And I do feel it working toward my heart,
Which when it once has reached, and kindled
Into a flame, no premeditation
Of the offense, shall blow it out again.
The Duke has entertaind a iealosie,
And imployes me in the discovery,
Which makes effectual to my purposes.
Mischief is brooding in my brains, and the event
Shall work my pleasures or their discontent.
Enter Bernard.
Ber. Well met Sir. How now? Melancholy.
But now I think on it, every man is so
After his height of dalliance, I did hear
You had admittance* And I says how find you her.

Dori. You have my land Sir.

Ber. Yes, in my pocket, a large hose you will say
Can hold so many Akers: But impart,
You told me, being familiar with the Cause,
I should partake in the Event.
She has performd --

Doril. Yes, very gracious.

Ber. Why so then, what wud you more?

Doril. No more.

Ber. Zfoot, he is turned Echo: but I have observed,
Knock at the heart of Man afterfull joys,
And you shall find him like an empty Vessel.
I will leave you Sir.

Doril. Hear me first.
Because you may not spread a Calumny,
Which when you are not your self, Wine may bring forth:
Here I protest by all that is Righteous,
Both in Earth and Heaven, though I had bought
And paid for this Sin as your self can witness,
And might have purchased it (but with her Curses)
I gave her Vows back freely to her self,
Made her the same Duchess that she was,
And is still absolute.

Ber. How? freely gave her what cost you so dear?

Doril. Freely: and had my Life bin in the Bargain,
It had gone, And Wife and Children,
If I had bin worth 'hem -- O you donnot know,
And it is tedious to relate it to you.

Ber. You are a frank Giver, and you shall teach me
(For in all Goodness I will be your Scholar)
To imitate, though not to equal you:
Here take your Bonds again, If you coud check
That untamed Fiend, called Lust, why should not I,
By your Example, bridle Avarice:
He is not worthy to receive, that knows not how to restore.
Pray take it, you wonnot,
You wud be singular, then look you Sir it is canceld:
Thus from the letters I do tear the law,
As you the crime you went with from your heart,
You have your own again: And I am richer
Without it, then possessing. Fare you well Sir.

Doril. Pray stay Sir, and make me not so wretched
As leave that ugly sin Ingratitude
For my Companion: I may through your friendship
Think this life happy, to score age upon me,
And die, with Stories of you to my children.

Ber. And I of you wud do the like to mine:
That shall if I can work it, call you uncle.

Doril. Bernard my friend, and chamber-fellow.
Discover himself
Ber. And brother that wud be, nay must be;
Though I undertake as bad a task as picking of flowers.
For here is my spirit Asmody can fly
The same way again.
Landoffe in his own shape.
Lan, No, I have clipped his wings.

Ber. Zfoote my Tutor, I am undone.

Lan. And bound him to a fiery chariot
For threescore years, and after to be thrown
Into the bottom of the burning lake,
Boiling with Pitch and Sulphur.

Ber. Alas poor Asmody, he will be over coddled,

Lan. For his audaciousnesse.

Ber. Alas Sir, 'twas not his fault; for to say truth, I coniurde him.


Lan. You coniurde him, into what? into a blew coat
And a beard, did you not? look you there is your Asmody.

Ber. Troth Sir, you have bin to cruel with him,
You might a let him have boyld in his liuorie,
For his heard, it was not a miss to be plucked off,
For in time it wud a bin scalded.

Lan. Come, you are a Nouice, did you think you could
Proceed in my own Art, but I should know it?
I was that Asmody appeared to you,
When you kept such a thundering, with words
That were of as much effect to call or move
Spirits, as mountains: But my Dorilus,
My loving Pupil, for whose good I cannot
With all the Art I have, labor enough.

Doril. O, your zeal Sir has bin ever shown,

Lan. Presume upon me, for I do predict
There will be need of me, and of my Art
Ere it be long: And unless it please
My Pupil Bernard, here to turn me off,
I Will even in to my liuory again.

Ber. You may do as you please Sir, but if you do,
I shall forget you are my Master, and make account
I have my servant Asmody again.

Lan. Do so, and command me as you have done,
I Will be unto your will obedient
As your own lymbs, and how so ere things sort,
In spite of Fortune we will have a* little sport.

ACTVS TER TIVS.
Scena Prima.
Enter Duke, L. Raymond at one door: Duchess, Dorilus bare before her, le^ing
on his shoulder and giving much grace unto him. Music.
Dor. Sir, I have a suite to you.

Duke. Speak it.

Dor. To know this Gentleman, and if not for my sake,
For his own to grace him, he has deserved it.

Duke. He has.
Dorilus kneeles, the Duke draws his sword and runs it on his bosom.
Iul. O my dear brother.

Dor. What do you mean Sir.

Duke. Away with her to prison, and let her father,
And her brother both be turned out of the Court.
Lord Raymond, be it your charge to see it done.
Exit.
Ray. Unwillingly I obey you; O my heart dances,
And tuned unto so many joys, it beats
My blood about me into every part,
That I grow young again; Alas good Lady,
Why do you weep? these tears were well becoming
If you had any crime to wash away,
But you are clear as heaven; then bear your self
As confident and shining, that stands unshaken,
When men speak blasphemy and throw up curses:
Beware sweet Princess, your too zealous care,
Expressed in the behalf of your firm friend,
May be by some informing Ear snatched up,
And carried to the Duke, which wud pile high,
And heighten up the mountain of his wrath.

Dor. Let it be so, and let that mountain Fall,
And all the world, with his displeasure on me,
But hidden in the ruin, yet at last
It is my comfort, I shall be found my self.

Ray, What a well built castle is a clear Conscience?
No Battery, no Invasion stirs it,
When a guilty on, is like a Spiders web,
Shook with the motion of each little fly.
What help there lies in me much injured Lady,
Assure your self of it, as if your own heart
Had the power to work it.
Enter a Guard.
Dor. I should wrong much noblesse to think otherwise.

Ray. See Madame, here is a Guard upon you.

Dor. They are welcome.

Ray. So, the devil when he means to seduce,
Puts on an Angels shape, who does not know.
How to dissemble, must not think to grow
Or prosper in his purpose. In this plot
Envy alone is not expressed, but hot
Untameable desires, which flame so hie;
One mischief must another satisfy.
I love, fair Iulia, and there was no way
How to obtain, but bringing to decay
The greatness of the Princess; misery
Will burst the strongest bar of Chastity.
She comes:
Enter Iulia.
Iul. Where is my wretched Mistress?

Ray. Alas, she is lost, and those that seek her,
Must be companions of her misery.
Therefore be wise fair Iulia, and forget her;
Thou art as fair as she, as excellent;
And I that rule the Duke do think so.

Iul. What means this?

Ray. The meaning is like him that vtters it,
Plain and sincere, to make thee Mistress
Of all the happiness which thou can wish;
As she whom I create shall stand above,
And laugh a^ the calamities of others:
Look not upon my hairs, I Am not so old
But I can kiss thee into Action,
Infuse a breath into you through your Ear,
Shall call a flaming blush into your cheek,
And turn this springtide of your tears to fire,
Or change 'hem into blood, and strike 'hem inward,
To incite a heat as sensual as the same
That did beget you.

Iul. I am incapable of this ill language:
But suppose I were (my Lord) as you esteem me,
Is this a time, when my heart's full of sorrow,
Ready to break for their unfortunate fates,
To give admittance to so loathed a fact,
That never coud be tempted in the height
Of festiuals: and all the soothing flatteries
Trust up in vows and glories of a Court.

Ray. Why? I will give you liberty to think,
To ponder on it for a little time;
For I wud rather Love should make thee mine
Then Violence or Fear. Consider of it
Without delays, return me absolute:
I am not like your dull cold Englishman,
That can attend his Mistress a whole day,
A week, a month, a year, yet check his blood,
And when it should have vent to burst in fire,
He weeps out in water. The Sun burns
Not outward, as my blood within, passions beat
So thick and short, they make my entrails sweat.
But for a while I leave you, think and be wise.
Exit Ray.
Iul. It Is wisdom to conceal what I do think,
And truth to call thee villain: O we are
Ruined, all of us are ruined,
Enter Bernard.
Bern. Yonder she is, and weeping --
Who will not be in love with sorrow, while it takes up
Her dwelling in that face, it is a question?
Whether smiles more adorn that cheek then tears.

Iul. O worthy Sir, how does my brother?

Bern. Well, donnot you fear it Lady.

Iul. Why do you leave him?

Ber. To comfort you that have more need of it,
For he sits up and laughs at misery,
Enter Fred. With hope to out live it, which is fortitude
Fitting a noble spirit.

Fred. Fortune my foe why do thou frown on me, etc. A good voice is a
perpetual comfort to a man, he shall be sure he cannot want a Trade. Yonder Is
Madam Iulia, and the Italian Doctor administering, they look like a couple of
Tragedians in the fourth Act, out of conntenance. Right Worshipful,
Charitable, most Bountiful and well disposed, please you to look upon the
Estate of a poor decayed Lord, blown out of the bosom of good Fortune, unto
the back side of men's Bounties, from whence a sweet gale of good will may
arise to blow me out of the dead sea of want and despair, into the happy
Haven of good harbor, where I may lie at rest from hunger and cold, bound unto
you in the bed-rolle of benevolence, which howsoever small a pittance it shall
be, in this ebb of adversity, it shall be returned treble to you again in the
next tide of prosperity -- Sweet Madame,

Ex. Ber. and Iul. Why here 'is the right fashion of the world,
To turn the backside to a man that has no money?
They are gone to wash away grief in salt water,
I mean to drown it in good Claret.
Enter Smi. O courteous fortune that has sennt me a Companion.
Smirke, how do thou chicken? come hold up thy head,
And let us see the dismalitie of thy Countenance,
The doleful dumps that therein do appear,
The Knobbles of adversity and Fate. Hum. --

Smir. Oh, Oh.

Fre. What Oh? where lies the Crampe?

Smir. Oh, Oh.
Strikes his breast.
Fre. With that the moody squire thumpt his breast,
And reared his eyes to heaven for revenge.
Speak sweet Ieronimo.

Smir. First take my tongue, and afterward my heart.

Fre. Good both being out, now let us have the Story.

Smir. Kicked with disgrace, and turned out of the Court
Both to the guard and black guard made a sport.

Fre. Excellent Smirke.

Smi. To Landresses and Lackies made a scorn,
And to all other people quite for lorne.

Fre. One, rhyme more, and I will crown thee Fennar Lawriate.


Smir. The Carters, Colliers, and the Carriers cursed me
The Porters pulled me, and the Pages pur^ ^me.

Fre. Why this it is to be a squire Smirke before your time
And your boy to be a Gentleman before you have him.

Smir. O that I had bin so happy to have lived and clefe wood in the country,
preached at the Buttery bar unto the Ploughmen, and there have used my
authority in Folio, when all the servants of the house should be drunk at
midnight, Cum Priuilegio.


Fre. I, those were certain days, but what wut thou do now?


Smir. Learn to wind whipcord, and go hang my self.


Fre. But where did thou leave my father?

Smi. I left him condoling with two or three of his friends
At the sign of the Lamentation.
Enter Callow and Ranoff.
Fre. The Salutation thou meanst.

Smi. In the Salutation one way, and the Lamentation
The the other -- Here comes more abuse.

Call. Me thinks sirrah, since my tongue brake loose,
I take an infinite pleasure in it, how thinks thou?

Ran. Your Lordship talks wondrous current,
For your word will go before many a man's bond.

Call. It shall run before any man's bond for a wager.
My honorable Lord, how does the great Duchess,
Your sister?

Ran. And the good Earl your father.

Call. With the rest of your kindred and acquaintance that bore the Court before
'hem.


Ran. I hope a man may court his Mistress now without a Patent from your honor.


Fre. I hope a man may crack your pipkin Pate,
And cut your neck of Mutton into Steakes,
If you will ^ot be quiet, ye brace of wicker bottles.

Ran. Wicker Bottles! he calls us wicker bottles.

Fre. I and mustie ones.

Call. And mangie ones to, are we not?

Fre. Yes, every thing that is troublesome and stinkes you are.


Call. Ha, ha, prithee laugh at him.

Ran. I, we will laugh at him, but let us go,
For the fellow is desperate, and perhaps may beat us;
Such people fear no law.

Call. Hang him, he dares not within the confines of the Court.


Ran. I, but we may talk our selves out of the liberties,
And then he may beat us without the confines.
Yet if he did, twere all one to me, for I can
Endure a beating as well as another man,
Custome's another Nature: but yet I wud we were gone:

Call. Why, come then lets go back again? For my own part, I donnot care for
quarrelling there we may be bold, though my Lord, I have a poor sister I wud
prefer to cut your Honors toes.


Ran. And I have a project, if it please your Honor, to set it on foot, it may
make a great many of us ride a horseback.


Fre. O that the place were not priuiledg'd.

Smir. I, and the place were not priuiledg'd.

Fre. Why? what wudst thou do?

Smir. Let 'hem alone, and laugh at 'hem.

Fre. Why, gramercy Smirke, thou have instructed me.
A my conscience I should now do so.

Smir. Yet he he gave me a bob in the project.

Fre. Why? have thou any thing to do with proiects?

Smi. Yes, I was to prefer one for putting down Pigs in the Fair time.


Fre. How? putting down Pigs, pry thy let us hear that?

Smi. Why, a fellow that will undertake to find the Country people, and the
people of the Fair, with good repast for three pence a meal.


Fre. How can that be? pry thy let us understand?

Smir. Why Sir, A cook will undertake to bake in a pasty
Four oxen, without Buttor corner wise,
Lamb and Mutton in the middle,
All kind of Foul on each side,
With their bills lying out to discover their condition,
With which he will be bound to find the fair seven days,
And give the over plus to the poor.

Fre. This is a very prittie one and profitable.

Smir. Then I have another, for the crying of small Bear, from six^ in the
morning, till twelve at noone, for all that are Barnab^.


Fre. A most necessary one, and had it bin propounded when I was a Lord, it
should have had my countenance.


Smir. Nay, it wud ha gone forward, for all your high bloods wud a countenanced
it, yet it was thought there was a rich Milke-woman wud a crossed it, and have
brought it to posset drink in the winter, and whay in the Summer, and the
Apothecaries wud have joined with her, to have clarified it.


Fre. Not unlikely. But Smirke, what is your purpose?

Smi. To stay till the good time, and take a whipping,
With as much resolution as a man may take a whipping

Fre. Then you look for the Lash?

Smir. I donnnot look for it, because it comes with a back blow, and there is
no ward for it but Patience.


Fre. Why thou say right, and it is manly done,
Not to run from, but to meet affliction.

Smir. I, but when affliction comes like a Fury, with a whip in her hand, it is
a fore matter.

Exeunt.
Scena secunda.
Enter Landoffe in his study, a spirit to him.
Spi. Leave with thy potent charms to tear the elements
And vex the poor inhabitants: here is the Ring
Transparant as the day, that makes the wearer
Lost to all sight, and walk invisible
To every eye but yours: And when so ere
It is your pleasure it shall loose its virtue,
Touched but with this herb and it falls in pieces.

Lan. Thanks my industrious spirit.

Spir. What else is thy command'

Lan. Naught else at this time, but on all occasions
Thou in a thought be ready to attend.

Spir. I shall.
Exit.
Lan. Begone. Dorilus, Bernard come forth, all things are at peace

Enter Dorilus and Bernard. As your hearts shall be ere I part from you,
At least forsake you: Behold this little Ring,
Purer then Crystal, full of subtiller flame
Then that which sparkles in the Diamond;
Of Virtue infinite beyond its Beauty.
With this Ring Dorilus thou shall free the Princess
At least endeavor; it is certainly reported
At her Arraignment, as the hour comes on,
She shall have none to plead her cause for her,
But her supposed crime laid open, and urged
Withal the mouth of law, and so condemned:
Yet thou that ever could speak well, without
A cause so full of matter and of Truth,
Shall hid to all eyes, by virtue of this Ring,
Become an Orator, and plead for her,
And make the Court amazed to hear thee speak.

Dor. You amaze me, first to hear you --

Lan. But I Will amaze my Pupil Bernard more,
When he shall stand by thee and hear thee talk,
Yet not have power to see thee: Put on this Ring,
Now tell me Bernard where is Dorilus?

Ber. Into air vanished, or suncke into the earth,
For I protest I see no Dorilus.

Lan. Call to him, try if he hear thee,

Ber. Dorilus, Dorilus.

Doril. Why here man, I am here.

Ber. Here; where?

Dor. Why here, close by thee, now I touch thee.

Ber. This is thy hand?

Doril. Yes.

Ber. It may be foot for any thing that I know, but that
Now I feel the fingers, thou may hold it up at the Bar
And nere be burnt i the hand I Will warrant thee.

Doril. Why? I see thee plain as I did before,
And every thing else.

Ber. But that I have confidence in my Master and his Art, I wud never look to
see thee again.


Lan. Look you Iulia your Mistres, comfort her,
And take the work upon you:
I Will to my blew coat again, and instantly wait on you.

Ber. All your best wishes. Fairest.
Enter Iul.
Iul. O Sir they lie in you.

Ber. O you speak music to the melancholy,
Health to the sick.

Iul. For next unto the delivery of my Mistress,
My brothers welfare is, which you promised.

Doril. Why sister I am well? next under Heaven
I praise this Gentleman.

Iul. That is his voice, where are you brother?

Doril. Here sister just before you.

Iul. Before me?

Doril. Yes, in the very mouth of you, as a man wud say

Iul. Trust me I cannot see you.

Doril. Trust me I Am glad of it, I Will talk the bolder and and the louder, they
shall hear me.


Ber. This I perceive dooes somewhat trouble you.
But let it not, it shall be for a good,
Which though it cannot change, may stir your blood.
See they are hot in preparation, and people making to behold the Arraignement,

Extnt.
Scetra tertia.
Enter Ferdinando, Cornelius.
Ferd. Fortune is a good huswife, she plies her wheel well Alas poor Lady, I
pity her; for a my conscience she is clear of the fact laid to her.


Cor. It is the maddest world, the report goes she ^hud lie with on for a
Nosegay.


Ferd. In some things Fame will be free I see, in some things scant; for I Will
assure you 'twas for a Garland.


Cor. Why a Garland let it be, she had bin better won it with some other dance
then the old one: but she has hard measure me thinks, not to be allowed an
Advocate; for alas, what can a woman say for her self in such a case?


Fer. Do thou think an Advocate can handle it better?


Cor. Yes, if he have a feeling of the business.

Fer. Away Traitor.
Enter the Duke, Judges, Raymond, with others, the form of a Court.
Judge. Bring forth the prisoner, place her at the Bar.
Enter Dorigen placed at the Bar.
Judge. Read the Indictment.

Clarke. Dorigen Ebroistene, daughter to Guide Ebroisten, in the Province of
Mysen Gentleman; and by the grace and favor of our Sovereign Lord Duke of
^axonie made Duchess, atainted of high Treason, by commitring Adultery with
one Dorilns Traohesse, a private Gentleman of the same Province of Mysen, who
by good and sufficient witness (beside her own shameless confession to the
Duke himself) is here justly accused, and indicted of the fact; yet the Duke
out of his most gracious clemency, desirous of a direct and lawful
proceeding, admitteh the said Dorigen -- daughter to the aforesaid Guido -- to
answer for her self, and wishes with all his soul (such is his infinite
affection to her, that she could clear her self of the crime. So Heaven and
the Justices of her cause defend her!


1 Judge. Speak Lady, free and fearelesse, what can you say?


Dor. Nothing but that I do desire to die,
For it is sin enough that the Duke thinks
I am guilty of the fact, all the Clemency
That you can, show me or I do desire,
Is to condemn me quickly.

Ray. That I must speak it grieves me in a cause,
Which I cud wish neuet had presidence,
As it has had too often, alas that I
Who do bleed inward, to behold this woman
Fallen by a sin equal to Lucifer.
From her clear Heaven where she stood a sta^,
Moving in his arms as her proper Orb,
That I should see this woman as I say.
Who had she bin a fixed one, had never
Shot from her sphere, but as an exhalation,
Drawn by the attractiue virtue of the Sun,
Appears a glorious star yet wanting matter.
To maintain his luster, shoots forth his flame:
And drops from whence it came unto a Dunghill,
So was this woman raised and so she fell:
That so much Beauty which was given for Honor,
And did advance her to it, should cause shame,
Who can tell whether this be the first man,
That she has sind withal, since usually,
Many faults are committed ere one found,
She promised the fellow of her lust,
Upon condition to make that: And what was it?
A Garland: A Garland of all flowers,
Of what effect who knows, or to what purpose,
Both being as certain as the thing it self,
How or from whence it came nay more then this;
She was so impudent to tell the Duke,
And tell him she had sworn, which the immodests,
And most professed Strumpet never wud:
What name of shame is to be given this woman,
That wud thus lewdly suffer the wild tongue,
Proclay me performance of so vild a deed,
And unto him she knew did love her so,
She might perhaps by her beauty and her tears,
Or both together stir compassion,
In many here, and in the Duke himself,
B^t when her crime shall be remembered,
A crime so beyond mercy being done,
Unto a Prince; and such a Prince as he is,
What can I less inspire me all ye powers?
That thought me worthy of authority
Then without pity to condemn this woman.

1. Judge. The case is too apparent.

Ray. Is it not grave Fathers.

2 Judge. Yes indeed it is, I was almost asleep.

Ray. Ye all do know, all ye that know the Law,
Who pardons the offender does commit,
An offense equal with him that does punish,
The harmless innocent then she must dye,
I grieve to speak't and am so charitable,
To wish that her reproach may dye with her.

Duke I thank thee for the last speech, it was well,
O that she now cud speak and clear her self.
But proceed, give sentence, if she stay long,
And I stand by a witness of her tears,
She Will weep her self guiltless and innocent,
Therefore go on.

Doril. Stay.

Duke. Whose that?

1 Judge. I know not.

Ray. Whence come that voice.

Cor. Out of the clouds I think,
For no man dares own it.

Duke. Go forward and give sentence.

Doril. Stay I say.

1 Judge. It spoke again.

2 Judge. It came by my Ear.

Fer. The Court is troubled.

Doril. Hear me ye ministers of Justice,
And thou Patron of it and Truth,
That comes to you for succor, and for safety.

Duke. Keep your places, for let it be the Devil
I will hear him; and hearing shall determine
Whether he be a spirit of Truth or Lies.

Doril. The All preserver that guards Innocence,
And often lets it pine, but never perish,
Can raise a voice from stones, or trees, or winds,
To plead the cause that neds no Eloquence.
What has this Lady done that here you bring her
Unto a Bar of shame? It is it for being virtuous,
Because she has bin constant to her Lord:
But some have called her chastity in question,
That never had a spark in their own Breasts,
And have possessed the Duke from his own thoughts,
That she must needs be bad because they are so.
Has every woman so much wit to hide
That fault especially? and had not she,
Who is the mirror of of her sex for that,
More then for Beauty? But she told the Duke
She had offended in an idle promise,
And that is objected to her for a crime;
A piece of impudence unparalleled.
When had she meant to have wronged her royal Lord,
She wud have locked the secret in her heart,
And set her face with smiles, beaten with kisses
Suspicion from his bosom; but she discovered
The guist, the giver, and the vow that bought it.
Who is it not knows, dishonestie consists
In the deed done, not in the spoken word?
And she imagining the deed in which
She employed the doer, never to be done,
And so the wickedness. Let me not be thought tedions
Nor be offensive, if I bring to mind
The meeting of those two, how she revealed,
That you great Duke consented to the fact,
Encouraged her vnto't, and led her on,
If she had bin a villain to her death.
But he looking on her, and seeing in her eyes,
The image of fair Virtue how it wept,
Gave back her vows, and freed her from his heart,
In that shape first she stood, but again placed her
As his most roy all mistress, and your wife.

Duke. Excellent voice go on, for I coud stand
A tedious winter but to hear thee talk.

Cor. So coud not I without a rug Gown.

Doril. It has bin still a maxim, she is not chaste
That has not bin attempted, but she who has stood
Temptation, and resisted. Gold is the purer
For being tryde; and Virtue put in act,
Appears more glorious, when it has wrought it self
Out of those troubles which would stifle it.
Heaven was assaulted by the Giants once,
Which showed Jove's power the greater: the pensive soul
Fighting with sin, the devil, and with death,
After the victory, triumphs and sings
Eternally amongst the blessed Angels,
Crowned with perpetual Peace and happiness:
But she for being virtuous must die,
For conquering her affections, for loving
Sincerely, and effectually, her Lord;
For having not the cunning to dissemble,
But for being Simple, Chaste, and Innocent,
Just, Noble, Beauteous, Excellent in all,
Save what no common woman wud have mist.
For this, and for this only she must die.

Duke No, she must live; and all the world must die,
To me, before a hair of her shall perish.
O I have wronged thy goodness, now I see it;
who was before made blind with jealousy,
The heavens take thy part, and wunnot suffer
So much of worthiness to fall at once,
Lest nothing here but wickedness abound.

Ray. Sir, will you hear me,

Duke Away, I will hear nothing but her Angels voice,
And that which spoke for her, which was no less,
It held such music in it, besides Truth.
Wipe from thine eyes those tears; let Messengers
Be sent to find the Earl my father forth,
And bring him back to the Court, there to receive
Of us his dignities and favors trebled;
I am new framed again. Afflictions mee^,
And mingling with our joys, make them more sweet.
Exit.
Call. I donnot like this.

Ran. Nor I. (with you.

Ber. Fair one, pray stay, your brother wud speak

Iul. Sir, you may command me, and for his sake,
To the utmost of my power, I am bound to you.
O my dear brother, how you joy my soul
To see you up again, in health, and lusty?

Dor. Place your thanks here kind sister, for to his skill.
Next under Heaven, it must be attributed.

Iul I do know it brother, and do thank him.
Heartily thank him, and the Duches shall,
That owes him equally as much as we,
Thank him a better way.

Ber. No Lady, your thanks pays me really,
And I will never look for better pay,
Nor take, then comes from you; pray look upon me,
And see if you can fasten your affection
Upon a man so unworthy as my selse.

Iul. Sir you are worthy of a better choice,
But let me for your own sake thus advise you,
If you have entertaind any such thought,
(As I hope you are wiser) to part with it;
For trust me, this poor heart I carry here,
Is not mine own; I do but walk with it,
And keep it for another: pray no more Sir,
Brother farewell, I shall be wanting to the Duches.
Exit
Lan. Lost it, it cannot be.

Doril. Now talking with you, plucking off this glove,
It fell out of my hand.

Lan. Seek good Sir.
Enter Fred.
Fred. And do we see the golden days again?
Does honor once more Court us? then look up.
Look up my friends I say, and see your Lord
Double and treble guilt; his happiness
Hatched, and inlaide, not to be worn out with The.
What do you look for?

Lan. A Jewel we have lost.

Fred. A Jewel, let it be hanged, I Will give you every one
Jewels a piece, shall over value it,
There Is not a friend I have, but shall have stones,
As fair and weighty as the Turk has any,
And Concubines like him, though not so many.
Ye shall good Doctor, thou art so melancholy.

Lan. Come, let it alone.

Doril. How? let it alone.

Lan. Yes, for lost it cannot be, if any find it,
When I am pleased to have it, I will send
A messenger shall fetch it with a vengeance.
Prythy forbear, and let us hear my Lord.

Fre. Gentlemen what will ye do? will ye come to Court, and be graced by me,
will you be Knights or Officers, Gentlemen vshers, or of the Bedchambe^? speak
what you will be whilst I am in the giving vain, and you are so.


Lan. We Will wait on you tomorrow my good Lord.

Fre. You blew Bottle Basket hilt I talk not to you,
And the other two are stupid, now I think on it:
Dorilus you were best leave the Court; a man
Suspected once, is very sildome found
In his heart that suspects him to be sound:
There ye have a touch of my Policy, farewell.

Doril. Farewell my Lord.

Fre. Think on it.
Passing by spies the Ring.
Dor. I Will warrant you.

Fre. What Is this? A ring: that is it and trust me,
A very pleasing one unto the eye,
Some Lady lost it, for whose sake i will wear it,
Until I find a challenger, it may he
It Was lost a purpose and here dropped for me.
Exeunt
ACTVS QVARTVS.
Scena Prima.
Enter Frederick.
Fre. Am I mad or drunk or the people, both: and blind too I think. For let
me come up to them never so near, talk never so loud, gripe them never so
hard, they see me not stare and gape, as if I were in the air, and ask,
where are you. If we were out of favor, I should never wonder at it, but
being Restord, and in greater grace then ever, it somewhat troubles me: zfoote,
and a Lord cannot be acknowledgd, what will be come of poor Gentlemen: here
come a couple, and sober as I take it, I Will try if they have not lost their
eyesight.

Enter Ferdinando, and Cornelius.
Cor. But that you justify ir so vehemently,
I should not a believed it: Lost again.

Ferd. Again, and sent to prison, her father
Banishd the Court again, and all his honors,
Took again from him, and from's son,
And alls again as it was, and if not worse,

Ferd. Nay then my admirations at an end. I remember no body wud know me last
time. But these are a couple of honest fellows, and yet they serve a Lord, if
any body have use of their eyes these will. By your leave Gentlemen, did you
see the young Lord Frederick.


Cor. Where Is he that asked that question?

Fer. Zfoote I cannot see him, yet heard him plain,

Cor. The invisible voice is come again,

Fer. I believe so,

Fre. People are blind, that's certain -- -- look how they stare -- I donnot
think there was ever any such thing in the world as an eye, a seeing eye. I
know Tailors needles have eyes, and Cheeses, but a discerning eye, that is the
eye I wud encounter with.

Enter Callow and Ranoff.
Call. It did me more good then my dinner, I protest, to see her transported to
prison again.


Ran. And so it did me I protest, for her brothers sake my Lord Frederick
Fadoudle.


Call. I wonder he is not taken yet, heel Fadoudle at the Gallows, I believe
when so ere he is, for I told the Duke what a saucy companion he was.


Fre. I will requite your kindness instantly,

Call. How now, what is that?

Fre. Will you too Coxcombs never be vncoupl'd,

Ran. Who was that my Lord?

Call. Nay, I know not:

Fre. Who was that then?

Call. Who was that said, who was that?

Fre. Marry it was I Sir,

Call. You, who are you?

Fre. One that'le bestow a*little pains with you,

Ran. Pray knock there no more my friend, that's the back gate, your best go
about.


Frede. I will do so, and wipe your Noses for you.


Ran. I Would rather you wud let it alone, unless you had a finer handkerche^*


Call. It Is the spirit of some Porter, and wipes her with his Frock.


Ranoff. Soones I Will not endure this: I Will draw first.

Call. And so will I.
Why do you not draw?

Call. Hark, the voice asked why we do not draw.

Ran. I, I heard it, but I Will be hanged before I Will draw for that trick.


Call. And so will I to -- See yonder is a company of Gentlemen, lets fly to them
for succor: Are you walking.


Cor. Yes Sir.

Call. We Would be glad of your company.

Ran. Heers an invisible voice follows us in the likeness of I know not what-


Call. And plays upon us like a Flute backward, and forward.


Fer. We hard a voice indeed but felt no touch of any thing.


Call. No, It may be you are valiant and wud strike again, but we are tender
hearted, and ten to one, but it knows as much.


Cor. Why if you will walk our way, we will guard you.


Call. Yes sir, your way is ours now how ever.

Fre. Well I am lost I see, there is no hope that ever I shall be seen again of
mortals; I walk i'th^ clouds; But that the other two before these, and before
them others, could not perceive me, I should think I had with beating made the
last pair cast a mist before their own eyes, Iubia and my Lord of mischief
with his two Faces Winter and Summer.

Enter Raymond and Iulia.
Ray. Sweet Iulia kiss me.

Fre. Ah you old whooremaster is the sign in Scorpio with you.


Ray. Thou see my power, how with a breath I turn.
And wind the Duke any way I please,
In spite of all those words wasted in air:
I pluct the D^tchesse from his arms again,
The only star of court, more then a Duchess,
Which is to be my Mistress.

Fre. Say you so, I Will master you anon.

Ray. Prithy look up and smile upon me.

Iuli. Pray away.

Ray. Come I have word sufficient nor will any longer be kept of thus weary of
delay, I mean to work y^u.


Iule Lay ofy our wicked hands.
Adders and Scorpions shall as soon embrace me,
Shall my dear mistress that equally laments:
My aduers Fate, which heeres if not about it.
And in her tears lies bathed, breaking her sigh^:
Into as many pieces, as if she striud
To number up her sins, which are no more,
Then will make truth appear that she must sin,
And shall I throw away all thought of her,
That altogether thinks of Heaven and me,
Whom hourly she solicites and ascends,
And calls me along with her in her Prayers,
Shall I forget this Lady, and to lust
Prostrate my self to him that works her ruin.
First, may Heaven point me out, his mark ^or veng^ance.
And I unable to avoid the stroke.
Be rent and torn as Thunder does an Oak,

Ray. Stay -- you are too wilful.

Iul. Is that all?

Ray. Here me -- -- I will speak what shall be liking to thee. Prythy come
back; so well I do perceive thou love the Duchess, that her affliction's
thine.


Iul. They are.

Ray. Can thou cast off grief with her releasement?
If I shall bring her sound unto the Duke,
In every circumstance, and fix her sure:
Nay set her one staire higher then she was,
And make him honor what before he admired.
Will thou then make a passage for my love,
And open me away into thy heart?

Iul. I will.

Ray. Wilt the give me a kiss upon the premises.

Fre. I Will give you a kiss anon, in your good father the Devils name.


Ray. I hold heaven in my arms, and all the joys:
Wut thou be just to me?

Iul. As you are unto me; for if you prove
The master of your word, I will be over mine the mistres,
And though it be a jewel I esteem,
I never saw how I coud part with it better.

Ray. Another kiss, and go and promise unto all thy friends, and to the
Duchess self, her liberty.


Fre. You are a villain.

Ray. Ha.

Fre. You are damned.

Ray. What voice is that?

Iul. I heard none.

Fre. I will cut your throat.

Ray. Cut my throat.

Fre. I, your Weason pipe, your Gullet, this ungodly Gullet.


Ray. Swoones it pincht me by the throat.

Fre. Your best cry out murder.

Ray. This is another voice allied to that which pleaded for the Duchess, but
not the same, and it is merely Witchcraft. I fear thee not Dinell, or Devils
mate, friend or acquaintantance.


Iul. Who do you talk to?

Ray. A scuruie voice, I know not, nor do care for,
An yet it troubles me, I cannot see
The thing that sets it going. Be you
Careful and constant. In the afternoon
Come to my lodging, I will have the Duke there
And you shall be a witness of my w^ing.
And of the subtle proiects I have laid,
To execute your wishes, till then farewell.

Iul. Farewell.

Ray. A pox upon thee what so ere thou art.

Fred. 'Twill come home.

Ray. Show thy self and be the Prince of Devils,
I Will not fear thee.

Fred. No, the great Devil and you are all one, which shows I am no Devil;
for if I were, I durst not thus abuse


Ray. What art? (thee.

Fred. A pleasant fellow Sir, and one of the noble Science, for look you Sir,
there is a Venie.


Ray. O, Swoones he has stabd me.

Fred. No Sir no, I am a blunt fellow, and so my weapon; nay* I wonnot leave
you thus.

Exit after Ray.
Doril. Here Is my sister, but very sad me thinks:
How now Iulia, why so disconsolate.

Iul. O brother we are undone: All Is out of joint again
As much or rather more then ever.

Dor. How?

Iul. The Duke's in old fit, and the poor Princess
Clapped up close prisoner, look to your self
Or you are lost. (me

Dori. Be it so; for life is wearisome sister, do you love

Iul. Why should you ask a question so frivolous.

Dori. Do you?

Iul. You know I do.

Dori. Show it then; for till you satisfy me in my request, I shall make doubt
of it.


Iul Pray speak it.

Dori. Here Is a Gentleman to whom I owe,
More then my parents gave me, more then
If Fortune should look up and smile,
Prove a prodigal in favors to me;
And I should live to take 'hem with this hand,
And with this, pay it as due Tribute unto him*
See how he languishes, can take no rest,
No food, but thoughts which nourish him,
And sighs again for you, drinks his own tears,
And weeps them forth again, yet does not call you cruel,
Pray speak to him.

Iul. Why alas? brother I did tell this man
How hopeless I was, prayed him to desist,
And make some better choice.

Ber. You did Lady, but I must die first.

Iul. Why if you be so desperate a lover,
That you will die for me, think me the like,
That I can die as well for him I love.

Ber. You were good company to go to heaven with.

Lan. I, but if either of you go that way, you take*
An ill course in your journey.

Doril. Have you then placed your heart on any man*

Iul Yes believe me, though I have made no noise
Wi^h sighs, able to blow up mountains.

Doril. What is he?

Iul. One that you praised your self into my heart,
Although his youth and feature need no Orator.

Doril. I praysd! Iulia you wrong me.

Iul. By Cupids self I donnot.

Doril. Name him.

Iul. It Is an unreasonable request in you,
But yet to show I am not ashamed of him,
It is young Bernard.

Ber. Who Lady? pray speak that name again.

Iul. Young Bernard.

Ber. Bernard la Vere.

Iul. The same.
Pulls of his disguisd Hair.
Ber. I thank you.

Doril. Nay Sister, once you are caught.

Lan. But in no worse trap then her lovers Arms

Ber. Nor shall you ever be ashamed of him, nor yet
Repent you, for he will love as faithfully
As you, and live and die with you.

Iul. There is no giving back, welcome my love,
And in a time that I did wish for thee;
Yet I shall startle you and try your temper:
aside. For since I have found away how to infranchise
My poor afflicted mistress, I Will be pleasant.

Ber. I never thought before, a man might be
In heaven and not know it, as to have a dwelling
In your heart and be ignorant of the bliss, Is little less.

Iul. O but my Bernard, we do never meet
With any happiness, but some kind of mischief
Mingles still with it, yet it is more or less,
As you shall make of it, if you might take me now:
Why, I were worth your love, for I am yet;
(I did not lie much, if I said a Virgin)
But without blushing I dare say a Maid.

Ber. It is not to be doubted.

Iul. But it is to be lost.

Lan. That is not to be doubted neither.

Iul. But not on him, for so it is not lost,
To deal directly with you, I cannot bring,
That thing called maiden* head, for it is promised.
And if you cannot love me without that,
Deal plainly then with me, as I with you,
And I will look out for another man:
Another handsome man a Citizen.
That shall make much of me, and not a whit,
Love me the worse for want of such a trifle.

Ber. I know sweet Iulia you were ever merry,
And not beyond a Maidens modesty.
But this is very strange,
Enter Frederick
Fre. But not so strange as true, I am a witness of it,
She has given away her maiden head to the Devil,
For an old whooremaster is little better.

Dori. That is Fredericks voice.

Fre. But as she said it is but a trifle: a cold Comodity
A man may buy at some time of the year
Like Cowcumbers, at any time for a small Ring,
A Pursse, or a pair of Gloves, for so your country
Wenches part with them, your City for an Apple.

Lan. There Is none if you see him.

Dori. Not I.

Lan. He has found the Ring.

Dori. Very likely.

Lan. Nay most certain, and let him keep it, for being ignorant in the virtue
of it, it may be some sport to us to hear him chase being lost to all mankind.


Fre. Doctor thou drop'st.

Ber. The devil what art thou, I see thee not.

Fre. No more, thou shall him that does cucklod thee.

Lan. That's true, wh^lst he enioyes the invisible Ring.

Iul. O you are a stout lover to be dejected thus, for such a vanity as a
Maidenhead is, you would ill endure to have your wife run away with another man two
or three year together, and afterward brought home, and again accepted with
Suppers and with Trumpets.


Lan. A plagy smart wench.

Iul. But since it is so estimate a Jewel,
Come my Barnard w'eele not part with it,
But lay our heads together how to preserve it.
(going out, he calls,
Fre. Why but do you hear, shall I be lost thus
Will none of you acknowledge me, Iulia,
Doctor Dorilus.

Dori. Frederick by the voice.

Fre. And Frederick by flesh and blood as good as any man or woman wud desire,
feel me else.


Dori. I do feel a hand.

Fre. And yet perceive no body.

Dori. Right.

Fre. Right, but by your leave all is not right; either your eyes are drawn
aside, or my body is taken assunder, and nothing left certain of me but a
hand and a voice, mas here comes Smirke, I Will try the strength of his eiesight.


Land. I beseech you stay, here is a promise of some mirth.

Enter Smirke with sever all pots of colors.
Fre. Smirke well met.

Smi. Not so my friend, well overtaken you may say,
But I am in have, therefore farewell.
What are there rubs in the air, it is some little dandiprat, that I ouerrun,
and ten to one he has broke his Nose against my Pipkin, Where art thou?


Fre. Here.

Smi. Here, where is that here.

Fre. What has he got tro there painting: that it is, since you know me not,
I Will bestow a little pains to picture you, that the best friend you have, shall
hardly take acquaintance of you.


Smi. A Pox of these Flies, they will never leave* sweet Mutton, but my friend,
my friend, he is gone poor felfellow again.


Fre. It Is strange you know not me.

Smi. I should know that voice.

Fre. You should do so, if you wud call your self to mind

Smi. My young master Frederick and quondam Lord where are you?


Fre. Here man here.

Smi. Something plays with my Nose I believe it is my whisking Muschatus, now I
am come in the wind.


Fre, What do thou do with this painting Smirk?

Smi. Marry I mean to live by it and purpose to set up my old trade again.
Fre. Thy old trade, what is that?


Smi. Why a Stainer, I have hired a Shop not far from Court. And I have painted
the most horrible things that many men know not what to make of them, I drew
Hercules a great while a go in the likeness of a man, and now every one says
he looks like a Lion. Then I drew Acteon hunted with his own dogs, and they
say it is like a Citizen pursued with Seriants.


Fre. Why, but can thou draw any thing into proportion?


Smi. Can I draw any thing into proportion; why, I will presently draw you
backward or forward, a limb, twoo'd do you good to behold it.


Fre. And thou be so good a workman, thou shall draw my Picture.


Smi. I wud be glad to see your face in, if it please you to come out of the
Cloud.


Frede. Well Smirke, pray for me, I am a man, but in this world I have small
store of money, and therefore cannot reward thee as I wud, but hold thee, give
me thy hand, I can see to take thee by it, there is a Ring, 'twill yield thee
somewhat.


Smi. I thank you sir, it will serve to exchange for a Corrall for my son
and heir when I have him.


Lan. Now step out altogether and salute him.

All Good Senior you are welcome to the light,

Fre. To the light: why, do you perceive me now?

Dori. As plain as the earth we tread on.

Fre. Whers Smirke?

Smi. Here I am Sir.

Fre. Where, come near me, O the Ring, the Ring,
Give me my Ring again, I find the virtue,

Smi Nay, soft, so play fools, nothing is surer then gift.

Fre. Come near me that I may touch thee.

Smi. I know what the Proverb says, touch me and take me, and therefore I
will keep aloft, Zfoote he is stricken put blind, he gropes like a young
Nouice, the contrary way. What ^re these blind too?


Fre. Good Gentlemen help me to lay hold of him.

Lan. Lay hold of whom.

Fre. Of Smirke.

Land. Smirke, why he is gone.

Fre. No, he is here, I smell the oily Rascal.

Smi. They are all blind, or else I walk invisible, I Will try that presently.

Kisses Iulia.
Iul. How now?

Smi. Nothing but a Flesh-flye forsooth lighted upon your lips, the place is
full of hem -- Somebody has sprinkled invisible Virgins water upon me for I
do go insensible. Here comes the two Eggs, I shall go near to crack their
Crows, for the last abuse, but walking as I do, I will find out a better
revenge.

Enter Callow and Ranoff.
Call. Sirrah I think it was much heereabout that we met with the taking voice
that kicked us?


Ran. It Was indeed.

Smi. I wud kick you again, but that I have Corns on my Toes, I will only
pencill you now. And because you have so much knavery and want color sor't I
will begin with Orange tawny.


Call. What was that?

Ran. What,

Call. Someting crossed my Nose.

Ran. A Door, a Door, the fields are full of them.

Smi. I Will give you the Door too.

Ran. There was another wiped me in the same place.

Smi. Cause you are a Knight, you shall bear a Cross

Ran. How now?
Zfoote I think some Bird has wraid in my eye.

Call. No it is nothing but the dew falls I think.
A Poxont, I am paid again.

Ran. There are some gadflies sure abroad, lets make away.
Another wipe first.

Call. Ha, ha, ha.

Ran. Why do you laugh my Lord? ha, ha, ha.

Smi. Nay, I Will put in too, for my ha, ha, ha, ha.
This is a three man's laughter.

Call. But why do you laugh my Lord? ha, ha.

Ran. ha, ha, Pray why do you laugh my Lord?

Call. For nothing, for nothing, come prithie lets go.

Ran. I pray lets go, ha ha,

Smi. I am glad I have made you merry.

Fre. Where art thou? So dear I love thee for this piece of knavery that I
could kiss thee, prithy let me kiss thee


Smi. No, no, kissing, I do bristle too much.

Fre. I Will give thee another Ring.

Smi. No no, no more Rings, I shall think my self an Alderman, and grow proud
then.


Lan. Come let him alone with it.

Smi. If you know any Lady that deals in complexion you may do me a
kindness to acquaint her that Smirke the seruingman is turned a Painter.


Scena Tertia.
Enter Frederick, Cornelius and Carolus,
Cor. How now Carolus, how does my Lord?

Caro. Troth scuruely, as a Lord may do in his case.

Fer. Why how is it man?

Caro. Wicked, wicked, extreme wicked, he cannot say his Prayers.


Fer. Why? is he speechless.

Cor. What a Pox is that to the purpose, has he made his will.


Caro. Yes, And in his will he does will and command that you two shall be
whipped, and that he has bequeathed you for your legacy.


Cor. Let him bestow it upon his friends, we can live without it.


Fer. But prithee sirrah, tell us the manner of his sickness which was wondrous
strange and sudden.


Caro. Why how shoud I know more then you, I am none of his Phisician.


Cor. They say but be it spoken in private that a Rat hants him, is it so? thou
can tell.


Fer. A Rat, a pox of a Rat, Zbloud I heard otherwise.

Cor. Well, lets hear what have thou heard.

Fer. Marry Sir that the Neopolitan Canker has searched into his bones: and he
lies buried in vleers, stincks so that without perfumes, nobody is able to
abide him. But mum mum, not a word of this I speak, it is amongst fellows and
friends.


Caro. It Is well you do so, for otherwise your legacies wud be bestowd upon you,
a yard or two of whipcord is no great cost, and the executors wud go to the
charge, Zbloud what Rascals are you to utter this, you are the inuenters of it.


Fer. Not I by this hand, I heard mine at my Barbers,

Cor. And I heard mine at the Apothecaries.

Car. Why heers the misery of great men, they cannot escape the slanders of
their slaves look you yonder goes one of the Doctors, you were best (to be
better satisfied) ^quier of him.


Fer. Not I, I love not to be inquisitue.
Enter a Docter.
Doct. Where Is any of my Lords Gentlemen there.

Cor. Here Is a Leash of us Sir.

Doct. One of you must instantly take horse, and ride to Doct or Lopez, and
bring him hither with all speed that may be: his counsel is wanting, and it
concerns your Lords life, therefore make have, and tell him so to: Tell him
the Duke will else be here before him; from whom, if so it happen, he will
receive a check.


Caro. we shall sir, we shall.

Fer. The Duke, why is the Duke sent for?

Caro Yes, and has sent word he will be here immediately.

Fer. Ber Lady Sir, then it is to be thought the dangers more then every Ague
brings, and it will go hard with him.


Caro. Why make not you more have then to the doctors?

Fer. I make more have, why does not he or you?

Caro. I, why I was not bidden.

Fer. Nor I.

Caro. Why, nor I, more particular then you.

Fer. But you must go that answered.

Caro. Why you may go as well as I that answered.

Fer. By this Air not I.

Caro. By this Earth nor I.

Cor. By this Air, Earth, Fire and Water too, not I: zbloud I get no more then
you, and why should I then?


Caro. This is very well, suppose my Lord for want of this same Doctor now
shall die.


Cor. Why, what can I help it. (you.

Car. Why you may by fetching him.

Cor. And so may

Caro. And so may he.

Fer. And so may you.

Caro. I care not, nay do as you please.

Fer. Why, nor I neither.
A Bed thrust out, Enter Lady the old Lord, some other Lady and Aliens.
Cor. Zfoote he shifts his Rome, I Will not be seen.

Fer. Byr Lady Sir nor I.

Ray. Who went for Lopez?

Car. Ferdinand my Lord.

Ray. Is he not come yet?

Car. No my Lord, nor gone yet I believe.

Ray. Oh, my blood boyles, as if the Sun
Had darted all his beams into my intrailes.
Short shot my soul, and like the shaft
Shot by great Hercules, fly till thou break'st,
Or else, strike through the body of the Sun,
And fix thy self in heaven a brighter Star.
What shall I do? Is there no power in Physic?
Swoones are you dumb, Doctors can you not talk,
Though you do nothing else?

Doct. Alas my Lord; we know not what to say.

Ray. Why then you might a said, that you can say,
That you know nothing, but your own
Privilege, to kill vnpunish'd; yet are you apt
When Nature workee her self, to assume it yours.
O my torment, when wut thou cease? get you gone,
Impostures as you are, and cosen people
That have faith in you; for I have found
No Art, but Voice among you.

Car. A way Physicians, go; my Lord thinks ye are fools,
And so do I: Therefore begone, begone.

Ray. Is not the Duke come yet?

Car. No my good Lord; but here are the Divines.

Ray. They ase very welcome.

Bishops. How does your Lordship?

Ray. Wondrous well satisfied in any point touching my salvation: only one
burden on my conscience lies, for the Duke himself to take away.

Enter Duke.
Caro. The Duke is come.

Ray. Then all the rest I pray depart the room.

Duke How is it man?

Ray. Cheerful, wondrous cheerful, all this whole day I felt not such a
minute.


Duke Be comforted good Raymond, me thinks I see another age of life yet shine
in thee, your eye is quick and sprightly, death does not show himself in any
part.


Ray. Your grace is a good comforter, and your sight blows up this spark of
life to such a light which is but as a twinkling before death.

Therefore I do beseech your Majesty,
As in this life and after death you will stand,
In history to the last hour of Time,
A just religious Prince to which I know,
In your own inclination you aspire,
Even for the Dukedomes peace, O -- your pardon:
My breath I find will fail me, -- your pardon Duke.
And quickly speak it; or I shall not hear you.

Duke What, what shall I pardon? good Raymond speak, I gather by thy speech
thou would unfold, something of consequence; you must not part thus with me,
therefore good Raymond speak, borrow a little time of death, and I will pay it
back out of my life: dear Raymond donnot leave me thus unsatisfied, for if you
do, I Will follow you to learn it.


Ray. O I have wronged you.

Duke Never, never good Raymond.

Ray. By that strong power which raises me I have,
And lends me breath to utter it; and this Lady,
Where is she and the Princess all of ye,
For when you first began your jealousy,
Upon a small presumption, I as apt.
And sudden as your self in fear to find,
The issue of a Prince which Heaven aduert,
So basely bastardize, held up your thought,
Told you of former and familiar tricks,
In the like nature I had seen between them,
Which I protest was then out of my care,
That such a thing might be, rather then any crime,
That ever I knew she was guilty of,
Send for her therefore, and condemn your rash
False suppositions, and pardon mine,
That grew but out of yours, but once being grown,
It spread into more branches then your own,

Duke What is thy purpose.

Ray. Religious as the Churches which is,
To clear all doubts and present Truth,
In her own Garments, to protect innocence,
And from her white hand lift her out of slanders,

Duk. By which you wud infer my Duchess honest

Ray. By all the best hopes of a dying man,
This being a time not to jest breath away.
There does not live this day in Christedome,
A Queen nor any woman through the world,
More truly virtuous, and as I speak truth,
So may I fail or find it.

Duke Whether my ioies are sensual or immortal,
I cannot say but surely I do feel,
And stand on such a change as if my soul,
Were melted into blood, or my blood turned.
To soul which lights, me up fresh Tapers,
Whose instructiue beams direct me to the Heart
Of my dear Duchess, where chastity I find,
Has built her temple -- within there.
Enter Duchess.
Attend. My Lord.

Duke. Here, take my Signet, deliver it to
Lord Lodwicke, command him bring the Duchess,
And wait upon her hither, withal the speed
And diligence his duty can perform.

At. I shall my Lord, and as I Am one of the honest men I am glad to hear it.

Enter Iulia.
Duke O noble Lady, how shall I look thy mistres in the face, that blush at
sight of thee? prithie stand by me, and imbolden me, be my Genius, prompt me
what I shall say, or the Scean's spoild; I shall be out, my tongue does falrer
for joy conceived of her great goodness, for grief of her much injury.


Iul. As in the fiction, Giants make war with heaven,
But are struck dead, so malice may strike at Virtue;
But at last, I see the blow will light where it began.
Welcome my Royal mistress, and I hope
Unto more comfort, then ever yet the Saxon
Court affoorded, it bears the likeliest face
Upon us now.
Enter the Duchess
Duke Why do you kneel to me? the slanderer
Ought to ask pardon of the slandred,
My own Law teaches it. Pray do you rise,
Or I will never think my self forgiven.

Duck. Nay now my Lord I fear you sent for me to mock me.


Duke God and all good men at my greatest need
Requite me with a mock, if I mean any.
O let me now expire, and be the happy messenger
To sing this news to heaven, such and so great.

Ray. So happy reconcilements make the Angels,
Tread the bright ring, and from the ordered spheres,
Strikes heavenly music to all earthly ears:
Give me your royal pardon and remit me,
The hand of death lies cold and weighty on me,
And what is he but must sink under it,
Therefore go exercise your joys where grief,
May not be heard to express her self in tears,
For sorrow still sings loud unto our ears,

Dor. O my Lord,

Ray. Dear Princes speak no more, I know your heart,
But as you love my quiet, leave me to it,
For I do find an enclination to
Rest and sleep, and perhaps my last.

Duke. Come then lets leave him sickness is froward,
And one while company is pleasing to it,
Another while offensive, Raymond farewell,
Heaven to his mercy take or restore thee.

Roy. Good Duke I thank thee, let me kiss thy hand,
And yours best Duchess, and Lady yours, -- so
Now if you will be gone, you may,
Sickness knows no manners.

Duke We Will trouble you no longer Raymond.

Ray. Why I thank you, and all good lighten on you.
But not stay -- Carolus.

Caro. My Lord.

Ray. Are they all forth the room?

Caro. Yes my Lord.

Ray. Active as fire I spring out of my grave then,
And will see some before me e're I dye,
That are more fit for Earth and Heaven then I,
Fetch me some water, and a cup of wine,
I Will drink my own health and my lust shall pledge it,
Do I bear earth about me, sure I donnot;
For in this ecstasy, I have no feeling,
No use of feet, but ride and rack in the Air,
Like a black Cloud, holding in his hand lightning,
And in this a tempest, give me, and go
And understand the cause of Iulias stay,
It puts me into doubts and she should go
Away now with the Queen and cheat my hopes,
I have made a sickmans plot of it,
But Iulia is Religious in her vows,
Knows what it is to swear, and what to break 'hem.
How now villain, why returned without her?

Caro. Why she is gone my Lord.

Ray. Be thoug on to then, and after her and fetchher,
And bring her to me, or lay down thy duty,
And let me never see it in a face,
Or an officious leg again presented,
Zoones are you scraping there when I forbid you.

Caro. Alas my Lord.

Ray. My Lord, my Loggerhead, begone.
Enter Iulia.
Caro. O Maddam, you come like to the Halcion, and bring fair weather with you.


Ray. Thou art my truth, and I will studdy thee,
No more shall misbeliefe enter my thoughts:
For thy Idea standing in my heart,
As in a Temple shall fright all false suggestions,
To the Tartars. Give me instead of Laurel,
For my deed, a sugared kiss, and crown my joys.

Iul. Away you are a villain, I came back to tell you so: And long life which
is a blessing to others, unto thee's a curse: thou shame of such a reverence
do not see, to what a monster lust in thee is grown: at lest in men's
immaginations.

A man as old in show as time himself,
Made up for counsel like another Nestor:
At least in men's imaginations,
To be so monstrous Goatishly inclind.
O fie my Lord! think with your self this ill,
Prouokes not in the flesh, but in your will:
Your blood moves slow and cold and all the fire,
That strikes up any heat, is in desire:
I blush for you, think of it.

Ray. Yes i will think of it, but you shall give me time,
And you and I will now go and consult of it.

Iul, Keep of.

Ray. Why you wonnot stab.

Iul. Yes to the heart believe it.

Ray. Why then a combat; look you, I am provided too
Will you yield now?

Iul. No.

Ray. This wud show handsome on a Stage,
An old man and a woman at the point:
Believe it i will stab too.

Iul. Thy worst: for I will mine,

Ray, This is scuruey wooing, Iulia no more.

Iul. Farewell then, and repent,

Ray. Nay then you stir me, yield, or I will force thee.
And after pay, thy perjury with death,
Are you so mannish.
Enter Duke, Duchess and all the rest spectators.
Duke Desist vild rauisher.

Ray. Ha, the Duke, then rage rise high in me,
And add unto this wickedness a worse.
Enter Bernard with his Ropier drawn.
Bar. Villain, what will thou do, keep of.

Ray. O I am lost.

Dor. A gaurd.

Duk. Cease on the Traitor, -- O that those hairs,
Which are the badge of truth and as I thought,
The care of her should shru'de such villainies,
So monstrously betraying and abusing:
Away with him to death.

Ray. To death.

Duk. Yes a cruel and a lasting.

Dor. I beseech your grace.

Duk. Will thou beg for him whom he so has wronged
And which is more, made me the instrument?

Dor. Yes, good my Lord his pardon?

Duk. Prithee sweet no more, ask any thing but that,
Let Law be of no force then in my Land,
If I forgive such Traitors.
O where is Dorilus?
That innocent and excellent good man:
If he be living, let him be brought to me
That I may honor him, if dead lament,
And wash him with my tears, sit on his Hearst
And ask forgive of his gentle spirit,
Least it do haunt me being his murderer.
Enter Guido.
Guido Justice, justice, my Sovereign.

Duke What art thou come for justice?

Guido One that under your authority performs it upon others.


Duke Perform it upon me for I am a murderer.

Guido My Lord.

Duke A murderer of my friends, of virtuous men,
Virtue herself did very hardly escape me.

Dor. Good my Lord.

Duke I must see Dorilus alive or dead,
To view how big the wound was that I gave him,
For I will have grief dig one in my breast,
As deep as it is, and as mortal too.

Dor. Why here is Dorrilus.

Duke Prayers of Princes fall on thee, do thou live
To tell me that my sword does want an edge,
But when it strikes offenders, rise Dorilus:
And thus unto thy Mistress I present thee,
As the best Jewel that I have to give her,
For a true Servant is of that esteem.

Dor. Sir, I thank you, but I return him back,
As fittest for your service.

Fre. Heeres giving and taking as if thei'd both be rid of him.


Duke Why I thank thee, and I receive him gladly.
Now where is he that wud have Justice?

Guido Here my Liege.

Duke Against whom wud'st thou have Justice?

Guido Against the President of Wittembergh.
Who falling foul with the learned Landoff
Tutor unto my son, is thought by most
And of the wisest of the University,
To have by some treacherous plot made them away,
He nor my son having bin seen ere since.

Lan. Why here is Landoff sir, your poor friend in safety.


Guido Landoff, where is my son?

Ber. Here sir, with a daughter to boot.

Guido Now Gods blessing a'thy heart, if thou have consen'd me thus.


Ber. E'ne thus Sir.
Rise with my blessing on you both.

Fre. So they are owned, no body calls upon me, nor regards me, nor to say the
truth, I regard nobody: the loss of my invisible Ring has broke my heart, now
when I knew the virtue of it, to lose it, and to an idiot, an innocent, that
deserves not to understand the virtue of it, what dainty devices might I have
had in every Chamber of the Court, seen such a Lord kiss such a Lady the
wrong way, such a Knight, lie with his Chambermaid, and his Lady with her
Groom, the Usher with the waiting-Gentlewoman, and the page with all. Phoebus
himself must a come short of those things, I should aseen, for one invisible
Ring wud discover another.


Du. How now, what is the cause of this? why kneel you al?

Dor. For that which I join with them too.
Lord Raymonds life, banish him the Court,
And let him be confined to his house in the country.

Duke Thou must not ask twice what I shall deny,
Rise, it is granted you; see you have good friends,
And a gracious mistress.

Ray. I see it, and shame to see my self,
How had the Devil blinded me, I could not
See your rare virtues? O let my penitence,
Which if it be not zealous, just heavens strike,
That breath into my throat, again which forms,
The words I utter, and let 'hem strangle me:
Let my true penitence I say beget,
Another virtue in you, besides mercy,
Credulity that I am truly sorry,
For the bold mischiefs against you and my Prince:
A guilty conscience followed by despair,
Light on all Traitors to their Sovereign,
Wants to the extreamst sickness without succor,
Without all good man's pity and their prayers,
Fall on the slanderers of all your sex:
Diseases rot him living; dead no grave,
But ravenous Fowls, become his sepulcher,
His bones kicked up and down by his enemies,
And charitable men allow of it,
Hell and the Devils, plying him with torments:
Bast his black soul, that he may roar so loud:
As to the earth crying he heard may be,
Who slanders women, may be damnd like men.

ACTVS QVINTVS.
Scena Prima.
Enter Ferdinand, and Cornelius.
Cor. Will there be such Revels say you.

Fer. Yes, but no words, for it must be kept private.

Cor. Private, why there are gone out Proclamations, that whosoever can by
device, or any quick conceits delight the Duchess, he shall have
correspondent to his quality an Annual stipend besides the favor of the Duke
for ever.


Fer. Such a thing was talked of, for the Duke now dotes far more on the
Duchess then at first; and whatsoere is done, is to delight her.


Cor. It Is a better hearing then the old Iealousies.
What Is your Lord confined to his house in the conntrie.

Fer. Yes.

Cor. And how find you your new Lord.

Fer. Very noble, and so does bear himself to every man, hark, yonder is such
a colle with the Musirians, the Masquers, and the Dancers, who now are
practicing.


Cor. Is not the Poet amongst them.

Fer. Yes, and which is a miracle a Masquer,
The learned, Landoff, who now although he be
A professed Acamedian,
Has laid aside his grauer waightier studdies,
To exercise his skill not yet forgotten,
Being brought up a Page at Court, and practiced
Much in that quallity -- Hark I must leave you,
I have a charge committed to me.

Cor. May I not under your protection,
Behold the sports.

Fer. I cannot tell, I will not promise you,
For my Lord's very strickt, I Will do my best.

Cor. Why I thank you.
Enter Smirke.
Smirke I donnot know how it comes about that I should be lost thus; villainous
witchcraft will never be left, I am feign to give over my shop, but I had
broke; howsoever my painting cloth was so rotten, it could not hold together,
but the best is, I shall live like a Gentleman, because I walk invisible, nay
I am not only invisible to other men, but to my self: I went this morning to a
Looking-glass, to be acquainted with this comely countenance, the devil of
countenance there was to be acquainted with; the Glass seemed to me like a
deep water, that I began to feel with my hands for fear I might a been
drowned: But finding my self above ground, and hunger tumbling like a Porpin
in my Maw, and doing the Somerset in my Guts, I smelt a Surloine of Beese hot
from the Spit followed the train close, set in my foot, drew my knife, sliced
me off a Collop, clapped it upon a penny loaf, went me to a side Table, consumed
it without any body saying much good do you, or the Devil choke you. Set my
lips to a Flagon of Beer, drunk twice with a breath, set it down again,
took it up again, and drunk it as dry as a Biscuit: so that I perceive I
cannot starve. And for clothes, it is no matter how I go, no body sees me.

Enter Lord Lodwicke.
Lod. Pray give 'hem great charge at the outward doors
They admit none but such as are Courtiers,
The Hall must not be pestred. Where Is Ferdinand?

Ferd. Here my Lord.

Lod. Pray have a care those lights be not offensive unto the Ladies, they hang
suspiciously, and let the hangings be removed.


Ferd. They shall my Lord, where is Pedro?

Pedro. Here Sir.

Fer. Look to those lights I pray, my Lord is very angry, fearing they might
do trespass, and those hangings must be removed.


Pedro. They shall sir, -- where is any of the Grooms?

Groom. Here Sir.

Pedro. Pray look to these lights, and let the hangings be removed, the
Gentleman Usher has commanded it.


Groom They shall sir, where is the fellow here should look unto these lights,
things are done so untowardly.


Smirke No body sees me, I come in like the air, when Lords and Ladies stand
waiting for this officer and the other officer, country gentlemen their pates
broke, and citizens wives thrust up and down in every corner, their husbands
kept out with flame and Torch, glad to fetch a nap in the Cloisters.

Enter Ferdinand, Grooms with Torches.
Groom. Bear back there, bear back, room for my Lord Lodwicke.


Lod. Here Madame you shall face the Duke and Duchess, it is the best place to
see in all the Hall.


Lady. I thank your honor.

Lod. Have a little patience, the Revels will begin immediately.


Grooms. Room for my Lord, bear back, swoones whither wud you?


Lod. Well said, thou do more good with thy oaths then all they with their
Trunchions.


Groo. The Duke is coming.
Music. Envy and pleasure pass over the stage.
Envy. Sports are intending which I will have crossed.
Add clouds to night, that pleasure may be lost.

Plea. Envy thou wound'st thy self in spite of thee,
This I break forth, out of obscurity.

Smir. This is the four winds driving of five
Devils -- This same Ring wud feign give
Me the slip, I must e'ne pocket him, for
Fear of the worst.

Groom. How now sirrah, what make you here?

Smir. Why, do you see me?

Groom. See you, yes marry do I: And get you gone quickly, or you shall
feel -- I see you, go, begone this is no place for such as you.


Smirk. Humh: Am I become a wretch again, and mortal?

The Masquers preparing to dance. Enter Smirke again.
Smirk. I am got in again, and have found the trick of it, thanks my dear
Iem; a man may have an invisible Ring I see, and not know of it; I wondered
that I grew palpable, now I perceive how the matter went: thanks my dear Iem,
I say still, I will not lose this finger that I have my invisible Ring upon,
for the best joint at the Bars.

Is this all the devices, sports, and delights, the Duke shall have for his
money: the Proclamation promised reward for him that coud show any varieties,
and is it all come to a dull Masque? I Will show his Grace some sport my self, with
help of my invisible Ring, which now must off again. By your Majesty's leave,
and the rest of the Honorable --


Duke. How now, what is he?

Smirk. What Is he? Why he is the miracle of your Kingdom.


Duke. How the Miracle!

Smirk. I, and can do wonders -- now you see me you know me.


Fred. Yes Sir, I do know you.

Smir. And you know not me, you know no body.
But keep off my Lord.

Doril. Prythy keep off.

Smir. You see me you say, Duke I speak to thee.

Duke. Yes Sir, I see you.

Smir. And you all see me.

Land. We do all see you.

Smirk. Very good, and I do see all you: but what is that to the purpose?


Land. Very little to purpose indeed,

Smir. Shall I demonstrate matter of Art.
And have nothing for my pains?

Lan. Yes marry shall you, does not the Proclamation tell you shall.


Smir. Proclamations may say what they list,
Something in hand does well.

Duke. Some body give him something.

Smir. I, but no body hears not on that Ear, yet because I -- wonnot do
Royalty wrong, in suspecting your bounty -- You see me you say.


Duke. Yes we do see you.

Smir. You do. Who sees me now?

Duke. Trust me not I, he is invisible to me.

Dor. And me.

Dori. To all.

Smir, I shoud be sorry else; for, and my invisible Ring shoud not keep his
old virtue, I wud hang my self directly.


Fre. Prithee appear again.

Smir. I will have Majesty call me first.

Lan. Why the Duke does call you.

Smir. Let me hear him vuia voce, Smirke is my name
A well beloved subject, once a Painter,
But now Esquire of the invisible Ring.

Duke Smirke, and our well-beloved subject, once a Painter, but now Esquire of
the invisible Ring.

I conjure thee to appear again.

Smir. See here I am, what wudst thou mighty monarch

Duke. I do command thee let me see the Ring.
By which thou walkst invisible.

Smir. I do command thee not to command me that,
For from my invisible Ring I will not part.

Dor. Lay hands upon him for a forcerer.

Smir. Assist me my dear Ring, no hands upon me,
For being invisible, I am a Prince,
And being a Prince no hands is to be laid on me;
Treason does never prosper.

Lan. He is gone again.

Smi. You follow me by sent, but never find me by sight.
I Will warrant you.
Enter Spirit, Landoff, whispering with him.
Lan. Seize it and fly.

Spirit I am gone.

Smir. O, O, O.

Fre. How, who'es that exclaimes.

Smir. The cramps in my finger.

Lan. The Crampe.

Fre. O sir, now you are visible again.

Smir. My Ring is gone now, the devil go with it, for a my conscience he
fetched it.


Lan. What have you lost your Ring.

Smir. I, I, and my middle finger, which served me for more use then all the
rest.


Lan. That's strange.

Duke But what is become of the Ring.

Land. Pardon me Liege, that virtue that it held,
Came from my Art, and at some fitter time,
I will acquaint you with the passages,
How, and the cause for what it was intended:
Your gracious Duchess knows and felt the worth,

Duk. Thy knowledge in good arts is found Landoff,
Nor will we be inquisitiue of more.
Then thou shall think it fit to be revealed:
For all thy Actions have bin just and loyal,

Lod. What means this Trumpet,

Lan. Perhaps some new delights and rarer.
Enter Page.
Page Thus was I bidden to my sovereign,
Fall on my face, now rise I up again
To render to the Ladies fair salutes,
And give them all their worthy attributes,
Wonder not that I resesolutely come,
Boldly thus daring press into this room,
For from a Lord and knight of eminent note,
I bring this challenge; such as can read may know it.

Fre. Very suceinct and peremptory.

Lan. For this day I am master of the Revels.
Be it known unto all men that I, -- of the Court, of Saxony, traveler, by
degree a Lord, and a professed Champion for all Ladies in the lists of peace,
do challenge all Courtiers whatsoever, without exceptions, native or
strangers, toco^fer, court, orco^plement, in silence with discorsiue motion and
true action of the face, hand, body, and leg, and afterward with the vollubily
of thetong, to talk longest, fastest and lowd'st, for sense I stand not upon
it, being seldom regarded by the party courted, therefore indeed belongs not to
the Courtier: also be it farther known that my assistants, Agents, or
seconds, does challenge likewise all Courtiers whatsoever, at the true
compendious form of compiling Epistles, alias Loue-Letters, to Ladies or
Mistresses, either in Prose or Verse, with Proverbs, or without Proverbs,
with Sentences, or without Sentences, Figures, or any other matter, to be
performed Extempore, or not Extempore, according as it shall please the
Challenged, which is to say, the Defendant to determine: All which, that
aforesaid, as well as this now spoken of, shall be performed by the said
Challengers instantly; who only staying to hear of any Opponents, are both
ready to enter.


Lod. Here is unexpected Sport.

Fred. Let 'hem enter, they shall be answered; Smirke, thou shall be my Second.


Smi. Shall I, that is some comfort yet, to put the loss of the Ring out of my
thought.

Shall Ianswere the Epistoler?

Fre. I, marry shall thou.

Smi. I Will Pistle and Pestle him, I Will warrant him, he was nere so pounded in his
life, I Will scorn to begin after my hearty commendations with him.


Land. Hark, they approach.
Enter Callow, and Ranoff.
Call. Which is my Antagonist?

Fre. I am he.

Ran. And who is mine?

Smi. Behold the man, with Pen and Ink provided.

Ran. Poor fool, thou wut but make thy self derided

Smi. So nimble in rhyme, I Will first break your head in Prose, and afterward
whip you in Verse, I Will lambaste you in compleates.


Iul. Nay I will not lose the honor of being the courted Lady.


Call. When my talking time comes I will thank you Lady in language.

Mark how my challenge goes, 'twas not to talk sense only, but longest,
fastest, lowdest, and you our talk me that way, I Will give you my tongue and
every tooth I have to make trorters on, for I was borne and bred and nursed a
talker, and of my quallity, this Lady has had some small experience, for I did
promise her to prove a talker, and for her sake do now profess, and practic't
and it is in vain for any creature to contend with me, -- I have put down the
Lawyers of all Nations, and all women, Gossips at Christnings, after they have
drunk wine the Midwife being there, words flow out of my mouth like water
from the Clouds, to make a deluge, to drown all voices but my own, which
drums nor trumpets, nor a Sea flight can do.


Fre. But a thump of the guts will.

Call. O.

Fre. It Is excellent; sweet Lady to hear words,
Though they want matter, for silence does betray,
A bashfulnesse in man, unmeet for courtiers,
For he that has a bold tongue and a free,
Can never want the affection of Ladies,
Nor is it fit he should, for he can keep 'them,
Walking at midnight with a tedious tale,
And longer it is the better, because sleep
Being accounted as some use to call it,
Deaths image, other some his elder brother,
By how much we do use it, by so much less,
We live in this world and loose time and pleasure,
Which both to rich and poor is the chief treasure,
Why donnot you talk now.

Call. Talk? If I have breath, enough to live, I care not.

Iul. Nay, and you give out, you have lost the day.

Call. I had not fair play shew'ne me, (uersaires

Fre. Stratagems are to be allowed, against all ad.
I Will have Judgment on it.

All. I, I, lawful. lawful.

Call. Lawful let it be then, but if ever I challenge a man of his hands, to a
trial of skill with the tongue again, I Will forswear talking all days of my
life, and that I wud be loath to do -- If I donnot feel the very breath that
should have been spent in words upwards, to twattle downward, I am avillaine.


Smirke I believe I smell the meaning, stand farther off, and give room to me
and the Epistoler, you challenge all men to compose?


Ran. I do.

Smi, With figures or without figures, with sentences or without sentences.


Ran. It Is right,

Smi. Draw out your Pen and Inkehorne, I am for you.

Lan. Give 'hem room, and set a Table forth.

Ran. With expedition too, I put in that.

Smi. No, expedition belongs to Clerks, and not to Secretaries, celerity if
you will.


Ran. I sir, Celerity, I mean so.

Smi. No more but so, a words enough.

Fre. But what is the subject?

Smi. Why each of us is to indite an Epistle to our Mistress, is it not so?


Ran. Right.

Smi. Then write.

Dor. This will be good mirth I hope.

Lan. Rediculous enough.

Fre, So it should be, and yet my little Smirke here has conceit, he will have
some flashes.


Dor. A couple of pretty scribes.

Ber. The challenger has the advantage, he might premeditate.


Fre. No matter, Smirks best at a start, his wit is like your Hackney, all a
gallop, to which he says, Vtere diligentia, nec sis tantus cessator and
calcoribus indigeas, which is clawing the Pole, as for example in your
Challenger.


Dori. He has rubbed it out it seems.

Fre. Smirke goes on smoothly, without any rub,

Lan. Yet there he had one.

Fred. Hold bias, and a sentence then.

Ran. Scripsi.

Smi. Et scripsi.

Lan. Very good, now lotdings lend your cares.

Ran. I will read it first my self.

Lan. And good reason.

Ran. Fairest in the world, and sweetest upon earth.

Fre. So.

Ran. I remember my duty to you in black and white.

Smi. I wud it had been black and blew.

Lan. Peace.

Ran. For all coulors else wave under the standard of your beauty.


Smi. I wonder what part of her, is Goose-^urd green: That's a color.


Ran. You are the mistress of beauty.

Smi. I wud a said the Queen or Empress.

Ran. And all other women are but your handmaids.

Smi. O abominable barren.

Lan. Nay Smirke silence, you must not interrupt your adversary.


Ran. I can say nothing without saying too much, nor say too much without
saying nothing.


Smi. I must say nothing, or else I wud say something, but here it is shall
shame thee.


Ran. Me thinks when thou standst'd in the sun with thy Feather on thy head,
and thy Fan in thy hand, thou look like the Phoenix of the East Indies,
burning in spices, for Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs are in thy breath.


Smi. She wud make an excellent Wassell-Bole.

Lan. Again.

Smi. I have done.

Ran. The Aples of thy breast are like the Lemans of Arabia, which makes the
vessel so sweet it can never smell of the Caske.


Fre. If she should that might prove the Brewers fault.

Ran. Being come to your middle I must draw to an end, for my end is at the
middle because of the Proverb. In Medio consistet virtus, and so I conclude:
yours while mine own, and afterward if it were possible Marmaduke Ranoff.


Smi. Well now let me run on, judgment I crave.

Fre. Which thou shall have.

Smir. Illustrious, bright shining, well spoken, and blood stirring Lady.


Lan. I, marry Sir.

Smir. If the Rope of my Capacity, could reach to the Belfrie of your Beauty,
these words of mine like silver Bells, might be worthy to hang in the ears of
your favor but the Ladder of my Invention is to low to clime up to the Steeple
of your Understanding.


All. Excellent Smirke.

Smir. If it were not, I shoud ring out my mind to you in a sweet Peale of
most sauory conceits. For your face it is like the Sun, no man is able to
endure it.


All That Is very good.

Smi. Your forehead which I will neither compare unto Alablaster, nor to the
Lilly, but it is as it is, and so are both your eyes, for your Nose, it is a
well arched Bridge, which for breuities sake I pass over: your Cheeks are like
a good Comedy, worthy to be clapped: your Lips, and your Teeth are incomparable;
your Tongue like the instrument of Orpheus, able to tame the furies: to handle
every part of you were too much, but some particular part, no man can
sufficient.


Fre. Prithee let me give thee a box on the care, for that conceit.


Smi. No my good Lord, pray keep your bounties.
From top to toe you are a sweet vessel of delight, I dare not say a Barrel,
for oftentimes with much ioulting, the Brewer beats out the Bunghole, and so
the good liquor runs out, but you contain yours although not hoopt about with
the old fashioned farthingall, but after the new fashion ti'd up with points,
to untruss at your pleasure, In which pleasure I leave you, fairest of a
hundred, and wittiest of a thousand: resting in little rest, till I rest wholly
yours, in the Downe-Bed of affection, where ever standing to my utmost, I rest
all in all yours.


Fre. Coud any man say more.

Ran. Your censures hereafter Gentlmen; now Sir I challenge you in verse, in
praise of tall women, and little women, and choose your subject, which you
refuse I Will take.


Smir. Why then I Will take your little women.

Ran. And I your lusty -- proceed.

Lan. I, here will be some sport now.

Dor. The Duke calls to see the Epistles.

Fre. And they are worth his perusal.

Land. We must have Patience, for this verse wonnot come of so roundly as your
Prose.


Ber. Best have a song to entertain the time.

Land. 'Twere not a miss.
Music --
A song.
Ranof. Scripsi.

Smir. Sed non feci, Stay a little, here is a couple of lines, a halter on 'hem,
they wonnot twist handsomely, go forward I have ended.


Lan. Attention.

Ran. Listen you tall and likewise you low man,
I sing the praises of a bouncing woman.
A full wellset bigge-bon'd and fairly ioynted,
Fit to bid welcome men that are best appointed.

Land. Excellent.

Ran. To your tall woman your little one is nothing,
No more then isa high thing to a low thing.

All That Is true.

Ran. For your small Dandiprat, I hope there is no man
That thinks her but a hobby horse to woman.
A thing to be forgot and never known,
But on a Holyday to the rout shown.
In wars the Basilisco is preferred
Before the Musket, and is louder heard.

Lan. There Is an error little and loud my friend, but pass it.


Ran. In every triumph where there is excess,
The greater always puts down the less.
The Lioness is more admired at,
Then her Epitome, which is a Cat.

Lan. The fool grows serious.

Fre. He has stolen it certainly.

Lan. No faith, it may be his own, for I think his brain

a little crazed, and mad men shoot forth strange things.


Ran. But to weak understandings now I come,
Is your small Taber music to your Drum.

Smir. Hum Drum, he has lightn'd within an Inch of a conceit of mine.


Ran. Or in instrument of peace, can there that trial
Be made upon a Kit as a base Viole.
Judge you my Masters, that on both have played,
It is but my opinion, and I have said.

Fre. Believe it he has said well, Smirke look to your self.


Smir. I warrant you. Give me audience.

All. Scilence.

Smir. In praise of little women I begin.
And will maintain what I have entered in.
Is not your Parochit or Marmoset
In more request then your Baboone or Parret.
Give but your little wench freely her licour,
And to bed send her you will find her quicker;
Pearter, nimbler, both to kiss and cogge,
Then your great wench that'll lie like a logge.
And he that all day at the Drum does labor,
Wud at night gladly play upon a Taber.
I hope there is no man, but of this belief,
That Veale's more sweet and nourishing then Beef:
Small meats is still preferred; for ask your glutton,
Heel always say, Lamb's sweeter then your Mutton.
Your Smelt then Whiting firmer is and sounder,
Nor must your Place compare with your neat Flounder.

Fred. Well said, now thou art in good victuals thou't never out.


Smir. In fish or flesh I Will prove it to each wight,
A Larkes leg, then the body of a Kite
Is better far: our Bakers always make
The finest flower in the lesser Cake.
And I Will be judge by those that Roots do eat,
That your small Turnep's better then your great.

Land. I am of thy mind too.

Smir. Who list to be resolved, let'hem both try;
In that boleefe I live, in that I Will die.

Fred. Incomparable Smirke, thou have my voice: judgment.


All. A Smirke, a Smirke.
Coronets.
Lan. Loath to grow tedious, yet once more we would try
To give content out of variety.
Music. With once dance more this night sports we will end,
Your pardon if with too much zeal we offend.

Duke Landoff we thank thee, and wish if any be,
All that are here, be pleased as well as we.

FINIS

