SERMONS UPON THE first Chapter of the first Epistle general of PETER. Wherein
METHOD, SENSE, Doctrine and Use is with great variety of matter profitably
handled. By NICHOLAS BYFEILD Preacher of Gods word at ISLEWORTH in MIDDLESEX.
The rest of the Epistle may be published in due time, if God will.

1 PET. 1. 13. Wherefore girde up the loins of your mind: be sober, and hope
to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of
Jesus Christ. LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, and are
to be sold at the sign of the Pyde Bull at S. Austins gate. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND most noble Lady, the Lady LV^Y Countess of
Bedford: Grace and peace be multiplied.
MADAM:
By reason of my Lords absence, and your Honors, a great part of the year
past, I have had more leisure, then I desired, and thereby opportunity to write
out my notes on the first chapter of Peter, and not knowing which way to
testify so fully as I ought, my observance, and duty to your Honor, or to
satisfy the daily importunity of many friends, I have adventured again to
come under the Press, that so (receiving daily an increase of favors from your
Honor,) I might thus publicly take occasion to profess my vows of service
and thankefulnes, beseeching your Honor to vouchsafe the acceptance,
protection, and perusal of this abridgement of those Sermons, many of which
your Honor has bin pleased to hear with great attention. As for the desire of
many godly friends herein, I should not have bin easily inclined to harken to
it (the world abounding with books even to loathing) but that in writings of
this nature, and upon this Epistle, there is some want, and that I have
received encouragement from the acceptance of my former labors, and that I
know the matter herein contained is wholesome, and not unprofitable; and
besides having suffered an involuntary vacation in my weeke-daies attendance in
your Honors family, and an extreme loss in the want of diverse of my chief
hearers, I was resolved to try, whether I might be helpful to the Church of
God abroad, by such an employment of my self in the hours I could spare from
my study for the Lords day. My most humble request to your Honor is, that you
would be pleased to grace these notes with the liberty to pass under the
protection of your name, and favor: I should much rejoice, if the reading
hereof, may make any supply of my intermitted service to your Honor, and (...)

(...) For their spiritual estate, they were the Elect of God; and their
Election is amplified: 1. By the foundation of it, the foreknowledge of God
the father. 2. By the means of execution of it, the san^tification of the
spirit. 3. By the ends of it, which are two: 1. the obedience of their lives.
2. the fruition of the benefits purchased by the blood of Christ, and applied
by the sprinkling of his blood.

The form of the salutation is in the end of the second verse: Grace and peace
be multiplied etc.

Thus much of the salutation: the doctrine of the Chapter follows, which
conteines both matter of consolation, and matter of exhortation.

The consolation is from verse 3. to verse 13: where consider both the
proposition of the consolation, verse 3, 4, 5. and the confirmation of it,
verse 6. to 13.

In the proposition consider first the manner of propounding it. 2. The
arguments themselves.

The manner of the propositions is, that it is expressed in form^ of
thanksgiving, Blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The arguments are three. The first taken from their regeneration, verse 3. The
second from their glorifi^ation, verse 4. The third from their preservation
unto glory, verse 5.

The consolation raised from their regeneration is amplified, 1. By the
impul^iue cause, the abundant mercy of God. 2. By the effect, viz: a lively
hope. 3. By the cause of merit, or efficacy, viz: the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.

The second argument is taken from our glorification, which is said to be the
inheritance of the Saints; which is amplified, 1. By the properties of it,
which are three. For it is first incorruptible. 2. undefiled. 3. immarcessible,
it withers not. Secondly, by the manner of their present interest; It is not
now possessed, but laid up for them. Thirdly, by the place, where it lies, and
that is heaven.

The third Argument is taken from our preservation unto glory, verse 5: where
consider, 1. the means of our preservation, which is both power in God, and
faith in us. 2. The end, which is salvation, which is amplified by the things
that go before it, viz: preparation and revelation, in these words, prepared
to be revealed: as also for the time, when it shall be communicated, viz: in
the last time.

Thus of the proposition of the consolation: the confirmation follows, which
is performed two ways. 1. By prolepsis, or the answer of objections, verse 6.
to 10. 2. By the testimony of the Prophets, verses 10, 11, 12.

For the first: the Apostle labors to confirm them against two objections.

The first objection might be taken from their crosses, to which the Apostle
gives answer, by yielding four reasons, why their manifold temptations should
not dismay them. 1. Because they may have much joy in the midst of many
crosses, verse 6. 2. Their heaviness is but for a season, verse 6 also. 3.
They are not bound always to grieve at their crosses, but when need requires,
verse 6 also. 4. Because their temptations do them good: for they try their
faith, verse 7: this effect is both propounded, and amplified: propounded in
those words, The trial of your faith: amplified, 1. by comparison with gold
tried in the furnace. 2. by the event; it will be found to praise, and honor,
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

The second objection might be made thus: We know not whether the former
comforts belong to us; to which the Apostle answers by giving three signs, by
which men might try themselves: 1. The love of Christ, whom they have not
seen. 2. Believing. 3. The unspeakable and glorious joys of the Holy Ghost,
verse 8. The end of all, which is, the salvation of their souls, verse 9.

Thus of the Prolepsis: The testimony of holy men follows, where consider
five things.

1. Who testify? In general, Prophets: In special, those Prophets, which
were appointed to testify of the grace that should come unto us Christians.

2. Their adiunct precisenes to furnish themselves for the knowledge of the
things they testifi^d, They searched and inquired diligently.

3. The question they studied, or unto which they testify: In general, it was
of salvation, ver. 10. In special, it was of the manner, and time of the grace
foretold.

4. The occasion, that fired them to this earnest desire after this knowledge,
and that was the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, driving them to foretell of the
passion of Christ, and glories that should follow.

5. The success, and that is, that they were answered of God, where observe
two things. 1. The manner of the giving the answer, it was by revelation; (...)
whom it was re^ealed. 2. The matter of the answer, which concerns both Persons
and Things. The persons are considered negatiuely, and so they were resolved,
that they themselves were not the men, to whom those glories did belong: and
affirmatively, that they did minister those things unto us Christians. Now the
things promised are not only propounded, but commended: and that two ways. 1.
By the glory of their effi^ient causes, which were less principal, the
Apostles: and more principal, the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. 2. By the
adiunct respect of the Angels, which things the Angels desire to look into.

Hitherto of the consolation. The exhortation follows from v. 13. to the end,
where observe: 1. The things, unto which they are exhorted, v. 13. 2. The
reasons, by which the exhortation is enforced.

The things to which he does exhort are three: 1. The first concerns the
renouation of the mind, Girde up the loins of your mind. 2. The second
concerns the moderation of life, be sober. 3. The third concerns the
confirmation of their hope, Trust perfectly on the grace to be brought etc.
ver. 13.

The reasons follow, and they are 6 in number, taken from the consideration, 1.
Of the image of God, verses 14, 15, 16. 2. of the judgment of God, verse 17.
3. of the redemption in Christ, verses 18, 19, 20, 21. 4. of the relation to
the godly, verse 22. 5. of the immortality of the soul, verse 23. 6. and
sixthly, of the mortality of the body, verses 24, 25.

The first reason taken from the image of God is both propounded, and
expounded: propounded in these words, as obedient children: expounded two
ways, 1. by description. 2. by testimony. By description, 1. negatiuely,
showing what they should shun, Not fashioning your selves to the lusts of
your former ignorance, verse 14. ^2. He sets it out affirmatively, both by
showing the pattern to be imitated, viz: the holin^sse of him that called
them; and also the manner of imitation, viz: to be holy in all manner of
conversation, verse. 15. In the testimony two things are to be noted. 1. whence
the proof was fetched in these words, As it is written. and 2. what was
alleged, viz: Be ye holy, as I am holy, v. 16.

The second reason is taken from the judgment of God, where note, 1. The
proposition of the reason, viz: He that ye call upon as father, etc. 2. The
inference, or use of the same, viz: Pass the time of your ^oiourning in fear.
In the proposition consider, 1. who shall be judge, viz: he that was called
upon as a father. 2. how he shall judge, viz: without respect of persons. 3.
whom he shall judge, viz: every man. 4. for what they shall be judged, viz:
according to their works, verse 17.

The third reason is taken from the consideration of our redemption, and this
reason should move the more,

1. Because all the precious things in the world could not redeem man, verse
18.

2. Because the deliverance from our vain conversation, was one of the maine
ends of our redemption, verse 18.

3. Because our redemption was effected by a matchles price, viz: the passion
of Christ, which is increased, 1. In that it was a suffering even to the
effusion of blood. 2. that it was a suffering of one, that was so infinitely
pure, without spot or blemish, verse. 19.

4. Because our redemption was ordained in Gods counsel, verse 20.

5. Because the honor of manifesting Christ in the clear preaching of the
Gospel is done now to us Christians, and not to the fathers of old, v. 20.

6. Because our ^^demption was ratified by God the Father, and that two ways.
1. By raising Christ from the dead. 2. By giving him glory, v. 21.

7. Because all this was done, that our faith and hope might be in God, verse
21.

The fourth reason is taken from our relation to the godly, verse. 22. In which
reason observe, 1. A proposition of doctrine. 2. An exhortation by way of use.
The proposition in it self properly concerns sanctification, which is
described, 1. By the nature of it, imported in the metaphorical term,
purified. 2. The subject of it, your souls. 3. The form of it, in obeying the
truth. 4. The cause of it, the spirit. 5. The end of it, which was brotherly
love, amplified by the property of it, unfeigned. The exhortation is therefore
to love one another with a pure heart fervently.

The fifth reason is taken from the immortality of the soul, which is
considered two ways. 1. In respect of the fountain of it, which is the new
birth. 2. In respect of the means of it, which is set down, 1. negatiuely,
not of corruptible seed. 2. affirmatively: where consider what the means is,
and by what it is. What it is, viz: incorruptible seed. By what it is, the
word, which is praised for three things: 1. It is of God. 2. ^t li^eth. 3. It
abides for ever, verse 23.

The sixth reason is taken from the mortality of the body compared with the
eternity of the word of God, verse. 24, 25. Of the vanity of man, v. 24. which
is both propounded, and repeated: propounded as it concerns either the person
of man, All flesh is grass: or the condition of man, All the glory thereof is
as the flower of grass. The repetition as it concerns both is in these words,
The grass withers, and the flower falls away. The eternity of the word of
God is propounded in these words, but the word of the Lord endures for ever:
and explained by showing of what word he speaks in these words, and this is
the word which is preached unto you.

THE METAPHRASE of the first Chapter of the first Epistle of PETER.
PETER by immediate calling and commission from JESUS CHRIST the Ambassador for
the Churches to the dispersed servants of God, Verse 1. P^TER an Apostle of
Jesus Christ to the strangers sca^tr^d throughout Pon^us, G^latia, Capadocia,
Asia, and Bith^nia.
strangers and pilgrims in this world, that dwell here and there in Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia.

Who for their spiritual estate were chosen of God from everlasting, V^rse 2.
Elect acc^rding to the foreknowledge of God the (...) through (...) unto
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ^ Grace unto you and peace
be multiplied.
and foreseen of God with special approbation above the rest of mankind,
and loved with a fatherly love (as appears by the inward sanctification of
their hearts, which can be found in none, but the Elect of God) separated of
God to these ends, namely that both they might glorify God by their holy
conversation, and be glorified of God by the fruition of the benefits purchased
by the blood of JESUS CHRIST, and n^w estated upon them by the application of
the merits of CHRIST: The grace of God, even his continual free favor, and
the gifts of his spirit, and peace, even tranquillity of heart and conscience,
and all comfortable and needful prosperity be established upon you, and more
and more increased in you.

Eternal thanks be given unto God, Verse 3. Blessed be the God and F^ther of
our Lord Jesus Christ which according to his aboundan^ mercy has begotten us
again unto a liuety ^ope by the re^urre^ction of Jesus Christ from the dead.
who is the God of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of his humane nature, and
his Father in respect of his divine nature, for all the consolations, wherein
he has given us reason of singular rejoicing, and in particular for that he
has regenerated us and made us his children by adoption, when we deserved
nothing but his eternal wrath, merely out of the abundance of his own
matchles mercies, and sets us in such an estate, as whatsoever our trialls and
afflictions may be; yet he has given us effectual and assured hope of full
happiness, the pledge and undoubted testimony whereof we have, in that Jesus
Christ is risen from the dead, which shows evidently, that all is discharged:
For else he could not have come out of prison, till he had paid the uttermost
farthing.

And to show that he will acknowledge us for sons, (...) 4 To an inhe^itance
incorruptible and vnde^iled, and that (...) not away, reserved in heaven for
you.
he has reserved for us in heaven such an inheritance, as shall never be lost,
or taken from us, and shall have no fault nor defect in it, nor every decay in
the incomparable worth and glory of it.

And that we may be sure of possession, Verse 5 Who are kept by the power of
God through fal^h unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time.
his own allmighty power will be as a strong garrison about us to keep us;
and he has given us also a lively faith, that will preserve us, till we be
possessed of that glorious and full salvation, which he has prepared for us,
and is ready to be revealed in the full perfection of it, when the day of
death, or judgment shall come.

If you object, Verse 6. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season
(if need be) you are in heaviness through manifold tentations.
that you cannot take that comfort in these Arguments of consolation, because
of the many tentations, inward and outward, with which you are daily
dishartned: I answer, that for all your crosses you may have exceeding much joy
even in the midst of your tribulations; and besides the trouble of your crosses
is but for a little while, they are but short trials, nor are you bound
always to be pensive for your crosses, but only when need requires, namely
when you need to be humbled for some corruptions, that get too much head in
you, or for other profitable ends.

And lastly you loose nothing by your tentations, V^rse 7. That the trial of
your faith being much more precious, then of gold that (...), though it be
tried by the fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ.
and afflictions. For your faith, which is a thing more preciou^ in Gods
account, then all the gold in the world (for that will perish, and come to be
of no use one day) is hereby tried; and what though the fire* of the furnace of
affliction be somewhat hot, yet remember what wonderful praise, and honor, and
glory you shall have for the stedfastnes of your faith, when Jesus Christ shall
appear, and with his own mouth commend you, and glorify you before all the
world.

If you object, that you do not know, whether the former consolations do
belong unto you, or no^ I will put you in mind of three infallible signs,
Verse ^. Whom hau^ng not seen ye love, in whom (though now (...) see him not)
yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.
that you are converted and shall go to heaven. 1. The first is your unfeigned
affection to the Lord Jesus Christ, though ye never yet saw him with your
bodily eyes. 2. The second is your continual faith relying upon him alone for
your reconciliation and salvation* 3. And the third is the wonderful,
m^^chlesse, and unutterable, and celestial joy, that (...) some times ye
feel in the presence of God in his ordinances.

And therefore ye need make no doubt, but believe confidently, Verse 9
Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.
that God will reward your trust in him, by giving such an end to your course,
as that your souls shall be sure to be saved.

And that you may be the more abundantly confirmed in the former consolations,
Verse 10. Of which salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you.
think of the testimony of the Prophets, that were men extraordinarily raised
up of God, and did prophecy of this great salvation, which is now come to
pass, and fulfilled in us Christians; and being appointed, and inspired of God
to foretell the singular privileges of the Christian Churches, they took
marvelous pains. (...) it, inquiring diligently by all the means they could.
Verse 11. Searching what or what manner of time the spirit of Christ which was
in them did signify, when it test^fied before hand the suff^^ings of Christ,
and the glory that should follovv.


Studying to find it out, if it were possible, what, and what manner of time
the Holy Ghost, which was in them meant, when it made them foretell both that
the MESSIAH should suffer so many things, and withal that after his suffering
there should be wonderful glorious times for the Church.

Now they were answered by revelation, Verse 12. Unto whom it was revealed,
that not unto themselves, but unto us they did the things, which are now
reported unto you by them, which have preached the gospel unto you with the
Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, which things the Angels desire to look into.
that they themselves must never see those glorious days on earth: but that
they were used only as Gods servants to signify to the Church, what should be
the estate of Christians after the (...) of Christ; according also to the
doctrine of the Apostles, who have published the same things to you in the
preaching of the gospel, being men inspired by the Holy Ghost from heaven, and
assisted with the visible-gifts of the Holy Ghost: and your happiness is so
great, that the Angels of heaven (like the Cherubins, that stood looking into
the Arc) do with singular admiration stand and wonder at, and search into the
manifold wisdom of God in the happiness, to which you are brought by Christ.
And as you need to be comforted, so have I thought it fit to exhort you, and
first in things that are general to you all, both concerning the matter of
holiness, and concerning the means of it.

There are three things you should labor after. Verse 13. Wherefore girde up
the loins of your mind: be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is
to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
1. The first is the restraining and resisting of all lets of godliness, which
within from corruption of nature are wont like long garments to hinder you in
the labor and race of a holy life. 2. The second is the moderation of your
selves, and that right temper in your hearts and lives, especially in the use
of the outward things of this world. 3. The third is, the perfecting of the
assurance of your hope concerning the glory of heaven, which God has given of
his free grace, and shall be fully brought upon you at the last day, when
Christ shall be showed in his glory to the world.

Now there are six reasons, which may induce you to the care of a holy
conversation intended in the former duties. Verse 14. As obedient children, not
fashioning your selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance.
1. The first concerns the image of God: ye are the children of God, and
therefore you should live so, as becomes Gods children, and express in your
carriage the resemblance of the nature of God, not giving your selves over out
of the liking of sin to the service and obedience of any of those
corruptions, which either your selves lived in before your calling, or are
usually found in such only, as know not GOD.

But as God, who by the power of his word has converted you, Verse 15. But as
he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy ^n all manner of conversation.
is holy; so should you strive with respect of all his co^^andements to
resemble the praises of God in all your carriage, striving in every duty to
follow your pattern.

And the rather, because this has been anciently required in the old Testament
of Gods people, Verse 16. Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy*
to propound unto themselves the i^itation of Gods holiness, and to detest
sin, because they would not be unlike to God.

2. A second reason may be taken from the judgments of God. For the time must
certainly come, when God, whom we call a father, and call upon as a father in
this life, Verse 17. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of
persons judges according unto every man's work, pass the time of your
soiourning here in fear.
will summon us before his Tribunal certainly, and speedily, and then no man
shall escape, but shall be dealt with without partiality, or any corrupt
respect, according as men's works have been either good or evil, and
therefore it beh^ues us, that are in this world but as s^iourners for a time,
to spend our days in all carefullnesse, and godly fear.

3. A third reason may be taken from the consideration of our redemption, Verse
18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things,
as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from
your fathers.
which has many important moti^es in it: For it cannot be, but ye all know,
that your misery by nature was so great, that ye could not be ransomed, if all
the treasures of gold and silver in the world had been given for you; and when
you were redeemed, a chief respect was had to the freeing of you from the
viciousness of your conversation, in which vainly ye spent your times, and
which corruption in many things ye sucked in from the sinful examples, and
precepts, and ill education of your Parents, and ancestors.

But especially, Verse 19. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb
without blemish, and without spot.
if ye consider, what a matchles price was given for your ransom, even the
precious blood of Christ, who as a most absolute sacrifice for our sins, was
without all fault of nature, or life, and so the full substance of all the
ceremonial sacrifices, and in particular was the true lamb without blemish,
or spot, that makes atonement for the sins of the world.

And the rather, if ye consider, that from all eternity God had ordained,
Verse 20. Who verily was fore ordanid before the ^ound (...) ^f the world, but
was (...) these (...) for you.
that Christ should dye for you, and when the fulln^sse of time came, that God
was to reveal his Some, as the Savior of the world, he showed him ^n the
flesh, and caused him to be preached unto you, and for your sakes with far
more evidence and clearenesse, then in former ages.

To you, and for your sakes I say, that do constantly put your trust in Gods
mercy through his merits: V^rs 21. Who by bin do believe in God, that raised
hivs up from the d^ad, and gave him glory, that your faith and hobe might bein
God.
that God, that to show he was fully paid the uttermost f^rthing of our debts,
came to the prison door, and let him out, which he did, when he raised him
from the dead; and besides exalted him to wonderful glory, when he ascended up
into heaven, that so for the time to come you might believe and trust upon Gods
goodness and favor to you without all fear or doubting.

4. And the rather in the fourth place should you be careful of the former
exhortation, Vers^ 22. Seeing you have purified your souls in obeying the
truth throu^h the (...) unto (...) love of the brethsen; see that y^e love one
another with a pure heart feru^nntly.
if you consider your relation to the godly, to whom ye are brethren: For
seeing that by the spirit of God your souls are purified from the leprosy of
inward e^ills by the holy course you have held in c^ensing your hearts of those
evils, which might hinder your internal sanctification, in that obedience you
yield to the truth of God: and ^nasmuch as the end of all this reformation was,
that there might be a holy communion and affection without hypocrisy and
dissembling among such as fear God, who are all the children of one Father:
therefore see to it by any means, that ye order your lives and hearts so,
that you may love one another both with ardent affection, and pure and sincere
hearts, which you never do, unless you girde up the loins of your minds,
and live soberly, and be settled in the assurance, that ye shall altogether one
day reign in heaven.

5. And fifthly, Verse 23. Being borne again not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and abides for ever.
the immortality of your souls should persuade with you: you were made new
men, not as you were made men by a natural propagation, but inspired with a
life, that should never cease, having the seed of this eternal life cast into
your hearts by the word of God, which in it self, and by effect in you, lives
and abides for ever.

6. And lastly, Verse 24. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man,
as the flower of grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls
away.
if you consider the mortality of your bodies: All in a man's outward estate is
but vain and transitory, the bodies of all men are but as the grass, which is
to day, and to morrow is cut down, and cast into the oven: Man is quickly and
suddenly gone, nor is the glory of men's outward (...) better then their bodies.
For all the riches, pleasures, etc, of this life, in which men glory most, they
are but as the flower of grass: His body withers like the grass, decaying
in a short time, till he have nothing left but the very root of life; and as
for his riches and pleasures, they like the flower fall of so, as they are
never recovered again, many times in this life, but always in death.

But on the other side; Verse 25. But the word of the Lord endures for ever;
and this is the word, which by the Gospel is preached unto you.
the word of God, upon which men should set their hearts, continues in the
efficacy of it, in the sense of it, and in the fruit of it for ever; and that
you may not be mistaken, this is that word of God, which is daily preached unto
you.

CERTAIN OF the chiefest and choicest things to be noted throughout the whole
BOOK.
Seven sorts of men transgress about the matter of callings. page 5 Man is a
stranger in five respects. 7 Fourteen things wherein we should be like
strangers. 8 Of election. from what men are elect, and how the Elect may be
known, with eight privileges of Gods elect. p. 16. 17 Distinctions about
praescience. 19 Six ways to kn^w things. 20 The doctrine of Gods
foreknowledge serves for consolation twelve ways. page 21. 22. and should
teach us seven things. 23. 24 Com^orts that arise from the consideration of
this, that God is our father, p. 26. and many instructions. 30. 31 Man said to
be holy three ways. 32 Of the sanctification of the spirit of man, the need
of it, and wherein it lies: where of the clensing of the spirit, from what, and
how; as also of the graces that adorn the spirit. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39 Six
things in humbleness of mind. 38 Eleven things wherein a sanctified heart
does rejoice. page 39 The heart adorned with eight graces. 39 The conscience
adorned with nine things. 41 Six things to be observed in our obedience. 44 The
benefits which flow from the blood of Christ. 50 A great part of the 19 of
Numbers interpreted, about the sprinkling of the blood of the red hei^er. 53 Of
the sprinkling at the Passover. 59 Of the sprinkling at the ratification of
the covenant. 60 Of the sprinkling mentioned Leuit. 16. 61 The order of the
whole Epistle. 81 How God is the God of Christ, and how he is his Father; where
of the eternal generation. 84. 85 Of the mercy of Go^, both in the fountain,
and in the streams; and how mercy is not an occasion of liberty, and what
mercy God shows to the wicked. 93. 94 Of the new birth, with the lets and
signs of it. 94, 95, 96, 97 Of hope, and the difference between a dead hope,
and a living hope in six things. 98, 99 Of the resurre^tion of Christ. 101.
102. 103 Our inheritance in heaven is incorruptible in 4 respects, (...), and
with^reth not in three respects. 106. 107 Where ^eauen is, and that it is not
every where, and of the (...) of heaven above all other places. 112. 113 A
Christian kep^ with a fiuefold garrison. 115 Questions abo^t the power of God.
117. 118 Faith does (...) to further our preservation. 123 How many kind^s of
faith will not preserve us. 125. 126 Difference between temporary faith and
justifying faith. 130 What we must do to be souted. 131 Salvation prepared
already five ways. 132 How many ways salvation is hid, and to whom it is
re^ealed, and how. 134. 135 Of the last time, and about the day of judgment
diverse things. 138. 139 Nine ways by which it may appear that a Christians
(...) is a (...). 144 N^ne ways of reio^cing for Gods servants. 145 What we
must do to preserve the joys of God in our hearts. 147 How far forth a
Christian may joy in earthly things. 148 Rules and observations about sorrow in
affliction. 149 Four kinds of tentations. 151 Five ways Satan tempts men.
153 Thirteen degrees of tentation. How tentation may be discerned from our
own corruption. 157 Comforts against tentations. 158 Twelve rules against
tentations. 160 Six ways God tries man. 164 Seven ways God tries man in
affli^tion. 165 Comforts in our trials. 166 How we may show our faith in
affliction. 171 Seven things should move us to rely upon God in affliction.
172 Afflictions better then gold in diverse respects. 175 Grace better then gold
in many respects. 175. 176 In six respects Christ is hid till his second
coming. 181 Seven signs of the love of Christ in the sparkle, and 7 signs
of the love of Christ in the flame. 185. 186 What we must do to get the love
of Christ, and to keep our selves in it when we have it. Page 188 Six kinds
of joy, and three kinds of diabolical joys. 190 Eight things by which the
joys of the Holy Ghost may be discerned from all other joys. 187 Whether the
joys of the Holy Ghost be felt of every Christian. 192 What we must do to get
the joys of God. 193 What we must do to preserve them. 194 Four signs of a
true persuasion of salvation. 196 What the soul is. 198 Such as have the
assurance of salvation should look to eight things. 200 Eleven prerogatives of
the Christian Church. 205 Four things to be done that we fail not of the
grace of God. 207 Four sorts of men inquire about times. 214 What we must do
that God might answer us. 220 Distinctions about revelations: and of six sorts
of revelations under the Gospel. 223. 224 About traditions diverse things. 231
About the Gospel diverse things. 234. 235. 236. etc. Eight things required in
every one that would have part in the Gospel. 236 Of the Holy Ghost diverse
things. 239. 240. 241 Many things about Angels. 248. 249. etc. Fourteen
internal lets of godliness. 262 Eight rules for girding up the loins of our
minds. 264 Of sobriety in six things. 266 Rules about recreations and apparel.
268 Against drunkenness. 270. 271 Five things in a perfect hope. 275 Nine
ways to show our hope. 276 Five things to be done that we may attain full
assurance of hope. page 277 In seven things we should imitate Gods mercy in
showing mercy. 282 Of those that think they feel ^ore hardness of heart after
assurance. 288 Our obedience must be like the obedience of children in six
things. 289 Sorts of lusts hateful after calling, and eight reasons to avoid
them, p. 291. 292. and four preservatives against them. 293 Seven things in
fashioning our selves to sin. 293 Seven signs of a presumptuous sin. 294
Diverse things about ignorance. 294. 295. etc. How ignorance in unregenerate men
differs from that in the godly. 299 Of the imitation of the holiness of God.
300. 301 Diverse things about effectual calling. 305. etc. Distinctions about
holiness. 310 Helps to holiness. 312 Twelve motives to a holy conversation.
313 Seven things in the manner of our conversation to be observed. 315 About
the day of judgment at large. 321. 322. etc. We are soiourners as the
Israelites were in Aegipt: many allusions from thence. 335 Of a conversation
with fear. 341 Of redemption many things. 343. etc. 353. 363 About a vain
conversation diverse things. 354. 355 Five degrees of redemption from a vain
conversation. 356 Seven signs of redemption from a vain conversation. 357 Six
ways of deriuing sin. 359 How many ways children are infected by the
traditions of their fathers. page 359 Seven niles for Parents in ordering
their children. 361 About the blood of Christ. 368. 370. 371 Christ like a
lamb in six things. 372 Of Christ like a lamb in ix things, with their
signification. 373 Of Gods statute-bookes diverse things. page 377. and of
fore-ordination. 380. etc. Christ manifeted five ways. 385 Five things
concerning faith. 391. etc. Seven rules for the daily use of faith. 400 The
glory given to Christ after his resurrection in eight things. 403 Of faith and
hope diverse things. 405. etc. Ten things that assault faith. 407 A large
expplication of the ceremonial law about the clensing of the ^eper, as it
concerns the sanctification of a sinner. 413. etc. ^ight things to be done to
get a clean heart. 440 Eight things for the discovery of Hipocrites. 444 How
men may know their obedience is right. 445 In eight things the spirit works
our obedience. 446 Nine signs of ^nfained love. 452 Of purity of heart. 454
etc. Seven signs of fervent love, and nine causes of the want of it. 457 Of
the new birth and immortulitie. 460. etc. Eight things in hearing the word as
the word of God, with other things about the word. 476 Of man's mortality of
the body at large. 483. etc.
FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION of the first Epistle general of PETER.
CHAP. I. verses 1, 2. 1. Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers,
that dwell here and there throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and
Bithynia.

2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father unto sanctification
of the spirit through obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ:
Grace and peace be multiplied unto you.

THE purpose of the Apostle in this Epistle is to confirm the Christians, The
scope of the Epistle.
to whom he writes, in the faith, and to assure them, that it was the true
grace of God, they had received, and to persuade them to all possible care of
sincerity of life, becoming the Gospel, and to constan^ie in trials.

The Epistle stands of three parts: The parts of the Epistle.
1. The salutation, Chap. 1. ver. 1, 2. 2. The body of the Epipistle, ch: 1. v.
3. to ch: 5. v. 12. 3. The Epilogue or conclusion, ch: 5. v. 12. to the end.

These two verses then contain the salutation: The parts of the salutation.
where observe, 1. The person saluting: 2. The persons saluted: 3. and the
manner of the salutation it self. 1. The person saluting is described, 1. By
his name, Peter: 2. By his office, an Apostle: 3. By the author of his calling,
Jesus Christ. 2. The persons saluted are described, both by their outward
estate, and by their spiritual estate. For their outward estate, note both,
what it was, and where it was: they were strangers of dispersion, and that
through Pontus, Asia, etc. For their spiritual estate; they are Gods Elect,
and their election is amplified: 1. By the foundation of it, which is Gods
^ore-knowledge: 2. By the means of execution of it, which is the
sanctification of the spirit: 3. By the end, which is twofold: 1. obedience of
life: 2. remission of sins by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ. 3. The
form or manner of the salutation is in the end of the second verse.

Peter] This Apostle was by Nation of Galile, Who Peter was.
borne in the town of Bethsaida: His fathers name was Iona, or John a
fisherman: He was the brother of Andrew, who (as they were fishing at the sea
of Galilee) of a fisherman was made a (...) of men Matthew. 4. 15.
: His name at his Circumcision was Simon, and this name of Peter was given him
by his Savior Mark. 3* 16.
. It signifies a stone, a rock, perhaps it was given him for his confession,
and acknowledgment of Christ the rock 1 Cor. 10. 3.
, upon which the Church was buitt: He was called by our Savior Cephas Ioh. 1.
42.
, which in the Chaldean tongue is of the same signification. The Siriack
version sets the title of the Epistle thus: The epistle of Peter Simon Cephas.
This is he, that was ever accounted a Prince amongst the Apostles, taught in
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven by the voice of the Son of God
himself before his death: This is he, to whom the Lord after his resurrection
three times said: Jonah, love thou me? feed my sheep, feed my lambs. It
is storied of him, that in one day he converted 3000 souls: He cured Aeneas
of the palsy: raised a to life, first preached to the Gentiles being
instructed by a sign from heaven, and baptized Cornelius with his household; He
was by agreement appointed to be the Apostle of the Circumcision Gal. 2.
.

Apostle] Peter had a threefold call from Christ. 1. To the Discipleship Matthew.
4. Ioh: 1.
. 2. To the Apostleship Mark. 3.
. 3. and then to the Apostleship Ioh. 21.
again, having fallen from his former call, by his threefold denial of Christ.

An Apostle was the highest office in the Church. The Apostle Ephesians. 4. reckons
the callings of the Ministry; some were extraordinary: viz: Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists: some were ordinary, viz: the Past^rs and Doct^rs.

His mentioning of his Apostleship here shows three things: 1. Authority. 2.
Modesty. 3. Consent.

1. His authority must needs be great, seeing he was the Orator, Legate,
Ambassador of Jesus Christ, which should persuade these, to whom he wrote to
receive his doctrine with all reverence, and care; and not them only, but us
also, for whom it is left upon record, so as what is here forbidden we should
take heed of, and what is commanded we should receive as the words of Christ:
we should take heed, we fashion not our selves after the lusts of our former
ignorance, verse. 14. and not dare to live in mali^e, decent, hypocrisy, etc.
chapter 2. 1. or yield to the (...) that fight against our souls, chap: 2. 12. or
to be offensive, or disobedient in our parti^ular callings, ch: 2. and 3. or to
revenge our selves, ch: 3. 8, 9: or to live after the wills of men: or to (...)
in the sins of the Gentiles, such as are mentioned, ch: 4. 3, 4. and so of
the rest.

2. His modesty appears in this, that he seeks not principality or Primacie

3. And his consent, in that he professes hereby to bring no other doctrine,
then that the rest of the Aposttes did. For being in the same office with them,
he brings the same words of Christ also.

Of Jesus Christ] Here he shows, who put him into this office, and
Apostleship, even he, that was (...), head of all principality and power: The
(...) and eternal wisdom of the Father: The image of the invisible God: The
first borne of every creature: The great (...): The Promised ^eed: The son of
David: The Lord our righteousness: The shepherd (...)
and bishop of our souls.

He is called Jesus a Savior, an Hebrew name, to intimate the interest of the
Jews, and Christ anointed, a Greek name, to (...) the (...) of the Gentiles:
the joining of both^ together, note that he is a perfect Mediator without
respect of persons for the elect both of Jews, and Gentiles.

It is a matter of great weight in the condition of life, ^ee li^e in, to have,
and to be able to show a good warrant, and sound calling thereunto: For the
knowledge of our calling from God may both encourage us, and support us:
encourage us to do the work required, as in this case of preaching: Woevnto
us, if we preach not the Gospel when we are sent of God: support us against
all the troubles, that may befall us in our Callings for the doing of our
duties.

Seven sorts of men transgress about this matter of calling. Seven sorts of
men transgress about their Callings.


1. Such as run into callings, before God send them: as many Ministers do.

2. Such as live by such means, as God calls them from, as they do, that live
by usury, lottery, oppression, deceit, etc.

3. Such, as do the works of a lawful calling at an unlawful time, or on
the Sabbath.

4. Such, as abide not in their callings 1 Cor: 7.
.

5. Such, as meddle with many Callings, or Vocations, being called but to one.

6. Such, as live without a calling 2 Thessalonians: 3.
.

7. Such, as are slothful to execute the calling, God has set them in: If
Christ make Peter his Apostle, or (...) Christ's Apostle, he must go and (...).

Thus of the person saluting.

The persons saluted are first described by their outward estate:

The strangers, (...)
that dwell here and there.

There are three opinions about these strangers, who they should be: 1. Some
think they were the provincial Jews, who were scattered into these parts,
and converted to the faith of Christ by Paul and Silas, (...)
and because Siluanus (which is Silas) was about to return to visit these
Churches, therefore Peter writes by him: Hierome thinks, they were converted
by Peter himself, who had preached unto them, when he was Bishop of Antiochia.
In the sixth of the Acts, there are two sorts of Jews, viz: (...)
Grecians, and Hebrews: The Grecians were such Jews, as were scattered
abroad: The Hebrews were such, as kept their own state, and removed not.
There are two reasons alleged, why these provincial Jews should be meant: 1.
Because they are not simply called strangers, but strangers of the dispersion,
which should note such Jews, as were driven thither either of old, or by the
persecution about Stephen, or at other times after. 2. Because it was agreed,
that Peter should be the Apostle of the Circumcision.

Others think, they were Gentiles converted to the Jewish Religion, (...)
and so they take strangers and Proselites to be all one; and to such Peter
preached Act: 2. and converted many of them, and they think he writes to them
now.

Others think, that this Epistle is so written to the Jews, as it is intended
also for those elect Gentiles in those parts, (...).
because he says chap: 2. 10. that these people were not in times past a
people, nor under mercy, but now were the people of God, and had obtained
mercy: which words do not so fitly agree to the Jews, and so all the Elect of
God are strangers in this world, and so the word is evidently used, ch: 2. 12.
and I think it is to be taken in this last sense.

Strangers] Man may be said to be a stranger in five respects. Man is a
stranger in five respects.


1. In respect of absence from his natural friends, and his native soil: so
Abraham was a stranger in Canaan.

2. In respect of the want of Gods favor and grace, so wicked men are
strangers from the covenant of promise, from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
from the life of God Ephesians. 2. 12. and 4. 17.
.

3. In respect of the contempt of the world: so Gods children, when they begin
to fear God, the world accounts them as strangers, and auoids them: so David
was a stranger to his brethren and kindred Psalm: 69.^
.

4. Some make themselves strangers by a wilful retyring, and coffeehouse
for crosses that befall them 1 Pet: 4. 12.
.

5. In respect of absence from the heavenly Canaan, and the troublesome
condition in this world, and so all Gods elect are strangers.

Gods elect then are strangers in this world: Doctrine.
this point is abundantly confirmed in these places: Gen: 47. 9. 1 Chr: 28. 15.
Psalm: 39. 13. Heb: 11. 12, 13. and 13. 14, 15.

And it may teach us many excellent things for the ordering of our carriage both
in our selves, Uses.
and toward others.

There are 12 things, 14 Things Wherein we should be like strangers.
which may be gathered out of this metaphorical term, to teach us (with much
life) by the comparisons may be taken from thence: Or there be 14 things,
wherein we should be like to strangers.

1. A stranger is unacquainted, and has little to do, but with his journey:
so while we are in this world, we should think chiefly on our journey, and
keep our selves estranged from the world, dissoluing our sinful acquaintance,
and keeping our hearts from the cares of life.

2. A stranger uses to be much affected with lesser courtesies in a strange
place, Ruth 2. 10. so should we be thankful to God for any kindness in this
world: it is enough it shall go well with us in heaven, we should say with
David, who am I, and what is my people, that we should etc. for all things come
of thee? Now therefore our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name:
for we are strangers before thee, and ^^iourners, were all our fathers: our
days on earth are as a shadow, and there (...), 1 Chronicles: 29. 14, 15.

3. A stranger is wont to be glad of any good company, that will go with him,
though it were but a part of the way: How should we then with all joy, and
dearness intertaine Gods servants into our inward and perpetual society?
These are they will go with us to heaven.

4. A stranger will be careful to inquire his way, fears to miss it, seeks
best directions, and (...) every day, yea and at every turning: It will not
serve his turn once, or twice, or seldom in his journey to take general
directions: yea he is glad to ask of any body, even children, when he is out
of his way, or does but fear it, or is in danger of it: And shall not this
teach us to make more conscience of asking the way to heaven? how should we go
to God to seek a way of him? yea going and weeping we should go, and ask the
way with our faces thitherward, Ier: 51. 4. Ezra 8. 22. How should we be glad
of guides, and make our selves also equal to them of the lower sort, that by
conference, and all good helps from Ministers, and godly people we might
receive daily directions? It is a horrible plague to have a heart, that is not
willing and forward to ask questions about the way to be saved, and
intolerable pride not to make use of any that can give us counsel. O the
incredible stupiditie of our spirits! we that cannot travail in a road-way,
that perhaps we have gone before, without every hours questions, yet think
our selves wise enough to find the way to heaven with little, or no directions.

5. A stranger looks not for great things for himself, he does not seek
honors, and offices, and possessions in the City he trauells through: his care
is only for necessaries for his journey. And are not we strangers on earth,
and is it now a time for us to take up our dwellings here, and to seek great
things for our selves in this world? Ier: 46. 5. a stranger never pleads any
privilege in the place he comes to: and this was the ancient mind of the
godly Pa^^iarks, they quitted all claims, and confessed plainly, they were
but pilgri^s, and embraced the promises as their portion, and so set up their
rest in their hopes, Heb: 11. 3.

6. A stranger can endure wrongs: He stays not his journey to turn again to
every dog, that barks at him, nor to seek revenge for every indignity: He
lets not his journey for every shower of rain, and should it not be thus with
us? Why do we fear reproach? what stand we still at every s^ander? why busy
we our heads for proiects of revenge? or our hearts with indignation at every
currish caitiff, or dogged Doeg, that will falsely accuse our good conversation
in Christ? When will we come to our iourneyes end, if we every day trouble our
selves with the indignities we receive in this strange world? let the currs
bark, ride thou on, and mind ^thy way. What if thy crosses fall like rain?
ride on, it is but a shower, it will be over.

7. A stranger or tr^ueller, so thinks of his travail in the day, that he
looks for rest at night, and so takes his rest at night, as he resolves to
travail again in the morning: so should we be minded: In prosperity to
provide for adversity, and in adversity to hope for prosperity again, as
assured, that man abides in no certain stay here.

8. A stranger never measures his own worth, by what he finds in the way, but
by what he shall possess when he comes home: 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7.
so should a Christian do, he should live by faith, and not by sight: It
matters not, what the world thinks of him, his greatness is in the kingdom of
(...).

9. A stranger will be glad to send home upon any opportunity, and to get any
friend to provide for him against he come: should not we then be glad of any
opportunities to send home to heaven by our prayers, and to beseech Christ (our
friend, Ioh: 15. 15.) to provide our place for us, who is ready with all
willingness to do all our business in heaven for us?

10. A stranger is unskillful in the language of the several people, where he
comes, only cunning in his own language: So it should be with us, though we
find in one place the ambitious man telling of his honors, offices, livings;
and in another place the covetous man telling of his barnes, wares, bargains;
and in another place the voluptuous man telling of his dogs, sports, whores;
and in another place the wrathful man, telling of his adversary, wrongs,
revenge, etc: yet we should keep us to the language of Canaan, and speak as
becomes the oracles of God, and the gifts God has made us stewards of.

11. A stranger is cautelous and wary, he looks to his words, and behavior:
So should a Christian be circumspect, and get the wisdom of a serpent with the
innocence of a dove, he should not be curions, nor inquisitiue, but study to
be quiet, and meddle with his own business, Phil: 2. 14, 15.

12. A stranger strives to ride on merrily, and to wear out the tediousnes of
the way with singing sweet songs to himself: So should we: our (...) should
be of the statutes of God in the house of our pilgrimage, Psalm: 119. 34.

13. A stranger, if by ignorance or passion be have brought restraint, or
bonds upon himself, he will use all possible entreaties, and means to get
himself loose again, that he may go on in his journey homewards: so should
we, it by sin we have brought restraint upon our selves, we should never be
quiet, but power out our tears and prayers unto God, and urge him to be good
unto us even for this reason, as Da^id does. Ps: 39. 12, 13.

14. A stranger specially has his mind still running upon his home, his
thoughts, desires, longings, wishes, and all for his iourneyes end: So should
it be with a Christian, his conversation should be in heaven, and our
affections continually running after God, and heavenly things, Phil. 3. 20.
^eb. 11. 12, 13, 14, etc. and 13. 14, 15.

This also should teach us, seeing Gods children are strangers in this world,
to use Gods pilgrims with all honor and kindness: let them be as princes of God
amongst us, though they be now far from home, yet they are noble persons, they
are Gods heirs, learn of the very Hittites, Gen: 23. 4. 6.

This doctrine may also serve for great reproof not only to wicked men, who
like cursed Edomites, Hab. 12. abuse Gods Israel in their journey: but also for
many, that are in Israel, yea of Israel, for their worldliness and continual
plodding cares about the things of this life, miserably forgetting, that they
are but strangers, and this world is but an Inn: Ps: 39. 5, 6. Eccles: 7. 1, 2.

Lastly, we should gather consolations to comfort us in our travail to heaven;
certainly the Lord has a great care of his pilgrims, he keeps the
strangers, Ps: 146. 9. If God command men to use strangers well, and not to
wrong them, Exodus: 22. 21: or vex them, Le^it: 19. 33: but love them, Deuteronomy: 10.
19: how much more will GOD himself have mercy ^n his banished, and pity his
weary servants in their travail. What though the way be long, and labor
great, and dangerous: yet think of two things: 1. That Christ will be the
guide of the way, and never leave thee, nor forsake thee: 2. How great thy
happiness shall be, when thou art come home to that heavenly Canaan, that
glorious new Jerusalem, the City of the great King, when God shall wipe away
all tears from thine eyes, and give thee a thousand-fold for all thy travail.

Dispersed here and there] If we understand this of the Jews: It shows the
malice of wicked men: if they may have their wills, they will never be quiet,
till they drive the godly from them.

If we understand it of the Elect in general, it teaches us:

1. That Gods children may be driven from their native dwelling, God does not
always build them a house in their own land.

2. That the Church of God is not tied to any one place, neither to Rome, nor
to Jerusalem.

3. That the godly are thin set: It is rare to find true godly men, they dwell
here and there.

4. That the Church has not always an ex^ernall glory to commend it: It
consists som^times of a few scattered persons, that live straggling here and
there.

5. That there may be a great inward beauty under a despised condition: These
dispersed ones are glorious creatures, sanctified in their spirits under the
abundant mercies of God, that have lively hope through the sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus, such as shall have an immortal inheritance.

6. That there may be excellent order in appearing confusion: One might think
the husbandmen spoiled their come, when they scatter it abroad the ground: and
yet we know, it is better so, then when it is in the barn all on a heap: so
^s it with the godly.

Quest. If any ask, what good can come of this dispersion of the godly?

Ans. I answer: First by this means they carry the light of the truth all
abroad the world: The good that comes by the dispersion of the godly.
2. By this means, they preserve the whole earth. For they are the worlds
guard: they bear up heaven as it were: were it not for these the world would
be destroyed: and by their dispersion they bind Gods hands, as it were, from
the places, wherein they are, and keep off his fierce judgments; and besides
it is good for the godly themselves to be a sunder thus: It quickens them to
prayer: It makes them love and long one for another more: It prepares them for
heaven: It trains them up in spiritual soldiery, when they see they must
fight alone: All the riches of a Christian is his armor, and he has nothing,
but what he gets by wrestling and fighting.

^

For the Ge^graphy of these places: some think they all belong to (...): Hence
some of the Fathers cite this Epistle by this title: (...) (...)
. Some say, they were called by one name of (...) (...)
: Others say, they are all in (...): It is certain, they are all in Greece
(...)
.

Two things may be observed from hence.

1. That Christians, though scattered here and there, yet they have one God,
one faith, one Lord Jesus Christ: the doctrine we see is common to them all.

2. That unthankfulness and contempt of the Gospel, and sinful li^ing may
ruinate famous Churches. Where are the Churches, that then were in those
places? Oh how has the Turkish fury swallowed up almost all amongst them? If
we continue in sin, may not our (...) set, as well as theirs?

Hitherto of their outward estate. Their spiritual estate in general is
comprehended in their election.

Elect.]

There is a fourefold election. (...)


1. There is a general election of a Nation, (...) City, singled out to the
benefit of Gods general covenant: and so Israel was Elect (...) 4. 37.
.

2. There is an Election to (...), which is the eternal predestination of God
appointing certain men to be vessels of mercy, and to enjoy the glory of
heaven (...) 1. 4, 5.
.

3. There is an Election (...) sandification, which is performed in time by the
power of the Gospel, separating the foreordained from the ma^^e of forlorn
men unto holiness of life (...) 15. 19.
: This is nothing else, but effectual vocation.

4. There is an Election to the administration of some (...), as to the
Apostleship (...) 670.
.

Election imports a singling of a man from some thing, that is vile and
miserable; From what they are elected^
and so the godly are elect from the mass of condemned men in Adam, and from
under the power of Satan, and the kingdom of darkness: from the first death:
from the company of evil men: from the tyranny of sins of all sorts: from
the rigor and curse of the law, and eternal condemnation.

These Elect men are not to be known by How they may be known.
their numbers (...): 7. 7.
wit, wealth, nobility (...)
, beauty, personage (...)
, nor by their presence, pains, or prioritie in Gods vineyard (...)
: but they are to be known both by their birth, and by their life: By their
birth, and so they may be known, for they are borne of God, borne by promise,
borne again: they are then called and conver^ed of God, Rom: 8. 30. By their
life, they may be known, for they d^part from in^quitie, and call upon the
name of the Lord, 2 Timothy: 2. 19. they are fruitful in well-doing, and their
fruits remain, Ioh: 15. 16: they are holy and (...), Ephesians: 1. 4: they bear the
^mage of the Senne of God both in holiness, and sufferings: ^or holiness, Rom:
8. 29. They ^^ound in faith, virtue, godliness, knowledge, temperance, pa^^ence,
brot^erly (...), 2 Pet: 1. 5: 6. 10.

These Elect men have admirable feli^ities, and privileges above all the men
in the world: For

1. They have most dear acceptatio^ with God, 8 (...).
in his beloved, ^ph: 1^5: they are his delight, Psalm: 132. 13: his chief
treasure, Ps: 135. 4: his peculiar people, Deuteronomy: 7. 6. and 26. 18.

2. They are adopted to be the children, and heirs of God in Christ, (...):
1. 4.

3. They have the pleasures of Gods house, Ps: 65. 4, 5.

4. In adver^^tie they are sure of countenance; Esaias 41. 8, 9: Protec^ion, v:
10: the au^nging of their wrongs, Esaias 41. 11, 12. Luke 18. 8. deliverance and
(...), Zach: 1. 17. 20. 21.

5. The non-suting of all actions, and accusations in heaven against them, Rom:
8. 35.

6. They are made the friends of God, and from thence have audience in all
suits, and communication of the secrets of God, Ioh: 15. 15, 16. Deuteronomy: 4. 7. 37.

7. They are assured of preservation to the end, Ma^th: 24.

8. They shall obtain glory in Jesus Christ, being chosen to salvation, 2 Thessalonians: 2. 13, 14, 15.

Hence we^ may inform our selves: 1. That there is a choice: Uses.
God did not drive in whole N^tions, Cities, Towns, etc, but a certain number
of them. 2. That the doctrine of Election may be taught: It is true, that it is
in some respects strong meat, and has in some things an Abyssus.

It should also inflame in every one of us, both praises, and prayers to God,
that he would above all things remember us with the favor of his people^ and
comfort us with the joy of his chosen (...).
, and abo^^ all care, to care to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet: 1.
10. What shall it profit a man to be sure of his house, money, lands, etc. and
not to be sure of the salvation of his soul? Know ye not that Christ Jesus is
in you, except you be repr^bates? 2. (...) 13. 5.

Such as find by the signs, their Election, should abound in all possible
thankfulness to God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. etc.

Further, has God chosen us, and shall we not live like Gods Flect? It should
teach us to endeavor to show by our works, that we are chosen of God,
separating our selves from the wicked, and holding forth the light of the truth
in all vnrebukablenes of holy conversation, not being discouraged with ill
entertainment in the world, Deuteronomy: 10. 12. to 18. and 14. 1. and 26. 16. etc.
Ephesians: 1. 5. and 2. 10. Ioh: (...), 20. etc.

(...) learn not to be ashamed of Gods Flect, but choose unto us, whom God
has chosen to him: choose them, I say, both to honor them, and to sort with
them, and to countenance them, and defend them. Ministers should acknowledge
these in their teaching, and great men in (...).

This also may be a doctrine of singular terror to wicked men, that will not
be gathered and called by the means of salvation, Esaias 66. 4, 5. If it be
such a felicity to be chosen of God, what misery is it then to be rejected of
God for ever? If such a ^exation to be disgraced and scorned of great men, what
is it then to be rejected of the great God? and this is the more woeful, if the
forerunner of the full declaration of it be upon men, I mean a spirit of
slumber, Rom: 11. 7. 10.

And thus of Election.

This Election is first amplified by the ground of it, which is the
foreknowledge of God.

According to foreknowledge.]

Prascience or foreknowledge in God is considered more largely, Distinctions
about prae. science.
or more strictly: more largely, and so it notes the whole act of
praordination: so in the 20 verse of this chapter, it is rendered ordained: more
strictly and properly, for the knowledge of God, praeceding in order the
appointment to the end, and thus it is taken two ways: For there is a
praescience, (...)
they call in schools absolute, by which God from eternity does know all
things simply and absolutely: (...).
so the word is used, 2 Pet: 3. 17: There is also a praescience, they call
special, (...).
by which God not only knows the Elect, as he knows other things, but
acknowledges them for his, and loves them above all others, and this is called
the knowledge of approbation. Rom: 8. 27. and 11. 2.

In the first sense there is difference between Foreknowledge, Providence,
and Predestination: Praescience reaches to all things, to be done either by
God, or any other, and so to sins: Providence reaches to all, that God would
do: Praedestination only to the counsel of God about reasonable creatures.

Quest. If any ask after what manner God views things, or looks upon them, or
knows them?

Ans: I answer: How God knows things.
that we are not able to express the manner of d^uine knowledge, unless it be
by way of negat^on, that is, by d^nying to God those ways of knowledge, which
are in the creatures, and note imperfection: For God does not know things

1. By sense, as by hearing, seeing, tasting, etc: For these things are in God
only by an Anthropop^t^y, or Metaphore.

2. By opinion or conjecture: For that knowledge is neither certain, nor
evident, and therefore cannot be in God.

3. By faith: For God knows nothing by relation, or report of others. Besides,
though faith be a certain knowledge, yet it is not evident. Heb. 11. 1

4. By Art: For God does not know things by de^ining, dividing, compounding,
or reasoning.

5. Successively: For God knows all things in one view, and not one after
another.

6. Nor lastly by Images, but by his essence, by a way more excellent above all
Men or Angels, by a knowledge most true, certain, evident, and per^e^t.

In this foreknowledge of God is as in a book recorded the person^, birth,
qualities, and deaths of (...) man, Psalm: 139. 16: and the deeds of all men,
according to which they must be judged.

The special foreknowledge of God looks upon the (...) only, and is joined
with an infinite (...) and delight in them, Rom: 8. 27. and 11. 2. (...) 2. 9.
Exodus 33. vlt. This is called the Lambs (...) of life, and the writing of the
house of Israel, Esaias 4. 4. Revel. 20. 12. Phil: 4. 3. Dan: 12. 1. Ezech: 13. 9.

The Uses follow.

1. For information: Uses.
We have here a sea of contemplation, that the heart of man can never be able
to conceive of. How great cause had the Apostle to cry out as he did, O the
depths of the wisdom of God! so David Ps: 114. 24. To: 11. 29. Secondly, this
may show us, that men cannot possibly be just before God, seeing the knowledge
of God is so excellent and infinite, Job 9. 2, 3.

2. The doctrine of this infinite and eternal knowledge, or foreknowledge of
God, is used in diverse scriptures for singular consolation in diverse
distresses: How the foreknowledge of God may comfort us in diverse distresses.
as

1. Against the malicious practices of evil men, that set themselves against
the godly. They shall not prevail, though they think the Lord does not see:
yet they shall one day know, that he that made the eye does see, and he that
gave man understanding will correct: and for the godly in the mean time this
may comfort them, that all the hairs of their head are numbered: Psalm: 94. 1.
to 12. Matthew: 24.

2. Against the errors, and spiritual frauds, and deceits of men: The deceiuer
and the deceived are with the Lord, Job 12. 13. 16: and therefore it is not
possible, that the Elect should be finally deceived. Matthew: 24.

3. Against our own cares, and doubtfulnesse under the afflictions, and
troubles of this life: Does our heavenly Father know what we stand in need
of? Matthew: 6. 33. does not knowledge also extend to the number, times, places,
and measure of our crosses? and not our persons only, but our banishment
^eares, etc, are in his book. Ps: 56. 9.

4. Against our unbelief and distrust of Gods love, and favorable acceptance
of us; His eye has been ever, is, and will be upon the righteous: Psalm. 34.
16.

5. Against the fear of falling away: Is not the foundation of God sure? Has
it not this seal, he knows who are his? 2 Timothy: 2. 19.

6. Against the spiritual distresses, and diseases of our souls: He has
experience and skill to heal the broken hea^ted, and this is a great addition
to our comfort, he knows our destres in all the afflictions of our spirits,
Ps: 147. 5.

7. Against the troubles of our private Calling: Thus God comfor^ed, and
encouraged Jeremy: Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and before
thou came out of the womb, I ordained thee a Prophet to the Nations, etc.
Ier: 1. 5, 6, 7.

8. Against the weakness of our faith in things promised, and are not yet
performed: In respect of this foreknowledge, he calls things, that yet are
not, (...) they were. Rom: 4. 17.

9. Against the doubt of audience, and succese in pray^er: and the Lord said
unto Moses, I will do this thing also, that thou have spoken. For thou have
found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name: Exodus: 33. 1^

10. Against the fear of Gods wrath, and forsaking of man, when he enters into
judgment: The Lord will not cast off the people, whom he knew before. Ps. 94.
12. to 17. Romans 11. 2. and 8. 29.

11. Against the contempt of the world, and the censures of the wicked, and all
their slanders and indignities: The Lord knows us, and our desires, and
endeavors, God knows our hearts, and our innocence, whatsoever the world say
or think of us: It matters not what the prisoner says, if the Judge acquit
us: If God know us, it is no matter, whether the world do, or no.

12. Lastly, How can it be but well with the righteous, whom not only a God
loves, but with such a lasting and preventing love, when he cares for them,
and takes order so long before.

3. Thirdly, the doctrine of Gods foreknowledge may teach us:

1. To fear God, and forsake sin, and not to dally with disobedience, seeing
all is naked and manifest before him, with whom we have to deal, Heb: 4. 13:
and we may be the surer of it, seeing his very word can tell us of our
thoughts, and the secret intent of our hearts, v. 12.

2. To trust upon God, and rely upon him in all estates, seeing there is
nothing but he knows it, and has considered of it long since.

3. It should inflame us to piety, seeing no good can be done, but he will know
it, though it be done never so secretly: It should make even holy thoughts
precious, and dear to us, and it should make us abho^ hypocrisy, seeing it is
so vain, and God sees so evidently through us, at all times, and in all
actions. Ps: 139. 17. 1 Thessalonians: 5. 8, 9.

4. It should quicken us to the meditation and care of our assurance of our
eternal salvation: God has delighted himself to foresee it from eternity,
and shall not we foreknow, and foremeditate of our own glory?

5. Paul uses this as a reason, why we should help and encourage Christians,
and do all the good we can for them. For their names are in the book of life.
Phil. 4. 3. etc.

6. When we are to choose men for any Calling, we should learn of God to know
before, and those we see to be wicked, we should never Elect: custom, riches,
friends, entreaty, kindred, etc, should never prevail with us.

7. It shows us, how we should love one another, we should imitate God, no
time should wear out our affection, God is not sadded with love, though he set
his affections upon us before the beginning of the world was.

4. This doctrine of Gods eternal knowledge is terrible for wicked men, and
that in four respects:

1. Against the conceit of their own parts, and praises, Job 11. 11. If God
should set in order before thee, what he knows by thee, thou would appear
more ugly then any Leper.

2. Against their persuasion of secrecy in their sins, as these places tell
them: Psalm: 90. 8. and 139. 1. 11. to 16. Ier: 17. 9, 10, 11: yea this doctrine
tells them, that God has had time enough to know them, he has ob^e^^d them
from eternity.

3. Against their persuasion of impunitie, they think, they shall escape
punishment for their sins, but they are deceived, as is at large showed, Psalm:
94. 1. to 11. and 139. 8, 9. Revel. 2. 23.

4. Lastly, woe to the man, whom the Lord does not acknowledge by his word,
spirit, and children in this world: This imports, that he shall not be known
in the day of Christ: oh how woeful will that sentence be, when he shall say,
away from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not: Matthew: 7. 27.

Hitherto of the foundation: The founder follows, who is described, by what he
is himself, viz: God: and what he is to us, viz: a Father.

Of God.]

To be elect and known before others is a great benefit: but to be chosen of
that dreadful and immortal being, and that when nothing was, must needs add
to this prerogative. If God choose them, it matters not, who refuse them: If
God know them, it matters not, who is ignorant of them: If God honor them, it
matters not, who disgrace them.

He that founded our election in his own eternal pr^science, is he, that
founded this earth, and spread over it this great heaven: Ichouah Eloh^^ is his
name; and spiritual, incomprehensible, immortal, infinite, allmighty is his
nature: The immense fountain of all love, mercy, holiness, justice,
goodness, wisdom, and bounty: It is he that before guided the ways of
eternity, as he now does of times.

What God has done in time, is done, that we might know, and praise him: but
what he did before time, is without our measure, and as it comes nearer to
Gods nature; so it goes farther from our apprehension; at least, till we be
glorified in heaven.

But this is a sea, over which no ship has failed: a mine, into which no spade
has delued: an Abissus, into which no bucket has sunk, our sight is too
tender to behold this sun; our understanding too finite to comprehend this
glorious and infinite being, and therefore I pass from what he is in
himself, to consider, what he is to us.

The Father.

God is Father to Christ, to Angels, to Men: To Christ he is Father by nature,
as he is God, and by personal union as he is man: To Angels he is father by
creation, and to faithful men by adoption: As he is father to Christ, I
consider of it verse 3: here only, as he is father to the faithful.

God has an everlasting fatherly care and compassion over the faithful and
elect, Doct.
and this may serve for three sorts of uses:

1. For consolation to the godly: Uses. Comforts to the godly as God is their
Father.
God uses them and ever will use them like a Father, both for the affections
of a father, and for the provisions of a father: he both loves them, and
prouides for them, as a father for his children. Gods affection to the godly is
a fatherly affection: for it is 1. free, and 2. reader, and 3. constant. 1. A
fatherly love is a free love, there needs no argument to a father, but that,
this is my child; so it is with God. 2. A fatherly love is a tender love, it
has much compassion and care in it; such is gods love to the godly: Look how
Parents pity their children, so does God pity them, that fear him, Psalm:
103. 13. yea God is troubled in their troubles, and his b^wels are turned in
him in their discouragements and griefs, Esaias 63. 8. Ierem: 31. 18, 19. 3. A
father still loves his child, so does God, and much more, then all fathers, or
any of them. For he loves with an everlasting love, Esaias 49. 14. and is called
an everlasting father, Esaias 9. 6. Add unto these, that a father will love his
child, though no body else do: so can God love us, though he love alone.
Though natural fathers, and kindred forsake us, Psalm: 27. 5. 10, and spiritual
fathers forget us, Esaias 63. 16, 17: yet God will never cease to love us, he
will never leave us nor forsa^^ us. Only we must ever remember, that Gods
love is a pure love: For it has not in it hurtful indulgence, he will not
mar his children with too much fondness: He can hide his face, and though he
will never take his mercies from them, yet if they sin, he will scourge them
with the rod of men, he will afflict them, though it be but for a short time.
Ps: 89. Esaias 67. 7, 8, 9.

As is the affection of God, so is his provision for the godly, a fatherly
provision, he prouides for them like a father, yea like a heavenly father in
their 1. attendance. 2. dye^. 3. preservation in trouble. and 4. portion. 1.
For their attendance: he prouides for them better, then the great men of the
earth can do for their children: He has given his Angels to be ministering
spirits to all these heirs of salvation, and these pitch their tents round
(...) them, Ps: 34. Hebr: ^. 14. 2. And for dye^, they are fed with the (...)
that perishes not, yea such food, as he that eats thereof shall live for
ever, Ioh: 6. 27. 3. And for preservation in trouble, the power of God does so
keep them, that a (...) of their heads (...) fall to the ground without the
providence of their he^^enly father, Matthew: 10. and to that end all the hairs
of their head are numbered, and the spirit of God is given them to teach them,
to comfort them, and uphold them. 4. And for portion: he has blessed them with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, and since the earth was forfeited
into Gods hands again, he has restored the i^herit^^ce of the earth to none
(as is the opinion of many learned) but to them: Other men hold without any
title from God, Ephesians: 1. 3. Esaias 45. 11. 17, 18, 19. and in the world to come,
they shall shine as the stars of heaven, and as the (...) in the firmament,
Matthew: 13. 43.

Ob. Object.
But God has so many sons of this kind, how can he provide for them all?

Sol. S^lut.
Our hearts are not troubled for that: we believe in God, and believe in
Christ also: In our fathers house there are many mansions: if it had not been
so, Christ would have told us, and he is g^^e before to make our places ready
for us. Ioh: 14. 1. 2.

Ob. Object.
But they have so many adversaries without and within, that there is great
danger, left they be pulled out of their inheritance.

Sol. S^lut.
God that has begotten them, and given them to Christ, is greater then all:
(...) pluck them out of his hands, Ioh 10. 29.

Object. Object.
But they are for the most part a people of many, and those continual wants,
there is scarce any moment, wherein they want not something, and therefore must
either be uncomfortable in themselves, or burdensome to God.

Sol. Solut.
Whatsoever they ask the father, he wiul gi^e it them: It is no trouble to God
to receive Petitions from them continually, he delights in it, and rather
bla^es them for asking so seldom, and so little, Ioh. 16. 23.

Object. Object.
God himself plagues them with troubles as much, or rather more then he does
other men.

Sol. Solut.
The fathers of our flesh, correct us, and shall not the father of spirits do
it, and the rather if we consider, that he shows his love therein: a man
will correct his own son more, then another man's, and he does correct us for
our profit, that we might partake of his holiness and live, and there is much
fruit in the afflictions of the godly, all working together for the best unto
them: If God spare wicked men, it is because they are bastards, and not sons,
and yet there is a great deal of difference between Gods usage of wicked men,
and of godly, even in their trouble. For he spares and pitties his own
children, as a man will spare and pity his own^ son. He never strikes them
but it is in measure, and in their branches. He does not make a full end of
them to confound them, as he will do with wicked men, Heb. 12. Esaias 27.

Object. Object.
The world sees no such excellency in them, or in their Estate.

Sol. Solut.
The world knows them not, because it knows not God their father: they are
now the sons of God, but it does not appear, what they shall be: but we
know, that when Christ shall appear, we shall be all like him, 1. Ioh. 3. 1.
2.

This doctrine of Gods fatherly love to his people may serve for instruction.
Use 2.


1 To godly men.

2 To carnal men.

3 To earthly fathers.

1 Godly men should learn here to live like the children of God, and so they
do, if they look to three things.

1 That they live without sin, How we may live like Gods children.
and not shame their father by their wicked lives: their works should show,
and bear witness by their care to finish them, that God is their father, and
set them about them, Ioh. 5. 36. Their righteousness must exceed the
righteousness of civil men in this world: Math. 5. 20. and therefore their
daily prayers unto God should be, that he would establish them in holiness
before him, till the coming of Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13.

2 Secondly that they live without care, having such a heavenly father to
provide for them, Math. 6. 25. etc.

3 Thirdly that they live out of the society with wicked men cleaving only to
the household of God, 2 Cor. 6. 18. they should love their fathers house, Psalm.
27. 4. and deny utterly the love of this world, Ioh. 2. 15. 16.

2. Carnal men should hence take notice, if it may be, to be better advised,
and not meddle with the godly, no not to despise the least of these little
ones: Their Angels always behold the face of God for them, and their heavenly
father will requi^e their wrongs, Math. 18. 10. etc.

3 Earthly parents should hear learn of God: God cares for his children
before they were, and shall not they care for their children, when God has
given them to them: Gods greatest care is to provide holiness for his children,
and should not they learn of God therein?

Lastly, Use 3.
this may serve for reproof both of some of the godly, and also of the wicked,
that live in the Church of God: some of the godly do greatly forget themselves
about this point, that is such, as stir not up themselves to take hold of
God, and to call upon his name in their distresses, but sit down dismaide and
dead hearted, as if there were not the compassion, care, or help of a father
in God: this is reproved, Esaias 64. 8. Those sons of Belial also, that live in
the Church, and call God father, but live like the Devil, who indeed is their
father, whose works they do: those I say are most bitterly reproved in these,
and such like Scriptures even from their daring to call God father, Mal. 1. 6.
and 3. vlt. Ier. 3. 4. etc. Math. 3. 9. and 7. 21. Ioh. 4. 23. and 8. 38 41.
44. 1 Ioh. 3. 15. 2 Ioh. 9.

Through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience and sprinckling of the
blood of Jesus Christ.

There is difference of senses about the understanding and dependancy of these
words amongst Interpreters.

Some take sanctification in a large sense for man's righteousness in general,
and obedience and sprinckling of the blood of Christ: as the two parts or
kinds of it: by obedience understanding man's righteousness, or holiness in
himself, and by sprinckling of Christ's blood, that righteousness of Christ,
that righteousness (I say) made ours by imputation, both which are applied or
wrought by the spirit of God.

Some others make sanctification the end, and obedience, and sprinckling the
means, and so con^eiue, that before man's sanctification there goes two things
in God: Election, and foreknowledge: and two things in Christ, obedience and
sufferings, and all this in both, that we might be sanctified.

Others understand sanctification of the heart, or spirit of man, as a means
intended in Gods Election for the fitting of us unto obedience of life, and the
fruition of the benefits purchased by the blood of Jesus Christ, and thus, I
take it, it is meant here.

The sum seems then to be this, that our lives may be obedient to Gods will,
and that we may en^oy the benefit of Christ's death, we must be sanctified
within in our spirits.

Sanctification of the spirit.

Man is said to be sanctified, or made holy three wa^es:

1 (...)
Of not holy priuatiuely, and so man, that was once without holiness, is made
holy by regeneration, and justification.

2. 2 (...)
Of less holy, and so Gods children are daily sanctified by proceeding from
grace to grace.

3 3 Ex n^n sancto negatiu^s*
Of not holy negatiuely, and so Christ as he was man was sanctified. For there
was a time, when Christ had not this holiness in his humane nature, viz. when
his humane nature was not.

Spirit is taken sometimes for the holy Ghost, sometimes for an evil Angel, 1
King. 22. Luke 10. 20. sometimes for the Gospel, which has adjoined to it the
spirit, or working of the spirit of God, 2. Cor. 3. 6. sometimes for the soul
of man, and so it is taken sometimes more strictly for the understanding, the
Queen of the soul, the reason of man's mind (and then the soul is taken for
the seat of affections) Ephesians. 4. 23. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 23. sometimes more largely for
the whole inward man, the whole soul with all the faculties of it, and so I
take it here.

Diverse things may be noted here in the general.

1 First that without sanctification we can never have comfort of our Election;
by our obedience others may discover our Election, and by inward holiness we
may discern it of our selves.

2 That ou^ sanctification has some dependence upon Gods election, and that, ^
as he has ordained the rules of good works, we should walk in, Ephesians. 2. 10.
2 as he has bound himself by his decree to guide his people to the holiness,
he does require of them.

3 That an outward civil life will not serve the turn, God requires
especially the sanctification of the heart of man, 1 Samuel 16. 17. when God
looks for the marks of his own people he tries the heart and reins, Ier. 11.
20. and 4 14. Pro. 4. 23. and 23. 16. Gods ways are in the blessed man's heart,
Psalm. 84. 5.

4 That there is flesh in the best of Gods Elect in this life, their spirits
only are sanctified.

Thus in general, more particularly concerning the sanctification of the
spirit, I propound two things distinctly to be considered of: 1 What need our
spirits have to be sanctified? 2 Wherein lies the sanctification of the spirit
of man?


Our spirits have great need to be sanctified: What need our spirits have to
be sanctified.
1 By reason of the first sin, they want original righteousness, and they
are corrupt and infected with a general leprosy. 2 By reason of the steine
and uncleanness all our actual sins have added to the former corruption. 3.
By reason of the inhabitation of unclean spirits our spirits have in them
trenches, cages, fortes, and strong holds of Satan, 2 Cor. 10. 4. and
therefore had need to be cleansed after such foul spirits have been there.
4 The natural spirit of man ^rames nothing but evil, and that continually:
this makes God so weary, Genesis 6.

In particular all the faculties of the spirit of man need^ sanctification.

1 The mind is covered with a veil, wrapped in an ugly mantle of darkness,
distracted with error, coupled with a thousand forms of evil thoughts.

2 The memory performs no service to God: it should be Gods Treasurer, and
Register, but no body is in the Office to keep record.

3 The Will is grievously diseased, and with sickness so distempered, that it
will not be ruled by any, not by God, not by men, not by reason, not by
religion, nor does it agree with it self. For man wills not always the same
thing.

4 The affections out of the first poison of natural corruption, have such
monstrous births of evil, that the spirit by them is set out of all order, they
are compared to beasts, Esaias 11. To fighting soldiers, 1 Pet. 2. 12. To
Tyrants making cruel laws, and leading into bondage, Romans 7.

5 The wretched Conscience (then which there was once no diuiner thing on
earth) is now in miserable case. For either it is sick of a Lethargy, and
sleeps, or if it waken it is like a mad Dog, or Lion, or a Judge transported
with rage: It is ignorant without light: it is soiled or steined with a
thousand sins: It is impure, and exceeding base, and without all properties
of a divine Judge. For it is blind and will be corrupted, and will defer the
Assise etc. In steed of a throne of judgment it is thrust into a hole, and
horrible dungeon of darkness, where the Sun of righteousness shines not,
and there for the most part, as if it were still night, it lies obscure and
sleeps.

And thus of the need we have of sanctification in our spirits. Wherein the
sanctification of the spirit (...) lies.


The sanctification of the spirit lies in two things.

1 In clensing the spirit from sin. 2 In adorning the spirit with graces.
In the clensing of the spirit consider both from what, Of (...) the spirit
man, from what and how.
and how.

For the first, if any ask, what (...) is in our spirits needs clensing away?

I answer: Ans.
That besides what has been showed, many more particulars may be set out
thus: There are vile both impieties, and unrighteousness in our spirits must be
done away. For impieties: There is ignorance, error, atheistical thoughts,
pride, hypocrisy, inconstancy, hardness of heart, and division of heart,
conceitednes, vanity, self^-loue, hatred of goodness, false fears, carnal
confidence, forgetfulness, doubts, vnsetlednes, vnbeliefes of all sorts, and
love of the world.

For unrighteousness: There are evil cares, and covetousness, lusts of all
sorts, hatred, malice, desire of revenge, anger, fretting, worldly grief,
bitterness, coffeehouse, vainglory, emulation, inordinate affection, and
evil concupiscence: as good as men think their hearts and meanings are, they
may by this taste see, how foul their spirits are.

Now for the second: The spirit is cleansed from these sins by degrees; 8 Things
to cleanse the spirit of man.
and to that purpose the spirit of God works and uses 8 distinct new
qualities, which have not place in the soul, but upon occasion of this service
against sin. And these are, 1. Spiritual poverty, or sense of sin and misery.
2. Base estimation, viz: of the world, with the pleasures, profits, and lusts
of it, Phil: 3. 8. Esaias 30. 22. 3. Hatred of sin. 4. Shame for sin. Rom: 6.
21. 5. Godly sorrow. 6. Fear. 7. Indignation. 8. A purpose and inclination to
forsake sin.


Thus of the clensing of the spirit.

The adorning of the spirit follows: Of the adorning of the spi^. 8.
The spirit of man in sanctification is adorned with holy graces; and here I
consider of the adorning, 1. of the mind: 2. of the heart: 3. of the
conscience.

The mind is adorned with three things, Three things which adorn the mind in
sanctification.
which come new into it.

1. The first is a heavenly light. 2. The second is humblenes of mind. 3. The
third is purity of imaginations.
1. This light comes in by the illumination of the spirit, setting in the mind
a celestial kind of knowledge, and this stands in two things: For first this
sanctification breaks open a way, and sets at liberty the light of nature,
which was imprisoned and withheld in unrighteousness, and then there is
besides infused a new light from above, and this light has in it:

1. A holy discerning of good and evil, The light of the mind has 5 things
in it.
truth and falsehood, by which the mind in a measure discerns a general
course of avoiding the ways of death, and the doctrine of hell.

2. A holy inquiry, by which the mind aspireth after God and truth, and tries
things that differ.

3. Wisdom from above, by which the mind is carried not only to a foresight,
and forecast for^the things of the soul and a better life, above the things of
the body, and this life; but is furnished with certain seeds of discretion
for practice with observation of the circumstances of time, place, persons,
manner, end, occasions, etc.

4. A sacred frame of piety, and pattern of godliness and truth, and this
pattern is so communicated to the understanding, that it is indelible, no
dangers, sin, or death can ever utterly abolish it. This frame of truth is
perfected by degrees.

5. There is planted in the mind Gods watch, by the light whereof all the
ways of the heart, and life are ouer-looked.

2. The second grace planted in the mind, Humblenes of mind has 6 things in
it.
is humblenes of mind. 1 Pet: 5. 5. and this has in it,

1. A sense of the wants of the soul, and life of man.

2. A lowly kind of forecast in all things to glorify God, and profit man,
accounting it no abasement to serve and please with all readiness.

3. A thankful acknowledgment of the mercies of God infinitely above desert,
by which a man holds himself not worthy of the least of Gods mercies.

4. A freedom in matters of opinion, from self-conceit, by which a man
attaines to that, not to be wise in himself, or to rely upon his own reason,
or judgment. Thus a man is not high-minded.

5. An accounting of others of Gods servants better then our selves.

6. A pronenesse to humiliation for sin, and humility in carriage.

3. The third thing brought into the mind is purity of imaginotions, Purity
of imaginations.
holy thoughts, by which the mind converseth as it were in heaven already, and
feeds upon the fairest objects in heaven and earth. Pro^: 14. 22. Phil: 3.
20. Colos. 3. 1.

Thus much of the ador^ing of the mind.

2. The heart is adorned with 8 graces.

1. Holy desires: The heart adomed with 8 graces.
such as the heart felt not before, such as these, after remission of sins,
and righteousness by Christ, Matthew. 5: after the means of Gods kingdom, and
the power of it, Psalm. 42. 1 Pet. 2. 2: after the presence of God, even that of
glory, and the coming of Christ, 2 Timothy: 4. 8. 2 Cor. 5. 8: after communion of
Saints (the heart longing after them) and in a word, after all sorts of
heavenly things.

2. Divine love: and that of God, Ps: 18. 1. of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 8. of the
word, Ps. 119. 103. of Gods house, Ps. 26. 8. and 84. 5. of the godly, Psalm.
16. 3. 1 Ioh. 3. 14.

3. Joy in the Holy Ghost, Rom: 14. 17. in such things as these.

1. In the satisfaction of Christ for sin, 11 Things wherein a sanctified
heart rejoices.
Gal: 6. 14. Romans 5. 11. and 15. 13. 2. In his Election, Luke 10. 20. 3. In the
breasts of the Churches consolation, Esaias 66. 10. 4. In the word both read and
heard, Ps. 119. 77. Ier. 11. 16. Ioh. 3. 29. and so in the sacraments. 5. In
the sabbath, Esaias 58. 13. 6. In well-doing, Prou: 21. 15. 7. In suffering for
righteousness, Matthew: 5. 10 8. In the presence of God knowing the soul in
adursiti^ especially, Ps. 31. 7. Romans 5. 4. 9. In the people of God, Ps. 137.
6. 10. In all the good things the Lord hoth given, as the pledges of his love.
Deuteronomy. 26. 11. 11. In the things, that pertain to God. Rom: 15. 17.
In these a Christian has his seasons, and though he may sow in tears, yet he
reapes in ^oy.

4. A holy fear of God, and that of his mercies, Ps: 147* 11. Hos. 3. 5: of
his word, Esaias 66. 2. of his presence, especially in time of his service, Heb:
12. 28: and of his name and glorious titles, Deuteronomy: 28. 58: and in all things a
fear of his offense and displeasure, in respect of which a man is ielous of
his own infirmities. Pro. 28. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 17.

5. Confidence: in which the godly are as mount Sion, that cannot be moved,
Psalm. 125. 5: by which he commits his way to God, Ps: 37. 5: and runs to
God for refuge, that he may be under his arms for ever, Deuteronomy: 33. 27: Gods
name is to him a strong tower, Prou. 18: in respect of which, his place is on
high, even in the defense of the munitions of the rocks, Esaias 33. 16. etc: yea
such is the power of this confidence sometimes, that though God trouble him
with his own hands, yet he will hope, Job 15. 19. By this sign God knows his
in the day of trouble, and will own them, Neh: 1. 7. and the eye of God is
never off them, because they trust in his mercies* Ps: 33. 18.

6. A holy hatred, by which he cannot abide sin, ^s: 97. 10: the garment
spotted with the flesh, Iud: 23: any false way, Psalm. 119. 128: wicked
company, Ps. 26. 5: the work of such as fall away, Psalm. 101. 3: them, that
hate God and goodness. Psalm 139. 21.

7. Peace: whereby a man is made to rest from passions, and perturbations, and
enjoys tranquillity in the contemplation of Gods favor, Rom: 14. 17.

8. Bowels of mercy, Col: 3. 12. I omit hope, patience, meeknes, and the rest:
either because they some way belong to some of these; or because these are the
most eminent, and easy to be discerned: and all these are put on by faith.

And thus much of the adorning of the heart.

3. The conscience also is adorned with 9 gifts. The Conscience adorned with 9.
things.


1. Life: it being quickened from the dead sleep, it was in. 2. Light from
ignorance. 3. Peace from terrors* differing from security. 4. Purity and care
in all things to do uprightly. Act: 23. 1. Heb: 13. 1. 2 Timothy: 2. 3. 5. Joy and
refreshing, it is now a continual feast. Prou: 15. 15. 6. Constancy, Job 27.
6. so as no power can compel it. 7. Plainness and harmelesnes. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
8. A divine sentence, so as in determining, it judges for God, and as God. 9.
Tenderness: so as it will now smite for lesser evils.
All this doctrine concerning the sanctification of the spirit may serve

First for humiliation: Uses.
We may all say, if God look upon our spirits, (...) passed us, Psalm: 40: and
therefore we had need to pray to God to cleanse us from secret sins, even
those sins of our spirits.

2. For admonition to all men, to take heed, that they neglect not this great
work of inward sanctification, especially if God have touched the heart with
any inward feeling of thy estate and remorse of sin: Look to thy self, thy
heart is deceitful, and sin is a witch: watch against security, or relapse
into security: Be persuaded it is a dangerous thing to sin against the
purposes of amendment: The axe is now laid to the root of the tree, and
therefore trifle not, let not thy righteousness be as the morning deaw; thou
art come near to the kingdom of God, quench not the sparkles of light and
remorse. And much more this may warn such, as will not be touched with the
care of sanctification, take heed of a swinish and dogged heart, the Lord will
not cast pearls before such swine still. And thirdly, it may warn such, as
rest in giving fair words: If they praise the Sermons, and speak fair to
Gods servants, they think all is well: The Devil could spea^e Christ fair to
be rid of him, Mark: 1. 24: and so did Herod, Mark: 6. 20.

3. For instruction to all sorts of men, that yet find not comfort in this
work: oh labor about it, that thou may be cleansed from all filthiness both
of flesh and spirit, even sanctified throughout, following after holiness,
without which no man shall see God, 2 Cor. 7. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Heb. 12. 14:
and if there were in men a heart to return, there are many encouragements:
Christ is given to us of God to be sanctification; and in his intercession, he
remembered to pray for this, that God would sanctify us, 1 Corinthians: 1. 30. Ioh:
17. 14. 17. 19: and the word of Christ is able to sa^ctifie us, Act: 20. 32:
and Christ hereby proves his resurrection from the dead, Rom: 1. 4: and God
has promised his spirit to help us, Ezech. 33. 37.

4. For confirmation: since this is so, let him that is holy, be holy still.

5. For much thankfulness, in such, as have attained in any measure to the gifts
of Gods grace herein, 2 Thessalonians: 2. 13.

Thus much of the sanctification of the spirit. Unto obedience]

The first end of our sanctification is, that our lives may be brought into
obedience.

This obedience must be considered either in the 1. whole, or in the 2. parts.
1. In the whole it is profitable to observe three things: Of obedience in
^enerall.
1. the original of true obedience: 2. The rules or properties of true
obedience in the manner of it. 3. The motives that might stir us up to the
care of obedience.

1 The cause of this obedience is 1. either without us, or 2. within us:
without us it is both God, and the word of God; Of the causes of our obedience.
God the Father causes it by electing, etc: the Son by redeeming: the holy
Ghost by calling. The word of God is the sampler or pattern of our obedience;
for if ever we would bring our lives into order, we must resolve not to
follow men's examples, wills, lusts, or our own reasons, inclinations, or
conjectures; but only to have recourse to the Law of God: this must be the
light to our feet, and the lantern to our paths, Psalm. 119. and 19. 2. Tim.
3. 15. to the end we must obey them that have the ouer-sight of us, and do
instruct us out of the word, and observe the form of (...) into which we are
delivered, Romans 6. 17. ^eb. 7. 18. and receive such teachers as the Corinthians
received (...), 2. Cor. 7. 15. we should get an ^are of obedience: Prou. 25.
12.

2. The causes within us are either 1. general: the sanctification of our
spirit; or 2. special, and so it is ^aith: ^or the first, the coherence
shows, that unless our hearts be sanctified, our lives can never be framed to
true holiness and obedience; and for faith, it is certain before ever we can
practice true obedience to the Law, we must have the obedience of Faith, that
is, we must be persuaded of Gods love to us, and receive his promises in
Christ, and repenting of our sins, believe the Gospel: Romans 1. 5. and 10.
16. 2 These. 1. 8. The faith of the Truth is generally the chief guide of all
our actions, whether they be works of reformation, or of our general calling,
or particular carriage: 2 Thessalonians. 3. 16. For we must believe Gods threatenings,
power, prom^ses, assistance and reward, or else our work will go slowly
forward.

2 Now for the second: there are six things to be observed in the manner of
our obedience, without which our (...) will never be brought into order. (...)


1 The first is ^^are. The Apostle says, we must yield our selves as servants
to obey: Romans 6. 16. which notes, that we must do the works of God, and show
our obedience to him, as the servant does his work, that is with great heed,
forecast, and care: God does not only require we should obey, but obey as
servants obey.

2 The second thing required in our obedience, is Wisdom: It is not enough to
do good, but we must be wise to that which good, and simple concerning evil:
This the Apostle shows, Romans 16. 19.

3. The third is Constancy, our obedience must be fulfilled, 2. Cor. 10. 16.
We must not be weary of well-doing: 1. These. 3. 13.

4 The fourth is abnegation: In obeying Gods will, we must throughout the
course of our lives be contented to deny our selves, so as we would do Gods
will with patience, though crosses follow, Luke 8. A sign of the seed sown in
good ground, it brings forth fruit with patience: and besides it imports,
that if we mean to reform our lives aright, we must live soberly, showing
our moderation in diet, apparel, recreations, and the like: yea we must not
think it much to be crossed in our reason, desires, ease, profits, or
preferments: but be contented to be that we may be, with a good Conscience:
Heb. 11. 8. Genesis 22. 18.

5 The fifth is sincerity: and the sincerity of our obedience appears, both
when we show respect to all Gods Commandments, as well as one, obeying in all
things: as also, when we obey without corrupt and carnal ends and respects:
Genesis 26. 5. Phil. 2. 12.

6. The sixth thing is peace: we must lay our proiects so for holiness, as we
follow after peace, as much as is possible, and that with all men, much more
with the Church and people of God, Romans 12. 19. Heb. 12. 14. so as our
conversation be without division or offense: Romans 16. 18. 19.

^ For the third point, Motive to obed^nence.
we may remember that it was long since noted by Samuel, that obedience is
better then sacrifice: 1 Samuel 15. This obedience is the end of the writings of
the Apostles and Prophets. If we be not trained up by the Scriptures to good
works, we do nothing with general profession of the name of Christ: Romans 1.
5. 2. Tim. 3. 15. etc. If we obey not, we are the servants of sin, and it will
be our ruin, we shall dye in our sins: The Ministry had never been broken
open, but that the Nations might be brought to obedience: Romans 16. 26. If you
obey not, you break the hearts of your teachers: it is not good words, and
liberal pensions will serve the turn, you must yield obedience to our
Ministry in your lives, or else you do nothing: Phil. 1. 15. 16. 2. Cor. 7.
15. Vengeance is ready against all disobedience, every whit as ready in Gods
hand, as in the Ministers mouth, 2. Corin. 10. 4. 5. In this text we may see
God delights to receive the obedience of his people from all eternity, and all
the benefits purchased by Christ's blood, shall be given to them that obey, he
is author of eternal salvation to them that obey: Heb: 5. 9.

Thus of obedience in general:

External obedience which is here entreated of, is distinguished by the
Apostle: Romans 15. 18. into two kinds. Of obedience in words.
For either it is obedience in word, or obedience in deed.

Quest. Here might some one say, what need the obedience of the tongue, our
tongues are free?

Ans. It seems some men think so: Those hypocritical, flattering, and wicked
men mentioned Psalm. 12. 3. say their tongues are their own, and yet it is
certain, the Lord will have the tongue bound to the good behavior, Iam. 3. 3.

Quest. What great hurt can there be in the tongue, if men live honestly
otherwise? It seems there can be no great offense in the tongue.

Ans. Men are extremely deceived that think they cannot commit dishonesty and
impiety by their words: There is a world of wickedness in the tongue, Iam. 3.
6. There are many sins which are most vile and hateful, which have their
principal seat in the tongue, or are practiced in words, as blasphemy,
murmuring, desperation, lip-seruice, swearing, ^ursing, perjury, charming,
reproching, persecution by the mo^king of the godly, bitter words, filthy
speaking, lying, backbiting, slandering, flattery, and false witness bearing,
together with diverse sins of deceit, hypocrisy, heresy, etc.

And on the other side excellent graces, and duties depend much upon the
service of the tongue: Gods glory; our own Callings, and other men's good are
much furthered by the tongue. By the tongue men preach, pray, confess their
sins, give thanks, comfort, exhort, rebuke, swear, vow, etc: and therefore
great reason, we should show our obedience even in the tongue.

Under the obedience of conversation are comprehended duties of piety to God,
of mercy to the distressed, of justice to all men, of temperance to our selves.
The catalogues of the sins we should avoid in our conversation, or of
duties we should do, I omit here, having some purpose, if God will, to handle
them more largely in Treatises by themselves.

And thus of obedience.

And sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.

Before I come to the more particular, and full opening of these words, these
things may be touched in the general.

1. There was blood in Christ, he took the true nature of his brethren, true
flesh and blood, that he might serve and satisfy God in the same nature, that
had offended.

2. This blood was shed. If you ask, who shed it? I answer: Judas by selling
it: the Priests by advising it: the people by consenting to it: Pilate by
decre^ing it: the soldiers by effecting it: CHRIST himself by permitting it,
and after presenting it to God (Heb: 9. 14): our sins, that chiefly caused
it. If any ask for whom it was shed. I answer briefly for the Church, Act:
20. not for himself, nor for impenitent, and obstinate sinners, that dye in
their sins.

3. It is not enough, that the blood of Christ be shed to make us happy,
unless it be applied also: which the word sprinkling notes.

4. This effusion of blood was solemnly prefigured, or foretold by the
sacraments, and sacrifices of the Law. For this word sprinkled is a metaphor,
borrowed from the legal sprinkling; which shows us two things: 1. The great
account that God and good men make of it, in that it was so solemnly and
anciently typed out: 2. That the ceremonies of that Law are now abolished,
seeing we have here the true sprinkling of the blood fore-shadowed out.

5. That our estate in Christ is better now, Our estate in Christ better then
our estate in Adam here in this life.
then our estate in Adam was. For God here in his eternal counsel is brought
in ouer-looking that first estate in Adam, and setting up his rest in this
estate purchased in the blood of his son. If any man marvel at this, he
shall be thus satisfied: Our estate in Christ is better, then our estate was at
the best in Adam, even in this life, and therefore much more in the world to
come: In this life, it is better only in two respects. 1. That we cannot fall
from this happiness. 2. That Christ's righteousness imputed to us is better, then
that righteousness was inherent in Adam. Now for the world to come, heaven is
better then paradise.

6. We can never discern our comfort in the blood of Christ, till we be
sanctified in spirit, and set upon the reducing of our lives into the obedience
of Christ. Justification and Sanctification are inseparable. Thus much for the
general.

In particular, concerning this sprinkling of the blood of Christ, I consider
two things: 1. What benefits the Christian enioyes by the blood of Christ,
which is here noted, as the end of his sanctification: 2. The mystery of this
sprinkling, or applying of the blood of Christ, as it was shadowed out by the
legal sprinklings.

The benefits which flow from the effusion of the blood of Christ are either
general, The bene^^^s flowing from the blood of Christ.
or particular. The general are; 1. The purchase of the Church, Act: 20. 2.
The ratification of the new Testament, or covenant of grace, Hebr: 9. 18. 3.
The breaking down of the partition wall between Jews and Gentiles, and the
adopting of the abject Gentiles, the freedenizing of the Gentiles, and
repealing of all statutes of aliens, Ephesians: 2. 13. etc. 4. The reconciliation of
all things both in heaven and earth, and the dissoluing of that enmity, which
came in by sin, Col: 1. 20.

The particular benefits, which flow from the blood of Christ to every
converted Christian, are

1. Justification: which has in it, 1. The pacification of Gods anger: Christ's
blood is the propitialory, like the cover of the Arc, that hides the law from
the sight of God, Rom: 3. 25. 2. The pardon of all sins, 1 Ioh: 1. 7. 9. Ephesians:
1. 7. 3. Preuent^on of Gods eternal wrath, or the loss of heaven, ^om: 5. 9.
4. The garment of imputed righteou^n^s, or putting on of robes made white in
his (...) 14.

2. (...) and the clensing the conscience from dead works to serve the living
God. Heb: 9. 13, 14.

3. The sanctification of all the means of help to the believer both
spiritual and temporal: The very book of God is sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, that it may be opened, and of use to the faithful, and so all means
else in his general and particular calling. Heb. 9. 19, 20.

4. Intercession: The blood of Christ speaking better things, then the blood of
Abel, pleading daily for the godly, and procuring the establishment of favor
in God, and acceptance. Heb: 12. 24.

5. Victory over Satan, who is overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and the
word of the testimony, Revel: 12. 11. so as his molestations, and temptations
shall not prevail.

6. The destruction of him, that had power over death, so as now the believer
needs not fear death, nor can he be hurt of it. Heb: 2. 14.

7. Entrance into the most holy place, even within the Veil, that is into
heaven. Heb: 10. 19, 20. you may see more Ioh: 6. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59,
etc.

All this may serve for diverse uses: As

1. For singular consolation to all the godly: Uses.
Oh what an honor is it to be descended of the blood of Christ? How does a
Christian man's new birth in this respect excel all the nobility of birth in
the world? Ioh: 1. 13. What reason have we of thankfulness for so happy a
condition? what should we complain of? what matters it, what we loose, or
want, if we neither loose nor want the blood of Christ? How incomparable are
these benefits beyond all the glory of this world, if we have eyes to see them,
and hearts large enough to conceive of the glory of them? The Lord from
eternity looking upon the blood of his Son sets up his rest there, as having
provided a sufficient portion for all that shall be sanctified by his spirit.

2. For instruction: we should every one of us be incited to all possible care
of assurance, that Christ died for us, and get it ratified to our hearts by all
the testimonies we can. There be three witnesses of a man's happiness: 1. The
water: 2. the blood: 3. and the spirit, 1 Ioh: 5. 6. The water of repentance:
the blood of expiation in the passion of Christ applied by faith; the spirit of
sanctification testified by saving graces, and new divine gifts.

3. For terror to all wicked men: that sin against the blood of Christ, by
despising and neglecting the grace of the covenant, by swearing, by unworthy
receiving the sacrament, and by their obstinate unbelief and impenitencie.
Shall the blood of Abel cry for such vengance, and shall not the blood of
Christ much more? What a blood-guiltines do these men draw upon themselves,
that sin against the blood of Christ? If Judas burst his he^rt with despair
for betraying it, how can their case be better for despising it?

Thus of the benefits, which come by the blood of Christ: Now it follows,
that I should open the meaning of those ceremonial legal sprinklings, and
show, how they did in their kind fore-signifie the mystery of this sprinkling
of the blood of Christ.

There was a fourefold legal sprinkling. 1. The first was of the blood of the
red Cow, and of a water made of the ashes of the red Cow, Nom: 19 2. The second
was of the blood of the Paschall Lamb, Exodus: 12. The third was of the bullock
by the High Priest, clensing the Tabernacle, Leuit: 16. The fourth was of the
blood of the burnt offering at the ratification of the covenant: and that these
things may be made more plain, I would take liberty to explain those types,
as they lie in the text, though the explication thereof will in some things
conteyne a little digression from this Text. And first for the sprinkling
mentioned Nomb: 19.

The Israelites by their wicked murmurings had brought the plague of God upon
themselves: An explication of the whole Ceremony of the sprinkling of the
blood of the red Heifer, N^mb: 19.
In their distress they cry and seek reconciliation: The Lord makes an
ordinance, and shows a way, how he may be pacified, where many things may be
noted.

1. That of necessity the expiation must be made in blood, which was a type of
the blood of Christ: God will never be friends with offenders, till they bring
him the blood of his son to make atonement; and this is of such absolute
necessity, that in the second verse the direction is called, the ordinance of
the law commanded of the Lord. Note: an ordinance, a law, and commanded: to
show the peremptorinesse of the Lord in this point, we must lay hold upon the
blood of Christ, or God will never turn away his displeasure from us.

2. That this expiation belongs only to the house of Israel.

3. That they of the house of Israel, that is, the members of the true Church
need to be called upon in this point, he must speak to the children of
Israel, verse: 2.

4. That Christ, that should be the true sacrifice, must be one taken out of
the Congregation: one, that lived amongst men on earth, and should be offered
up in the flower of his youth, and should likewise take the very infirmities of
our nature upon himself: This was shadowed by the Heifer taken out of the
heard.

5. The Heifer was red, to shadow out the bloody passion of Christ: The Church
says of Christ, my love is white, and ruddy: white, in respect of the
righteousness of his life; and ruddy, in respect of his passion unto blood.

6. The Heifer was without spot, and blemish, to signify, that Christ should
be without sin: He was indeed in the similitude of sinful flesh, but had no
sin in his flesh: It is somewhat, that the Heifer must be such, as had in
her-selfe no blemish: Note, in her-selfe; for it is true, Christ had no fault
in himself, but his members were not without fault. For no flesh in this life
is without sin, but the flesh of Christ.

7. The Heifer must be such, as upon which never came yoke, and that fitly and
significantly required. For such was Christ: for he never bare the yoke, in
that he never sinned; he came to deliver those, that were under the yoke, and
servants of sin, but knew no sin himself. Besides, the yoke was not put
upon his flesh, because he had power uncompelled to lay down his life, and to
take it up again. Some say, that a Heifer was to be offered to expiate the
idolatry in the Calfe, and it was to be brought to Moses, because Aaron had
sinned: and must be without yoke, to note, that the Israelites had cast of the
yoke of Gods law, but the former sense is the right.

8. This Heifer was to be brought to Moses; and why that? not only to signify,
that Christ should be condemned under pretense of the breach of Moses law; nor
only because he should dye by the appointment of the Magistrate; but to
import, that Christ must be offered up to God the Father, the Lawgiver, who was
the party offended.

9. Who must bring this Heifer to Moses? Ans: All the Congregation of Israel,
they must all get them a red Heifer, that is, a bloody Savior, or else they
can never be accepted: This is the best, yea the only present they can bring to
God to pacify his displeasure toward them.

10. Verse. 3. It is said, He shall give her to Eleazar the Priest. Who
delivered up Christ to be slain? In the letter, the Jews; in the mystery,
the Elect. But why delivered to the Priest? to note (as in all other
sacrifices) the priesthood of Christ by his eternal spirit offering up
himself to God, Heb: 9. 14. perhaps to foretell, that the Priests should kill
Christ. But why to Eleazar, rather then to Aaron? Some say, because Aaron had
offended in the Calfe: But others say, to note, that the passion of Christ
should not only serve for that time, or the time under the law; but for their
successors, and all successions to come; and to note, that this was a doctrine
to be delivered down by all Ministers one after another.

11. It must be without the camp, to praefigure, that he should suffer
without Jerusalem, and thereby leave us a warning to withdraw our selves from
conversation with this world, and bear our reproach, Ioh; 19. Heb: 13.

12. She must be slain before Eleazars face: The flesh of Christ was slain
before the face of the Priests of the Lord in the new Testament; or rather
Christ was offered up before the face of God the Father: that which in the sight
of the world was a punishm^t; in the sight of God was a sacrifice.

13. Verse. 4. Eleazer must take of this blood with his (...), to note, that men
may not rudely with band hopes thrust in their hands into this sacred blood:
it must be touched, or applied with great discr^tion, and reverence; and the
blood of Christ is to be touched with our fingers, or hands, not with o^r
mouths, or hearts only: To note, that our practice should be died in the
blood of Christ, and ^auour of the virtue of his death, and our applications of
it, that so we may imitate his passion as well as know it: 1 Pet: 2. 21.

14. The blood must be sprinkled directly before the tabernacle of the
Congregation seven times. Some understand the Jewish synagogue, upon which the
curse for the effusion of Christ's blood came most exquisitely, according to
their own desire, when they said, His blood be upon us, and our children: But
rather hereby is signified, that the Church of God only has the benefit of
Christ's blood applied; and then 7 times notes both the perfection of
Justification, and the often need we have of the renewing of the application
of it, and also the continuance of it to all ages.

15. The skin, flesh, blood, and dung of the heifer must be burnt, Verse. 5. By
the skin, flesh, and blood may be meant the substance of the flesh of Christ:
and by the dung, the base indignities and contumelies, which were cast upon
him, and these were all offered up, and sacrificed in the fire of his passion.

16. Verse. 6. Cedar-wood, hysop, and scarlet are not without their
signification: The Papists reach high here, that cna find in these three to be
meant three persons suffering with Christ: By Hyssop should be meant the Virgin
Mary, and by the Cedar, John the Evangelist, and these two should suffer with
him per compassion^e^ment is, and by the scarlet should be meant the thief,
that suffered with him per compassionem carnis.

Some think, that the cedarwood is hope, that dwells on high, and will not be
putrified: Hysop is faith, a low growing herb, that lastens her root upon the
rock: scarlet is charity: Others understand by the cedar contemplation: by the
hysop humility, and by scarlet twice died, (...)
charity which is twice died, viz. on the one side with the love of God, on the
other with the love of our neighbor: All these must burn in the Lords passion:
but I think, that hereby may be noted, that three things arise out of the
passion of Christ: 1 the cedar of immortality. 2. the hysop o^ mortification:
For so the word purge applied to hysop Ps. 51. does import. 3 the scarlet is
the blood of (...), which is twice died, in that it is twice applied: once for
expiation, 600. years ago: and then again for iustifi^ation of every particular
believer.

1^ The impurity of the Priests mentioned verses 7. 8. might prefigure the
impuritie of the Jewish Priests, till they were washed by conversion from their
sin in killing Christ, of whose conversion is mentioned Act. 6. But rather
hereby may be gathered, as the Apostle does gather it, the great excellency
of Christ's Priesthood above all those legal Priests. For they in their
solemnest sacrifices were impure themselves, and needed clensing: but Christ
was not so, Heb. 10.

Quest. How could the Priests be made unclean by that, which did purify the
people? Answ. Uncleanness was two ways contracted. 1 First by the foulness
of the things touched, and so he that touched a dead corpse was unclean. 2.
Secondly by the unworthiness of the man touching, and so it was here: He must
profess himself unworthy to touch so sacred an expiation; we had need to take
time even till the evening to humble our souls, and bewail our unworthiness
of the blood of Christ.

18 Now after the death of the Heifer, it is said Verse 9. that a man that is
clean, must gather up the ashes of the Heifer, and lay them up without the
Camp in a clean place. This man, that is clean, is the Gentile purified by
faith (For this is after the death of Christ) the gathering of the ashes is the
applying of the merits of Christ, and laying hold of the mysteries of his
kingdom. The laying up of the ashes imports the Christians accounts of Christ's
merits, as his chief treasure: The clean place is the clean heart, for the
merits of Christ belong not to all Gentiles, but to such as have a clean
heart, and will keep the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. Without the
Camp notes the native condition of the Gentiles, who were without the law:
strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, and from the covenant of promise,
without sacrifices, and out of the Synagogue of the Jews.

19 These ashes are kept for the congregation; to note, that there shall never
be want of merit to any Christian, to any member of the congregation of Christ:
when he says, it is to make a water of separation, it notes, what our sins
bring upon us by nature, we are separate and cast out of Gods sight, and need
the blood of Christ to recover us from our separation. This water was made of
the ashes of the Heifer, and running water, to note, that after separation, to
cleanse us again we must be sprinkled with a water made of the ashes of
Christ's merits, and the water of the grace of the holy Spirit of God: This is
the perpetual way of purification for sin, and in that it must be sprinkled
upon us with Hissop, it notes, that we can have no comfort either of the
merits of Christ, or the grace of the spirit, without the hissop of true
mortification.

20 He that gathers the ashes, must wash his clothes and be unclean, till
the Even: to note, that even the nearer a Christian comes to the merits of
Christ, the more he is affected with the sense of his own uncleanness, he
that has the strongest faith does most wash his clothes, yea he retains the
sense of his uncleanness till Even, that is, till death, as some interpret it.

Thus much of the sprinkling of the blood of the Heifer.

In the sprinkling, Of the sprinkling at the Passover.
that was used, about the passover there are not many things which need
expounding

The Lamb for the Passover is Christ the lamb of God: the blood is the blood
of Christ.

The sprinkling of the blood is the application of the blood of Christ.

The sprinkler is the Minister.

The hyssop wherewith it is sprinkled, is the word of mortification.

The people are the faithful.

The house is the soul of man.

The doors of the house are the ears, eyes, and mouth of man.

The benefit is deliverance and protection from the destroying Angel.

In the narration of the sprinkling of blood used at the ratification of the
covenant: Exodus: 24.
The sense of the most things may be briefly touched. Of the sprinkling at the
ratification of the Covenant.


The altar under the hill, is Jesus Christ, ready, to succor and sanctify
those, that are afflicted in spirit with terrors of conscience, in the sense of
the law given on the hill Sin^.

The pillars are the faithful, that stand before, and bear witness to the
comforts expected, or felt for the sacrifice of Christ, and they are 12. to
note out the 12. Tribes, and in them all the faithful.

The young men, and the first borne of the children of Israel, were types of
the Elect in visible Churches, borne again to God, his first fruits of the
multitude, a people consecrated to God, as his only portion.

These offer to God two kinds of sacrifice: the one was the Holocaust, or the
whole burnt offering, even the dedication of themselves wholly even of their
lives unto the death for the service of God, and the practice of godliness:
The other was the peace offerings, which were sacrifices of praise, and
thanksgiving.

The blood was the blood of Christ.

The basins, that received the blood, are the word and sacraments.

The Altar sprinkled with blood is Christ truly suffering, and truly
retaining in himself all sufficiency of merits.

The other part of the blood sprinkled on the people, notes the application of
the merits of Christ to the faithful, and of his graces without diminishing
from the fountain of excellency of merit and grace in himself.

The means, by which it is sprinkled, is to be supplied out of the Heb. 9.
19. viz. the hisoppe of mortification, and the scarlet of charity, and the
Christian love enflamed with zeal against sin and fervent desire of piety.

The benefit is the reconciling of the people to God, and the establishing of
the covenant.

In the (...) of blood mentioned, Of the sprinkling Leuit. 16.
Leuit. 16. I note only four things.

1 The benefits, that come by it, which are first entrance within the veil,
even the right to the kingdom of heaven. 2 The assured procurement and
continued establishment of mercy from God, noted by the sprinkling of the
mercy seat 7. times.

2 The intercession of Christ noted by the incense, heated by the burning
coals of his own ardent affection, Verse: 12. 13.

3 The perfection of Christ's mediation, in that no man is joined with him, nor
must any man be present Verse. 17.

4 The extent of the benefits to all the Elect, noted by the sprinkling of the
blood upon the four horns of the Altar.

The Use of all may be briefly both for instruction, Use
and consolation. For instruction:

1 To the people, who should be above all things careful to seek the comfort
of the application of Gods favor in Jesus Christ: oh we must above all things
by faith keep this sprinkling of blood, as is said of them, Heb: 11 28.

2 Ministers should hence take notice of the maine end of preaching, which is
to sprinkle blood upon the hearts of the people, that they may both be settled
in the knowledge, and assurance of their right in Christ, and the covenant of
grace, and likewise purged in their consciences from dead works: we do little
by preaching, if we beget not reformation, and assurance in the hearts of the
people; he preaches not that sprinkles not.

2 For Consolation.

Be not fearful, Christ's blood will protect thee, as safely, as ever did the
blood of the paschal lamb the ^hildren of Israel.

Be not doubtful, of the efficacy of it: For if the blood of bulls and goats
etc. could purify in respect of legal clensings? how much more shall the
blood of Christ, who by the eternal spirit offered up himself to God, purge
thy conscience from dead works, and make atonement for all thy sins, clensing
thee from all unrighteousness, Heb. 9. 13. 14. 15. 1 Ioh. 1. 7.

Be not discontent, with thy condition, thou have, what was merited, and
purchased with blood, how little soever it seem in thy eyes.

But especially be not unthankful for such a singular way of mercy, but with
all gladness of heart rejoice above all things in Christ, and him crucified
for thee.

Hitherto of the persons saluted, the form of the salutation follows.

Grace and peace be multiplied to you. It was the manner in their salutations
to wish to their friends that which they accounted a chief happiness to them:
The form of the Salutation.
So does the Apostle here wishing the multiplying of grace and peace.

Grace (...) peace. Grace must be co^^dered two ways. 1 First, as it is in
God, and so it is his free love and gracious disposition to show mercy in
Christ. 2 Secondly, as it is in man, and so it notes either the gifts of their
mind, or their condition, or estate in Christ, and so the faithful are said
to be under grace, and not under the law.

Peace is both inward, and outward: Inward peace consists in the contentation
and rest of the soul, and so it is both the rest of the conscience from
terrors, and the rest of the heart from passions and perturbations. Outward
peace is nothing else, but prosperity, or an estate free from unquietness and
molestation, and adorned with needful blessings.

Grace and Peace are the two principal things to be sought, and wished in this
world, when Christ comes to enrich the world, he comes with grace and truth,
Ioh. 1. he cannot be miserable, that has these two, nor happy, that wants them
altogether. Which may be a singular comfort to a Christian: in grace and peace
is his portion, and he may go boldly to the throne of God in the intercession
of Christ to beg either of these in his need Heb. 4. vl^. God may deny him
other things, but he will never deny him grace and peace.

And therefore also Christians should joy in the grace of God, wherein they
stand, Rom: 5. 3: and be resolved in themselves, that the grace of God is
sufficient for them, 2. Cor. 12. 9. Especially they should praise and esteem
and glorify the grace of God: It is all God asks for as it were at our hands,
even to honor him, by praising his grace and free love to us, Ephesians. 1. 6.

Woe unto wicked men, that neglect the grace of God, what shall it profit them
to gain the world (which yet they do not) and want grace and peace: but
especially why do they not let Christians alone with their portion? why do
they trouble them in their peace, and despite them for their grace? can they
not follow their pleasures, lusts, profits, honors, etc. and let Christians
live quietly by them, who desire but liberty to enjoy grace with peace?

There is something also to be noted from the order of placing: grace must be
had before peace, there can be no peace to the wicked, and he is undoubtedly
wicked, that has not the grace of God.

Be multiplied. Grace and Peace is multiplied. 1 First when the number of
gracious persons is increased: This is to be sought, and prayed for. 2 When the
kinds of grace and peace are all had: For there is the manifold grace of God. 3
Thirdly, when the measures and degrees are augmented.

The Husbandman would feign have his seed increase, Uses.
and the Tradesman his trade: so would the ambitious man his honors, and
preferments etc. Even so should the Christian be ambitious, and covetous in
his desires, that his grace and peace might increase.

Quest. What should we do, that grace and ^eace might be multiplied?

Ans. 1 Be sure it be true grace, What we must do that grace and peace may be
multiplied in us.
else it will never ^ncrease.

2 Thou must increase in meekness, and humili^ie: For God will give more grace
to the humble, ^am. 4. 8. and the meek shall have abundance of peace Psalm. 37.
6. 11.

3 If thou would have thy grace and peace ^ncrease, thou must be constant
much in the use of all the ordinances of God, which are the means of grace and
peace: As thou measurest to God in ^he means, so will God measure to thee in
the success: thou must be much in hearing. For grace is in the lips of
Christ, Psalm. 45. 3. and much peace shall be to them, that love Gods laws,
Psalm. 119. and ^hou must go often unto God by prayer, who gives grau and glory,
and will withold no good thing, Psalm. 84. 12. 2 These: 1. 11. 12. Run by
faith to Christ, who is the Prince of peace, Es: 9. 6. and stir up the grace of
God, that is in thee. For thou have not received the spirit of fear, but of
power, 2. (...)

4 Thou must not perplex thy heart with cares of this life: but in all things
go to (...) prayer, and cast all thy care upon him: so shall (...) have peace
that passes all understanding to keep^^^ heart and mind: Phil: 4. 6. 7.

5 Thou must make much of the beginnin^^ (...) desires, joy, liking, and care
of the means of (...), and not let them go out, so as thou (...) fail of the
grace of God, or receive those graces (...) vain

6 Thou must be resolved upon it to deny (...) godliness and worldy lusts, and
to live (...) and religiously, and soberly in this present world: (...) thou
can never meet with true peace further (...) thou art good and true in thy
heart; and as (...) ^^^creasest in the care of reformation in thy life, (...)
shall thou increase in every good and perfect (...) till thou come to a ripe
age in Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 1 (...) Esaias 32. 16. Psalm. 125. vlt.

This likewise may be comfortable to a (...) Christian, and that two ways.

1 First, If he consider, that grace is not given (...) at once, but by
degrees, and therefore he must (...) be discouraged, though he have many wants.

2 Secondly, if he consider the bountifuln^^ God to all, that seek grace and
peace, it may (...) had in abundance. For the Apostle implies, (...) God will
multiply grace and peace, if we be (...) in the use of the means, and
glorify him (...) seeking to him, he will give liberally and (...) man. And
thus much of the Salutation.

Verse. 3.Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a li^ely hope,
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Hitherto of the salutation:
the substance or the body of the Epistle follows: the doctrine whereof is two
ways to be considered, The order of the body of the Epistle.
1 as it is propounded, 2 as it is repeated: Three things are principally
propounded, and the same also repeated, or gone over again. For there is first
matter of consolation. 2 Matter of exhortation. 3 Matter of dehortation. The
consolation is from this third verse to the thirteenth of this Chapter. The
Exhortation is from verse. 13. of this Chapter, to verse. eight of the 3. chap.
The Dehortation is from v: 8. of the 3. chap. to the end of that chapter.

Then does the Apostle a little changing the order go over the same three
things again. For he exhorts from verse. 1. of chap. 4. to the 12. verse. of
the same chap. and then he comforts from verse. 12. to the end of the 4. chap.
and the Dehortation he lodges under request to the Elders, and the people
chap. 5. 1. to 12.

In this first part he intends to comfort, where I consider, first, the
Proposition of comfort, verse: 3. 4. 5. Secondly, and the confirmation of that
comfort, verse. 6. to the 13.

In the Proposition I observe, first, the manner of propounding, and the
arguments themselves, by which he would comfort.

The manner of the Proposition is, that it is expressed in form of
thanksgiving in these words: blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The arguments of consolation are 3. The first is taken from our
Regeneration verse. 3. the second from our Glorification verse. 4. the third from
our Preservation unto glory verse: 5.

Blessed be the God etc. 1 Observation from the coherence.
Two things I observe from the coherence of these words: First, that a stranger
and used like a stranger, though he be scattered and driven to and fro: yet in
all the days of his dispersion he may obser^e many memorable things, for which
he ought to

Blessing is diversely taken or carried: sometimes man blesses Psalm. 129. 8.
man: sometimes God blesses man Psalm. 6^. 1.
: sometimes man is said to bless God: and so here.

Man blesses God three ways: Man bless^th God 3. wa^^s.
1 In his heart, when being refreshed with Gods favor, and inflamed with the
joys of his presence, and nourished with the sense of his blessings, he does
lift up his heart within him inwardly with affection, striving to laud God and
acknowledge his mercy. 2. In his tongue, when he taken to him words and opens
his lips to confess and praise God either in secret, or openly: either
privately or publicly. 3 In his works, and that ^ ways: When he sets up
memorialls of Gods great works or deliverances. 2 When he receives the
Sacrament, setting himself apart to celebrate the memory of Christ's death, by
which the covenant of God was confirmed, and the fountain of all grace opened.
Da^id when he would render thanks unto God takes the cup of Psalm. 116. 12.
salvation. And the Sacrament is called the E^charist from giving of thanks,
and so the cup is called the cup of 1 Cor: 10. 16.
blessing: 3 By the obedience of his life striving to glorify God in a holy
conversation. 4 And lastly by showing mercy, and thereby causing the hearts and
lives of other to bless God.

Great reason has man to bless God, Reasons of blessing God.
1 For God is blessedness it self, and whether should the water run but
into the sea, from whence it is originally taken. 2 Besides the Lord has
required our praise, as the chief means of Psalm. 50. 23.
glorifying him: 3 And thirdly he has blessed us, and therefore we have great
reason to bless him. He has blessed us in the Creatures: blessed the work
of our hands: blessed the fruit of our loins: blessed us in his s^nne:
blessed us by his Angels: blessed us by his Ministers: blessed us in the
blessings of the Gospel, and blessed us in the fruits of the earth: blessed
us in his house, and in our own houses: blessed us in our Sabboths,
Sacraments, the Word, Prayer, etc. blessed us in our souls, bodies, states,
names, etc.

And therefore let the people praise thee o God, Use.
yea let all the people praise Psalm. 67. 3.
thee. All thy works praise thee, and the Saints shall (...) of thy praise,
and of the glory of thy power, and the majesty Psalm. 145 10. 11. 12.
of thy king dome

The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. This periphrasis is used to
distinguish our God from the god of Turks, Jews, and Pagans.

The Lord was used to be known to the old Church by the names of the God of
Ahraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: but now in the Church of the
Christians he is celebrated by the name of the God and father of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Two things are here affirmed, 1 that God is the God of Christ. 2 That he is
the Father of Christ: It is not against the use of Scripture to say, that God
is the God of Christ, for (Ioh. 20. 1.) Christ says, I go to your God, and to
my God, and Psalm. 45. 7. It is said to Christ, God even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of glad^esse above thy fellows. How God is the God of
Christ.
Now if any ask, how this can be; that God is the God of Christ, I answer by
distinguishing the natures in Christ. If you consider Christ in his divine
nature, he is God of himself, but not son of homselfe: (...)
His persan is of the Father: but his essence is of himself: but I think that
this is properly taken or meant of his humane nature, for that he received from
God by the mighty working and ouershadowing power of the holy Ghost.

And as he is the God of Christ, How God is the ^^ther of Ch^^^
so he is the Father of Christ: his God in respect of his humane nature, and
his father in respect of his divine nature: such an high Priest it became us to
have, as was after the order of Melchisedech without father or mother. For so
was Christ without father, as man, without mother, as God: now in that he is
here said to have a father, How Christ is without Father or Mother.
it is to be understood of his divine nature, in respect of which by an
eternal generation the person of the son was begotten of the Father:
dreadful is this mystery, and most difficult to be understood, or conceived,
and the rather because nothing carnal or earthly is here to be imagined. For
the son was not begotten, as sons amongst men are: but after a more admirable
and more excelling manner, neither know I how to express a way of conceiving
of this generation better then by way of negation, denying unto it, whatsoever
has imperfection.

There is a threefold generation. A threefold generation. Per se, de se, and
extra se.


The first is corporeal, called in Schools Logical and predicamentall, and
this is of bodily things, which by themselves, and out of themselves, and
without themselves do beget. The second is transcendent and metaphyficall, and
this is of spirits, and is mental. For here the mind as an uncompounded
subject, does not out of it self, but by it self, and in it self beget, and
thus it begets contemplation or reason, Non de se, sed per se, (...)
thoughts or affections. The third is supreme and singular, or divine, and
that is that generation, by which the Father in himself, and by himself, by
nature, and not by faculty or power, begets the son, and this is that, which
in this place is to be conceived of: so that we must ascend higher, then the
geniture of bodies, or souls, and when we are come to the Ocean, that is
beyond and higher, then either of those, we must rest and wonder, especially
taking heed to our thoughts, as in other things, so that in three things we
imagine no likeness between the Father begetting the so^e in the Trinity, and
earthly fathers begetting their sons in the world.

First here is no prioritie in time between the father and the son, Three
things wherein Christ's generation is not like ours.
as in some sense there is in corporeal generations. For Christ is of the
Father, but not after the father.

Secondly, there is no inequality: the son is not lesser, then the father.
For Christ is coequall, as well as coeternall.

Thirdly, here is no division: the son is not divided from the father. For
Christ is not only like the father (...), but of the same substance with the
father, he is (...).

The consideration of this doctrine, that Christ is Gods soon, Uses.
may serve for diverse uses. For as it may confirm us in the detestation of the
blasphemous wickedness of the Jews, that would never receive the doctrine,
that John 5. 1^. 6. 41. 3. 19.
Christ was the son of God: so it may diversely both instruct, and comfort: It
may instruct us three ways. For first, here we may see, that it is a matter of
necessity to be believed, and accordingly we should labor to inform our
selves aright in this doctrine, as being a point should be illustrious in the
Churches of the Christians, and the rather because of that promise, that
whosoever shall confess that lesus is the son of God 1 Job. 4. 15.
, God dwells in him, and he in God. Secondly we may hence gather our own
dignity. For if this be an honor unto Christ to have God to be his father,
then what reason have poor Chri^^ians to rejoice, considering that whatsoever
they are in this world, yet they have no worse then the true God, the great
Ieho^ab to be their father also? Thirdly, from hence by inference we may
learn our duty to God: For by this doctrine we hear, that God is the father
of Christ, now by other Scriptures we may observe, how Christ carried himself
toward his father, and from him we may learn, how to order our behavior also.

Three things are memorable in Christ. In three things we should learn of
Christ to carry our selves toward God as toward our Father.
1. His obedience. 2. His patience and humility. 3. And his willingness to
die: all inferred upon this consideration, that God was his father. For first,
Ioh: 5. 17. 19. 6. 38.
If the father work, the son works also, yea whatsoever the Father did,
the Son did also. Yea Christ did not desire to be believed, when he said, he
was God son, further, then he proved it, Ioh: 10. 36.
by doing the works of his Father. And for his patience and humility it was
admirable. This son of God had not whereon to lay his head: he endured the
impious contradictions of vile sunners, he would not tempt God by presumptuous
trusting upon extraordinary support, when ordinary means was Math: 4. 3.
offered: he was to be consecrated through afflictions, and Heb: 2. 10.
to learn obedience by what he suffered: and when he had suites to God his
Father, he does in all humility pray and importune, yea he used strong cries
in the days of his flesh, and left his Father to expound the meaning of his
prayer: Heb: 5. 7. 8.
also by the good pleasure of his own will even to honor him, as he thought
best for him. And for his willingness to dye in the 13. of John he uses that
as a reason, why he could gladly go out of the world, because it was nothing
else, (...) 13. 1.
but to go to his father.

In all these we, that are younger brothers, should learn, how to order our
selves aright toward God. If we call God Father, we should do the works of
our father, and never desire to be longer reputed the children of God, then by
our works we could show our generation to be of God by resembling his holiness.
And for patience and humility, we are specially charged with it by Christ,
even to learn of him to be lowly and meek, and it is a great shame for us to
make so much ado about our crosses, when we consider the patience of Christ,
or to think it much if we be not heard in our prayers at the first, or as we
would have it in the letter of our desires, when we observe the carriage herein
of God toward Christ the son of his love.

And as this doctrine does instruct, so it does comfort, and that especially
three ways: 1 For first it may comfort us against all the difficulties of
sanctification, and against all the power of Satan. For as this doctrine tells
us, that Christ is the son of God, so other Scripture does assure us, that he
will mightily prove himself to be the son of God by the spirit of
sanctification, showing his power in throwing down and dissoluing (...) 1. 4.
1 (...) 3. 8
the works of the Devil. 2. Secondly, it may comfort us in all our suites to
God. For as by other Scriptures we know, that Christ is our advocate and has
taken upon him to present our prayers to God: so by this doctrine we may gather
the success. We are sure to speed well, when we have the Kings son to put
up our petitions, and the rather because Christ does desire to show his
greatness with his Father by obtaining our requests at his hands. For thereby
the Father is glorified in his son, and God loves us so much the better,
because we love Christ, and believe, that he came from his father, and show it
by using Job: 14: 12. 13. 14. ^6. 23. 24. 26. 27.
him as our Mediator: and indeed what need we any other to the King, then the
Kings ^onne. And thirdly, it may comfort us in respect of the hope of
preferment by his service: we cannot serve a more honorable Lord. Many times
if we serve earthly Princes, they may neglect us. For we seldom see all the
Followers of the greatest^ Princes come to preferment: but if Princes on earth
were never so honorable, that they did purpose to exalt every one of their
servants, yet under that hope men may consume all their means, and in the end
dye beggars, because the Prince may dye, before they get their preferment; but
it is not so with Christians in their service of Christ. For as for greatness
he is the king of all Kings, and himself Lord of all Lords: ^o for will, he
never neglected any, that served in truth and sincerity, and besides he cannot
die. For he has life in himself, and therefore blessed are they, that serve
him, and trust in his goodness. For he ever liucth to make request for them,
till he have gotten them to himself, that where he is, there they may be also.

Thus of the manner of propounding: The places or arguments of Consolation
follow. The first is taken from their regeneration, which is amplified

(...)
