A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE DRAYNING OF FENNES AND SVRROVNDED GROUNDS in the
six Counteys of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge with the Isle of Ely,
Huntington, Northampton, and Lincoln.

Printed at London, 1629.

The Printer to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, This discourse came unto my hands not long since from a
well-willer to the business therein treated of; and I hearing that the
Fennie-Countreys are at this time more then ordinarily overflowed, have thought
fit to publish the same, if happily it may persuade such as are interested, to
set forward the work of drayning which would be both honorable and profitable
to the Commonwealth, as I conceive.

A Discourse concerning the drayning of the Fennes.
COncerning the drayning of the Fennes in the six Counties of Norfolk,
Suffolk, Cambridge with the Isle of Ely, Huntington, Northampton, and
Lincoln, as well on this side Boston as beyond, there arise three maine
questions. The first, whether it would be honorable and profitable to the King,
and Commonwealth in general, and to those Countries in particular, if it
might be effected. The second, whether it be Feasible. The third, how a
compitent reward may be apportioned for them that should undertake so great a
work.

For the first, the first argument shall be the counsel and care of the State
in every age since this Kingdom began to be improued, appearing by the many
Acts of Parliament concerning this business, as against Wears, Gorces,
Stankes, etc. begun the 9. of H. 3. itterated the 25. of Ed. 1. augmented the
25. and 45. of Ed. 3. the 21. of Rich. 2. the 1. and 4. of H. 4. And at length
more districtly the 12. of Ed. 4. But in all these times by reason of the
turbulent condition of the State at home and abroad, the prosecution of this
business was either altogether fore flowed, or so snatchingly persued, that
little fruit came thereof. But in the peaceable time of King Henry the 8. who
was the first great Improuer, and in whose time the mischief was grown to a
great height, a settled course of Commission of Sewers was established, with a
very endless power, such as has neither length nor breadth, against
offenders, (it is the word of the Statute not only against the forenamed
inconveniences, but now for the maintenance and increase of Walls, Ditches,
Banks, Gutters, Sewers, Goats, Caulcies, Bridges, Streams and other defenses
against inundations: by which very names of things in the former Acts not
mentioned it does appear how the mischief was grown almost past remedy
before any sufficient provision was publicly made for redress. Yea, although
the Laws of Sewers were ordained like Acts of Parliament, not examinable by
any other authority, as being the most absolute that passes under the great
Seal of England, (such was my Lord Pophams judgment) yet so bootlesse seemed
the labor unto the Countries afflicted, that the wisdom of the whole
Commonwealth thought fit to provide an other Act two years after to
constrain the Gentlemen of the Country under pain and forfeiture to take the
oath of a Commission of Sewers as they should be thereunto designed. In this
time also that royal Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond, procured an
admeasurement and division of all the surrounded grounds on the North side of
Spalding, which before that time lay promiscuously. This was a great work, and
of excellent use, not for those times only, but the fruit of it has continued
ever since, even unto these days, and will be a great guide in this drayning
business whenever it is undertaken. Neither did that royal Lady rest in
this, but she sat her self amongst the Commissioners of Sewers, yea, and set
her hand to the very work of drayning, and indeed, hit upon the right way:
but in her work there were some notable errors (the world not being then so
skillful) which being followed by the neglect of the Country, in time
forfeited her gracious intention. After her stood up John of Gaunt; Duke of
Lancaster, and took great pains to perfect what she had begun: He went into
the Country in person, and employed all his authority in it; but because the
Country should have borne the charge, when he was once passed on to York,
nothing went forward that he had proiected, notwithstanding his many Letters,
and increpations. In the 3. of Ed. 6. the Commission of Sewers was made
perpetual, which by the former Statute of H. 8. was to endure but twenty
years, and in the 13. of Eliz. it was enacted that every particular
Commission of Sewers should continue for ten years, which before was limited
to five; and that in the interim between the determining of one Commission,
and the Awarding of another, the Justices of the Peace might execute the
Commission of Sewers for a whole year. After that by these provisions and
presidents men's wits were a little set on work, in the 29. of El. some
Gentlemen undertook the recovery of the Marshes of Erith, Lesnes and
Plumstead, for whose encouragement a Statute was made, That they should have
the moyetie of all such gained Lands, and an eighth part of the other moyetie,
and hold it of the Queen as of the Manor of East-Greenwitch in Socage by
Fealty, pa^ing a penny an Acre yearly, and no Tyth for seven years. This
Act of Parliament encouraged many men to undertake also in the Isle of Ely, and
the Countries confining, and that with approbation of the State, because (says
the Statute) such Approuement will be a great and inestimable benefit to her
Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, disburthening her Highness of many
chargeable Banks, and works of Sewers in those surrounded grounds, and in the
increase of many able Subjects by habitations being there erected, and in like
sort, profitable to many her Highness Subjects, both bodies Politic, as
Corporate, who have estate of inheritance, and other interest within the same.
The same also was the opinion of the State in the fourth of King James his
reign, when the Parliament passed an Act for the undertaking of Francis
Tindall, Henry Far, and John Cooper in the Isle of Ely, which Act gave them two
parts of the Land so to be inned and drayned, and immunitie of Tyth for seven
years after those seven years which were allotted to them to do their work
in. To speak nothing of the improuement of Marsh-Land, Waldersey, the
Londoners proportion, and diverse others, which though they remain chargeable
to the owners, because the general drayning is not effected, yet do they
yield so great an improuement, as well witnesses how abundant it would be if
those charges by a general drayning were prevented.

But if any man beside this Argument taken from the consent of so many ages,
wise and politic Princes and assemblies of Parliament, do desire to be led
into those particulars whereby it is probable they were moved, let him
consider, First, the costly and troublesome meetings of the Commissioners of
Sewers; Grievous (though necessary) Taxations, Hartburnings, Emulations,
Controversies, and insupportable charges, for cutting, clensing and repayring
of Rivers, Draynes, Goats, Sluices, Banks, and such like costly works of
Sewers, so much to be lamented, so impossible to be any other ways prevented,
then by a general drayning of the several Leuels wherein those Lands
respectively do lie. Next, it would be remembered, that in winter, when the Ice
is strong enough to hinder the passage of Boats, and yet not able to bear a
man, the Inhabitants upon the Hards, and the Banks within the Fennes, can have
no help of Food, no comfort for Body or Soul, no Woman aid in her Travel, no
means to baptize a Child or to administer the Communion, no supply of any
necessity, saving what those poor desolate places can afford. Moreover, it
has been the policy of this State to demolish all places of defense, saving
those that be in the hand of the Sovereign power; this only remains,
whether we know in the Barrons Wars, the Rebels, upon the natural strength
of the place and abundance of provision there, resorted, as into a Fastness,
and to which purpose it might serve again, if God and the wisdom of our
Governors were not watchful at the Helm. What should I speak of the health
of men's bodies, where there is no Element good. The Aer Nebulous, gross and
full of rotten Harres; the Water putred and muddy, yea full of loathsome
vermin; the Earth spuing, vnfast and boggie; the Fire noisome turfe and
hassocks: such are the inconveniences of the Drownings.

But if a man would attend the manifold and great profits of Drayning, it were
not hard to muster a royal Army of them. Consider first the quantity of the
Pen-Leuels valued at 500000 Acres. Mr Camden accounts it from the edge of
Suffolk, to Waynflet in Lincolneshire, 68 Miles, and that is by the Stringe;
but if you reckon the Bow of the Fenne which runs up on both sides Witham
till you come within a Mile of Lincoln (as rotten a piece as any of the rest)
we may well call it 80 Miles in length; in breadth it is much 30, more 20,
seldom so little as 10 Miles: a goodly Garden of a Kingdom; yea, a little
Kingdom it self: as much and as good ground, it is supposed, as the States of
the Low Countries enjoy in the Netherlands.

For the riches of the soil if it were gained from the waters, much may be
said. Compare it with high ground, who will not prefer a level Meadow?
Compare it with the grounds in the same tract which lie but a yard higher then
it; ordinarily let for 20. shil. an Acre and upward: not about Ely and other
good Towns only, but at Thorny-Abbey my Lord of Beaford lets between 3 and
400 Acres of rising ground upon which the Abbey stands, for 300. li. per annum,
whereas the rest of his Lordship of Thorny, containing 16 or 17000 Acres of
drowned ground, is esteemed as it now lies, of little or no value: yet it
appears by the History of William of Malmesburie (vouched by Mr Camden) who
lived about 1200 years since, that in his time it represented a very Paradise,
for that in pleasure and delight it resembles Heaven it self; in the very
Marshes bearing Trees that for their straight tallness, and the same without
knots, strive to touch the Stars. A Plain there is as even as the Sea, which
with green grass allureth the eye: so smooth and level, that if any walk
along the Fields, they shall find nothing to stumble at. There is not the least
parcel of ground that lies wast and void there, here you shall find the earth
rising somewhere for Apple Trees, there shall you have a Field set with Vines,
which either creep upon the ground, or mount on high upon poles to support
them, etc. For in those days Vineyards were very frequent in England. The
like may be said of the Abbey of Crowland, of the great Lordship of Whittlesea,
and of all the rest that consist of part dry and part drowned Land; yet those
dry and drowned Lands are of the same nature, and where there is any
difference, the drowned is the richer, as appeared in the two extraordinary
dry years 1619 and 1620, when the edges of the drowned Fenne being dry,
yielded twice as much grass as the rising grounds did. I shall speak of a
strange thing, yet was it related by a Gentleman interested in the place and of
good credit: Borrough great Fenne contains about 7000 Acres, this Fen is
usually so much surrounded, that the dry places and all, are not well able to
bear the Inhabitants Cattle: in those two years it was all dry and yielded
such abundance of Foather, that they received for a great part of Summer 50.
li. a day for the ioysting of Cattle, as they call it, out of the high
Countries. The like may be imagined to be the condition of all the rest of the
Fens, especially if the ground be smooth and free from Hassocks. I will give
you an instance. There is a bank in Thorny of a Mile long or more, cast up out
of two Draynes of the most mirie Fens, which lying somewhat high, as being a
Horse-way from Thorny-Abbey to Peterborough, is grown into very fine and
feeding grass.

And here to prove the Richness of the Fen-soyle, let it be observed, that
where water stands all the Spring in barren Land, there will be no grass at
all; not so much as where for want of rain the Sun burns the soil: and
this is a certain argument of Sterile or lean Earth. But where though the
waters stand, the Earth notwithstanding brings forth Fruit, it is an argument
of a fat and lusty soil, and so much the fatter by how much the Fruit is
courser and larger; for all grounds that will afford nourishment to Grass,
will not suffice sap enough for Sedge or Reed; but on the contrary, that which
will bear Reed or Sedge in any quantity, is able to yield sap enough for
abundance of Grass. So great a quantity therefore of rich Land being gained,
would meruailously increase and support the multitude of his Majesty's
subjects, wherein consists the glory and strength of a Kingdom. Add hereto
the augmentations of his Highness Reuenews (for there are in the Fen, if I
remember a right, 16 Manors belonging to the Crown on the South Side of
Boston, besides the great Honor of Bullingbrooke on the North, containing
about it by estimation 60000 Acres of Fen-Land, which was lately let for 18.
li. a year to Sr Vincent Skinner) besides his Customs, Subsidies, Provisions,
Casualties, etc. What should I remember the profits which would accrue to the
Commonwealth? the abundance of provision for victual, Flesh, Fish and
whit-meats, the breed of Horses serviceable both in Peace and for War, the
rich and necessary Merchandises of Wool, Hydes, Tallow, Hemp, Rape, and such
like; the transportation of the commodities of the Country from place to place
for the use of the neighbour-parts; the ease of Trauellors, who now are feign
to make compass iournies to avoid the ouerflowings; the conuoy of his
Majesty's Armies if occasion should require, are all public profits, and of
excellent consequence to the King and kingdom. Such also would be the
restoring of the Navigations unto the Towns of Wisbich, Spalding and Waynflet,
and from thence up into the Countries. These are public benefits: and for
private the drayning would increase the reuenew of many Corparations, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and of many his Majesty's particular Subjects, as
well Laymen as Rectors and Vicars of many great Parishes which now afford the
Incumbents very small means. There is one other great commodity which a
drayning will produce worthy to be insisted upon, and that is the securing of
Sheep and other Cattle from the rot. For it is a true thing, that when the
Fens yield most pasturage, then they do the most mischief to men in their
Sheep and Cattle, thence is the common saying of the Country, From the Farm
to the Fenne, from the Fenne to Ireland. The reason is, because the Fen is
never so dry, but there are many watery plashes, and much rotting Spire-grasse
in it, wherewith the Sheep are usually tainted in the Summertime, and
whereof they dye in the Winter, if men be not careful to sell them to the
Butcher before: if they be so provident, then is the Country and City too,
fed with unwholesome food. As for other Cattle, together with the wet Grass
they slap up such an abundance of small Stiklebacks, that when they dye of the
rot, or be killed for use, their Mawes will be found full of them.
Contrariewise, in the Marshes beyond Wainflet in Lincolneshire, and such like,
where the grounds be severed and trenched, it is hard to find a poor man,
though they sit at great rents, for their Cattle are always sound and
thriuing, and therefore ever merchandable: or if they come to a mischance, yet
fit for food. And that this was the opinion of all the Commissioners of Sewers,
appears by the Sessions at Peterborough the eighth of September, 1619, there
being present the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, the Earl of Bedford, Sr Francis
Fane, and 25 other Knights and Gentlemen Commissioners of Sewers, assisted by a
multitude of the Country. They agreed and concluded, That by a drayning, an
apparent great profit would arise to the Countries and Owners of Lands, and
that it would be without prejudice public or private. And thereupon did decree
the design should be proceeded in, and determined to give all lawful aid and
assistance thereto, according to the extent of the Commission of Sewers. Which
also was confirmed the 23 of September following at Ely, and the 24 at St Iues.
And the business was prosecuted at Cambridge the 15 of Oct. and at St Iues and
Hunting. the 16 of Oct. where there was 20. shill. set upon every Acre for the
accomplishment of the work.

If men descend unto particular objections, then must several answers be given
them. First therefore it is objected, that they find less burden of Foather
upon the ground in dry years then in wet. I answer, it must be confessed that
ground which bears Reed or Sedge will not be so fruitful if it be dry,
because such rank trash requires a great deal of moisture, but when through
want of such store of moisture it improueth into grass (as in a year or two
it will certainly do) then a little moisture will suffice, as we see in
ordinary Meddows. It will be urged that even in Meddows ouerflowings will do
good. It is true, if so be the water remain not long upon the soil: but to be
surrounded, or to lie in the suds, as we say, three quarters or half a year
more or less, does mischief not help the ground. I appeal to the Country
if there were not in the year 1619 many thousand loads of Foather gotten where
scarce ever any was had in the memory of man. Witness the great stacks which
were then seen all along the wild Fennes, as thick (to men's seeming that road
aloof) as shocks of Corn in a Corne-field, and that of reasonable good
Grass. For if the water be drayned, and the cold moisture removed from the
root of Reed-ground, that Reed will in one summer return into Sedge, and that
Sedge shortly into good Grass, of which there has been abundant experience
throughout the Fens in the dry years 1619, and 1620.

But the drayning some say will decay Fishing and Fowling. I answer, it is
neither possible nor profitable to drayne Porsen in Crowland, or some Deepes in
the East-Fen beyond Boston, or the Meares of Whittlesea, Ramsey, etc. which be
the chief places for Fish and Foul. For other Fens there are no Fish or Foul
taken in them, but only in the Rivers or Draynes; and those will be both more
in number and more enlarged after the drayning, and the Fish and Foul better
contained in them, and so more easily gotten: For now the water ouerflowing
all, the Foul are so dispersed, that men cannot come at them (for there is
not, nor must there be any shooting in the Fen) and the Fry of the Fish is lost
or devoured in the Reed or Sedge, which in the deep Rivers and Draynes would
be secured. But all this is not considerable in respect of the great benefit
that will be made of Grass in so large proportions of excellent Land.

It will again be objected, that although the drayning will be benefitiall to
the Lords and Owners, yet the poor Commoner shall be in danger to loose his
Common by the incroaching Lords, or at lest when such Common-Fens are recovered
and secured, the rich men will so ouercharge them with Cattle, that the poor
man shall not be able to make any benefit, where now he gets a poor living,
partly by the Pasturage of a few Cowes, partly by his labor in Fishing and
Fowling, which labor the rich man will not take. Now says the poor Fen-man,
we have every year an Order brought from Northampton, which lays a Law upon
the rich, that they oppress not the Commons: he means the confluence of
waters which drown all. This is a great objection and of consequence, and has
two parts. To the first part concerning the Lords incroaching upon the Commons,
I know not what provision the State will think fit to make: but there is
already a good care taken for it in that very Act of Parliament which was made
for Approuements in this kind, the 43. Eliz. Cap. 11. the words be these,
Provided always, and be it enacted, That this Act, nor any thing therein
contained, shall not extend to the impairing, diminishing, letting, taking
away, or extinguishing of the interest of the Commoners, or any of them, or of
the Lords or Owners of the Soil, in or to any part of the residue of the Wastes
or Commons which is not, or shall not be set forth or assigned to the
Undertakers: Nor to any franchises or Liberties, or Waife, Stray, Leete,
Law-day, nor other Liberties to be used or taken in the part so to the
Undertakers assigned: But that as well the Commoners, as Lords and Owners of
that Soil shall and may enjoy their Commons in the residue thereof. To the
second part of the objection that rich men will ouer-charge the Common when it
is secured, and so oppress the poor; I confess it is a common calamity in
all vnstinted Commons, and deserves a great deal of wisdom and care in the
State to prevent it, especially in such rich Soyles. Two helps there are: One,
that the Commoner who dwells upon, or near the Common will make good shift
if the rich man dwell but a Mile off, as in the Fen it will often be. But if
the Land which is set out for the recompense of the drayning be let, part to
the poorer sort at reasonable rents, then the poor man having several grounds
(adjoining to the Common) wherein to succor his Cattle at need and whereupon
to get Foather for them, he may shift with his rich Neighbor so much the
better. Other help I know none but an apportionment; which in the Fen will be
more difficult then in other vnstinted Commons, because in one Fen many
Towne-ships have interest of Common; and yet there will be enough for all if it
be well ordered.

It is farther objected, that if the drayning should succeed there will be then
as much want of water, as there has been formerly too much. I answer, that
when the Rivers and Draynes are deepened (which is a thing must be performed)
they will hold a world of water more then they now do; and it will ordinarily
be held up also to a sufficient height by the Works for the drayning, except
when a Flood is feared, which if it come, there will be water enough and two
much; if it come not, yet within a few hours, if the Current of the water at
the Works be inhibited, the Country will be full enough: beside, the
partitions of the Land assigned for recompense of the drayning, will in a short
time make Ditches enowe to contain more water then the Cattle in those parts
will use: and by common intendment, all good Husbands will make Ditches for
divisions in their own grounds, and Sluices to detain or let go the water at
their pleasure.

Finally, some will say they are many times drayned from Heaven and therefore
need not man's help. True it is that God Almighty has taught them by the
experience of some dry years, though rarely, the difference between a
wilderness of water and a goodly green Meddow: to lead them by sense (who are
hardly governed by reason) to discern what may be best for themselves and
their posterity: of which great document if they make sinister use, vainly
fancying to themselves that which is to man's reason impossible, they must be
content to be punished according to reason. That is to say, whereas such dry
years shall have drunk up the waters, if not of the Rivers, yet of many of
the Draynes, which thereupon are grown up and pestered with weeds and rubbish,
it follows necessarily, that upon the next confluence of waters into that
Level, the Sewers which contained them being stifled, they have bred a greater
and more fearful Inundation.

Beside these there be certain Tacit and silent objections which some are
either afraid, or ashamed to utter, and yet are obstinately governed by them. I
will name but two: The one is, the loss of their Land: The other is, mere
envy; or if you will give it a gentler name, Private Emulation. The former I
may more boldly avouch, because it pleased his late Majesty to fasten upon it
when he gave gracious audience to a hearing of this business in the year
1619. viz. The Lord or Owner had rather be said to be Lord or Owner of 1000
Acres though they be scarcely worth to him 1000. shill. in the year, then part
with 500 to make the rest worth 500 Angels by the year: In like manner the
Commoner. Reason for this if they could give any, it is likely I also were able
to render some, but in truth I cannot, nor any shadow of reason, but as a
sullen Bird that is taken when it is old will rather dye then feed, so such
Fen-men; not considering that though the alotment for the reward of drayning
should be in Land, yet the expense being necessarily to be in money, much of
the Land must be sold for supply thereof, which they that are able and willing
may purchase before any other, to keep their inheritances entire, being
exceedingly improued. For Emulation, it is so notorious, so diffusiue a vice
amongst them, as a man may imagine it to be bread there, as Hydra was in the
Fen of Lerna. I will put a case. John a Style has 2000 Acres in the Fen worth
him happily 50. li. a year, and no other Liue-load. John a Nokes has 200 Acres
in the same Fen worth 50. li. a year, but besides he has an Inheritance of
300. li. a year, and thinks himself, and so is, a Gentleman of some
reckoning, the other is but a poor man and lives hardly. When the question of
the drayning of the Fens comes, John a Style is glad, and promoteth it all he
may: But John a Nokes his rich Neighbor (what says he) shall John a Style be
a better man then I, who has been always glad to shroud himself under my
wings, that I cannot, I must not endure: For if the Fen be drayned, his Land
may be worth 500. li. a year, though he part with one half for the drayning:
my improuement will be little worth, no drayning therefore by my consent. But
enough in an unpleasing Argument, it being against my disposition to have but
touched so harsh a string.

Having thus long held the Candle to the Sun, that is, proved what no
reasonable man can deny, that the drayning of the Fens in the six Counties
will be both honorable and profitable to the King and Kingdom and many
particular persons, and answered the objections which some ignorant or wilful
people stand most upon, give me leave to proceed to the second Question, that
is, whether it be feazable or no.

First, Let it be for the time admitted not granted, that this great work
cannot be accomplished; I ask what shall the Country loose? For they that
undertake it, must have no benefit till the work be done. If it be not done,
they indeed loose both labor and cost, the Country loses nothing, but on
the contrary must gain much, For it cannot be indeauoured that all the Fens
should be drayned, but at lest some must necessarily reap great benefit, all
some, by such endeavor. But the wisdom of the Parliament thought the work
feazable, and that not long since to wit in the last Parliament of Queen
Elizabeth, the words are these. Wherein it is apparent to such as have
travailed in execution of the Commission of Sewers in the Isle of Ely and
Counties adjoining, that the Wastes, Commons, Marshes, and Fenny-grounds there
subject to surrounding, may be recovered by skillful and able undertakers. And
the Commissioners of Sewers at Peterborough the 8. of September, 1619, were
resolved of the possibility of the same. But what are the reasons men think
the Fens cannot be drayned? Forsooth because many and great men have attempted
it and failed: as if all wisdom and insight were conferred on great men. It
may be their misses have taught other men wisdom: there is no greater
advantage then to learn by other men's losses. Hence it is that we see many
things performed every day which our forefathers thought bootlesse to
attempt: besides, the causes of mischiefs and so the remedies are oftentimes
not perceived till the mischief be perfected. But will you give me leave to
render you also a reason why those many and great men failed in their
enterprises? I hold it for a certainty, that it is utterly impossible to
drayne, or fruitfully to recover any notable part of the Fen unless all that
Level of Fen whereof it is a part, be jointly recovered. And this has been
abundantly proved by the miscariage of all particular works, except
Marshland, and that is gained by imbanking, partly because it lies on the
outside of all the rest next the Sea and adioyneth upon the excellent out-fall
of Linne; partly also, because as much cost has been and is bestowed upon it,
as the very Soil is worth, for it now costs about 3000. li. a year to
maintain the Banks, and so the medicine has been as ill as the disease.
Something might be said also for Holland-Ellow by South of Spalding, which is
bettered by the Banks, but neither recovered nor secured, and likewise of
Waldersey and such portions. But for the drayning of all together, my Lord
Popham of worthy memory may be an example somewhat to stay men's minds from
thinking it so utterly impossible, who being a wise experienced Gentleman, and
of better estate then that he should be contented wilfully to cast it away, yet
was very desirous to have adventured upon the drayning of all Cambridgeshire,
and the Isle of Ely, and surely had put it to the hazard, if he had lived but
two years longer. But if I may speak without disparagement to his wisdom,
that course which he intended (for I have seen his Card and the ways he
intended to work) would rather have bettered much, then won or secured any.

After his time and not above 13 or 14 years since, his Majesty and the Lords
were so afflicted with Petitioners out of those parts, all imploring help
against that common calamity (whereof they are now again made sensible) that
it was thought fit by the State to send Sr Clement Edmonds to take view of the
Country, being assisted by the Lords and other Commissioners of Sewers. In
which his Perigrination (for it was an uncouth and wild way he went, and a long
time he spent in searching into every nooke and corner) he observed with all
diligence whatsoever might inuit him to think the drayning feazible, or
discourage him from it. At length in the return of his Report to the State, he
resolves that it may be done. Yet not probably by any consent of the Country,
or such as are interested in the Land, but rather by others. His reasons I
forbear here to touch upon. After that, the right noble Patriot, the Earl of
Arundel, by direction from King James, and the advice of the Lords of the
Council, made a journey into those parts to promote the general drayning, as
a business of great honor to his Majesty, with whom joined the honorable
and worthy Commissioners of Sewers, and by an unanimous decree designed unto
his Majesty 120000 Acres of the Fennes to enable him to accomplish so great a
work. Which Decree his Majesty ratified by his Royal assent and acceptance,
and would certainly have performed the work Royally and Really, saving that he
was at that time and unto his death, taken and kept off by his weighty and
important affairs of State. Since whose decease, his Royal Majesty that now
is, has greatly desired that the said work might be proceeded in, and for
that purpose, finding that he could not presently relieve the great distress
the Country is now in by reason of the Inundation, has remitted unto the said
Commissioners the forenamed Decree to enable them to provide some other more
expedite way for the Countries relief. By all which it appears that by the
judgment of King James, of the Lords of the Counsel, and the Commissioners of
Sewers, the work is feazable and greatly desired. For the Soil I doubt not it
is well disposed to a drayning, both because it has a sufficient fall to the
sea, and because the Sewers (though with some difficulty and greater charge
which yet the profit will far surmount) may be in a short time sufficiently
eased. That the Fennes have a Competent fall to the sea, it is argument enough
because they at length empty themselves into the Sea, which the deep Meares
do not. Whether that fall be sufficient to empty them sooner and with a
stronger Current then now they have, is the question. I leave the particular
fall of every level how many foot it has to the high water mark to farther
examination; but it is evident that from the heads of the several draynes unto
the low water mark there is fall sufficient.

It is also evident that Deeping Fenne lies lower then Thornie, Borough or
Croyland Fennes (whence also says Mr. Cambden it has his name) yet has the
Earl of Exeter made a conueyance of the water from Deeping Fennes under
Spalding river to the sea, and that to some good effect if the out fall at sea
were kept open: whence it follows, that there is a fall into the Sea out of
the lowest Fennes, and a descent much lower then the bottom of Spalding river;
and yet the Flood at Spalding is not one hour in ordinary Tides, and
consequently the Ebb there above 10. From which observation it may be
gathered, that a fall may be had from Spalding to the low water mark of
twenty foot, which fall being improued by skillful workmen will produce a
strange effect. The like may be said of Wisbich, Clowes Cross, Salters Load,
etc. But how that must be done, and how the incoueniences thereupon ensuing are
to be prevented is the very Elusinium sacrum the mystery of drayning, which
belongs not to this place. For the out fall at Linne, no man makes question
of it, only the difficulty will be thought to be in the placing of the works,
which will indeed be chargeable but of necessary and excellent use. I would
have it also considered that within these few years the Tide from Spalding did
flow up beyond Crowland and near Thornie, where as now the Tides are seldom
seen above Spalding; an evident argument that the Fennes grow every year
worse then other. For the out falls of Wisbich and Spalding being daily more and
more choked with sands from the sea and mudd out of the draynes which cannot
now pass to sea, and the rivers stifled with weeds for want of a current; it
comes to pass that the whole Fenne is now under water; though this present
drought has brought all other rivers of the Kingdom to a very low ebb. Which
mischief if it grow but a few years more (as it will certainly do if it be
not prevented) the whole Level will be drowned perpetually and become of no
use at all. Besides, those waters growing deep in so large a level, and being
increased by a Flood; a storm of wind will have so much water to work upon,
that it will raise billows as in a sea, the force whereof neither the banks
of Marsh land nor of other inned grounds, nor houses, nor bridges will be able
to resist. What then will become of the fishing and fowling (their principal
comndities) when the game is dispersed so wide that it will not be worth the
labor and charge to go about to take them? What will become also of the
multitude of poor people, who now live (though very meanly) in those Fennes
by taking Fish and Foul, by gathering Hassocke, Reed, etc. and by
transporting by their Boats passengers and commodities too and fro? Finally
the Towneships and particular men that live now upon the Hards, will be
confined as into small Islands in an open sea: and even those Islands will be
daily lessened by the billows which storms will drive against them on all
sides. Add hereto that the Meares (and Whitlesea Meare says Mr. Cambden is
six miles long and three miles broad) which have of late years much enlarged
themselves, being yet more deepned and their waves raised by storms and raging
like the sea, will daily swallow more and more of the light Fenny soil
bordering upon them, and so at length may grow to an immense both longitude and
latitude, and make it truly Circumfusa Palus. But to insist a little more upon
the fall or descent of the Level of the Fennes into the sea; it appears that
the river of Peterbrough, (whose natural Current, as it is most plentiful, so
his excess is most inundant) which should fall out at Splading, or at Wisbich,
or both, if it had vent, passes now on to Whittlesea Meare, and so runs
through the whole Isle, and meeting the rivers of Ouse, Grant, Brandon and
Stoke, ouerflowes all, and falls out leasurely at Linne above threescore
miles from his aberration; in which tract running upon a level and in small
and cloyed draynes, it makes the greatest deluge: beside, the winds having the
advantage of the waters when they are out, with greater violence then any bank
made of loose earth can resist, carry them whether they list upon the face of
the whole Fenne, because they have no such strength of Current as will
violently lead them away: so that if the wind be Northerly and stiff, it
beats them toward Linne, and then the Fenne is sooner dry; but if it blow
out of the East or South, the whole mass of waters is carried from Lin ward,
and finding no other out-fall, continues upon the face of the Fenne till those
winds remit, and the waters fall back to Linne, where they find no very free
discharge because they are holden up by the Tide 12 hours in 24. and thence it
comes that if any Flood happen in April or after, the Fennes are lost for that
whole year.

More concerning the possibility to drayne the Fennes need not be said, this
being no place fit to discover the manner of the Works or the places of
Advantage whereon to set them, or the old or new draynes that must lead unto
them. Only thus much I think fit to intimate, that there is a great
difference between these Fennes and the Leuels in the Low Countries. For there
the sea is higher then the Land, and therefore their only way is by Banking to
keep out the sea, and then by mils and other devices to heave out the water:
which work of banking though it be exceeding chargeable and dangerous for
breaches, yet they are constrained to trust to it, because they have no fall to
the sea, and beside they are so scanted for Land that the value thereof does
counteruaile that excessive charge: but with us in the Fennes all is otherwise.
For we have a fall to the low water mark of more then twenty foot to empty
the waters into the sea. Beside, we have abundance of rivers and draynes to
lead them unto the several out-fals which may and must be deepned; but we
have no firm earth in place to make banks, nor sound ground to place them
upon. Besides, the Land to be gained will not defray that charge neither (if
all the trust be upon banks) can it be secure to encourage men to inhabit,
build, plant and stock the ground to be gained, because we have had
experience that some few breaches in Marshland and other banked grounds have
brought great deluges and destruction of houses, Cattle, etc. many of which are
not yet regained, others held good at an excessive charge, and under desperate
dangers.

There is also an other danger in Banking procured by a small contemptible
Vermin, they be Water-rats, which make their holes in the banks close to the
water when it is at the shallowest in infinite number, and feeding upon the
fry of fish, do multiply like fishes. These borough deep into the banks,
which being made of light earth, when the waters do rise and are beaten into
them by the wind, many of those holes are worn into one, and so the whole
bank is in no long time demolished; a mischief which it is impossible to
remedy, and yet such as will render all Banking insufficient to keep out the
water, much more unsafe for men to trust unto if they should be desirous to
inhabit near them or under their protection. Finally, the cure by Banking is
impossible for our Fennes, unless the water could be taken into those banked
draynes before it fall into the level of the Fennes, that is to say, as the
rivers descend from the high ground; otherwise the waters can never rise to
make use of the height of such banks, but will rather return and drown
Peterborrough, Deeping Huntington, etc. Therefore the way must be to begin at
the Out-fals and there to repulse the salt water and sands, and by taking
advantage of the fall to low water mark, to convey away the fresh and the sand
and other silte which now choketh the rivers and draynes.

Besides these arguments against trusting to Banks in a case where in great
adventures of men's persons, habitations and estates are to be borne; there is
another argument against entertaining of Strangers to perform this work, for
this Banking is the conceit of Strangers who are accustomed only to banking at
home. And this is an argument first of Honor, secondly of security, thirdly of
profit. For the matter of Honor: Now, if ever, we have reason to insist upon
it, when the reputation of our Country is brought into competition with our
neighbors, who were wont to have their dependence upon us, and relief from
us. Is the old Actiuity and abilities of the English Nation (who in former
times were esteemed the greatest undertakers in the Western parts of the
world) grown now so dull and insufficient that we must pray in aid of our
neighbors to improve our own Demaynes? The Duke of Venice is said to marry
the sea, as if he had with it but diuisum Imperium; we have been always
Lords of the sea, and our Common Law has adjudged the sea to be part of our
Kingdom, shall we suffer that Regality to become obnoxious to Strangers, and
not that only, but the fresh waters within our Continent, as if our selves
were not able to bring them into order? Surely our great plenty and abundance
of fruitful Land has been hitherto one cause why this improuement has been
neglected: but of late the blessing of peace has so multiplied our people
under our last two peaceful Princes, that we have transplanted many Colonies
into Ireland, Virginea, Bermuda, St. Christophers, New England, etc. and beside
has stirred up men at home to gain much rich Land from the seas, and in
particular to attempt upon this surrounded Leuel, wherein that they have not
hitherto prevailed, has not been want of skill, or will, nor yet of
endeavor. For diverse worthy men have appeared in the undertaking, the last and
worthiest being our late Sovereign Lord of blessed memory, who thought it no
dishonor to declare himself an Undertaker herein, but being translated hence,
has left The Honor of this Work to Crown the Reign,
Of his dear Son our now dread Sovereign.


For matter of security; shall we esteem it of small moment to put into the
hands of Strangers three or four such Ports and Harbors as Linne, Wisbeach,
Spalding and Boston will be when the out-fals shall be opened to Low water
mark, and permit the Country within and between them to be peopled by
overthwart neighbors whose strength and undertakings begin to grow formidable;
or if they quail themselves must give place to our most Ancient and dangerous
enemies, who will be ready enough to take advantage of so many fair Inlets
into the bosom of our Land, lying so near together, that an Army landing part
in each of them, may easily meet and strongly entrench themselves with walls of
water and drown the Country about them at their pleasure? This very thing was
objected by a worthy Patriot in a late Parliament, wherein a bill was preferred
for the admitting of Strangers to undertake this Work, and thereupon cast out.

Finally, if nothing were considerable but the matter of profit, would it be
thought fit to give so great a portion of our Land as the third part of that
Level to Strangers to empty themselves into, and leave our own Countrymen
with so great travel, charge and adventure to seek for seats abroad in
remote parts, when we may comfort both them and our selves by placing them at
home? Neither yet would I be understood to be so envious to Strangers, as that
I had rather the water then they should possess the Land; but the question
being whither should be preferred to the Undertaking of the work, Strangers or
men of our own Country, I am out of doubt that no true English man will be
scrupulous in the choice. Yet I do ingeniously acknowledge that the industrye
of some of our neighbors, especially the Dutchmen, deserves commendations and
imitation for enlarging themselves into the sea, especially in, and about
Amsterdam, and securing themselves from the sea by costly and ingenious
devices; but such devices are not proper for our business, which is to be
performed in a far different manner, the error leading us directly to the
remedy which is merely Natural: for Nature has given to all rivers and
waters as well their courses, issues and out-fals into the sea as their heads
and springs; and by the former has as well provided for the use of man as by
the latter. This guidance of Nature if we follow, and add Art as a hand-mayd
unto it, we shall by removing the cause avoid also the effect; and by
consideration how the mischief has grown, learn to prevent it in the
future; wherein the sparing of cost is no frugality. But if it be questioned,
Whether those Englishmen that offer to adventure their estates and the
reputation of their skill, be able to accomplish the business? the answer is,
That beside that they can demonstrate their abilities, What praejudice can it
be to any man to be an idle spectator, whilst they expend their money and
exercise their skill, they requiring no recompense till the Work be performed?

The third and last Question is, How a Competent Reward may be apportioned for
them that should undertake so great a Work? This indeed has been the great
and maine Impediment of the Drayning of the Fennes, for many years; most men
interessed, being unable to disburse Money, and also unwilling to part with any
of their Land, of how little value soever it has been unto them, or how great
soever the improuement of the remainder might be: or if some were willing, yet
the minds of the multitude have not been unlike the Waters of the Fenne; which
not being contained within due limits, but dispersed abroad over the surface of
so great a Level, are easily interrupted in their course by the slender
opposition of Flagges and Reeds: even so, these men's minds not being
restrained by Authority, nor guided by rule of Reason, do stray into several
Opinions, and receive Impediment from Oppositions as slender as those Weeds:
some of them being not ashamed to allege, that by gayning of Grass, they
should loose their Reeds and Sedge, not considering the difference of their
values. But of late, receiving information from the King and his Council, and
the Commissioners of Sewers taking into their consideration, that the Wisdom
of several Parliaments have thought fit to give a part of such Lands to those
that should improve the whole, and pondering how great the benefit of such
improuement would be to them and their posterity, have (not many years since)
fallen upon an excellent course to encourage men of skill and ability to
embarke themselves in that Design. Whereupon, after a Tax laid upon the Lands
of that whole Country by the Acre, to enable the Commissioners of Sewers
legally to convey part thereof to bear the charge of advancing the whole, King
James of blessed memory declaring himself to be the Undertaker, a Decree of
Sewers was enacted at Cambridge the 20. day of February, in the years of the
Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King James, of England, France, and Ireland,
the 19. and of Scotland, the 55. Whereby was designed to be granted to his
Majesty for the supportation of that vast Charge, 120000. Acres of the Fenne
Lands, to be conveyed unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors: that is to
say, out of every particular part, a proportion answerable to the quantity of
the Land, and the benefit that should redound unto the Owners thereof, so that
in the whole it should accomplish the said number of 120000. Acres, as the
Commissioners of Sewers, after a particular survey, should think fit to allot
the same. Which Lands notwithstanding, the King was not to have any interest
in, or possession of, until either the whole Fennes, or some notable part,
were effectually Drayned, and so adjudged by the Commissioners, or a competent
number of them. The reason why this Decree took no effect, was the many and
important affairs of State, wherewith his Majesty was exercised the whole
time of his life, after the said Decree was enacted. Whereupon all the good
intentions and preparation, both on the part of his Majesty, and the
Commissioners fell to the ground.

Since which time, those Countries having been grievously afflicted with the
continuance and increase of Inundations, they are now by the hand of God not
led only, but constrained to seek some effectual means for speedy relief.
Whereupon some of them (as men ready to perish by the Waters, are wont) have
reached out their hands, to take hold upon such weak and defective helps, as
the examples of their predecessors have left unto them, that is to say, upon
particular Works of Goats, Draynes, Banks, etc. not duly weighing, how they
have formerly failed those that have laid hold upon them: Witness the costly
Draynes of Morton Bishop of Ely called The New Leame; Clowes Cross, Popham
Mea, The Londoners Load and many others; and the many miles of Banks about
Deeping, Thornie Walter Sea, The Londoners Land, and infinite others: all which
are now of little or no use, though the charge of them has been so great, as
if it had been bestowed at once upon the general Work, would have gone far
toward the accomplishment of a Real Drayning, which long before this time had
made a rich Improuement. Others there are, who finding the Disease of the Fen
to be like the stopping of the Urine near the fall of the Kidneyes; from
whence being returned, it first fills up all the veins of the body which
before were near full with blood, and then drownes the Patient in his own
Water: of which Disease there is no possible Cure, but to remove the Impediment
near the Kidneyes, so to regayne the natural Out-fall. In like manner, the
Waters that annoy the Fennes, do first fill the Rivers and Draynes; at whose
issues being returned back by Impediment, they ouerflow and stifle the whole
Body of the Fenne: of which Disease, there is no possible Cure, but the opening
and securing of the Natural Out-falls; at which, the whole Body of the Fenne
will equally and speedily unburden it self, and so return to that pristine
Condition, so much extolled in the Monuments of Antiquity. This then being the
only way for Cure of that grand Disease, under which many thousand Acres of
Ground, and (which more is) many thousand People do languish, those only
shall approve their Judgments in this Cure, who themselves incline and labor
to incline others to further by Art that Natural Remedy.

Yet how Natural soever this Remedy be, it cannot be imagined that so vast and
enorme a quantity of Land as these Leuels do contain can be drayned without a
huge expense; and the prevention of the same mischief for time to come by apt
Works will greatly increase if not double the charge, beside the necessary
provision to maintain, nay to better the Navigations by deepning the rivers,
etc. Add hereto the adventure of so great sums as are necessary to be
expended in these Works; whereof although such as shall undertake the
business, well knowing their own ways and means are (as behooves them)
secure, yet their assistants (for without aduentureres no private man's ability
is able to effect it) relying upon their credit and skill, have reason to
require no Litigeous, but a Legal and pregnant assurance of a valuable
recompense which being conformed to the decree for the 120000 Acres before
recited will be indifferent both for the Adventurers and the Owners, as it
seems was concluded by the Commissioners before they enacted that Decree.

Here it may be objected, that many Noblemen and Gentlemen interested in those
Leuels, will choose rather to disburse some sums of money for their parts to
keep their Inheritances entire, then part with any of their Lands. The answer
whereunto is, that a book may be made according to the Custom of Adventures,
wherein every man that lists may write such a proportion for his adventure as
will entitle him to so many Acres as upon the survey shall be set out of his
Land to make up the number of 120000 Acres. Out of which also it must be
considered, that a good proportion must be set apart for the perpetual
securing of the works to be effected, as the Commissioners of Sewers in the
forenamed Decree have juditiously provided.

Thus much being collected out of loose papers which had lien long by the walls,
and tied together with some Additions out of new observations, is presented by
a friend to this incomparable design; which if it be effected, will be
^egistred to all succeeding ages, and happily this may conduce somewhat thereto,
with which if the Author be honored he is well ap^^ed, but if he be
remembered to have cast in his Mite into the Treasury he will exult.

H. C.

FJNJS.

