A GODLY AND LEARNED SERMON, UPON THE 91. Psalm.

Declaring how, and to what place, a Christian man ought to fly in the
dangerous time of the Pestilence, for his best safety and deliverance.

By T. C.

VVher-unto are joined, certain fruitful Prayers, very necessary for the
time of infection.

LONDON Printed for Edward White, dwelling near the little North door of S.
Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun. 1603.

A godly and learned Sermon upon the 91. Psalm.
Showing how, and to what place, a Christian man ought to fly in the
dangerous time of the Pestilence, for his best safety and deliverance.

FOr-as-much as Almighty God, does now visit, handle and punish this country
and region with the horrible and fearful plague of the Pestilence, and many
folks (after an unmannerly fashion) are so affraide thereof, that there be
heard and seen of them almanner of vnaccustomable words and works, which
become not well a Christian man: And seeing that all the deeds of charity
which one Christian man is bound to show unto another (no less then unto
Christ him self) are perilously omitted, whereby then rises all manner of
slander to the weak, and misreport unto the holy Gospel: I thought it
profitable and necessary to bestow upon your charity in this case, a short
instruction and comfort out of the holy Scripture, to the intent, that the
ignorant may be taught, the weak strengthened, and every one counseled after
his calling, to serve his neighbor.

And I will take for my Text, the 91. Psalm, which sounds after this manner:

Verse. 1 Who so sits under the defense of the highest, and abides under
the shadow of the Almighty.

2 He says unto the Lord: my hope, and my strong hold: my God, in him will I
trust.

3 For he delivers me from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence.

4 He shall cover thee with his feathers, and thy trust shall be under his
wings: his faithfulness and truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

5 So that thou need not to fear for any terror by night, nor for the
arrows that fly by day.

6 For the Pestilence that comes privily in the dark: nor for the sickness
that destroys in the no one day.

7 Though a thousand fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, yet
shall it not come nigh thee.

8 Yea, with thine eyes shall thou see thy desire, and behold, how the ungodly
shall be rewarded.

BUt before we come to the understanding of these comfortable words: your
charity shall first know, that it is not my meaning to forbid or inhibite any
man to fly or to use Physic, or to avoid dangerous and sick places in
these fearful airs, so far as a man does not therein against the belief,
nor Gods commandment, nor against his calling, nor against the love of his
neighbor. For though some will say: Such Plague touches no man, but those
that be ordained of God thereunto, like as there be certain ensamples thereof
found in holy Scripture: namely, as in Ezech. 9. and Apoc. 7. there was sent an
Angel, which aforehand marked the virtuous and elect, or ever it was charged
and commanded the second Angel to smite (with Pestilence or other Plagues)
those that were not marked. Nevertheless, against that it might be said: Good
sir, though it went so at such a time in such places, who makes us sure yet
now, that it shall therefore chance so in all other deaths of the country?
Therefore I will now at this time let all such things continue in their
liberty at your discretio^s like as al other natural things, which be subject
and committed unto our reason to rule. But as for the Christian which (by
reason of office, or for pouerties sake, or for other reasonable causes)
cannot, or be not minded to fly, I will herewithal show them their best and
highest comfort that they have.

In like manner, I will not enter against them, that speak naturally thereof,
and say: Such Plague comes out of the influence of the Stars, out of the
working of the Cometes, out of the unseasonable weather and altering of the
air, out of the South winds, out of stinking waters, or out of foul mistes
of the ground: For such wisdom of theirs, will we leave unto them
vndespised, and not fight thereagainst: But (as Christian men) we will hold us
unto the word of God, the same will we suffer to be our most high wisdom,
and give credence unto it, and follow it: and so shall we find much better
and surer instruction: Namely, that this horible Plague of the Pestilence
comes out of Gods wrath, because of the despising and transgressing of his
godly commandments. For thus says the holy Prophet Moses in the book of
Deuteronomy. Chap. 28.

Verse. 1. If thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy GOD, to
observe and keep all his commandments and ordinances which I command thee,
then shall all these curses come upon thee, etc.

And it follows:

Verse. 21. The Lord shall cause the Pestilence to endure long with thee:

Verse. 22. The Lord shall smire thee with swelling, Fever, heat, burning,
blasting, drouth, etc. And shall persecute thee till he utterly destroy thee,
and bring thee to naught.

And certainly this is the plain truth, and the very original of these
Plagues. No man ought to doubt thereon: For though the foresaid natural
causes do somewhat agree also thereunto, yet is it sure and undoubted, that
the same causes be sent and stirred up out of Gods wrath for our sin and
unthankfulness.

And truly, that it is even so; the holy Scripture declares; not with bare
words only, but shows it also with notable ensamples. For in the fourteenth
chapter of the book of Numbers, when all the spies (except Joshua and Caleb)
spoke evil of the land of promise, and made the people impatient and in an
uproar: so that they chose them a Captain, and thought to go again into
Egypt, and to stone Moses and Aaron which commanded them the contrary, we
read thus: Then appeared the glory of the Lord, and spoke unto Moses; How long
does this people blaspheame me? And how long will it be yer they believe me, for all the tokens that I have done upon them? therefore will I smite and destroy
them with Pestilence, and make of thee a greater nation then this.

Likewise also when David caused the people to be numbered, against Gods
commandment, he displeased the Lord God horribly therewith. Therefore laid he
the punishment upon him, so that he was feign to choose himself, whether he
had rather have seven years dearth, or three Months mischance in battle,
or three days Pestilence in the Land? And when he chose the Pestilence, there
dyed in three days, seauenty thousand men, as it is written in the last
chapter of the second book of Samuel.

Seeing then that out of the word of God, we know the very cause of this
horrible Plague: Namely, that it is the fault of our sins; as unbelief,
disobedience and unthankfulness. Therefore, before all things, it shall be
necessary, that we refrain from the same; repent and amend our lives, if we
will be preserved and delivered from this horrible Plague. For if God punish
us, because of sin: it is good to consider that we must first acknowledge and
eschew our sins, in case that he shall withdraw and take away his wrath
and sharp punishment from us. For if we continue in our evil, sinful and
culpable life, certainly he will not cease with the punishment, but go forth
more and more, till he give and recompense according to our works. But if we
knowledge our sin, refrain from it, repent and ask grace, then shall he also
take away his wrath. And this horrible wrath (with other heavy burdens, as
war and dearth, that lie upon our neck) shall he mercifully take away from
us again. As holy Paul says, 1. Cor. 11. If we judged our selves, we should
not be judged: But when we are judged, we be chastened of the Lord, that we
should not bedamned with the world.

And out of all this may your charity well perceive, how unwisely and
unchristianly they do, that out of inordinate fear of this Plague, leave
their calling and office, maliciously withdrawing the love, help, and
faithfulness, which they (out of Gods commandment) are bound to show unto
their Neighbors, and so do sin grienously against the commandment of God.
For certainly they do but stir up the wrath of God more earnestly against
themselves, that he may the sooner take hold upon them and pluck them away
with this Plague. For men may hear on every side, that some do shun and
fly not only the sick, but also the whole: Yea (that which is more
foolishness) even the Platters and Candlestickes, which come out of strange
houses, as though death did surely stick therein. And (out of such fond
childish fear) it comes, that not only some sick folks be suffered to
die without any keeping, help and comfort: but that women also great with
child, are forsaken in their most need, for at such times, few or none will
come unto them: Yea, a man may hear also that the children forsake their
Fathers and Mothers, and one household body keeps himself away from another,
and shows no love unto him: Which nevertheless he would be glad to be
showed unto himself, if he lay in like necessity.

How be it, I suppose there come not many such chances to pass: nevertheless
I must speak thereof that it be done no more from henceforth. For certainly
it is unwisely and unchristianly handled: and we need not think that the
same is the way to escape this Plague, but rather an occasion that it reigns
more mightily over us. For seeing it is sure (as ye have heard before) that
such Plague is sent for punishment of our sins, and Christ has given us a
new Commandment, that we should love one another (as he has loved us) it
follows that the farther we depart from the love of our neighbor, the more
we lade sin upon us, and deserve this plague so much the more.

Again, the more diligently that we take heed unto the love of our neighbor,
the surer shall we be from this Plague: No man needs to doubt thereof.

But here withal will I also counsel or compel no man, to any vnneedeful
danger (that he is not bound unto by his calling nor by love) but only warn
those which for fear, leave that which they are bound to do before God: To the
intent that for such naked fears sake, they do not transgress nor omit the
commandment of God, and hope by sin to escape this plague, which
nevertheless comes because of sin. For that were a foolish unadvised
counsel, if one would go about to escape the wrath of God by transgression,
and by sin to avoid the punishment of sin.

Besides this, does experience show also that they which be so sore afraid,
do commonly miscary. Again, they that wait upon their offices and serve
their neighbors, be delivered; As it is well seen in the ministers of the
Church, and other more, that shun not the sick, but must visit them and
comfort them with Gods word, and provide for them with the holy Sacrament: For
we see no where, that they therefore must also be soon sick and must die. Yea,
how must the higher powers of the world do, which (by reason of their
calling, and for the common profit and regiments sake) abide also in the
^eoperdie, and must minister because of love? specially the chiefest, of one
whereof there dies more then a thousand of other: And yet does God commonly
preserve them also that they be delivered, left still a live, and dye in a
good quiet age.

Therefore certainly such kind of inordinate fear and flying against Gods
commandment, is nothing else, but a declaring of a great and sore unbelief,
that men do not believe and trust in God, that he can and will deliver. And
thus is verifyed the saying: The ungodly have no peace. Esa. lvij. For if we
will fear and fly where no perrill is, when will we then bestow our lives for
our neighbors, as Christ has done for us: and we also be bound to do
likewise? 1. Ioh. 3.

Who so now desires to escape the wrath of God, and this horrible Plague, let
him not ask his own reason how he shall do, but believe and follow the
word of God: which teaches him not to fly evil air and infected places
(which he may well do: nevertheless he remains yet uncertain whether it
helps or no) but it teaches him to leave off from sin, as from the very
original cause of this Plague and punishment, and (by true repentance and
amendment of life) to walk again in the right way. For that is the only sure
and wholesome flying in this dangerous time, whereby a man may escape this
Plague.

But whither a man ought to fly, thereof will we hear the holy Ghost by the
Prophet in this Psalm. He knows it much better then we can think, and
says after this manner.

Verse 1. Who so sits under the defense of the highest, and abides under
the shadow of the almighty.

2 He says unto the Lord: My hope, and my strong hold: My God on whom I
hope. For he delivers me from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome
Pestilence.

These words (my most dearly beloved) shall ye take to heart, and mark them
well with all diligence: For they be not the words of men which can lie and
deceive: Howbeit though they were men's words, and some old wise man spoke
them (or some well learned Physician) ye would not yet despise them, but
receive and keep them. But now be they the very words of the high Majesty
of God, which the holy Ghost speaks by the mouth of the Prophet. And they
teach us whither we ought to fly from this Plague, that we may be safe. And
certainly they must needs be the very truth: For heaven and earth must
pass, but my words shall not pass away, says the Lord.

But that ye may understand them right and well, ye shall remember that it is
the use of the Holy Scripture (specially in the Psalm) to declare one meaning
with two manner of sayings, as ye have often times heard. For so does the
Prophet here speak, and says:

Who so sits under the defense of the highest, and abides under the shadow
of the Almighty.

For to sit under the defense of the highest, is even as much as to say, as
to abide under the shadow of the almighty.

And with these words means the holy Prophet nothing else, but who so
puts his trust in God with a right sure Christian belief, and gives
himself over into his protection and defense, (for such people does God
receive to grace) them holds he for his own dear children (and even so
they be) and gives them his holy spirit, which works in them true salvation
and godly works.

Therefore remains he also upon them, and all things must serve for their
wealth as Paul says, Romans 8. Such protection also and defense of God, is set
forth unto us every where in the Scripture, as an ouer-shaddowing and covering
with wings. For like as the two Cherubins spread out their wings over the Arc;
Exodus 37. Even so does God spread out the wings of his protection over his
elect. Therefore says Moses Deuteronomy. 32. Like as an Egle stirs up his nest,
and flies over his young ones: so spreads he out his feathers, and bears his
people upon his wings: After this manner spoke the holy Angel Gabriell also
unto the most blessed and pure Virgin Mary, when she should be the Mother of
God: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most highest
shall over shadow thee. Luc. 1. In like manner spoke Christ also unto
Jerusalem: How often would I have gathered thy Children together, as an Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Mat. 23. For though a
true believing man be in deed the Temple of God, and God dwells in him, yet
uses the Scripture often to speak thereof, as though he did fly above us, in
as much as he does over shadow, cover and defend us? and that because the
heaven and the heaven of all heavens (as Solomon says) can not comprehend nor
contain him. Revel. 3. But though he dwells in us, yet flies he wide, hye
and low, not only on the out side of us, but also on the outside and over all
creatures. And so in all these words, there is nothing else said, but
whosoever is a right believing Christian:

Mark now then that he says not: who so is wise, strong, rich, whole, or
well friended: Neither says he also: who so keeps him self thence, or
flies thither, holds himself well, or uses good Physic: but who so
puts his trust in God. Not that the foresaid good things be evil, or may
not be had or used with profit: But that they (where faith is not) may even as
soon do harm as good, and are in no wise able to deliuere from the wrath of
God. But what does the believer? He says unto the Lord: My hope. But this
do not the ungodly and unbelievers, but set their hope in the foresaid points,
put their trust in them, and boast thereon, and so commit spiritual whoredom
therewith, and make Idols thereof. But to God do they not lift up their eyes,
neither think they upon him, nor fear him. And when he comes then with his
wrath and ouertaketh them with his Plague, so that of necessity they must
needs think upon him, then fear they, and be afraid of him; fly away, and
know not where to abide: Then vanishes away their hope and boasting, which
they (in time of prosperity) had unto the creatures. And so comes it to
pass, that their wisdom has been plain foolishnes: their strength, their
own misfortune: their riches, their own destruction: their health, their own
harm: their friends, their own hypocrites, and traitors. And all that which
they trusted unto, cannot help them. When they would hide themselves on the
backside thereof, it is even as much as when one hides him behind a ladder.
And when they would seek help thereby, if is even like as a Wolf should
defend a Sheep or a Goose.

But thus goes it not with the believer: for who so puts his trust in the
Lord, shall not be confounded. Therefore says he not only that the Lord is
his hope but also his strong hold, which he may fly unto, in the which he may
shut him self close, and be delivered therein. As Solomon says in the xviii.
Chapter of the Proverbs: The name of the Lord is a strong Castle, the
righteous flies unto it, and shall be defended. For the unbelievers have
their hope even in their goods, but in necessity, they find no refuge, as
the faithful has a strong hold and high Castle in GOD the Lord.

And though the unbelievers have their whole will all their life long, yet has
it an evil end, as it had with the rich man, which was buried in hell. Luke
Chapter xvi. For who so believes not, shall be damned.

Again, though the faithful be plagued and persecuted all his life long, so
that he can not see how he may be delivered, yet has he this comfort, that
the Lord is his God: that is, that he can help and deliver him as an almighty
Lord, yea, after such a fashion and way, as neither he himself nor any man's
reason can think or devise.

And though he do it not, yet does not the faithful despair: but lets
the Lord be his God, on whom he hops: that is, at whose hand he looks
for all good in the life for to come and everlasting. For hope sees and
looks on that which is to come, which as yet is hid. As Paul says, Romans the
viii. Chapt. Hope that is seen is no hope. for how can a man hope for that
which is seen. But if we hope for that which we see not, we look for it by
patience.

And so this is the meaning: The unbelievers have their hope in the creatures,
and are afraid of God. The faithful has his hope to God, and is Lord over
the creatures. The unbelievers miscarie, and by the creatures find they no
help in need. The faithful miscarie not, but God is unto them a strong
hold. The unbelievers may well have their wills as long as they live, but at
the last (through their despair) there follows everlasting damnation. The
faithful may have disquietnesse and temptation all their life long, but at the
last (through their hope) there follows everlasting life.

Such hope should they have, and they have it indeed, that though they must
lie under as long as they live, yet after death they shall inherit everlasting
life.

But certainly it comes not to pass, that they must always lie under: For
God is faithful, and suffers not his to be tempted above their strength, but
makes the temptation so to have an end, that we may bear it. 1. Cor. 10.
Therefore says the Prophet moreover:

For he delivers me from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome
Pestilence.

And in these words, does he shortly show unto us, that almighty God can and
will deliver his own from all misfortune, yet even in this life. For all the
mischaunces that we be troubled withal in this temporal life, are of two
sorts: Some come out of the wicked devise of the Devil, and of men: as shame
and persecution. Some plainly of nature, and out of the ordinance of God: as
Tempest and Pestilence. The faithful now believes and makes his boaste, that
these mischaunces can not be so great and mighty, but GOD shall deliver him
therefrom.

And it is a goodly natural similitude, that he likeneth the evil wicked device
of the ungodly against the faithful, to a net or snare of the hunter. For
like as a hunterproueth the kind and nature of every wild beast, comes
privily after him, seeks out the course and habitation thereof, and afterward
sets the Net, that he may drive it thereinto: Even so do the ungodly also
unto the righteous. First, they look how they be minded: If any one be free
of language, then set they him on fire, that he may speak somewhat sharply, as
Saint Ste even did. Acts the vij. Chapter. If he be gentle and friendly, then
imagine they some foolish thing upon him, and flatter away his heart from him
as Dalila did unto Sampson. If he seek the salvation of the people, then
sclaunder they him, as the Jews blaspheamed Christ to be a Wine-supper, and a
companion of Publicanes. If he be simple, then lie they upon him, behind his
back, or ever he beware thereof: Then follow they upon him, cry, lie, and
complain, that the virtuous Christian man knows not what point to be at or
how he has deserved it. Nevertheless, they think the Bell is so cast, that
at the last it must ring as they will, but if fails them.

For the Lord on whom we believe, which is our hope, refuge and God, can not
only preserve us from their snares that we fall not therein, but also when we
fall into them, and they think we be their captives, he can and will deliver
us yet thereout. In like manner does God the Lord preserve his faithful, not
only from the noisome sickness of the Pestilence, but also when they be
taken therewith and infected already, he delivers them from it, and makes
them whole again. But how that comes to pass, and how we shall understand
it, it shall follow hereafter more clearly.

This is now well to be marked also, that the Pestilence is a noisome
sickness, not because it brings death (for that do all other mortal
sickenesses likewise, and death is no loss unto the faithful, but advantage,
as Paul says unto the Philippians, the first Chapter) but because that it
takes away the people very suddenly, unlooked for and unawares: And thereout
then follows strife, lawing or business among sinners, and of the common
wealth, as every man by him self can lightly perceive and understand.

Therefore it is also an horrible punishment over the sin of the world,
which concerns both them that dye, and them that are left alive, as hereafter
it shall follow.

Where as if there be now such a faith as gieueth credence unto God, he shall
preserve him from al wicked imaginations of men, like wise from all noisome
sicknesses. And at the last shall he save him, that continues not without
fruit, but breaks out with right love and faithfulness toward his
neighbor, and desires also to bring him unto that point, that he may believe
and be pertaker of all such goodness and benefits of God. Therefore does the
Prophet turn his words now also unto his neighbor, and says furthermore;

He shall cover thee with his feathers, and thine hope shall be under his
wings. That is: if thou also wilt put thy trust in him, thou shall find it so
likewise. For he shows such his benefits unto all and every one that put
their trust in him As for the covering of his feathers, and hope under his
wings, your charity has heard enough before what it is.

Now, though all the faithful look for such help at God, and it happens unto
them, yet is it not done without a special battle of Faith. For such help
does he promise us in his holy word, that we should believe it: and if we
believe it, it happens unto us according to our Faith. Therefore says the
Prophet moreover, His truth is spear and shield, that is, his godly promises,
which are sure and true, and neither lie nor deceane: Those are our weapons
wherewith we fight, and overcome all adversities. But like as spear and shield
are not profitable unto him that cannot, or will not use them: even so also do
not the promises of God profit him, that cannot fight therewith, and will not
believe thereon. For that is the right science in this battle, when
misfortune, adversity, or tentation comes, that we look out all for
according unto Gods word: Namely, what comfort and promise he has made unto
us in such a case, and with a right belief to take hold of the same, as of a
shield, and to comfort and defend our selves therewith: so can there no
mischance do us harm, as the holy Saint Paul in the last chapter of his
epistle to the Ephesians teaches, and says: Before al things take the shield
of Faith, where with ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

Against the same (namely against Satan our head enemy) is such word of God,
even the right spear, wherewith we wound and overcome him. For no bodily
weapon hurts and hinders men so sore, as the word of God stops and
hinders Satan, if it be thrust under his nose, against his venomous dealing
and tentation, For if a servant (that deals wrongfully and unthriftily in his
masters goods and businesses) be affraide, vexed, and pearsed through the
heart, when a simple man says unto him: Thou unthrift, why do thou so? That
is not thy masters will and meaning, he did not so command thee. How much
more goes it through Satan's heart, when a virtuous Christian man holds the
word of God under his eyes, and brings witness over him that he as a wicked
creature deals against his maker, and against his chosen children? Therefore
does holy Saint Paul call Gods word also the sword of the spirit: And the Lord
Christ defends himself only with the same against all temptations of Satan
in the wilderness.

Now when thou take hold thus of Gods promises thorow-faith, and use them
for spear and shield to defend thy self, and to smite Satan, then out of
the same, it follows, as the Prophet says farther:

That thou need not to fear for the horriblenesse of the night.

For the arrows that fly in the day time.

For the Pestilence that comes privily in the dark.

For the sickness that destroys in the noone day.

For these four adversities set forward and shorten the life of the
unbelievers: But the faithful has such consolation and promise, that he
needs not be afraid. First, for the horriblenesse of ye night: That is, for all manner of temptation and deceit, that happen unto men by night in the
darkness. For this we al perceive, that in the night and in the darkness we
are weaker minded, of more despair, and more afraid then in the light.

The blood runs to our hearts, and the hairs stand upright, and all the
body waxes cold for fear. Out of this comes it then, that wethinke we see,
hear, and perceive somewhat, which in very deed is not so: then goes one
astray, another leeseth his color, the third falls sick, the fourth is
become crooked: the fifth goes out of his wit: And so men think that the
Devil has done it, where as it is yet a plain natural woorking of the
exceeding great fear, which would destroy a man even by day time, if it were
so great.

How-be-it, true it is that the Devil causes such fear, and printeth it in,
that he may beguyle and destroy us by fear, as by a natural working. Yet is
it nothing but a fear: for the Prophet calls it not an evil or good spirit,
but plainly the horriblenes of the night: Neither is it any thing else but an
horror and fear, and continues an horror and and fear.

Therefore where a right belief is, there is no fear. Where no fearefulnes
is, there is also no horror, nor fantasy of spirits or deceitfulnes of the
night, but plain courage and boldness. If any thing else be seen (as fire or
light) they be but natural things, out of the heat of the ground: like as
lightnings, dragons, falling stars and Cometes, be in the air and in the
heaven. But herewithal will not I speak against the wonderful visions and
tokens, which God sends for a warning before great mischaunces to come.

Secondarliye the faithful is sure for the arrows that fly in the day time.
That is all manner of mischaunces, which overtake a man openly in the day: and
yet so suddenly and unawares, that he can not escape them. As when a tyle
falls from the rooofe of an house, when a wicked beast does evil, or when
an vn^grations person does hurt in body, train, or goods. For such misfortunes
come for the most part so suddenly, that a man can not prevent them, but must
let them hitte as with an arrow, and afterward restore and heal the harm with
great travail and labor. But now will God preserve his faithful from such
misfortune* if they have his promises before their eyes, believe thereon, and
order their lives thereafter.

Thirdly, a faithful person needs not also to be afraid for the Pestilence,
that flippeth in privily in the dark. This is verily a comfortable promise in
this dangerous time, for the which, we should by right put our trust in God,
and thank him therefore, for as much as it is one of the most perilous and
horrible Plagues, wherewith he visits and punishes the sin of the world.
For it takes hold of life unawares, and plucketh a man a way in two or three
days (or ever he can order his business and house, and make his Testament)
creeps in privily in the dark, so that no man knows what it is, or whence
it comes, or whether it goes, therefore can no man keep himself surely
from it.

For if it were in meat or drink, it might be eschued: If it were an evil
taste, it might be expelled with a sweet savor: If it were an evil wind, ye
chamber might with diligence be made close therefore: If it were a cloud or
mist, it might be seen and avoided: If it were a rain, a man might cover
himself for it: but now it is a secret misfortune that creeps in privily,
so that it can neither be seen nor heard, neither smelled nor tasted, til it
have done thee harm.

Therefore the more dangerous and noisome that the plague is, the better and
more excellent is the promise, that no man should have cause to despair. For
how might God make us a more excellent and fairer promise then that he
promises to deliver from the Pestilence us that be his children, and that we
need not to be affraide thereof, though a thousand die of the same at our left
side, and ten thousand at our right side. Yet shall it not reach unto us, if we
do but believe this promise, and let it be our spear and shield. For if we so
do, then shall such poisoned arrows either not hit us at all, or else not
wound us to death.

Fourthly, God will also preserve his children from the sickness that
destroys in the noone day: For the noone day when the Sun is at the
strongest, is cause of much heat and feuerous sicknesses: specially in those
countries where the Sun ryseth hye, and comes nigh over men's heads. For
great heat brings much sweat, consumes and alters the blood, causes
inordinate drinking, and makes that the people are glad to cool themselves
again foolishly: and thereout arises all manner of perilous diseases, which
are not very unlike the sickness of the Pestilence.

Now, whether it be fear of the night, or arrowe of the day, whether it be
Pestilence or sickness that comes by the evil Southwinde, or what plague
soever, that lies upon the world because of their sins, God the Lord will
preserve his faithful therfrom or deliver them from it. And that shall come to
pass so certainly and so wonderfully, that (as the Psalmist and our Prophet
says,) Though a thousand fall at thy left side, and ten thousand at thy right
side, yet shall it not touch thee.

This is doubtless a loving, merciful, comfortable and fair promise, whereon
our heart by reason should trust, and chieslie rejoice in the same. For he that
speaks it, is only Almighty, and most true, therefore we should with
reason give credence unto him.

For we can do God no greater dishonor then to despair in his holy word. We
ought therefore to be much more afraid of that inordinate fear then of death
it self: for death can not hurt us, in as much as (we through baptism) are
graffed and buried unto like death with Christ. But fearfulness (which is
nothing else but an unbelief) may harm us, and bring us into imprudence.
Wherefore my most dearly beloved, take these promises to heart, strengthen
your heart, mind, and understanding therewith, and be not faint hearted. So
shall ye prove by experience, that God is true, and faithfully performs that
which he promises.

And that ye may the more easily believe it, I will declare it unto your
charity, by a similitude how it comes to pass, and whence it springs,
that a right faithful Christian man may be safe and free from all these
Plagues: for it is good to understand, and comfortable to know.

Your charity sees and proves daily by experience, how mighty and horrible
a thing the darkness of the night is. For when it falls, it covers all
the whole world, darkneth the color and fashion of all creatures, captiuateth
all men and beasts living, that they must be still and rest, yea, and makes
them faintharted and fearful, and so of all things it is a mighty invincible
tyrant whom no man may withstand. Nevertheless, it is not yet so mighty, that
it can darken, ouerwhelme, and quench the least light that is found in the
world. For we see, that the darker the night is, the clearer do the stars
shine: Yea, the least candle light that is lighted, withstandeth ye whole
night, and suffers not only the darkness not to cover or oppress it, but
gives light even in the mids of the darkness, and smites it back a
certain space on every side: and where it is borne, thence must darkness
depart, and give place unto the light: all the power and fearfulness thereof,
can not help against it.

And though a light be so weak, that it gives not light far above it,
neither can smite the darkness back (as the spark of an whote cole) yet can
not the darkness cover it, much less quench it: but it gives light it self
alone, so that it may be seen a far off in the darkness, and remains
vnouercome of the same, though it cannot help other things, nor give light
vn^to them.

Yea (that yet more wonderful is) a rotten shining piece of Wood, which
nevertheless has the fayntest light that can be found, remains invincible
of all the power of darkness: and the more it is compassed about with
darkness, the clearer light it gives: so little can darkness overcome or
hold down any light, but it rules, vanquisheth, and expels the
darkness, which else ouerwhelmeth, snareth, and puts all things in fear.

Even so likewise does a well spring also, for there may we see, how a little
vain of water, breaks out of the groundsome where scarce so great as a
finger.

And when it is closed in round about, that the water may gather together, and
must needs be a ditch or a pit, yet springs it nevertheless. And though
the water be certain hundreds weight above the spring, yet may not it drive
the spring back, but the spring drives the whole burden of the water back,
and above it self, and springs still more and more, till the poole flow
over. And if the other water be foul and unclean, it cannot mi^e it self
under the fresh clear water of the spring, but it remains clear till it
come farther abroad from the first head thereof, as it may well be proved by
daily experience. If a natural light then be so mighty against the darkness of
the night, and an earthen well spring so strong in stryuing against all
standing waters: how much more does it then, the true everlasting and
heavenly light, and the only inuinsible spring of all life, namely, God the
Lord our maker and Savior?

That God is the true, everlasting and heavenly light, witnesses John the
Evangelist in the first Chapter, and says: God was the word, in him was the
life, and the life was the light of men. Likewise also in his Canonical
Epistle in the first Chapter: God is light, and in him is no darkness.

In like manner, That he is the only invincible spring of all life, witnesses
the Prophet Jeremy in the second Chapter. For there says the Lord: My people
commits a double sin, they forsake me the living spring of life, and make
themselves fair wells, which nevertheless give no water. And David says in
the xxxv. Psalm: With thee is the spring of life, and in thy light see we
light.

If God the Lord then be the true light, it follows that all they which put
their trust in him, be as a burning candle: for by faith does God dwell in our
hearts, and we are the living temple of God, as Paul to the Corinthians does
witness more then once. Therefore says Christ of his Disciples. Math. 5. Ye
are the light of the world. And of John the Baptist: He was a burning* and
shining light. John 5. Likewise if God be the everlasting and living fountain,
it follows, that the faithful be even flowing springs. Therefore says
Christ also. John 7. Who so believes on me, as the Scripture says, out of
his body shall flow streams of living Water: But this he said of the Spirit
which they that believe on him should receive.

Like as the darkness of the night now can hurt no earthly or worldly light,
but must give place and fly from the light: Even so says Satan also which is
a Prince of spiritual darkness, can do no harm to a true right believing
Christian man, but must fear and fly from him: For God which is the
everlasting light, dwells and shines in his heart, and drives and expels
far from him all the works of darkness. And like as no heap of water can
drive back any fountain of the ground, and hinder the quick spring thereof:
and like as no uncleanness can make it foul, even so also can no adversity of
this world take away or shorten any Christian man's life. For God which is the
fountain of all life, dwells and lives in his heart, and drives all
hurtful poison and mortal sicknesses far away from thence, so that not only
it can not harm him, but he also helps other people, and delivers them by
his presence: even as a light that shines far about it, and as a spring that
always flows, runs and makes the ground moist and fruitful.

And this is that the Lord says in the Gospel, in the last of Mark: The
tokens that shall follow them which believe, are these: In my name shall they
cast out devils, speak with new tongues, drive away serpents: and if they
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: They shall lay hands upon the
sick, and they shall recover. So is it read also in the Acts of the Apostles
the v. Chapter, that the sick were made whole only of Saint Peter's shadow.

So utterly must we vanish every thing that is contrary and against the
everlasting light and spring of life, where a right Christian man is, in whom
God dwells by a true belief and out of whom the holy Ghost shines and
flows.

Let Satan then press in here with all his darkness, and with all his
hurtful infection, yet shall ye see in belief that he can not take or destroy
any Christian man therewith, if he continue in faith, and keep God in his
heart: But he shall be smitten back and driven away by force, as the
wounderfull works of Christ, and of all Saints do manifestly declare.
Therefore it is a great shame for a christian man to be afraid for the Plague
of the Pestilence, as to fly from them whom he is bound to serve by Gods
commandment. For by reason he should without all fear make haste unto them,
not only to fulfill Gods commandment, but also by his presence to help
them, if their faith do else work withal. But if it come not to pass, yet
is he sure, for as much as God dwells in him, and he walks and goes in
Gods commandment. For certainly this promise shall not fail him:

Though a thousand fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right side, yet
shall it not touch thee.

But with faith must these words be taken hold upon, for natural reason does
not comprehend them, in as much as indeed it appears far otherwise. And no
man needs to think nor judge, that they which die of this plague, be all
unchristian and faithless: but we ought not to doubt, but that there die
thereof many virtuous men, and leave many ungodly. This is done, because that
death may happen to a man two manner of ways.

One way after the common course of nature, according as every man's death is
appointed him of God: and we have consented unto it in baptism. Of this says
the holy man Job in the xiiii. Chapter: A man has his appointed time, the
number of his months stands with thee: thou have appointed him his bounds,
which he shall not ouerpasse. Another way may death happen to a man before the
time, by reason of his great and grievous sins: As the Lord has threatened by
Moses, that if his commandment be not kept, he will cause pestilence to
reign: whereout it is certain, that when they be kept, the plague abides out.
Likewise says he in the commandments: Honor Father and mother that thou
may live long, etc. Out of the which it is certain, that his life which
does them not, shall be shortened. In like manner says David in the 55.
Psalm, The bloud-thirstie shall not bring their life to the half number.
Whereout it is sure, that they should live much longer, if they shed not
innocent blood. Likewise Christ says: Luke 12. Ifye do not repent, ye shall
all perish, as they that the tower in Siloa fell upon. Whereby it is certain,
that who so repents not, may look for all misfortune.

And of this untimely death only speaks this Psalm, and promises the
faithful Christian men, that they shall be free from it. For from the right
appointed death into the which we have consented in Baptism, we neither can,
nor shall be delivered. Wherefore if a virtuous right Christian man die of this
plague, it is certainly his very hour appointed unto him of God which he
cannot prevent. But doubtless, there dye of it many sinners also beside, which
might well live longer if they repented. And though some be taken because of
their sins, yet be they not therefore damned, but if they ask forgiveness
of sins, and believe, they shall be saved: As Paul says: When we be judged,
we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

Thus goes it then together, that just men die their own right death, but the
wicked die an untimely death, and therewith does God punish the world sorest
of all, because of their sins, but spares his own for their faiths sake.
Therefore should they not be fearful nor faint-hearted: but (as the Prophet
says) they should look and behold, how the ungodly are recompensed: For
whether the wicked dye before the time, or the just in the right season, yet is
it done both for the punishment and plague of the ungodly. If vertous fathers
and mothers die from wicked disobedient children, then be the children plaged:
for they are afterward, evil nurtered, hanged or slain. If young children dye
from wicked fathers and mothers, then be the children delivered, and the
fathers and mothers punished, in that they have gathered their goods for those
that they wish them not unto. If tyraunts die, then be they punished, and the
persecuted Christian delivered. If good rulers die, which with their wisdom
have maintained peace and good governance, then be they in peace: And so the
ungodly which are left alive, raise up war and sedicion, and be always
punished worse and worse. Shortly who so has eyes of faith, sees that true
believers die in a right season, but the ungodly before the time. Wherefore
whether good men die or live, it is done for their wealth. But whether the
wicked die or live, it is done for their punishment, and always shall they be
plagued, and their wickedness shall be rewarded them.

Wherefore my most dearly beloved, take ye such doctrine and comfort to heart
and follow the same. Fly in good earnest (by true repentance and amendment)
from sin wherewith the world has deserved this horrible plague: And fly by
a true upright faith unto Gods word, wherein is the fountain of life, and the
light of men: Then shall ye be whole and safe from this and other plagues, and
so live to the honor of God and wealth of your neighbor, til the appointed
time come wherein God ye father (in ye death of Christ that we be baptized in)
shall send for us out of this miserable life to his own everlasting kingdom:
which God grant unto us all,

Amen.
How Wife, Children, and other friends shall be comforted, the Husband being
dead.
SEeing now that GOD has called your husband, father or other good friend out
of this misery into everlasting joy, therefore shall ye receive it willingly,
for it is his work. Repine not therefore at his work, neither weep against
his will, but commit the cause unto him: take it at his hand, as a fatherly
proouing, and say with Job: God has given us him, and has taken him again,
the name of the Lord be blessed: as it was the Lords will, so is it hapened.

God almighty will prove you as he did Job, how ye will behave your self,
as he takes out of your sight the thing that ye love: He will admit well
enough that ye be sorry. For it is seldom seen but a man (be he never so
vile or of so little reputation) has ever a sundry gift wherewith he served
and profited other. And the same gifts were not greatly regarded in a man while
he lived: for we regard little commonly such things as are present, but as
soon as the man is gone, so soon as the vessel is spilt, then begin we to
want the gifts that were contained therein.

Therefore is it no marvel, that we be sorry for such a gift of God, if it
be taken out of our sight.

As long as we use men, and the gifts according as they be ordained of God
for our necessity, then do we well, and that can God suffer well enough: But
that we misuse them and make an ydoll of them, that cannot God suffer. For when
we put our trust and comfort in man, or any other creature, then do we wrong
and misuse the same, and the curse comes upon us: whereof it is written
Jeremy 17. Cursed is the man that puts his trust in man.

For all man's help is to be suffered only when they be present, and that we
have need of them: but as soon as they are gone, then must we look for other
help, namely: God letting go it that passes away thinking it to be
temporal, fading at the twinkling of an eye, and vanity that is in this
world. We have here no abiding thing, but must look about for the thing to
come, that endures for ever.

For this cause does God draw and pull us so from the creatures. And seeing he
is our true father, and bridegroom and husband, he can not (for he is strong
and ielous) abide that we set our hope, love or trust upon any creature. This
is the cause then that he does take us from them and carries us upon him
self. For look on what creature we have most hope, love and affection, that
will he soonest take out of our sight, if he does love us. And when he has
such jealousy upon us, then does he most chiefly declare his love toward us.

By this also it comes, that Christ Math. 18. forbids us to call any man
father upon earth, for we have only one father in heaven, namely GOD, which
will not, nor can suffer us to call or to have any man upon earth father: and
that because we should depend and hang only upon him, looking for all good of
him. For he will be the same that we may surely trust unto: seeing he cannot nor
will fail us, and that because he is no earthly but an heavenly father. For
this cause then is that man blessed and happy, that puts his trust, hope
and confidence in the Lord, as the Prophet says.

Finally, if when nature fulfilleth her course, man has but continual
travail and misery, and after that this course of nature is ended and at
rest, man is eased of so great travail: we seem to hate rather then to love
them that be departed, if we would wish them to be in this wretched world
again. Moreover in making so much of our friends departed, and setting so
great affection upon them, wishing Gods work not to be fulfilled upon them:
we blame God in his will and working, as though he knew not better what were
best both for them and us than we.

Let us therefore set our will in Gods will, and suffer him to work at his
pleasure. For he knows best what is both our friends, and our souls health.

A Psalm to be said in the time of sickness or any other adversities.
O Come let us humble our selves, and fall down before the Lord with
reverence and fear.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

Come therefore, let us turn again unto our Lord, for he has smitten us, and
he shall heal us.

Let us repent and turn from our wickedness: And our sins shall be forgiven
us.

Let us turn, and the Lord will turn from his heavy wrath, and will pardon
us, and we shall not perrish.

For we acknowledge our faults; and our sins be ever before us.

We have sore provoked thine anger, O Lord: thy wrath is waxed hot, and thy
heavy displeasure is sore kindled against us.

Thou have in thine indignation stricke^ us with grieuoussicknes: and by and by
we have fallen as leaves beaten down with a vehement wind.

Indeed we acknowledge, that all punishments are less then our deseruings:
But yet of thy mercy* Lord correct us to amendment, and plague us not to our
destruction.

For thy hand is not shortened, that thou can not help: neither is thy
goodness abated, that thou will not hear.

Thou have promised, O Lord, that before we cry thou will hear us: whilst we
yet speak, thou will have mercy upon us.

For none that trust in thee shall be confounded: neither any that call upon
thee shall be despised.

For thou art the only Lord, who woundest, and do heal again, who killest,
and reuiuest, bring even to hell, and bring back again.

Our fathers hoped in thee: they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver
them.

They called upon thee, and were helped: they put their trust in thee, and were
not consounded.

O Lord, rebuke us not in thine indignation: neither chaste^ us in thy heavy
displeasure.

O remember not the sins and offenses of our youth: but according to thy
mercy think thou upon us, O Lord for thy goodness.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord heal us, for our bones
are vexed.

And now in the vexation of our spirits, and the anguish of our souls, we
remember thee, and we cry unto thee: hear Lord, and have mercy.

For thine own sake, and for thy holy names sake: in cline thine ear, and
hear, O merciful Lord.

For we do not power out our prayers before thy face, trusting in our own
righteousness, but in thy great and manifold mercies.

Wash us thoroughly from our wickedness and cleanse us from our sins.

Turn thy face from our sins: and put out all our misdeedes.

Make us clean hearts, O God: and renew a right spirit within us.

Help us, O God of our salvation: for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and
be merciful unto our sins for thy names sake.

So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever: and will always be showing forth thy praise, from generation to
generation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the son and to the holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end.

Amen.
A Prayer to be used at the visitation of the sick.
O Almighty Lord and heavenly Father, which have promised to hear our
requests, and the petitions of those that ask of thee in thy Son our Savior
Christ's Name, and have commanded us to pray one for another, we humbly
beseech thee through his precious death and bloodshedding, which is the only
atonement for our sins, to be merciful to this thy sick servant. Forgive
unto him his sins, O Lord: and increase in him such a lyuelie Faith, and
feeling of thy fatherly love toward him, that all pangues and pains of
sickness, be they never so extreme, may seem nothing but thy merciful and
loving calling from these worldly miseries, into the fellowship of thy holy
ones, whom the more thou louedst, the more they taste of afflictions, that
being thoroughly purged from the rust of sin, they might shine the more
gloriously in the kingdom of heaven.

Nevertheless, O merciful Lord, for that through our frailty we often doubt
whether in extreme pain we may feel our selves thy children, or thee our
angry Judge: whereby our Faith is wavering and sore displeasing unto thee: we
humbly pray thee (if it be thy holy will) to mitigate his torments, and make
steadfast and perfect his Faith, that he may with the more quiet mind and
assured confidence, cry, Abba Father in this life, and after, joyfully to
receive the crown which thou have prepared for them that continue unto the end.
The Lord perform all our petitions through Jesus Christ our Savior.

Thy mighty arm, O Lord, be still his defender: thy mercy and loving
kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son, his salvation: thy grace and holy
Spirit, his comfort and consolation, unto the end, and in the end. So-be-it.

Amen.

