ADELPHOAIA, OR THE WARS OF PROTESTANCY. Being a Treatise, wherein are laid
open the wonderful, and almost incredible DISSENTIONS of the Protestants among
themselves, in most (if not all) Articles of Protesta^cy: And this proved from
their own words and writings. Written by a Cath. Priest. WHEREUNTO IS
ADJOINED A brief Appendix, in which is proved; First, That the Ancient
Fathers, by the acknowledgments of the learned Protestants, taught our Cath.
and Roman Faith. Secondly, That the said Fathers have diverse advantages above
the Protestant Writers, for finding out the true sense of the Scripture.

I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, so every one shall fight
against his Brother, Isa. 19. M.DC.XXXVII.

TO THE LEARNED PROTESTANT WRITERS the Author of this Treatise wishes all
true Faith.
LEARNED MEN.

It may be, you will think strange, that I have selected you from all others,
to dedicate this small Treatise unto. I cannot expect your Patronage hereof,
in regard of the disparity of our Religions. My main Allectiue of this my
Dedication, is, Because You, being placed upon the stage of the Worlds Eye, and
most different from me in Faith and Religion, may by reading these few leaves,
perceive with what disease of Contrarieties in Faith, Protestancy (being your
own Religion) does labor: A most dangerous sickness, and such as in time,
through its violent Conuulsions, may threaten its own future dissolution.

Here you shall find, that the chiefest Protestants have with their Pens, made
infinite blots and blurs of Contradictions in their Writings: So certain it is,
that the high swelling River of Protestancy is fed with the different (or
rather most opposite) opinions of each Professor of it. Therefore I probably
assure my self (and the rather in regard of your presumed Integrity, Learning,
and other good Parts) that after your perusal of this Treatise, you will even
blush, in your own Brethrens behalf.

For, is it not strange, and deserving Admiration, to find men (otherwise
reputed most learned) to be so flexuous, variable, and of such fluctuating
judgments touching their doctrines, as that Andraeas Duditius (a literate
Protestant) does in these words following, euaporate forth his grief,
conceived through his own Brethrens dissentions? In Beza in Epist. Theolog.
epist. ad Dudit. page 5. relates these words of Duditius.
what Religion (says he) do they agree, who impugn the Roman Bishop? If you
examine all from the head to the foot, you shall almost find nothing affirmed
by one, which another will not affirm to be wicked etc. Their deuines do daily
differ from themselves etc. (menstruam fidem habent) coining a Monthly Faith.
Thus we see, how Duditius strikes his own Religion, even in its mayster-Veyne;
Who notwithstanding is called by Beza, Beza vbi supra, page 1.
Clarissimus and ornatissimus Vir, and saluted by him, by the name of vbi
supra, page 2.
Frater.

And the Learned Melancthon complayneth in like sort of this point, saying:
Quos The author of the Treatise entitled; A mirror for Martinists, printed,
1590. page 24. relates these words, as spoken by Melancthon.
fugiamus, habemus, (meaning the Papists,) sed quos sequamur, non intelligimus.
In so much as he further writes in one of his Books: Nulla Melancthon in
Council. Theolog. part. 1. page 149.
res aque deterret homines ab Euangelio, ac nostra discordia. Thus (Learned
Men) you see, that the Sphere of Protestancy (even in the judgment of its own
Mathematicians) turns upon the Poles of Dissension in doctrine.

I presume, that you have made great progress, not only in the study of
Divinity, but also in humane Learning, and Philosophy. Call then to
remembrance, How God in his Creation of the World, and the parts thereof, may
seem even zealously to affect Unity and Concordancy Non 1. Cor. 14.
est dissentionis Deus, fed Facis For first, do we not see, how the several
Spheres in Heaven, in their continual rotation and moving (both in respect of
Primum Mobile, as also of their peculiar Motions) do, notwithstanding the
diversity of them, still move without any hindrance, or crossing one of
another Motions, in that sweet temper, as that some of the Philosophers did
ascribe a pleasing and Musical Harmony to such their Motions?

In like sort, to contemplate upon the Elements. How has that supreme Workman
made them to conspire and agree together, through force of their symbolizing
qualities? In so much, as by this means there is a Transelementation among
them, one turning it self into another. Again, how wonderfully (by the hand
of the same Divine Providence) do the Inferior Causes in Nature humble (as it
were) and subject themselves to the Higher Causes, without the least
Reluctation or Contradiction? In the proportion of Man's body, and the Faculties
thereof, what Miracles of Unity and Concordancy are found; one member thereof
becoming serviceable to another; and all of them Uniting the forces (without
any mutiny, as I may say) for the keeping of the whole Body in a grateful
repose of Health?

If then God, who has created all things in Numero, Pondere, and Mensura; Who
is ever working, yet ever quiet; more radiant and shyning in his Works, then
all Light; more high, then all sublimity; and yet more low, then any depth:
Being above all, in governing of things; Underneath all, in supporting of
things: Finally internal in all things, by his penetration; external to all
things, by his comprehending them within his large Circumference: If then (I
say) this most wise Intelligence, or Spirit (Spiritus Joan. 4.
est Deus) be so sollicitous in the structure and manner of creating, and
preserving of things created, and this with a most stupendous and conspiring
Symmetry, Proportion, and Consonancy, not brooking in them the least jar of
Division; how can it be thought, that he would institute a Religion for the
saving of Man's Soul (for whom all other things are created) which consists
of such Heterogenious and different doctrines (as Protestancy is found to be,)
exhaling and breathing nothing, but Enormity in Manners, Simulties,
Oppositions, and manifest Contradictions in Faith; the Professors thereof
tearing asunder each others reputation and honor, with their violent
Philippicks, and declamatory Satyrs? It is not probable; It is not credible; It
is not possible. The true Church of Christ is charactred in sacred Writ, with
the stamp of Unity; and therefore it is styled: Joan. 20.
One sheepfould, Romans 1^.
One Body, Cant. 6.
One Spouse.

These things then (Worthy Men) being thus explorate, and evident, let not the
fruition of temporal Preferments and Opulency of state; neither the Applause
of Men, (being but a poor wyndy purchase of Air) nor any other humane and
transitory Respects (since all these are but glorious and gilded Miseries)
seele up your Judgment and Will, from acknowledging, and practizing the truth
of Religion. Matthew. 10.
Quid prodest homini, si vniuersum mundum lacretur, Animae vero suae
detrimentum patiatur?

O remember, That every thing is short which is measured with the yard of Time,
and Eternity only long. Strive therefore in a Christian contempt of
Temporalities, to say, in zeal of spirit, with S. Austin: Fecisti L. 1.
Confess. c. 1.
nos Domine ad te; and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec requiescat in te: And
assure your selves, that what thing soever is (as I may say) out of God, soon
breeds a fastidious saciety: (...).

Thus forbearing further surplusage of Words, I commit you to his Holy
Protection, of whom (through the boundles sea of his Mercy) it is said: If any
Apocalyp. ^.
Man will hear his voice, and open the Gate, he will come into him, and suppe
with him. I beseech his Divine Majesty, that you may auayleably interest your
selves in this most comfortable Inuitation.

Yours in all Christian Love and Charity. B. C.

Aduertisment to the Reader.
THIS Treatise is entitled, Adelphomachia; which Greek Word signifies, A
fight among Brethren: because it shows the DISSENTIONS among the Protestants
themselves, touching matter of Faith and Religion. All which Protestants,
whether they be Lutherans, Swinglians, or Caluinists (which are comprehended
under the name of Swinglians) do hold one another for Brethren. For Doctor
Whitaker, in respons. ad rations Campiani, rat. 8. thus confesses of this
Point: We willingly honor Luther, for our Father; and the Lutherans, and the
Swinglians, as our most dear Brethren in Christ.

A TABLE OF Such disagreements of the Protestants, in matter of Faith and
Religion, as are handled, and set down in the ensuing Treatise.
. 1. THe Contentions, delivered in most contumetious Words, of one Protestant
against another Protestant; And first of the Lutherans against the
Sacramentaries, or Swinglians, and Caluinists. Secondly, of the Swinglians or
Caluinists, against the Lutherans. Thirdly, of the Lutherans among themselves.
Fourthly, the Caluinists among themselves. Fyftly, The Puritans against the
moderate Protestants. Sixthly, the Moderate Protestants against the Puritans:
Within which Clause, are comprehended the English moderate Protestants, and the
English Puritans.. 2. The most splenefull Titles (full of malignity) of twenty
Books, made by Protestants, against other Protestants, their Brethren.. 3.
Touching other external Comportment of the Protestants among themselves. And
first the prohibiting of the Sale and Reading of each others Books. 2. The
banishing of each other from their Territories. 3. The appointing of Articles of
Visitation and enquiry, concerning the discovery and apprehending of each other.
4. Their committing of each other to Prison 5. The entering into open Arms of
one Party, against another. 6. The inhumane deportment of some Protestants,
against the dead Bodies of other Protestants. All which several kinds of
Violent Proceedings are only for matter of Religion, among the Protestants.. 4
Disagreements touching the Scripture. First what Books be Scripture, what not.
2. Touching the Translation of acknowledged Scripture, either in Latin, or in
English. 3. Touching the supposed easiness, or difficulty of the sense of the
Scripture.. 5. The English Protestant disagreements, touching their Communion
Book of Prayer.. 6. The Protestants disagreements, touching Christ. First,
touching the Nature of Christ. 2. Whether Christ did merit any thing for
himself, or not? 3. According to what Nature, Christ suffered? 4. Whether
Christ dyed for all the World, or but for the Elect only? 5. Whether Heathens
not believing in Christ, can be saved?. 7. Disagreements, touching the Primacy
of Peter, and his successors.. 8. Whether the Pope be Antichrist or not? 2.
Supposing him to be Antichrist, at what time Antichrist did come?. 9.
Disagreements, touching the Church. First, whether the Protestant Church has
ever been Visible? 2. Whether in the Protestant Church, there ever has been
a Perpetual Succession, and Vocation of Ministers? 3. Who be the Persons, that
constitute the Protestant Church? 4. Whether Papists (dying Papists) and
members of the present Roman Church, can be saved?. 10. Disagreements, Whether
the Ancient Fathers of the Primative Church, are to be admitted, or rejected?.
11. Whether the Authority of General Counsels are to be admitted, or
rejected?. 12. Whether there be any Apostolical Traditions, or not?. 13.
Disagreements touching the Sacraments. First, of the number of the Sacraments.
2. Whether the known intention of the Church be necessary to the
Administration of the Sacraments? 3. Whether any of the Sacraments do imprint
any indeleble Character, in the Receauers of them? 4. Whether the Sacraments do
only signify, or withal confer, Grace?. 14. Baptism in particular. First,
Whether Baptism be absolutely Necessary, or not? 2. Whether any particular
form of Words be necessary in Baptizing, or not? 3. Whether Lay Persons, and
Women in time of Necessity may administer Baptism?. 15. Disagreemen^^ whether
Man has Freewill, or not?. 16. Disagreements, touching the doctrine of
certainty of Reprobation, of Predestination, and of the certainty of
Justification.. 17. Disagreements, touching the doctrine of good Works. First,
Whether good Works do merit, or not; or at least be necessary to salvation? 2.
Whether Perpetual Chastity, Fasting, and Poverty be gratfull, and pleasing to
God, or not? 3. Whether Vows be now lawful in these times of Christianity?.
18. Disagreements, touching the doctrine of Sin First, What Sin is in its
own Nature? 2. Touching the distinction of Venial and Mortal sin. 3.
Whether all sins be equa^l or not? 4. Whether sin be hurtful to him that
belieueth? 5. Whether God be the Author of sin?. 19. Disagreements, Whether
Absolute Princes and Magistrates ought to be now in the time of the Gospel;
and how their Authority may be resisted?. 20. Disagreements touching Polygamy.
First, whether a Man may have many Wives at one time? 2. Touching divorce, and
the Occasions thereof.. 21. Other disagreements of Protestants, touching twenty
Catholic Points (besides those above entreated of,) which points some
Protestants believe as true; others reject them, as false: The point are these
following 1. Touching Christ's descending into Hell, presently after his
Corporal death. 2. Touching ^^bus Patrum. 3. Touching (...) ^cession of Saints.
4. Touching intercession of Angels. 5. Touching Invocation of Saints. 6.
Touching Prayer for the dead. 7. Touching the Possibility of the Ten
Commandments. 8. Touching the Patronage of certain Angels, over certain
Countries. 9. Touching Images to be in the Churches. 10. Touching reverence and
bowing down to the Name of JESUS. 11. Whether the good Works of one may help
another? 12. Whether Christ, as Man, was from his Nativity freed from
Ignorance? 13. Touching Evangelical Counsels, or Works of Supererogation. 14.
Whether it can be known to us, without the Churches Tradition, What Scriptures
be Canonical, what not? 15. Whether Jnfants have actual Faith, in the time of
their Baptising? 16. Whether the Sacraments of the Old Testament, be of equal
force and virtue, with the Sacraments of the New Testament? 17. Touching
Auricular Confession. 18. Whether temporal Punishment be reserved for sin,
already remitted? 19. Whether the Visible Church of God can wholly err, or
not? 20. Whether set times of fasting from certain meats, be appointed only
for Polytick order; but with all for spiritual Considerations?
. 22. Besides the former disagreements, touching the twenty Catholic Articles
above recited. There are certain Catholic Points, maintained by diverse
Protestants, to be of that indifferency of Nature, as that the believing, or
not believing of them, it not in any sort necessarily to be exacted, through
any danger to the party believing them, or not believing them; The belief of
which Points in particular other Protestants do hold, as most impious,
superstitious, and not standing with the Salvation of the party believing them.
The Articles are these following. 1. Touching the Belief of Praying to
Saints. 2. Touching the belief of the Real. Presence. 3. Touching receiving
under Both, or One kind only. 4. Concerning Freewill. 5. Concerning the
Indifferency of honoring the Relics of Saints. 6. Touching our B. Lady being
preserved from Original sin. 7. Touching Satisfaction, and Merit of Works.
8. Concerning the Popes Primacy. 9. Touching the Indifferency of Private Mass.
10. Touching not only the Indifferency of Private Mass, but of several other
Catholic Points, so jointly maintained in the Protestant Writings.
. 23. Now to all these former disagreements among the Protestants, are adjoined
certain Porismata, or Resultancyes, ineuitably rising from a true
Consideration of diverse of the said dissentions and Disagreements.
THE PREFACE Wherein, First, are discovered the several sleights used by
Protestants, to charge the Church of Rome with Dissentions in doctrine.
Secondly, it is proved, that the Necessity of Unity in Faith, ought to be in
the Church of Christ.
-- HORRENTIA Martis Arma Virumque cano. -- Undertaking to record the
unnatural, and blouddy Wars, which the Protestant wageth against the
Protestant in matter of Faith; And intending in this Ensuing discourse, to
dismantle, and lay open to the view of all, the naked state of Protestancy, so
far forth, as it concerns its want of Unity, and the immortal Dissentions
among the Professors thereof; and further well remembering, that our
Adversaries (through their Serpentine calumny of some among them) are ever
ready pressed (by way of Recrimination) to obtrude, though most wrongfully, the
like dissentions upon us Catholics: Therefore I have thought good in the front
hereof, to remove such Replies, and surprise all Objections, by prevention, as
may seem to fix upon the Catholics that blemish or Scar, wherewith Protestancy
lies here justly chargeable. I herein imitating the proceeding of a careful
General in the Wars, who first labors to preclude and forestall the Enemy of
all Passages and Ways, whereby the approach of his forces might endanger him;
and then draws out his own Troops for the assaulting of his said Enemy. Well
then, to the point.

1. First we are to observe (which the yawning and heedles Reader perhaps will
not espy) that in doctrines, there are to be considered two things (as Beza
Beza ^n Epist. Theolog. Epist. 18. says: (...) explicandum sempe^; (...),
nunquam nisi sobrie and prudenter attingen^um.
well notes,) to wit, The (...), and the (...). The (...), signifying a
Categoricall or Positive assertion, that such a thing is true in doctrine, has
ever reference to the Conclusion: As for example, That Saints in Heaven do
hear us. The (...), has respect only to the Manner, or some other
Circumstance of the Conclusion; As whether the Saints do hear us, by
behoulding all things intuitiuely in God, in whom they see all things: Or that
they hear our Prayers, through their celerity and incredible speedines of the
Motion of their souls, who in the smallest time are able to descend, and
ascend from Heaven to earth. This (...), or Conclusion in Faith, is that, in
which all Catholics (continuing Catholics) do unanimously agree. But touching
the, (...), or manner of such a point or Conclusion, they dissent sometimes
among themselves: Because the manner of a point in doctrine is (for the most
part) of that Adiaphorous, and indifferent Nature, as that several learned Men
may teach severally touching the said Manner, without any breach of Faith. And
we are thus warned from being ouercurious and searching into the Manner of the
Conclusion by an ancient Father, who says: Nazianze^^ Orat 1. (...) Theologia.
(...). And thus accordingly hereto, all Men are obliged to believe all decreed
Articles of Faith; yet not ever to believe the particular Manner, or Reason
thereof: Which manner being a Point but of Indifferency, is often reduced for
trial, to some Scholasticall subtilty or apprehension.

2. I am to aduertize the Reader, that whereas there is Question Juris, and
Question Facti; we are here to observe, that matter of Fact (but not matter of
Faith) may be controuerted among Deuines, without any want of Unity in
doctrine; because the Sentences and determinations passed upon matter of Fact,
may and ought to be altered, upon later and better Informations, touching the
matter of Fact. And in this sense and upon this Occasion, were alterable the
Decrees (objected against us by some Protestants) of Pope Formosas, by Pope
Steven the 6. and Pope Sergius the 3. Which decrees were after confirmed again
by Pope Romanus, Theodorus 2. and John 10. Now the reason of altering the said
decrees originally proceeded from matter of Fact; to wit, whether Formosus was
truly and Canonically elected Pope (and consequently had full power to make
those decrees) or was but only a schismatic Pope. And thus these other Popes
maintained several Opinions, touching his Election, being but matter of Fact,
and according to their different judgments therein, did abrogate or confirm
the decrees of the said Formosus.

3. A Third Observation may here be taken from the authority of S. Austin,
thus writing: Sometimes S. Austin, l. de Baptismo Contra Julian. Telag. l. 1.
c. 2.
the most learned and best defenders of the Catholic Rule, do without breaking
the Frame of Faith, not accord. And more: Diverse August. de Baptism. contra
Donat l. ^^. c. 18.
men be of diverse judgments without breach of Peace, until a General Council
allow some one part for clear and pure. Thus according hereto we are
instructed, that if any doubt of Points concerning Faith and Religion, do occur
and rise (never before determined by the Authority of Gods Church) Christians
may maintain different Opinions, touching the same Points, until the Voice of
Gods Church has definitiuely and sententionally decreed the said Points one
only way. And according to this Caution, the Controversy houlden between the
Thomists and Scotists, concerning the Conception of our Blessed Lady (much
insisted upon against us by our Adversaries) may be houlden without any
violence to Unity in Faith; seeing this Controversy is not yet determined and
defined by the Church. Of which Controversy D. Field thus says: Touching D.
Field. l. 2 ^f the Church. ^. 9. page 58.
Contradictory Opinions, some were named Thomists, other Scotists in
Controuersyes of Religion, not yet determined by consent of the Universal
Church: So idly and impertinently do the Protestants diuerberate the air, in
vpbrayding the Catholics with this Controversy, touching the Conception of our
B. Lady.

4. Another Observation, of which I think good to advertise the Reader,
concerns certain forlorn and broken Men (yet competently learned) who once
were Catholics, but after did apostate from the Catholic Church, by
entertayning some one or other Opinion of Nouelism, condemned by the said
Church; With every one of which we may well expostulate in the Dialect of
Josue: Noster Iosu^ c. 5.
es an Aduersariorum? yet before their deaths, most of them abandoned, their
said Innouations, and so by their final submission they dyed Members of our
Catholic Church: Such were these few following, Erasmus, Berengarius Aeneas
Siluius, Polidor Virgil, Laurentius Valla; Wicelius, Cassander, and one or two
other Pseudo-Catholiks; out of all which Doctor Morton In his ^^olog. Catho^.
is not ashamed to urge that they (being Papists) are divided in doctrine among
themselves. Now to this I answer. This Objection is of no force, because the
former Men did maintain but some one or other Point against the Church,
comparting and interleaging in all the rest with the Catholics: But after, the
most part of them relinquishing their former Errors, dyed Catholics; and in
regard of their submission before their deaths to the Church of Rome (and not
otherwise) they are accounted Catholics. Secondly, I say, that whiles these
former Men did persist in their Nouelismes, during all that time, they were
condemned by the Church of Rome for Heretics; and therefore it cannot be urged,
that these Men were Papists, at that time of their dissenting from the
Universal Church; for by such their Schism, they were cut off from the
Catholic Church, and wholly rejected for members thereof. And I freely grant,
that a Catholic, or Papist (as we are opprobriously called) may become an
Heretic, by entertayning some Innouations; But then (I say) he cease to be a
Catholic, or Papist.

But the Case is far otherwise with the Protestants urged in this following
Treatise. For first the Protestants here produced (being incomparably far
greater in number, then the former named Sectaries) do not disagree in one, or
two, or three Points only of Protestancy among themselves; but they are
distracted almost in all points of Protestancy. Again, I say, the Protestants
by me urged, though reciprocally crossing one another (contrary to the state of
Berengarius Erasmus, and the rest above specified) yet during he same time of
maintayning their co^tradictory Opinions, do still remain Protestants; and
accordingly they are all promiscuously acknowledged, as good Members of the
Protestant Church: So great is the disparity between the former urged Authors
by D. Morton, and the Protestants hereafter by me alleged. That these
Protestants, whether they be Lutherans or Swinglians (under whom are
comprehended Caluinists) which I am to produce, notwithstanding their great
discrepancy and dissentions in Faith, do remain still Members of the
Protestant Church, appears from the judgment of D. Whitaker, who thus writes
to his Adversary Father Campian (happy Man, who pledged his blood for the faith
of Christ:) Quod In respons. ad rations Campiani rat. 8.
autem Lutheranos cum Swingliants coniungis etc. In that thou do conioyne,
and unite the Lutherans and the Swinglians together, thou do not offend us;
For we willingly honor Luther as our Father, and all them (meaning, the
Lutherans, Swinglians, and Caluinists) as our most dear brethren in Christ.
And according to this tenor D. Jewel affirms, saying: The In his Apolog. of
the Church of England. page 101.
Swinglians and Lutherans are good friends; they vary not among themselves,
upon the Principles and foundation of our Religion, but upon only one Question,
which is neither weighty nor great. And thus far of the transparency of the
former Objection, touching Berengarius, Erasmus etc.

Hitherto may be adjoined, that whereas the Protestants are hereafter charged
with great dissentions and inconstancy, touching their often altering their
Common Book of Prayer; D. Dove acknowledging so much, seeks to avoid this
blemish, by saying: The D. D^ne in his persuasion to English Recusants. page 11.
Papists have done the like etc. How many times have their Breuiaryes been
altered? But good Reader, see the great difference herein. The Protestants
altering their Communion Book, do withal alter some points of Belief and
doctrine; seeing the change of their Communion Book rests only in change of
doctrine; the later Communion Book ever rejecting certain Articles of Faith,
which the former did allow off. Now the altering of the Breuiaries consists
only in inserting certain prayers in the later, which were not in the former,
through occasion of Canonization of Saints, or some other urgent Cause: But
there is not any alteration, or change or Articles of Faith in their different
Breuiaries, which is the point only here to be insisted upon.

Now these Premonitions being before acknowledged for true, whereby are
prevented some weak Objections, of which diverse of our Adversaries have made
use, to seek to prove the Catholics disagreements in matter of Faith; it is
less strange that some of them have not forborne (such is the scarsity and
want of them) to allege This objection of different Orders in the Church of
Rome, is urged by D. Fulke in his answer to a Counterfeyte Catholic p. ^5. By
D. Jewel in his Apology of the Church of England. page ^^. and by others.
for matter of Controuersyes, that among the Papists, some are called
Franciscans, some Benedictines, others Augustines etc. These do sometimes eat
flesh, those other feed only upon fish, most idly and ignorantly insisted
upon. For what do these differences concern matter of Faith and Religion? Do
not all these several Orders of Gods Church believe all the Articles of our
Catholic and Roman Faith? They only differ among themselves in living in a
more strict, or remiss course of life. And this Answer is given by D. Field
in these Words: We must Of the Church. l. 2. c. 9. page 58.
observe, that they, who profess the Faith of Christ have been sometimes in
these later Ages of the Church, called after the special names of such Men, as
were the Authors, Beginners, and Deuisers of such courses of Monastical
Profession as they made choice to follow; as Benedictins, and such like. Thus
D. Field.

Therefore I conclude, that in regard of want of true Arguments in proof of
dissentions among Catholics, touching merely matters of Religion, I cannot but
much approve the ingenuous and plain Confessions of some of our Adversaries
here, in our be half. And fortably hereto we find D. Whitaker thus to
confess of this Point: The dissentions De Eccles. contra Bellarm. controuer.
2. q 5. page 327.
among the Papists, are but futiles, concerning things of small importance. And
D. Fulke agrees with him, saying: As for the Against Heskins, Sanders etc.
page 295.
consent, and peace of the Popish Church, it proves nothing, but that the
Devil had all things at his Will, and therefore might sleep: thus truly
acknowledging Unity in Faith in the Roman Church, but most maliciously
transferring the Cause thereof to him, who is the chief Enemy to Unity. But Sir
Edwin Sands (a most remarkable Protestant) does not only acknowledge all war of
dissension in our Catholic Church; but also gives his reason thereof in these
Words: The Papists In his Relation. fol. 8.
have the Pope, as a common Father, Aduiser, and Conductour to reconcile their
iarres, to decide their differences, to draw their Religion, by consent of
Counsels, to Unity etc. To whose Judgment herein subscribeth Andraeas Duditius
the Protestant above mentioned, in the Epistle Dedicatory) who thus writes:
The Roman Beza reports these words of Duditius, in his Epist. Theolog. Epist.
ad Duditium.
Church is not divided with so many Diss^ntions, but it has the plausible
appearance of Venerable Antiquity, Ordinary Succession, and Perpetual Consent.
Thus Duditius. And thus far by way of Prevention of all such Arguments, as
the Protestant Writers may seem to urge, thereby to make their Ignorant
followers believe, that the Catholics do labor with one and the same disease
with themselves, touching disagreements in points of Faith, and Religion.

Only before I pass further, I think good to relate that ordinary and common
refuge, and tergiuersation, which diverse Protestants of England being vpbrayded
with disagreements in Faith among themselves, are accustomed to fly unto, who
thus reason: I am an English Protestant, I little regard, how foreign
Protestants disagree among themselves; I am content to range my self under our
English learned Protestants; who I am assured, maintain the Truth of Faith
without any contradiction, or dissension among themselves. Now because this
point requires a large and full Answer, therefore as willing to contract this
Preface in as few words, as conveniently I may, I refer the Reader for his full
satisfaction herein to the latter end of this ensuing Treatise, viz. at 22.
Paragraph, where he shall see the Vanity of this silly evasion, fully laid
open and answered. Before I come to any other Passages of this Preface, I hold
it not amiss to relate (for the benefit of others) what happened touching
these former Points to my self. In my being in Spain, a Chaplayne of the
English Ambassadors there resyding, (being my former familiar acquaintance in
England) oftentimes came to the place where I there studied; and did much
solicit and diswade me, from entering into Holy Orders (for then I was not
Priest.) His chiefest argument by him alleged, was taken out of D. Mortons
Apologia Catholica, (which book it seems, he had studied di^igently) touching
the dissentions in doctrine of some few broken Catholics above alleged, as,
Erasmus* Nilus, Cassander etc. as also from the dissension of the Thomists and
Scotists, touching the Conception of our B. Lady; the Chaplain much urging and
inferring, that our Catholic Religion, as wanting Unity in doctrine in the
Professors thereof, could not be true. This his Argument for a time (I grant)
seemed very strong to me (I then being but young, and not conversant in the
Protestants own books, thereby to discern their dissentions in doctrine) and
did cause me to defer my taking of Priesthood, a year or more longer, then
before I was determined to have done.

But after acquainting others of my daily familiars (much read in the
Protestants Writings) with this my doubt; they fully resolved, and satisfied me
touching those Pseudo. Catholics; to wit, what kind of Men they were, and how,
and upon what grounds they for the time, dissented from the then Common
doctrine of the Catholic Church: As also I was then informed how the Question
of the immaculate Conception of the B. Virgin, was not defined on either side
by the Church; and that therefore it was lawful (without any breach of Unity)
to maintain either part. Upon whose learned Resolution all my former doubt
instantly vanished away. And indeed this Accident first be got a desire in me,
to look into the Protestants Works more fully, to see, whether they had thy
disagreements in Faith among them: So forcible (we see) the Argument drawn
from want of Unity in Faith (though but indirectly, and with mistaking, urged)
seems to prove that Religion, which wants Unity in Faith and doctrine,
cannot be the true Religion, instituted by our Savior, Jesus Christ. But to
recall my self, and to proceed further.

In the next place of this my Preface, I will demonstrate the absolute
necessity of Union, touching Matters of Faith in the Church of God; it being an
acknowledged and inseparable Mark thereof:) and how incompatible, dissentions,
and Errors in Faith, are with the said true Church: Adulterari August. lib. de
Vnitate Ecclesia.
non potest sponsa Christi; Incorrupta est, and pudica. This I will euict both
from humane and divine Authorities: and will begin with humane proofs, and so
ascend in weight of proofs, to the divine Scriptures.

And first I will allege some testimonies of Protestants themselves: For do we
not find Luther thus to teach? A Kingdom Luther. tom. 3. Witten. berg. in
Psalm. 5. fol. 166.
divided in it self shall not stand; Neither have any Heretics at any time
been overcome by force or Subtilty, but by mutual dissension: Neither does
Christ fight with them otherwise, then with a spirit of giddiness and
disagreement. And more, The Authors Luth. tom. 5. Witten. berg. in Galat. c.
5. fol. 416.
of Schisms are disagreeing among themselves etc. They byte and deuours one
another etc. till at the last they perish etc. O see, how truly his own Words
do recoyle upon himself.

The Like want of this Unity in doctrine, do the Deuines of Manifold urge (as a
Mark of a false Church) against the Sacramentaries, to impugn their doctrine;
those deuines thus writing: We have Theologi Mansfeldenses in Confessione.
Mansfeldica Latina. fol. 110.
just reason to hold in suspicion the doctrine of the Sacramentaries, in that
they are not concordant in one, and the same sentence, or judgment; but are
among themselves divided: so as some of them are called Carolostadians, others
Swinglians, Occolampadians, Caluinists etc. And the same kind of argument is
used by the Deuines of Heidelberge (all Protestants) against the Anabaptists,
thus urging. Si Pro^ocollo Frankaltalensi n^ Praefatad Anabaptistas.
vobis Ecclesiae titulum concedere vellemus etc. If we would grant to you the
name of a Church, what Sect among you, should be reputed the Church of God,
seeing you are divided into so many Sects?

To come, in this next place, to the Authoriries of the ancient Fathers; Whose
Pens were ever employed against every then new arising Doctrine, not bearing
Unity to the Faith of Gods Universal Church; we find S. Athanasius thus to
Write: Jllud Orat. 1. contra Arianos.
quoque prorsus admirabile etc. This also is very wonderful, that all
Heresies, in coining diverse things, do differ in themselves, and do jointly
agree in defense of falsehood. S. Chrysostom sharpeneth his pen in this sort,
against the Enemies of Unity in Faith: Omnes Infideles Opera imperfect. in
Math. hom. 20.
qui sub diabolo sunt etc. All such Infidells, or Misbelieuers, which are in
the power of the Devil, are not united, but are divided through diversity of
Opinions: And such is the want of Faith among Heretics, who never agree in one
consent of Things; but maintain as several Opinions, as themselves are
several in number. Thus S. Chrysostom. S. Hilarious in this sort pensilleth
out the face, and countenance of disagreing Heretics: L. 7. d^ Trinitate.
Haeretici omnes contra Ecclesiam veniunt etc. All Heretics do assault the
Church; But whiles Heretics do mutually overcome one another, they overcome
nothing therein; since their Victory, when one Heresy does even fight against
another, is finally become the Triu^ph of the Church. Tertullian L. de
Praescription. aduersus Haeres. 41.
writes of this point in this manner: Inspectae Haereses omnes etc. All
Heresies (being truly looked into) are deprehended to dissent in many things,
even with thi^ own Authors.

I will conclude with Irenaeus: Videmus L. 1. c. 5. in initio.
nunc and little inconstantem sententiam etc. We now see their inconstant
judgment, who, if they be but two or three in number, how diversely they teach
the same things. And further the said Father: Durum Vbi supra. c. 1^.
est omnium describere sententias etc. It is a difficult thing, to set down
the different Sentences of all Heretics. For greater breuity of this point, I
refer the Reader to the testimonies of S. Jerome In Math. ^4.
, S. Austin Contra Epist Parmenian. l. 3. c. 4.
, S. Ambrose L. de fide, ad Gratianum. c. ^.
, and the Council of In de cretis Synod. Ni^e nae contra Haeres^m Arianam.
Nyce. And thus far touching the Fathers herein.

Now, in this last place, to ascend to the sacred Authorities of Gods Word,
which are the stamps, sealing up the Truth of all the former Humane
Authorities; which testimonies I reserve hitherto, wherewith to close yp the
Judgment of the Reader herein. And first to show the Vglines of Dissension, we
read: Luc. 11.
Every Kingdom divided in it self, shall perish. And upon this ground the
Prophet thus prays. Destroy, Psalm. ^5.
O Lord, and divide their Tongues; implying hereby, that their divided Tongues
in judgment, shall occasion their destruction. And another Prophet in further
proof of this point, thus has left recorded: Their Ose. ^0.
Heart is divided, they shall now perish. And the Wiseman instructs us in
these Words: God Proverb. 6.
hates him, that raises up Contentions among Brethren. All which Scripturall
Authorities as they show the malice and wickedness of Disunion and Dissension in
general; so they implicitly, and potentially prove, that Want of Unity in
Doctrine, cannot stand with true Faith. Therefore the more reason had the
Apostle S. Paul to use this his feruerous admonition to the Christians of his
time, saying: I beseech 1. Cor. 1.
you Brethren, that there be no dissentions among you: Not forsaking Hebr. 10.
the fellowship, which we have among our selves. Neither is the Apostle less
slow in recommending the Virtue of Unity in express words (though this be
coincident with the former;) for thus he instructs his followers: I beseech
1. Cor. 1.
you, that you all speak one thing; be you knit together in one mind, and one
judgment: Ephesians. 4.
Endeavoring to keep the Unity of spirit in the band of peace. God is the God,
1. Cor. 14.
not of division, but of Peace. And according hereto we read, that our Savior
prayed for the Members of his Church, that they may be One Joan. 17.
. And to conclude according to this his prayer, it is recorded, that the
Multitude of them, which believed, were Act. 4.
of One Heart, and One Soul; so luxuriant and abounding we find the sacred
Scriptures to be, ^or the extirpation of all Dissension and Di^ision out of the
society of Christians, and ^or the entertayning of Unity among them, in all
Matters of Religion.

Now then having thus demonstrated the Necessity of Union in matters of Faith,
both from divine and humane Authorities; and withal having in the beginning
above (as it were) beset all ways and passages, by which our Adversaries might
in a vulgar judgment, seem to assault us, by their pretense of some weak and
feeble Reasons, Szegedin. (the Protestant) in loc. om. page 1^4. thus says:
Unity, one of the Notes of the Church.
for proof of Division in Faith to be in our Catholic Church: it remains,
that we hasten to show, whether Unity in Faith (as being a Mark of the true
Church, even by the judgment of Protestants themselves) can be found in
Protestancy; Or in place thereof implacable and irreconcilable Disagreements
and Wars: A most foul scarre or moale, to remain upon the Faith of the
supposed Chief Professors of the Gospel: So indisputably true it is, that
Protestancy lies exposed, or rather becomes thrall to all Fluctuation and
Inconstancy in doctrine. And with this (I say) I will hasten to present to the
sight of the Reader, that face, which is engendered of so many Contradictions in
Faith; and I will be content (for the time) to become the Protestants Herald,
in blasing the Arms of their Contentions. So shall the Reader withal
discern, that the Protestants Pens are ever pressed, and ready to discharge upon
their own Brethren (for matter of Faith and Religion) even whole Volleys of
shot, of most reproachful Words, and intemperate Language.

ADELPHOAIA, OR THE WARS OF PROTESTANCY.
The I. Paragraph.
BEFORE we enter into the distentions of the Protestants, touching particular
Doctrines, severally maintained by several sides of them; I will first lay
open with what kind, and brotherly language one Sect of them (and yet all good
Protestants) does entertayne another. Now this Discors Concordia, this
disagreeing Harmony of theirs consists of many parts: To wit, First, of the
Lutherans against the Sacramentaries, I mean the Swinglians and Caluinists;
then reciprocally of the Caluinists against the Lutherans. Secondly, The
Lutherans among themselves. Thirdly, The Caluinists among them selves.
Fourthly, The Moderate Protestant against the Puritan and the Puritan against
the Moderate Protestant; within which Clause are comprehended the E^g^^sh
Moderate Protestants, and the English Puritans.

1 And to begin. Luther the first Parent of Protestancy, thus disgo^geth hi^
venom against his own brood (for the Swinglians and Caluinists primitiuely
descended from his loins. We These. ^1. contra Louaniens.
seriously judge the Swinglians and Sacramentari^s to be Heretics, and Aliens
from the Church of God. And more: We will Luth. tom. 7. in defens. Verbor.
Coena Domini fol. 38^.
reprove and condemn them (meaning the Sacramentaries) for Idolaters,
Corrupters of Gods word, blasphemers, and deceivers; And of them, as of the
Enemies of the Gospel, we will sustain persecution, and spoil of our goods
etc. And yet more; The-Sacramentaries began their Opinion with Lies, and with
Lies they defend it. And further: Luth. Epist. ad Joan. Heruag. Typograph.
Argentin.
I do protest Luth. tom. 7. Wittenb. fol. 383.
before God and the world, that I do not agree with them (meaning the
Swinglians) nor ever will, whiles the world stands, but will have my hand
clear from the blood of those sheep, which these Heretics do drive from
Christ deceive, and kill etc. And after in the same place: Cursed Vbi supra.
be the Charity and Concord of Sacramentaries, for ever, and ever, to all
Eternity. And to conclude, Luther being (as he thought) near to his grave,
leaves (as his Legacy) these ensuing charitable words: I having Luth. de Coena
Domin. tom. 2.
now one of my feet in the grave, will carry this testimony and glory to the
Tribunal of God; that I will with all my heart, condemn and eschew
Carolostactius, Swinglius, Decolampadius, and their scholars; German. fol.
174. which words are also reported of Luther by the Tigur. Deuines. tract. 3.
fol. 108.
nor will have with any of them Familiarity neither by letters or writings,
neither by word, or Deed, as the Lord has Commanded.

Thus much, to let pass much more of Luthers Charity toward Swinglius and his
party. And this his Charity toward the Sacramentaries, the Lutherans, being of
the next descent from him, seem to inherit; for Brentius (the Lutheran) thus
writes: All the In recognit. Prophet.
Swinglian works are full of deprauations, cunning deceits, and slanders:
Westphalus (a Lutheran) thus auerreth: All Apolog. contra Caluinum. p 430. c.
1^.
the Caluinian Works are stuffed with taunts, curses, and lies, he further
maintayning in the same place, That there are certain pages of Caluins Works,
of which every one contains at least twenty lies and taunts. Hunnius (the
eminent Lutheran) charge Calvin, that he In his Epist. Dedicat. to the
Confutation of Caluins deprauat.
wresteth the Scriptures horribly from their true sense, to the overthrow of
himself, and others. Conradus Schlusselburg the Lutheran: The Caluinists In
Prafati Theolog. Caluinist.
do nourish Arian and Turkish Impieties in their hearts, which does not seldom,
at fit times, openly disclose it self.

To Conclude, Luke Osiander thus blaseth the Caluinists, concerning certain
Assertions touching Christ: But here (Gentle Enchirid. contra Calu. cap. 7.
Reader) beyond, and above the blasphemous things, which in the discourse before
we have heard, against the son of God, out of the Opinions of our Adversaries
(the Caluinists) there opens it self a gulf of Hell of Caluinian Doctrine,
in which God it said to be the Author of sin etc. Stankarus Stankarus contr^
Caluinum. 14.
(a Lutheran) thus writes to Calvin: What Devil (O Calvin) has seduced thee,
to speak with Arius, against the son of God? And again he thus says:
Beware (O Christian Reader) and especially all you Ministers, beware of the
Books of Calvin, and principally in the Articles of the Trinity, Incarnation,
Mediator, the Sacrament of Baptism. Thus far for some taste of Luther, and the
Lutherans Deportments in words and writing against the Swinglians,
Sacramentarians, and the Caluinists. Now let us see, with what Retaliation of
kindness do the Sacramentaries, or Caluinists requite the Lutherans.

2. First, then we find, that Swinglius thus inueighs against Luther: Thou In
Respons. ad Luther. l. de Sacrament. fol. 401.
Luther shall be enforced either to deny the whole Scriptures of the New
Testament, or to acknowledge Marcions Heresy. And in the same place he thus
further writes: En, vt totum istum hominem Satan occupare conetur: Behold, how
the Devil laboreth wholly to possess this Man, meaning Luther. Again,
Swinglius through contempt, calls Luther, Marcion Swingl. tom. 2. in respons.
ad Luther. Confess. fol. 458. and 40^.
the old Heretic; and further concludes in these words; to wit, that Luther
is guilty of high blasphemy against the Nature and essence of God, in that he
taught, that Christ dyed according to his Divinity. And Swinglius in the
foresaid alleged place thus: This can be by no reason explayned, or excused;
for Luther clearly and manifestly confesses, that he will not acknowledge
Christ to be his Savior, if only his Humanity had suffered. Finally, Swinglius
thus concludes of Luthers words: In verbis Swinglius tom. 2. in respons.
Luther fol. 474.
Lutheri, etc. In the words of Luther, there lie most great Errors; when I
read Luthers Book, it seems to me, that a beastly Hogg does gruntle in a
garden, beset with most fragrant flowers: So impurely, so unlike to a Divine
Luther disputes of God, and all holy things. Thus Swinglius.

But to leave Swinglius, and to descend to other Sacramentaries; Campanus (a
Sacramentary) thus fully and resolutely pronounces of Luther: As In Colloq.
lat. Luth. com. 2. cap. de Aduers.
Certain as God is God so certain it is, that Luther was a devilish Liar.
Oecolampadius (the Sacramentary) thus fearfully speaks of Luther himself:
Let Luther In Respons. ad Confess. Luther.
take heed, least being puffed with Pride, he be deceived by Satan. The said
Oecolampadius thus censureth of the Lutherans in general: The In Dialog.
contra Melancth.
Lutherans bring forth only a color or shadow of the Word of God (as all
Heretics commonly are accustomed to do) they bring not the Word of God, and
yet they will seem to build upon the Word of God.

The Tigurine Deuines (being Swinglians or Caluinists) thus recriminate Luther:
Nos Tigurin. tract. 3 contra supremant Lutheri Confess.
condemnatam and execrabilem vocat Sectam Lutherus. etc. Luther calls us a
damnable and execrable sect; But let him look, that he do not declare himself
an Arch-Heretike, seeing he will not, nor cannot have Society with those, that
confess Christ. But how meruelously does Luther bewray himself with his
Devils? etc. For he says, that the Devil dwells both now, and ever in the
Swinglians, and that they have a blasphemous Breast, Insatanized,
Supersatanized, and Persatanized etc. Did ever any man hear such speeches
pass from a furious Devil himself? Thus far the Tigurine Deuines.

I will Conclude with Calvin, who thus exclaymeth against the Lutherans in
General. By the Lutherans Instit. l. 4. cap. 17.. 16.
Marcion is raised out of Hell: And in like sort Calvin thus more writes: The
Admonit. 3. ad West^y balum.
Lutherans are forgets and Liars. These implacable and mutual dissentions
between the Lutherans and the Caluinists are so great and irreconcilable, as
that Conradus Schlusselburg in Theolog. Caluinist. in his Catalogue
praecipuorum Doctrinae Capitum. etc.
Schlusselburg (the great Lutheran) recites three and thirty several Articles
of Doctrine in question, and controuerted between the Lutherans, whom he
defends, and the Caluinists, against whom he writes. And Luke Osiander (the
Protestant) did write a Treatise bearing this title: Enchiridion
Controuersiarum, quas Augustanae Confessionis Theologi habent cum Caluinianis.
Printed Tubingae. 1603.

And Hubberus, a learned Lutheran, wrote a book in Dutch, printed Regiomonti.
1592. having this title: The Opposition of the Lutheran and Caluinian Doctrine
in certain chief Articles of Faith: So just reason had Nicolaus Gallus (the
Protestant, and superintendent at Ratisbone) thus to complain of the
Contentions between his own Brethren, all Protestants: Non In Thesibus of
Hypoi^esibus.
sunt leaves etc. The dissentions, that are among us, are not of light matters,
but of the greatest articles of Christian Doctrine, of the Law and the Gospel,
of Justification and good Works etc. And finally Pappus (the Protestant) has
no less resentment and feeling touching this point, thus writing: Etsi Papipus
in Theolog. Caluinist. l 1. Art. 28.
initio de vno tantum articulo etc. Although in the beginning, one only Article
was called into doubt notwithstanding the Caluinists are now so far gone as
they call in doubt neither few neither the least Articles of Christian
Doctrine. etc. With whom conspites Bullinger the Protestant, in these words:
Ipsi inter Bullinger in his ^undamentum fi^mum. cap. 1. page 5.
se Euangelici acriter pungunt, and pugnant etc. Those alone, who are
professors of the Gospel, do vehemently prick, and feight one against
another; And from hence are hard among us those unfortunate names, or
appellations of the Lutherans, and the Swinglians.

3. In this next place, let us behold how the Lutherans do agree among
themselves. Their contentions are so great, that Conradus Schlussenburg
Schluss^lb. in Catal. Haeret. nostri temporis. l. 2.
(the most eminent Lutheran) places six sorts of his own Lutherans in the
Catalogue of Heretics; And from this several sort of Lutherans did first rise
that distinction of Molles Lutherant, and Rigidi Lutherani. These several
Kinds of Lutherans had several appellations or names, for some of them were
called, Substantarij, for teaching sin to be of the essence and nature of
Man; Others opposite to these, were termed, Accidentarij who impugned the
former Opinion; Some called Vbiquitarij, for confounding. Christ's Humanity with
his Divinity. Some called Osiandrians, in regard of their different Doctrine of
Justification. Some others were styled Maiorists, of Gregorius Mayor, in
respect of the necessity of Good Works; Others, Flaccians, of Flaccus
Illyricus, who oppugned the Maiorists therein; Finally others were denominated,
Adiaphorists, for maintayning the indifferency of Rites and Ceremonies, wherein
they are greatly written against by the Flaccians. Now all these (as above is
said) are Lutherans and do embrace and acknowledge the Confession of Augusta:
which Confession of faith the Caluinists do wholly reject; And yet these
Several sorts of Lutherans have written and published several Books one
against another, in defense of their several maintained different Doctrines.

4. To come to the Sacramentaries or Caluinists alone, we find, that Castalio
(the Sacramentary or Caluinist) condemns Calvin himself, for his presumed
Doctrine, of God being the Author of sin, thus writing hereof: By this
Castal. l. ad Caluinum de Praedestinat.
means, not the Devil, but the God of Calvin, is the Father of Lies; But that
God, which the holy Scripture teaches, is altogether contrary to this God of
Calvin. And then after: The true God came to destroy the works of the
Caluinian God: And these two Gods, as they be contrary in Nature, one to
another; so they beget, and bring forth Children of contrary disposition; to
wit, that God of Calvin, Children without mercy, proud, etc. Thus the foresaid
Castalio. In like sort Calvin L. de Coena Dom. and l. 4 Instit. c. 15. sect. 1
wholly condemns Swinglius for his teaching, that the Sacraments are bare
external signs; and Epist. ad quandam Germaniae Ciuitatem fol. 196.
Swinglius reciprocally condemns Calvin for his teaching, that to the
Sacraments more is attributed, then to external signs. According to these
dissentions of the Protestants, or Sacramentaries among themselves. Doctor
Willet a formal Protestant thus reprehendeth M. Hooker, D. Couell, and others
in these words: From this Fountain In his meditat. upon the 12^. Psalm.
have sprung forth those, and such other whirlepooles and bubbles of new
doctrine, etc. and then after: Thus have some been bold to teach and write,
who as some Schismatikes (meaning the Puritans) have disturbed the peace of the
Church one way in external matters concerning Discipline; they have troubled
the Church another way by opposing themselves by new quirks and devises, to the
soundnes of Doctrine among Protestants. Thus far D. Willet of the strifes among
the moderate Protestants themselves.

In this last passage we will descend more particularly to the doctrinall
contentions of English moderate Protestants, and English Puritans. And to
begin, the English Puritans writing against the English Protestants thus say:
If In a Treatise, entitled: A Christian and modest offer. p. 11.
we be in error and the Prelates on the contrary side have the truth, we
protest to all the World, that the Pope and the Church of Rome (and in them God
and Christ) have great wrong and indignity offered unto them, in that they are
rejected etc. And more, the English Puritans thus complayn hereof: Do we In the
mild defense of the silenced Ministers supplication to the high Court of
Parlame^t.
vary from the sincere doctrine of the Scripture? Nay rather, many of them
(meaning the Bishops and their Adherents) do much swerve from the same,
touching general Grace and the death of Christ for every particular person
etc. Touching the manner of Christ's presence in the Eucharist etc. Finally the
English Puritans do more fully dismaske themselves, thus bursting out, and
maintayning, that the These Positions of the Puritans are verbally recited and
condemned in the book entitled: Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical,
printed anno 1604
Worship of the Church of England is corrupt superstitious, unlawful repugnant
to the Scriptures. Again: The Articles of the Bishops Religion are erroneous,
their rites Antichristian. And yet more: The government of the Church of England
under his Majesty by Archbishops, and Deanes, is Antichristian, and repugnant
to the word of God.

6. Now, to turn over the leaf, and see how the more moderate English
Protestant recompenseth the English Puritans Charity herein: And First we find,
that M. Barks thus auerreth confidently. The Puritans In his Epist. Dedicat. p.
3.
are beadstrong and hardened in error; They stryke at the main points of
faith, Shaking the very foundation it self Heaven and Hell; The Diniuity and
Humanity; Yea the very soul, and Salvation of our Savior. And yet more
plainly in the foresaid place: They have pestilent Heresies. And finally: They
are heretical, and sacrilegious. And further the said M. Parks thus
discourses: The Creed M. Parks vbi supra.
it self, which always has been the badg, or cognizance, whereby to
discern and know the faithful from unbelievers etc. is the main point in
question between us and the Puritans. D. Couell speaking of certain fiery
English Puritans, thus delivers his words: The In his Examen. page 1.
first English Ministers so far descended, that some books, and the greatest
Part of Christendom was filled with vnreuerent, unholy, and unnatural
Contentions etc. M. Powell is very plain with them, for thus he writes: The
Powell in his considerations.
Puritans are notorious and manifest Schismatiks, cut from the Church of God.

To forbear diverse others like Censure, passed upon our English Puritans, I
will alledg these few following; First of the foresaid D. Couell, who
registring the positions of the English Puritans, among other of their
positions, sets down these following: The In his defense of Hooker. p. 65.
and 74.75.
statute Congregations of England are no true Church: And again, The
Protestant Church of England has no form of a Church. We also thus read in
the Book of The Survey of the pretended Discipline: The C. 5. etc. ^4. etc. 35.
Puritans pervert the true meaning of certain places both of Scripture and
Fathers, to serve their own turns. And again: The word of God is troubled
with such choppers and changers of it. Lastly (besides diverse other such
reprehensions of them) we thus read: The Catebraulls, pitiful Distractions,
and Confusions among the Puritans proceed from such intolerable presumption,
as is used, by perverting and false interpretation of holy Scripture.

Now, by all this touching the immortal dissentions between our English
Protestants and English Puritans, we may discern the Vanity of the Protestants
answer to the Catholics, charging them in England with Controversies in
faith; the Protestants replying, that their Dissentions rest only touching
government, and other Indifferencyes, but touching the main Articles of
Protestancy, they have no Differencye at all. O os impudens! So ingenuously and
truly does M. Parks confess hereof, saying: The Protestants deceive M. Parks
in his Epi^t. Dedic.
the world, and make men believe, That there is agreement in all substantial
Points; They affirm, that there is no question among them of the Truth.

Now the main Differences in doctrine between the Caluinists, especially
between the foreign Protestants among themselves, and the English Protestans
and the Puritans, be (among others) these following. 1. Whether the
Ecclesiastical Minister does truly forgive sin; or but only pronounce the
remission thereof. 2. Touching the Churches Visibility and Inuisibility. 3.
Whether in case of adultery the innocent party may marry again.

4. Whether Christ's body be really and substantially present to the Mouth of
Faith; (as D. Whitaker and M. Hooker do hold) or but Sacramentally only
present, as the Puritans do teach.

5. Touching Reprobation and universality of Grace. 6. Christ's suffering in
soul the pains of Hell: His descending into Hell after his death. 7. Baptism
by lay persons in time of Neressity. 8. Whether Ministers should be ordained by
imposition of hands, or by the Election of the Presbytery. 9. Whether Usury be
lawful.

10. Whether the Sacraments do confer Grace, or but only signify it. 11.
Whether there has been since the Apostles time, any extraordinary Calling; Or
whether such Calling may be. 12. Whether vows are now to be abrogated, as
supposed to be but Ceremonial, and parcel of the old Law.

13. Whether the Roman Church be a true Church, affording salvation. 14.
Whether the Civil Magistrate may be head of the Church. 15. Whether the
Communion ought ever to be delivered under both kinds. 16. Finally (to omit
some others) touching the use of the sign of the Cross, of the Surplisse of
Organs in the Church etc.

The II. Paragraph.
NOw, having displayed in part the great Differences between the Protestants
of all kinds among themselves; and this but only from the particular sentences
and words, found here and there scattered in their writings; In this next
place I will demonstrate the same more fully even from the many scores (if not
some hundreds) of Books, written all by Protestants against Protestants; of
which, one Catalogue of them comprehends such books, as are written by the
Caluinists against the Lutherans; Another Catalogue of books, written by the
Lutherans against the Caluinists; A third by the Lutherans, against the
Lutherans; All which three Catalogues of books may be found in Iodocus Coccius
his Thesaurus, Tom. 2. The fourth Catalogue contains the books written by the
Protestants one against another, touching the Question only of the Sacrament.
The Catalogue of which books is taken from the Protestant Writer Hospinianus,
in his historiae Sacrament. part. 2. And all these were made between the year
of our Lord 1574. and 1598. Since which time diverse other books of that
subject have been written by other Protestants, against their own Brethren.

Now in regard of the multiplicity of the said books of the several same
Catalogues, and for greater breuity, I refer the Reader to the two foresaid
Authors, Coccius and Hospinian, in the places above alleged. Yet for some
delibation and taste of all the rest, I will set here down the particular
titles only of twenty of the said Books; from the vitulency and bitterness of
which Titles the Reader may conjecture of all the other books, in what spirit
of Charity (or rather of Serpentyne hatred and malignity) they are written by
Protestants against Protestants. Of which twenty Books here alleged, not any
does touch the question of the Real presence, maintained by the Lutherans,
because I have purposely forborne that subject in relation of the Books here
alleged, in that, the Lutherans agree with us Catholics therein.

1. The First Book then, which I allege, is entitled: Alberti Grauari,
bellum Ioannis Caluini, and Jesus Christi. Printed Braptae. Anno Domini 1598.
The war between John Calvin and Jesus Christ, written by Albertus Grauerus.

2. Antiparaeus; hoc est, Refutatio venenati scriptia Dauide Paraeo editi in
defensionem stropharum, and corruptelarum, quibus Ioannes Caluinus
illustrissima Scripturae testimonia, de Mysterio Trinitatis, nec non oracula
Prophetarum de Christo, detestandum in modum corrupit. Printed Franeo-furti.
Anno 1598. Antipaeraeus; that is, a Refutation of a venomous writing, published
and made by David Paraeus, in defense of the deceits and falsifications, with
which John Calvin in a detestable manner has corrupted the most illustrious or
clear testimonies of Scripture, touching the mystery of the Trinity, as also
the Oracles of the Prophets concerning Christ.

3. Demonstratio imposturarum and fraudum, quibus Aegid^us Hunnius Ecclesiae
Othodoxae doctrinam petulanter corrumpere pergit. Brema. 1592. A demonstration
of the impostures and deceits, with the which Egidius Hunnius proceeds
perulantly, to corrupt the doctrine of the Orthodoxall Church.

4. Oration de Incarnatione filij Dei, contra impios and blasphemos Errores
Swinglianorum and Caluinisturum. Tubingae. 1586. An Oration, or Discourse of
the Incarnation of the Son of God, against the wicked and blasphemous Errors
of the Swinglians, and the Caluinists.

5. Aegidij Hunnij Caluinus Iudaicans: Hoc est, Iudaicae Glossae and
corruptelae, quibus Ioannes Caluinus illustrissima Scripturae sacra loca and
testimonia, de gloriosa Trinitate, Deitate Christi, and spiritus Sancti; Cum
primi^ autem vaticinia Prophetarum de Aduentu Messiae, and natiuitate eius,
Passione, Resurrectione, Ascensione ad Caelos, and Sestiane ad Dexiram Dei,
detestandum in modum corrumpere non abhorruit. Wittembergae. 1593. Caluinus
Iud^i^ans, written by Egidius Humnius; That is, a declaration of the Judicial
expositions and falsifications, with the which John Calvin was not afraid
detust^^bly to corrupt the most clear places and testimonies of Holy
Scripture, against the glorious Trinity, the Deity of Christ, and the Holy
Ghost; As also the Prophesies, touching the Incarnation of the Messiah; his
Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension to Heaven, and his sitting at the
right hand of God.

6. Pia defensio aduersus Ioannis Caluini, Petri Boquini, Theodori Bezae,
Willielmi Clebitij etc. and similium Calumnias: Item Refutatio Pelagiani seu
Anabaptistici Caluinistarum Erroris, de Baptismo, and peccato Originali.
Adduntur Collectanea plurimoru^ Caluins contra Deum, eius Prou^dentiam and
Praedestinationem. Printed Errordiae. 1583. A godly Defense against the
Calumnies, or deceits of John Calvin, Peter Boquinus, Theodorus Beza,
Willielmus Clebitius, and such others etc. Also a Refutation of the Pelagian,
or Anabaptisticall error of the Caluinists concerning Baptism and Original
sin. Here are also adjoined certain Collections out of Calvin against God,
and his Providence, and Predestination.

7. Veritatis Victoria, and ruina Papatus Saxonici. Printed Losannae. 1563. The
Victory of the Truth, and the ruin of the Papacy of Saxony.

8. Conradi Schlusselburgi Theologiae Caluinisticae libri tres, in quibus, seu
in tabula quadam, quasi ad oculum plusquam ex ducentis viginti tri^us
Sacramentariorum publicis scriptis, pagellis, verbis proprijs, and Authorum
Nominibus indicatis demonstratur, eos de nullo fere Christianae Fidei articulo
recte sentire. Francoforti. 1594. Three books written by Conradus
Schlusselburg, touching Caluinisticall Divinity, in which (as in a table to the
very eye) is demonstrated from more then two hundred twenty three public
writings of the Sacramentaries, with setting down the pages, their own words,
and the Names of the Authors, that the Caluinists do scarsly believe truly any
one Article of Christian Faith.

9. Argumentorum and Obiectorum de praecipuis articulis doctrinae Christianae,
cum Responsionibus, quae sunt collecta ex scriptis Philippi Melancthonis:
additis scholijs illustrantibus vsum singularum responsionum parts septem.
Neap oli. 1578. Seven parts or Heads, touching the Arguments and Objections
of the principal articles of Christian Religion, with their Answers; Which
Answers are gathered out of the writings of Philipp Melancthon, with the
illustration of the use of all the Answers.

10. Responsio triplex ad Fratres Tubingenses. and triplex eorum scriptum de
tribus grauissimi^ Quaestionibus; de Coena Domini; de Maiestate hominis
Christi; and de non damnandis Ecclesijs Dei, nec auditis, nec vocatis. Geneuae.
1582. A threefould Answer to the brethren of Tubing, and their threefould
writing touching three most weighty Questions; to wit of the supper of our
Lord; of the Majesty of Christ's as man; and of not condemning the Churches of
God, before they be heard, and called to answer for themselves.

11. Gulielmi Zepperi Dillenbergensis Ecclesia Pastoris Institutio, de tribus
Religionis summis Capitibus quae inter Euangelicos in Controuersiam vocantur.
Hanoniae. 1596. An Institution or Discourse, made by Gulielmus Zepperus,
Pastor of the Church of Dillinberg, concerning three chief Heads or points
of Religion, which are called into Controversy by the Professors of the
Gospel.

12. Apologia ad omnes Germaniae Ecclesias reformatas quae sub Swingliani and
Caluiniani Nominis inuidia vim and iniuriam patiuntur. Tiguri. 1578. An Apology
to all the reformed Churches of Germany, the professors whereof suffer wrong
and injury, under the title of being Swinglians or Caluinists.

13. Ad Ioannis Brentij argumenta, and Iacobi Andreae Theses quibus Carnis
Christi omni-praesentiam nituntur confirmare; Id est, aduersum renouatos
Nestorij and Eutichetis Errores, responsum. Geneuae. 1570. An Answer to the
arguments of John Brentius, and to the Theses of Iacobus Andreas, by the which
they labor to confirm the omni-presence of Christ's Flesh; That is, against
the revived Errors of Nestorius and Eutiches.

14. Colloqui Montisbelgardensis, inter Iacobum Andream and Theodorum Bezam,
Acta. Tubingae. 1584. The Acts of the Conference at Mont-belgard, between
Iacobus Andreas, and Theodorus Beza.

15. Christophori Pezelij Apologia verae doctrinae, de definitione Euangelij
apposita Thrasonicit prastigijs Ioannis Wigandi. Wittembergae. 1572. An Apology
of Christopher Pezelius, touching the true doctrine of the definition of the
Gospel, opposed against the Thrasonicall and boasting sleights and impostures
of Ioannes Wigandus.

16. Hamelmannia, sieve Aries Theologizans, Dialogus, appositus duabus
Narrationibus Historicis Hamelmanni. Neostadij 1582. Hamelmannia, Or a
Theologizing Ram, being a Dialogue impugning two historical Narrations of
Hermannus Hamelmannus.

17. Hieremiae Victoris vera and dilucida demonstratio; quod Swingliani and
Caluinistae nunquam se subiecerunt Confessioni Augustanae, exhibita Carolo
Quinto. Anno 1530. Germ. Francofurti. 1591. A true and evident Demonstration,
proving that the Swinglians and the Caluinists, did never submit themselves to
the Confession of Augusta, exhibited in time of Charles the Fifth.

18. Christiani Kittelmanni, december graves and perniciosi Errores Swinglianorum
in doctrina, de peccatis and Baptismo ex proprijs eorum libris Collecti and
refutati. Madelburgi 1592. Ten weighty and pernicious Errors of the
Swinglians, concerning the doctrine of sin and Baptism, being taken out of
their own Books, and refuted by Christianus Kittelmanus.

19. Responsio ad scriptum quod Theologi Bremenses aduersus Collectores
Apologiae formula Concordiae publicarunt. Lipsiae. 1585. An answer to the
writing, which the Deuines of Brema published against the Collectours of the
Apology of the form of Concord.

20. Ioannis Mosellani Praeseruatiua, contra venenum Swinglianorum. Tubingae.
1586. A Preservative of Ioannes Mossellanus, against the poison of the
Swinglians.

Thus far of these twenty Titles of the Protestant venomous kind of writing,
one against another. And here we may say with the Poet, ex vno discite omnes;
that is, from Consideration of these twenty titles only, we may make the like
conjecture of many scores of books by them written: Only this I may note, that
if the Titles of the foresaid books be so fraught with Malice, what spleenfull
sentences full of Rancour may, in all probability, be thought to occur here and
there in the said books?

The III. Paragraph.
But what? does the Scene of the Protestants Disagreements rest only in words
and writing one against another? No, for it passes further, finally into
extreme and barbarous outrages. For first, they are not content to call one
another Heretics, (as by many before alleged testimonies are evident) but with
all they prohibit the sale and reading of each others books. For thus Hospinian
(the Protestant) writes, touching the restraint made in Sxony: Edictum
promulgatum In histor. Sacrament. part. altera. fol. 393.
est etc. An edict is promulgated and diuulged, by the which not only the
reading, but also the selling of all books written by the Caluinists, is
prohibited: And the Lutherans do charge the Caluinists in this sort: Biblia
Hospinian vbi supra. fol. 3^4.
and Catechismum Lutheri etc. The Caluinists have prohibited the Bibles, and
the Catechism, approved by Luther and his followers.

Secondly, they banish each other from their Territories, not suffering them to
enter therein, as Crispinus In his book of the state of the Church. page 697.
, Osiander In Epitom. histor. Eccles. Cent. 16. part. altera. page 803. and 860.
, Conradus In Catalogo. Haret. l. 13. and vltimo, page 828. and 847.
Schlusselburg (all Protestants) and others do witness. Thirdly, they appoint
Articles of Visitation and Enquiry, concerning the discovery and apprehending
of each other. For thus the foresaid Hospinian writes of this point, showing
how the Saxons made a petition to their Duke, Vt famosos Hospinian. in histor.
Sacrament. part altera fol. ^93.
Sacramentariorum libros prohiberet etc. That he would forbid all markable
Books of the Sacramentaries; and that he would chastise the Authors of them
with due Punishments; And that in the next visitation he would give directions,
that All Caluinists should be cast out from the Schools, Churches, from all
Magistracy, or public government. Fourthly, They commit them to imprisonment,
of which point Hospinian thus records: Hospinian vbi supra.
Nicolaus Crellius Saxoniae Cancellarius, in vincula conijcitur. Nicolaus
Crellius, being Chancelour of Saxony, is cast into bonds, or Prison. And again
in the foresaid place: Theologi nonnulli etc. Many Deuines being apprehended in
several places, are cast into bonds. Fifthly, they will not affoard each other
Common entertaynement, usual to all Strangers in every Country. This course of
the Lutherans, against the Caluinists is reported by the foresaid Hospinian In
histor Sacramen. part. 2 fol. 399.
, and by Osiander In Epirom etc. Cent. 16. page 6. 8.
; And on the other side, by the Caluinists against the Lutherans the same is
related by In Catalog. Haeret l. 13. and vltimo. p. 828.
Conradus Schlusselburge.

Sixthly, they enter into Arms one side against another. For, that the
Lutherans did hastily and tumultuously assault the Caluinists, is recorded by
Hospinian Vbi supra. p. 395.
. And that the Caluinists did actually attempt the like against the Lutherans,
is witnessed by Osiander Epitom. Cent. 16. page 7^^. and p. 803.
. This is further evident, by the Example of the Arminians and Gomorists not
many years since in Holland, where one, called Barneuille, being the head of
one of the Factions, was beheaded. Lastly, the implacable Dissentions have
been so violent, exceeding all humane Nature, as that the Lutherans have
extended their malice toward the dead Corpse of the Caluinists; This is
verified by Hospinian: Cum In histor. Sacrament. part. 2. fol. 308.
impetu occurrentes Sandapilam etc. The Lutherans assaulting one, called
Sandapila, by force, and in humanely using his body, did expose it to be eaten
by Dogs. See here the Vatinian and irreconcilable hatred of the Protestants,
against the Protestants.

Now here the Reader is to be aduertized, that the different Names of
Lutherans, Swinglians, Sacramentaries, Caluinists, Puritans etc. are not
invented for disgrace and contumely to the different Professors; but even of
necessity, for the better distinguishment of their different Doctrines. And
according hereto M. Parkes thus writes, touching the name of Puritans: Neither
In his Apology under the title of Quaerulous Motions. page 30.
do I see any sufficient reason why those among us whom singularity in
Affection, and Nouelty in Faction have denominated Puritans, should not be
distinguished by that Name. Bu. Conradus Schlusselburg passes more fully into
the subdiuision of the word Protestant, thus writing: In Catalog. Haeret. l.
13. and vltim. de Interemistis p. 866.
Neque vero nostra partis Theologi etc. Neither do the Deuines of our side,
name their Adversaries, Swinglians, Caluinists, Sacramentaries, through
detraction or bate; neither when we our selves are called Lutherans. Finally
Hospinian thus writes; Schismatica In histor. Sacrament. par. altera,
throughout his whole-booke he uses these different Names.
ista etc. I hate these Schismatic Names of Lutherans, Swinglians,
Caluinists; and yet I use them in this my history, for the better
distinguishing of their doctrines, and instructing the Reader. So clearly
appears the great disparity of the several Religions among them, even from
the several appellations, imposed upon the several Professors.

Having in the precedent passages discoursed of the (almost incredible)
Dissentions in Religion between several sorts of Protestants; and this
chiefly from the alleging of words full of contumely, disgrace, and rancour,
one against another, only for matter of Religion, and from the tetricall,
harsh, and opprobrious titles of twenty of their Books, written in great
acerbity of style; and lastly, from their external comportment; and yet all of
them promiscuously assuming to themselves in general the Name of Protestants:
I hold it now convenient in this next place to descend more particularly to
the different points of Religion, in which these several Sects maynely dissent
among themselves, one side not approving (but wholly rejecting) the judgment of
the other side.

The IV. Paragraph.
I Will begin touching the Question of the Word of God, or Scripture; And
first, touching such Books of Scripture, as are rejected by some Protestants,
but approved and allowed for Scripture by other Protestants. Secondly, the
Protestants disagreements in the Translation of confessed Scripture. Thirdly,
touching their dissentions in the interpretation of such places, or texts,
which are on all sides confessed to be Canonical Scripture, and truly
translated.

And to begin with the New Testament and so to ascend to the Old: we find
touching Luthers Condemnation of the Apocalypse Bullinger thus to complain:
Doctor Martin Upon the Apocalips Englished. cap. 1. sermon. 1. fol. 2.
Luther has (as it were) sticked this book by a sharp Preface, set before
his first Edition of the New Testament in Dutch; for which his judgment, good
and learned Men were offended with him. With Luther herein, agree Kempnitius
and Brentius in the places next herea^ter noted in the Margent; and yet Calvin
and the Protestants in England admit it for Canonical. In like sort, the
Epistle of James is termed by Luther, Epistola In pro legom. b^ius Epist.
straminea: An Epistle swelling, Contentions, Strawy, and unworthy altogether
an Apostolical spirit. In the same manner, the Magdeburgenses Cent. l. 2. c.
4. col. 55.
, Kempnitius Exam. 4. Sess. Council. Trident.
, and Brentius Confess. Witiemberg. l. de sacra Scriptura.
do condemn the same Epistle with Luther, as Apocryphal; notwithstanding
Calvin and the Church of England acknowledge it for Canonical Scripture.

In like sort Luther, Luther in Annotat. in hanc Epistol.
the Centurists, Kempnitius, and Brentius, in the places above noted in the
Margent, condemn, as Apocryphal, the Epistle of Jude, the second Epistle of
Peter, and they rest uncertain and doubtful of the Authority of the second
and third Epistle of John: But Erasmus more fully speaks thereof; his words
are these: The In Prolegem. ad hanc Epist.
Second and Third Epistle of John, are not to be taken as his Epistles, but as
written by some other man: And yet all these are acknowledged for Scripture by
Calvin, the Caluinists, and the Church of England. Beza rejects the History
of the adulterous Woman, recorded in the Gospel of S. John c. 8. And Bullinger
He is so charged by Laurentius Valla.
(a Sacramentary) rejects that addition to our Lords Prayer: For thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and glory etc. And yet these parcells are taken for
Scripture, by other Sacramentaries. Luther in like manner discanoneth the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Prolegom. Epist. ad Haebreos.
maintayning, that it was not written either by S. Paul, or by any other
Apostle: for it contains (says Luther) certain things, contrary to the
Apostolical Doctrine. With him conspire in judgment Brentius, Kempnitius, and
the Magdeburgians, in the places above quoted.

Touching the Four Ghospells, Luther, to Luth. Praefat. in Nouum Testam. and
lib. de Scripturae, and Ecclesiae authoritate. c. 3.
extenuate and depresse the Authority of three of them, ce^sureth, that the
Gospel of John is the only fair and true Gospel, and to be preferred before
the other three, by many degrees; he further maintayning, that the general
Opinion of four Gospells ought to be abandoned and relinquished; he
protesting, that he ascribes more Reverence to the Epistles of Paul, and
Peter, then to the other three Evangelists.

To come to the Old Testament: The Book of Baruch is accounted as Apocryphal,
by L. 3. Instit. c. 10.. 8.
Calvin, and In Exam. 4. Sess. Council. Trid.
Kempnitius; and yet is taken as Canonical, by most other Protestants, since
we do not find it in their writings to be rejected by them. The Canticles, is
wholly rejected by In Translat. Latin. suorum. Bibliorum.
Castalio, who maintaynes, that it contaynes matter of wanton love; for which
his Censure, he is grievously and sharply reprehended even by Beza. Beza in
Praefat. in Iosue.
The Book entitled Ecclesiastes, is thus scurrilously traduced by Luther: The
Author Luther in Conuiuialibus, titulo de Patriarchis. and Prophetis.
of Ecclesiastes seems to ride without spurrs or boots, only with bare
stockings: Yet is it taken for Scripture generally by the Caluinists. The Book
of Job is reverenced for Canonical Scripture by the Protestants of England,
and by Calvin, and the Caluinists; and yet Luther so contemns it, as that he
thus plainly condemns the said Book: The Argument In Conuiuialibus ser.
titulo de Patriar^ is and Prophetis.
of Job is a mere fiction, invented only for the setting down of a true and
lively example of Patience.

Thus far of such parts only of the New and Old Testament, which some
Protestants repute as Apocryphal, and therefore reject them; other Protestants
acknowledge them, as Canonical, and therefore take them for the true and
undoubted word of God. Here before I leave speaking of the rejecting or
approving of the Scripture, I will adioyne thereto, that whereas the most
learned and moderate Protestants do so reverence Moses, and the Apostles,
teaching and believing, that their Pens were so directed by the Holy Ghost, as
that they did not, nor could err in their writings; yet hear what is said to
the contrary by other Protestants. And first, Luther thus conuitiateth Moses:
Moses Luth^^ tom. 3. Wittenberg. in Psalm. 41. fol. 423. and tom. 3. German.
fol. 40. and in Colloq. mensal. German. fol. 152. and 153.
had his lips, unpleasant, stopped, angry, etc. Do you collect all the Wisdom
of Moses, and of the Heathen Philosophers, and you shall find them to be
before God, either Idolatry or Hypocritical Wisdom; or if it be politic, the
wisdom of wrath etc. Moses had his Lips full of gaul and anger etc. Away
therefore with Moses.

Luther, and other Protestants further rail in great acerbity of language, and
intemperate words, at the Apostles, for thus he writes expressly against S.
Peter: Peter Luther in Epist. ad Galat. c. 1. after the English Translation,
fol. 33. and 34. and tom. 5. Wittenbeg. anno 1554. fol. 290.
the chief of the Apostles, did live and teach, extra verbum Dei, besides the
Word of God. The Centuristi thus tax S. Paul: Paul does turn Cent. 1. l. 2.
c. 10. col. 580.
to James the Apostle and a Synod of Presbyters being called together, he is
persuaded by James and the rest, that for the offended Jews he should purify
himself in the Temple, whereunto Paul yields; which certainly is no small
slyding of so great a Doctor. D. Bancroft alleges out of Zanchius his
Epistles, that a Caluinist thus said: If In his Survey of the pretended
Discipline. page 37^.
Paul should come to Geneua, and preach the same hour that Calvin did, I would
leave Paul, and hear Calvin.

Calvin thus bouldly affirms of S. Peter: Peter In Comment. in omnes Pauli
Episto^as. p. 510.
erred to the schism of the Church, to the endangering of Christian liberty,
and the o^erthrow of the grace of God Conradus Schluffeth (...) charge Calvin
to maintain and say; that, The Apostles In Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol 40.
alleged the Prophets in anoth^^ sense, then was meant. Brentius plainly
writes thus: S. Peter In Apol. Confess. de Con^t^ijs p. 900.
(chief of the Apostles) and Barnabas, after the Holy Ghost received, together
with the Church of Jerusalem, erred. And D. Fulke speaking of the same matter
is no less sparing, thus saying: Peter Against the Rhemish Testament. in
Galat. 2.
erred in Ignorance, against the Gospel.

I will conclude these their wonderful Inuectiues against the Apostles, with D.
Whitakers accusation of them, thus writing: It is D. Whitaker de Eccles. contra
Bellarm Controu. 2. quaest. 4. p. 213.
manifest, that even after Christ his Ascension, and the Holy Ghost descending
upon the Apostles, not only the Common sort, but even the Apostles themselves
erred in the vocation of the Gentills etc. Yea, Peter also erred concerning the
abrogation of the Ceremonial Law; and this was a matter of Faith. Thus D.
Whitaker. Would any Christian ever think, that such horrid words as these any
Protestant (contrary to the judgment of other their brethren) should disgorge
against the Apostles themselves?

2. I now hasten to the several Translations of the sacred Scriptures, about
which there is no less contention among the Protestants, then is touching
which is true Scripture, and which is forged, and (so to speak) abastarded.
And First, touching that translation, which is commonly called, the Vulgar
Translation, made by S. Hierome, though it be much disliked by most
Protestants, and accordingly hereto D. Whitaker calls it. An old In his
Answer to M. Reynolds Preface. page 2. and 26.
rotten translation etc. full of faults, errors, and corruptions of all
sorts; Yet Carolus Molinaeus (a learned Protestant) thus approves it: I can
In Nouo Testam. page 30.
very hardly depart from the vulgar and accustomed reading, which also I am
accustomed earnestly to defend. His words in Latin are these: Agerrime a
vulgari consuetaque lectione recedo, quam etiam enixe defendere soleo. Yea this
Molinaeus further says: I prefer Molinas in Luc. 17.
the Vulgar Edition before Erasmus, Bucer, Bullinger, Brentius, the Tigurine
Translations; also before John Calvin his translation, and all others. D.
Couell plainly affirms, that he prefers In his answer to M. John Burges.
page 94.
the vulgar Translation, before all others. To conclude, even Beza himself
(contrary to most other Caluinists) does in these words advance the vulgar
Translation: The vulgar In praefat. Noui Testament. anno 155^.
Edition I do for the most part embrace, and prefer before all others.

But now leaving the vulgar Translation, the which some Protestants (as we see)
do allow, far more do reject, (so great disparity there is in their judgments;)
Let us come to such Translations of Scripture, as have been made by the
Protestants themselves; and let us observe, what mutual and interchangeable
entertayneme^t the said Translations have received from the Pens of others
their brethren, And to begin, Luther made a Translation of the Holy Scripture;
yet this his Translation is condemned by Swinglius in this sort: Thou, Luther
To. 2. ad Luth. lib. de Sacr. p. 412. and 413.
do corrupt the Word of God; Thou art seen to be a manifest corrupter, and
peruerter of the Holy Scriptures: How much are we ashamed of thee? etc. And
Kekermannus (the Protestant) thus censureth this Translation of Luther: In
System. 55. Theolog. l. 1. p. 188.
Lutheri versio Germanica etc. The Translation of Luther of the Scripture in
Dutch etc. especially in Job, and the Prophets, has no small blemishes. And
the said Translation is in like manner condemned by Osiander Osiander his
condemnation is mentioned by Luther, in Colloq. Mensal. Germ. fol. 245.
. The Deuines of Basil, and Oecolampadius did compyle a Translation, yet it is
censured in these words by Beza: The Beza in respons. ad defens. and resp.
Castal.
Translation of Basil is in many places wicked, and altogether differing from
the mind of the Holy Ghost.

The Swinglians undertook to translate the Scriptures; against the authors of
which Translation, Luther thus belcheth: They Vbi supra. 388.
are Fools, Asses, Antichrists, Deceauers, and of Asslyke understandings. In
so much, as when a Copy of that Translation was sent to Luther, he would not
receive it, but rejected it, as Hospinian In Hist. Sacram. part. altera fol.
1^3.
witnesses. Castalio his Translation is censured by Beza, to be Beza, in Test.
^^e^i 1558. in praefat.
Sacrilegious, wicked and Ethnicall. Caluins Translation is also rejected; for
Carolus Molinaeus (the forsaid markable Protestant) says thus thereof: Calvin
in In sua Translat. Test. Noui. part. ^1. fol. 110.
his Harmony, makes the Text of the Gospel to leap up and down; He uses
violence to the letter of the Gospel, and besides, he adds to the Text.

Beza also (for the up shot of all) made a Translation; of which translation
the foresaid Molinaeus thus speaks: Beza In Translat. Testam. Noui. page 64.
65. 66.
de facto textum mutat; Beza even actually changes the text of the Scripture.
And Castalio the foresaid Protestant, by way of retaliation, thus writes
thereof: To note In defens. Translat. page 170.
the errors of Beza his Translation, would require a great volume. And
Castalio particularly insisteth in that false Translation of Beza against
Freewill, in the first Chapter of John; where it is in the Greek, As many at
received him, he gave them Power to be made the sons of God; Beza
translating: Dignity to be the sons of God; Castalio thus saying: Beza
Castalio, vbi supra.
pulcherrimum maximique momenti locum deprauat etc. (...), est Potestas,
nunquam Dignitas etc.

Now touching our English Translations of the Bible, The Disagreements of our
English Protestants are no less violent and implacable. For First, we find one
English Author thus to condemn them: The English Translations Carleyle, lib.
That Christ descended not into Hell. page 116. 117. 118.
have depraved the sense, obscured the Truth, and deceived the ignorant; and in
many places, they detort the Scripture from its true sense. Another Protestant
thus censureth them: How M. Burges in his Apology. Sect. 6.
can I approve under my hand a Translation which has many Omissions, many
Additions, which sometimes obscureth, sometimes peruerteth the sense; being
sometimes sensles, sometimes contrary?

The Ministers of Lincoln Diocese thus write: The English In the Abridgment
of a book delivered to King, James by the said Ministers. page 11. and 12.
Translation takes away from the Text, adds to the Text, and this sometimes
to the changing, or obscuring of the meaning of the Holy Ghost. They further
enlarging themselves in these words: A Translation, Vbi supra.
which is absurd and sensles, perverting in many places the meaning of the Holy
Ghost. Other Puritans are no less sparing in their Censures; for diverse
Puritans with one consent thus write only of the Translation of the Psalms:
Our Translation In a Treatise entitled: A Treatise directed to her Excellent
Majesty.
of the Psalms compared in our Book of Common Prayer, does in Addition,
Substraction and Alteration differ from the truth of the Hebrew, in two hundred
places at least. M. Parkes, censureth the English Bibles with the Notes of
Geneua in these words: As for In his Apology, concerning Christ's descending
into Hell.
those Bibles it is to be wished, that either they may be purged from those
manifould Errors, which are both in the Text and Margent, or else utterly
prohibited.

To conclude with M. Broughtons Condemnation of the English Bibles. This great
Hebritian thus expressly writes: The public In his Aduertisment to the Bishops.
Translation of the Scripture in English, is such, as that it peruerteth the
Text of the Old Testament in eight hundred forty and eight places; and it
causes Millions of Millions to reject the New Testament, and to run into
eternull Flames. And hence it is, that D Reynolds in the Conference at
Hampton Court (being the speaker for the Puritans) openly denied before the
King to subscribe to the Communion Book; because said he, It warranted a
corrupt and false Translation of the Bible. Thus far of the immortal
Disagreements of the Protestants, both touching the Authority of the many
Books of Scripture, and of the Translations of the Scriptures, made by the
Protestants.

3. I will here in this next place rest in the easines, and difficulty of the
Scripture, severally maintained by several Protestants. We find In Prolegom^
contra Patrum a Soto.
Brentins to write that it belongs, through the easines of Scripture, to
every man, to judge from the Scripture of the Doctrine of Religion, and to
discern truth from falsehood. In like sort. D Whitaker thus writes, touching
each unlearned Man's reading the Scripture: The de sacra script, p. 529.
unlearned in the exposition of Scripture, is to demand the Opinion of the
learned, and to read the Commentaries of Interpreters; but they must take heed,
ne nimis illis tribuant, that they do not ascribe too much to them, but so as
that in the mean time they retain their own liberty; that is, that every
illiterate fellow must finally judge of the sense of the Scripture.

This point needs no further allegations, for we see, that every Mechanical
Fellow (if so he can but read, and thinks himself to be of the number of the
Faithful) vanteth of his easy understanding of the Scripture. And this
deportment is the Character of each ignorant Puritan; Yea each silly ignorant
Puritan-Woman will assume so much to herself, in the interpretation of
Scripture: And yet to cross, this their Vanity, we find Luther thus to write:
Scio In praefat, in Psalm.
esse impudentissimae temeritatis etc. I know it to be a sign of most shameless
temerity and rashness for any Man to profess, that he truly understands in
all places, but any one book of the Scriptures. And D. Field maintayneth the
same, and shows Reasons in defense thereof, thus writing: There is no L. 4.
of the Church. cap. 15.
Question, but that therebe many difficulties of the Holy Scriptures,
proceeding partly from the high and excellent things therein contained, which
are without the compass of Natural Understanding and so are hidden from
natural Men etc partly out of the ignorance of tongues etc. And the truth of
this point is warranted from the practice of the learned Protestants, many of
whom have written Commentaries and Expositions of most books of Scripture;
which Commentaries and Expositions had been needlessly undertaken, if the
Scripture were of that facility and easines, as the Puritans seem to suggest.

Here now in this last place concerning the Protestants disagreements about
Scripture, I will descend to show how they disagree in severally expounding
several texts of Scripture. To go through all such texts of their
disagreements, would be most laboursome and needles; therefore I will insist in
some few. And First, to begin with those words of the Institution of the
blessed Eucharist, Hoc est corpus meum: Touching which text, after all the
Protestants have wholly disclaymed from the Catholics exposition thereof; they
presently dissent among themselves.

1. For First, In lib. suo ca^^o Basiliae, anno 1526.
Carolostadius the Protestant, will have the Aduerb, Hic, to be understood by
the Pronoune, Hoc; he thus meaning: Hic sedet corpus meum.

2. Bucer In R^tract^^. suis.
affirms, that the Pronoune, Hoc; signifies the whole action of the supper;
So as the sense must be: This action signifies my body.

3. Swinglius L. d^ vera and falsa Religi^. cap. de Eucharistia.
teaches, that the words of the Institution are to be taken Figuratively; And
the Figure to consist not in the Pronoune, Hoc, but in the Verb, Est: Which
ought (says he) to be taken for the word, Significat; he thus meaning: This
signifies my body.

4. Petrus In examen. libri Hothusi^ prop^i^^tium.
Boquinus affirms, that the bread is truly called the Body of Christ, propter
communicationem Idiomatum; as by the same form of speech, we truly say of
Christ: This Man is God.

5. Oecolampadius In lib. de genuine exposit. horum verborum,
does not rely either in the Pronoune, Hoc; nor in the verb, Est, but in the
Substantive, Body. For he maintayneth, that the bread is called the Body, by
the Figure Metonymia, by which Figure the name of the thing signified, is
attributed to the sign: So as the sense (says he) is this: Hoc est corpus
meum, that is, this bread is a Figure of my body.

6. Calvin Lib. (...) Instit. c. 17. ^. 11.
teaches in part with Oecolampadius, that the Figure Metonymia lies in the
word, Corpus; But withal he adds, that the bread of the Eucharist is not a
naked Figure of Christ's body, but it is a Figure, which does exhibit and
present the thing it self; And therefore Christ did not say: This bread is a
Figure of my Body, but is, the body it self. And Peter L. de ver aque natura
Christi.
Martyr conspireth with Calvin herein.

7. Certain other Caluinists mentioned (though their names not expressed) by
Cornelius In Comment. cap. 59. Concord. in illa ve^ba. Nisi manducaueritis.
Iansenius, do teach, that the word Corpus, ought to be taken for the Mystical
body of Christ; that is, for the Church: So as the sense of the words of the
Institution should be this: This is my body, that is, you Disciples are my body.

8. Johannes Vti testatur. Lutherus insua bre^i Confess. edita anno 46.
Campanus (a Sacramentary) thus expounds the words of the Institution; This
is my body, that is: This body is created, and made by me. See here (Good
Reader) the wonderful disagreements of the Protestants in the exposition of
these few words, who all conspire together in rejecting the Catholic
Interpretation; but then presently they dissent in each ones particular
construction given thereof; They resembling many lines, which meet together in
one Center, but then presently they break of, and run several ways.

The Protestants do no less disagree, touching the manner of receiving the
body of Christ; for First, all the Lutherans mantaine with the Catholics, that
the body of Christ is received with the Corporal mouth. But Calvin teaches,
it is truly present, and received with the mouth of Faith; in regard whereof,
as placing a great Mystery therein, Calvin thus breaks forth in words: Nihil
Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c 17.. 7.
restat etc. Nothing remains but that I break forth into admiration of this
mystery, the which neither the understanding is able to conceive, nor the
tongue to deliver in words. With Calvin agree herein D. D. Whitak. contra
Duraeum, page 109.
Whitaker, The Confession The Confession of Belgia in the English Harmony, page
4^1.
of Belgia, M. Hooker. Eccles. pol. l. 5. sect. 67. page 174.
Hooker, Bucer, inscript. Anglic. p. 548. and 549.
Bucer, and many others. Yet this doctrine is impugned by Peter Peter Martyr,
in his Epistles, annexed to his Common places in English. p. 107. epist. 25.
Martyr, Aretius sermon. 1. de Coena.
Aretius and Ludouicus Alamannus in positionib. apud Lugdunens, editis anno
1566.
Alamannus, reproouing it in these words: Neque etiam per fidem etc. Neither is
the body taken by the mouth of Faith, after an incomprehensible manner, as they
say; for this is clearly imaginary, and is evidently repugnant to the word of
God. Finally the former doctrine is denied by all our English In their
Christian letter to M. Hooker. page 35.
Puritans.

Touching those words, Thou art Math. 16.
Peter, and upon this rock will I buyld my Church, etc. Now here the
Protestants to avoid this pressing Authority, for the proof of Peter's
Primacy, do answer severally, and most distractedly. For Calvin Lib. 4.
Instit. c. 6.. 6.
says, that here by the word, Rock, is understood Christ figuratively. Eras.
in hunc locum.
Erasmus maintayneth, that every one of the faithful, is understood thereby.
But Lib. de Potestate Papae.
Luther, that the Word, Rock, there signifies The Confession of our Faith: So
disparate the Protestants are in themselves in the construction of this Text.

In like sort they are not much less various, in expounding that Article of
the Creed, Descendit ad inferos, He descended into Hell. For Bucer in Math. ^^.
Bucer by the word Hell, understands the Grave, by the Figure Epexegesis, or
rather by an idle Tautology: Yet Calvin and most (though not all) of the
Caluinists, do interpret by the word, Hell, that Christ suffered really and
truly the pains of Hell. For thus Calvin discourses of this text, and the
sense thereof: Since Calu. l. 1. Instit. c. 16. ^um ^0. and 11.
Christ only by corporal Death, could profit us nothing, his soul therefore
ought to fight with everlasting Death, that by this means be might expiate our
wickedness and punishment. To whose construction herein In Ca^^ches. an^^ 155^.
Brentius subscribeth. Yea Calvin is so pre^ipitious and resolute in his
exposition of the former words, as that he terms all others, Perditos L. ^.
Iustit. c. 26. number. ^1.
nebulenes, qui doctrinam istam solatij plenam exagitant: Lost and damned
fellows, who should call in question this most Comfortable Doctrine. So just
reason had that Blessed Martyr Father Campian, to burst out in a Christian and
Zealous fervor, saying: In ratio, redd. Academ. rat. 8.
O Tempora, Tempora, cuiusmodi monstrum aluistis!

Touching that place of Scripture, I, and my Father are one; Calvin in Joan, ^^.
Calvin differently from all others, affirms thus: This text shows not,
that Christ is Consubstantiall with his Father. Which exposition of Calvin is
also defended by D. Whitaker, contra Campian. rat. 8. page 123. In like sort,
that Sentence in Psalm. 2. Thou art my son, this day I have begotten thee;
Which text proves the Divinity of Christ, even in the judgment of most
Protestants: Yet Calvin differently expounds it from them, thus w^^^ing in
Hebr. c. 1. Friuola Augustini argutia est etc. The subtility of Austin is here
frivolous who by the word, H^di^, interprets, Eternal and Continual.

Again where we read 1. Joan. 5. There be three, which give testimony in
Heaven. The Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and those three b^ one;
alleged not only by the Fathers and Catholics, but also even by most
Protestants, to prove the Divinity of Christ; yet Calvin upon this place thus
differently from them all expounds these words, saying: Quod dicit tres esse
v^um, ad essentiam non refertur, sed ad consensum. Whereas it is here said
these three are one; this is to be referred not to the essence, but rather to
consent.

Lastly, to avoid prolixity, concerning the word Eloim in Genes c. 1. M. Willet
upon Genes. in c. 1. thus urges 11: Against the Jews, who deny the Trinity,
we have evident proof in this Chapter, where the word Eloim etc. Which
Interpretation Peter Martyr, and Zanchius in Hunnius his Anti-paraus page 16.
and 19. and many other Protestants of note do approve; yet Calvin diss nteth in
the Construction thereof from them all, thus writing in Genes. c. 1. Ex verbo
Eloim colligero solent etc. They are accustomed to infer from the Word Eloim,
that there are three persons in God but because the proof of so great a matter
seems to me but weak, I will not insist in that word; but rather will
admonish my Readers, that they take heed of such violent Glosses, and
interpretations. Thus far of Caluins constructions of the former Texts, against
the judgment almost of all other Protestants, to impugn with the Arians, the
Divinity of Christ.

And thus far for a taste of some few texts of Holy Scripture, receiving from
our Adversaries Pens most contrary constructions; So as admitting one of the
said Constructions to be true, it follows necessarily, that all the rest are
false; for they are in sense, and in the inferences thereof, most incompatible
one with another. This point shall be made more evident hereafter, by setting
down many points of Catholic Religion, maintained by learned Protestants from
the Scriptures; and therefore the said Protestants dissent wholly in interpreting
the Scriptures touching those Doctrines, from other Protestants, not believing
the said Doctrines.

The V. Paragraph.
I Will in this next place, insist in our Adversaries disagreements touching
their Liturgy, or book of Common Prayer, chiefly peculiar to England; showing
how often the Protestants, through diversity of Judgments at several times,
have altered the same; the later Edition thereof ever condemning the former.
And to begin. The Reformed Communion Book of Prayer begun by Luther and the
Lutheran Churches (the oblation of the Sacrifice excepted) was so agreeable and
consenting with the Roman Church, that the Confession of Augusta thus speaks
thereof: Our Cap. de missa. s^ also Osiander Cent: 16. page 163.
Churches are wrongfully accused for abolishing the Mass; for the Mass is
still retained among us, and celebrated with great Reverence etc. But this
Liturgy or Common Book of Prayer, being rejected in England; another was made
(in King Edward the Sixth his reign) by the advice of Bucer, Peter Martyr, and
Cramner, and presumed (as the In the Statutes 2.3. of K. Edw. 6.6.1.
Statutes affirm) to be done by the aid of the Holy Ghost, and ratifyed by
the Authority of the high Court of Parliament.

This Book of Common prayer, printed by Edward Whitchurch, Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum. anno 1549 makes special defense of Fol. 116.
Prayer for the Dead, and Intercession Fol. 117.
and offering of our prayers by Angels, of Fol. 129.
Baptism by Lay persons in time of necessity and of the Ibidem.
Grace of that Sacrament, of the Fol. 137. 139.
Priests absolution of the Sick Penitent, and the Priests blessing of the
bryde and brydegrome, Of the Fol. 144.
Anointing of the Sick, Of Confirmation Fol. 132.
of Children; Of Fol. 116.
consecrating the Eucharist with the sign of the Cross; Finally (to omit some
other Catholic points, confirmed and practiced in that Communion Book) Of the
Fol. 1^8.
Chrisme, and the Child's annoynting, and of Fol. 126.
Exorcisme.

Now, no sooner Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, but that the former
Liturgy of King Edward being wholly abolished, another was made; Yet not so
perfect in all points, but that M. Parker thus speaks hereof: The Day Against
Symboli^ing part. 1. ca. 5. sect 1. page 4.
star was not risen so high in their days, when yet Queen Elizabeth
reformed the defects of King Edwards Communion Book. And further he says: It
is Ibidem Sect. 17. page 39.
not the same Book with tha^ of King Edwards; but it is altered in very many
and sundry Places: Yea so altered, as when it was proposed to be Confirmed by
the Parliament, it was refused. This point of altering the Communion Book of
Prayer, is so evident, that M. Cartwright acknowledges it in these words: The
2. Reply. part 1. page 41.
Church of England changed the Book of Common Prayer, twyce or thryce, after
it had received the knowledge of the Gospel.

Now, all what is above set down touching the Communion Book, I think good
briefly to recapitulate in the words of Doctor Dove an eminent Protestant)
thus fully discoursing of this point: Persuasion to English Recu^ants. pa. ^^.
Concerning the Book of Common Prayer, when the Mass was fi st put down King
Henry had his English Liturgy, and that was judged absolute, and without
exception: But when King Edward came to the Crown^, that was condemned, and
another set forth in the place which Peter Martyr and Bucer did approve, as
very consonant to the word of God. When Queen Elizabeth began her reign, the
forsaid Book was judged to be full of imperfections, and a new devised and
allowed by the Consent of the Clergy. But about the middle of her reign, we
grew weary of that Book and great means have been wrought, to abandon that
and establish another; which although it was not obtained, yet we do at the
least at every change of Prince, change our Book of Common Prayers; We be so
wanton, that we know not what we would have. Thus far D Dove touching our
English Protestants disagreements for the approving or rejecting of their
Liturgy, or Common Book of Prayer.

Now, how yet the Puritans rest affected toward the last Edition of the
Communion Book in Queeene Elizabeth her Days, may appear from their
censuring it in these words: The These words are related by D. Whitguift, as
spoken by the Puritans, in his Defense page 474.
form of the Communion Book is taken from the Church of Antichrist; as the
reading of the Epistles, the Gospells etc. The most of the Prayers, the manner
of ministering the Sacraments etc. Again, our more late Puritans do thus
Syndicate, and condemn the Communion Book: Many In the book entitled: The
Petition of twenty two Preachers in London.
things in the Communion Book are repugnant to the word of God; And more: In
the Communion Book, there are things, of which there is no sense; there is
Contradiction in it, even of necessary and essential points of Religion. Other
Puritans thus write against it: The These words are alleged in the Survey.
page ^0. and 14.
Communion Book is not agreeable to the Word of God in many things. And yet
more: The Certain Considerations printed, anno 1605. f. 10 11. 17.
Protestants Communion Book and service, is naught: it has gross and
palpable repugnancy in it. This point is further made evident, by the Authority
of Doctor Couell, who being an Adversary to the Puritans, delivers their
Sentence, touching their extreme dislyke of the Communion Book in these words:
The D. Couell, in his Exam pa. 1^8.
Communion Book is bouldly despised, Gross errors and manifest impietyes
(meaning in the judgment of the Puritans) are in the Communion Book.

Thus far of the Protestants irreconciliable Disagreements touching the
several Forms of Liturgyes, or Communion Books of Prayer, since the
Catholic Religion was first abolished in England. From whence it ineuitably
follows, that during all these several years of alterations of their
Communion Books, they never enjoyed (if their own Censures and judgments be
perfect,) a true form, how to pray to Allmighty God.

The VI. Paragraph.
I Will next come to their Disagreements, touching Christ our Redeemer. And, 1.
touching Christ's Nature, Beza l. de Vnitate Eccles.
Beza differently from most other Protestants, teaches, that two Hypostaticall
Unions are constituted in Christ; the one of the Soul with the Body the other
of the Divinity with the Humanity. Beza in Hesbusium.
Beza further teaches, that Christ is not begotten of the Substance of the
Father. That Christ is not Consubstantiall with his Father, Luther thus
writes: Anima Luth. contra Latimer.
mea odit hoc verbum Homousion: My very Soul hates this word Homousios, or
Consubstantialis.

2. That Christ by his Works did merit nothing to himself, contrary to the
judgments almost of all Christians, is maintained by Calvin, who terms this
Doctrine, A Foolish Instit. l. 2. c. 17.. 10.
Curiosity, and rash Opinion. The same blasphemy is maintained by In his book
entitled: the wicked Mammon.
Tindall, and by John Act. Mon. page 487.
Teuxbury.

3. That Christ suffered not only according to his Humane Nature, but also
according to his Divinity, is defended by Luth. in Confess. maiore in cana
Domini.
Luther, contrary to all Christians, both Protestants and Catholics, Luther
thus speaking of this point: When I believe, that the only Humane Nature
suffered for me, then is Christ a Savior but of a base and small worth, and
himself needs a Savior.

4. That Christ did not dye for all the world, but only for the Elect, being
most contrary not only to the sacred Scripture, which says: Christ 1. Joan. 2.
and 1. Tim. 2.
dyed for the sins of the whole World, but also almost to all learned
Protestants, is maintained by Calu. de arcana Dei Provident. p. 155.
Calvin, and Beza in respons. ad Act. Colloq. Montisbelgar. part. alt^ra. p.
215. and 221.
Beza.

5. That men not believing in Christ may be saved (a most horrid blasphemy) is
maintained by Swinglius, who thus writes thereof: Swingl. in l. Ep. Swinglij
and Oecol. l. 1. p. 39.
Ethnicus, si piam mentem domi fouerit, Christianus est, etiamsi Christum
ignoret. A Heathen, if he bear within him a pious mind, is a Christian, though
he be ignorant of Christ. And hereupon Swinglius concludes: That Swing. tom.
2. fol. 18. and 559.
Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, Arist. des etc. are now in Heaven: A point so
evident, that Echarius (a learned Protestant) thus writes thereof: Quod In his
Fasciculut Controu. printed Lipsiae. anno 1^^9.
Socrates, Aristides, Numa, Camillus, Hercules, Scipiones, Catones, and alij
Gentiles etc. That Socrates, Aristides, Numa, Camillus, Hercules, the
Scipio'es, the Cato'es, and other Gentills are partakers of Heaven or eternal
life, Swinglius writes to the King of France, whom the Tigurin Deuines,
Bullinger, Gualterus, and Hardenburgius etc. do defend, for this his Doctrine.
Thus far this Protestant. That In his Apol. fol. 27. prafix. ^. tom. Swingl.
Gualterus, In Confess. Eccles.
Bullinger, In vita Bulling.
Simlerus, the Bullinger in his preface of allowance to Swinglius his
Exposition.
Tigurin Deuines, maintained this former Heresy with Swinglius, appears from
the references here set down in the Margent.

From Christ. I come to Christ's Successor, to wit S. Peter. Now the Primacy of
S. Peter is maintained by Calvin, thus confessing: The Calvin is alleged thus
to say, in D. Whitguifts Defense. p. 173.
twelve Apostles had one among them, to govern the rest. Musculus, thus
teaches: The Musculus so alleged by Whit. gift, vbi sup. a page 66.
Celestial spirits are not equal; The Apostles themselves were not equal;
Peter is found in many places to have been chief among the rest. And D.
Whitguift himself, thus auerreth: Among D. Whitguift vbi su^rd. page 1^^.
the Apostles themselves, there was one Chief etc. that had chief authority
over the rest etc. that Schisms might be compounded. Yet is this doctrine
wholly denied by most other Protestant writers.

The VII. Paragraph.
TOuching more particularly the Bishop or Pope of Rome, being S. Peter's
successor; that the Popes Primacy is above other Bishops, is maintained by
Melancthon thus writing: Quemadmodum Melanct in the Book entitled: C^nturia
Epistolar. Theology. Epist. 74.
sunt aliqui Episcopi qui prasunt pluribus Ecclesijs etc. As certain Bishops
are president over many Churches, so the Bishop of Rome is President over all
Bishops. And this Canonical policy no wise man (I think) does, or ought to
disalow. The same Doctrine is also defended by John Husse, as Luther writes,
thus saying. Ioannes Husse In. (...) sert. Act. ^0.
^on repugnare videtur etc. John Husse seems not to contradict, why the
Monarchy of the Pope should not be: So much different are these former
Authorities to the judgments of all other Protestants, who wholly reject the
Popes Primacy.

Now touching the Pope being Antichrist, the Protestants do thus differ from
among themselves. First some of them teach, Antichrist is not yet come; to wit,
In Ep. ^auli Cole los and Thessal. page ^40.
Zanchius, Franciscus In his Prognosti^on f^nis noudi. p. 74.
Lambertus, and some others; And hereupon it is, that M Dove In his Sermon of
his second coming of Christ, versus fin^m.
charge some Protestants, in this sort: Some Protestants make a doubt,
whether Antichrist be yet revealed, or no. Now some others do think, that
Antichrist is come, but that the Turk is this Antichrist. Of this opinion is
Melancthon; for so he is alleged to think by M. In his Theolog. Discourses p
1^8
Haruey. Of the same judgment also i^ Bucer, who terms the Turk, Ipsissimus
In his lib. psalm. 5. psalm. 22. f^. 146.
Antichristus, as also M. Fox In Act. Mon. of anno 1^76. page ^^^.
.

The VIII. Paragraph.
TOuching those Protestants who believe, that the Pope is Antichrist, observe
here their great Dissentions, concerning the time of Antichrists coming. And
first D. Willet In Syn. p. ^00.
places Antichrists first coming, in the year, 607. making Boniface the
third, to be the first Antichrist. With whom agrees D. Whitaker, saying: De
Eccl. contr^ Bellar. Contro. 8^ Quaest 4. page 141.
Gregory the Great, was the last true and holy Bishop of that Church etc
Therefore because our Adversaries demand of us the time of Antichrists first
coming, we design and set down to them the very time of his coming. With
whom conspires In his Answer to a Counterfayte Catholic. p. 36.
D. Fulke. Julius Upon the Revel. 5.10.
the great Protestant, makes Hildebrand, who was Pope anno 1074. to be the
first Antichrist: with whom D. Downam seem to conspire in these words In his
Treatise concerning Antichrist. page 1^0.
: Gregory the seventh (alias Hildebrand) was the first of the Popes, who was
openly acknowledged to be Antichrist. Beza teaches, that Leo who was Pope anno
Domini 440. did clearly Beza. Confess. gener. 7. Sect. 21.
breath forth the arrogance of the Antichristian Sea. But M. Napper Upon the
Revel. p. 66.
ascends to higher times, affirming that Antichrist came in, anno Domini 313.
and maintayning, that Siluester the Pope, was the first Antichrist.

But the Reformed Churches of So relates M. Hooker in his Ecclesiestic. Policy.
Transiluania ascribe a greater antiquity to the coming of Antichrist, who
confidently aver, that his first coming was in the year 200. Yet Sebastianus
Francus (no vulgar Protestant) rises higher, placing Antichrists first coming
in the days immediately after the Apostles, for thus he writes: For certain,
In Epist. de abrogundis in vniuersum statutis Ecclesiast.
through the work of Antichrist, the external Church, together with the Faith
and Sacraments vanished away, presently after the Apostles departure.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis? So incredible and indeed ridiculous are the
Dissentions of the Protestants, touching who is Antichrist, and at what time
(dreaming him already to have been come) he first appeared. But I hasten to
other Points.

The IX. Paragraph.
I Will next entreat of the Church; and First of the Visibility of the
Protestant Church, severally mantayned by several of our Adversaries.
Secondly, whether in the Protestant Church, there has been Personal
succession and Vocation of Ministers; Thirdly, who be the Persons of Members
that Constitute the Protestants Church. Fourthly, whether the present Roman
Church be the true Church of God, and the same Church with the Protestants.
Lastly, whether Papists (as the Protestants call the Catholics) dying Papists,
may be saved; In all which several points, the Reader shall find strange
Dissentions in the Protestants writings touching them.

1. And to begin with the Visibility of the Protestant Church; we find most
Protestants confidently to justify the Visibility of it in all Ages. And
according hereto D. Field with a most frontles impudency thus writes; We D.
Field in his book of the Church l. 3. c. 8. page 76.
firmly believe, all the Churches of the World, wherein our Fathers lived and
dyed, to have been true (Protestant) Churches of God; etc. And that they, who
taught, embraced, and believed those damnable Errors, which the Romanists
defend against us, were only a Faction; Which words necessarily imply, that the
Protestant Church was in his judgment ever visible.

In like sort, a little Book written in the year 1624. and entitled: A
Treatise of the Perpetual visibility and succession of the true Church in all
ages; written (as is thought) by the last pretended Archbishop of Canterbury,
D. Abbots, or else by D. White, or D. Featly, in proof of the uninterrupted
visibility of the Protestant Church, iustifyeth their like judgment herein.
Finally D. White and D. Featly in their private Conference in London some
years since, with M. Fisher and M. Sweet, of the Society of Jesus, with great
venditation in words auerred the continual Visibility of the Protestant Church
in all ages; and the greater Part of Protestants do mantayne the same.

Now let us see, how these men are crossed and impugned in this their Tenet by
other learned Protestants. First D. Jewel (merely crossing D. Fields former
most bold and shameless assertion) thus says: The In his Apology of the Church.
part. 4. l. 4.
truth (meaning the Protestant Faith and Religion) was unknown at that time,
and unheard of, when Martin Luther and Hulderick Swinglius first came unto the
knowledge and preaching of the Gospel: And upon this it proceeds, that Bucer
styleth Luther: The In Epist. Anno 36. ad Episcopum Hereford.
first Apostle to us, of the reformed Doctrine. With these former agree
Benedictus Morgensterne the Protestant, thus saying: It is ridiculous Tract. de
Ecclesia page 145.
to say, that any before the time of Luther, had the purity of the Gospel. And
Conradus Schlusselburg (the Lutheran) is no less fervent in this point, thus
auerring: It is In Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. 130.
impudency to affirm, that any learned men before Luther did hold the
Doctrine of the Gospel. From all which authorities it appears, that before
Luthers first breaking out, the Protestant Church was invisible throughout the
whole world.

But let us see, what more the Protestants confess (contrary to the assertions
of infinite other their Brethren) touching the inuisibility of the Protestant
Church, during the several ages before Luther. First then Caelius secundus
Curio (a learned Protestant) thus teaches: Factum De amplitudine regni Dei p.
212.
est, vt per multos iam annos Ecclesia latuerit etc. It is brought to pass,
that the Church for many years has been latent, and that the Citizens of
this Kingdom, could scarsly (ac ne vix quidem, and indeed not at all) be
known of others. In the same Dialect writes M. Perkins, saying: We In his
exposition of the Creed page 44^.
say, that before the days of Luther, for the space of many hundred years, an
universal Apostasy ouerspred the whole face of the earth, and that our Church
was not then visible to the World.

Doctor Fulke speaks here of more particularly touching the time of the
Protestants Churches Inuisibility, saying: The In his answer to a Counterfeyte
Catholic. p. 16.
Church in time of Boniface the third, it being anno 607. was invisible, and
fled into wilderness, thereto remain a long season. The forsaid D. Perkins in
another of his Books, writes more expressly of this point; his words are these;
During In his exposition of the Creed.
the space of nine hundred years, the popish Heresy has spread it self over
the whole earth.

M. Napper rises higher, acknowledging thus: In his Treatise upon the
Revelation. page ^8.
Between the years of Christ 300. and 316. the Antichristian and Papisticall
reign began, reigning universally without any debatible Contradiction, one
thousand two hundred and sixty years: Yea the said M. Napper in another place
ascends to higher times, thus writing: During Upon the Revel. in c. 11. and
12.
even the second and third age, (to wit after Christ) the true Church of God
and light of the Gospel, was obscured by the Roman Antichrist himself: with
whom conspireth M. Brocard, saying: During Upon the Reuelat. page 100.
the second and third age after Christ, the true Temple of God and light of the
Gospel, was obscured by the Roman Antichrist. Sebastianus Francus (a great
Protestant) more liberally acknowledges of this point, writing in this manner:
For In Epistol. de ^brogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis Ecclesiast.
certain, through the work of Antichrist, the external Church, together with
the Faith and Sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles departure;
And that for these Fourteen hundred years, the Church has not been
external, and Visible. With whom D. Fulke, as forgetting what before he had
written, touching anno 607. fully agrees, auerring thus: The true In his
answer to a Counterfeyte Catholic. p. ^3.
Church decayed immediately after the Apostles time.

Thus much concerning the Protestant Church, where we see, that whereas most
Protestants do teach, that it has in all ages continued Visible; diverse others
most remarkable Protestants do not only dissent from these former, in teaching
the contrary Doctrine, to wit, that the Protestant Church has been wholly
invisible for many ages; But also these later disagree among themselves,
touching the time of the Latency of their Church; Some of them designing a
shorter time, others a longer time of its Inuisibility; Yea one and the same
Author, at several times writes severally of the time of their Churches
Inuisibility, as appears by the above alleged different judgments of Doctor
Fulke, and M. Napper: So wonderful are their contentions herein.

2. In this Passage, I come to the Doctrine of Personal succession, and
vocation of Ministers in the Protestant Church, differently mantayned by
different Protestants. For first Calvin challenges to himself, extraordinary
calling, as being sent from no Man, but only from God in these words: Quia
Lascitius the Protestant, recites this saying of Calvin, l. de Russorum and
Muscouit. Religione. c. 13.
Papa tyrannide etc. Because through the tyranny of the Pope, true succession
of Ordination was broken of; Therefore we stand in need of a new Course
herein; and this Function, or calling was altogether extraordinary. In this
Opinion conspire most other Protestants, especially of the more earnest sort:
According hereto M. Perkins In his works printed anno 605. fol. 916.
writes, that the calling of Wicliffe, Hus, Luther, Oecolampadius, Peter
Martyr etc. was ex^raordinary. And Doctor Fulke iumpeth with the former,
saying: The Against stapleton, Martial. page 2.
Protestants that first preached in these days, had extraordinary calling:
Thus far in Defense of extraordinary calling in these days.

Now the Reader shall see, how others more sober Protestants do wholly reject
this extraordinary calling immediately from God, ^xcept it be confirmed with
miracles, as it was in the Apostles. First, M. Cartwright thus writes: To In
his second Reply. part. 2. pa. 14^.
minister the Sacraments is an ho^our in the Church, which none can take to
him. ^ut he which is called unto it, as Aaron was. Musculus, the great
Protestant, writes thus: Vecatio In loc. Comm. page 394.
quae immediate est a Christo, iam in vsu non est, vt erat olim etc. The
calling immediately from Christ, is not now in use, as it was in former times.
The Bishop of Winchester thus teaches: They In his perpetual government of the
Church. l. ^. p. 111.
can have no part of Apostolical commission, that have no show of Apostolical
succession. D. Sarauia agrees with the former, saying: Speciem In defens.
tract. contra respons. Beza. p. 306. and 307
illam extraordinariae vocationis ad Ecclesiae ministerium non admitto etc. I
do not approve that show of extraordinary calling, seeing it is not warranted
with any authority of Scripture, or certain example.

Now whereas diverse other Protestants do teach, that all extraordinary calling
to the ministry is accompanied with working of Miracles, or else is a mere
illusion; In this manner and restriction writes Luther; saying: Vnde Tom. 3.
len. Germ. fol. 491.
venis? quis te misit? vbi sigilla quod ab hominibus missus sis? Vbi miracula?
etc. And Amandus In partitionib. Theol. l. 1. p. 308.
Polanus, In his sovereign Remedy against Schism. p. ^5.
Henoch Clapham, In loc. Comm. p. 304.
Musculus, and many others too long to write, do maintain the same. Yet this
wholly makes against the calling of Luther himself, Calvin and all other
Sectaries of this age, touching their vocation; Seeing it is granted by Doctor
Fulke in these words: It is Against the Rhemish Testam, in Apoc. 13.
known, that Calvin and the rest (whom Papists call Archheretiks) do work no
miracles; with whom D. Sutcliffe conspireth, saying: We In his Exam. of D.
Kellisons Survey, printed 1606. page 8.
do not practice miracles, nor do we teach, that the Doctrine of Truth is to be
confirmed with miracles. Thus much touching the contrary, and
Crossing-Iudgments of the Protestants, concerning the necessity of Personal
Succession in the Church of Christ.

3. I next come to discover their disagreements touching such persons, as they
acknowledge to be members of the Protestant Church, in which point we shall
find wonderful opposition among the Protestants. First I will show all such
sorts of persons, which many Protestants exclude from being members of their
Protestant Church. And First, we find all Heretics to be excluded; and herein
I will begin with the judgment of the Lutherans, then of the Caluinists.
Touching the Lutherans, the Centurists thus write: Cent. 6. in the Preface.
Neither Heretics, nor deuisers of Phanaticall Opinions, are of Christ, but
they are of Antichrist, and the Devil. And Luther is of the same judgment,
saying: In his Explicat. of the Creed.
Neither Gentill, Jew, Heretic, or any sinner can be saved, unless he make
atonement with the Church, and in all things do, and teach the same; he
meaning his own Protestant Church.

To come to the Sacramentaries, Calvin thus teaches: Instit. l. 2. c. 15. Number.
1.
Rightly Austin denies Heretics to have the same Foundation with the Godly,
albeit they Preach the name of Christ. D. White: All In his way to the Church.
p. 10.
Heretics teach the truth in some things; Yet we deny them to be of the Church
of God. The Confession of Basil: Art. 24.
We drive away all, whosoever dissenting from the Society of the holy Church,
do bring in or follow strange and wicked Doctrines. To conclude, D. Sutcliffe:
In his book of the Church. c. 1.
Heretics are not of the Church. Now here I am to advertise the Reader, that
seeing most of these Testimonies (as also diverse other following) do speak
literally of the true Church of God, that therefore the Protestants mean
thereby their own Protestant Church; seeing they teach, it alone to be the
true Church of God.

To come to Schismatiks; they are in like sort rejected from being members of
the Protestant Church: For first Luther thus writes: I believe, Luther in his
great Catech. tom. 5. page 628.
there is on earth a little Congregation of Saints, agreeing in all things,
without Sects or schisms. Melancthon: Neither In his book against Swenkfeld.
tom. 2. pa. ^01.
is there more, then one Church of Christ: Neither does this Company consist of
diverse sects. D. Fulke, thus accordingly teaches: What Of the Succession of
the Church.
skilleth it, whether one (being drawn by Heresy, or schism from the body of
Christ) be subject to eternal damnation? D. Whitaker: It is Controuers 2. q.
9. c. 9.
false, that Heretical and Schismatic Churches are true Churches. To
conclude with D. Field: The name Of the Church l. 1. cap. 7.
of the Catholic Church (he thereby understanding his own Protestant Church)
is applied to distinguish men, houlding the Faith in the Unity, from
Schismatikes.

The Anabaptists are in like manner by diverse Protestants, disclaymed from
being members of their Protestant Church. For thus does the Confession of
Switzerland teach: We Cap. 20.
condemn Anabaptists, who maintain, that Infants are not to he baptized, The
Confession of Ausburg teaches the same, saying: We Cap. 9.
condemn the Anabaptists, who disalow the Baptism of Infants, and think them
to be saved without Baptism. Which Confession of Ausburg does in like sort
eliminate and exclude the Arians from their Church, in these words: We Act. 1.
condemn all Heresies, rising against this Article (meaning the Article of the
Trinity) as the Maniches, Arians, Eunomians. etc. That the Papists (as the
Catholics are contumeliously called) are excluded from the members of the
Protestant Church, is so generally taught (and but truly taught) as that I need
not to insist therein, only D. Whitakers words shall serve at this time, thus
scurrilously railing: I Contro Duraeum. 2. sect. 2.
will not allow the very name of a lawful Church unto the Roman Church,
because it has nothing which a true Church ought to have. Thus far to show
what men are not acknowledged by most Protestants (and in part, most truly) to
be members of the Protestant Church: But now we will see, how they are
contradicted by other Protestants, and sometimes by their own pens.

And first we find the Anabaptists to be accounted members of the Protestants
Church for D. Whitaker thus writes: We Controuers. 4. 9. c. 2. p. 716.
may abstain from Baptism, so there be no contempt thereof. Oecolampadius:
Baptism L. 2. Epist. page 363.
is an external thing, which by the Law of charity may be dispensed with: and
D. Morton seems to enclyne to the same judgment, thus saying: We In his
answer to the Protestants Apology l. 4. c. 1. sect. 10.
Protestants judge the state of the Anabaptists, not to be utterly desperate.

Touching the Arians, M. Morton iustifyeth, that the Arians are of the
Protestant Church, because, (to use his own words) the Arians In his book of
of the kingdom of Israel and the Church. p. 94.
hold the foundation of the Gospel. M. Hookers words are these: The Arians
Eccles polic. l. 4. page 181.
in the reformed Churches of Poland etc. Now these Reformed Churches in Poland
are Protestanticall Churches; therefore the Arians are included as members of
the said Protestanticall Churches.

Touching Idolaters, whether they be of the Protestant Church or no, hear what
the said M Hooker writes: Eccles. pol. l. 3. p. 216.
Christians by ezternall Profession they are all, whose mark of recognizance
has in it those things, which we have mentioned, yea although they he impious
Idolaters, wicked Heretics etc. Thus he.

Touching Infidells, M. Fox relates, how a Protestant of Eminency for
learning, did thus teach: A Turk, Act. Mon. page 493.
Saracene, or any Mohammedan whatsoever may be saved, if he trust in one God,
and keep the Law. But if such a man may be saved, then follows, that he is of
the Protestant Church; seeing most Protestants teach, that the Protestant
Church only affords Salvation. And Cent. 6. page 404.
Bale admonishes us, to be wary in condemning over rashly any Turk. Finally
this their most wicked opinion is already made evident, by the above alleged
testimonies of Swinglius and others, who teach, that Heathens (dying Heathens,
and not believing in Christ) may be saved.

That the Papists and the Protestants are members of one and the same
Protestant Church, is taught (though most falsely) by these Protestants
following: The Confession of Ausburge, speaking of the Catholics and the
Protestants, thus believe and say: We In Praefat.
are all soldiers under one Christ. And Luther thus: In Luther in Epist.
contra Anabapt.
Popery there is true Christianity, yea the kernel of Christianity, etc. M.
Hooker: we L. Eccl. pol. 3. c. 118.
gladly acknowledge them of Rome to be of the Family of Jesus Christ. M. Bunny:
We In his Treatise of Pacificat.
are no several Church from them (meaning the Papists) nor they from us. D.
Whitguift: The In his answer to the Admonition. page: 40.
Papists do believe the same Articles of Faith, which we do. Finally D. White:
In the In defense of the way. c. 38.
substantial Articles of our Faith, we agree with the Papists. From all which
testimonies it follows, that these said Protestants thus teaching, do hold
the Catholics to be members of their Protestant Church.

I will conclude, showing, that whom diverse Protestants hold to be Antichrist,
other Protestants acknowledge the same man to be in state of Salvation; and
consequently a member of the supposed true Protestant Church. This I prove
thus: Most Protestants teach, that the Pope is Antichrist (as is well known)
yet other Protestants confess, that some Popes even since they began to be
Antichrist, are saved. But none are saved, but such as are members of the true
Church. And according hereto, I find M. Powell thus to write; I will in L. de
Antichr. c. 33. page 338.
no wise say, that all the Popes from the time, wherein Papistry was revealed
to be Antichristianity, are damned. With whom D. Whitaker even in the same
words thus affirms. I In his answer to the first Demonstration of D. Sanders.
will not say, that from the time, that Papistry began to be Antichristianity,
the Popes themselves have been all damned. And yet we see, even by these two
last testimonies, that both D. Whitaker and M. Powell teach, that the Pope is
Antichrist, by the reason of the Word Antichristianity, by them both used in
their said testimonies. I will shut up their Disagreements, touching the
members of the Protestant Church, with the malicious Asseueration of Musculus,
thus writing: I embrace In loc. comm. de Coena page 552.
all for brethren in the Lord, howsoever they disagree from me, or among
themselves, as long as they maintain not the Popish Impiety. Thus far of
Protestants contrary judgments, touching who are members of the Protestant
Church, and who are not.

I will conclude their dissentions touching the Church, whether the Papists (as
we are styled) dying Papists (though in part it has been all ready displayed)
and out of the Protestant Church, may be saved. Every man knows, that all the
Puritans as houlding Papists Religion to be idolatrous, and superstitious, and
the Pope to be Antichrist, deny to them all Hope of salvation. Yet D. Some thus
censureth of this point: If In his Defense against Penry. p. 176.
you think, that all the Popish sort, which dyed in the Popish Church, are
damned, you think absurdly, and do dissent from the judgment of all learned
Protestants. D. Barrow: I dare In his 4. Sermons, and two Questions disputed,
ad Clorum. p. 448.
not deny the name of Christians to the Romanists, since the learneder Writers
do acknowledge the Church of Rome, to be the Church of God. M. Cartwright: I
doubt In his Reply to D. Whitguifts Defense, p. 82.
not, but diverse Fathers of the Greek Church, and who were Patrones of
Freewill, are saved. And the same sentence is delivered by D. Whitaker Contra
rat. Camp. pa. 74.
touching the Salvation of the Ancient Fathers, notwithstanding their doctrine
of Justification and merit of works. D. Field: We doubt Of the Church. l. 3. c.
46.
not, but that the Church, in which the Bishop of Rome with more then a
Luciferian pride, exalted himself, was notwithstanding the true Church of God,
and that is held a saving Profession of the truth of Christ. To contract this
point, D. Couell thus expressly teaches: We In his Defense of M. Hooker. page
77.
affirm them of the Church of Rome, to be parts of the Church of God; and that
those, who live and dye in that Church, may notwithstanding be saved; charging
other Protestants teaching the contrary (to use his own words) with ignorant
Zeal.

Thus much touching the dissentions of the Puritans, and the moderate
Protestants, concerning the salvation of Papists, dying Papists, co^cluding
this point with the judgment of the Deuiues of Geneua (contrary to other their
brethren), who teach, that the Baptism of Catholic Children either by
Protestant Ministers, or Catholic Priests; is aualeable, because (say they)
the So teach the Deuines of Geneua in the Propositions and Principles disputed
(...) Geneua. p. 128.
Children are comprehended within the Covenant of eternal life, by means of
the Faith of their Parents. Which very point is in like manner taught (to the
great dislike of many Puritans) by D. Whitguift In his Defense page 62^.
, and M. Hooker Eccles. pol. l. 5. page 1^^
. For most (if not all the Puritans) teach; that Papists dying Papists, cannot
be saved; seeing (say they) their Faith is Idolatry, and superstition.

The X. Paragraph.
I Next come to the Ancient Fathers, because they were the most learned and
eminent members of the Ancient Church: where we shall see the strange diversity
of the Protestants Judgments of them; Some of the Protestants reuerencing and
embracing their Authorities; others wholly betrampling their testimonies, and
entertayning them with all contempt and scorn. And First, we will allege the
judgments of diverse Protestants, admitting their Authorities and worth;
according hereto we find, that D. Jewel in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, thus
cried out: O Gregory, O Austin, O Jerome etc. if we be deceived, you have
deceived us, And after in the said Sermon: As I said before, so I say again; I
am content to yield and subscribe, if any of our learned Adversaries, or if all
the learned men that be alive, be able to bring any one sufficient sentence,
out of any old Catholic Doctor, or Father, or out of any old General
Council, for the space of six hundred years after Christ. Which challenge D.
Whitaker after justified in these words, writing to Father Campian: Audi
Whitak. in respons. ad ration. Camp. rat: 5.
Campiane etc. Hear O Campian, that most true and constant Challenge, which
Jewel that day made, when he appealed to the antiquity of the first six
hundred years etc. That is the proffer and Challenge of us all, we do promise
the same with Jewel, and we will make it good.

D. Sutcliffe thus auerreth: The In his Exam. of D. Kelliso^s survey.
Fathers in all points are for us, and not for the Pope. D. Willet is no less
confident herein, thus protesting: I take In his Antilog. p. 263.
God to witness, before whom I must render an account etc. that the same Faith
and Religion, which I defend, is taught and confirmed in the more substantial
points by those Histories, Counsels, and Fathers, that lived within five or
six hundred years after Christ. Kempnitius: We In Exam. Council. Trident. part.
1. page 74.
doubt not, but that the Primitive Church received from the Apostles and
Apostolical men, not only the text of Scripture, but also the right and native
sense thereof. And again: We are greatly confirmed in the true and sound sense
of the Scripture, by the testimony of the ancient Church. The Confession of
Bohemia: The In the Harmony of Confessions, page 400.
ancient Church is the true and best Mistress of posterity, and going before,
leads us the way. D. Bancroft speaking of Calvin and Beza, thus says: For In
his Survey of the pretended holy Discipline.
M. Calvin, and M. Beza, I do think of them, as their Writings do deserve; But
yet I think better of the ancient Fathers, I must confess. I will conclude
this their acknowledgment of the Primitive Church and Fathers, with D. Jewel
(with whom I first did begin) he thus writing: The Primitive In his Defense of
the Apology.
Church, which was under the Apostles and Martyrs, has ever been accounted
the Purest of all others, without exception.

But now let us see, how Diametrically and repugnantly other Protestants stand
to these former Protestants, touching the Authority and dignity of the ancient
Fathers: And to forbear the former Confessions of Protestants, touching the
Inuisibility of their Church, during the first five or six hundred years after
Christ, above related, which evidently demonstrateth, that such Protestants,
who teach so long an Inuisibility, do consequently teach and grant, that the
Fathers of those times, were in judgment Papists, and not Protestants; for if
they had been Protestants, then the Protestanticall Church had most remarkably
been visible and conspicuous in the said Fathers: To forbear the iteration (I
say) thereof, I will descend to the particular Reproualls, given by the
Protestants against them. And first, do we not find the same D. Whitaker,
(observe the inconstancy of this man) who above so much maintained D Jewels
appeal thus to write? ( Ex Whitak. contra Duraeum. l. 6. p. 423.
Patrum erroribus vester ille religionis Cento consutus est: Your Popish
Religion, is but a patched Couerlet of the Fathers errors, sowed together.

Pomeran (the Protestants) thus writes: Nostri Patres, sieve sancti, five non
sancti etc. Our Pomeran in Io^au.
ancient Fathers, whether they were holy, or not holy I not much rest upon,
were blinded with the spirit of Montanus; and through humane Traditions and
Doctrines of the Devils etc. they did not teach purely of Justification etc.
Neither were they sollicitous to preach Jesus Christ in his Gospel. Iacobus
Acontius (the Protestant) thus condemns the Fathers: Quidem In stratagem.
Satanae. l. c. p. 196.
eo redierunt etc. Certain men (meaning Protestants) are gone so far, as that
they would have all points to be tried by the authorities of the Fathers etc.
But this custom I hold to be most pernicious, and altogether to be avoided.
D. Humfrey so smally pryaeth the Fathers, as that he rebuked D. Whitaker, for
renewing D. Jewels challenge, in appealing to the ancient Fathers above
related, in this manner: D. Whitaker Lib. de vita Jewel li. printed at London.
page 212.
gave the Papists too large a scope was injurious to himself and after a
manner spoiled himself and the Church. Melancthon: In 1. Cor. cap. 3.
Presently In 1. Cor. cap. 3.
from the beginning of the Church the ancient Fathers obscured the Doctrine
concerning Justification by Faith, increased Ceremonies, and devised peculiar
worships. Beza thus ballanceth the Fathers, with the Protestants of this age,
saving: If we In Epist. Theolog Ep. 1.
compare our times, next to the times of the Apostles, my judgment is, that
those times had plus conscientiae, scientiae minus; and we scientia plus,
conscientiae minus. The Archbishop of Canterbury thus vanteth against those
ancient times: The In his Defense of the answer, to the Admonition. page 472.
473.
Doctrine taught and professed by our Bishops at this day, is more perfect and
sounder, then it was in any age after the Apostles.

I will close up the Aristarchian and censuring judgments of the Protestants
against the ancient Fathers (merely contrary to the former alleged
Protestants) with the scurrilous and depressing words of Luther passed upon
them; who thus in one place writes: The Tom. 2. Wittenb. anno 1551. lib. de
seruo arbitrio.
Fathers of so many ages, have been plainly blind, and most ignorant in the
Scriptures; they have erred all their life time; and unless they were amended
before their deaths, they were neither Saints, nor appertayning to the Church.
And further: The In Colloq. mensal. and lib. de seruo arbitrio.
Apology of Philip Melancthon does far excel all the Doctors of the Church,
and exceedes even Austin himself. And of his own judgment, with reference to
their judgments he thus Thrasonically boasts: I Contra Henricum regem Angliae.
ear not, if a thousand Austins, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand Churches
stood against me.

But to come to particular Fathers, mark how Luther showers down words of
reproach against them; In the In Colloq mensa lib cap de Patribus Ecclesia.
writings of Jerome, there is not a word of true Faith in Christ and sound
Religion: Tertullian is very superstitious; I have houlden Origin long since
accursed: Of Chrysostom I make no account: Basil is of no worth, he is wholly
a Monk, I waygh him not of a hair. Thus Luther, and with this I end this
Paragraph; aduertising the Reader, that besides the dissentions which these
last alleged Protestants have with the former Protestants, acknowledging the
Fathers authorities and worth; these sharp censures delivered, in so full a
manner against the Fathers, make greatly in proof of our ancient, Catholic,
and Romay Faith; Seeing they irreplyably prove, that those most blessed and
learned Fathers (so near to the days of our Savior Christ, and his Apostles)
were Papists in Faith and Religion, and not Protestants.

The XI. Paragraph.
CEasing to discourse further of particular Fathers, how they are admitted by
some Protestants, and rejected by others, I will ascend to speak of General
Counsels, which consist of the Assembly and confluence of many hundred of
Fathers; touching which point we shall find great contrariety of opinions,
among the Protestants. And first, for the rejecting of the authority of
General Councels* we find D. Whitaker thus expressly to say: L. d^ Council.
contra Bellarm. q. 6.
General Councels may err. But Peter Martyr is more full and plain herein,
showing the reason, why Counsels are not to be admitted; thus writing: As long
L. de rotis. page 476.
as we insist in General Counsels, so long we shall continue in the Papists
Errors. In like manner, D. Fulke thus depresseth the authority of General
Councels; The In his answer to a Counterfeyt. Catholic. p. ^0 and 90. and p.
86.
whole Church militant may err altogether, as every part thereof. Beza
actually charge the Primitive General Counsels, with error saying: In his
Preface upon the New Testament. Dedicated to the Prince of Condy. anno 1587.
Even in the best times (meaning the Primitive times) the ambition, ignorance,
and lewdnes of Bishops was such, that the very blind may easily perceive, how
that Satan was President in their Assemblies.

But now observe, how other learned Protestants contradict their former
brethrens sentences herein: And first Doctor Bilson discou^sing of the means
to decyde Controversies in Faith, thus writes: To have In his perpetual
Government etc. page 37^.
no Judge for the ending of Ecclesiastical contentions, were the utter
subversion of all peace; and thereupon the said Doctor concludes thus: Synods
Vbi supra p. 370.
are an external Judicial means, to discern errors, and the surest means
to decide doubts. And he further thus writes: If Vbi supra page 374.
Synods were not, the Church neither at any time was, nor indeed safely can be
without tempests. D. Sutcliffe, as not allowing trial of Controversies only by
Scripture, thus writes: In his reuiew of his Examination of D. Kellisons
Survey. printed. 1^06. p. 41.
It is false, that we will admit no judge but Scripture; for m^ appeal still
to a lawful General Council. M. Hooker In his Preface to his book of
Ecclesiast. Policy.
relates, now Beza as being tired with disputs only from Scripture, submits
himself finally to a lawful Assembly, or Council.

And the said M. Hooker in the place above alleged, thus further writes: We
are sure of this that Nature, Scripture and Experience have taught the world,
for the ending of Controversies, to submit it self unto some iudie^ all and
definitive sentence; meaning to the judgment or a General Council. D. Field
conspireth with M. Hooker herein, thus writing: In his Treatise of the Church
in his Epist. Dedicat.
Seeing the controversies in Religion in our time are grown so many in number,
and in nature so intricate, that few have time, leisure, and strength to
examine them; what remains for man, desirous of satisfaction in things of
such consequence, but diligently to search out, which, among all the Societies
of the men in the World, is that blessed Company of Holy ones, that househould
of Faith, that spouse of Christ, that Church of the living God etc. He meaning
the judgment of the Church delivered in a General Council. To conclude, an
External judgment or Definitive Sentence (besides the Scripture) which is
chiefly the sentence of a General Council, is further taught by D. Baneroft
In his Sermon, preached 1. February. 1588, page 4^.
D. Couell In his modest Examination. page 108. and 109.
, and finally (to omit others) even by the Puritanes; of whose judgment herein
s^e D. Baneroft^ Page 1^4,
Survey.

The XII. Paragraph.
TO come to Traditions. That they are rejected by most Protestants, it will be
needless much to labor therein; Seeing they are so luxuriant (especially the
Puritans and the most forward Protestants) and abundant in the condemnation of
all Traditions, yet observe, L. ^. pistol. Swinglij and Oecolamp. page 301.
how diverse points of Christian Faith, not taught in the Scriptures, are
acknowledged by other learned Protestants, to be Apostolical Traditions. And
to begin: Tom. ^ l. de Baptism. fol. 9^.
Swinglius, and (h) Oecolampadius confess, that Baptism of Infants is not
taught in the Scripture; to whose judgment D. Field subscribeth in these words:
Of the Church page ^1^.
Baptism of Infants is a Tradition, because it is not expressly delivered in
Scripture, that the Apostles did Bapt^ze Infants; nor any express precept
there found, that they should so do. M Hooker Eccles. pol. l. 2 sect. 7. p. 1^8.
is so full in acknowledging the Doctrine of Traditions, as that he makes
special answer to the Fathers objected against Traditions, by diverse
Protestants. D. In his Defense. page 539.
Whitguift proves most fully the Tradition of Easter day, from the Apostles. D
Couell affirms (to use his own words) that the In his Answer to John
Burges. page 130.
moderate use of the Cross is an Apostolical Constitution. The said D. Couell
does also refer the word of Archbishop, unto In his Ex^minat. against the Plea
of the Innocent. c 9. page 104.
Apostolical ordination.

The alteration of the Sabbath from Saturday to Sunday, is acknowledged by the
De^tines of Geneua (to set down their own words) for In their Propositions,
and Principles, page 80. sect. 13.
an Apostolical Tradition, to be perpetually observed. Of the same judgment
touching the change of the Sabbath day (to omit others) is Vrsinus (the great
Protestant) saying: Hanc In Doctrinae Christian, Compend in Prolegom. page 36.
esse Apostolicam Traditionem credimus. For greater breuity I will conclude
with M. Hooker, and D. Whitaker, touching Canonical Scripture; of which point
M. Hooker thus discourses: Of Eccles. pol. l. 1. sect. 14. page 86.
things necessary, the very chief is to know, what books we are bound to
esteem holy, which point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to
teach. So he, referring it to Tradition. D. Whitaker speaking of the same
subject thus writes: Canonical Scripture, is not Aduers. Stapleton. l 2. cap.
6. page 170. and l. 2. c. 4. page 1^0.
tried by testimony of spirit, but by the Ecclesiastical Tradition etc. Thus
far touching different judgments of Protestants, concerning the Doctrine of
Traditions.

The XIII. Paragraph.
TOuching the Sacraments, no less are their Disagreeme^ts. And first, touching
the number of them, whereas most Protestants acknowledge but two Sacraments, to
wit Baptism and the Eucharist, yet the Protestant Deuines assembled at
Ratisbone anno 1541. do teach in that their Conference, that there are seven
Sacraments; of which point Bucer complayneth, saying: B^cer (...) Art. Colloq.
R^^isb^n.
Protestants non grauatim admiserunt septem sacramenta: The Protestants
(meaning at their meeting at Ratisbone) have not unwillingly admitted, or
approved seven Sacraments. In like sort, the number of seven Sacraments is
taught by the Protestant Deuines in their Conference at Lypsia, where they were
assembled. This is auerred by Illyric in adh^rtatione ad Constantiam, in aguita
Christi religion. printed in 8. Magdeburgae. 1550 paul^ post initium; and paulo
post medium.
Illiricus.

2. That the known Intention of the Church is necessary to the administration
of the Sacraments, is denied by certain English In their Christ. Let. to M.
Hooker. page 29. and 30.
Protestants, condemning M. Hooker for mantayning the contrary Opinion, as
appears out of M. Hookers own Eccles. pol. l. 3^. ^. sect. ^3^. p^. 120.
writings. As also the same Doctrine is mantayned by D. Couell In his Defense
of M. Hooker p. 10^.
, and almost by all moderate English Protestants. And yet it is so condemned by
Luther, as that D. Couell D. Couel. in his Defense of M Hooker. Art. 5. p. 101.
The same is auerred of Luther, by Hospinian. in his Histor. Sacrament. part.
altera. fol. 14.
) charge Luther with teaching: That the Sacraments are effectual, though
administered by Satan himself.

3. That certain Sacraments do imprint an indeleble character in the Receauers
of them, is denied by M. Willet In Synop. p. 419.
, and by most Puritan Protestants, yet affirmed by D. Couell In his Defense of
M. Hooker. page 87 and ^1.
, and by M. Hooker, who is reprehended therein by M. Willet In his Meditation
upon 122 Psalm. printed 16^3. p. ^1.
. In like sort it is affirmed by most moderate Protestants.

4. That Sacraments do not only signify, but also confer grace, is affirmed by
Melancthon, who thus writes thereof: In c. 4. Epist. ad Roman, after the first
Edition.
Repudianda est Swinglij opinio, qua tantum civilly mode indicat de signis etc.
That Opinion of Swinglius is to be rejected, which teaches, that Sacraments
are only Netes, and signs of our Profession. The same is also mantayned
affirmatively by Osiander In Eucheirid, coher (...) fiar, quas Augustanae
Confessionis Theologi habene cum Caluinianis. p. 27^.
, D. Whitaker Contra Duraeum. l. 8. p. ^61. and 664
, M Hooker Eccles. polic. l. 5. sect 57. p. 226. and 527.
, D. Bilson In his true Difference, part. 4. page 539. and 5^^. and 368.
, and many others; yet it is denied and rejected for Popish, by D. Fulke
Against Purgatory, page 35.
, M. Willet In his Synops. p. 415.
(who In his meditation upon the 122. Psalm. page 92.
reprehendeth some P^o ^stants for their mantayning the contrary Doctrine) by
the Survey Page 103. and 104.
of the book of Common Prayer, and by most English Puritans.

The XIV. Paragraph.
1. TO speak particularly of the Sacrament of Baptism. Luther houldeth
Baptism to be of no force, thus writing: Si habes Luther. l. de Captiuit.
Babylon.
been etc. If thou be Baptized, it is well, if thou want it, no loss:
Believe and tho^^ri saved before thou be baptized And Calvin Lib 4. Justin cap.
15. (...). 7.
prizeth Baptism at no higher worth, then the Ceremony thereof performed by S.
John Baptist. And of the same judgment are the Cent. 2. c. 4.
Centurists, thus writing: before we will ascribe any Operation to the
Sacrament of Baptism, we will mantayne, that Infants have Faith by which they
are saved. And according here to Luther thus concludes: It is Luth. aduers.
Coe^^^um.
better to omit the baptising of an Infant, since his oblation if he do not
believe, is unprofitable. The same opinion of the inefficacy of Baptism, (to
omit Calvin, Beza etc. teaching the same) is mantayned by most Puritanes. And
conspiringly hereto D, Whitaker (as is above alleged) thus teaches: We Cont^^
4.9.^2. page 716.
may abstain from Baptism, if there be no contempt or scandal following. Now
that there are other Protestants, who ascribe an Efficacy to Baptism, is
evident: for we find, that to the Children of the Faithful, dying unbaptized,
salvation is not promised, to be taught by the Confession of Ausburg In the
Harmony. page 403.
, by D. Bilson In his true Difference. part. 4. page 36^.
, by Vrbanus ^n 1. part. operum Catech. minor. fol. 105.
Regius (the learned Protestant) by In loc. Common 238. 239. etc.
Sarcerius (the Protestant,) by the Page 16
Conference before King James; and finally, by the most of the more temperate
Protestants.

2. Again, whereas all Protestants (for the most part) do use in Baptizing of
Children, these precise and particular words: I baptize thee in the name of the
Father, the son, and the Holy Ghost; there are diverse other Protestants, who
teach, that no particular form of words is necessary thereto: For first Luther
mantayneth, that Baptism is auayleably ministered, in what words soever, so
that (as says he) the Tom. 2. Wittenberg. in (...) de Captiuit Babylon. c.
(...) Baptism. fol. 75.
same be not in the name of Man, but of God. The same thing of not using any
peculiar and set form of words, is taught by In Catechis. cap. de Baptismo.
Brentius, and by Swinglius who thus writes. Swing. tom. 2 l. de Baptism. fol.
(...).
Christus Baptismi formulam, qua vteremur, his verbis non iustituit etc. Christ
did not ordain that form of Baptism in words, which we (...) use, as the
Deuines hither to have falsely delivered. Finally the same is justified by many
other Protestants over long here to be set down.

3. To conclude: Baptism in time of Necessity, ministered by lay Persons, and
Women, it justified and warranted by Schlusselburge In Theo^og. Caluinist. l.
^. fol 68. and 61.
, by M. Hooker L. 5. sect. ^1. page 137.
, by D. Couel In his Defense of M. Hooker. p. 518.
, by Iacobus In Epitom. Colloq. Montisbelgar. pa. 64.
Andraas, and by diverse others; Yet it it impugned by D. Willet In his Synops.
p. 4^2.
, by Calvin So is Calvin alleged by Schlusselburg. in Theolog. Caluinist. l.
1. fol. 60. and 61.
, and infinite others. Thus far touching the great Dissentions of the
Protestants concerning the Doctrine of the Sacraments, both in general, and in
particular.

The XV. Paragraph.
IN this next place I will examine the like disagreements of our Adversaries
touching the Doctrine of Freewill, Predestination, and Reprobation. And to
begin with Freewill: That most Protestants (as Calvin, Beza, and infinite
others) deny Freewill in Man, is over evident; and therefore needless it were
to insist in their Authorities and words therein: Therefore I will allege some
other eminent Protestants (contrary to their former brethrens judgments)
teaching and maintayning the Doctrine of Freewill.

And first, I allege Castalio (the learned Caluinist) as justifying Freewill
in Man, most vehemently to charge Beza, for falsely translating and corrupting
the first Chapter of S. John's Gospel (a place above by me alleged) in denial
of Freewill, touching the Greek word, (...), which signifies Liberty, or
Freedom, and yet translated by Beza, Dignity, thereby to weaken this place for
the proof of Freewill; of which his translating Castalio thus complayneth: The
In Defense Translat. page 183.
word (...), here used, signifies Power, but never Dignity: Now seeing Beza
would not have, that Christians should have this power from Christ what other
thing is this, then to envy at the benefits of Christ, bestowed upon
Christians? Molinaus (the remarkable Protestant) is so great a defendour of
Freewill, as that Peter Martyr thus rebukes him: Molinaeus In his Epistles
annexed, to his Common places, Englished In his Epistle to Calvin.
adiudgeth certain things amiss, touching Freewill.

M. Perkins (though at other times may seem to impugn Freewill) yet in the
close, he thus expressly writes: In his reformed Catholic. page 26.
Because God gives men Commandment to repent and believe; therefore they have
power to repent and believe; God with his Vbi supra pa. 5^.
commandment giving grace, that the thing prescribed may be done. D. Willet,
adverse to the Doctrine of Freewill, does charge Hemingius and Snecanus
(Protestants of note) for their defending of the Doctrine of Freewill, in these
words: They In his Synops. page 808. and 810.
meaning the two former Protestants) are more erroneous, concerning Freewill,
then are the Papists. M. Hooker thus writes of Freewill: Eccles. polic. l. 5.
p. 101.
Distributiuely at the least, all grievous actual offenses may be avoided; so
that in this sense to be preserved from all sin, it is not impossible; which
words necessarily implye freedom of will. With M. Hooker accords D. Couell In
defense of M. Hooker etc. art. 5.
herein. To be brief the Doctrine of Freewill is in like sort taught by Ceut.
16. p. 814.
Osiander the Protestant, and by some Protestants, recorded by M. Fox Act. Mon.
page 1533. and 1605.
.

The XVI. Paragraph.
TO come to the Doctrine of Reprobation, and Predestination; Beza thus writes
of this point: In his treatise englished and entitled: A display of Popish
practices. p. 17. and 38.
God does create some men to perdition, appoints and decrees them to his
hatred and destruction. And thereupon he teaches, that God In respons. ad act
Colloq. Montisbel. p. 285. 2^1.
did not suffer death for such men. With whom agrees Calvin, thus teaching, or
rather blaspheming: God Instit. l. 3. c 13. sect. 6.
does ordain by his Counsel and decree that among men some be borne destined
to certain Damnation from their Mothers Womb, who by their destruction may
glorify God: with these former conspireth M. Willet thus saying: God In Synops.
page 554.
has ordained some to be vessels of wrath, without any respect had to their
Works, either Good or Bad. And hereupon Peter Martyr concludes thus: Sins In
his Common Places. part 3. page 12.
foreseen are not the cause of Reprobation.

Now see how these are crossed and impugned by a whole army of other learned
Protestants, both Lutherans and Caluinists, their brethren. For first to begin
with the Lutherans: In respons. Beza ad Colloq. Montisbelg. part. altera. page
251.
Iacobus Andreas, Conradus Schlusselburg In Theolog. Called. l. 1. art. 12.
, Kempnitius In Eucheirid. page 158.
, The In the harmony of Confessions in English. page 268. 269.
Confession of Ausburg, The Century In loc. Comm. page 140.
writers; and finally (to omit diverse other Lutherans) even Melancthon
himself, though for a time in the beginning, he maintained the contrary
Doctrine, do jointly reject this former doctrine of Reprobation.

To come to Caluinists. M. Hooker thus writes: Eccles. polic. page 104.
Gods general inclination is, that all men might be saved. D Couel: God has
In his Defense of M. Hooker. p. 62. and 63.
a general inclination to save all men etc. And that with a conditional Will,
he wills all men to be saved; Who therefore that they are not saved, is not
his decree, but their own fault. M. Fox is also full herein, thus teaching: In
Apocalypse. page 473.
Seeing the benefit of Redemption, which takes away the sins of the world,
is an universal thing: It is demanded, whether the Grace of this Redemption do
appertain equally to all the posterity of Adam, or be restrained to a certain
number? I answer, that the incredulity of men, not the default of the Lamb,
makes this restraint. D. Willet much complayneth, that this Doctrine is so
general among Protestants, thus writing: In Synops. p. 784.
Universality of grace (which potentially includes, that God for his part
reprobates no man to damnation) seems much to be approved by our own
Countrymen, and has already gotten some Patrones in our Church. Bullinger thus
confidently writes of this point: The Upon the Revelations Englished. c. 5.
fol. 79.
Lord dyed for all, but that all men are not made partakers of this Redemption,
is through their own Fault, for the Lord excludes no man. Amandus Polanus
(the great Caluinist:) God In partitionib. Theolog. p. 11. ^^.
by his Conditional will would have all men saved.

I will conclude with Hemingius (a learned Caluinist) who thus fully discourses
of this point: Pugnat cum verbo Dei v^cant^ etc. This opinion (to wit, which
teaches that God does Reprobat man from his mothers womb) feighteth with the
word of God, calling and inuiting all men to repentance; It In lib de
universally Gratia. page 111.
makes men partly sluggish partly secure, and partly desperate: for many are
driven to despair whites by this Opinion is overthrown the Doctrine of
Universal Grace, in which all men are commanded by Faith to include
themselves. Thus far Hemingius. And thus much touching the contrary opinions of
the Protestants, concerning Reprobation.

Now, concerning the Doctrine of the Certainty of Man's Justification, and of
Predestination; the Protestants are little less concordant among themselves,
then we see, they are in the Doctrines of Freewill and Reprobation. And as
touching those, who maintain, that Justifying Faith once had cannot be lost,
and consequently, that a man once having this Justifying Faith, is certainly
and infallibly predestined, and assured of his salvation; We first will
allege D. Willet, who thus reprehendeth such Protestants, as teach the
contrary: These In Synops. p. 811.
Patrones of universal Grace and conditional Election, do consequently hold,
that men may loose their Election and Faith: Hemingius p. 30. the same is also
maintained by Snecanus. Thus D. Willet.

But to proceed to others, D. Whitaker thus teaches: Si quis L de Eccles.
page 31.
actum fidei haebet etc. He who makes an act of faith, his sins cannot hurt
him. Beza thus conspiringly instructs his followers: He Andraaes (the
Protestant) reports these words of Beza in Epist. Colloq. Montisbelg. pa. 48.
and 44.
who ones belieueth, cannot afterward fall from the grace of God, or loose his
Faith by Adultery, or any other like sins. From whence it follows, that a
man once having true Faith, is infallibly assured of his salvation. Luther thus
Catechiseth his Scholars: A Christian, Lib. di Captiuit. Babylon. This saying
of Luther is also mentioned by the Protestant Author, in his treatise against
Defense of the Censure. p. 198.
or baptized Person is so rich, as although he would, he cannot lose his
Salvation by any sins how greatsoeuer, unless he will not believe. In like
sort, the said Luther has further thus left written in defense of the
certainty of Predestination: As Luth. in Loc. Comm. printed Magdeburg. 1594.
Class. 5. c. 27 p. 68.
nothing iustifyeth but Faith; so nothing sins but unbelief. Yea some
Protestants thus strangly write for certainty of Predestination: We See the
Acts and Monuments. page 1563. page 488.
cannot be damned, except Christ be damned with us. M. Perkins earnestly M.
Perkins in his reformed Catholic. p. 3^. and 55.
maintayneth the said Doctrine; as also it is taught by Calvin, and finally by
most Puritans, and the most forward Protestants in these days.

Now let us see, how cross and Antipodes-like do other Protestants (as
maintayning the contrary,) tread to their former Brethren. I will begin with
the Lutherans, and first with Kempnitius who thus writes: True In Exam Council.
Trident. printed 1578. part 2. p. 1^3.
lively justifying Faith may be lost, and the party made guilty of eternal
Damnation. The Confession of In the Harmony of Confessions in English. page 214
Ausburg condemns the contrary Doctrine, for Anabaptisme. The Protestant
Deuines of Saxony do also thus teach: It is Ibid. p. 80. and see, p. 223.
manifest, that some, who are regenerate etc. are again rejected of God, and
made subject to eternal Punishment; And more: Justification In the Harmony
etc. page ^95.
and regeneration may be shaken of and we lose eternal life. This doctrine of
the uncertainty of Salvation is in like manner taught by diverse other Lutherans
(whose sayings were over long here to set down) as by In his Disputat.
Theolog. p. 117. and 318.
Lobechius, (Doctor and Professor in the University of Rostock) by Conradus
In Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. art. 14. fol. 45.
Schlusselburg, by Iacobus In Epitom. Colloq. Moutisberg. Editio tertia. p. 73.
74. etc.
Andreas, by In his Disput 17 pro ^a^ctiss. Lib. Concord. Disput. 16. page 650.
Gesnerus (Doctor and Professor at Wittemberg) and finally (to omit many
other Lutherans, for greater expedition) by Philip Melancthon, who thus
writes: In Council. Theolog. page 3^^.
Excidunt homines a gratia, aciustificantem fidem amittunt: Men do fall from
grace, and lose their justifying Faith.

To come to the Caluinists teaching the same Doctrine. And first M. Perkins
thus confesses hereof: This In his four Treatises, necessarily to be
considered of all Christians, Treatise fourth. Sect. 14.
testimony of being persuaded, that we are Adopted and Chosen in Christ, is
weak in most men, and scarsly can be perceived. Musculus (the great and famous
Protestant) thus teaches: If In loc. Com. loc. de peccato, sect. 5.
he, who has been made partaker of heavenly Grace, do fall from that Grace,
and of a just and faithful man become unjust and unfaithful etc. this man's
conscience (the purity of Faith being lost) is made guilty unto Damnation. M.
Robert Rollocke (Rectour of the University of Edinburgh) and greatly praised by
Beza, thus teaches: I tell thee In his book of Lectures upon the Epist. of
Paul to the Coloss. l. 3. p. 64.
that notwithstanding thou art redeemed, and by the blood of Christ freed from
sin and death; yet if thou take delight in sin, the greater shall be thy
Damnation. The same Doctrine is maintained by several English learned
Protestants, as by D. Oueral In the Conference before his Majesty. p. 4^.
, by D. Harsenet D. Harsenet did preach of this very subject at Paul's Cross.
, and by all those who are at this present called among us, by the name of
Arminians.

Thus far touching the mutual Disagreements of the Protestants in the
Doctrines of Freewill, Reprobation, and Predestination: aduertizing the Reader,
that such Protestants, who maintain the Doctrine of Freewill, do consequently
and potentially teach the uncertainty both of Reprobation and Predestination;
The reason hereof being, in that the foundation of the contrary Doctrines, to
wit of the certainty of Reprobation, and Predestination is chiefly grounded,
upon the denial of the Doctrine of Freewill.

The XVII. Paragraph.
IN this next place, I will descend to the Doctrine of good works. And First I
will set down the opinions of diverse learned and moderate Protestants, some
approving even the merit of works; others at least the necessity of them to
Justification and Salvation. And to begin with this later point. The necessity
of good works (at least to accompany Faith, though not as cause of our
Justification) is taught by D. Fulke Against the Rhemish Testament. in 2. Petr.
2.
, by D. Whitaker Against M. Reynolds.
, by D. Willet In his Tetra^lylon Papisint, page ^0.
. And of this point special mention is made of the great Dissentions had
between the Deui^^^ This is related in Colloq. Altenberg. fol. 168. and i^
Artit Colloq. Al^^burg. p. 101. and 48^.
of England, and the Lutherans in Germa^^; the one side maintayning the
necessity of good works, the other denying the same. No^ that other learned
Protestants do not only teach the necessity and presence of good works; but
also that our good works are meritorious in regard of Christ's Passion, and
promise to them, is affirmed by M. Hooker Eccles Fol. l. 5. sect. 72. pa. 208.
, by Melancthon Loc. Comm. de bonis Operibus circa medium.
, by Spandeburg In Margarit. Theol. page 48. and ^0.
(^he Protestant) and by the Page 495. and 273.
Confessions in the Harmony.

2. To descend more particularly to good works; And first we find that Vowed
Chastity is defended by Augustine Marloret (the Protestant) saying: The In ^.
Timoth. c. 5.
Widows (he meaning those mentioned by S. Paul.) did give their ^ayth to
Christ their spouse, willingly barring themselves from Mariadge; by the
Protestant Author of the book entitled: Antichristus Page 148. 149.
, sieve Prognosticon finis mundi; by M. Alison In his Confutat. of Brownisme. p.
71.
(the Protestant:) all which Protestants do maintain and affirm the votary
resolution of the said widows; Yea M. Alison expressly thus writes: This place
(meaning of S. Paul touching the said widows) is thus expounded by Bullinger,
Claudius, and others. In like sort, Vowed Chastity is taught by M. Hooker as
lawful, who further thus writes of the vow of Poverty: Anauias Eccles. pol.
l. 2. p. 103.
his solemn row to God did strictly bynd him, to the giving of his Possession
to the Churches use. Yea Christian Vows in general are maintained by Musculus
In loc. Comm. de votis. p. 524.
, by M. Willet In Synops. page 241.
, by Amandus In partitionib. Theol. l. 2. p. 3^4.
Polanus, and (to omit other^) by M. Perkins, thus writing: Now In his reformed
Catholic p. 157.
in the new Testament we have like manner to vow etc. Of this kind are the
vows to keep set fastings etc.

But now let us cast our eye, another way, and see, how other Protestants do
impugn and cross these their brethren, and how fiery and violent they are, in
depressing and betrampling of all good works in general, as also of Vows. And
first, we find Luther thus to write: It Upon the Galat. English. c. 2.
is impiety to affirm, that Faith, except it be adorned with Charity,
iustifyeth not. Yea Luther further proceeds, thus teaching: Fides, Tom. 1.
Propos. 3.
nisi sit sine etc. Faith except it be without the least good works, does not
justify; nay it is not Faith. And according hereto Amsdorphius (a Protestant)
writes a book, entituling it: Quod bona opera sint perniciosa ad salutem.
Agreably hereto Schlusselburg (the Lutheran) teaches in this manner: Good In
Catalog. Haeret. l 23. in Epist. Dedicat. page 22.
works are not necessary, necessitate praesentiae; so much as with a necessity
of Presence.

In like manner Illyricus affirms, Good works In Praefat. ad Romans
are not so much, as Causa sine qua non, of Salvation. The said Illyricus
further proceeds, saying: The I^ly ricus vbi supra.
Controversy with the Papists is not (only) whether works do justify; but
whether they be in any respect necessary to salvation; which later point to
maintain (says he) is a Papisticall Error. And yet more in these words: The
Doctrine of the New Papists, is as pernicious as the Old; to say, that the
Apostle meant to exclude good works from Justification, not simply and as due,
but only as meritorious and causes efficient. Yea some Protestants are so far
from granting merit of works, as that Calvin himself affirms: To Instit. l.
2. c. 17. sect. ^.
maintain that Christ did merit any thing to himself, non minus stulta est
curiositas, quam temeraria definitio; is no less a foolish curiosity, then a
rash sentence; And according hereto Tyndall (the Protestant Martyr) writes
thus: Christ Fox Act. Mon. page 486.
with all his works did not deserve Heaven: which said Tyndall is so far gone
against good works, as thus M Fox has registered him to say: As for Act. Mon.
page 1136.
pleasing God, there is no work better then another; As touching to please
God, to make water, to wash dishes, to be a sower, or an Apostle, all is one.

Now to come more particularly to the good works of perpetual Chastity,
voluntary Poverty, and Fasting; The Protestants contrary to their former
Brethren thus teach: Luther thus maintayneth in express words, touching
Chastity, or perpetual Virginity: If we Luth. Tom. 1. Wittenberg. ad cap. 7.1.
Cor. fol. 107.
respect the nature of Matrimony, and single life in themselves, matrimony is
as gould, and the spiritual state of single life as dung. To whom D. Whitaker
subscribes in these words: Contra Camp. rat. 8.
Virginity is not simply good, but after a certain manner. Touching Fasting,
M. Perkins says: In his reformed Catholic. page 220.
Fasting in it self is a thing indifferent, as is eating and drinking. And M.
Willet affirms that: Neither Synop. p. 241.
is God better worshipped by eating, or not eating, Lastly, concerning
voluntary Poverty, the same M. Willet thus teaches: He is an In his Syneps. p.
145.
Enemy to the glory of God, that changes his rich estate (wherein he may serve
God) for a poor; thus he, not making difference between a Stoicall dulnes,
and a Christian contempt of transitory things, himself belike being so greedy
to have for a time the government and rule of a little piece of the entralls of
the earth.

To conclude with denial of the Doctrine of rows (contrary to the judgments
of the former above alleged Protestants:) First then, Peter Martyr writes a
book against single life, and vows, stiling it: de Calibatu and vo^is. In
like sort Swinglius says: Part. 1. in explanat. art. 30. fol. 6^.
Concerning vows, I say, that all vows are abolished by Christ's coming. To
whose judgment herein subscribes Bullinger In his Decads in English. page 380.
saying: Vows belong to the Jewish Ceremonies; of the same mind is D. Fulke In
his Retentiue to Bristowes Motives. page 153.
, and diverse others. Thus much concerning the great discrepancy and diversity
of the Protestants among themselves, touching the Doctrine of Good Works, and
of Vows.

The XVIII. Paragraph.
IN this place I will display the Protestants like difference touching Sin,
and the Nature thereof: And first, concerning what Sin is; Not only all
Catholics, but also many learned Protestants teach, that Sin in its own
Nature, is a mere Non Ens, or only Privation of what should be, and therefore
God never made Sin, who made only Entia. And hereupon the said both Catholics
and Protestants conclude, that sin (as being a Non Ens, or privation) has no
Efficient, but only a Deficient cause. I will allege Peter Martyr thus
discoursing of this point: An Peter Martyr in loc. Comm. places in English
part. 1. cap. 17. sect. 12. page 1^4.
Evil thing (and such is sin) has no efficient, but a deficient cause; If
any will search out this efficient cause, it is even like, as if he would see
the darkness with his eyes, or comprehend silence with his ears, which being
Priuations, it is no need that they should have efficient causes. Thus Peter
Martyr, with whom conspire herein Szegedinus Szegedinus Loc. Com. page 230.
and Keckermannus In his Systema sacrae Theologiae. l. 2 p. 248. 249. etc.
(both remarkable Protestants) besides diverse others.

Now other Protestants, merely crossing these former, do severally teach
hereof: for D. Whitaker Whit. contra Campian. rat. 8.
teaches Sin to be an Accident, or Quality; But Illyricus Illyricus varijs
libris de peccato Originali.
, (the chief of the Magdeburgenses) affirms sin to be a Substance; See also
Heshusius hereof in Epist. ad Illyricum, An peccatum sit substantia. See also
Piscator hereof in volum. 1. Thesaur. Theologic. l. 7. p. 169. sect. 104. And
according hereto the foresaid Illyricus in the place next above alleged,
defines Original sin, to be (after the fall of Adam) the internal
substance, which the Devil does work or cause, and which he transformeth into
himself.

2. Concerning the distinction of Sin, into Venial, and Mortal sin: All
the Protestants do admit this distinction in words; but in the explication of
this Distinction, they maynely differ. For most of the more forward Protestants
teach, that this Difference of sin lies not in the diversity of the sins
themselves, but in the diversity of the parties committing them. According
hereto, Musculus (the pryme Protestant) thus writes: Musculus in loc. Com. de
peccato. sect. 5. de discrimine peccati venia is and mortalis. page 28.
Sciendum est, magis in hac causa, personas peccantium: quam ipsa peccata esse
considerandas. We are to know, that in this point, rather the persons of such
as sin then the sins themselves, are to be considered. And hence it rises,
that many Protestants teach, to wit; (to omit others) Calvin, and Doctor
Fulke, that All sins (how great soever) to the Faithful Professors, are So
teach Calvin Instit. l 2. c. 4. sect. 28. and D. Fulke against the Rhemi^h
Testam. in Epist. Joan fol. 447.
Venial; and to others M. Willet M. Willet in his Synops. p. 560.
, and Musculus Musculus in loc. cem. page 28.
affirm all sins (how small soever) are mortal. And upon this ground are
builded Luthers words: No Luth. in his Sermons Englished, and printed anno
1578. page 167.
work it disalowed of God, except the Author thereof be disalowed before.

But now contrary to this explication of the former distinction, most of the
more sober Protestants teach, that this distinction of Sin is in one and the
same Person; and therefore they place this diversity of Sin, to consist in
the disparity of the sins themselves, and not in the diversity of the Persons
committing the said sins. This is taught by Iacobus Andraeas, so alleged and
reprehended by Beza In respons. ad (...) Colloq. Montisbesgar. p. 64.
. The same doctrine is further justified by In Ce^cil. Theol. page 546.
Melancthon, by Adamus In his Margarit. Theol. page 469.
Francisci, by Hemingius In Encheirid. page 103. printed Londini, anno 1577.
; and to pretermit many others, by the Page 80 and 70.
Harmony of Confessions. That all sins are equal, is maintained by Calvin
Calvin in Antidot. Council. Trident.
, by Wicliff Wiclef, apud Waldens. l. de Sacrament. c. 1^4.
, and some ohers; yet contradicted herein by Doctor Whitaker D. Whitaker
contra Campian. in rat. ^.
, and almost all the more temperate Protestants.

I will next descend to that Doctrine maintained by some Protestants, (though
wholly rejected by others) who teach, that no sin is hurtful to that man, who
belieueth: And first we find Luther thus to write: A Christian Luth in tom. 2.
Wittenberg. de Captiuit, Babylon, fol. 74.
or Baptized person, is so rich, that although he would, he cannot los^ his
salvation by any sin, how great soever, unless he will not believe. And
further, Luther thus reaches: As Luth. in loc. Co^naelass. 25. c. 27.
nothing iustifyeth but Faith, so nothing sins, but unbelief. Others
according here to teach, that sins are not hurtful to him that belieueth;
for thus D. Whitaker writes, as is above noted: Nos dicimus si quis actum fidei
habeat etc. We D. Whitak. de Eccles. contra Bellarm. Controu. 2. q. 3. page ^01.
maimayne, that if a man does exercise an act of faith, to that man sin is
not hurtful. D. Fulke teaches thus: When David D. Fulke, in the Tower
disputat. with Edm. Camp. the second days conference
committed adultery, he was and remained the child of God. Yea they further
teach, thus saying: He that See this in Epitom. Colloq. Montisbilgar. pa. 44.
and 48.
once truly belieues, cannot after fall from the grace of God, or lose his
Faith by his Adultery, or any other like sins. Others again say, thus: Sin
is So says M. Wotton in his answer to the late Popish Articles. page 9^.
pardoned, as soon, as it is committed.

Finally (to omit many other such like sentences and authorities of them) they
thus conclude: When See this in Act. Mon. page 1338.
we sin, we diminish not the glory of God; all the danger in our sin being,
the evil Example to our neighbor. How does this Doctrine open the sluse to
all Impurity, Wickedness, and Libertinisme? the maintayners of which Doctrine
are in the number of those, who (as S. Jude says) transfer Jude Epist. verse.
14.
the grace of God into wantonness. Now this Doctrine of extenuating and
lessing sin is so mainly contradicted and gainsaid, by all moral and Civil
Protestants, as that it were needles to set down the names of them: In like
sort it is implicitly impugned by all those particular Protestants above
alleged, who require goodworkes, at least to accompany Faith; For it sin
cannot be prejudicial to Faith, to what end then should the former Protestants
teach, that good works of necessity must accompany Faith?

In this last place concerning Sin, I will set down the disagreements of
Protestants, of which some do teach that God is the Author of sin: Other
Protestants condemning this Doctrine, as most blasphemous, and injurious to
God. And to begin with such, as really teach God to be the Author of sin, I
produce Luther thus saying: How Luth. in ^ssert. damnat. per Leonem, art. 36.
can man prepare himself to good, seeing it is not in his power to make his
ways evil; Nam mala opera in impijs Deus operatur; for God works the wicked
work^ in the wicked? Beza thus writes: God In his Display of Popish practices.
p. 202.
exciteth the wicked will of one Thief to kill another, guides his hand and
weapon, justly enforcing the Will of the thief. M. Willet thus In Synops. page
563.
; God not only permits, but leads into temptation, even with an active
power, and not permissiuely only. D. Barrow thus In his Treatise of Gods
Providence, in English c. 4.
: God does truly and by his determinate purpose, harden, make blind, lead into
temptation, and enclyne the heart to evil. Swinglius thus: God Swi^gl. tom. 1.
de Prouidentia Dei. fol. 366.
moves the Thief to kill, and the Thief kills God procuring him. And
again: The Swinglius vbi sapra. Where he says, A^ inquus, coactus est a^
peccandum, pe^e mitto.
thief is enforced to sin. And more: Deo impulsore Swinglius. vbi supra.
occidit; The thief kills, God moving and enforcing him thereto. Melancthon
thus: The Adultery Melancth. in Romans 8.
of David was the proper work of God, as was the Conversion of Paul. Finally
that Calvin teaches the said Doctrine, appears not only from Castali^
charging him therewith, in these words, by this means not the Devil but the
God of Calvin is Author of Lies: but also from the places of Caluins Instit.
l. 2 c. 4. sect. 3. 4. and 5. et. l. 1. c. 18. sect. 1.
own books, here noted in the Margent.

Now this Doctrine is mainly contradicted (and this most deservedly) by other
Protestants. And first D. Whitaker, as maintayning the contrary Doctrine, and
in defense, that not any Protestant teaches this foresaid doctrine, thus
provoke his Adversary in most confident words Whitaker contra Camp. rat. 8.
page ^15.
: If Calvin, Peter Martyr, Melancthon, or Luther, or any of ours affirm God to
be the Author of sin, I will not deny, but that we are all guilty of
horrible blasphemy, and wickedness: So much does this D^ctour dislike the
foresaid Doctrine; and so gladly would he vindicate and free his Protestant
Brethren (if he could) from maintayning the said wicked Position. In like sort,
Hemingius Hemingius, l. de Universal. Great page 109.
, as maintayning this contrary Doctrine, charge and reprehendeth the
Caluinists for their teaching, that God is the Author of sin.

The Caluinists are also condemned for this their impious Doctrine, by
Sitzlinus In his Disputat. Theolog. de prouidentia Dei. sect. 141.
(the Protestant) by Iacobus Andraeas (the remarkable Protestant) who in
express words thus writes: Deus Andraeas, in Epitom. Colloq. Montisblegar.
pa. 47. 49. 53.
est author peccati, secundum Bezam. This point is so evident, as that the
Magistrates of Vide literas Senatus Bernensis ad ministros etc. 1555.
Berna, decreed it to be punishable by their Laws, for any to preach Caluins
Doctrine hereof, within their own Territories and Jurisdiction; or for the
people to read any of Caluins Books of that subject. The foresaid Doctrine of
God being the Author of sin, is further contradicted and condemned by Lib.
ad Caluinum de Praedestinat.
Castalio, by Amandus Polanus, in partition. Theolog. l. 1. page 46.
Polanus, by M. Gibbens in his Questions upon Genesis, page 108.
Gibbens, by the Book entitled Corpus doctrina etc. printed 1561. in folio,
page 618. It is further condemned, not only almost by all the Lutherans, but
even by all moderate and temperate Protestants: So disagreeing are the
Protestants touching this Tenet.

The XIX. Paragraph.
TOuching the Doctrine, which denies we ought to have any absolute Princes or
Magistrates, now in the time of the Gospel; Luther thus teaches: Among Luth.
de secular. potestat. in tom. 9. German.
Christi^^ ^en, none is Superior, save one, and only Christ. And yet more
fully: Among Luth. vbi supra.
Christians no man can, or ought to be a Magistrate; but each one is to other
equally subject. And further Luth. Sermons Englished and printed 1579. page 97.
: As Christ cannot suffer himself to be tied or bound by Laws etc. So ought
not the Conscience of a Christian to suffer them. Other Protestants, though
they do not write so absolutely against Princes and all Magistracy; yet they
wounderfully seek to depresse and lessen their Authority, for thus Swinglius
indoctrinateth his followers: Quando Swing. tom. 1. in explanat. Art. 41.
perfide, and extra regulam Christi egerint Principes etc. When Princes do
evil, and contrary to the Law of Christ, they may be deposed. Again,
Swinglius thus further teaches: Romanum S^ing in l. Epist. Oecolamp. and
Suing. l. 4. Epist. ^^nhardo ^omio.
Imperium, imo quodui^ aliud imperium etc. If the Roman Emperor, or any other
Prince or Sovereign shall begin to oppress the sincere Religion; and nas
illud negligenter patimur etc, And we negligently suffer the same, we shall
stand charged with the contempt thereof, as much as even the oppressors
themselves.

Now this sentence is so much displeasing to moderate and loyal Protestants,
as that Doctor Bilson in place of further answer to them, thus says: As I In
his true difference. part. 3. page 273.
muse at Swinglius his words so I like not his judgment. Calvin in Daniel. c. ^
Calvin conspireth with Swinglius thus affirming: Earthly Princes de deprive
themselves of authority, when they erect themselves against God; Yea they are
unworthy to be accounted among the number of men; and we are rather to spit
upon their faces, then to obey them. With these words of Calvin, Doctor Wilkes
does vpbrayde the Puritans, saying: They were Wilks in his obedience of
Ecclesiast. Union. pa. 60.
your teachers, who account those Princes (who are not refined by your spirit)
unworthy to be accounted among the number of men, and therefore rather to be
spitted upon then obeyed.

Beza, according to his former brethren, much betrampleth upon Christian
Princes; for he did write a book, bearing this title: De iure Magistratuum in
subdites; A book much disliked and condemned by D. Bancroft In his Survey of
the Pretended Discipline. p. 48.
and D. Succliffe; of which book D. Succliffe thus censureth: Beza In his
Answer to a certain libel supplicatory. page 75.
in his book of the Power of Magistrates does arm the subjects against their
Princes in these cases etc. And the same Doctor thus further inlargeth
himself in his dislike of that book, saying D. Sutcliffe vbi supra. page 98.
: A book^, which overthrows in effect all authority of Christian Magistrates.

The writings of Calvin and Beza touching the Magistracy and authority of
Princes, is so violent and indeed traitorous, as that the foresaid D. Bancroft
thus passes his judgment of them: He that In his Survey of the pretended
Discipline. page 41.
shall read M. Caluins and M. Bezaes two books of Epistles etc. Would
certainly marvel to understand, into what actions and dealings they put
themselves, of War, of Peace, of subjection, of reformation, without staying
for the Magistrate Knox of Scotland, thus answerably teaches: If Princes Kno^
to England and Scotland. fol. 76.
be Tyrants against God and his Truth their subjects are freed from the Oath of
Obedience, Bucanan (his familiar friend) thus unanimously writes: The L. de
iure Regni. page 13.
People have right to bestow the Crown at their pleasure. And yet more; If
Su^^^am vbi supra. page 40.
were good, that rewards were appointed by the People for such, as should kill
Tyrants, as commonly there are for those, which have killed Wolves. These two
Scottish writers were so strong and headlong in this their Doctrine; as that
the Bishop of Rochester in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, calls these two men:
The two Preached the tenth of November, and printe^ 16^^.
fiery spirits of the Church and Nation of Scotland. Thus much for a taste of
the Doctrine of some turbulent Protestants, against the soueraingty of Princes;
and contradicted by the former more moderate Protestants, as also by all other
grave and loyal Protestant writers.

The XX. Paragraph.
TOuching Poligamy, or having many wives at one time, Luther thus writes
hereof: Poligamy Luth. in Propos. de Bigamiae Episcop. Edit. anno 1528. Propos
62. 65 66.
is no more abrogated, then is the rest of Moses Law; and it is free, as being
neither cammanded, nor forbidden. Whose doctrine herein, Bucer did so much
embrace, as that he thus writes: Whosoever Bucer in his scripta Anglicana de
regno Christi. cap. 28. pa. 101.
will not induce his mind to love his wife, and to treat her with conjugal
Charity, that man is commanded by God, to put her away, and marry another. And
this Bucer vbi supra. page 100.
being commanded in the old Law, pertayneth also to Christians.

The Doctrine of Poligamy was defended by Bernardine Ochine, of which subject
he did write certain Dialogues. And Musculus in Ep. Pauli ad Philip. Colos.
etc. in ^. Tim. 5. page ^96.
Musculus thinks Polygamy was tolerated in the Apostles time. And from hence
it rises, that Bucer allows liberty of divorce, and to take another wife, in
case of the ones departure Bucor in hic scripta Anglic. de regno Dei. l. 2. c.
26. page 104.
from the other; Of Bucer vbi supra, l. 2. cap. 37. etc. 40.
Homicide, or theft; Of but repayring to the Company Vbi supra, c. 37. p. 115.
or banquets of immodest Persons; Or in case of incurable infirmity of the
woman by Childbirth; or of the Man's Lunacy, or otherwise, whereby either is
made unable to render Nuptial right; And then Bucer concludes the lawfullnes
Vbi supra, p. 124.
of Divorce, and marriage again, and says: It is, verbo Dei Vbi supra. p. 124.
and see page 120.
consentienter, agreeable to the Word of God. Furthermore, Vbi supra. c. 42. p.
123. and 124.
It was decreed in Geneua, that if the Husband were Vide Canones Gener. l^^
Geneuenses, anno 1560.
absent, the wife might cause a prefixed time of his return to be proclaimed;
and if he returned not within that time, the Minister might give the wife
license, to take another Husband. Which kind of Divorce, and second Marying
again, is also defended by Beza L. de repudi^ 5. page ^85.
, by Amandus In partitionib. Theolog. page 730.
Polanus, by M. Willet In his Synops. of Anno 1600.
; Yea this kind of divorce is so defended by Bucer, as that he teaches the
wife may so proceed, in case only of one years voluntary absence of the
Husband.

Now this former Doctrine of Poligamy, and of Divorce through the causes
alleged, is as we see, impugned by almost all other modest writers, as that it
needs not to set down their particular Names; since the contrary Practice is
observed even in all Protestant Countries among men of any integrity and
honesty in manners and Conversation. Yea that even in case of Divorce upon
Adultery, the innocent Party could not mary again, was preached at Paul's
Church by D. Dove, and was after defended in the University of Oxford by D.
Howson In tertia These printed anno 16^^
, and it is the professed doctrine of most others. And thus much touching the
Protestants Disagreement, concerning the Doctrine of Poligamy, and Divorce.

The XXI. Paragraph.
NOw after I have discovered the great and irreconcilable dissentions of the
points above set down, I will descend to certain Catholic Articles
(different from some Catholic points above touched,) in which diverse
Protestants do compart with us Catholics therein, and many more do dissent
from their other Brethren teaching with us. And because I will make choice to
set down twenty Catholic Articles (besides those above entreated of, some one
or two only excepted, of which it is discoursed above) wherein the Protestants
do mainly differ from the Protestants; in regard therefore of the multiplicity
of the Articles, and because I fear, I have already dulled the cares of the
Reader with a fastidious tediousnes, in discovering the particular sentences
and words of the Protestants, either affirming or condemning the foresaid
points above treated of; I will content my self in these Catholic points
following, only to refer the Reader to such places of the Protestants Writings
and books, wherein these ensuing Catholic Points are either defended or
impugned; forbearing (for greater breuity) to produce their particular Words
and Authorities.

1. And I will begin with Christ his descending into Hell, presently after his
Corporal Death: This is taught by D. Hill In his special of that ^ila.
, and by Melancthon, M. Newell, and Aretius (all Protestants,) all which
Authors are alleged by the said Doctor D. Hill vbi supra. fol. 33. and 44.
Hill; yet is this Doctrine impugned for popish, by Beza In Act. 2.
, Bucer In Math. 26.
, and infinite others.

2. Limbus Patrum is in like sort taught, by Oecolampadius In l. Epist.
Swinglij and Oecolampad. l. 1. p. 19.
, by Swinglius in his Epist. Swinglij and Oecolampadij. l. 3. p. 560. and 561.
Swinglius, by Peter In his Common places Englished. part. 2 cap. 18 page 161.
Martyr, by Lascitius In his book entitled de Russorum and Muscouit. relig.
page 122. and 123.
the Protestant, and by Bullinger In his Decads. fol. 66.
; But contradicted by most other Protestants.

3. Intercession of Saints, defended by Oecolampadius Oecolampad. ad Orat. 1.
Chrysostomy de Iuuentio and Maximo Martyr.
, by M. Latimer Act. Hon. page 1322.
, and others; yet impugned by D. Whitaker Contra Duraum. page 793.
, and most other Protestants.

4. Intercession of Angels, maintained by Calvin Instit. l. 1. c. 14. sect. 6.
and 7.
, Melancthon In Apolog. Confess. August. fol. 179.
, M. Hooker L. 5. sect. 23. page 52. and 53
, D. Couell In his answer to M. John Burges, page 90.
, Peter Martyr, and by the Communion Printed 1549. fol. 117.
book in King Edwards time: Impugned by most Protestants.

5. Invocation of Saints, allowed by Luther, who says: De inuocatione In
purgatione quorundam Articulorum.
Sanctorum cum tota Ecclesia Christiana sentio and iudico, Sanctos esse
inuocandos; By Oecolampadius In Orat. 1. Chrysostom. de Iuuentio and Maximo.
, by certain Protestants in Polonia (whereof see In Loc. Theolog. l. 3. stat
4. loc. 5. page 463.
Hafferenferus) by Latimer Act. Mon. page 1312.
, by Thomas Bilney Act. Mon page 462.
: contradicted by most other Protestants.

6. Payer for the Dead, taught by Luther and Vrbanus Regius, alleged by D.
Couell in the place above cited.
as Vrbanus In prima part Operum, in Formula caute loquenoi. cap. de Sanctorum
cultu.
Regius does witness; by the Printed 1549. fol. 116.
Communion Book in king Edwards time; by Act. mon. page 149.
William Thorpe, and by Martin Bucer In his Script. Anglican. p. 450.
. Heereto may be annexed the Doctrine of Purgatory, taught by Luther Luther.
tom. 1. Wittenberg. in resolut. de Indulgentijs conclus. 15. fol. 112.
, and taught in Disputatione Lipsica cum Ickio, and by Latiner Act. Mon. page
1313 and 1315.
.

7. That the ten Commandments are not Impossible, taught by M. Perkins In his
reformed Catholic. p. 26. and 51.
, by M. Hooker Ecclesiast. policy. l. 2. page 101.
; who is reprehended therefore by certain English Protestants in their
Christian Letter to that Reverend man M. R. Hooker; Taught also by M. In his
meditation upon the 122. psalm. printed 160^.
Willet, by Castalio de Perfecta Obedient. legis Dei.
the eminent Protestant, who is therefore impugned by Doctor In his second
Conclusion annexed to his Conference. pa. 697.
Reynolds.

8. Patronage of certain Angels over certain Countries and Kingdoms,
maintained by Calvin Calvin. Instit. l. 1. cap. 14. sect 7.
, by Peter In his Common places in English. part. 1. page 1^0.
Martyr, by Hyperius In Method. Theolog. page 297.
the Protestant and others; yet impugned by M. Willet In Synops. pa. 264.
, D. Fulke Against the Rhemish Testament. in Revel. 1.
, and many others.

9. Images to be in Churches, maintained by Luther, and Brentius (as Beza so
says in respons. ad act. Colloq. Montis belgar. part. altera, in Praefat. page
12.
Beza witnesses) by Iacobus in Epitom. Colloq. Montis. belg. page 39.
Andraeas, by In his Examen part. 4. page 14 and p. 33.
Kempnitius, by In Cent. Exercitas. Theolog. page 270.
Bachmannus etc. yet contradicted by D. Against the Rhemish Testament in 1.
Epist. Joan. cap. 1. fol. 456.
Fulke, and almost all the Puritans.

10. Touching Reverence and bowing down at the name of Jesus (which is the
same to the ear, which Images are to the eye:) This Reverence is defended by
Doctor Whitguift In his Defense, page 742.
, by Musculus In loc. Comm. page 59.
the Great Protestant) by the learned In Epist. Pauli ad Philip. Coloss. c. 2.
fol. 123.
Zanchius, by Leonard In his Summon for sleepers.
Wright (the Protestant;) Finally by Queen Elizabeth's Art. 52.
Injunctions: Contradicted for Popish by all the most forward Protestants.

11. That the Good works of one may help another, is maintained by In loc.
com. de Eucharistico sacrificio in his Edition of anno 1561. page 425.
Melancthon, and by the Harmony of Confessions p. 298. yet impugned by the
greater number of Protestants.

12. That Christ (as man) was from his Nativity, freed from Ignorance, is
defended by Iacobus Andraeas In Epitom. Colloq. Montisbelg. p 33.
, by Osiander In Euchirid. controuers. printed Tubingae. 1603. p. 146, 147.
, and generally affirmed by most of the Lutheran Protestants, over many to
recite; And yet impugned by Beza In resp. ad Acta. Colloq. Montisbelg. part. 1.
page 147. and 148.
, D. Willet, D. Willet in his Synops. p. 199. and p. 600
and M. Sutcliffe M. Sutcliffe in his reuiew and Examination of D. Kellisons
Survey, printed 1606. p. 55.
, who will not ascribe to the Humane Nature of Christ, fulness of knowledge, in
respect of its Personal Union with the Godhead, but thus says to the
contrary: If Christ, as Man, by the Union, be Omniscient, why is he not
Omnipresent, and in all places?

13. Evangelical Counsels (to wit, that a Man may do and perform more, then
he is commanded) taught by Luther, in Assor^. ar. 36.
Luther, by D. Couell In his Defense of M. Hooker. Art. ^. p. 49. 50. 51. 52
, by M. (z) Hooker: Impugned by M. Willet Ecclesiast policy, l. 3. sect 8. p.
140.
(who particularly In his Meditation upon the 122. Psalm. p. 91.
charge M. Hooker with his Defense of this and other Catholic Opinions; In
like sort impugned by M. Perkins In his reformed Catholic. p. 241.
, and many others.

14. That it cannot be known to us, which Scriptures be sacred, which not,
otherwise then by the Churches Tradition; affirmed by Peter Martyr In his com.
places pa. 1. c. ^. sect. 8.
, by Lubbertus De Princip. Chrstian Dogm. l. 1. c. 4. p. 18.
(the Protestant) by D. Whitaker Aduersus Stapletonum. l. 2. cap. 6. p. 370.
and p. 357. and l. 2. c. 4. p. 300. and p. 298.
, by M. Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 1. sect. 14. p. 86. and l. 2. sect. 4. p. 102. and
l. 3. sect. 8. p. 147.
, and some others: Yet impugned by Inst. l. 1. c. 7. Sect. 4.
Calvin, Vrsinus Vrsinus in his doctrinae Christianae compend. in Proleg. p. 13.
the Protestant, as also by certain English In their Christian Letter to M.
Hooker, p. 9. and 10.
Protestants.

15. That Infants have not actual Faith in the time of their Baptizing, is
affirmed by D. Whitaker D. Whita. contra Duraeum. l. 8. p. 6^1.
, by Beza In resp. ad Act. Montisbelg. part. 2. p. 124.
, by M. Cartwright In D. Whitguifts Defense, p. 611.
, by Jacob Kimzdocus In his Redemption of mankind, l. (...), 15. p. 654.
(the Protestant) and by most other Protestants: Yet impugned by Luther Luther
in loc. com. Class. 2. p. 122.
, by Andraeas See Andraeas his words, in Beza his resp. ad Act. Colloq.
Montisb. part. ^ p. 124.
, and generally by the Lutherans.

16. That the Sacraments of the Old Testament were not equal in working and
effect, with the Sacraments of the New Testament, affirmed for the most part by
the Lutherans, whereof see Schlusselburg In Theol. Calvin. l. 1 fol. 95.
, Luther Loc. Com. Class. 1. p. 88.
, and Osiander In Epit. Cent. 11. p. 411.
; yet the contrary maintained by the Caluinists, of which point see In his
Synops. p. 418.
M. Willet.

17. Auricular Confession of sins, taught by In loc. Com. de Confessione,
fol. 289.
Sarcerius the Protestant, thus writing: Falsum est etc. It is false to
affirm, that Confession, which is made to God, should take away all Private
Confession. The same is taught, by Lobechius In Disput. Theol. pa. 295. sect. 4.
, by Schlusselburg In Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. 147.
, by Melancthon Lib. Epist page 234.
, by the Confessions In the Harmony of confessions, page 231. and p. 357. and
358.
of Saxony and Bohemia, and diverse others; yet impugned for Popish, by most of
the Puritans.

18. That Temporal punishment is reserved for sin remitted, by Gods Justice,
is affirmed by John Knox In his answer against the Adversaries of Gods
Predestination. page 215. 216, 217.
, by Gasper Oleuianus In Symbolum. page 8.
the Protestant) and by the Public Confessions of the Protestants; yet
contradicted for Popish, as implying the Doctrine of Purgatory, by M. Willet In
Synops. page 514.
, by Calvin, Beza etc. and most other earnest Protestants.

19. That the true Visible Church cannot wholly err, affirmed by D. Bancroft In
a Sermon, preached by D. Bancroft.
, by the Deuines of Geneua In their Propositions and Principles disputed, page
141 sect. 12. and 13.
, by M. Fox Act. Mon. page 999.
, and others: Impugned by D. Fulke In his answer to a Counterfeyte Catholic.
page 8^.
, who thus writes: The whole Church Militant consisting of men, which all are
liars, may err altogether, as every part thereof; And impugned in like sort
by the Puritans, who in their brief Discovery of untruths Page 34.
, do reprove D. Bancroft for his teaching the contrary Doctrine, in a Sermon
preached by the said Doctor, 1588. page 34.

20. That set times of Fasting, and from In the Harmony of Confess. page 229.
certain meats appointed, not only for polytick Order, but for spiritual
considerations, is affirmed by the Protestant Author of the book, entitled:
Quaerimonia Page 31. and 94. and 103.
Ecclesiae, printed Londini 1592. who reproves Arius for his denying of all
religious Fasting; who also answers the Objection of Montanus. It is also
affirmed by M. Hooker Eccles. polic. l. 5. sect. 72. p. 204. and 205.
, in so much, as he M. Hooker vbi supra, 209.
answers the vulgar objection of Montanus, and the Common objection from S.
Paul 1. Timoth. 4. and thus concludes: Arius was worthily condemned for his
opposition against Fasting. Yet is this Doctrine gainsaid for Popish, by D.
Whitaker Contra Duraeum. l. 9. page 830.
, who obiecteth 1. Timoth. 4. to prove this Fasting to be the Doctrine of the
Devils. In like sort the foresaid Doctrine is condemned, as Popish, by D.
Fulke, who to the contrary, obiecteth D. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament.
in Math. 15. sect. 5. fol. 28.
Montanus, and defends Arius D. Fulke, in his Answer to a Counterfeyte
Catholic. page 45.
.

Thus far touching these former twenty Points of Catholic Religion, maintained
by diverse learned Protestants, and contradicted in great Dissension of spirit,
by other Protestants.

The XXII. Paragraph.
IN this last place of Displaying the Protestants Disagreements, I will insist
in certain Catholic Points, the which, though the Protestants which are to be
alleged, do not wholly embrace and intertayne them, as absolutely true (as the
former Protestants above cited have done, touching the twenty Articles already
discoursed of;) yet they hold them to be of that Adiaphorous Nature, and
indifferency, as that either by denying or affirming them, the said Protestants
hereafter to be produced, do hold them to stand compatible with man's
Salvation; though other more severe Protestants do altogether condemn the said
Articles as Popish, and do exclude the Belieuers of them from all hope of
Salvation: So irresolute and contradicting the Protestants are among
themselves, in their different and irreconcilable Judgments, and Censures
herein.

1. To begin. First, touching prayer to Saints, D. Goad, D. Goad and D Fulke,
in the Disputation had in the Tower, with Fat. Campian. 2. days conference,
argum. 8. rat. 111.
and D Fulke thus write: It does not exclude from being members of the Church
etc.

2. Touching the Real Presence, D. Reynolds thus says: the Real In his 5.
Conclusion, annexed to his Conference page 722.
Presence is but (as it were) the grudging of a former Ague, if the Party
otherwise hold the Christian Faith. Iacobus Acontius (a learned Protestant)
thus accords with D. Reynolds, saying: It is In l. 3. Stratagem. Satanae. p.
135.
evident, as well concerning those who hold the Real Presence of Christ's Body
in the bread, as those others which deny it, that although of necessity the one
part do err, yet both are in the way of Salvation, if in other things they be
obedient. And Frith (one of M. Fox his Martyrs) says: The Act. Mon. page 503.
matter touching the substance of the Sacrament, binds no man of necessity to
Salvation, or Damnation, whether he believe it, or not. Luthers judgment is the
like herein touching Transubstantiation, as he is cited by Ama^dus In his
Syllog. Thesium Theolog. page 464.
Polanus.

3. Touching Receiving under one, or both kinds, Luther thus writes: Quamuis
Luth. in Epist. ad Bobemos.
pulcrum quidem esset etc. Although it were very seemly to use both the kinds
in the Eucharist; and though Christ in this matter did not command any thing,
as necessary; yet it were better to affect Peace, then to contend about the
species, or Forms of this Sacrament. And Luther further thus writes: Si Luth.
de vtraque specie Sacramenti.
veneris ad locum, vbi tantum vna species ministratur, cum alijs vna tantum
specie vtere etc. If thou come to such a place where one only species or Form
is ministered, then with such men use only one Form or species. And the same
Indifferency of receiving under one or both kinds, is further taught by
Melancthon, in ^ent. E^ist. Theolog. p. 252.
Melancthon, and other See these other Protestants houlding the indifferency of
this point, alleged and by M. Jewel not denied in his Replye. page 110. 106.
Protestants. And yet every man knows, that almost all Puritan-Protestants do
seek to charge the Catholics with breach (as they pretend) of our Saviors
Precept, in receiving the Sacrament only under one kind.

4. Concerning Freewill, M. Perkins thus teaches: A weaking Error is that,
the houlding whereof does not ouerturne any point in the Foundation of
Salvation, as the Error of Freewill, and other such like. Of the same judgment
is M. Cartwright In his Reply. 14 sect. 1.2. and in M. Whitguifts Defense, p.
^2.
, touching Freewill, Prayer for the Dead, and a number of others, as necessary
Doctrines, wherein (says he) Men, being nusled, have notwithstanding been
saved. And M. Cartwright a little before in the place alleged, thus writes. In
his Exposition of the Creed. page 402.
If you mean by matters of Faith, and necessary to Salvation, those, without
which a man cannot be saved; then the Doctrine, which teaches there is no
Freewill, or Prayer for the Dead, is not within your Compass. For I doubt not,
but Diverse Fathers of the Greek Church, who were great Patrones of Freewill,
are saved. The same indifferency of Prayer for the Dead, is maintained by D.
Fulke Confutation of Purgatory. pa. 336.
, by Penry Penry in his book entitled: M. Some laid open p. ^^.
, by John Frith. Act. men. page 501.
Frith, and others.

5. Concerning the Indifferency of honoring Saints Relikes, and prayer for
the Dead, M. Sparks thus writes: We Answer to M. Albins. p. 382.
are not so hasty, to pronounce sentence of Damnation for any such Errors: For
you know well enough, that we make not these matters such, as that either we
think all must he saved that hold the one way; or all condemned, that hold
the other.

6. Touching our B. Ladies being preserved from Original sins, and the
worshipping of Images, M. Bunny houldeth these Points as mere Indifferences,
thus writing: In In his Pacification, sect. 12. p. 104. and 105.
these (points) and such like, whosoever will condemn all those to be none of
the Church, that are not fully persuaded herein, as we are etc. commits an
uncharitable Act to those his brethren.

7. Concerning Satisfaction, and Merit of works, D, Whitaker thus writes: The
Fathers Contra Camp. p. 7^. And M. Willam Reynolds. c. ^. p. 135. and 136.
thought by their external Discipline of life, to pay the pains due for
sin; wherein they derogated not a little from Christ his Death etc. which
though it be an Error, yet were they notwithstanding good Men, and holy
Fathers.

8. Concerning the Popes Primacy. M. Wotton Answer to a Popish (...).
denies, That to hold the Kings Supremacy, is an essential Point of Faith?
But Luther thus extenuateth this point, saying: The Popes Luth. in Assert. art.
36.
Primacy is among those unnecessary trifles, wherein the Popes leuity and
foolishnes is to be borne withal. And Melancthon is no less indifferent in
this Article, thus writing: The Melancth. in his Epistle, extant, in the book,
entitled: Centuria Epistolar. Theologicarum. Epist. 74. page 245.
Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome is profitable to this end, that consent may be
retained; wherefore an agreement might easily be established, in this article
of the Popes Primacy, if other Articles could be agreed upon.

9. Touching Mass, Luther thus speaks of the Indifferency thereof: Private
Luth. in Colloq. Germ^nic. cap. de Missa.
Mass has deceived many Saints, and carried them away into Error, from the
time of Gregory, for eight hundred years. And Tindall thus speaks hereof: I
doubt Act. Mon. page 1338.
not, but that S. Bernard, Francis, and many other holy Men erred, as
concerning Mass. So well in his judgment did Mass stand with holiness.

10. In this last place, touching the Indifferency of Mass, and diverse other
points of Faith, Benedict Morgensterne thus writes: Condonanda In tract. de
Eccles. pa. 41. there writing of former times.
erant pijs etc. These things were pardonable in the godly, who held the Pope
to be the Vicar of Christ and head of the Church, Saints for Mediators, and
the Mass for the Supper of our Lord. In like sort M. Francis Johnson (the
Protestant) thus writes: Did not John In M. Jacobs Defense of the Church, and
Ministry of England. page 13.
Husse, that worthy Cha^pion of Christ, and others also of the Martyrs of
foretimes, say and hear Mass eue^ to their dying Day? etc. Did not diverse of
them acknowledge, some the Popes calling and Supremacy, some seven Sacraments,
some auricular Confession? etc.

Thus far these Protestants touching the Indifferency of these former Catholic
Points, teaching most differently from the judgments of other Protestants,
maintayning that the belief of the said Points stand not with Salvation. And
thus far touching the incredible Dissentions and Diametricall oppositions of
the Protestants among themselves, concerning so many Articles of Christian
Faith, displayed and laid open throughout this whole Treatise. And here now I
refer to the Censure of the Judicious (as I did in the Front of this Discourse)
whether that a man (solicitous and careful of his Salvation) can with any show
of Reason, Communicate with that Church, which is thus divided with the
maintenance of such cross, and contradictory Opinions, as we find the
Protestants in these few leaves to be. And where perhaps it may be here replied
(for Error is glad of a weak Sanctuary) by some one or other in this sort (as
is intimated in the Preface): I Profess my self to be a Protestant, according
to the Form of English Protestancy: what for ayne Protestants do write, or how
they do differ among themselves, I am not to regard; This refuge, and
tergiuersation is most poor.

First, in that there is no more reason, why a man should be rather an English
Protestant, then any other kind of Protestant: Since all kinds of Protestancy
(as rejecting the authority of Gods universal Church) proceed Originally from
the private Spirit, to the which, Protestancy even commits Idolatry; And yet
there is no more reason, why an English Protestant should assume to himself an
infallibility of his private Spirit, then any other foraine Protestant of other
Country. Secondly, because the English Protestants have no reason to disclayme
from the Protestants of other Countries, if so we will believe the English
Protestants themselves; for D. Jewel (though most falsely) thus teaches: The
Lutherans, and the Swinglians D. Jewel in his Apology of the Church of
England. p. 101.
(within which number the English Protestants are comprehended) are good
friends, they vary not between themselves, upon the principles and Foundations
of their Religion, but only upon one Question, which is neither weighty, nor
great. With whom agrees D. Whitaker speaking to his Adversary Father Campian,
for his conioyning together the Lutherans and Swinglians in Faith and Religion;
for this Doctor thus writes: Quod In respons. ad rations Camp. rat. 8.
versus ^^em.
autem Lutheran^s cum Swinglianis coniungere voluisti, in eo nos quidem
nequaquam offendisti etc. In that thou do conioyne and unite the Lutherans
and the Swinglians together, thou do not offend us; for we willingly honor
Luther as our Father, and all them (meaning the Lutherans and the Swinglians)
as our most Dear Brethren in Christ. Thirdly, the inueterate Dissentions even
among the English moderate Protestants themselves, as also between the English
moderate Protestants against the English Puritans, both touching the
Translation of the English Bible, the Common book of prayer, and diverse other
points of Controversies above displayed, manifests the shallownes of this
former Replye.

Thus much concerning the avoiding of this seely Refuge; and I have thought
good to insist in the discovering the vanity of it in this place (though it be
above touched in the Preface, only by mentioning of it) because it is the
ordinary Asyle, or Sanctuary, whitherunto many Protestants do fly, when they
hear the Catholics to vpbraid them with mutual Dissentions, in the Articles
of Protestancy.

The XXIII. Paragraph.
NOw before I close up this Treatise, I will draw certain Inferences, or
Resultancies out of the former Premises.

1. The First whereof may concern the belief of the former Catholic Points
by Protestants; which belief is indeed no supernatural belief (I mean, it
is not any of the three supernatural virtues) but only it is in them a mere
private opinion or inducement, to give a natural consent to that, which is
true. For the better and more clear illustration of which point, the Reader is
to conceive, that two things do necessarily concur to the producing of the
Virtue of supernatural Faith. The one is, Prima S. Thomas part. 2. q. 8.
veritas reuelans, which is God: The other is called the authority of the
Church. This prima veritas reuelans, being God, is otherwise called by the
Deuines, Obiectum formale Fidei. This prima veritas, does reveal all true
points of Faith. The second; to wit, The Authority of the Church, is called
Amussit, Regula, or the Propounder, because it propounds to the members of
the Church, all such points to be believed, which God revealed to the Church to
be believed. Now to apply this to our purpose: This Prima veritas reuelant, as
also this Propounder do indifferently propound to the Members of the Church,
all points of Faith to be believed, as well as any one only point; and the
Persons to whom such points of Faith are revealed, and propounded to be
believed, do through the same authority of the Church believe all points of
Faith, to be revealed alike. Therefore seeing the former Protestants believing
the former particular Catholic Articles, do believe them, not through the
Authority of the Church, propounding them to be believed; for if they did
believe them, by force thereof, they would in like sort believe all other
Catholic points; seeing all of them are alike revealed by God to the Church,
and alike propounded by the Church to Christians to be believed: Therefore from
hence it follows, that the former Protestants do believe the foresaid
Catholic Points, only through the force of their own private spirit, which
intertayneth them as points probable and true. And thus the Close of all is,
that the said Protestants do believe, or rather give assent unto Truths,
falsely, (so man's Ghostly Enemy, when he speaks the truth, he lies,) that is,
they believe truths upon false Grounds and Principles; For they believe
certain Catholic Doctrines; but they believe not the Church teaching those
Doctrines. Thus much touching the first Porisma.

2. The second shall be the scandal and stumbing block, which these great
Dissentions among the Protestants do beget, in the minds of other Protestants;
to wit, a forsaking of the Protestant Religion, and embracing the Catholic
Religion. To begin: We find Duditius (the markable Protestant) thus to confess
of this point: The Beza in his Epistol. Theolog. Epist. ad Andraeam Duditium.
p. 13. rela^teth Duditius thus to say.
Protestants are carried about with every wynd of Doctrine, now to this part,
now to that; whose religion what it is to day, you may perhaps know; but what
it will be to morrow, neither you, nor they can certainly tell. Thus Duditius.
And Sir Edwin Sands in like manner thus writes: Protestants In his relation,
etc. fol. 8.
are as severed, or rather scattered troops, each drawing aduerseway etc. In
like sort, Georgint Mayor (a great Lutheran) thus disconsolately writes:
Obijciunt In Orat. de Confusionibus Dogmatum veteribus, and recentibus. and
nobis Papistae etc. The Papists do object to us Scandals and Dissentions; I do
freely acknowledge such to be as cannot be sufficiently lamented. And
Melancthon thus complayneth hereof, as is above noted; Nulla Melanch. in
Council. Theolog. part. 1. page 245.
res aeque deterret homines ab Euangelio ac nostra Discordia; no one thing
deterreth and withdraws men more from the Gospel, then the Discord among our
selves. And upon this ground it is, that Dresserus the Protestant, thus
speaks of Staphylus who was once a Protestant; Oh Theologorum dissidia
Dresserus in Millenar. ^. pa. 214.
ad Catholicos defecit Staphylus. Staphylus revolted to the Catholics, by
reason of the Disagreements among the (Protestant) Deuines. And dare our
Adversaries notwithstanding, suggest the Protestant Church to be the true
Church, it being thus deprived of Unity, the inseparable mark of the true
Church?

3. A third may be, that whereas many Protestants above alleged, do approve
and allow many Articles of our Catholic Faith, that such Confessions even of
the Adversaries themselves, do much advantage our said Religion; For why should
their judgments agree with the Catholic Church therein, but that the force of
the Truth constrayneth them thereto? and therefore it is truly said of D.
Whitaker: The Whitak. contra Bellarm. l. de Eccles. Controuers. 2. q. 5. c. 14.
argument must be strong and efficacious, which is taken from the Confessions
of the Adversaries: And I do freely acknowledge, that Truth is able to extort
testimonies even from its Enemies. Whose Sentence herein is agreeable to the
judgment of Irenaeus thus writing: It is Lib. 4. c. 14,
an unanswerable prooffe, that brings attestation from the Adversaries
themselves. And further it may be inferred, that seeing most Protestants do
reject the Doctrine of Traditions, that therefore those Protestants who are
related above to give an assent to our Catholic Positions, do consequently
believe, that the said Articles are most agreeable to the Holy Scriptures;
seeing these Protestants will believe nothing as matter of Faith, but what has
its proof from Scripture.

4. A Fourth is, their rejecting of parts of true Scripture, and their
contentions, touching the several translations of confessed Scripture. Now it
bring once granted, that it is not certainly known, what books be Scripture,
and that all translations of Scripture yet extant are false; how prejudicial
must this be to the Protestants, who erect the Scripture alone for the sole
Judge of all Controversies in Faith? Seeing admitting, that the Scripture
should be this Judge, yet this is to be understood of those writings, which are
infallibly Divine Scripture, and are truly and faithfully translated; Since
otherwise such books of the Bibles, which are Spurious and not the true Word
of God, and such Translations of true Scripture, which are adulterated, and
made contrary to the Sense of the Holy Ghost therein, should become this Judge;
And thus it follows, that the Protestants till this day (even by their own
implicit Censure) never enjoyed a true Judge, for the decyding of Controversies
in says.

5. Touching the imaginary facility in fynding out the true sense of the
Scripture, justified not only by some learned Protestants; but also by every
silly Puritanicall Woman, and Mechanical fellow that can out read, vanting
themselves to be (as it were) possessed with the Holy Ghost; how dangerously
does this assertion lie open to the defense of any Heresy? I will here set
down some few Texts, whereof the literal words may seem to justify strange
Errors and Heresies: so certain Drugs taken in their gross substance, are
hurtful to a man's health, which being extracted, become most medicinable. The
texts shall be these: 1. The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only has
Immortality. 1. Timoth. c. 6. Now from this place one might seem to argue,
that since God alone is immortal, the soul of Man is not immortal, but dies
with the body: an Atheistical blasphemy. 2. He that strikes thee on the
Cheek, offer also the other; and him, that takes away thy Cloak, forbid not
to take thy Coat also. Luke 6. Which words of our Savior seem to implye that
we must offer upon such an occasion, the other cheek to be strocken, and
suffer our Coat to be taken away with our Cloak; And if we do not this we
sin, since it is a sin, not to observe the precept of Christ. 3. Call no
man your Father upon earth. Math. 23. etc. Which words seem to sound, that the
son ought not to call that man, which begot him, Father. 4. If any man come
to me, and hates not his Father and mother, and Wife and brethren, and sisters
etc. he cannot be my Disciple. Luc. 14. Here the naked words sound, that
whereas in the ten Commandments we are taught to honor our Father and mother,
as also obliged to love our wives and friends; yet here the next way to serve
Christ truly, is to hate our Parents, our Wives, and other our nearest Friends.
5. Vanum est vobis ante lucem surgere; Psalm. 126. It is but vain for you, to
rise before it he light; thus it seems a man ought not to rise before
Sunne-rising: A good pretense for sluggards. 6. Melchisedech King of Salem etc.
Without Father, without mother without Genealogy, having neither beginning of
Days, or end of Life. Hebr. 7. A text, from whence (if one rest only in the
naked Words) an illiterate man may seem to euict, that this Melchisedech,
being a man, is nevertheless as it were another God, as neither having
beginning nor ending, as being sempiternall; And also that he is another Adam,
as not begotten by any Carnal Copulation. 7. I do accomplish those things
(quae desunt passionum Christi) that want of the Passions of Christ, in my
flesh, for his body, which is the Church. Colos. 1. From whence the poor
Puritan-Reader might be induced to think, that the Apostle did here speak no
less then blasphemy, as intimating, that something were wanting, or defective
in the Passion of Christ, which himself was to fulfill and make perfect. 8.
Lastly, to turn my Pen more particularly to our She-ignorant Puritans, who by
carrying the Bible, they think they can understand any part thereof: Now how
would these ignorant Fools understand this text against themselves, Melior est
iniquitas viri, quam mulier benefaciens; The Iniquity or wickedness of a man, is
better then a Woman doing good? Ecclesiast. 42. by which words the
Puritan-Woman must be forced to confess (understanding the words, as they
simply lie) that a man fraught with all wickedness, is to be preferred before
herself, who seems to be full of the spirit, and the written word. Thus far
these few examples (for instance sake) to the which many hundred more may be
adjoined. All which are most true in the sacred and intended sense of the Holy
Ghost; yet they convince, that the Scriptures are not of that facility and
easines for the perfect understanding of them, as diverse Protestants alleged
toward the beginning of this Treatise (merely contrary to the more grave
judgments of other Protestants their brethren) do make show to teach.

6. In this next place, we may call to mind, what Indignity and dishonor, that
most blasphemous and miscreant Opinion and Sentence of Swinglius, and his
Companions (as so many Charons, serving to wast souls over to Hell) do offer
to the Christian Faith, by teaching (as is above showed) most differently from
all their own Christian Protestant Brethren, That a man though not believing
in Christ so that he lead not a wicked life, may be saved. For who houldeth
this for true, little pryseth the Passion of Christ; they being in the number of
those, of whom it is said: They deny 1. Petr. 2.
him, that bought them; the Lord bringing upon themselves speedy Damnation: So
forgetfulll they are of that other sacred Sentence: There is no John. 1.
other Name under Heaven, given unto men, then that of Jesus, wherein we must
be saved. And thus these men make him to become to themselves, Petra Scandali,
who to all good Christians is, Lapis angulularis.

7. Touching the Diversity of Persons, which are included within the members of
the Protestant Church, above defended by some Protestants, and denied by
others; Their disagreements are so uncertain, as that some admit Papists,
Anabaptists, Arians, Heret^kes, Infidells, yea (by supposall) Antichrist
himself; So making their Church to consist of certain mungre^l Persons;
whereas other Protestants do exclude all these kinds from being members of the
Protestant Church; Now I say, their irresolution and uncertainty of Judgment is
so wonderful herein; as that no Protestant) can assure himself; with what
kind of men he may communicate in practice of Faith and Religion, and from what
men he ought to abstain, in all such spiritual intercourse and association.

8. Touching the denial of Freewill, the certainty of Reprobation, and of
Predestination, and both without any reference to our good or bad works:
Contrary to other learned Protestants Judgments. How do all these Doctrines
most forcibly impell men to the perpetrating of the most flagitious crimes
whatsoever? Seeing upon these their grounds (granting them by supposall for
true) they may justly Apologize for themselves. First, that they are to be
pardoned in all such their Enormous actions, seeing they had not Freewill to
forbear the committing of them; and punishment even in force of Reason,
belongs to such only, in whose power it is to do, or not to do such or such a
wicked thing. Secondly, they may Reply, that seeing by their former Doctrines
of Predestination and Reprobation, a vicious life is no way prejudicial to a
man's predestination, not a virtuous life for the preventing of Reprobatio^, why
may they not then live, yea become thrall to all pleasure, voluptuousnes, and
sensuality without any remorse or sting of Conscience? Again, by their said
Doctrines of Predestination and Reprobation, we yearly see many most
lamentable Tragedies of diverse, shortning their own days by violent deaths,
wrought by their own Hands; some even butchering themselves, through a vain
hope and expectation of ariuing the sooner to Heaven; And others again
perpetrating the like, through a most wicked and desperate conceyt of their
Reprobation, and that it is not in their power (concurring with Gods grace) to
prevent it: so forgetful these men are of those most comfortable words of holy
Scripture: Ezech. 18.31.32.
Cast away all your transgressions etc. for I desire not the death of him, that
dies. This speaks he, who has placed his Psalm. 18.
Tabernacle in the Sun; and who himself, being Sol increatus, is not
inexorable; but will lend a willing ear to him who has true penitency of his
sins, saying to such: Deleui Isa. 44.
vt nubem, iniquitates tuas, and quasi nebulam peccata tua.

9. In like sort touching their Doctrines, that good works are not auaylable
toward Justification, nor are respected by God; nor sins or bad works any
way exitiall or hurtful to Salvation; as also that Tenet of diverse
Protestants, that God is the Author of all our Sins; what a sluice and
fludgate do these Doctrines open to all turpitude in ma^ners and Conversation?
For seeing it is nauseous and ungrateful to man's nature, to weary himself out
in the exercise of a virtuous life, if such a life (as wanting all pleasing
motives thereto) be no ways beneficial to his Soul; as on the contrary, most
sweet to man, to live in all voluptuousnes, pleasure, and Iouialisme, if so
this course cannot be in any sort dangerous to him; and this the more, seeing
he is indoctrinated by diverse Protestants, that what sins are committed by
him, God is the Author of them, and himself but Gods bare instrument therein;
they by such their belief running upon the Dint of those words, spoken by the
Psalmist in the Person of God: Psalm. 128.
supra dorsum meu^ fabricauerunt peccatores: As if I would say, they have
transferred the committing of their sins even upon me. Thus they making God,
who dyed for sin, to be the Patron of sin.

10. The Doctrine of Polygamy and Divorce, according to Swinglius and others
(most different from the judgment of other Protestants) how does it sow the
seeds of dissension between husband and wife to repudiate one the other, and
to part a sunder upon the least dislike, or discontent on either side, and both
of them to mary again? they being warranted by this Doctrine to take upon
occasion of such discontents, as many wives and husbands as they will; so both
the parties living after their first Divorce, in a continual state of
Adultery, and begetting and bringing forth several broods of bastards.

11. The Positions of some Protestants above alleged, that no Princes or
Magistrates are now to be in the times of the new Testament, ingendreth
nothing, but a tumultuous Anarchy, intestine simulties, wars and Traitorous
insurrections of the Subjects against their Prince; threating (vipar-lyke) an
utter euisceration of their own Country: And woe be to that Nation or Realm,
which nourishes such Monsters of sedition and disloyalty, and which places
all Soueraingty and Principality in the common people, the many- Headed-Tyrant
of Mankind; since the certain event thereof will be, that a man's own Country
shall finally become a Golgathae, or field of blood. And with this my Pen gives
it last pause to this short discourse.

AN APPENDIX. In which is proved; First, that the ancient Fathers by the
acknowledgements of the learned Protestants, taught our Catholic and Roman
Faith. Secondly, that the said Fathers have diverse advantages, above the
Protestant Writers, for fynding out the true sense of the Scripture.
WHEREAS in this former Treatise (I mean in the tenth Paragraph) we have
showed, how most Protestants do contemn the ancient Fathers; exercising their
fomy language in the eiuculation of most gaulfull words against them (though
the said Fathers be by other more moderate Protestants respected and
reverenced:) Now here in this short Appendix I think it to be much
convenient; First to show the reason more particularly, why the Protestants do
rest disaffected against the Fathers: It being (though above in part intimated)
in that it is ackowledged by the Protestants themselves that all the Articles
of Catholic Religion, were with an Uniformity of Judgment, believed, taught,
and practiced by the said Fathers in those most pure times. Secondly, I will
make it evident, even with several choaching Reasons, why every Christian Man
(solicitous of entertayning a true faith) should prefer the ancient Fathers in
the Exposition of the Scriptures (from whence they draw of theirs, and our
Catholic faith and Religion) before the different or contrary expositions of
them, given by the Protestant Doctors. The discovery of which later Point
shall rest in setting down diverse conducing and auaylable Circumstances in
behalf of the Fathers, but altogether prejudicial and incompetent to the
Protestants. Which two former Points shall be the Subject of this short
Appendix.

Now to begin with the first; I mean, in laying open the acknowledgment of the
learned Protestants, that our Catholic Articles are generally taught by the
Primitive Fathers of Christ's Church. 1. And first touching the Real presence,
we find the Ce^turists thus to write: Cent. 4. cap. 10. col. 985.
Eusebius Emissenus did speak unprofitably of Transubstantiation. And the said
Ce^turists thus confess of Chrysostom: Cent. 5. Col. 577.
Chrysostomus Transubsta^tiationem videtur confirmare; na^ ita scribit etc.
Chrysostom may be thought to confirm Transubstantiation; for thus he writes
etc. Peter Martyr thus charge Cyril: In his Epistles annexed to his common
places, in his Epistle to Beza. page 106.
I will not easily subscribe to Cyril, who affirms such a Communion, as
thereby even the substance of the flesh and blood of Christ, is joined to the
Blessings (for so he calls the holy bread,) Cyprian is no less charged by
the Protestants herein; for one of them thus writes: In In the Treatise
attributed to Vrsinus.
Cyprian are many sayings, which seem to affirm Transubstantiation. D.
Humfrey charge S. Gregory (who first by the labor of S. Austin, converted
England to Christianity) in this sort: In Ecclesia^ Iesuitism rat. 5.
quid in^exerunt Gregorius and Augustinus? Intulerunt onus Caremoniarum,
Oblationem salutaris Hostiae etc. Transubstantiationem. The Cent. 4. c. 4. col.
295.
Centurists reprehe^d Ambrose for not writing well of Transubstantiation. To
proceed a little further: whereas the Christians in the days of Tertullian,
Cyprian, and Origin, were accused, that they killed Infants, and did eat man's
flesh; This calumny Osiander Cent. 3. lib. 2. c. ^^ page 6.
(says Osiander the Protestant) undoubtedly first arrised, in that Christians
believed and confessed, that in the sacred supper of our Lord, the body of
Christ was eaten, and his blood drunk. To conclude this point, as most evident,
we find Adamus Francisci (a Protestant) thus to write: In Margarit. Theolog.
page 250.
The Papists Invention touching Transubstantiation, crept early into the
Church. And Antonius de Adamo (another Protestant) thus acknowledges of the
Antiquity of Transubstantiation; I have In his Anatomy of the Mass.
not been able to know, when the Opinion of the Real and bodily being of
Christ in the Eucharist, did first begin.

2. To descend to the Doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass (which rises from
the former doctrine of Transubstantiation) we first find the Centurists thus to
charge Cent. 4. c. 4. col. 295.
S. Ambrose: Ambrosius locutionibus vtitur etc. vt Missam facere, offerre
sacrificium etc. Ambrose uses those kind of speache^ etc. as to say Ma^^^, to
offer v^ Sacrifice etc. Cyrill of Jerusalem is thus reprehended by Hospinian
Lib. Sacram. page ^67.
: Quod ad Cyrillum Hieresolymitanum attinet etc. As concerning Cyrill of
Jerusalem, be indeed affirmed (according to the custom of his times) that the
Sacrifice of the Altar was a great help of the souls. Crastouius the
Protestant: An ignoramus De Opifi^i. Missae. sect. 164.
opinionem Nysseni etc. Are we ignorant, that the Opinion of Nyssene is of it
self absurd; who said, that when Christ gave his body to his Disciples to
eat, that then his Body was latently, ineffably, and inuisibly sacrifized up?
D. Contra Duraeum. l. 4. page 310.
Whitaker charge him with the same doctrine. Cyprian is also insimulated
within the supposed error of Sacrifice, by the Centurists in this manner;
Sacerdotem Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 83.
inquit Cyprianus etc. Cyprian affirms, that the Priest does enjoy the place
of Christ, and offers Sacrifice to God the Father. Ignatius (the Apostles
Scholar) is thus controuled: Certain The Centurists so write of him, in Cent.
2. cap. 4. col. ^3.
things occur in this Fathers writings, which are ambiguous, and incommodiously
spoken; as in the Epistle of Ignatius ad Smirnenses: Where Ignatius says that
it is not lawful without a Bishop, neither to offer, or to immolate the
Sacrifice. I will conclude this point with the large Confession of Calvin, who
comprehends the ancient Fathers in general, with teaching the doctrine of the
Sacrifice of the Mass; His words are these: Veteres Instit. 4. c. 18.
quoque illos video etc. And, I see, that those ancient Fathers did wrest
otherwise the memory hereof (he meaning of the Lords supper) then was agreeing
to the Institution of the Lord: for their supper makes show of an iterated (or
at least) renewed Sacrifice etc. For they have imitated more nearly the Jewish
manner of sacrifizing, then either Christ ordained, or the Gospel could well
suffer. Thus Calvin. And thus far of the Protestants Confession, touching the
Fathers in this point of Sacrifice.

3. As concerning Invocation of Saints: D. Iesuitism. part. 2. rat. 5.
Humfrey confesses, that Gregory the great, at his first Conversion of England
(among other points of the Roman Faith) taught Invocation of Saints.
Kempnitius alleges S. Austin praying to S. Cyprian, of which Act Kempnitius
thus censureth: These things In Exam. part. 3. page 211.
Austin did without Scripture, yielding to the times, and custom. D. Fulke
thus writes: I In his Reioinder to Bristow etc.
confess that Ambrose, Austin and Jerome held invocation of Saints to be
lawful. The said Doctor confesses also more in these words: In Against the
Rh^mish Testam. in 1. Petr. c. 1.
Nazianzen, Basil, and Chrysostom is mention of Invocation of Saints. The
Cent. 5. c. 6. col. 635.
Centurists charge S. Chrysostomes Lyturgy with invocation of our B. Lady by
name. But the Centurists Cent. 3. col. 84.
do not rest here; for they allege sundry examples of Prayer to Saints, in
Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzene, Ambrose, Prudentius, Epiphanius, and Ephrem. S.
Cyprian is acknowledged by the Centurists to teach: Cent. 3. Col. 83.
Cent. 4. col. 295. 296. 297.
That Martyrs and dead Saints do pray for the living; yea they confess, that
Origin prayed to holy Job. Thus far (to omit many other like Confessions of the
Protestants) touching both the doctrine and practice of Invocation of Saints,
in the Writings of the ancient Fathers.

4. The Doctrine of Purgatory is confessedly taught by the ancient Fathers. D.
Fulke thus says: Acrius In his answer to a counterfeyte Catholic page 44.
taught, that prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witness both Epiphanius
and S. Austin, which they count for an Error. The said Doctor thus further
confesses: In his Confutation of Purgatory, pa. 320. 149. and 326. and 349.
Ambrose, Chrysostom, and S. Austin allowed prayer for the dead. And yet more:
Fulke vbi supra page 362.
Tertullian, Austin, Cyprian, Jerome, and a great many more do witness, that
sacrifice for the dead is the Tradition of the Apostles: A point so evident,
that Calvin thus writes: Ante Instit. lib. 3. cap, 5. sect. 10.
mill, and trecentos annos etc. More then thirteen hundred years since, it
was received, that prayers were made for the dead etc. But I will grant those
times were in error. I will conclude this point with the Confession of M.
Gifford, thus writing: In his plain demonstration, that our Brownists are
Donatists. page 38.
Public worship to pray for the souls of the dead, and to offer Oblations for
the dead, was generally in the Church before the days of Austin, as appears
in Cyprian and Tertullian, which were before him, and nearer to the times of
the Apostles.

5. Touching Unwritten Traditions: Whereas S. Chrysostom says; The In 2.
Thessal. hom. 4.
Apostles did not deliver all things by writing, but many things without, D.
Whitaker in answer heerto faith: I De sacra Scriptura page 478.
answer, that this is an inconsiderate speech, and unworthy so great a Father.
Of which saying of Chrysostom, as also of S. Basil speaking the like, D.
Reynolds thus censureth: I take In his conclusions annexed to his Conference.
Conclus. page 689.
not upon me to control them (meaning the two former Fathers) but let the
Church judge, if they considered with advice enough. Whereas S. Austine
maintayneth the Doctrine of unwritten Traditions, M. Cartwright thus censureth
him therefore: If In M Whitguifts defense. page 103.
S. Austins Judgment be a good judgment, then there be some things commanded
of God, which are not in the Scriptures; and thereupon no sufficient doctrine
contained in the Scriptares. And further: To allow Cartwright, vbi supra,
S. Austins saying, is to bring in Popery again. D. Whitaker De sacra
Scriptura. page 678. 681. 683. 689. 690. 695. 696.
charge Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Austin, Innocentius,
Leo, Basil, Eusebius, Damascene etc. with maintayning the Doctrine of
Traditions. To conclude Exem. Council. Trid. part. 1. page 87. 89. 90.
Kemnitius reprehendeth Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Epiphanius, Ambrose,
Jerome etc. for their teaching the same Doctrine.

6. As concerning Images. We find, that L. Iustit. 2 c. ^1. number. 5.
Calvin affirms that Gregory the great was not taught in the holy Ghost,
because he called Images, Laymens Books. In like sort the foresaid Father S.
Gregory, is reprehended by In his Common Places, part. 2, p. 343.
Peter Martyr, In his Exam. part. 4 p. 3^.
Kempnitius, and Cent. 6. p. 288.
Ostander, for his lawful use of Images. In his Pageant of Popes. fol. 33.
Bale maintained, that Leo allowed worshipping of Images. Chrysostom is
charged for giving reverence to Christ his Image, by D. Against Heskins etc.
Fulke. Lactantius is condemned by the Cent. 4. col. 408, 409.
Ce^turists, for that (say they) he affirms many superstitious things,
concerning the efficacy of Christ's Image. D. Morton thus writes of the
antiquity of Images in Churches: About In Protest. Appeal. p. 586.
the foureteenth hundred year, Images crept out of private men's Houses and went
into public Churches, there standing etc. To conclude, touching the use of
Images, the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 409.
, Kempnitius In Examen. part. 4. p. ^6. 2^. 30.
, and Peter Parker against Symbolizing, part. 2. page 32.
Martyr do confess the same from diverse testimonies of Zozomen, Athanasius,
Prudentius, and diverse others.

7. Touching Relikes of Martys: And first touching Reverence exhibited to them
by the ancient Fathers: first we find by the Confession of In Iesuitism. rat. 5.
D. Humfrey, that Gregory and Austin at their first planting of Christianity in
England, did (among other points of Catholic Doctrine) bring in the doctrine
of Relikes: The which point Doct. Fulke against the Rhemish Testam. in Apocal.
6.
D. Fulke acknowledging as true, thus auoydeth: Gregory (i) being so near to
the Revelation of Antichrist, it is no marvel though he be superstitious to
Relikes. To ascend to higher times. S. Hierome Jerome contra Vigilant.
affirms, that the Emperor Constantine did translate the holy Relickes of
Andrew, Luke, and Timothy to Constanninople; at which, says he, the devils
did roar. Now Bullinger not approving his judgment, thus writes: De Origins
Erroris, fol. 67. and 58.
Jerome is over full, in that he says the devils do roar at the holy Relickes
of Andrew. S. Ambrose having made a pious discourse touching the reuerencing of
Martyrs Tombs, the Centurists thus judge thereof: Let Cent. 4. p. 301.
the godly reader consider, how horrible these things are, uttered by Ambrose.
The Centurists thus reprehend Constantine the first Christian Emperor: With
Cent. 4. col. 50. 29.
like superstition Constantine is said to have translated to Constantinople
certain Relickes of the Cross found by Helene, that the Cross might preserve
that City. Kempnitius In Exam. part. 4. page 10.
acknowledges the ancient use of carrying of Relickes in time of Procession in
these words: from Translation of Relickes, forthwith was used the carrying of
them as is to be seen in Jerome and Austin.

Touching Pilgrimages to Relics and Holy Places, we thus find confessed by the
Centurists: Concerning Pilgrimages Cent. 4. col. 457.
to holy places, that in this age under Constantine first began the places of
the Holy Land etc. to be had in esteem; Helen Mother of Constantine (a
superstitious Woman) going thither to worship. In like sort Kempnitius says:
Pilgrimages Exam. Trid. part. 4. p. 10.
were made (he meaning in those Primitive times) where men heard were Relics,
famous In his Retractiue from Romish Religion. pa. 197. 198.
and renowned for Miracles. D. Beard thus confesses: In former times they
placed the Relics of Saints under the Altar, as Ambrose witnesses of the
Relics of Geruasius, and Protasius.

Touching Miracles, exhibited at the Monuments and Relics of Saints;
Kempnitius thus writes: Mention is Exam. part. 4. page 10.
made in Austin, that a blind Woman received sight at the Translation of the
Relics of Steven; Contra Duraeum, l. 10. page 860.
and that sometimes certain Miracles were wrought at Relics etc. D. Whitaker
says: I do not think those Miracles vain, which are reported to be done at
the Monuments of Martyrs. Finally M. Fox Act. Mon. page 61. and se^ Crispinus
of the Estate of the Church. page 13^.
reports out of Chrysostom contra gentiles, and Theodoret mentions the
same, how after the bringing of the dead body of Babilas (Martyr) into the
Temple (of an Idol) the Idol ceased to give any more Oracles; saying, that for
the body of Babilas he could give no more Answers.

In this last place, touching the sign of the Cross; That it was worshipped
by the an^ient Fathers, and by others of those Primi^ue times, as also that
great efficacy, power, and virtue was ascribed thereto, we find thus confessed.
First then M. Perkins acknowledges In his Problem. page 83.
thus: About four hundred years after Christ, the Cross began by little and
little to be adored; And in proof hereof M. Perkins alleges Prudentius,
Jerome, and Euagrius. Peter In his Common places. part. 2. c. 5.
Martyr affirms, that Constantine made the sign of the Cross in gould.
Osiander Cent. 4. l 2. c. 30.
relates out of In Vita Constant. l. 1. c. 2.
Eusebius, that Constantine affirmed, that the sign of the Cross appeared to
him in the after noone, in great light above the Sun, and a Writing therein,
with these Words: In hoc vinces. Danaeus (the Protestant) auerreth thus: In 1.
part, altara part. ad Bellarm. page 14. 15.
Cyrill* and sundry other Fathers were plainly superstitious and blinded, with
this enchantment of the Crosses adoration. The Centurists Cent. 4. col. 302.
rebuke Ephrem, they thus saying: He attributes too much to the sign of the
Cross. Touching the Miracles wrought by the sign of the Cross, we find Peter
In his Common places, part. 2. c. 5.
Martyr thus to write: I deny not, but certain Miracles have sometimes been
wrought by the sign of the Cross; as S. Austin reports. l. 2. de Ciuitate
Dei, c. 28. D. Parker Against Symbolizing part. 1. c. 3. page 154.
reports certain Miracles done by the sign of the Cross. To conclude this
passage, D. Couell thus acknowledges: No In his Answer to M. Burges, p. 138.
man can deny but that God after the death of his son manifested his power to
the amazement of the World, in this contemptible sign, as being the Instrument
of many Miracles.

8. I will in this next place touch the doctrine of good Works, concerning
Justification, and Merit. And first, that Works do justify by the judgment of
the ancient Fathers, is evident: For we read, that the Cent. 6. c. 10. col. 748.
Centurists do charge S. Gregory, with this doctrine of Good Works, and
Justification. Brentius thus reprehendeth S. Austin: Austin In Confess.
Wittemberg.
taught affiance in Man's Works, touching Remission of sins. Chrysostom is
thus controuled by the Centurists. Chrysostom Cent. 5. col. 1178.
handles impurely the doctrine of Justification, and attributes merit to
Works Luther (in contempt) styleth Jerome, Ambrose, Austin, and other Fathers,
Iustice-Workers In Galat. c. 4. after the English Translation.
of the Old Papacy. Melancthons words are these: In Romans ^. 591.
Origin and many following him, imagined, that men were just, by reason of
their Works. And the Cent. 3. col. 240.
Centurists Cent. 3. col. 240.
confess the same of Tertullian, D. Humfrey thus freely writes; It Iesuitism.
part. 2. page 530.
may not be denied but that Jerome, Clemens and others (called Apostolical
men) have in their Writings the Opinion of Merit of Works. Bullinger ascends
thus high in time, saying: The doctrine In Apocalyp. Sermon. 87. fol. 270.
of merit, satisfaction, and Justification of works, did incontinently after
the Apostles time lay their first foundation. I Will conclude with D. Couell;
His Confession in general is this: Diverse In his Examen. c. 9. p. 120.
both of the Greek and Latin Church were spotted with Errors, about Freewill,
Merit etc. Hereto I will adioyne the doctrine of Works of Supererogation, or
Evangelical Counsels. That vowed Chastity was taught and practiced in those
Primitive times, the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 488.
do witness. They also acknowledge the doctrine and practice in those
Primitive times of voluntary Cent. 4. col. 30.
Poverty, of Abstinence from Wine Cent. 4. col 471.
, flesh, and certain other Meats; Of their going barefoote Cent. 4. col. 474.
, lying on the ground, wearing sackcloth etc. and diverse other such
Austerities.

9. Concerning Auricular Confession of sins to a Priest; It is evident, that
the Centurists Cent. 6. c. 10. p. 748.
do reprehend Gregory the Great, for teaching Confession of Sins, Penance,
and Satisfaction. S. Leo is charged by M. Simonds Upon the Reuelat. page, 57.
with the doctrine of auricular Confession. The Centurists acknowledge Cent. 3.
c. 6. col. 27.
that in the times of Cyprian and Tertullian, was used private Confession of
thoughts and lesser sins; and that the same was thought necessary. Yea the
Centurists do further confess, that Penance Cent. 3. col. 127.
and satisfaction was enjoined, according to the offense. And fortably hereto
D. Whitaker Contra Camp. rat. 5.
thus acknowledges: Cyprian and Tertullian thought by their external
discipline of life, to pay the pains due for sin, and to satisfy Gods
Justice; And not only Cyprian, but almost all the Fathers of that time, were in
that Error. Thus this Doctor. To conclude this point, Kempnitius Exam. part.
4. page ^8.
charge the ancient Fathers in general, saying: I am not ignorant, that the
old Fathers do sometimes over largly, and with words ouervaunting, command that
Canonical Discipline; As that, Tertullian says: By these satisfactions sins
are purged. Cyprian says: By these, sins are redeemed, washed, and cured.
Ambrose: By them the pains of Hell are recompensed. Austin: God by them is
pacifyed for sins past. Thus far Kempnitius; Who never calls to mind, that
the Fathers meaning only is, that Satisfactions, not as they are considered in
their own Nature, but only as they receive their force and virtue from Christ
his Passion, and his promise to them (and not otherwise) do purge and redeem
sins.

10. Touching the Sacraments: And first that there are seven Sacraments in the
judgment of the ancient Fathers; D. Humfrey thus writes of Dionysius: At
dices, In Iesuitism. part. 2. pa. 51^.
quid ad Dionysium dices etc. But thou will say: What say thou to Dionysius,
who numbreth six Sacraments? I answer, that among the Ancients, this only one
Father teaches that there are seven Sacraments; although he (omitting
Matrimony) do only speak of six Sacraments. That Grace is given and confirmed
by the Sacraments; Whereas S. Austin thus writes: The In psalm. 79. and co^tra
Paustum lib. 1^ cap. 13.
Sacrament of the new Testament gave Salvation; The Sacrament of the old
Testament did but promise the Savior: Musculus answers heerto, saying: This
In loc. comm. page 299.
was spoken by Austin without consideration: Yea the said Musculus charge all
the Fathers in general with the said doctrine in these words: The Fathers
attribute greater efficacy to our Sacraments, then to the Sacraments of the old
Testament; Musc. vbi supra.
affirming ours to be effectual signs of grace; not ^nly by signifying the
same, as the others did, but also by conferring and giving grace and salvation.

Now touching the necessity of Baptism, M. Cartwright thus confesses: Austin
In D. Whitgifts defense. pa. 1227.
was of mind, that Children could not be saved without Baptism. Scultetus (the
Protestant) writes thus: In medulla Theolog. page 30.
The blemish noted in Cyprian etc. is, that he thinks Baptism to be
absolutely and simply necessary. Vrbanus Rhegius confidently auerreth, that in
part. 1. operum Cathe^his. minor. fol. 105.
the Scripture and the Authority of the ancient Church, constrained him to
believe, that Children unbaptized, are damned. And hence it is, that Calvin
thus confesses: Almost L. Instit. 4. c. ^5. sect. 20.
from the beginning of the Church, Baptism by Lay Persons was used in danger
of death. Thus much of the Sacraments.

11. That the doctrine of Limbus Paetrum was taught by the Primitive Church and
Fathers; First I will produce the words of D. Whitaker, against whom when
Duraeus (his Adversary) had alleged testimonies from the Fathers for the
proof of Limbus Patrum, the said Doctor thus answers him: Quod Contra
Duraeum. l. 8. page 557.
Scripturis euincere minus potuisti etc. That, which thou could less prove by
Scriptures, that thou doubtlesly wilt euince from the testimonies of the
Fathers: But touching this, I answer thee briefly what I conceive; That is;
that one Word of Scripture carries more force with me, then the Sentences, and
Judgments of a thousand Fathers without Scripture; therefore do not expect, that
I will make particular Answers to the several erroneous testimonies of the
Fathers, alleged by thee. Thus D. Whitaker, confessing, that the Fathers
unanimously taught the doctrine of Limbus Patrum. D. Barlow thus writes: This
In his Defense of the Articles of the Protestant Religion. page 173.
passes most ryfe among the Fathers, Who taking, Inferi, for Abraham's bosom,
expound it, that Christ went thither, ad liberandum liberandos, to convey the
Fathers deceased (before the Resurrection) into that place, where now they are.
In like manner M. Jacob (the Protestant) thus most fully acknowledges: All the Sea this in D. Bilsons book of the full Redemption of Mankind. page 188.
Fathers with one consent affirm, that Christ delivered the souls of the
Patriarchs and Prophets out of Hell, at his coming thither; and so spoiled
Satan of those, who were in his present Possession. To close up this point,
whereas Cardinal Bellarmine Bellarm. tom. 1. l. 4. de Ch^isti Animae. c. 14.
alleges in proof of Limbus Patrum, the testimonies of the Greek Fathers;
to wit, of Justinius, Irenaeus, Clemens, Origin Eusebius, Basil, Nazianzene,
Nicene, Epiphanius; Chrysostom etc. As also of the Latin Bellarm. vbi supra.
Fathers; namely, Tertullian, Hyppolitus, Cyprian, Hillary, Gaudentius,
Prudentius, Ambrose, Jerome, Ruffinus, Austin, Leo, Fulgentius etc. Danaeus
(the Protestant) acknowledging all this for true, answers only thus: As
concerning Danaeus ad Roberti Bellar. disput. part. page 176.
these Fathers, they were not instructed out of Gods word; Neither do they
confirm their Opinion from it, but only from their own Conjectures etc. Thus
Danaeus.

12. That the Primitive Fathers did conspiringly teach the doctrine of
Freewill, is most perspicuous. For the Centurists reciting the sayings of
Lactantius, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzene, Epiphanius, Jerome etc. in defense
of Freewill, thus contemn all their Testimonies: Patres omnes Cent. 4 col. 29^.
fere huius aetatis etc. Almost all the Fathers of this Age, do speak
confusedly of Freewill. In like sort, In me^ulla Theo^og. Patrum. page 379. and
304 and 466. etc.
Scultetus (the former Protestant) reprehendeth Cyprian, Theophilas,
Tertullian, Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Iustine, Irenaeus, Athanagoras,
Tatianus etc. for their teaching of freewill. In like manner certain English
Puritans thus largely confess hereof, saying: Freewill This saying of the
Puritans is related in their brief discovery of Untruths etc. contained in D
Bancrofts. Sermon. page 203.
ever since the Apostles times in a manner flourished every where, till Martin
Luther took the sword in hand against it: So true is that Confession of D.
Humfrey, (a testimony upon other occasion above alleged): It may not be
denied, but In Iesuitism. part. 2. page 530.
that Ireneus, Clemens, and others (called Apostolical men) have in their
Writings the Opinions of freewill. etc. According hereto the Centurists,
speaking of the times next to the Apostles, thus freely say: Nullus Cent. 4.
cap. 4. col. ^8.
fere doctrinae locus etc. Almost no one Point of doctrine, so quickly began to
be obscured, as the doctrine, Whether man had Freewill, or no? And thus much
briefly of the Protestants Confessions touching Freewill; of which point (as
also of all the former doctrines, above discoursed of in this Appendix) I have
not set down the half of what the Protestants do acknowledge therein,
touching the ancient Fathers belief, and doctrines in the said Points.

13. Touching Peter's Primacy, above the rest of the Apostles; The antiquity of
this doctrine is so great, that, The Centurists do reprehend Jerome Cent. 4 col
11 15.
, Cent. 4. col. 555.
Hilary, Cent. 4. col* 558.
Nazianzen, Cent. 3. col. 84.
Tertullian, Cent. 3. p. 84.
Cyprian, Cent. 3. col. 85.
Origin, and in general many other Fathers, for teaching, that the Church was
built upon Peter. Their words touching Cyprian are these in the place above
alleged: Passim dicit Cypriaenus super Petrum Ecclesiam fundatam esse. Calvin
thus writes: In Petro lib. 4. instit. cap. ^. sect. 6.
fundatam esse Ecclesiam etc. diverse Fathers did expound, that the Church was
founded upon Peter, because it is said: Super hanc Petram etc. But the whole
Scripture makes against this their exposition. Thus Calvin. The Centurists
Cent. 4. col. 5^^.
do further charge Optatus for saying: Petrus Apostolorum caput, vnde Cephas
appellatur. D. Reynolds In his Conference page 485.
rebukes Dionysius for styling Peter, the chief and most ancient topp (or
head) of the Apostles. To conclude D. Fulke speaking of S. Leo, and S. Gregory
(Bishops of Rome) says: The mystery In his retentiue against Bristowe motives
page 248.
of iniquity did work in that seat near five or six hundred years before
them (which must be in the Aposties days, or presently after:) and then
greatly increased, they were so deceived with long continuance of Error, that
they thought the dignity of Peter was much more over the rest of his fellow
Apostles, then the Holy Scriptures of God do allow.

14. Now that the Bishop of Rome is Peter's Successor, in the judgment of the
Fathers, is no less certain; for D. Bilson confesses it plainly in these
words: The In his difference part. 1. page, 1^7.
ancient and learned Fathers call the Roman Bishop, Peter's Successor. The
Ce^turists charge Leo in this manner: Leo Cent. 5. col. 1262.
paynfully goes about to prove, that singular preeminence was given to Peter,
above the other Apostles; and that thence did rise the Primacy of the Roman
Church. D. Cowper In his Chronicles.
calls Linus, first Bishop of Rome, after Peter. To conclude, Bucer thus
freely says: We In prae paratorijs ad Council.
plainly confess that among the ancient fathers, the Roman Church obtained
Primacy above others; as that, which has the Chair of S. Peter, and whose
Bishops have almost always been accounted the successors of Peter. Thus
Bucer.

15. Touching the Catholic Ceremonies of Funerals, and other Ecclesiastical
custom^^, we thus find confessed. The Centurists acknowledge, that Cent. ^.
col. 454.
Solebant Cerei proferri funeri etc. Wax candels were accustomed to be brought
in the time of the funerals: And the Centurists do also grant, that it was
Cent. 4 col. 455.
the custostome to cover the grave with flowers. The said Centurists further
make mention of minning days in these words: Celebris Cent. 4. col. 455.
ob defuncti memoriam fuit dies quadragesimus post obitum; the fortith day
after the death of the party, was kept with solemnity. Lastly, they record
those words of Tertullian: We Cent 3. col. 138.
offer up sacrifices and oblations every anniuersary day for the dead.

16. That prayer was made toward the East, in those ancient times, is
confessed by the Gent. 4. col. 432
Centurists. That Canonical Cent. 4. col. 433.
hours of Prayers were then used, the Centurists confess. They also record,
that there was in those primitive times Cent. 4 col. 459.
rising in the night to prayer: Also that the Cent. col. 433.
Lyturgy was then accustomed to be recited: That Cent. 4. col. 1326
prayers were then made by nu^bring them upon little stones; which is the same
as in these days, by numbering prayers with beads.

17. D. Fulke Against Heskin^ etc. page ^57.
confesses, that the Cross (by report of Paulinus) was by the Bishop of
Jerusalem his appointment, at Easter (yearly) to be worshipped by the people.
But here we are to note, that Paulinus did not mean any idolatrous worship to
be given to the Cross (as the Protestants do most wrongly charge us Catholics
to exhibit to it), but only a Christian reverence and respect, as being an
Instrument, upon which the Savior of the world suffered for Man's Redemption.

18. That set times of fasting were used in those ancient times, is clear: for
first touching the fast of Lent, Ke^pnitius In Examen. part. 1. pa. 8^.
confesses, that Ambrose, Maximus, Taurinensis, Theophil^^, Jerome, and
others, do affirm the fast of Lent to be an Apostolical Tradition: Yea
Scultetus thus says: The In medulla Theolog. p. 440.
superstitious fast of Lent was allowed and commanded by Ignatius. Now Ignatius
was in the Apostle days. M. Cartwright is alleged by M. Whitguift In D.
Whitguifts defense. page 100.
to reprove S. Ambrose, for saying: It is a sin not to fast in Lent. Touching
the fast of Quatuor Tempora, Whitak. contra Duraeum. l. 7. p. 80.
D. Whitaker confessetht it to be as ancient as Calixtus the Pope, who was
immediate Successor to Pope Victor, who lived in the third Century.

19. I will conclude the Protestants Confessions, touching the ancient Fathers,
in the doctrine of Religious Persons. And first, touching Monks; the
Centurists Cent. 4. col. 46^. under the title, de Consecratione M^nachi.
acknowledge Monks, to have been in those Primitive Times. D. Humfrey thus
writes of Gregory the Great: These In Iesuitis. par. 2. rat. 5.
things Austin the Monk (taught by Gregory the great Monk) brought in: Thus
the Doctor acknowledging M^nachisme in those days. M. Cartwright thus
confesses: In D. Whitguifts defense. page 344.
Ruffinus, Theodoret, Sozomene, Socrates etc. do mention Monks almost in every
Page. In like manner the Centurists speaking of the age wherein Constantine
lived, Cent. 4. c. 10. col. 1294.
do confess, that there were Monks throughout Syria, Palestine, Bithinia, and
other places of Asia. The Centurists further acknowledging a place of S. Basil
in praise of Monastical life, thus censure him: All which Cent. 4. p. 300. and
3^^.
words (meaning of Basil) are both besides, and contrary to the Holy Scripture.

20. The Centurists Cent. 4. c. 6. col. 404. 466.
also make mention of Monasteries, wherein the Monks did dwell. The Centurists
finally record the Monasteries Cent. 4. col. 467. 479. ^335. etc.
of Virgins. The like mention the Monasteries of Virgins is made by Osiander
cent. 4. pa. 507. 503. etc.
Osiander. Thus far of all the former Points of Catholic Faith and Religion,
that they were taught, and practiced by the ancient Fathers, even in our
Adversaries Judgment. I could prove the like by the Confessions of the learned
Protestants, in all other Articles, controuerted between us and the
Protestants; But I trust, that these former Articles (being of greatest Moment)
may serve in lieu of all the rest, which are of lesser Consequence.

Only I think good to adioyne here this ensuing Animaduersion. To wit, That
whereas in the producing of the former Authorities of the Fathers, in behalf
of the Catholic Religion, all Fathers are not brought in, by the Confession of
the Protestants, to teach the said Catholic Articles; Now the reason of this
is, in that every ancient Father did not write of every particular Article of
Catholic Religion; and consequently such could not be alleged by the
Protestants confessions, in proof of the Articles omitted by them.
Nevertheless it unavoidably follows, by all true inference of Reason, that
all other Fathers in such particular points of Catholic Religion, as are
omitted by the Protestants, do agree and conspire with the former Fathers,
above confessed. The reason i^ this. If the other Fathers (above omitted, and
not spoken of) had maintained contrary doctrines to the former produced
Fat^ers; they then would have been written against, by some other more
Orthodoxall Writers and Fathers, touching the said points: As we see that
certain Errors in Origin, Tertullian, and Cyprian (to omit the like Examples
in Donatus, Iouinian, Pelagius, and sundry such other Nouelists) were instantly
impugned by Austin, Jerome, Epiphanius, Theodoret etc. But no such writing was
against the former confessed Fathers in this Treatise, for their houlding the
foresaid Catholic Points; Therefore it is certain, that all other Fathers of
the Primitive Church did jointly teach, and believe the said Catholic
doctrines, with the above confessed Fathers.

Again, the alleged Fathers in this Appendix, were the chief Pastors in God
Church in those days; in whom the Church of Christ was peculiarly and more
markably personated. Therefore all other Inferior Members of the Church, did
agree with them in the belief of the said Catholic Doctrines; or otherwise by
their denial of them they did cease to be members of the said Church of God:
Cum Cyprian. l. Vnitate Ecclesiae.
Deo manner non possunt, qui in Ecclesia Dei vnanimes esse noluerunt.

Now to descend to the second Part of this Appendix; which is touching the
Comparison made between the ancient Fathers, and the Protestant Doctors and
Writers, for the fynding out of the intended sense of the Holy Ghost, in the
exposition of the sacred Scripture: In the consideration of which point, I
grant, I am finally moved to a just and warrantable Anger; since the want
thereof upon so urgent an occasion, might well be reputed but stupidity, and an
insensiblenes of the indignities and wrongs, offered to those blessed and happy
Saints. Therefore let the Reader pardon me, if I here sharpen my Pen (which can
hardly spend its ink, upon a more worthy and noble subject,) and if I become
somewhat more luxuriant in defense of these Champions of Christ his Church;
upon whom diverse Protestants (as in the former Treatise is showed) do even
shower down infinite words of reproach and contumely, and do throw upon their
honorable Memories, the durte, and filth of their own most intemperate and
gaulefull Language.

But first, I think it convenient, to take away the vulgar Stumbling Block,
which most of our Adversaries have laid between the Truth, and the eyes of
the ignorant and credulous Protestant. Which is, as the Protestants most
wrongfully (and to themselves consciously) suggest; That seeing the Scripture
(as being the undoubted Word of God) is to be advanced before the Authority of
the Fathers, they being but men: and seeing the Protestants (say they) rely
only upon Scripture, the Fathers upon their own and other humane Authorities;
Why then should not the Scripture be pryzed above the Authorities of the said
Fathers? Now to dispell and dissipate this weak smoke from the Eyes of the
Ignorant; I do aver this their answer to be a mere Elench of Fallacy, called
by the Logitians, Petitio Principij; since here it is falsely presumed, that the
Protestants do rely only upon the true sense of the Scripture, and the Fathers
do reject the Scripture. Whereas indeed the Fathers with all Reverence and
honor do affect the Scripture, and most humbly submit themselves to it. And
therefore the life and touch of the doubt in this point only consists: To
wit, whether the Fathers (who buyld the Articles of their Faith upon the
Scriptures) are to be preferred before the Protestants, interpreting the said
Scriptures in a contrary Sense. And thus the Antithesis, or opposition is here
to be made, not between the Fathers and the Scripture (as our Adversaries do
calumniously pretend) but between the Constructions, given by the Fathers of
certain Texts of holy Scripture, and the different, or contrary constructions
of the said Text, given by the Protestants

The like subtility our adversaries (to wit, the Centurists, D. Whitaker,
Illyricus, and others) do use, when the call Catholic doctrines, as they are
maintained by us, Idolatry, Heresies, Blasphemies etc. thereby to intimate,
that the Papists are no members of Christ's Church: which very doctrines, as
they are taught by the ancient Fathers, the Protestants style, but nauos,
naenia, errores etc. with intention to show, that the Protestants do not divide
themselves from the Church, of which the Fathers were members: O incredible,
and serpentine Craft, and Imposture.

But to lance further in discoursing of the Comparison, between the Fathers
and the Protestants: For I hold it my honor to be their poor Advocate upon
earth; and I hope, that in their Seraphicall, and burning Charity, they will be
my Adocate in Heaven: and will vouchsafe to intercede to his Divine Majesty for
the remission of my infinite sins and transgressions. Here I say, that any
true and zealous Christian ought to have a sensible grief and religious
Resent, to see, that Saphyrs should be preferred before Diamonds, the lowest
Shrubs to dare to contend in height with the Cedars of Lybanus, vpstart
Innovation to take the wall (as I may say) of reverend and gray-hayrd
Antiquity: I mean, that Luther, Swinglius, Melancthon, Calvin, Beza, and such
refuse of men, should shoulder out of the due Seat^ of Honor and Authority,
Austin, Jerome, Epiphanius, the Gregory's, the Cyrills, Basil, Ambrose, Hylary,
Optatus, Athanasius, Cyprian, Ephrem, Irenaeus, Ignatius, Polycarpus, and
diverse other Fathers of those Primitive and purest times. But to descend more
particularly to the dissecting of this point; I hold it most conducing, to
present to the Readers Eye, certain forcible Circumstances, aduantaging the
ancient Fathers much above the Protestants, for the searching and picking out
the true and intended sense of the Holy Ghost in the Texts of sacred Writ,
produced either by the Catholics or the Protestants. Thus I mean to Parallele
the Fathers with the Protestants (not as Plutarch did, by comparing Worthy Men
with Worthy Men, but) by ballancing the ancient, grave, and most literate
Doctors, with certain Nouellizing, and but competently learned Sectaries.

1. And to begin. Our first Circumstance may be taken from the different
times, wherein the Fathers and the former Protestants did live. The Fathers (as
is known) flourished in those pure times, near to Christ and his Apostles;
when his Spouse (I mean his Church) remained intemerate and incontaminate, as
then not brooking any defiled touch, but of one Heretic. We may adioyne
hereto, that in regard of their proximity in time to Christ (for some of them
lived in the Ignatius, Dionysius Areopagita lived in the days of the Apostles.
Apostles days, others in the next Justinius Martyr, Pope Pius, Ireneus lived
in the second age. Origin. Tertullian, Cyprian etc. in the third age.
Athanasius, Hilarious Cyrill of Jerusalem, Ambrose, Basil, Optatus, Gregorius,
Nyssenus, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Ephrem, Epiphanius etc. in the fourth Age, in
which age was celebrated the Council of Nyce. Gaudentius, Chrysostom, Jerome,
Austin, Cyrill of Alexandria, Proclus Constantinopolitanus, Theodoret,
Gelasius, Leo Pope Hilarious, Eusebius Emyssenus in the fifth age. Gregory the
Great and Austin (our Apostle) in the sixth age.
ensuing ages) the true Faith and Doctrine (and consequently the true meaning
of the Scripture) might well be Paraphrazed by force of Tradition, during that
short desce^t of the Church; each man receiving from his Predecessor, even from
hand to hand, the practice of the true Religion: so as such Men as then would
not acknowledge the splendor of the Catholic Religion in those firster Times,
may well resemble the stars, when they are darkened through over much light.
This far of this Circumstance in behalf of the Fathers; from whence we may
gather, that diverse of them lived a thousand years since, others more then
fifteen hundred.

But now let us cast our eye upon the other End of the Balance. Have our
Protestant Writers been in Rerum Natura fifteen hundred years since? Have
they been a thousand years? Have they been one hundred? This is the most, if
so much: so as if you will have recorded the several Stations of their Church,
you must divide them by Centuries of Months, instead of Centuries of years:
So fully it is confessed by one of their prime Men: It Benedictus
Morgensternensis (a Lutheran) so writes, tract. de Ecclesia page 145.
is impudency to say, that any before the time of Luther, had the purity of the
Gospel. Is there any Man of so stopped a Nose, as not thoroughly to sent the
disparity of these two different times, wherein the Fathers and the Protestants
Writers lived; and consequently the great advantage, of which the Fathers for
the true interpreting of the Scripture, and practice of Christian Religion, are
made capable; the Protestants resting wholly there, on precluded?

2. But to proceed further. The Fathers (I speak of the Orthodoxall Fathers)
though writing their Voluminous Tomes, upon different emergent Occasions, in
different ^ymes, in different tongues, in different and ^ost discoasted
Nations, ever in defense of ^^e Catholic and Roman Faith, did so v^animously
conspire The Catholics grant, that the Fathers did expound some Texts in
different senses, but not ever in behalf of the Protestants Errors: for
example, Luke 13. When you have done all these, things, which are commanded
Isay, We are unprofitable Servants. Chrysostom (in Illud, Illatum est cor
Osiae) says: We should only think our selves though humility to be
unprofitable servants. Austin in Sermon de Verbis Domini, interprets. We are
called unprofitable servants, because we have done nothing, but what we ought
to have done. But neither of these expositions do prejudice the doctrine of
good works, or works of Supererogation, against which this text it urged by the
Protestants.
in their Writings; (...) if one and the same Genius had a general ^nfluency
over all their Pens; Whose very ^ens were ever pressed to rescue the Church in
any sort endangered, with the arising Heresies of those times.

Now touching the Protestants, the Reader may fully glass their infinite and
immortal dissentions in their Wrytings, by perusing these former Leaves: Their
Agreement here^n, being like to the agreement of Esaias 9.
Ephraim and Manasses, who did eat up one another: The Protestants even
spinning out at length several years, in writing reciprocal venomous Satyrs
and Inuectiues.

3. The Fathers lived in a most strict and severe course of Discipline, and
Manners, through their thirsty expectation of Heaven, and hope to find their
former sins drowned in the blood of Christ. And hereupon they observed
perpetual Chastity, practiced much Prayer and Fasting, betrampled with a
spiritual Contempt upon all fading Honors, and Temporalities; ever checking
the malice of each Temptation with an internal Elevation of their souls to God.
Thus did their Religious comportment (by which they wholly exposed their labors
to the service of God) dispell and drive away all mists and clouds, gathered
before the Eye of their Understanding, for their myning out of the sense of
the Scripture, and did even depose the inexpugnable Certainty of their Faith.

But now, as the Sun casts its Influence upon several Countries,
indifferently, and after the same manner, yet with most different and contrary
effects: So Gods Inspirations, though sent to the ancient Fathers, and to the
learned Protestants, through their wilful rejecting of them, do produce most
opposite operations. For if we call to mind the carriage of most of our
Protestants first writers, we shall find that Virtue with them was reputed, but
as an aerie and intentionall Schoole-name, they lying (for the most part) in the
mud of sensuality and temporal pleasures; such a Confluence of several Vices
was in diverse of them. He that rests doubtful hereof, let him peruse
(besides the Book of daily Experience) the Book entitled, The life of
Luther, printed anno 1624. wherein he shall find pencilled, and delineated at
large, the most facinorous and enormous life's of Luther, Andreas, Melancthon,
Bucer, Ochinus, Carolostadius, Swinglius, Calvin and Beza: All of them chief
Promoters of the Protestants Religion with their Pens. And what in that Book
is delivered in painting forth their wicked and irreligious courses, is
delivered from the Writings only of other Protestants, their Brethren: so truly
are verified of these Protestant Writers, Animalis 1. Cor. 2.
homo non percipit ea, quae sunt Spiritus Dei.

Furthermore, diverse learned Protestants of these days are so far from
abandoning the temporal Benefis of the World, as that they commonly make their
Religion, a Shoinghorne to draw on some opulent, and great Ecclesiastical
Living, or Parsonage; so they finally making a Steeple, yea two or three
steeples sometimes (of so great a swallow diverse of them are) and a Sister in
the Lord (thus coopling Pluto, and Venus together) their very But, or Mark of
all their Scholasticall endeauours, or their supreme felicity in this World: So
thrall and mancipated they are become to all transitory and fading Allectiues,
and so breathlesly do they run in cry in the pursuit of them; Howsoever many
of them, through their sophistical Comportment, and dooble-faced Actions,
seem externally to be wholly spiritualized, and even to feed only upon the
Gospel.

4. Another Privilege granted from God to those blessed Men of ancient times,
and others of the faithful of those days, is, that diverse of them had the
honor of working most stupendous Miracles, and this often in defense and
proof of their Catholyke Religion; in the patration of which Miracles, it was
in their power to dissolve and untie the knot of Nature. For example. Touching
Miracles done in proof of the virtue of the sign of the Cross, read In vita
Antonij.
Athanasius, Haeres. 30
Epiphanius In vita Hilarionis.
Jerome, and Histor. l. 5. c 21.
Theodoret. Touching the Image of Christ, read Histor. l. 7. c. 14.
Eusebius. Touching Miracles at the presence of Relickes of Saints, read L. 9.
Confess. c. 7. and 8.
S. Austin; touching some done at the Monuments or Tombs of Martyrs, see the
foresaid L. de Ciuitate Dei 22. c. 8.
S. Austin. Touching Prayer to Saints, see also Aug. vbi supra.
S. Austin. In confirmation of the Real presence, see L. 6. de Sacerdotio, c.
4.
Chrysostom. To be short, the gift of working Miracles was so ordinary in
those times, as that one Father (to wit Gregorius Thaumaturgus) took his
denomination and Name, from working of Miracles; for so much does the greek
Word, Thaumaturgus, import: so just reason had S. Austin to have recorded; In
his Survey of, D Kellisons etc. D. Morton in his Apol. Cathol. part. 1. l. 2
25. and diverse others.
Culmen authoritatis obtinuit Ecclesia Catholica, Haerecicis miraculorum
maiestate damnatis.

But let us see, if any Protestant was ever graced with the working of such
supernatural Wonders. L. de Vtilitate credendi cap 27.
But it is so fully acknowledged, that the Protestant Ministers never effected
any of them (no not so much, as supernaturally curing a pricked fingar, or
raising to life a dead flea) as that diverse of them, behoulding with the eye of
sulliuation and envy, the miracles wrought by the former Fathers and other
devout persons, do peremptorily In his Survey of, D Kellisons etc. D. Morton in
his Apol. Cathol. part. 1. l. 2 25. and diverse others.
teach, that all Miracles have ceased ever since the Apostles days: so willing
they are to shackle and tie the hands of God, from exhibiting all such
stupendous Actions. And hence it is, that their own chief Doctors do wholly
confess the want of all Miracles, in confirmation of their first plantation of
Protestancy; For thus does D. Fulke acknowledge, saying: It is Against the
Rhemish Testament in Apocalyp. cap. 13.
known, that Calvin and the rest (whom the Papists call Arch-Hereticks) do no
Miracles. And no less is confessed by D. Sutcliffe in these words: We do In
his examen of D. Kellisons Survey, printed 1606. p. 8.
not practice Miracles; nor do we teach, that the doctrine of Truth is to be
confirmed with Miracles.

5. Another ouerballancing Circumstance resulteth, from the different
Conditions of the Fathers, and of the Protestants, touching the preaching of
their several doctrines in Faith. The Fathers interpreted the Holy Scriptures
in confirmation of our Catholic Faith, when as no other Faith was known, and
many ages before Protestancy was ever dreamed of: And therefore what they did
write, or teach out of the Scriptures, they did it in an Azisme and purity of
Conscience; not being forestalled with any Prejudice of Judgment, or invited
thereto by any humane or temporary Motives; the most dangerous Sands, upon
which many Scholars do suffer shipwreck. Now the Protestants (I mean chiefly
many Protestant Ministers throghout Christendom) even from the first time that
Protestancy began to get on wing, do prosecute their Faith with a most strong
bent of Endeavor, because their temporal states (as above is intimated) are so
embarked therein, as that an utter extinguishment of Protestancy would
instantly threaten all mendicity, and ruin to the Doctors thereof: So fully
are their temporal states engaged in their own Religion.

Therefore no wonder it is, if most Protestant Doctors (as in likelihood they
do) do thus syllogize and dispute in the secret of their own Soul: I am
married, I am attended on with a great train and charge of Children: My
temporal Means lie only in my possessing of Parsonages, and other
Ecclesiastical Livings, which are allotted to me for my Ministerial and
Protestanticall functien: If Protestancy should suffer an utter disparition,
and vanishing out of the World, What then would become of me? How should I, my
Wife, and my poor Children maintain our selves? We cannot live only upon
breathing the Air: Therefore I must (nay I will) in all estuation and heat of
dispute and writing maintain my own Religion of Protestancy; shaping (though
I grant, in a retrograde manner) the pretended sense of the Scripture, to the
fortifying of my lately appearing Faith not my Faith, to the true sense of the
Scripture. God is merciful, and I hope (seeing my state otherwise lies mortally
a bleeding) he will pardon this my Offense, proceeding from such a forced and
urging Necessity. O most dangerous, and desperate Resolution!

6. To proceed to another Circumstance. Diverse of those ancient Fathers (as
Ignatius, Dionysius, Polycarpe, Cyprian etc.) spent their lives in defense of
the Christian and Catholic Religion (to speak nothing of many thousands of
others less eminent Christians dying for the same) they suffering most
glorious Martyrdomes for their faith, in justifying in themselves that
sentence, Paradisi Tertul in l. de Anima.
clauis, sanguis Martyrum; Of which, every one might well say in his own
person, Occidi possum, superari non possum; so becoming Balls to the then
boisterous times. Happy Men, who by losing of life, did find life, and by
sheeding their blood, did Apoc. 7.
wash their Robes in the Blood of the Lamb; And who did pass the Red Sea of
of persecution, and Martyrdom with such humility, alacrity, eauennes, and
constancy of mind, as that their Honorable Memories might well deserve to be
recorded in more several pages, then here are lines; I might well say, in
more lines then here are letters. And can it then be thought possible (their
admirable fortitude for Christ his sake considered) that God would conceal
from them, the true Sense of Scripture, without which their Souls could not
enjoy Salvation? It is repugnant, even to Gods Justice; What is it then to his
Mercy?

Among the Adversaries; who ever suffered death in defense of Protestancy? John
Husse, say they. It is false. For Husse (being otherwise a turbulent fellow,
and raising combustions in his own Country) dyed for only defending the
necessity of Communion under both kinds, comparting with the Roman Church in
other points; Of whom Luther thus writes: The Papists Luth. in Colloq. Mensal.
German. de Antichristo.
burned Husse, when he departed not a fingers breadth from the Papacy. Who else?
Jerome of Prage. This man also maintained but one or two Heresies; being wholly
Catholic in all other Articles, who after a second recidiuation and Relapse,
was burned. Who more? A company of Mechanical, ignorant, despicable, and poor
Snakes, in Queen Mary's reign ( M. Fox his Martyrs) who, as being possessed
with a Jewish Obstinacy, in defense of some few points only of Protestancy
(believing withal many Catholic Articles) became proud (forsooth) of their
future-dying honor; and so through their own froward Wilfulnes, did even
importune the Faggot; thus losing their breath, for the gayning of a little
breath or Wynd of praise: Miserable Wretches, their Bodies no sooner ceasing to
be afflicted with temporal flames, then their souls (as is to be feared)
began to be tormented with eternal flames.

7. The last Collateral respect, between the Primitive Fathers and the
Protestant Doctors and Writers (in which I will here insist) much
preponderating in this business, is; that most of the new Testament (if not all)
was originally written in the Greek tongue; and that diverse of the ancient
Fathers were Ignatius, Epiphanus, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzene, Chrysostom,
Cyrill, Theodoret (besides others) were Greek Fathers.
Grecians borne; and so that tongue became their Mother tongue. Now whereas the
Tongues are deservedly styled, the Porters of learning, or the mines wherein
the goulden Oar of knowledge is found; and also whereas what skill the
Protestants can have in that language, is only Artificial, and gotten by their
own pains and labor, therefore it ineuitably follows, that the Fathers (as
better knowing the true Emphasis and Energy of every Greek Word, then the
Protestant can) are much aduantaged above the Protestants, for the digging (as
it were) and myning out of the true sense of the Holy Ghost, in those sacred
writings. And this no wonder, since we find, that Art (which is but a print or
stamp, impressed by the seal of Nature) ever subscribes to Nature.

Thus far touching the Trutination of the Fathers with our Protestant Teachers,
and of this -- Impar congressus Achille. Concerning which Fathers, I hold it
my great Honor (as above I professed) to employ my pen in their Panegyricks,
and due commendation; Howsoever many of our Adversaries (as is already made
evident) do take great complacency in eiurgating out of their impure stomachs,
words of contumely and reproach, against the said Sentinels of Gods Church: Upon
Esaias. ^2.
thy Walls, O Jerusalem, I have set watches for ever.

And here before I end, I demand (to recapitulate the former points) how can
any Christian justly apologize for himself at that most dreadful day, ( the
day Esaias. 13.
of our Lord, a cruel day, full of indignation, wrath, and fury) when it
shall be urged against him, that in the election and choice of his faith drawn
from the Scriptures (upon the truth or falsehood whereof depended his everlasting
happiness or misery) he did prefer Nouelty, before Antiquity; few, before
many; Men but ignorant in the Scripturall tongues, before others, who sucked
with their milk those tongues, from their Mothers Breasts; Prejudice of
judgment; before all impartiality; dissension in doctrine; before unity in
doctrine; such, as traffic nothing but transitory benefits and pleasure,
before Men of most mortifyed and stupendous lives and conversation; Men being
most According herto, we find Luther to have had familiar conference with the
Devil; as himself witnesses, in tom. 7. Wittenberg, lib. de M^ssa priuata.
fol. 2^8. Oecolampadius was slain by the Devil, as Lauather (the Protestant)
witnesses, in histor. Sacrament. printed Tiguri. 1563. fol. 24. Carolostadius
is termed by D Fulke, an Epicurean Gospeller, in his Reioynder to Bristows
Reply, printed 1582. page 240. And Melancthon calls Carolostadius, A
barbarous f^llow in whom there is no sign of the Holy Ghost, in Epist. ad
Fredericum Miconium. Swinglius thus writes of his own lust, in his Treatise
to the Heluetian State, We so burned (O for shame) as that we have committed
many things unseemly, Calvin is charged with Sodomy, as the City of Noyon in
France, in its Register, does testify, and was burned upon the shoulder for
that crime. Beza in like sort, charged with Sodomy with a young boy, called
Andebertus, and this is testified by Conradus Schlusselburg (the Protestant) in
Theolog. Calvin. l. 1. fol. 93. To pass over others for breuity, Ochinus
became a Jew, as Zanchius (the Protestant) witnesses, in his book, de tribus
Elohim. l. 5. c 9. Finally Andraeas (the great Protestant) is charged by
Hospinian the Protestant, in histor. Sacrament. to have no other God, but
Mammon and Bacchus. fol. 389.
impious and profane livers, before works of miracles; Briefly certain
ignorant, ignoble fellows, desperately casting away their lives for the
purchasing of a little popular air, before many holy and learned Martyrs?

And with this I close up these leaves* And I trust, he closes well, who
closes his speech in defense of such Men, who were defenders of the Ancient,
Christian, and Catholic Religion.

God save the King.
THE Faults which have escaped in printing, I hope be not many, nor yet such
as may not easily be corrected by the judicious Reader.


