A Godly Song, entitled, A farewell to the World, made by a Godly Christian,
named Thomas Byll, being the Parish Clerk of West-Felton, as he lay upon his
Deathbed, showing the vanity of the World, and his desire to be dissolved.
To the Tune of, Fortune my Foe.


BEhold O Lord a Sinner in distress,
Whose heart is vexed with inward heaviness;
Remit my sins my God, and mercy show,
For here I live in grief, perplexed with woe,
All flesh is frail, and brittle like to glass,
Man's life like fading Flowers away does pass,
My time is come that I from hence must go,
Then for sweet Jesus sake Lord mercy show.
The day and hour is come that I must dye,
I trust my Souls shall strait ascend the sky,
Where Saints and Angels ever do rejoice,
Giving him praises due with heart and voice.
Oh sinful Man defer not thou the time.
Up Jacobs Ladder Father let me clime,
Where as thy Angels up and down descend,
Betwixt my Soul and Body at my end.
I must not die never to rise again,
But I must die for to be freed from pain;
My Savior by his death has bought my life,
To reign with him when finished is this strife.
My earthly Spirits fail, my time is run,
My face is wan, thy Messenger is come,
A welcome Guest that welcome is to me,
To heave me hence unto felicity.
My Sun is set, I have not long to stay,
But ere the morning I shall see a day
That shall outshine the splendour of the Sun,
When to the holy Trinity I come.
Me thinks I (casting up my dying eyes)
Behold the Lord in glory on the skies,
With all his heavenly Angels in that place,
Smiling with joy to see his cheerful face.
Both King and Kesar every one must die,
The stoutest heart the sting of death must try,
The Rich, the Poor, the Aged, and the Babe,
When Sickle comes each flower then does fade.
Then World farewell, I see all is but vain,
From dust I came, to dust I must again,
No humane pomp our life from death can stay.
When time is come we must forthwith away.
For worldly pleasure is but vanity,
None can redeem this life from death I see,
Nor Cresus wealth, nor Alexanders fame,
Nor Sampsons strength that could deaths fury tame
Our Father Adam he for sin did fall,
Which brought destruction present on us all*
But heavenly Father thou thy Son (...) send,
Us to redeem his dearest blood did spend.
Farewell dear Wife and my (...) Children (...)
For I must go when as the Lord does call*
The Glass is run, my time is past away,
The trumpe does sound, I can no longer (...).
Nothing but one I in this world do crave,
That is, to bring my Corp^^ dead to the (...)
And Angels shall my Soul in safety keep,
Whilst that my Body in the grave does sleep.
The Bells most sweetly ringing do I (...),
And now stern death with speed approaches (...)
But the Bell towling do I hear at last,
Sweet Lord receive my Soul when (...).
FINIS.
Thomas Byl.

The Souls Petition at Heaven Gate; Or, the Second Part of the Clerk of
West-Felton, being Thomas Byll.
To the same Tune.


O God which framedst both the earth and sky,
With speed give ear unto my woeful cry,
Receive my Soul with thee for to remain,
In Angels bliss, where thou O Lord do reign.
Though I against thy Laws rebelled have,
For my rebellion Lord I mercy crave,
Remit my sins though I have don amiss,
For Jesus sake take me into true bliss.
Where joys are evermore without an end,
And heavenly Quiristers the time does spend,
In singing Himnes and praises to the Lord,
Lifting up heart and voice with one accord.
Oh, what a comfort is it for to see
The sacred Face of such a Maistie
As thou O God, amongst thy Angels bright,
The which no mortal can behold with sight.
Cast me not Lord out from before that face.
But with thy Saints grant me a dwelling place,
And from thy Throane, O Lord do not expel
My Soul, but grant that it with thee may dwell.
Let me with David beg to keep a door,
In that the (...) Court where joys are evermore,
In (...) Father let me sit,
(...) into the fiery pit.
^,
^,
^,
(...), but let me enter in.
I (...) I thee offended have,
(...) am not worthy pardon for to crave,
But (...) with thee all mercy is alone,
To whom my Soul for mercy now is flowne.
Take pity then O Lord for Jesus sake,
Into thy Tabernacle my Soul take:
Remember how thy Son for me has (...),
And for my sake deaths passions did abide.
He is the Key the gate for to unlock,
He makes me entrance when my soul does knock,
Unto repentant Souls he promise gave,
That they with him a place in Heaven should have.
Thou open unto me O Lord thy Gate,
Where thou as King do reign in high estate,
Confound me not with them that wicked are,
But in thy mercies let me have a share.
Deal not in justice with my Soul O Lord,
For thou a heavy sentence thou wilt a^^rd
If sinful Souls should have their due desert,
In Hells hot flame they should for ever (...)
Grant that my Soul may enter in true bliss,
Condeme me not though I have don amiss,
But let my Soul with heavenly Angels sing
Most joyfully to thee my Lord and King.
For there are joys which ever shall endure,
The waters sweet of Life flow there most pure,
There shall no worldly cares our minds (...),
But there shall we remain in truest rest.
Which blessed inheritance O Lord I pray,
Give to such Christian in thy righteous way^
Grant that we all may gain felicity,
In Heaven to dwell above the starrie sky.
FINIS.
London printed for Henry Gossen.


