AN A. B. C. OR Holy Alphabet, Containing Some plain Lessons gathered out of
the Word, to the number of the Letters in the English Alphabet, to enter Young
beginners in the School of Christ.

1 COR. 3.2. I have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat, for hitherto ye
were not able to bear it; neither yet now are ye able. HEBR. 5.12. For when
for the time ye ought to be Teachers; yet have ye need again, that one
teach you what be the first principles of the Oracles of God; and are become
such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. LONDON, Printed by I N.
for William Shefford, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes head alley, 1626

The Authors Advertisement to the Reader.
Gross IGNORANCE, accompanied with supine NEGLIGENCE, in pursuit of saving
Knowledge, I have, not without grief, observed, by experience now of twenty
years exercise of my Ministry, still to remain, and even reign both in the
Country and City.

This has made me willing in desire to become all to all, 1 Cor. 9.22
and with an aim of doing good, chiefly to them of mine own Country charge,
and younger people especially, (in whom my Ministry through Gods mercy has
ever most rejoiced) to collect this A. B. C. or Alphabet (as I have thought
meet to term it, the (...). Elementa prima. Heb. 5.12.
Apostles phrase, sounding to such a title) to initiate young beginners in the
most necessary grounds of godliness.

Which labor (howsoever some perhaps may slight it, as too vulgar, or mean a
project, or deem not so necessary) may I trust yield direction and
encouragement by Gods blessing to some of his weaker servants; the matter
hereof being, for the most part, only plain places, and selected sentences,
serving pregnantly for special purposes, of holy Scripture, wherein Saint
Austin In eis quae aperte in scriptura posita sunt, continentur illa omnia quae
co^tinent fidem moresque viuendi. De doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
has avouched to be contained all things, concerning faith and manners; and
no weapon being like to this Ephesians 6.17
sword of the spirit, 2 Co. 10 4
mighty through God to cast down holds, and to Heb. 4.12
cut off sin from the very soul: Nor any Psalm. 119.109.
Lamp or Torch for conueying heavenly light, to be compared with this, which
goes under those glorious titles, of Psa. 19.7.
the perfect law of the Lord, converting the soul, and sure testimony, making
wise the simple.

Only this I must add, (that the promise seem not more then the performance)
how it is not in the purpose or compass of this Alphabet, to meddle much with
matters of Doctrine, already established in our Christian Church, nor yet to
touch upon all particulars of Christian Practice: neither shall I seek to
digest these directions into any artificial frame or method, as others have
profitably endeavored in their exact Treatises, therein more accommodated to
learned and judicious Readers.

All here aimed at is, (answerable to the prefixed title) to deliver some
rudiments that may yield instruction to poor ignorant people (of whom the
world is yet full, for all our learned and elaborate preaching) and set forward
young beginners, not capable for their weakness of the benefit of any
artificial method, in that their holy course, whereinto they are entered
toward Gods heavenly Kingdom.

Which desired and hoped for fruit, such, I assure my self, shall, by Gods
blessing, not fail to find, that shall take pains, both seriously to
acquaint themselves with the directions in general, and in special tie
themselves to commit to memory those main and Capital places of holy
Scripture, laid down, as it were the Text, in every title, and by the letter
differenced from the rest in every section. Since these, in as much as they be
the plain words of Scripture, being once made their own, will in such sort
continually stick by them, and (more then any the things of men) prevail with
them; as that thereby they shall still have lodged within them, grounds of
Piety, and store of knowledge, for their spiritual good, and daily growth in
those ways of godliness, which are the ways to endless happiness; which
God grant.

E. C.

1 PET. 2.2. As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby.
A short Table of the Titles and Texts of the several Letters of this Alphabet.
A. A Christians charge, or sum of Religion. 1. Chro. 28.9. P. 1 B. The
Sinners suite for daily Devotion. Psalm. 51. P. 3 C. David's blessed man, or way
to Life. Psalm. 1.1, 2. P. 7 D. The Doctrine and use of the Lords Supper. 1
Cor. 11.23, 24 etc. P. 9 E. The form and force of Fasting. Joel 2.12, 13, 14.
Page 15 F. Discovery of sin by the Commanments. 1 John 3.4. P. 22 G. The
Practice and power of true Repentance. Prou. 28.13, 14. P. 25 H. The Tenor of
the New Covenant. Ezech. 36.25, etc. P. 27 I The Lesson of Saving Grace. Tit.
2.11, 12, etc. P. 30 K. The works of the Flesh, and fruits of the Spirit.
Gall. 5.19, etc, and 22. etc. P. 32 L. The Ladder of Blessedness or 8.
Beatitudes. Math. 5.3, 4, etc. P. 34 M. The straitness of the Gate and Way to
Life. Luke 13.23, 24. Page 37 N. The Name of GOD proclaimed. Exodus 34.6, 7. P.
39 O. The power and efficacy of the Word Psalm. 119.9, and 11. P. 43 P. Reading
the Word a means of blessedness. Revel. 1.3. P. 50 Q. Hearing of the Word
another means Iam. 1.21, 22. P. 54 R. The continual Christian watch, or
euery-daies Sabbath. Psalm. 90.12. P. 56 S. The Religious observation of the
Lords day, or Christian Sabbath. Isay 58.13, 14. P. 63 T. The Essential
properties of Christian Charity. 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. P. 67 V. Direction for
discharge of particular callings. 1 Cor. 7.20, and 24. P. 69 W. The Christian
care required for nurture of Youth. Prou. 22.6. P. 74 X. An Item against the
excess and abuse of sports. Prou. 21.17. P. 77 Y. A Caveat against Drunkenness
and excess in drinking. Luke 21.34. P. 80 Z. The difference of rewards for
well-doing and ill. Jsai. 3 10, 11. P. 85 and. or etc. An Addition (for
Conclusion) of some Rules for Knowledge, and prescripts, with forms of Prayer,
P. 90
An A. B. C. or holy Alphabet.
A.
A Christians Charge contained, and with a powerful reason pressed, in David's
counsel to Solomon.

1 CHRONICLES. 28.9.

And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with
a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: For the Lord searches all hearts,
and understands the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will
be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

See places suitable hereunto, to force this Counsel farther.

Deuteronomy. 10.12.13. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee,
etc.

Mica. 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, etc.

Eccles. 12.13.14. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, etc.

All which, as they prescribe what God expects, yielding reason to move us to
be thereof careful, so do they also administer both motives and matter of
prayer, to make us earnest with God, for his strength and grace, to enable us
for a meet performance.

B.
THe sinners suite, or David's repentant Prayer, after his fall, for himself
and the Church, not unfit to be used in our daily devotion, in regard of our
continual failing in the precedent duties.

PSALM. 51.

1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness, according to
the multitude of thy compassions, blot out my transgressions.

2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

3. For I acknowledge my transgressions; and my sin is ever before me.

4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight: that
thou may be justified, when thou speak, and be clear when thou iudgest.

5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.

6. Behold, thou love truth in the inward affections, and have made me to
know wisdom in the secret of my heart.

7. Purge me with That is, with the blood of Christ sprinkled on my leaprous
soul by the holy spirit: David for the stre^gthning of his faith, alluding to
that ceremony in cleansing the Leaper. Leuit 14.67. As see 1. Pet. 1.2. 1.
Cor. 6.11.
Hysope, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow.

8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken
may rejoice.

9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

11 Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free
spirit.

13. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

14. Deliver me from That is the guilt of blood; being the particular sin
that mostwounded David's conscience; as we, under this term, may pray against
that particular sin, which wounds us most, and is to us as blood was to David.
blood, O God, thou God of my salvation, and my tongue shall sing aloude of thy
righteousness.

15. O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

16. For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee, but thou
delightest not in burnt offerings.

17. The sacrifice of God, is a contrite spirit, a contrite and broken heart, O
God, thou will not despise.

18 Be favorable for thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of
Jerusalem.

19. Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with
These David me^tioneth, according to the condition of those times; answering
whereto, are now the holy ministry of the word, the Sacraments, with prayer,
praises, and thanksgiving; As see Hos. 14. 2. Heb. 13.15.
burnt offerings, and whole burnt offerings, then shall they offer young
bullocks upon thine Altar.

And now to direct and encourage us to this continual duty of holy prayer (one
most useful form to furnish us, both for words and matter, whereunto may be,
as I conceive, this blessed Psalm, to that end proposed) take notice farther
of these prescripts, promises, and presidents.

Math. 7.7, 8. Ask, and it shall be given you, etc.

Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, etc.

Romans 8.26.27. Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities, etc.

Jsai 65.24. Yea before they call I will answer, etc.

Dan. 9.20.21. And while I was speaking and praying, etc.

Ver. 23. At the beginning of thy supplication the Commandment came forth, etc.

All assuring us of Gods readiness, to hear, when ever by his grace he stirs
our hearts to pray, whereby we may even prophecy of the success of our
desires: according to that acknowledgement, Psalm. 10.17. O Lord thou have heard
the desire of the humble, thou preparest their hearts, and (then) causest thine
ear to hear.

C.
David's blessed man, pointing out yet more particularly the right path to life,
in renouncing evil ways, and cleaving unto Gods word.

PSALM. 1.1.2.

1. Blessed is the man, that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.

2. But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he meditate
day and night.

Agreeing hereunto, see likewise

Job 22.21.22.23. Acquaint now thy self with God, and be at peace, etc.

Ephesi. 5.8, 11. Ye were darkness, but now are light in the Lord; walk as
children of the light. And have no fellowship, etc. As also Psalm. 119.1.2.3.
and 26.4.5.6.

All warning us, if ever we would be happy, above all to fly (as we are still
in Scripture warned) the contagion of ill company, Pro. 1.10.4.14.23.20.
that fixing our delight upon Gods law, 2. Cor. 6.14
we may entertain familiarity and fellowship with the Lord, our both Sun and
shield; Psalm. 84.11 Psalm. 16 11
in whose presence is fullness of joy, and pleasures at his right hand for
evermore.

D.
THe Doctrine and use of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (together with
an adjoined direction for a meet preparation thereunto) delivered by St. Paul.

1. COR. 11.

23. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you;
that the Lord Jesus in the same night that he was betrayed, took bread.

24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this
is my body which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me.

25. After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying,
This Cup is the new Testament in my blood; this do ye as often as ye drink it
in remembrance of me.

26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the
Lords death till he come.

27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup.

29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation
(or judgment) to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

THe direction for preparation in the twelve questions following.

1. Quest. How may a Christian fit himself for the Lords Table?

A. He must consider 1. why 2. how
he should come thereunto.

2. Q. Why is he to come?

An. In obedience to Christ's commandment, who has bidden us so to do, in
remembrance of him.

3. Q. What profit may he expect hereby, to make him come willingly?

A. He is called by God to renew and confirm unto his comfort, the covenant
made betwixt Christ and him in Baptism.

4. Q. What is that covenant?

A. That Christ will undoubtedly save us, if we with a lively faith working by
love, shall cleave unto him.

5. Q. If there be such gain in coming, what makes many so unwilling to
repair often hereunto?

A. This is either for that being grossly ignorant, they conceive not rightly of
the benefit: or else being carnal and careless, they are loath to take pains
to fit themselves to come in that manner as Christ would have them.

6. Q. To pass then to the second consideration, How would the Lord have us to
come?

A. Not for fashion or custom (as it may be feared many do) but in great
reverence, and with a due preparation, that we may come worthily.

7. Q. What preparation are we to use, that we may so come?

A. Every one ought seriously to examine his own soul, whether he can find
in himself the graces by God required in worthy Communicants.

8. Q What be those graces, which God chiefly requires?

A. 1. A true faith grounded upon the knowledge of God and this holy Sacrament.

2. Sound repentance accompanied with Christian love both to God and man.

9. Q. How should a man examine or try his faith?

An. By well understanding the Articles of the Creed, with the doctrine of the
Lords Supper, set down by St. Paul, 1. Cor. 11. he may come to know what he
should believe concerning God, and this holy Sacrament; which he must labor
to bring his heart unto, and withal heartily beg of God (whose gift it is)
to work and increase this true faith in him.

10. Q How is he to try his repentance and charity?

An. Laboring to find out and bewail his sins past, and want of charity,
with earnest prayer to God for pardon and grace, he is to resolve and purpose,
to leave off his sins, and henceforth to live in obedience to all Gods
commandments, and in love and charity with all men.

11. Q. Being thus prepared, how ought a Christian to come unto the LORDS Table?

A. With great reverence, and a feeling remembrance of the Lords death, for
redeeming of his soul, he ought in all thankfulness to resign and give up
himself wholly, and for ever unto the Lord.

12. Q. After so communicating at Christ's Table, what farther remains by a
Christian to be performed?

A. His endeavor must be to keep still in a joyful memory, the promises so
renewed, and by Christ's blood sealed, betwixt him and the Lord in the holy
Sacrament, hereby to strengthen himself against sin, and to increase faith
and other graces in his soul, until God please to call him to the like again.

Add here only, how for trial of our faith required in the ninth Question,
as we are to have recourse to the Doctrine of the Sacrament before set down;
so it will be expedient to young beginners, for the farther understanding of
the common Creed, to acquaint themselves with the two other, namely, the
Nicene Creed beginning thus, I believe in one God, etc. And that of
Athanasius; Whosoever will be saved, etc. In which latter, the two great
mysteries of the blessed Trinity, and our Saviors holy Incarnation, are most
excellently set forth and expressed.

E.
THe form and force of Religious fasting, together with a brief Instruction,
for farther explication, and Christian practice.

JOEL. 2.

12. Therefore also now, says the Lord, Turn ye even unto me with all your
heart; and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.

13. And rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your
God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness,
and repents him of the evil.

14. Who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind
him, even a meat offering, and a drink offering unto the Lord our God?

THe Instruction concerning Fasting, delivered also in Twelve short Questions.

1. Quest. What does the Scripture teach concerning Fasting?

A. Religious Fasting for furtherance of Piety, is found commanded by God, and
commended unto us by the frequent use of the best of Gods servants in the holy
Scriptures.

2. Q. What difference is there to be put between Prayer and Fasting?

A. Prayer is of daily and ordinary use, as the washing of plate or vessel,
continually to keep them clean: but Fasting is a thing less ordinary, and
at times only to be undertaken, as the scowring of such plate or vessel
sometimes, to make them bright.

3. Qu. When are Christians enjoined to Fast?

A. The Gospel has not prescribed any set days or times for this exercise,
but then are Christians to betake themselves thereunto, when either they are
enjoined by lawful authority, or when God shall by the occasions of
extraordinary humiliation, as by his own voice, call and sammon them so to
do.

4. Qu. What occasions be there of so humbling our selves before God?

A. Either 1. When as for sin we fear, or begin to feel Gods judgments
falling on us: Or

2. When we desire, or expect to receive some special and extraordinary good
at the hands of God, as when we come to the holy Sacrament, to renew our
covenant with the Lord.

5. Qu. Who are bound to the performance of this duty?

A. First, if the Fast for public occasions be by authority enjoined, it
concerns all (except in case of necessity) to have a due respect thereof.

Secondly, for private Fasting, it ought to be by well-taught Christians
undertaken, as they have warrant from the practice of the best of Gods holy
servants, still upon the like particular occasions.

6. Qu. How are Christians rightly to perform this duty?

A. As in the fourth Commandment touching the Sabbath, there are two things
enjoined, 1. Rest from labor, 2. Sanctifying of that Rest; even so, in this
work of Fasting two things also are required:

1. The one outward respecting the body.

2. The other inward or spiritual, unto which the outward is to be referred.

7. Qu. What is the outward thing required in Fasting?

A. 1. Abstinence from food, either altogether, or as far as may be with
preservation of health; as also from other delights, and outward comforts for
humbling of the flesh.

2. Rest from labor, so far as with conueniencie we may, during that time of
abstinence; that we may the better intend the inward duty required in Fasting.

8. Quest. What is the inward substance chiefly required?

A. An extraordinary humbling of our soul, Ezr. 8.21.
and seeking after God by earnest Prayer, and in the serious practice of true
repentance.

9. Qu. How should we in the day of fasting exercise our selves in the serious
practice of true repentance?

An. By diligent examination of our hearts and lives, by the rule of Gods Law,
the ten Commandments, our labor must be, to get a through sight of our sins,
and sinful corruptions, displeasing God, and deserving wrath: for which
therefore we must desire, and endeavor even to rent our hearts, and to be
truly humbled before the Lord with godly sorrow.

10. Qu. How shall we bring our hearts to this heart-renting sorrow?

An. The remembrance of Gods great kindness, and our own wretched
unthankfulness, but especially our looking upon Jesus Christ pierced for our
sins, Zach. 12.10
and seriously considering what he endured to redeem us from death, 2. Cor.
7.10
are chief means to bring us to this godly sorrow, causing repentance not to
be repented of.

11. Qu. What may we expect upon this humiliation?

A. If being thus humbled in our selves, we shall repair to God (and as in
Dan. 9. EZra. 9. and Nehem. 9. we have presidents) shall penitently confess
our sins with hearty prayer to God for pardon, and grace, and with a thorough
resolution, to forsake all our evil ways, and henceforth to live in obedience
to Gods holy will, we may have assurance, that our sins are pardoned, and
shall find grace renewed in our hearts, to make us to perform what we have
resolved and promised.

12. Qu. How serves the outward ceremonies of rest and abstinence, to this
inward substance?

An. The bodily exercise of Rest and Abstinence, is of profitable use.

1. In respect of time, which is thereby gained for the better dispatch,
without distraction of such holy duties.

2. For the duties themselves, whereunto these outward obseruances serve more
or less, either, as signs to testify, or as helps to further our
humiliation, prayer, and true repentance.

Add here, that for the better examination of our hearts and lives (as is
required in the ninth Question:) it may be fit for people, who are more
ignorant, to take a view of the explication made by M. Perkins, of the breaches
of the several Precepts, in his little Treatise of the nature and practice of
repentance: as also it will be expedient for the same purpose to observe, as
keys to open unto us the more full knowledge of the Commandments, the Rules
set down in the section following.

F.
Six general Rules for the better understanding of the true meaning, due
extent, and binding power of the ten Commandments, for the better discovering
of the knowledge of sin, according to that ground of truth, and definition of
sin, set down by S. John.

1. JOHN 3.4.

Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the Law; (...)
For Sin is the transgression of the Law.

THE Rules are these following.

1. Where any Mat. 15.4 and 4.10.
duty is enjoined, the contrary sin is forbidden: and where any Ephesians 4.28 1.
These. 4 3.4, 5.
sin is forbidden, the contrary duty is required.

2. Under one maine 1. Ioh. 3.15.
duty or crime, expressly mentioned, all degrees and branches of the same kind
are either commanded or forbidden; together with all Pro 23.31 1. These. 5.22
occasions or means furthering thereto, and all effects signs, or proper
consequents of the same.

3. The Precepts being given generally, do bind all estates and persons
without exception, Romans 3.19 Col. 3.25.
both themselves to keep them; as also to take heed how they make themselves
1 Timothy 5.22. Ephesians. 5.11 Romans 1.31.
accessaries to others breaking of them.

4. None can Iam. 4.12
dispense with any Commandment, but God only; nor can any Genesis 22.2 Exodus
12.35 36.
break them without sin, except by Gods special warrant to the contrary;
nor can any be held Iam. 2.10 Psalm 119.6. Luke 18.21, 22.
conscionably to observe any of them, that has not a due respect to all of
them.

5. The least breach of any precept, is 1 Ioh. 3.4
sin, and in it self Romans 6.23
mortal, deserving everlasting wrath: yet in each Commandment are different
Math. 5.22. Math. 7.2.
degrees of sin, and the breaches of the Commandments of the Mat. 22.38. 1.
Sam. 2.25
first table greater (comparing them in a lik^ degree) then of the second.

6. One and the same duty or crime, may be in different respects referred to
Pro. 25.18. Mal. 3.5.
diverse Commandments, and the breach principally of one table, be in other
respects the breach also of the other.

The Scriptures cited in the margent, being well considered, may give some
light for the justifying and clearing of these Rules propounded.

G.
THe knowledge of the Law having a twofold use, the one to humble us by sight
of sin unto repentance, and the other to guide us (being qualified by the
Gospel) in the way of righteousness; Concerning the practice and power of the
former of these two, viz. repentance, we may take it briefly in these words
of Solomon.

PRO. 28.

13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper: but who so confesses and
forsakes them, shall find mercy.

14 Blessed is the man that fears always, but he that hardens his heart,
shall fall into evil.

Agreeing whereunto, see those counsels and comforts annexed.

Jsai. 55.6, 7, 8. Seek ye the Lord whilst, etc.

Isa. 1.16.17, 18, 19. Wash you, make you clean, etc.

As also that excellent place, 2. Cor. 7.10.11. where are set down the seven
properties of true repentance: an exposition whereof may be found in that
plain but profitable and powerful Sermon of Repentance, made by M. Dent;
which together with his book of the Plain Man's Pathway, deserve to be
recommended to ignorant persons, and all young beginners in the ways of
godliness, to awaken them up to some light and love of life and salvation.

H.
FOr further encouragement hereunto, let us lay up in our hearts the tenor of
the new and comfortable covenant of grace, with the stipulation on our part by
GOD required.

EZEKIEL. 36.

25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean, from
all your filthiness; and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.

26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you,
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a
heart of flesh.

27. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

28. And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave unto your Fathers, and ye
shall be my people, and I will be your GOD.

After which follows the stipulation or condition on our parts required.

31. Then shall ye remember your own wicked ways, and your doings that were
not good: and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities,
and for your abominations.

32. Be it known unto you, that I do not this for your sakes (says the Lord)
therefore be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel.

The sum of which said covenant, see also excellently expressed by the
Prophet Jeremy.

Ier. 31, 33, 34. Behold the days come (says the Lord) that I will make a new
covenant, etc. And again,

Ier. 32.38, 39, 40, 41. And they shall be my people, and I will be their God,
etc.

And the effect, which is the stipulation by God intended.

EZech 16.62, 63. And I will establish my covenant with them, etc.

All to assure us (that we may not doubt through unbelief) of Gods thoughts of
peace, and his firm, Romans 4.20. Ier. 29.11.
as free purpose of good toward us: hereby emboldening us to importune, and
even implead the Lord upon his promise, as David sometime does, 2. Sa. 7.25.27.
Ezekiel. 36.37
and God expects his people should, that so he may perform the same unto
them.

I.
ACcording to the tenor of this covenant of grace, and the other forenamed
use of the right knowledge of the Law, is the lesson of saving grace, delivered
by St. Paul, to advise servants, and all of all sorts to do their duties, that
they may adorn the Gospel, and expect the glory of Christ their Savior.

TITUS. 2.

11. For the grace of GOD that brings salvation has appeared to all men.

12. Teaching us that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world.

13. Looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the mighty
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purge unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Answerable whereunto we may take notice of those Evangelical exhortations,
given by St Paul upon the same ground, and to the same purpose.

Romans 12.1, 2. I beseech you brethren, by the mercifulnes of God, etc. And 2.
Cor, 7.1 Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, etc. And also that
notable place (by lighting upon which St. Augustine confesses himself to be
fully converted to the faith. Lib 8 confess. cap. 12.
)

Romans 13 11.12, 13. The night is past, etc. Therefore let us walk as in the
day, not in gluttony and drunkenness, etc. but putting on the Lord Jesus, etc.

All which agreeing with the rule of the new creature, Gal. 6.16.
promise peace, and mercy to as many as walk thereafter, and prove themselves
thereby, to be the true Israel of God, cleane-hearted, Psalm. 73.1. Ioh. 1.47.
and like Nathaniel, free from guile.

K.
FVrther, for trial of our Christian state, and standing in grace, that we
may know whether we walk after the flesh, or (as those that are in Christ
Jesus) after the spirit, Romans 8.1.
observe heedefully the works of the flesh, and fruits of the spirit,
expressed, as contrary one to the other, by S. Paul.

GAL. 5.

19 Now the works of the flesh That is, of that whole man not regenerate, or
of the fleshly part of the man regenerate. Romans 7.18.
are manifest, which are these; adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness,

20 Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies,

21 Envying, murders, drunkenness, reuellings, and such like: of the which I
tell you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they which do
such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

22 But the fruit of the Spirit That is, of men made spiritual, or of the
spiritual part in the man regenerate by Gods spirit.
is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, faith,

23 Meekness, temperance; That is no law to hurt them, the curse, which is
the strength of the law, being taken away by Christ, Gal. 3.13.
against such there is no law.

24 And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts.

A like opposition whereto, we may take notice of in other pregnant places for
the same purpose. As

Col. 3.5, 6, 7. Mortify therefore your earthly memb^rs etc.

1. John 2.15, 16 17, Love not the world, neither the things of the world etc.
As also

Iam. 3.15 In the difference put between earthly and heavenly wisdom, by the
properties, and fruits.

All to learn us true wisdom to labor to find our selves taught of God:
Isai. 54 13 1 Pet. 2.11 2 Cor. 5.14. Romans 8.14.
not carried by the world, or our own lusts, but constrained by Christ's love,
and led by his free spirit in the way to life.

L.
Moreover as sure marks of our salvation, and earnests in hand of our future
and full happiness, let us strive to climb up that Ladder of blessedness,
consisting of those eight rounds, commonly called the eight beatitudes,
delivered by our Savior.

MATH. 5.

3 Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

4 Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

5 Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

6 Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled.

7 Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

8 Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

9 Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

10 Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven.

Evidences of like nature on our part, to make sure that our Election, the
foundation whereof on Gods part stands firm and immovable, 2 Timothy 2, 19.
are those eight linkes of St. Peter's Golden chain, to adorn themselves
wherewith Christians are invited.

2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. Join moreover virtue with your faith, and with virtue
knowledge, etc.

As also those peculiar qualities of every rightful dweller in Gods Tabernacle
and holy hill (by way of question moved to God, and resolution adjoined)
delivered by David.

Psalm. 15.1. etc. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, etc.

The Selah or conclusion of assurance, in the Prophet and Apostle being the
same, both to prove it attaineable, and to establish the true believers heart
therein (against all uncomfortable doubting of falling away from Grace) for who
so does (or) if ye do these things, Psalm. 15.5. 2. Pet. 1.10.
ye shall never fall.

M.
FInally, to make us yet the more careful, that we be not shut out of Gods
Tabernacle, let us remember the straitness of the gate and way, and how for
want of earnest striving, many shall want desired entrance, from that prying
question made to Christ, and that profitable resolution thereupon by him
delivered.

LVKE 13.

23 Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that shall be saved? And he
said unto them,

24 Strive to enter in at the strait g^te: for many I say unto you, will seek
to enter in, and shall not be able.

A further explication and confirmation whereof, see, as in the Treatise
published o^ that The strait Gate and narrow way to life.
Text, so in the verses following, 25, 26, 27. When the good man of the house
is risen up, etc.

As likewise, Math 7 21, 22, 23. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
etc.

And in that also, Math 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes, etc.

All pressing upon us, what is commended by our Savior in John Baptists
hearers: Mat. 11.12.
and whereto both by St. Paul's example and exhortation, we are directed, viZ. a
following Phil. 3.14
hard toward the mark for the price of the high calling of GOD in Christ
jesus. Heb. 12.1.
And running (therefore) with patience (in the footsteps of the faithful gone
before) the race that is set before us looking that we faint not) unto Jesus
hims lfe, (...).
Ver. 2.
the Author and finisher of our faith.

N.
FArther, for a foundation of our liuel^ faith, and a furtherance of our godly
fear, Psalm. 9.10.
that knowing Gods name, we may rest thereon, and ever stand in awe of that
glorious and fearful name, Deuteronomy 28.58.
THE LORD OUR GOD: Let us take the same into our thoughts, as himself has
proclaimed it before Moses in mount Sinai.

EXODUS 34.

6 The LORD, (...)
the LORD GOD, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth.

7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and
sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation.

Pro. 18.10.
For this name, as the righteous running to it, have still found a strong Tower
to them of sure defense; so may we likewise, if upon all occasions repairing
thereto, we shall for strengthening of our confidence, 2. Chro. 20.6. Act.
1.24. Number. 14.17 2. Reg. 19.19.
to obtain what we ask after the pattern of their faith, give unto God
Titles suitable to our requests: hereby manifesting, that we rely not on any
thing in our selves: but on the alone power, wisdom, compassion,
faithfulness, and infinite goodness, which are in God.

And to this end also how behoouefull will it be for the simplest Christian, to
learn and be well acquainted with the meaning and signification of the more
ordinary names and titles, whereby our blessed Savior the Son of God, is in
Scriptures set forth unto us, as (to omit all other) those three especially, of
JESUS, IMMANVEL, and CHRIST.

1. JESUS: an Hebrew name, signifying a Savior; Act. 7.45. Heb. 4.8. Col. 4.11.
which though it be found given in Type, and for some inferior respects to
others, is, in the full and perfect sense, proper only to the Son of the
blessed Virgin, sent into the world to be our JESUS, that is, our Savior, to
save us his people from all our sins; Math. 1.21
for neither is there salvation in any other; Act. 4.12.
there being among men none other name given under heaven, whereby we must be
saved.

2. IMMANVEL: an Hebrew compound name, Isai 7.14.
likewise given him of the Lord by the Prophet, and by the Evangelist
interpreted, to signify as much as [God with vs] to note forth (for the
Churches comfort) as the Union of both his natures in one person, Mat. 1.23.
Nobiscum Deus.
God with us, that is, God made man by his holy incarnation: Ioh. 1.14. 1. Tim.
2.5.
So also the effect and fruit of his coming, as mediator betwixt God and man,
to make atonement and reconciliation for us; for so he was also our Immanuel,
God with us, that is, sen^ to reunite us, who were fallen and separated again
to God.

(...).
3. CHRIST, a Greek name, answering to the H^brew MESSIAH, Ioh. 1 41. Vnctus.
both signifying the same, viz Anointed, to witness him the anointed of the
Lord, before promised, not in regard of any material oil powered upon him;
Dan. 9 21. Psalm. 2.2.
but for that he was furnished with all fullness of the holy Spirit, to be the
only and all-sufficient, both Priest, and Prophet, Ioh 1.16. Act. 11.26
and King of his Church; and of whose fullness we receiving grace, are
therefore called Christians, as partaking of that his anointing, and made
thereby Priests and Kings to God his Father. Reu. 1.6.


Let the learned, if they light hereon, bear with these plain Explications,
which the ignorance of the common people (with grief known to such as have any
care o^ Country charges) does eu^n seem to enforce in these particulars.

And thus far (to add no more) touching the name of God.

O.
FOr the power and efficacy of the word of God, Psalm. 138, 2
whereby above all things, GOD magnifieth his name, Consider that Quaere made
and resolved by David, and his own professed practice suitable thereunto.

PSALM. 119.

9 Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto,
according to thy word.

11 I have hid thy word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.

Where mark, he says not, J have hanged it about my neck (as superstition
of old taught people, to do the beginning of St. John's Gospel, to drive away
the devil:) nor I have had it in my house; or only got it into my head; but
hid it in my heart, viz. (by faith) that I might not sin against thee.

This being the commendations of the word of God, that it only is able to
cleanse even the young man's way, that is commonly most disordered and
dissolute, in the pride of youth, and heat of lust, and to preserve from
sin: yea, some word or other (so laid up) from every sin.

As for some useful instances to confirm this truth.

1. From PRIDE (the beginning of sin) these places among others, ( Ecclus
10.13.
warning of the disgrace and danger, or aduising to the contrary virtue.

Pro. 11.2. When pride comes, then comes shame; but with the lowly is
wisdom.

Iam. 4.6. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

With that also of our Savior,

Math. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly, and ye shall find rest
unto your souls.

From rash SWEARING (that word clothed about with death) the third great
Commandment (if it were as heedfully regarded, ( Ecclus 23.12.)
as it is often heard.)

Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain. And that
counsel also agreeing thereto.

Iam. 5.12. Above all things my brethren swear not, neither by heaven, nor by
the earth, neither by any other ^ath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay,
nay, lest ye fall into condemnation.

( Ecclus 7.13.)
3. From LYING (the custom whereof is not good) that fearful place,

Revel. 22.15. Without shall be dogs and Sorcerers, and murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes lies; and where is that? but in the
lake burning with fire and brimstone; as see Revel 21.8.

And again (which may be conceived a reason of the former sentence) that
sharp censure given by our Savior.

Ioh. 8.44. Ye are of your Father the devil, and the lusts of your Father ye
will do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth,
because there is no truth in him: when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his
own; for he is a liar, and the Father thereof. And what Christian would be
willingly accounted the child of such a Father?

4. ( Ecclus 31.30)
From DRVNKENNES (and Pot-good fellowship) which increases so every where the
rage of fools, That

Prou. 23.29, etc. To whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to
whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause? to whom is redness of the
eyes, even to them that tarry long at the wine, etc. And so see on forward to
the Chapters end, a sha pe inu^ctiue against Drunkenness, displaying the
wretchedness thereof, to make people that have any grace in them to abhor
it. And before,

Verse. 19, 20, 21 O thou my Son, hear and be wise, and guides ne heart in
the way: Keep not company with drunkards and gluttons; for the drunkard and
glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsinesse shall cloathe such with rags.
Lo, beggerie the fairest end of such good fellowship: then what thrifty
person, believing this, would not tremble at it? Finally,

Isai. 5.11, 12 Woe to them that rise up early in the morning to follow strong
drink, and continue until night, till the wine inflame them, etc. And

Verse 22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink, and to them that are
strong, to pour in strong drink. And where God proclaims a woe, who dare or
can promise peace?

5 From WHOREDOM, fornication, (1 Cor. 6.18.)
and uncleanness (that peculiar sin against ones own body.)

1. Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And
therefore

Verse. 18. Fly fornication, etc. For see the reasons urged there against
throughout the Chapter.

And yet again,

Hebr. 13.4. Marriage is honorable amongst all, and the bed undefiled: but
Whooremongers and Adulteres God will judge. And where and how? but by excluding
them, namely, out of heaven, and giving them their portion (without Redemption)
in the Lake which burns with fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death:
as in the places fore alleged against Lying, Revel. 22.15. and 21.8.

6 From COVETOVSNES, as other Testimonies, so that set Treatise of the Apostle,
1 Timothy 6.9.10.11. For those that will be rich, fall into tentations and snares,
(...). Who make it their resolution to be rich.
etc. And that Caveat of our Savior, with the annexed confirmation Luke 12.15.
Take heed and beware of Covetousness, etc.

And so against carking CAREFVLNES, that full Sermon of our Savior, Math. 6.25
etc. (to the end.) Take no thought, etc. Where is showed, how Needless,
Bootelesse, Faithless, and Fruitless, such care is.

Finally, against quickly taking OFFENSE at others evil words, that Item,

Eccles. 7.21.22. Take no heed unto all words that are spoken, least thou
hear thy servant curse thee. For,

Oftentimes also thine own heart knows, that thou thy self likewise have
cursed others.

And generally, what restraint we find from these, may upon farther search be
likewise found in the same WORD, from all other Sins whatsoever.

P.
THe Means of entertaining this Word into our hearts, so to preserve from
sin, and to make us happy, is two fold, viz. Reading and Hearing, as

REVEL. 1.3.

Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear, the words of Prophecy, and
keep the things that are written therein.

Touching the first of which means, to wit, Reading, wherein by the Eye saving
knowledge shines into the Soul, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
enjoined even unto Kings, amidst all their most weighty affairs of State, we
may receive these directions.

1 That we are to esteem it a great blessing of God, to be able to read the
Word; and thereupon labor to attain it our selves, and to procure it as a
special portion to those that belong unto us.

2 Having this ablilitie, Let us follow the counsel of that good Father
Chrysostom, In Coloss. Homil. 9.
In getting into our hands this Book of God, and carefully making use thereof,
with rejoicing in this liberty, which our Forefathers wanted; according to the
wholesome Praescript of our Savior, Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, etc. And
the much honored practice of those Noble Beraeans, Acts 17.11.

3 In this exercise of Reading it will be good to begin betimes, and so to
train up Children in this thriuing Trade, 2 Timothy 1.5.
that (with Timothy, so well educated by his Mother and Grandmother) they may
from their Childhood Know the Scriptures, which are able to make wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15.

4 To stir up People to this duty the better, Young beginners may be advised
seriously to read over once and again, the 9. first Chapters of the Book of
Proverbs, and every day after, one Part of the 119. Psalm, containing in sum
a most excellent Meditation of the quickening power and profit of the Word,
which David out of the sweet experience he had himself, does therefore seek
to commend to others.

5 Besides this, (and the looking into the Scriptures upon all occasions for
special purposes,) it will be found profitable for Christians to hold a
constant course of Reading forward, in both Old and New Testament, so as their
callings and occasions shall permit, redeeming there to (with the noble
Eunuche, Act 8.28.
who even when he was traveling, neglected not Reading) all good
opportunities; and when at any time they be cast behind by necessary
occasions, recovering their losses by redoubled diligence.

6 In this course of private Reading, let people come with due reverence,
desire, and hope of profit, and looking up to God for a blessing; wisely
referring what they read to the right ends: with serious Meditations and
Prayers fitted to the things read; applying all for such particular use as the
Scriptures may afford, and their estate require; and still in their reading,
taking notice, (or some Note also, if they be able for remembrance) of any
thing wherein is occasion of doubt, till they meet with an opportunity of
inquiring resolution.

And so much for the rules of private Reading.

Q.
FOr Hearing (the other outward means of receiving the Word) especially in the
Public Ministry, Romans 10.17
the chief ordinary instrument of working Faith, Gal. 3.2.
the Scripture it self gives sufficient direction: as

JAMES 1.

21 Wherefore laying apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness,
receive with meekness the Word to be ingraffed in you, which is able to save
your souls.

22 And be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
selves.

Agreeing wherewith is that exhortation also in 1 Peter 2.1.2. Wherefore laying
aside, etc. As newborn Babes desire, etc. With many pregnant Testimonies,
such as that, Commendations given the Beraeans, Acts 17.11. These were also
more Noble men, etc. And thanks to God for the believing Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. For this cause also thank we God, etc. Cornelius his profession
of readiness Acts 10.33. Now therefore are we all here present before God,
etc. And Wisdoms encouragement to attendance, Prou. 8.32.34. Hear
instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not: blessed is the man that hears
me, etc. All serving abundantly to stir up, and direct us hereabout.

According to which grounds, there is a little Book translated into English,
written by Zepperus, entitled the Art of hearing Sermons: which prescribes
Rules both for praecedent Praeparation present Attention, and after use for
profit, (as do many other Treatises) so sufficiently, in this behalf, that I
need to add no more; but only counsel to take care, that our obedience of
heart and life do so continually follow and accompany this our hearing, Ioh.
13.17 Iam. 1.25
that we may be blessed in our doing; and so build on the Rock, Math. 7.24
that we may remain immovable in times of trial.

And this also touching Hearing.

R.
THE commendations given Genesis 5.24
Henoch, and condition of the Covenant made with Genesis 17.1
Abraham, in the Old Testament, and counsel for wise, and even (...)
precise walking with God, given by the Epes. 5.15
Apostle in the New; enforcing upon us a continual wachfullnesse over our
hearts and ways, do necessarily bind us to a provident Verse 16
Redeeming the time; and therefore to an earnest seeking unto God: which we
may be guided, unto by that pithie Prayer, made to that very purpose by Moses
the man of God.

PSALM. 90.12.

Teach us (O Lord) so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to
wisdom.

According whereunto, that our Practice may be framed, these short Rules may be
observed.

1 For the time past, every one so to come back to his own heart, saying, Ier.
8.6
What have I done? As that it may abundantly suffice us (as 1 Pet. 4.3
Saint Peter warns) to have misspent the time past, according to the lusts of
sensual men, Verse. 2.
and resolve for the space remaining, wholly to conform our heart and ways
unto the Will of God.

2 For the time to come, so wisely every one to consider our latter end, Deu.
32.29
forecasting the uncertain shortness of our life, a Vapor quickly vanishing,
Iam 4.14.
and the stricktnes of our account, when ever we shall be called hence to
Judgment, 1 Cor. 5.11
that we never sing to our souls the rich man's Requiem, Luke 12.19. but rather
with the Five wise Virgins, Math. 25.4. continually nourish in our selves, a
watchful expectation of the Bridgroomes coming.

3 For the time present, so every one of us, with all diligence to improve our
opportunities, Gal. 6.10. Mat. 25.16.
and employ our Talents, as that we may do the work of him that has called
us in that day which he gives us, Ioh. 9.4.
thereby preventing our Saviors tears, and making proof, both to our selves
and others, that we are taught to know in this our day, Luke 19, 41 42.
those things that belong unto our peace.

And now for a familiar help unto this heavenly skill, especially to those of
younger years, whose hearts God shall touch, Eccles. 12.1
to remember their Creator in the days of youth, and to endeavor with that
noble Courtier Obadiah, 1. Reg. 18.3, 12.
by fearing God timely, to fear him greatly; Let me add, to advise as a
profitable course (if having skill to write, they be enabled thereunto) the
keeping of a Diarie or Journall, a book I mean of daily remembrance for
spiritual reckonings, such as are their own failings in duty toward God,
needing humbling; and Gods benefits, whether public or personal, requiring
thanks. Which course, though I urge not on all as necessary; yet for them
whose disposition and leisure suteth with it, and who shall be prouidently
careful only of setting down matters of secrecy with such abreuiations or
characters of their own framing, as that themselves only may be privy to
them, it will be found (I doubt not) singularly profitable; as sometimes it was
to a young Nobleman of this Land, The late Lord Harington testified in his
Funeral Sermon made by M. R. S. and Printed anno 1614.
whose example and gain thereby, may recommend it to all others, for daily
observation, and right ordering of their ways, and especially for weekly
preparation to Sabbath-exercises, and furnishing themselves principally for
private extraordinary humiliations.

Moreover, to the end that our whole time may be better bestowed, and we our
selves against all oppositions and impediments, may be at all times better
armed: it shall not be amiss to adnex for conclusion these two directions.

1. For munition, to see we be ever armed with the Panoplie or complete armor
of a Christian, described by St. Paul (Ephesians. 6, Ephesians. 6 13.
) in the several pieces; (but mark, no backe-piece, to learn us, never to
turn back from our enemies) such as are the girdle of truth, Iam. 4.7.
the breast plate of righteousness the helmet of salvation, the shield of
faith, and the rest, M. Gouge. M. Dounham. Ephesians. 6.13.
which having been by diverse largely opened unto us, I exhort only with the
Apostle, that by fervent prayer they may be daily buckled and girded upon us.

2. For meditation; concerning which, being the study (or serious musing) of
the mind, and so a chief furtherance either to good or evil actions,
according to the objects, whereon it is exercised, leaving the rules thereof to
such as have exactly, Doctor Hall.
and at large discovered that Art unto us; I will only add, as general
heads, whereon profitably to set on work our vacant thoughts in such exercise,
six questions, all found in several places of Scripture, in the very words
wherein they are expressed, viZ.

1. What is man? [ Psa. 8.4.]

ViZ. That he should be so highly advanced.

2. Who am I? [2. Sam. 7.18.]

ViZ. That I should be so greatly regarded.

3. What have I done? [ Ierem. 8.6.]

ViZ. For which I should be humbled.

4. What shall I do? [ Act. 16.30.]

Viz That (yet) I may be saved.

5. Whither shall I flee? [ Psa. 139.7.]

Viz. If sin be committed.

6. What shall I render? [ Psa. 116.12.]

ViZ. For benefits received.

And thus far concerning the continual Christian watch, or eueryday-Sabbath,
which they certainly observe best, who are carefullest to keep the Lords day
as they should do.

S.
TOuching the which Lords day, being to us Christians in place of the former
seventh day, or Sabbath, the ordinary Sabbath or weekly day of holy rest,
founded on our Saviors glorious resurrection, Ioh. 20.1. Act 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2
and from the Apostles practice (recorded in holy Scripture) commended to the
Church: I see not why we may not, to raise up our selves to the highest pitch
of holy devotion therein, set before our eyes that religious and spiritual
observation of the Sabbath, whereunto as one maine branch of piety, in those
times, put for the whole, the Jews were invited by promise of rich reward from
God.

ISAI. 58.

13 If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath (that is, as the words
following show, from profaning it, whereto by corrupt nature all are carried)
from doing thy will on my holy day: and shall call the Sabbath a delight, the
holy of the Lord honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways,
nor seeking thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words.

14 Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of
Jacob thy Father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Some have sought to antiquate and quite abolish now under the Gospel, the
authority of the fourth Commandment, as the Papists in their Catechismes
expunge the second: And Athiests and Blasphemers would as gladly have the first
and third ^azed out. But both the devotion and doctrine of our Church, still
directing us to our ten Comandements The same which God spoke in Exodus 20. As
see ^n our Church Catechism and book of Common Prayer, viz in the Communion
and ministration of Baptism.
: and in particular to this In the Homily of the time and place of Prayer.
: sober minded Christians ought, and will have a due respect ther^unto: and as
we celebrate in steed of the passover the Eucharist, as the new S^crament of
the Gospel, called for distinction from the former by St. Paul the 1 Cor.
11.20. (...)
Lords Supper: So likewise, to observe in place of the Sabbath, this first day
of the week, as our Christian Sabbath, and sanctified day of rest for holy
worship, called, for like distinction by Saint John Reu. 1.10. (...)
the Lords day.

In which, as that blessed Apostle then in banishment was ravished in the
spirit, and saw heavenly visions, and revelations: So should we also labor,
who have received the spirit, to be in what we may that day wholly spiritual
and heavenly minded; so withdrawing our minds and hearts, as far as we are
able (except in cases of more urgent necessities) from all distracting
whatsoever businesses or delights, as that we deuote our selves, and be wholly
taken up in public, and more private services of Gods holy worship, Psa.
92.1, 2
heau^nly contemplations, and works of Christian charity, as in an holy
festival of rejoicing before the Lord. Of which particulars so much having
been written In the Homily forealledged of the time and place of prayer: and in
the Practice of Piety, etc. Exodus 20.8. Nehe. 13.22
, I spare to add more, but only exhort, that without either superstition or
profaneness, we so remember before hand to prepare for it, and ever when it
comes (as God would have us) to keep it holy, that God may remember us in
mercy, and we receive the blessing.

And thus also briefly for the observation of the Lords day, the more solemn
Christian Sabbath, or day of holy rest.

T.
NExt, for direction touching Charity, (that common and perpetual Debt of
Christians, Romans 13 8 1 Pet. 1 22. Romans 12.10
owed generally to all, but with tender and brotherly affection to true
Believers, professing and giving proof of their precious Faith, and walking in
Truth,) which St. Paul terms the More excellent way, 1 Cor. 12.31. Col. 31 4
Romans 13.10 Ephesians. 4.4. Ioh. 13.34 Verse. 35.
the Bond of perfectness, and fulfilling of the Law, tying us thereto by so
many bonds; and which our Savior himself styles his New Commandment, and
makes known, as the chief cognizance of his Disciples: take notice of the
fifteen properties hereof set down.

1 COR. 13.

4 CHARITY (or Love) suffers long, and is kind (or bountiful) Charity
enuieth not, (...).
charity vaunteth not it selte (or is not thwarting, (...).
or doing frowardly) it is not puffed up.

5 It does not behave it self unseemly, it seeks not her own things: it is
not easily provoked, it thinks none evil.

6 It rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth:

(...).
7 It bears (or covers) all things, it believes all things, it hops all
things, it endures all things.

By which properties, the meaning well apprehended, shall we try our hearts and
lives (as we may do also in the mutual good offices of the bodily members, 1
Cor. 12.26.
) it may be feared, we shall find in us much want of Charity; which since it
argues (by Saint John's rule) weakness, 1 Ioh 4.20.
at least in our love to God, we had the more need to pray that God, who is
Charity it self, Ver. 16.
would by his spirit of love bestow upon us, and more and more heat and
inflame in us this quickening and working Grace.

V.
FVrther yet, the exercise and excellency of this grace of Charity, being most
obseruable in Christians carriage about their special Callings; rules in
Scripture are not wanting, (shall men consult with these Counselors) to guide
Christians in such personal duties according to that general charge, Psalm.
119.24.
as the maine and special foundation laid by grace, of good order in humane
society.

1 COR. 7.20. and 24.

Let every man, in the same vocation wherein he is called, (...).
therein abide with God: (that is, doing duties to men therein, out of
Conscience toward God.)

More special directions of which kind applied to those Domestical
subordinations wherein Families are established, Ephesians. 5.21
that Each may submit to other in the fear of God, according to his will, we
shall find:

1 Of Husbands and Wives: the sum whereof comprised, Coloss. 3.18.19. And
more unfolded, Ephesians. 5. and 1 Peter 3. consisting of fervent and faithful
love in the Husband, and due subjection and reverence in the Wife; is usefully
read, by order of our Church, in Marriage Solemnities, to make both parties
(and their Neighbors also) more mindful of their duties.

2 Of Parents and Children: the sum whereof grounded on the fifth
Commandment, being in Children, Honor, and thankful Obedience to their
Parents; In Parents, wise and due care for nurture, and education of their
Children, and every way, toward them Love, and tender kindness, is by the
same Apostle also, both in Coloss. 3.20, 21, briefly touched, and Ephesians. 6.1,
2, 3, 4. more fully opened, and by the Legal Promise, annexed to the Praecept,
powerfully persuaded.

3 Of Masters and Servants; the sum of the Masters duty, which is, to do
that which is just and equal to their Servants, Knowing that they also have a
Master in heaven, that regards every man's carriage, and respects no man's
person, being delivered, Ephesians. 6.9. and Coloss. 4.1.

But more expressly, and at large the duty of Servants, (as needing in those
times most to be remembered) set down, as in other places, so in these
following.

COLOS. 3.

22 Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh: not with
eye-seruice, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God.

23 And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men.

24 Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of inheritance, for
ye serve the Lord Christ.

25 But he that does wrong shall receive for the wrong that he has done, and
there is no respect of persons.

TITUS 2.

9 Exhort Servants to be obedient unto their own Masters, and to please them
well in all things, not answering again.

10 Not purloyning, but showing al good fidelity, that they may adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

1 PETER 2.

18 Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward.

19 For this is thank worthy if a man for Conscience toward God endure grief,
suffering wrongfully.

20 For what glory is it, if when you be buffeted for your faults, ye shall
take it patiently? but if when you do well and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God.

All which places, sufficiently expressing the sum of Servants duties, both
to Masters of all sorts, and duties of all kinds, with the manner also of due
performance, and the encouragement thereto; I have thought fitting to have set
down, to the end, that such as want Bibles, or be not able to use them, may
better be taught and minded of what belongs to their places, and be
encouraged by those gracious promimises, which God has made them, to bear
that yoke which God has laid upon them.

W.
THe Nurture and good Education of Children, and Youth, being the foundation of
their weldoing, and their Parents, and others hopes, a weighty charge is laid
on those that take on them the care, discreetly and betime, to teach and train
them up in a right way, according to that Counsel given by Solomon, with the
employed reason.

PROVE. 22.

(...)
6 Train up (or Catechist) a Child in the trade of his way, and when he is
old, he shall not depart from it.

A special part of which discretion, for towardly Educatio^, being to be used
(need so requiring, by reason of inbred and increasing corruption) in
seasonable chastisement, Ephesians 6.4 1 Samuel 2.29 1 Reg. 1.6.
that they may not for lack thereof (as Elies sons and Adoniiah) become an
after grief unto their too indulgent Parents: wise Solomon has given for that
purpose these quickening directions.

Pro. 13, 24. He that spares his rod hates his son, but he that loves
him, chasteneth him betime.

Pro. 19.18. Chasten thy son while there is hope (implying that if he once
grow headstrong, it will be too late: witness the complaint against an
incorrigible child, Deu. 21.18) And let not thy soul spare for his crying. as
(...) * Psalm. 119.9. Showing that chastisement may be need full for such as are
rising to years of some discretion.


The reason hereof see.

Pro. 22.15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child (or* Youth) but the
rod of correction shall drive it far from him.

Agreeing hereunto also is that,

Pro. 29.15. The rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child left to himself
brings his mother to shame.

And therefore finally that counsel again.

Pro. 23.13, 14. Withhold not correction from the child (or The word is still
the same as before.
youth for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not dye.

Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from Hell, viZ.
by withdrawing him hereby from evil and sin, that would bring him unto hell.

All which places, expressing both the ground of such chastisement, which is
the truest love; and the season, betimes, whiles there is yet hope, and the
necessity employed in the cause, and good consequent thereof; (to omit others) I
have thought fit thus to set down at large, as to make Parents and Governors
mindful of this tedious duty; so to this end chiefly, that children may so
learn and mark them, as that correction being feared, may be the more
prevented, or else, if at any time deserved, and needfully inflicted, it may
be with more patience and profit endured.

X.
TOuching Sports and Games, since they be of so frequent use, and the abuse in
these dissolute times no less common then the use, although the Scriptures
speak little in particular of them, See P. Martyr. loc. com. clas. 2. c. 12.
and therefore I shall say the less; yet to add something to draw from the
Excess, and withhold from the Abuse; let me remember them that are thereunto
addicted, of that one prophetical sentence of the wisest Solomon.

PRO. 21.

17 He that loves Pastime, (or sport) shall be a poor man: and he that
loves wine and oil, shall not be rich.

A true Prophecy oftentimes in regard of outward penury, experience proving
how such prodigal courses bring the belly to husks, and the back to rags,
Luke 15.16 17. Pro. 23.21.
and the heart also, coming home to it self, to bitter tears.

But howsoever it fare with the outward state, most certain it is, that whiles
such (as if they were made only to spend their time on the earth, Ps. 104.26
Iam. 5.5. Amos 6.3. 1 Cor. 10.7.
as the great Leuiathan in the Sea) so live all in pleasure, putting far away
the evil day, and (after the pattern of the Idolatrous Israelites) sit down
to eat and drink, and rise up to play: they cannot choose but have poor and
beggarly souls, deuoid, if not of sound knowledge, yet of true and sanctifying
grace, and those fruits of grace, which show themselves in a well ordered life;
these pleasures being as thorns to choke the seed of the word, Luk 8.14.
and their surfeiting thereupon, sorting them within that corrupt confederacy,
2 Timothy 3.1.4.
which make perilous the times, and are branded with that deep and deserved
reproach, (...)
to be lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God.

Howbeit, in this, I deny not the use of all Recreations: some whereof are
required by a true necessity; or yet of all Sports; some whereof may be
exercised lawfully for due delight, only I would restrain the use of both,
within the limits of the former lesson of Grace: Tit. 2.11, 12.
which extending it self to all the passages of our whole life, and being
aptly applied to this particular, will serve to discover, as by the negative
branch of denying ungodliness and what rec^eations and sports are allowed
Christians, viZ. such as be not ungodly in their nature, or the mere
exercises of our worldly and sensual lusts: so in the affirmative of living
soberly, righteously, How these that be allowed may be lawfully used, viZ.
Soberly without justly without either wrong or robbery to our selves or
others, and godly without either blaspheming Gods name, profaning his Sabbath,
or hindering our selves and others from his sacred service.

All which infer (men's consciences being witness to them in this particular)
a just condemnation of this luxutious age, and may serve withal for the
settling Christians in a rightful use of their Christian liberty hereabout.

And thus far for the present, touching the abuse and use of sports.

Y.
TO touch briefly, ere we leave, one other evil; (where under, in this last
and luxurious age our Land groaneth; and for which, amongst other our many
fearful sins, we may well fear the Lord is angry with us) the idle and
base humor of drunkenness, and excessive drinking, if not always to
deprivation of sense and reason, yet to distemper, and beyond the bounds of
Christian sobriety, remains justly to be reproved; our blessed Savior
having given us warning there against.

LVKE 21.34.

Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting and Drunkenness, and cares of this life, and lest that day come on
you at unawares.

For surely an Heathenish lust this is, and work of darkness, 1 Pet. 4.3.
Romans 13.13. Gal. 5.21. 1 Cor. 6.20.
ill beseeming Christians, yea a work of the flesh, and one chief point of
that unrighteousness, that excludes quite from all portion of inheritance in
Gods Kingdom.

And yet how many of all conditions may be seen every where, wilfully
throwing themselves into this Quagmire, or whirlepoole? which some have likened
to the pit of hell; out of which there is no redemption, loytring and very
idleness, and others in an ouer-fond humor of showing their good nature, or
rather foolish yea many in a vainglorious proud conceit and bravery, to prove
their brutish valor, and withal wicked hellish lust, in aduenturing Gods
image in others, Hab. 2.15.
and turn them into beasts; all certainly for the want of grace, Psalm. 36.1.
and the holy fear of God, addict themselves so long to such bibbing and
bezelling courses and company, till the wine and strong drink, which Solomon
terms a mocker, Pro. 20.1.
and raging, Hos. 4.11.
depriueth them of their heart, and makes them like NebuchadneZZar, Dan 4.
brutish, and very sots, and swine; so enslaued to the pot, and given over unto
their lust, that hardliest of all other offenders, and not without a strong
hand of grace, are such reformed.

This I heartily wish, that younger people, of themselves inclineable (if Gods
grace, or, at least, good education stay them not) to such riotous courses, and
who shall not want elder ones to draw them forward, would timely think upon,
and labor by Gods word stored in their hearts (as before they have been
directed) and a continual growth in sound knowledge, Psalm. 119 9
2 Pet. 3.17.
and sanctifying grace, to strengthen themselves, Verse. 1 6.
that they be not carried away with such error of the wicked.

As for such as, being hardened in evil ways, regard not the terrors of Gods
word, so they may satiate their sensual lusts; howsoever they fear not either
rags and ruin to their state, Pro. 23.21. Verse. 29.
or diseases and deformities breeding in their bodies, neither finally dread
the danger of Gods wrath and endless destruction, Math. 24.49, 50.
ready (when Christ shall come, how soon they know not, and find their hearts
oppressed, and them unprepared) to sease upon their souls, and everlastingly
to torment both body and soul in hell, Psalm 9 16 Luke 16.24
where they shall not find so much as one drop of water to cool their
enflamed tongues.

Yet oh, that some respect to their name and credit (which has prevailed with
mere natural men to restrain them from grosser wickedness) might work on
them in this behalf; so far, at least, that they leave not their name to rot
upon the earth, as their bodies in the grave: that as Judas is still known by
the name of Judas the Traitor, Luke 6.16. Act. 8.9.
and Simon Magus by the name of Simon the Sorcerer, so they remain not (to the
shame of themselves and their posterity) branded in the mouths and memories of
them that survive, with that reproach of such an one, a very Swine, a Beast, a
drunken companion.

And let this suffice also for the present, for a check to this beastly sin
of the reasonable creature, viz. drunkenness and excessive drinking.

Z.
ANd now, making stop for the present, from farther particulars, that we may
end with the just number of our Letters, to press to an heedfull regard of all
delivered; let me beseech us all, to have our eye fixed (with Moses) on the
recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26
yea on the difference of rewards by God proposed, according to that
proclamation.

ISA. 3.

10 Say ye surely, it shall be well with the righteous; for they shall eat
the fruit of their doings.

11 But woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the reward of his
hands shall be given him.

A more full expression of which sum, we may read in those two notable
Chapters of Blessings and Curses, Leuit. 26. Leuit. 26
and Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 28
And agreeing hereunto, shall we find the constant tenor of the Law and
Gospel, which both turn upon the same hinges.

Only with this maine difference; that the Law in it self considered,
pressing to the first covenant of works, promises the rewards of Blessedness
to the personal, Romans 10.5
full, and exact observance, without administering any the least strength
toward the performance; Gal 3.10 Deu. 27.26
withal threatening wrath, and the curse for the least failing or disobedience.

But in the Gospel, which brings in the latter Covenant established on
better promises, Heb 7.19 Gal. 3.22
God offers more Grace, and first accepting in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.30 2
Cor. 5.21
and for his alone righteousness the person of the Believer as truly
justified, and so perfectly righteous in his sight; does thereby, so both take
away the curse, Gal. 3.13.
and qualify the rigor of the Law, 1 John. 5.3 Psa. 119.32
and withal supply through the holy Spirit, a strength of Grace to furnish to
the work; That even the Law it it self does become to such a perfect law of
Liberty, and, Iam. 1.25.2.12.
as it were a Gospel: and both Law and Gospel join to promise, and assure a
reward, and Crown of righteousness: both for the present, and more fully
hereafter, to sincere, though weak and imperfect endeavor after righteousness;
according to the Aliud est reddere secundum opera, and aliud reddere propter
opera, etc. In Psalm. 142
measure, though not for the merit, (as Saint Gregory well distinguishes) of
every Christians well doing.

In which respect it is avouched concerning true Godliness, consisting in the
power, 2 Timothy 3.5
and not the bare shape (or shadow) of Religion) though in the world so much
despised, that it is the greatest gain, 1 Timothy 6.6 and 4.8
only able to give content, and profitable to all things, having the promise
of this present life, and that that is to come. All to press upon us the:
Apostles Exhortation, wherewith he concludes his joyful and tryumphant
Doctrine, concerning the last Resurrection; 1 Cor. 15.58
that namely, We should be steadfast and immovable, abundant always in the
work of the Lord, ( Pr 23.18) ( Heb. 6.17, 18.)
for as much as we know, (since surely there is an end; Of which we need not
doubt, when God has both by his Word and Oath confirmed it) That our Labor is
not in vain in the Lord.

Eccls. 8.11. Romans 2.4 Mal. 3.15 Psalm. 50.21
On the contrary, for the wicked that presume, because God is Patient, to go on
boldly in sinful courses, and for that they are set up, and prosper, Judge God
like themselves, or, to like their doings well enough, hardening their foolish
hearts against the curses of the Law, Deuteronomy. 29.19
presuming up on the grace and pardon of the Gospel; how wretchedly do such
deceive themselves, whiles the Lord for such their presumption has
peremptorily excluded them from all hope of mercy and the very Gospel is
turned, verse. 20 Ioh. 12 48 Romans 2.16
as it were, into a Law, or Judge, to pass sentence on them for refusing the
offer of Grace therein made to them.

Neither need any other to envy their present prosperity, who shall observe
from those two Psalms, Psalm. 37. and 73.
viZ. Psalm. 37. and 73. to that very end composed, how their standing is,
though in high, Psalm. 73.13
yet in slippery places, (as that of the malefactor on the Ladder,) From which,
if in this present Life, they be not with Haman tumbled; yet, Eccles. 7
What is the hope of the Hypocrite, though he has gained, Job 27.8
when God takes away his soul? And how will such cry to the Mountains and
Rocks to hide them? Reu. 6.16.
when The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 3.
rendering vengeance to them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

And thus far touching the differences of rewards, and so for the Letters of
this Alphabet. ONly as an and. or etc to close up all; let be added for the
benefit of the Simpler sort (whose profit is here chiefly intended) a Rule or
two to further knowledge, with some few Prescripts and Forms, to set forward
Devotion.

The Rules of Knowldge shall be only these two.

tender Infancy, taught so soon as they can speak the Language of Canaan,
Isai 19.18
and their tongues inured to the terms of Religion, even before they be of
capacity to understand the sense or meaning, as being told, of God, and of
Christ, and Heaven, ( Psalm. 8.2) ( Mat. 12.01)
etc. and taught to answer, that God made them, and Christ redeemed them, etc.
and then made to learn the As charge is given in the form of Baptism.
words of the Lords Prayer, as also of the Creed, and Ten Commandments: The
meaning whereof, and so of the whole common Catechism, may, as years
increase, and they grow capable, be the sooner by little and little instilled
into them.

2 When such, or any else (perhaps) Children in understanding, Heb 5.12 1 Cor.
14.20
are once made perfect and grounded in these principles, and parts of the
common Catechism; for their better understanding thereof, it will be good for
them, to be acqainted with some other more distinct directions, such as is
(among many others) that Guide unto true blessedness, Set forth by M. Sam.
Crook.
or body of the doctrine of the Scripture, with the Abridgement; and
especially, as a most familiar and brief sum of Christian Religion, Master
Perkins his Six principles: wherein are comprised so plainly and fully, the
most needful things for every Christian to know and believe, unto salvation,
concerning God, and our selves, our estate by nature without Christ, and of
Grace, whereunto by Christ we are through Faith, wrought in us by the means of
Grace, recovered, and so consequently our future estate of Glory; that I know
no better, or more compendious direction for any ignorant person, or of weak
capacity, whereby to try his spiritual estate and standing in Grace, then to
refer him to those 6. Questions, to see whether he can find himself
removed out of that wrerched condition, whereinto all are fallen, discovered in
the Second, into that hopeful and happy estate, set forth in the Fourth
principle; the ground whereof is laid in the third, the helping means in the
fifth, and finally the fruit and accomplishment following in the last.

The right apprehension whereof, will make a Christian fit, by so hearing and
reading the Word (as before he has been directed) to profit and grow in grace,
2 Pet 3.18
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

And this briefly for the Rules to further knowledge.

FOr the matter of Devotion, by which in this place, I mean a Christians
repayring daily and upon all occasions unto God, in humble fervent Prayer, and
hearty thanksgiving, according to those Exhortions given by the Apostle.

1 Thessalonians. 5.17, 18. Pray continually O^e fi^e q^^^ter, Co^de semper.
In all things give thanks: For this is the will of God in Christ IeIesus
toward you.

There may be many Prescripts given: but for direction still, and help herein
only, of the more ignorant and weaker sort; these few Aduertisements shall
for the present serve.

public prayer, being the more solemn service of God, in the Christian
assemblies and congregations of the Church; let people make conscience duly and
timely to repair thereunto (as the faithful have done) both on the Lords day
especially, Acts 3.1 Luke 2.37 Leuit. 19 30.
as also in other Festiuals and times of prayer appointed by the Church,
evermore taking heed unto their feet (that is unto the affections of the
heart, Eccle. 5.1
whereby they walk to God) when ever they come to meet the Lord in his house
of prayer, Isa. 56.7
that they be near to hear, and so joining in all meek reverence, and with
pure affection, with the minister and congregation in all the parts of Gods
holy worship, that they suffer not drowsinesse, or wandering thoughts, or
talking with others, or reading in books (though of never so good use for
private devotion at other times) to withdraw their hearts from the business in
hand, making them to offer the sacrifice of fools; Hab. 1.13 Eccle. 5.4
in whom the wise God being of pure eyes, can have no pleasure.

2 For private devotion, it concerns Christian of whatsoever condition, man
or woman, if not with David and Daniel thrice a day, yet, at least, Psalm. 55.17
Dan. 6.10
morning and evening ordinarily, to come before God on bended knees, as well
taught children, to ask blessing, Math. 6.11
and their daily bread of him our heavenly Father: and moreover, often and
still upon more special occasions in secret, Psalm. 62.8
to pour out their souls to God, for such graces and blessings as they stand
in need of; or to render humble thanks for his received favors and benefits.

As helps to the weaker sort, in which holy exercise (and perhaps necessary, In
M. Hierons help to Devotion, and The Practice of Piety.
as Truckles are to young children, to learn them to go) there want not many
good and wholesome forms of prayers, already penned for several purposes: But
knowledge in the word, with a right understanding of the Lords prayer, and
Psalm. 51. gotten into their heart; to such as have received of God the spirit
of Grace and Prayer, Zach. 12.10
will be the best Schoolmaster to help their infirmities: Romans 8.26.
and to teach them how to make suites to God (no matter though in broken
English, so it be with contrite and broken hearts) according to the will of
God: so as he the searcher of the hearts, Verse 27.
may know and graciously accept them in Christ Jesus.

prayer, which concerns chiefly the governors of families, of whatsoever
estate or condition, who would have the commendations given Cornelius, Act. 10.2
of fearing God with all their households, carefully to see performed in their
families every day, morning and evening: whereunto at times (as their occasions
and callings may permit) some Deuteronomy. 6.7
reading in the word, and Col. 3.16.
singing of Psalms, (with Catechizing and instructing of their children and
servants, Act. 17.11.
repetition of what they have heard, and such like holy exercises) should be
profitably adjoined, especially on the Sabbath day.

For this, as it will approve them Genesis 18.19.
children of Abraham, and men of Josh. 24.15.
Ioshuah his godly resolution, and make their houses rightly accounted, as the
faithful ones by 1 Cor. 16 19. Coloss. 4.15
Saint Paul saluted, as little Churches: so will it, not only free them from
that execration made by the Prophet, Ior. 10.25
against such families as call not on Gods name, but give them farther hope of
Gods blessing (as sometimes 2 Sa^. 6.11
on Obed Edoms house for the presence of the Arc) upon them and theirs, and
Job 5.24.
Gods peace to rest and abide upon their dwellings.

Which religious duty of family prayer (together with thanksgiving, or Grace
always at our meals, by our Saviors own example, Ioh. 6.11. 1 Timothy 4.5.
and his Apostles, both prescript and president recomme^ded to us) howsoever,
either through ignorance it be in Act. 27.35.
many places utterly unknown, or out of profaneness or want of ability for
performance, it be woefully neglected in most families; yet being a service so
well pleasing unto God, and of such special consequence, I cannot but heartily
wish, that it may be henceforward by all, that would be held to fear God, more
conscionably practiced, yea, even among such ignorant ones, and in such small
poor families, where, through weakness, and want of skill in any to read,
they be able to do no more then kneel down with their folk, and join
together in rehearsing the Lords prayer, and praying God to bless and keep
them: and (if they can get that also into their heads and hearts) making use of
the 51. Psalm. before to that end proposed, or of some other good form of
prayer, The help to Devotion. The Practice of Piety.
such as those that are added in the end of our Bibles, and book of Common
Prayer: or which may be found in other approved Anthors, or (if they want
others) these short forms; which for Conclusion of these directions shall here
be annexed.

A short Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Most holy and glorious Lord God, and in Christ Jesus our most gracious and
merciful Father; as In thee we live, move, and have our being, and from thee
do daily receive our well-being, and all our good: So is it meet, and our
bounden duty, by humble suit unto thy Majesty, and hearty thanksgiving, to
acknowledge and profess the same unto thy praise.

We therefore thine unworthy servants, prostrating our selves here before thy
foote-stoole, do render unto thy Majesty all hearty thanks and praise, for
all thy mercies and blessings continually bestowed upon us, both in regard of
our souls and bodies, ever since we were born until this present: and in
particular we bless and praise thy Fatherly goodness, for safe keeping us
this night past by thy watchful providence, when we could not keep our
selves; refreshing us comfortably with thy good blessing of sleep, and raising
us up again in some measure of health and strength this day to do thee
service.

Now, O Lord, we beseech thee, take us into thy favor, and Fatherly
protection, and keep us continually in thy most holy fear. Pardon graciously,
and forgive unto us, for Christ Jesus his sake, all our sins past: put them
quite out of thy sight, and purge them clean out of our hearts; and so
sanctify us throughout with the grace of thy holy spirit, that we may take no
longer delight to walk after the lusts of our own wicked hearts; but may give
up our selves hence-forward, wholly in obedience to thy blessed will, so doing,
in particular this present day, the duties both of our general and special
callings, as that by thy blessing and providence being upon us, we may be
preserved from all dangers that otherwise might befall us, and find much
comfort in thy service: so as that at night we may again return, with
rejoicing and thankful hearts, to resign, and give up our selves, both
souls and bodies, into thine hands.

Meanewhile, and ever, remember also, we most humbly beseech thee, most
merciful God and Father, together with our selves, thy whole Church on earth,
and all thine afflicted Children, and in particular this Land and Christian
Country wherein we live: Herein bless the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
together with the Queen, and the Princes, the whole Royal Family, with the
Nobles, and all set in Authority, and place of Charge or government over us,
either in the Church or Commonwealth: Our private Friends also, kindred and
godly acquaintance, who are by any bond more near unto us, or have desired to
be in our prayers remembered by us.

In special manner, bless O Lord, this whole Family with all that belong
thereto, or are therein; giving us all grace to live in thy fear, and to do
thee service, so knowing our places, and endeavoring with sincerity and
singleness of heart to do our duties, that we may be for comfort each to
other, and all of us in all things to thy glory, through Christ Jesus our
blessed Lord and alone Savior: In whose holy Name we continue to call on
thee, and recommend our selves unto thee, in that perfect prayer, which
himself did teach us, saying: Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

A Grace, or blessing before Meat.
GOod Lord, forgive us all our sins, that make us unworthy of any of thy
blessings, and remove from us all thy Judgments which are upon us, or due
unto us for the same: bless and sanctify us ever for thy service, and thy
good creatures at this present for our use: give them strength to nourish us,
and give us grace for them, and all thy mercies, to be thankful to thee, and
to receive them as tokens of thy love toward us, through Jesus Christ our Lord
Amen.

A Thanksgiving, or Grace after meat.
O Lord, we give thee humble thanks for all thy blessings bestowed upon us,
both for our souls and bodies, in regard of this life present, and that to
come; and in particular for refreshing us at this present with thy good
creatures. We beseech thee continue thy favor unto us, and keep us ever in
thy fear.

Bless thy whole Church, this Land, the King, Queen, and all the Royal
Family: our friends, and all that are dear unto us. Grant thy Gospel a free
and a fruitful passage; comfort all thine aflicted servants, and guide us in
the right way to everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for a Family in the Evening.
O Lord God, gracious and merciful, by whose watchful providence, we thy
poor and unworthy servants have been this day preserved, and with thy rich and
undeserved favors, many ways comforted and blessed: we return to render
unto thine holy Majesty all humble and hearty thanks, for these and all thy
benefits, and blessings, out of the euer-flowing fountain of thy love toward
us in Jesus Christ, abundantly powered down upon us. O Lord, we do confess,
we be not worthy of the least favor, nay, having been sinners from the
womb, we deserve wrath, and daily go on to provoke the eyes of thy Majesty
to displeasure, by our manifold sins and sinful corruption, still unto this
day remaining in us: and oft-times, every day breaking out upon us to thy
dishonor.

We acknowledge, O good Lord, our ignorance, and much want of desire and
endeavor after the saving knowledge of thy blessed will, revealed to us in thy
holy word: and we have just cause to bewail the profaneness and stubborn
pride, and disobedience of our hearts, which make us daily to rebel against
thy most righteous laws; both by leaving undone the duties which thou
enioynest, and aduenturing upon those evil courses, which thou forbiddest:
yea, O Lord, our vile hypocrisy in our best services: our wretched
unthankfulness for thy continual blessings: our murmuring impatience under
thy fatherly chastisements and trials: our contempt and abuse of thy sacred
Gospel: our blaspheming of thy glorious and fearful name; and profaning of
thy blessed Sabbaths: our self-love and high-mindednes: our worldliness and
wicked covetousness: our wantonness, voluptuousness, and other unclean and
sinful lusts: our wrathfulnesse and maliciousness: our unmercifulness and
impenitencie, and hard-heartednes, and earthly mindednes, and a whole world of
wickedness; notwithstanding all the means of grace vouchsafed, still
abounding in us: How do they testify against us to our face, and in thy
sight, that we are most wretched and miserable sinners, deserving in thy
justice, (should thou enter into judgment with us) ten thousand deaths,
and even damnation in hell for ever.

Howbeit, since we perceive even hereby, that it is of thine own free
goodness, and gracious mercy, that we are not consumed; because thy
compassions fail not, but are toward thine renewed every morning, and do
continue with them to the evening: We are emboldned to look up to thee, and in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom alone thou art well pleased, to
beseech thee for his sake to forgive us all our sins, to wash us clean in
his blood, and to assure our conscience by the witness of thine holy Spirit,
of the full discharge, and pardon of them all.

Merciful Father, we most humbly pray thee, for his sake, to put them all,
every one of them, great and small, out of thy sight, and withal by thy
blessed Spirit, purge them more and more out of our hearts: O Lord give us
grace every day more and more our selves to see them, and the vileness of
them, and how base and filthy they make us in thy sight: and give us hearts to
be unfeignedly sorry, that we have by them offended thee our so gracious God,
and grieved thine holy Spirit, whereby we are sealed to the day of redemption.
Work in us an hatred and detestation of all sins whatsoever, and give us
grace for the time to come, to strive and labor against them (those especially
whereunto we are by age, education, complexion, company, or any other occasion
most inclined) as against the deadliest enemies of our souls.

Yea, O Lord God, grant that for this purpose we may carefully shun all
occasion of evil, such as are idleness, ill company, profaneness,
wantonness, and the like: and may more conscionably entertain and use all
good means of grace, such as are the hearing, reading, and meditating in thy
holy Word, the often calling upon thy holy name, the keeping of thy holy
Sabaths, the receiving of thy blessed Sacraments, the joining our selves in
familiarity and fellowship with thy faithful children, and the like; that by
thy blessing hereupon, we may increase and grow together with our years and
age, in faith, patience, and humility; in meekness, temperance, and sobriety,
in love unto thee, and to thy truth, and to other for thy sake; in a contempt
of this wretched world, which will shortly leave us, and a longing after the
joys to bereuealed in thy Kingdom, and all good fruits of thy sanctifying
Spirit, which may fa^ther our reckoning, and seal up our salvation unto the
day of Christ.

Mean while, we continue our prayers, most merciful God, for thy whole
Church, and all the rest of thy chosen children, who are our fellow heirs of
future glory, whersoeuer they be scattered, especially all those who being in
misery, whether in their souls or bodies, do want thy more special comfort.
O Lord instruct them that yet are ignorant, convert those that are profane,
raise up the fallen, strengthen them that stand, and keep us that we never
fall, but that our end may be better then our beginning, and our works
better, and more at the last then at the first.

Be gracious and good unto all Christian Churches that profess thy Truth,
restore peace (if it be thy blessed will) in thy good time to them which are
troubled, and continue peace and the light of thy Gospel for ever unto this,
wherein we live. Bless herein we beseech thee our Gracious King, and give
him an heart to fear thee, and seek thy glory, to know thee, and serve thee,
with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, that thou may bless him, and his
Throne for ever. Bless also our gracious Queen, and give her an understanding
heart to know the Truth, and with Mary to choose the better part, that she may
be an helper also and furtherer of thy glory. Bless the rest of the Royal
Family, the Counsel, Ministry, and Magistracy in this whole Land, and all
that have place of command, charge or government over others in the Church or
Commonwealth: Particularly, O Lord, bless, we beseech thee, all our Kindred
and Friends, and specially us of this Family, that we may live in thy fear,
and be blessed with all things necessary, both for our souls and for our
comfort in this present life.

And now, as thou have added this day unto the days past of our life: Lord
add our repentance, we beseech thee, unto the day; and let us rest in peace
this night under the shadow of thy wings, that being refreshed by thy good
blessing of sleep, which our beds cannot give us, but thou, O Lord, who give
thy beloved rest, we may be enabled the better to serve thee in our callings,
the day following, to thy glory, for others good, and our own comfort, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose name, we conclude our prayers as himself has
taught us, saying, Our Father, etc.

A private Prayer, framed (for the most part) out of the precedent Scriptures,
and especially the 51. Psalm.
O Lord God, merciful and gracious, that forgiuest iniquity, and yet wilt by
no means clear the guilty, I thine unworthy and sinful Servant, am bold to
come before thee, in confidence of thy mercy; but with all humble and free
acknowledgement, that I am grievously guilty, and that by reason of the sin,
both of my nature and life.

For I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. And
this sin wherein I was conceived (enough of it self to condemn me) has
been too to fruitful in bringing forth both sins of Omission, and
Commission in the whole course of my life, whereby it has come to pass, that
I have neither denied ungodliness, and worldly lusts; nor lived soberly,
righteously, and godly, in this present world.

I have not known thee, my God, so much as I might, nor served thee so well as
I ought, but have greatly failed even in the most principal duties; not
Reading thy Word so diligently; not hearing it so heedfully; not receiving the
Sacrament so preparedly; not keeping the Sabbath so conscionably; not calling
upon thy Name, so often and earnestly as I should have done; much less have I
regarded that extraordinary service of Fasting and humiliation, though so many
weighty occasions, both public and private, have called upon me for it. And
when I have at any time performed these duties, it has not been with so
perfect an heart, and so willing a mind as thou requirest; but there has been
much both heaviness and hypocrisy in my best Devotions. I have too to much
distasted and shunned the narrow way, not walking in my Calling so faithfully;
not using Recreation so moderately, nor thy Creatures so soberly, and
inoffensiuely; nor carrying my self toward my Neighbor (for the good both of
his soul, and body, and state) so religiously, Charitably and justly, as it
had been meet I should.

But besides this want of delighting in thy Law and holy duties, I have
committed many grievous sins against thy Majesty, following very fearfully
(especially, in the time of You h and ignorance) both the Company, and the
Counsels, and the Courses of Wicked men, and so, instead of bringing forth the
holy and pleasing fruits of the Spirit, have wrought and brought forth the
fi^thy and noisome works of the Flesh: Yea, O Lord, against thee, against thee
have I sinned; and besides Common evils, an guilty (as holy David of blood) of
some notorious and special prouocations.

Nor have I been thus sinful, O Lord, for want of instruction and means to
be better; for thou have taught me wisdom, and made known thy Word unto me,
whereby I might have bin cleansed and amended; but it is because I have wanted
care, and have not taken heed to my ways according unto thy Word; nor laid up
that word of thine in my heart, whereby I might have been kept from sinning
against thee: So that I can by no means justify my self; nay, O Lord, I am
so far from that, that say what thou will against me in thy Word, lay what
thou will upon me with thy Hand, I do freely confess, Thou shall be justified
when thou speak, and clear when thou iudgest.

Nevertheless, O gracious Father, since thou have proclaimed thy self to be a
God that pardonest iniquity, and transgression, and sin; Let me find grace,
I beseech thee, in thy sight, and pardon my iniquity, and my sin: I have
nothing to plead for my self, but Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy
loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
transgressions. I cannot deny, O Lord, but I am a great Sinner, but I know that
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Purge me therefore with
that Hyssop, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter then the
Snow. So make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness, that my heart
(afflicted with sin) may rejoice in thee. Its true, O Lord, thou art a GOD
that do by no means clear the guilty, yet, have mercy on me, while (by
this means) the guilt of sin is removed from me.

Nor do thou only Hide thy face from my sin, O Lord, and blot out all my
iniquity, but (together with the guilt of sin) take away the filthiness
likewise: Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin;
yea, Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me:
Vouchsafe unto me the benefit of the new Covenant of grace, working that grace
in me, that thou requirest of me: Take away (more and more) the stony heart out
of my flesh and give me an heart of flesh; that so I may remember my former
evil ways, and my doings that were not good and loath my self in my own
sight for my iniquities, and my abominations.

Together with this Repentance (yea, that I may have this Repentance) work in
me that Faith, whereby the House of Israel enquires after thee; and whereby I
a wretched Sinner (finding my self heavy laden) may so come unto thee as to
have ease from thee. And because none shall have mercy but he that forsakes
his sin, as well as confesses it, Give me so much grace as to forsake my
wicked ways, yea, and all my unrighteous thoughts, that so thou may have
mercy on me, and abundantly pardon me. And because forsaking of sin is not
enough, neither, without returning unto thee my Lord and my God, make me, I
beseech thee, to go in the paths of thy Commandments, and so put thy Spirit
within me, as to cause me to walk in thy Statutes, to keep thy judgments,
and to do them.

Thus make me, by thy good graces, meet to receive the benefit of thy gracious
promises; And by that good grace of thine, do thou (more and more) so
enlighten me, and so sanctify me, as that I may know thee the God of my
Fathers, and serve thee with a perfect heart and a willing mind, and that both
in the duties of my general and particular calling. Grant that (for the time
to come) I may read thy Word, and mark it; that I may hear thy word and
keep it; that I may call upon thy Name, and be watchful in it; that I may
receive thy Sacrament, and prepare for it; that I may keep thy whole Sabbath,
and delight in it; that when thou call to Fasting, I may come to it
willingly; and when thou requirest the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, I may offer
it freely. Grant that, abstaining as a Pilgrim and Stranger from fleshly
lusts, I may daily bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, striving mainely to
enter in at the narrow gate, and, being in the number of those violent ones,
that take the Kingdom of heaven by force.

For which purpose, do thou, O Lord, so prevail with me, as that the power of
Religion may be seen in all the passages of my particular calling: grant that
I may carry my self faithfully in it, and use only such lawful and moderate
Recreations, as may be helpful unto it, and thy creatures so temperately, as
that I may not be hindered, at any time, from performing service to thee.

Thus let me observe the lesson that Grace teaches, carrying my self
conscionably toward thy Majesty, and justly and charitably toward my
neighbor, and in my conversation so soberly, and with Christian modesty, that
I may expect the comfort that Grace promises, looking (with all assurance) for
that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ.

In whom, being assured (while I endeavor to offer the Sacrifice of a contrite
heart) that thou will not despise me, I make bold (even as my own sins put me
in mind, which help to make up that heap of sins which provoke thee to punish
thy whole Church) to entreat thy favor in the behalf of thy Church and
children. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion, and build thou the walls of
Jerusalem. Be merciful to thy Church in other parts; Make them careful to
be holy, as thou their God art holy. Where thou have given prosperity,
continue their comforts; where thou have sent adversity, sanctify their
crosses; make them gracious by their sufferings, and in thine own good time
glorious by deliverance.

But in special manner, I beseech thee, be gracious unto thy Church within
these his Majesty's Dominions, and in particular to this our Land. Above all
things, continue the light, the purity, and the power of thy Gospel amongst
us, and give us grace to bring forth better fruit of it then we have done, that
it may not be taken away from us, and given to another people.

Herein amongst, and above the rest, let all thy blessings be powered down upon
the head of our gracious King. Enrich him with all Princely gifts, and saving
graces: Preserve his life from destruction, and crown him with loving
kindness and tender mercy. Bless (together with him) his royal Consort, and
let the Queen be all glorious within. Bless the Nobles with grace, together
with their greatness, that they may be powerful instruments of thy glory, and
thy Peoples good. Bless the Magistrates of this Land, and make them zealous:
All thy Ministers likewise, and make them faithful; that so by the power both
of the word and sword, we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. Be graciously good to all those to whom I am any way
tied, either by the bond of nature, or grace, or love, or duty. Sanctify them
by thy good Spirit, Prosper them by thy good providence, and grant that they
may first seek thy Kingdom, that so other things may be cast upon them. Be
merciful especially unto all that be afflicted in such sort, as that in the
end every one of thine may say; It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
yea so, and so long afflicted.

Lastly, O Lord, I desire (as duty binds me) with all thankfulness, to
acknowledge thy manifold and great favors. Blessed (especially) be God and the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for spiritual blessings in heavenly things,
and for giving unto such unworthy wretches as I am, Jesus Christ, and together
with him all things also; even all those outward blessings: for which likewise
(O gracious and merciful Father) I desire to bless thy Name; to wit, for the
blessing of health; the benefit of peace and liberty; the comfort of friends;
that fatherly portion, and fit allowance of outward things, which it has
pleased thee out of thy wisdom and goodness to allot unto me, and for that
contentedness, which together with it thou have bestowed upon me. O Lord, I
am less then the least of all thy mercies; yea, in stead of being thus
blessed, I deserve to be every way accursed: But be graciously pleased
(Father of Mercies) to continue unto me these thy good blessings, out of the
same favor of thine, whereby thou did at first s^nd them; yea, and to add
unto them likewise, what thou see needful for me, that so enjoying from thy
good hand all prosperity and good content, my heart may be lift up in thy
ways, so, as to perform unto thee all cheerful and acceptable service.

Grant this, O most merciful Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our alone
Mediator and Advocate; unto whom with thee, O Father, and thy blessed Spirit,
I humbly render, and ascribe, and desire to be given and ascribed, all honor,
praise, and glory, power, might, dominion, and Majesty, by me, and thy whole
Church, now, and henceforth, for evermore. Amen.

PSALM. 119.130. The entrance into thy words shows light, and gives
understanding unto the simple.
FINIS.

