A HANDKERCHER FOR PARENTS WET EYES, UPON THE DEATH OF CHILDREN.

A Consolatory Letter to a Friend.

LONDON, Printed by E. A. for Michael Sparks, dwelling at the blue Bible in
Green Arbor. 1630.

To the Reader that is, or may be exercised with this kind of Cross.
GEntle Reader, I did not think that ever any Lines of mine should have looked
in at a Printing House. My Conceit is not wont to be in the Eaning Mood, as
knowing that with Jacobs Ewes, it should bring forth but spotted and straked
Lambs.

Yet now at the instance of a Pair of worthy Friends, that had equally drunk
of this Cup of Sorrow, I have yielded to put the Press to a short affliction;
and to communicate to All, what was first intended for the comfort of One.

I might have sat still, with the finger on the lip, amidst those sage and
faithful Counselors and Companions (Good Books) or have sung to my self,
and the Muses only; or to a wellknowne Friend, or Two, with whom every Thing
should have received a favorable interpretation: But for thy sake, that I
might not be uncharitable, I am feign to be imprudent, in aduenturing to
trench thus near upon the Worlds tuchy Censure.

I may hap by this means, to be carried shortly into the Street, where they
sell Frankincense, and Sweet Pouders, and Pepper, and such Things as they use
to cloathe in weak and worthless Papers. No matter. It was not to my Pen any
Herculean Labor; nor to My self in the writing altogether ungrateful.

And if in the vast Petegrination of Books, it may please God, that but one
delected heart may by any good word in It, be a little lifted up; or Passion
hasht, and calmed; or flowing Eye dried; or sorrow made happy, by being
transverted to a righter Object; or any (yet entirely enjoying the fair
Blessings of Marriage) forearmed against a future storm, if God see good to
send it; I shall hold my self abundantly rewarded from Heaven in that one
Book, or Page, or Passage, or Line, though all the rest of these Leaves perish.

I have only dipped the Tip of my finger in Comfort for thee; The God of all
Consolation can give thee the fullness of it; which is His wish to Thee, that
wishes Ill to None.

I. C.

To my worthy Friend Master I. R.
SIr, I know you do now feel what it is to be a Father; and therefore to
bar you altogether from lamenting and sorrowing in such an Accident as this
[The death of your beloved Sonne] were as unreasonable, as to chide a Man, for
showing himself sensible, when a Tooth is drawn, or a Leg or an Arm is sawd
off from his body. For if I should persuade you that these may be taken from
you without feeling, or pain, you would say, I played the Mountebanke.

For mine own part, I was at the first unlooked for word of [Dead] like Niobe,
Lapideus factus, Cold at the heart; and having recollected my self, found I
was a sharer in your loss, and could not temper mine Eyes from running over as
for a Kinsman of mine own. (For why should not I have an interest, nay a kind
of affinity with His Son, who vouchsafed to be so kind a nourisher of My
Daughter?)

Had you lost him newborn, and but saluting the world; Junent. Sat. 7.
-- Primes incipientem
Edere vagitus, and adhuc a matre rubentem;
First squayling Cries from Infant Throat outstrayning,
And from his Mother, yet the Red retayning;


Or a Youngling first bestriding his Hobbyhorse, or driving his Top, or new
learning the way to School; the parting had not been so bitter. We do
somewhat easily shake hands with green and slight Acquaintances.

But he was Solidus Adolescens, A grown Man, arrived half way to the Solslice
of his Age; Strong, active, well shaped, well-graced, faire-demeanord,
studious, of an honest and virtuous disposition, yielding not only the
blossoms, but the fruits of a good education.

Grave, with the first appearing Down upon his Chinne, yet without any
grumnesse or sowrenesse of manners.

His by-studies and delights manly and generous, serving either to enable him
for the service of his Prince and Country; As the exercise of Ames and
Hardiment.

Hor. ad Lol. Epist. 19. l. 1.
-- Add virilia, quod speciosius Arma,
Non est qui tractet.
His manly Arms none bears with better grace.
Or by imparting their delight to others, to make the Vser thereof welcome. As
Music, Dancing, History, Faire-writing, etc.

To his God he was religious and devout, early remembering his Creator, wearing
the Threshold of his House, and sitting attentive at the feet of this
Ministers.

To his Father and Mother obseruant and dutiful; To his Kindred loving; To his
Elders reverent; To his Equals facile and sociable; To All courteous and
pleasing; Which turned Men's eyes and regards upon him, and made him accepted and
desired, both of one and other.

And for the maine Study, whereunto he had addicted himself, he was by your
conduct and trayning so good a proficient therein, for notion and understanding
of the passages, if not for dexterity of Acting (which is acquired by Time and
use) that he was in a manner fitted and prepared to have put his shoulders
under your burden, and by inheriting at once both your place and toils, to
have given your years at length their deserved Vacation.

Job 14.
But Man that is borne of a Woman, has but a short time to live. He comes up
like a Flower, and is cropped off. He is plucked from the Stalk as an unripe
Grape; and shaken down as the wind shakes down the Olive blossoms.

I know, you are not Stoicall, without affections; Pers.
-- Neque enum tibi cornea fibra est.
Your heart strings are not so tough and horny.


^onos vi^os facile solui in Iachrymas.
I have noted your eyes sometimes to stand great with tears at others woes,
Chancer.
for pity renneth soon in Gentle heart. And therefore I blame you not to
melt, yea, to ache, and be sore of such a wound and mayme as this. This is not a
slea-bite, or a scratch with a pin; nor a foreign hurt a great way distant,
but Domestike and Concerning.

If David thought his sorrow justifiable for his Son that was a Rebel, and
almost a Parricide; your sorrow cannot but be just for so towardly, so dear,
so precious a Son: A right Benjamin, the Son of your Right hand, the Staff
and Prop of your old Age.

Aegritudinem doloremque animi moderatu^ improbari non oportet. One must not be
shent for moderate sorrow and grief of mind.

But yet you must take heed of making your Grief unjust, by exceeding a just
and regular measure in it. As we must not be doloris expertes, indolent and
void of sorrow, for that is inhumane: So neither may we be perdite dolentes,
immeasurable, obstinate, desperate grieuers, for that is unchristian.

Strangulat inclusus dolor atque ^or aestuat intus, Cogitur and vires
multiplicare su^s.
It must not be stopped too soon; for then the Tears turn back to drown the
heart. Jobs Friends said not a word to him for the first seven days, but let
passion have his course, and tire it self, themselves sitting sad and silent
by him.

But on the other side, you must not stay it too long; for then it plays the
Tyrant, and killes and slayes without mercy. ^ Cor. 7.
Worldly sorrow causes death and disease.

It Is like a foraigne power called in, to the Aid of a distressed Kingdom,
which cannot be got out again, but proves a worse enemy then that it came to
expel.

You have already played the part of a loving Father, wept the Tears of Nature;
you must now change your Copy, withdraw your finger from the sore, and play the
part of a wise and constant man: And that is, either to prevent a mischief
when it is approaching; or if it happen, to amend it, and labor to make it as
little as may be: According to the old precept, Bona quam maxima facere, mala
contrahere atque imminuere. Extend and enlarge any Good to the utmost, Hebetant
Rationis ^ciem miseriae. Omnes in monendo sapientes sumus, cu^ aure ipsi^
liqu^d fa^mus, no intelligimu^ Eru^mid
but contract and diminish (what you can) the evil.

But because generally all succors fail us in adversity; passion sending up
such Fogs, that the understanding is blinded, (though we have been (in our
own wel-faring) never so able, to minister words of comfort to others in their
distresses) give me leave at this Time, to take you by the hand, and only to
set you in the way to the door of Consolation.

Multa etiam ab Olitore, recte atque in loco proferri possunt.
Even an Herb-wife sometimes may
Things right, and to the purpose say.
CONSIDERATION. I.
FIrst, call to your remembrance that great Statute, That all must once dye.
And that doom for sin, Heb. 9.27 Genesis 3.
Dust thou art, and into Dust thou shall return.

Herod.
Omnibus vna manet nox,
Fit calcanda semel via lethi.
One darksome night awaits each living wight,
And Deaths highway must once be trod (despite.)
Nascimur, and morimur, is every ones Motto; We are all borne mortal.

What marvel to see that cut asunder which may be cut asunder? That melted
which is fusible and apt to melt? That burnt which is combustible? The Son
die as well as the Father, being borne under the same Condition of Mortality,
that the Father was?

All unions in this world must be dissolved: Fathers and Children must be
severed; Friends and Friends, Husbands and Wives, as they had a Time to come
together, so they must have a Time to part asunder.

Sic Natura postulat, nec grave putandum, fieri quod necesse est.
So Nature craves, nor think it much to see,
The Thing so done, that needs so done must be.
CONSIDERATION. 2.
SEcondly, consider that it is the case of others with you. If you had been
the first, or only Father that had lost a Son, and no other had drunk of
this Cup before you; then you had some Color to complain, and to continue and
spin out your laments. But the worm is spread even under Royal Branches; Kings
and Princes are deprived of their Children, as well as meaner men; yea those
Children, that should keep their Kingdom from staggering.

Histories are full of instances; Whence you (that are so conversant in those
readings) can easily store your self; let it be enough for me to reach you
only three or four familiar Ones, within the reach and l^en of our own
memory.

That Noble Lord of the North lost three of his Sons, In florentissima
aetate, in the very bloome of youth, and lustihood: One, before his aged Eyes,
by the ruggedness of an unbroken Horse; and Two together out of a Boat
passing over a rough Ferry.

You know, but a little since, A worthy Knight of our Country lost one of his
Sons, a lusty young Gentleman, in our own River, his Horse leaping with his
Rider, plum over the Boats side.

A Noble Gentlewoman, our neighbor, after the loss of a dear and excellent
Husband, lost in the Circle of a few years, six of her Children, all grown
Men and Women, three fair Daughters, and three brave Sons; the youngest in a
Tempest of Bullets, at the assault of an unfortunate Island.

The Prince Palatines loss of his Firstborn Son, by the unlucky running of
a Ship with full sail over his Barge, is fresh in all minds.

Perishing by misfortune is a greater Cut, then leaving the world by Gods
Visitation. So that your case being common with others, and more easy then
diverse others, That may stifle some sighs, and calm a many repining complaints.

Inter arma and lituos, Am. Mar. lib. 26. c. 13.
conditionis aequatio leuiorafacit pericula. Even among weapons and sounding
Trumpets, the equality of Condition makes the danger lighter, and less
sensible.

Who reckes his life, or dreads death, when in the whirle and Din of war, he
sees not only his Fellow Soldiers knocked down beside him, but a many valiant
young Nobles, resolute and hardy Knights, and Commanders, that erewhile cleft
the crowdes, and hewed themselves a way through the thickest Ranks of the
Enemy, fallen to ground also, and lying breathles among Thousands of other dead
bodies?

What a Row might be presented of weeping Fathers and Mothers for their
Sons, accomplished (at their no small charge) with learning and breeding,
suddenly hurried out of the world upon a Sword or Rapiers point, in desperate
quarrels, or Challenges and Duells, within the compass of half Your Time?

Age, desine; intuonsque aliorum miserias,
Tua lenius feres.
Go to, give over, and by view
Of others Griefs, your own subdue.
CONSIDERATION. 3.
THirdly, the impossibility of recovering your loss. Prorsus no sunt tentada
impossibilia. Sopho.


Optimum est obliuisci, quodrecuperari non potest. The best salve for an
irrecouerable loss, is Oblivion.

Non placet istud factum, Terent. Adelph. Act. 4.5.8
si possem mutare; nunc cum non queo, aequo animo fero. This fact likes me not,
if I knew how to help it; now that I cannot, what remedy but patience?

If your Son were to be bought and brought to life again at a set price of
sorrow, I believe, you would bid frankly for him. But, The Grave returns no
Men. You shall go to him, he shall not come again to you.

And therefore to sit day by day with folded arms, and dropping eyes, and a
heart heavy as lead, for the Loss cannot possibly be regayned; as it is
unprofitable to the bemoaned, so it is a hurt to the bemoaner; yea of one harm
to make Two. Nay it is to resist the high and heavenly Will, and to be found
Striuers against God: In which number, I know, you would be loath to be ranked.
You have not so learned Christ.

CONSIDERATION. 4.
FOurthly, Time it self may minister some Physic to your Affliction. A
Prisoners Irons seem not so heavy to him the second day, as the first. No
grief has so much violence in the continuation, as in the first Access.

Take the simplest Country-Mother, the weakest Nurse of a Village, that wrings
her hands, and tears her hair, and laues the Ground (on which she wallowes)
with eye-water, and takes on never so impotently for her departed Child; and
the space of a few days will slake the rage of her sorrow, and anon bury it in
utter forgetfulness.

That which Time works in the ignorant, shall not Time and Reason together
effect as easily in the wise?

CONSIDERATION 5.
Fifthly, But you will say, your Son might have lived longer. And he might as
well have dyed sooner. Who can show me a Lease of his life under Seal for one
hour? Why may not every day prove our last day?

Some are suffocated in the womb; others crowz'd to death in the Birth. One is
snatched away in the Cradle: Another mowed off in his May of youth; being only
shown to the world like a curious picture finished, and straight the Curtain
drawn and removed away again. Its the privilege but of few, to step down
upon the Griece of Old Age. Our life, from the first hour to the last, gallops
on toward death: And who sees not, with what speed it conquers even the
longest way in this journey?

If Time then be the thing you stand on for your Son, how small a matter of
Odds is a little more or less Time in so fugitive and swift a Race? It Is
scarce discernable.

A Cart full of Prisoners are brought to execution; what skills it which is
first, or third, or sixth, or tenth, or sixteenth? All must dye. What gets he
that is delayed till the afternoon, above him that was executed in the
morning? Perhaps to be superafflicted with longer expectance and
pre-apprehension; sighing that his turn had not been with the foremost.

(But the Prisoner may not appoint his own course, that is in the Judge or the
Sheriff to dispose of.)

The whole world is but a Cart of condemned persons: God culls out every day
some and some for Execution.

This very Minute a Slave dies, foredone with toil and hardship. Instantly, a
King or great Lord mounts the Scaffold. By and by a Mechanic, a Rusticke, a
Pesant, a Milkmaid, a Cow-heard, a Schoole-boy, or Girl, suffer.

Straight after, a Royal Lady or Princess stoopes her fair Neck to the
Block.

Anon, a fresh, lovely, active, vigorous Youth, a beauteous young Damsel
(Ornaments to the world) are presented to the Axe.

Behold now, a feeble old man is led up, having scarce life enough left, to be
killed, etc.

The oldest of these has not lived a minute over his Time, nor the youngest a
minute under: for neither might the one budge any sooner without summons and
order; nor the other tarry any longer, being called away. But you will say, He
had no cause to complain, that was respited to Old Age, which brings with it a
saciety of living. Nor You, by the same reason. For when God has decreed, I
shall live no longer, This (fall it when it will) is my Old Age.

We are not Caruers of our own Times. He only that predestined the hour
of our Birth from all Eternity, has power to decree the hour of our Death.

You neither could cause your Child to be borne sooner, or to dye later. Times
Maker knows the fittest Times for all his purposes.

He has not appointed all to live the same term of years. Some go before,
Serius aut citius, metam properamus ad vnam. Ovid.
some after. But first or last, all arrive at the same mark.

The Husbandman reapes not all his Akers at once, but one sooner, another
later, as they are sooner or later ripe. Let God alone, he knows (better then
any Farmer) the number and condition of his Akers, and where he finds one
forward, turned white betimes, (though but the other day green, and in the
blade) there he puts in his Sickle, and carries it into the Heavenly Barn: A
Place of safety.

Which with longer standing might have spilt and shed, or been wansled, and
come to nothing.

Long lasting, even to the frostiest old Age is not the matter, Puer centum
annotum. Esa. 65.
for there may be a Child of a hundred years old, that yet is not ready for
Heaven.

God has reserved to himself alone, the sight of the running out of the
Glass. Man knows not his Time and End: but vnperceiuingly slides into it, as
the Fish into the Net, or the Bird into the Snare, God pushing on means, to us
vndreamt of, and unsuspected, to serve his Decree.

It is with men in the world, as with the Vessels in a Potters Shop. There are
of all sorts, sizes, and fashions. That which to day is whole, and handsome,
and useful: to morrow, with a knock, or a fall, may be broken to sheards.
Your Vessel was sheene and new, of a firm making, likely to have lasted many
a fair year, even till it had flawed and moudred away of it self; but it
stood in harmes-way, disease and sickness gave it a knock, and a crack,
which could not be soldred. And indeed, the sleekest, the sweetest, the
trimmest Dish of China, is but a China Dish; handle it, or set it up as charily
as you can devise.

We would have our Candle burn down into the socket; but God has a wind to
blow it out, sometimes as soon as lighted; or a Thief to consume it with
guttering, ere any Eye heed it. Few of our living Candles (not one amongst a
Thousand) last burning to the last Inch.

He that numbreth all our Times and hours, has numbered your Sons also, and
set him his day, beyond which he could not pass.

Honor him with free yielding this preeminence to him, and let it stop your
mouth, and stoop your heart. I held my peace, Psalm. 1. Sam. Job.
because thou did it. It is the Lord, let him do whatsoever he pleases. He
gives, he takes, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

But he does nothing but for the best to them that love him. Many times Life is
not so much taken away, as Death given for a special Favor.

Just and Merciful men are taken away from the Evils to come. Esaias.
How many times over, have some dyed, by living long?

Righteous Abel, the second Son of the sole Emperor of the whole Earth, was
cut off in his Youth. The Eternal Son of God himself died a young Man.

Our Estimate of Life is wrong, and false; quite odd and different from Gods.
We measure it like Canuas, by the Ell; God like Gold, by the Grain. Our Examen
is by the Tale, so many Scores; Gods by the Touch, so virtuous, so exemplary,
of such an Allay.

Now, God having thus qualified Your Son with Grace, made him early ready for
Heaven; he had attained his due, and true Seniority, and could not complain
that he lackt Time, or had lived too little while.

M. B. Hol. in Transtat. of Pers.
Action, not Time, does number Age. The Heathens have noted it for a blessing,
to dye young.

M^^^nd.
Aetate prima moritur, quem diy diligunt.
Early to dye it him behoou'd,
Whom gods above so dearly loved. And again:
-- Nec illi,
Quem Diuum Pater atque hominum, quem Phoebus
Amabat ante omnes, sera licuit gaudere senecta.
Nor might he (here) live to be old as other,
Whom Jove and Phoebus tendered as their brother.
Cleobis and Biton, Cic. Tusc, quast.
when their Mother for their piety in drawing her Chariot to the Temple
themselves, (in the absence of the Horses) prayed, that they might be rewarded
with the greatest blessing that could possibly happen from God to Man; were
both found dead next morning in their sleep.

And when news hereof was brought to their Mother, as of a great misfortune:
No (says she) I will never count my self unfortunate, that was the Mother of
such Sons, as the gods have guerdon'd with immortality for their pious Act.

Shall a Pagan Mother, having no other light but that of duske nature, count it
for a Divine Favor, that her excellent Sons have early quit this life and
world; and a Christian Father enlightened with the Rays of the Sacred Truth
breathed from the Holy Ghost, pule, and repine, and look sour upon Heaven,
and God, when in mercy he has done for ours, not what is most pleasing to us,
but what is most fit and commodious for both? If we be truly penitent for our
sins, and can persuade our hearts of our right and interest in the blood and
merits of Christ Jesus, what need we doubt of Gods Favor?

Has he not told us in his Word assured us, proou'd, demonstrated to us, that
he loves us; yea better then we can love our selves?

Charior est illis homo, quam sibi. Innem.

Dearer to him is Man,
Then to himself he can.
And will such a Cause produce any other then beneficial, and friendly effects?

Was it not in love unspeakable, that he gave his own Son to Us? and can it be
but in like love, that he takes our Sons and Daughters unto him?

O think of it; and think withal, whether such a love, from Him so great, to
Us so base, be not worthy re-louing, above Sons, Daughters, Wines, Friends,
Wealth, Lands, or whatsoever else the World holds most dear?

May we not, having this left us (the love of God in Christ) fit us down as
blessed Men and Women, with cheerful hearts and faces, though all things else
be torn from us?

This is the miraculous Philosophers Stone, that turns any Metal it touches,
into Gold.

This turns Crosses into Comforts, Losses into Thrifts, Sorrows into Smiles,
Wounds into Medicines, and Death it self of our selves, or ours, into
superlatiue Advantage and Bliss.

CONSIDERATION 6.
GOd may intend herein the Fathers trial, as well as the Child's Benefit. You
your self have sometimes given one of your little Ones an Apple, and asked it
again immediately, to try his love. So God gives us dear Pledges, and anon
requires them from us again, to make proof which we love better, our
Children or Him. Chora pignora, Charior Deui.
He allows us to hold them dear, but Himself must be dearer.

Was It not enough, that God (who could have withheld that blessing of
marriage) gave you such a Son, unless he would bargain with you to let him
live forty years beyond you? would you rather be childlesse, then the Father
of such a Son, as might outrunne his Father in the race of Death?

If you had a journey to go afoote thirty Miles, will you not say God a mercy
to him will let you ride a Dozen of it, because he will not spare you his Horse
the other Eighteen?

A great Duke or Prince lends you a dainty sweet Picture, of exquisite
Workmanship, to delight your Eyes withal; Will you powte, and snuff, and take
on as iniuri'd, when after diverse years use, he re-demaunds it from you, to
be placed again among the Ornaments of his Gallery?

Ah te, si flentem super aethera mox rapuisset Jupiter.

What could you say for your self; how excuse such froward bearing, if God
should instantly summon you to make you answer before him?

CONSIDERATION 7.
But you could have better brookt any Cross, then this. But we may not choose
our Cross, but bear patiently that is laid on us. Shall we take upon us to
curb, or direct, and give laws to God?

You deceive your self, and lay up but discomfort against the evil day, if
you think no Thorn could prick, but this. God can quickly make you know,
that he is able to set a point, and sting upon a Cross of wool.

Exodus
He can make a few Flies as irksome and intolerable, as angry Botchos and
Blaynes all the body over. Darkness, which every night makes familiar to us,
as discomfortable and dreadful, as incessant Haile-stormes mingled with fire,
and accompanied with Thunder-strokes able to shake the heart of a Mirmadon.

That Rod shall smart, which God will set on, though it be but of Rushes.

A little brown paper shot out of an Elder-Gun, is scarce felt against the
hand of a Child; The same brown paper out of a Musket, is able to break the
Ribs of a Giant.

-- Quid enim mirabile, si quis
A lotte percussius, non leave vuluns habet?
What marvel if one be in bitterness, the stroke falling like a Talent of
Lead, and the wound no light one, when the hand of God inflicts it?

I know, loss of Children, Men of best Blood and Minds, take most to heart:
and by the help of their sharp conceit, increase and sharpen their
affliction: which made that saying escape from the Pen of One, In non sapiendo
iucundissima vita. Sodho.
The sweetest life is in not being wise. And from another, It Is good sometimes
to be a fool. Dulce est desipere in loco.


Iners malorum Remedium ignorantia. The more of ignorance, the less of
grieuance. It Is the downright, senseless Remedy of Evils. For Such a one
cannot by his discourse aggrauate a Loss.

But me thinks, Wisdom should reach us as soft a Cushion to lean on, as
Ignorance can: and Discretion forge an Armor of as good proof against
Adversity, Jsocrat.
as Folly and Doltishnesse. Qui memmit quid homo sit, propter nullum euenientem
casum immodice tristabitur. He that remembers well, what Man is, (the Butt
against which so many shafts of disasters are aimed every hand-while) shall
never be immoderately hadded for any Chance obuersant to him in this world: he
shall be able to say with Job, Job.
The thing I scared, is fallen upon me.

If God had spared you from this affliction, do you think you should have
been at rest from evils? Has God but one Rod? Is his Storehouse so
unfurnished? Is not the very place we live in, a place of toil, and turmoyle,
and bickering, and vexation? And shall we think to find Rest in that, whose
composition is of Tumults?

Nam nemini esse prorsus folici, licet. No man but finds a Pound of Woe, for a
Dram of Content. God will not glut us with Felicities.

His manner is eftsoons to vitiate the comforts he allows his Children with
some vn-expected Dash of sorrow, lest they should imagine that true and sincere
Content might be found on Earth.

I have heard you observe a like course held with your self. For, speaking of
some proiects of yours for a retired Country life, how much you affected the
sweetness and innocence thereof, and what please you could give your self in
it: God (you said) did by one means or other still cross and defeat your
purposes, foreseeing how it might steal away your heart from heaven and him,
and make you desire to moare here, and set up your Rest in the things of this
world. This use you made of that Cross then; do the like by this now. God
has taken your Darling from You, lest he should have taken your heart from Him.

CONSIDERATION 8.
POnder often that saying, Sapit qui non tristatur propter absentia, sed gaudet
praesentibus. He is wise that is not so much sorry for the absent, as joyous in
the present Comforts.

You look to what you have lost, but not to what you have left. As God has
Crosses more then one: So He has Comforts and Blessings more than one. And he
has left you a great many of them, even Childrens Children; When others have
nor Son, nor Daughter in their inheritance.

Will you, because one is removed out of your sight, waywardly deprive Your
self of enjoying the Remainder, as not worth thanks, now one of the tale is
diminisht?

That were leke little Children, if you catch up one of their Play-games, they
presently cast away all the rest in a fume.

If in a vast succourles Champian, or Down, the furious Wind should snatch off
your Hat, and hurry it away beyond ouertaking, (so much, as with you Eye,)
would you straight in a Mood strip off your other Garments to your shirt, and
dare the Wind to do his worst with those Parcels also? O take heed of such
behavior.

It Is not stouting, and stomach, and pettishnesse, but meekness, and
patience, and humility, makes God propitious. What shall you get by standing
and knocking your Fists at Him, that must be your only Comfort in your
Anguishes; or you are like to have none at all, but scorn and dirision?

Set not God to School; appoint him not what to take, what to leave. He knows
best which Branch of the Vine to prune off.

Be thankful for them are reserved to you, and enjoy them as from a thrice
friendly and gracious hand. Set your love on them as on another man's Loan,
which you must restore upon demand.

Think not that to be your own, that was but lent you; nor that to be too
soon required again, which without injury might have been altogether kept
from you.

CONSIDERATION. 9.
O But, he was so hopeful, so towardly, so well disposed, such a Model of
Goodness, etc. I grant you all this. But how know you, he would have held on
so, if he had lived longer? How many godly Fathers have had their hearts broke
with the lewdness and ill proof of their Children? Tacit.
Even many Good Princes came short of Neroes first 5. years.

What Traps do we see set daily in the way of Virtue, to trip it, and make it
fall?

Occasions to many sins are presented, and taken hold of in tract of Time,
which once we never dreamt of committing, or contracting the least acquaintance
with them.

He is gone, beginning to relish virtue, untainted of vicious inclinations;
his soul had not yet dipped in the dish of voluptuousness; wickedness had
not altered his heart. What has he lost by that? By being Heavenly on Earth,
he is now made Glorious in Heaven.

Sic fuit vtilius finiri ipsique, tibique.
So was it most profit to exspire,
Both to himself, and you (his Sire.)
Besides; you will say, (for passion has no hoe in obiecting) To you, he was
so useful, so necessary, your finger next the Thumb, grown fit to advise
with, to impart your Counsels to, to make a Friend and Companion of, etc. Hinc
lachrymae. This smoke also makes your eyes run over. But let me tell you,

To bewail the loss of your Child, because he was necessary to you, and you
could ill miss him, is self-love, not the love of your Child. And to be sad
for the welfare of your Child, being euaded all perils, and highly promoted,
and dignified besides; is the part of an envious person, not of a Father or
Kinsman.

Would old Jacob, or any true-hearted Friend or acquaintance of Joseph's be
dressed in melancholy, to hear that the King of Egypt had releast him out of
prison, and sent for him to Court, to make him a great Lord, and Viceroy of
the Kingdom?

If you had been told a while agon of some extraordinary worldly preferment
befalne your Son, above all that you could think or hope for, though in some
far remote place, whereby your former familiar Conuerses must be cut off; yet
I suppose, that for his good, you would have entertained the news with
gladness, and laid by your own particular respects:

And now that he is exalted to the very Top and height of honor, and that in
eternity; now that he is enstall'd a Prince among Celestial Princes (for not
any are less then Kings and Queens that are admitted thither) will you lowre
and be in dumps, as for a matter of special discomfort, and mishap?

Will you be sorry for his joy? dejected for his advancement? sick of his
happiness?

Had you rather your Son should be without Heaven, then you without your
Son? This is a plain degree of Madness.

Shall we lament for them that laugh? mourn for them that feast and sing?
hurt our health for them that are perfectly whole? Now that he is dead and
buried, nay now that his life is indeed truly Vital and Living; will you for
his sake go drown your self in your own tears?

Certe plus animi debet inesse viris.
More wisdom ought to rest in them,
That wear the only name of Men.
He has no sense of your sorrows for him, nor will thank you for hurting
your self, by the liberty you give to the Rage of Nature.

CONSIDERATION. 10.
GOd has by death freed him, not only from the dangers and corruptions of the
Age, wherein he might have been swallowed, but from the common evils which
may fall upon his Suruiuers, greater perhaps, and nearer then we imagine. The
Condition of the Times is so bad, as punishments cannot be far off.

To be set in safety before their approaches, whilst the storm is but a
thickning, is no small benefit.

Comicus ^^t. ap. Plutar.
Si tu sciebas illu^, vitae tempus hoc
Ereptum ei quod est, habiturum prosperum,
Mors eius immatura existimanda erit.
Quid si molesta habuisset multa ac tristia?
Haec finiens mors, non te beneuolentior
Illi fuit?
If you were sure that he should have enjoyed
The life rest from him free, and vn-annoy'd,
Then you might think his death to have hapt too rathe;
But what if now much Ruth were to ensue,
And troublous storms, which Death prevented has,
Was It not in that, more kind to him then You?
If ye loved me (says our Lord to his Disciples) ye would verily rejoice,
because I go to the Father; out of this troublesome and evil world.

So if we loved our Children, and Friends departed, it would be a more regular
course to express it, in gratulating their escape by Death from so manifold
hazards and evils of life, and their estating thereby into so ample beatitude
and happiness, then in giving scope to those effeminate plaints, and distaffe
lamentations.

That which eases us of all burdens and cares; Is the end and death of our
miseries; The everlasting farewell to all smart and woes; Preuents our seeing,
suffering, and doing of much evil; Cuts the Cords whereby we are hampered in
the world, and hindered to go to God; Is the accomplishment of our
sanctification; our Porter to Glory, rendering us into the Arms and Embrace of
our Bridgroome Christ Jesus, never more to be separated, or disioyned from him;
does it present us cause of pensiveness and mourning, or of Iubile and
rejoicing rather?

Is the tired Bondsman sorry for the approach of night, that he may give over,
and go to rest? Is the brute Ox grieved to be vnyoked? was ever Mariner ill
apaid, that after long and doubtful tossing in a dreadful high-going Sea, he
had recovered the safe and quiet Haven? Or banished man, that he was called
home to his Country and Kindred? Or Prisoner, that he was brought out of a
Dungeon, into the liberty and pleasures of a Palace? And will you still wear a
Cloudy brow, and wither away in your Mournings for him, that is a sharer in all
these Privileges and Blessings?

CONSIDERATION. 11.
ELeuenthly: You remember the saying; Schola crucis, Schola lucis. The School
of Tribulation is the School of Edification. The Grecian Proverb is like it,
(...). Those things that trouble us, teach us. You may perhaps learn more out
of this Affliction, then prosperity ever could teach you in all your life. This
may make you look into your Conscience, examine the state of your soul, weep
your own Deseruings, and justify God in all his Doings; and in this
Particular, though the weight were doubled and trebled upon you. Pray that
these effects may be wrought in you.

These will prove salubres cogitationes, lacrymae beatae, verni imbres; wholesome
Meditations, Tears of Grace, April showers, which will cause the flowers of
Consolation to spring up in your heart.

When I lost the better half of my self, (the Best of Wives, such a One, as
even by wishing could hardly have been exceeded, the Country that bred her,
being left poor of such another;) Pectore concepi nil nisi triste meo: You can
judge (for your hand dropped the first Balsome into my wound) whether there were
not cause for my Breast to be full fraught, bursting-ripe, with Anguish and
Dolor?

And how long had the wound been kept raw, if I had wilfully insisted here,
and sat only plodding, and showring Tears upon my Loss?

But when at length (almost too late) I turned away from Nature, and humane
Reason, (ill aduising Friends in this Time and Occasion) to Religion, and
considered this Cross as the Rod of God for my many many sins; That it was
not a beating upon the Coats, but laid on in good earnest, with a provoked
angry hand; That he was constrained to run this rugged Race with me; Though
my Grief were not lessened by this consideration, yet it began to be turned
into a righter Channel.

Recenti Malo, priorum quoque admonemur. The fresh Evil which I suffered, laid
fresh before me former Evils I had done. And where before I grieved for the
suffering, now my grief was to have deserved so to suffer.

Here was sorrow changed into sorrow; worldly sorrow for a Precious, but
Temporal Loss, into godly Sorrow to Repentance, never to be repented off.
Dolor ipse iam voluptas erat. Plin.
There was now a kind of pleasure in these brinish drops.

Now began Nature to be content to wipe her Eyes, and Reason, that suggested
the value of such a Jewel, to lay her hand upon her Mouth; and the golden
Morn of Comfort to dawne to me.

Now I found it true, That God will not always be chiding, nor keeps his anger
for ever. That his correcting is not to destruction, but to save us from being
destroyed and condemned with the World. Cypr.
He chastens us, to amend us, and amends us, to save us. When we stoop, he is
appeased. Discipline goes before, but pardon follows after.

Now I willingly kissed the Rod, that beat me nearer to Heaven and God; and blessed
the Occasion, that led me from sorrow to sorrow, that I might arrive at true
and sound Joy.

O how good was it for me to be so afflicted! Psalm. Judge.
Out of the Eater came meat, and out of the Strong came sweetness. According
to the measure of our sorrow, so is his Consolation.

Finally, now I saw how grossly passion had made my thoughts ouershoote
before; not only in wronging her happy soul, by so often wishing her again
in these Elements of sorrow, who walks arm in arm with Angels; but even in
charging God foolishly, (pardon me, O blessed Fountain of long suffering and
Goodness) as ouer-cruell and rigorous to his Creature, (rauishing our Comforts
from us, then, when we had cause to hold them closest to our bosom;
delighting, sporting in our vn-resistable miseries and ill-turnes;) who indeed
of very faithfulness had caused me to be troubled.

O what a Fool, a Frantic, a wild prodigious thing is Man thus transported,
till God vouchsafe his finger, to temper, and tune him right again!

This End the Lord in his mercy made for Me; This was the Method of my Cure,
the Crop and Harvest of my sowing in Tears; And my Wish and Hope is, that by
his Blessing, Yours may be like.

CONSIDERATION. 12.
TWelfthly. And now, Sir, sum up these parcels, and see if the foot of the
Account declare you not a Gayner.

You have lost a Son, whom all that knew, loved living, and commend dead. One
you had bred up for Heaven; and have now returned him to the true Owner, the
Father of Spirits. Is he not well there? do you think he would be better
here? would you have him change his glorious Eternal Mansion, for a ragged,
reeling, mudwalld Houell?

Did you not aim at his being a Citizen there, instructing, preparing, fitting
him for it? Could you wish a righter Season to be taken thither, then when the
Ages viciousness, and infections example had dropped least slubber and soil
upon him?

Are you sorry he is early there arrived, his Vessel safely landed before you
thought he should?

What though (in your esteem) others were nearer Land then he? Is it any
disadvantage to a Merchant, that his Ship so far behind the rest, while they
lie still at Anchor, is flown to shore fraught with welcome lading?

Pains have chased his soul out of this House of Earth: But is not Abraham's
bosom, where Angels have lodged it, a joyful Receptacle? Come, wash your
Cheeks, give no further passage nor indulgence to your passions, Vina bibe,
and laetus vescere pane tuo.
Eat your bread with gladness: You thought you were hurt, and are benefited
rather.

He is not clean gone, Praemissus, non amissus.
but only gone before. His Mortality is ended, rather then his life. You have
lost him for a Time, God has found him for Ever.

Rejoice and bless God, that you had such a Son. Had him, did I say? You have
him still. Not one Child the fewer have you for his taking hence.

When God turned the Captivity of Job, the Text says, he gave him twice so
much Substance of every kind, as he had before.

He had 7000. Sheep before, now he had 14000. Three thousand Cammels before,
now 6000. Five Hundred Yoke of Oxen before, now 1000. 500. Shee-Asses before,
now 1000. of them also. Why were not his Children doubled as his other
Blessings? Gregor.
Having Ten Children before, why had he but Ten now? Because those in Heaven
were his still.

But oh! How much changed from that themselves were, or that their Brothers and
Sisters are in their Fathers House!

Jobs Children on Earth, though the prime Women of the Land for Beauty, would
appear but Ethiopians, compared with the radiant glistering faces of Them in
Glory. Their Festival Apparel here, though as rich as Salomons Royallest
Mantles, would seem no better then Cannas, or Haire-cloth, being set in match
with the Robes of Glory, and immortality, bright as the light it self, of
those Heauen-dwellers.

And as great Ods is there between your Immortal Son, and his Mortal
Brethren and Sisters.

You may, when you will, have him present with you in your mind and thought.
You may see him as he was, A young Plant in your house; You may see him as he
is; A blessed Soul in Gods heavenly Palace.

Live you mindful of your own Mortality, and Eternal life; and let your
heart leap up into joy, that he has already hit the White, whereat others are
but leuelling; And wears the Garland, for which others are doubtfully
wrestling and contending.

He sits aloft, and smiles at this Emmet-hill of Earth, with such a deal of
Bustle and Garboyle, and Vanity, and Foolery, and Mischief, and Wickedness left
beneath him; Out of the Gun-shotte of Temptation, freed from sin, in safety
from Foes, resting from labors, exempt from sighs, and tears, and cares; A
Consort with Angels, and happy Spirits that see Gods Face, and attend upon his
Throne; laughing even Kings, and all their painted Glories and Pleasures here,
to scorn.

There you shall one day see him again face to face, in that very House of
clay, which he laid down, when he left the World and You, (though altered in
Quality:) And (if that may make to the increase of your Bliss) I am persuaded,
know, and enjoy him, see Heaven the richer in your Seed, his joy augmented and
made fuller by yours, and yours by his

Let Sadduces deny this, and Gentiles deride it; This is the Hope of Israel.

There you shall sing that Alleluia with him, Reu.
to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, that has redeemed you
from the earth, and made you Kings and Priests to God his Father; and to the
blessed Spirit of Truth, and Comfort, proceeding from them both; the
All-glorious, Ineffable, Eternal Trinity; To whom in the mean time, let us in
earth with them in Heaven, (knees, faces, and hearts bending to the dust before
Him.) render all Praise, Power, Majesty, and Dominion for evermore, Amen.

Soli Deo Trin-vni Gloria. FILIVS AD PARENTS.
Viuo, Ex Epitap^ cu iusdem nobilis Juuenis Germani, qui in Angliae inter
peregrinandum occubuit, and in Ecclesia Sancti Olaui, Londini, in Fratribus
Crucigeris sepultus iacet.
fruor tandem veris (ne flete Parents)
Delicijs, Coelo, Posteritate, Deo.
Dear Parents weep not, I live, and have abode
In Bliss; enjoying Heaven, posterity, and God.
FINIS.

