DIATELESMA: THE FIFTH PART OR NVMBER. Comprehending THE PRINCIPAL ACTIONS OF
GERMANY, FRANCE, SPAIN, AND The NEATHERLANDS.

Continued from November, 1637.

(...) -- Hom. Odyss. (...). Hic libere utere, and fruere. LONDON, Printed by
Tho: Harper, for Nath: Butter and Nich: Bourne. 1639.

TO THE INGENVOVS READER.
Claudere quae Coenas Lactuea solebat Auorum,
Dic mihi cur nostras inchoat illa dapes?

IT may be questioned, why the Business of the Neatherlands, which used to
stand in the Rear, should lead the Van, in this discovery; It is here, as in
a ranged Battle, Faces about, alter not either Files or Ranks, but the Posture
only: and it first presented it self to my Fancy, was first brought down
Methodically, and first came to the Press. If it be a mistake reprehensible,
it was Error Protographi, and the Printer is not to be blamed. But the
confusion, in the disposition of this Relation, by mistaking the Title
over-head, in the 3. Chap. and interrupting the Title of the Low Dutch Story,
by interweaving a New one, was Erratum Typographi, herein excusable, that it
was brought unto him by loose sheets, who perhaps, was vvilling to have ended
it with the Tournament, more pleasant than the confusion of War: or else, as
the best of Latin Poets does sometimes make a Breach in his Verse, upon the
Breach of a Spear; would show his Fancy, in expressing the tumultuary Actions
of War, by the (...) of his Papers. However it happened, he craveth your
connivence at this Error, and doubts not to obtain it from such as you, who
can more easily reduce the last sheet of that History to its proper place, than
he can recompose it.

THE TABLE.
AN Anslaught upon Rhyneberke. Page 2 Undertaken upon good grounds. Page 3 Is
prosecuted valiantly. ibid. Yet disappointed happily. Page 4 The Spaniards
surprised at Hanuit. Page 6 The Romanists banished from Breda. Page 13 Some
persons prescribed by the Liegois. Page 14 The Liegois require the Governor of
Hoy to submit and come in. Page 15 The Senate of Hoy return their answer, and
preseribe the Liegois. Page 16 The order taken by the Liegois, to defend their
Country against the Spaniards. Page 17 The Cardinal Infants preparation for
War. Page 18 A Tournament intended at the Hage, at the Marriage of the
Countess of Solmes. Page 19 The Cavaliers divide themselves into parties. Page
20 The Batavians send out the Challenge. ibid. And are answered by six
Mauritanians. Page 21 Secondly, by five Teutons. Page 22 Thirdly, by the
Knights of Rome. Page 23 Fourthly, by the Knight of the Tears. Page 24
Fifthly, the Chimists Reply to the Batavians Challenge. Page 28 The entry of
the Challengers. Page 29 Their devices. ibid. The entry of the Mauritanian
Knights. Page 30 Their devices. Page 31 The entry of the Teuton Knights. ibid.
The entry of the Roman Knights. Page 32 Their devices. ibid. The entry of the
Knight de Larnes. Page 33 The issue of the Tournament. Page 34 Seckinguen
surprised by Duke Bernhard. Page 43 Waldshut surrendered to Him. Page 44 John de
Werth sent to Benfieldt. Page 55 The Bryssackers sent to rescue him upon the
way. ibid. Are utterly defeated by Cullembach. Page 56 John de Werth desires to
be exchanged for Horn. ibid. Rhinefelden rebesieged and surrendered. Page 57
The Articles. Page 58 The Dukes proceedings. Page 61 A Treason at Mastricht.
Page 62 Discovered. Page 63 And the Traitors executed. Page 65 The Abbey of
Beff plundered by the Viscount Turenne. ibid. Count William Nassaw at the
Blocker-dyke. Page 68 Is assaulted by the Cardinal Infant. Page 70 And forced
to fly. ibid. The consequents of this Victory. Page 71 The Castles of Saint
Paul. ibid. Saint Martin de Fresne. Perne. Page 72 Therovenne, and other Forts
and Abbeys taken by the French. Page 73 The Siege of Saint Omaers. ibid. The
description of Saint Omaers. Page 74 The order of the Siege. ibid. A French
Captain of horse surprised by Forgatz. Page 75 Forgatz defeated. Page 78 Saint
Omaers succored by Prince Thomaso. Page 77 Saint Omaers relieved by
Piccolomini. ibid. The Siege is raised. Page 79 The Siege and taking of
Freyburg. Page 80 A worthy Adventure of two English Gentlemen, but unfortunate.
Page 81 The Town surrendered. Page 82 Five Regiments of Butlers Infantry
defeated by Kanoftky. Page 84 120 Curriassiers surprised by Tupadell. Page 86
200 Crabats and 6 Companies of Dragons slain and taken by Rosa. ib. Altkirken
taken in. John de Werth removed into France. Page 87 400 Crabats slain and
routed by Duke Bernhard. Page 88 2 Dunkercks men of War, taken at Port du
Passage. Page 91 Diverse places taken by the Prince of Conde. ibid. Bechara
summoned, and not yielding. ibid. The Duke de S. Simon bath order to enforce
it. Page 9^ Encounters 1200 Spaniards. ibid. Defeateth them. Burns Bechara.
Page 93 3000 Spaniards defeated near Fontarabie. Page 94 And 2 Spanish Ships
sunk. Page 95
The Occurrences in the Netherlands.
CHAP. I.
FOrtified Towns, though by the best Politicians they are thought unnecessary
in Kingdoms, and absolute Monarchies, defended by nature from the invasion of
foreign Princes, save only in the Frontiers, as those Realms, which are
enclosed with unaccessible Mountains, or surrounded by the Ocean, yet in
Aristocraties, for preservation of that state in its first species, and
Kingdoms open to the incursions of neighboring Princes, they are not only
requisite for ornament, but the safety of the state, those defenses standing as
Bulwarks against the hostility of strangers, and sometimes stopping the course
of their designs, though the presidiary soldiers and inhabitants be
unprepared at their first approach to resist them till both may arm, and make
head against the violence of the assaylants; yet require the art and industry
of men to manage them, being otherwise easily assaylable.

Prospera prudenter: A discreet moderation is as necessary in the smiles, as
the frowns of fortune: to endure the last with a well governed patience, is the
way to vanquish her: and to abide secure in confidence of perpetual good
success, is not seldom the cause of utter loss, often of jeopardy. The happy
event of the Prince of Orange his travels before Breda, had filled the hearts
of the people under the Government of the united States, with joy; and the
Catholic Kings Allies with emulation; The loss of so important a place, was
not easilier digested, and the Spanish men of war, expected an opportunity,
to recover some thing which being added to their late prizes of Venloe and
Ruremund, might counterpoyse the loss at Breda; October. 16.26, was the day,
which presented the occasion which was undertaken prudently, prosecuted
valiantly, and might have ended gloriously, had not the Epimethean wits of the
Statish Garrison been better then their Promethean. It was then a day of
jollity at Rhinberck, An Anslaught upon Rhineberck.
(a little but strong piece in the Frontiers of Gelderland) for joy of the
Prince his late atchievment: the bonfires made the night seem as glorious as
day, the great Ordnance thundered out a Proclamation of triumphant victory, the
soldiers and inhabitants kept Revels and feasting, and as if there had been no
enemy near them, and after their feeding, lay down to sleep. The Spanish
Garrisons of Guelders, Gennep, Ruremund, Venlo, and other places upon the Maze,
conjecturing what the issue of that days froliking might be, mustered up 1500
men, and armed with Petards and such like instruments, marched up thither-ward
to surprise the City.

Each circumstance answered their hopes for execution of the Enterprise;
Undertaken upon good grounds.
the Lord of Wynbergen was the person to whose care the custody and government
of the Town was deputed. He was then absent from his charge, and his absence
was no small encouragement to the undertakers: Common men will assume more
liberty, when their prime Commander is away, then they dare think of while he
is with them: The darkness of the night concealed their approches, and the loud
reports of the Canon, and outstretched shouts of the people, their actions. An
artificial bridge, was laid over one part of the outward Moat, and a pile of
brush-wood and bul-rushes dammed up another; the Canons were ready to play, and
the enemy to enter, yet nothing was suspected, much less perceived by the
Garrison and inhabitants. How happy a presage was this of their wished end?
their counsels hitherto found no reluctance, in a still silence they stood
armed to give the assault, till the triumphs being past, and as still a silence
in the Town, as was observed in the Army, gave the assaylants some evidence,
that then was their time for action. The word was given, Is prosecuted
valiantly.
and each man conformed himself to an active obedience. The assault was made
with such violence, that one of the gates, which was made only for the ingresse
and egresse of friends, was thereby become under the command of the enemies.
Here only was the rub which stayed the race of their conquest, the drawbridge
was up, and that being wanting stopped them in their full carreer. But it only
hindered their speed, and could not divert the resolved Spaniards from
prosecution of this (thus far fortunate) beginning. True valor is not
heartlesse upon each disadvantage, and a right soldier accounts it his honor
to encounter with difficulties.

Though the way was thus hedged up, yet on they went, but not with such speed
as they intended, nor with that happiness, which their hopes had promised. The
assault was discovered then by a Sentinel, whose fear made the danger greater
then it was, his throat proclayming the state of the Town to be past danger, as
already in the absolute power of the Enemy. The Citizens stood like amazed men,
and were ready to buy their lives, with the voluntary surrendry of their goods
to the victor; only the Lieutenant Governors heart fainted not, he made good
use of the little breathing time, the yawne of the bridge had given him, beat
up the Alarm, drew up his Companies together, and wisely ordering his half
distracted men, who by his example took fresh courage, fell upon the Enemy with
an impetuous violence, when having scaled the walls, he ganto cry victoria.

The end crowns the work: And disappointed happily.
had the conclusion bin answerable to the premises, the Governor of Gelders,
the principal adventurer in this expedition had got much more profit, by the
Catastrophe then glory by his well advised Enterprise. Wesell had bin blocked
up, though no Enemy appeared in the field; the Spanish Garrisons had incircled
it, nor could it have received relief from the States conveniently. The valor
and vigilance of the Lieutenant Governor prevented al with his new awaked men,
he made an assault upon the over-watched adversary; who neither prepared
perfectly to defend himself, nor offend the Garrison (some of his men being
upon the wall, and rather seeking the way down into the City, to endamage the
defendants, then tosecure themselves, others got over the Moat, and more
expecting the assistance of their companions and friends then affronts of their
foes) and in conclusion, with the loss of his own life, and 60 of his men,
repulsed the besieger with the slaughter of some hundreds of his men, and many
prisoners leaving the name of Wike (so was he called) more glorious after his
death then it was in his life by dying victoriously.

Yet nor his valor nor fate was all, to which the Town was obliged, for this
deliverance. Some other accidents intercided, which forwarded, if not perfected
it. The Spanish Canon was not good, two old Pieces were planted to scour the
streets, when the Gate was laid open, and those (crasie things) upon the first
discharging, fell on pieces: and then, the noise of the Guns within the Town
being heard at Wesell, not above four English miles thence distant, some
companies were sent out with 3 Drums, to assist their confederates which
according to direction beating the marches of 3 several Nations disheartented
the Spaniards from presuming too far, as not knowing what Enemy might be
behind them, and so caused them to leave their weapons, to save their persons,
their Petards, Grenades, Pikes, Halberts, Harquebusses, of crocks, and other
military instruments, being thus made a prey to the victorious Hollander.

Stratagems in war are like goodly houses in eminent Cities, one is but the
model of another. This design of the Spanish garrisons was the pattern of the
like to the Statists of Mastricht, against the little city of Hanuyit, which
was undertaken as advisedly as the other, and ended more happily, though not
prosecuted so eagerly.

Their intentions were different, as their issues: these last adventurers had
no design upon the place, which desired neutrality, but upon four companies of
Spanish foot and horse, which were thrust upon the city as Presidiaries, whom
the duke of Bovillon intended to surprise by onslaught, and to restore the city
to its ancient liberty. To this purpose the fifth of November new style,
Surprised at Hanuit.
withal the Cavallery, and some fire-lockes drawn of each company in the
garrison, nine out of each companies, under two Captains, three lievtenants
and three ensigns, armed with petards and hand grenades, he marched about
eight at night toward the city, which lies in little Brabant upon the
frontiers of the Bishop of Liege, and arrived there the next morning before
day. His approach was suspected by the sentinel, but not known perfectly: the
Watchman heard a noise, and called his Corporal, who coming from the Corpse
dugard, and listening a while in vain for a better information, (the army upon
the sentinels word keeping strict silence) returned, checking the scout for his
vain fear, which he concluded to have troubled his fancy with an ungrounded
suspicion of an approaching enemy. Facile credimus quod volumus, Men's
understandings are often fooled by their corruptible appetite; which presenting
things to the sense otherwise than they are, deludeth the reason, and by a
false conception produces a Phrygian Monster, too late repentance. The
departure and security of the corporal was not hid from the camp, which
presently scaled the walls, opened the gates, fell upon the weak corpse du
guard, of which they slew some, and took others prisoners, to the great
amasement of the soldiers, who for their safety, with Priests ran into the
churchyard, church and steeple. The church and hallowed ground about it
prooved a fanctuary to those which had retired thither, they desired quarter
and had it. But the steeple could not secure them within, the Priests unwilling
to yield, jangled the bells as in a common combustion, hoping by that means to
call in some of their neighboring allies to their succor, and not depend upon
their enemies mercy. But whilst they thus flatter themselves with help from
abroad, death attends them from within, ten barrels of gunpouder placed in the
tower as in a storehouse (whether casually or otherwise it is uncertain)
taking fire, and blowing up the priests and seventy others, which were fled
thither with them.

The next day the duke returned to Mastricht, waited upon by an hundred and
eighty soldiers prisoners, two and forty horses and their equipage, one
Ancient, one cornet, and only one Ensign, the rest being burned and lost, but
without any pillage from the citisens, having commanded his soldiers by
proclamation, that they should re-deliver all they had taken from the
inhabitants, into the hands of the auditor, to be restored to the right owners,
which they did accordingly, and the auditor performed it faithfully.

News of the good success of the States designs had in Brasil, were brought
about the same time into the Netherlands, the sum whereof was this, That the
Hollanders got ground daily there, ever since the time that the Spaniard with
twenty five soldiers having passed the river S. Francisco, had taken some
Hollanders prisoners, upon whom they set so high a ransom, that each common
man was valued at three hundred gilders, and each Captain at a thousand.

That they expected every day a good account from those nine men of War, the
Amersfort, the Neptune, the golden Sun, the Rotterdam, the Gray Wife, the
Pinnace Sperrhewer, the Pinnace Fernambucke, Endract, and the Halfe-Moon, which
they had sent with eight hundred soldiers under the command of Kein the
Captain of the Guard, and four hundred mariners under Captain John Wendel,
against the castle of Mine, with assurance that they had taken it.

That the ship called the Wesell, sailing toward the West Indies, about twenty
one degrees of Northern latitude had taken a Spanish-vessel laden with two
hundred and forty chests of sugar, and sent it to Pariba. That the Crescent had
brought from Guinee a hundred seventy eight Negroes, which were sold for
258000 Ryals of eight, that is, each man at one hundred and ten French Crowns,
a price set upon them for their service in the sugar Mills, wherein they expect
not any other worth, that being the staple trade of the country. That their
ordinary traffic was highly improved, both in general by the way of policy,
their Ferries, weights, and Offices, being set at an high rate: and in
particular, a strange increase of trade. All which jointly were no small
encouragement to the Commons: but that which rejoiced them most, was to be eye
witnesses of a prize taken by their sea Captain Cornelius Cornelison Ioll, who
the very day that these novels were brought to the States, brought into the
Texel fifteen thousand pounds sterling, taken from the silver fleet; and left
his confederate Captain Abraham Michael Rosendale tugging for another, of
whose success he gave them some probable evidence.

-- Pax una triumphis
Innumeris potior: --
Half a loaf with quiet is better than a table stuffed with variety of
dishes, where Ate sits as mistress of the feast, and brawles bring up the
services. The people took some pleasure in hearing of their success abroad,
by the means of their soldiery: yet were more inquisitive after some nearer
negotiation at home: a treaty (as it was supposed of peace) begun at Rosendale,
betwixt the Deputies of the Cardinal Infant and the Prince of Orange. But the
end answered not their expectation, the Treaty ended only in concluding a set
rate upon the ransom generally of prisoners taken in the Betwe and Velew,
namely at a months pay for a man, according to their several states, and
particularly of the Governor of Geldres, who was taken at his last design
upon Rhinberg, and so after two months deliberation, the parley ended, and the
deputies returned home.

Winter now grew on, and the armies not able to keep the field were designed
to their garrisons and Winter quarters; the States soldiers being lodged in
Breda, S. Hertogenbosch, Berghen-up-Zoom, Graves, Nimeghen, and the frontiers
of Brabant, to preserve the inward parts of that Aristocracy from invasion by
the Cardinal Infants forces. And those Spanish troops which were mustered up
about Antwerp, Liar, and Mechlen, were garrisoned in the frontiers of Artois,
Flanders and Henault, where we will leave them. Only Piccolomini found some
trouble before he could dispose his army for Winter. The diocese of Liege was
first appointed for his residence. But the Luicklanders, who would not
entertain him, stood upon their guard, and kept him out, and in the end
Gulick-land was forced to receive him, where how welcome he was may be
collected no less by the opposition made by the duke of Neuburg against him,
who first sent his Agent to treat with him, and to persuade him (if his
oratorie could prevail so much) to remove the Sceance of his forces, and to
lay it elsewhere: and this course not prevailing, assisted by the States of
Berck and Gulicke, fortified Mulheim both by water and land, lest the Italian
Count should attempt to enforce it. Then by the flight of the Natives and
inhabitants of Sittert, Susteren and other places of that dukedom, from their
dwellings, upon the news of his coming. And with what difficulty he got his
admittance might be gathered by his letters sent to the Lords States of the
United-Provinces, desiring them not to oppose his neighboring sojournment, as
suspecting him for an enemy to their government, but to repute him as a
Neutrall, that Imperial army over which he then commanded never being brought
or employed against them, but to the aid of the Spanish Cardinal against the
Christian King. Yet he prevailed with the States for Neutrality, by the
frequent negotiations of his Agents, and with the duke of Newburg by his power,
and about the beginning of December, his whole forces consisting of seven
regiments of horse, and as many foot, though not half full, were brought and
billeted in the Bercke, Gulicke, and Cleveland, under the commands of the
Sergeant Major General Lamboy, and the Baron of Suys, whilst he in person
went to Cologne to refresh himself, and to consult with the Elector there,
about preparations against the Spring.

It little availes to stuff a City with numbers of men, if they have not the
hearts to resist a daring enemy. An handful of soldiers armed with resolution
will do more than a timorous multitude. Mulheim was sufficiently provided for
by the care of the Duke, who to secure the city laid in an accrewt of 500 men;
but exposed to the pillage of the Imperialists, by the remiss cowardice of
those to whom the keeping thereof was committed, who yielded upon the first
sight of the Roman Eagles, and had the reward of their falsehood and cowardice,
being stripped stark naked and expelled by the Caesareans, who immediately
began to plunder the city, and had utterly spoiled the Inhabitants, had not the
General Major Lamboy expressly forbidden them to go on so roughly against
that people to whom they came for succor in extremity, without any commission
to use them as enemies.

Santen a smaller City, and not so strongly guarded, stood upon its liberty and
maintained it. The Presidiaries there were fewer in number than those at
Mulheim, yet of more valor and better fortune; they punctually denied to admit
any part of the Caesarean army to be billited there: and when Piccolomini would
have forced them to it, they took up their arms, stood upon their defense, and
twice repelling those troops which came to compel them, made them seek their
winter station elsewhere: and here the Polemicke occurrences betwixt the Prince
Cardinal of Spain, and the States of the United Provinces and Allies have
their period. Only about Artois and Henault something was done betwixt the
cardinal of France and Infant of Spain, the Duke de Candale surprising the
little city of Semay, three leagues from Avennes, November the nineteenth or
twenty ninth; and the Infant recovering it soon after, as also Beaumont, which
in the Summer had bin taken by the French Forces, but was now regained by the
Spaniard in Winter.

Policy was now the object of all their studies, preparation for war, reforming
the regiments, execution of justice, and other attendants of a peaceable state,
as marriages and triumphs, the cold breath of Winter giving some time of respit
from military actions and a short resemblance of quiet. The Prince of Orange to
settle himself in a sure possession of Breda, more fearing the practice of
intestine then foreign enemies first commanded all those of the Roman
Religion to depart the City, and the order not prevailing, soon after effected
it upon this occasion, November. 15, The Romanists banished from Breda.
25 (being Saint Katherines day) the Romanists which lurked in the City
undiscovered intended a Mass in the Cloister of the Capuchines, assembled
together, and for fear of apprehension in the very act, barricadoed the doors,
shut up all the windows and so fell to the service. Their Counsel, and their
act were both discovered to the Governor and Sheriff of the place, who, in
that nick of time, commanded a party of the Garrison to attend them, marched to
the Cloister, forced open the doors and windows, laid hands upon the Priest
that sung Mass, and by him discovering the rest of that Religion, which lay
secretly there, banished both him and them immediately.

The Liegois, though of the same profession with the Elector of Collen, yet
rather affected the Christian King, then him; and upon pretense of their
liberty, and revenge of the death of their late affected Governor Ruelle,
published a Placard, December 7 17, against certain spiritual, and civil
persons, whom they suspected more to adhere to the Elector of Collen, then
their State, the tenor whereof is as follows.

Upon the proofs given in Court of the number of the late Magistrate of this
City, and about the seditions, conspiracies, sieges, blocking up, and other
violent attempts against this City, Some persons proscribed by the Liegois.
and Territory; the Counsel has condemned and judged as Traitors and Enemies
to their native Country, the Lord de Iehen, de la Capelle, Godfrey de Bocholt,
Horion de Heel, the Burgomaster, Rausin, the Sheriffs Dormael, and Zorne,
Lambert Tournaco, Anthony de Marets, Ernest de Marets, John de Henneff, Francis
Bertrand the Major of Hoy, Kelenis the Quartermaster, the Baron of
Hollinghoven, the Lord Chancellor Blocquerie, Chockler and Process both Canons
of the Church of Saint Lambert, and Doctor Dawuns Pastor of the 11000 Virgins;
Promising: that if any of those condemned persons, can deliver his fellow, or
any one of them, though he were one of those who had a hand in the murder of
the Burgomaster la Ruelle, he shall have besides his particular pardon 200 A
Patacoon is a Royal of eighth, four shillings sterling.
Patacoones for his guerdon: and if any of the Citizens can apprehend or kill
any of the lay proscribed men he shall have 300 Patacoones; but, who ever can
bring in one of the Spiritual persons, he shall have 500 Patacoons, and
whosoever can deliver up John de Werth, or bring an authentike attestation that
he has killed him, shall have for his recompense 1000 Patacoons: withal,
prohibiting all and each person, to support, mayntain, or lodge any of these
proscribed men, upon pain of suffering the same punishment, which is sentenced
upon them. Subscribed H. le Clercy.

Thus they expressed their love to the memory of their late Magistrate, but
their care in preserving their franchises more. The name of a deceased Patriot
yields a sweet odor to the survivors, but stands in no equipage with the love
that is justly challenged from every Citizen by the Commonwealth. The Liegers
declared both, though in a different measure, according to their several
objects. Ruelle was reverenced for his care in preserving the public state;
the state, for it self, and the public good of the Denisons. The Placard was
proclaimed instantly, and two Prebends of Saint Lambert were presently
dispatched to Hoy (a City upon the Maze 28 English miles West, and by South
from Liege) with authority to command the Governor there, to surrender up the
place, into the hands of the Liegers; who without deliberation returned first,
The Liegois require the Governor of Hoy to submit and come in.
this doubtful answer, that he would first be paid 25000 Gilders, which he was
out of purse, for maintenance of the Castle and Garrison; and then a
Categoricall denial of the proposition, adding that he was bound by oath to
hold it for the Elector of Collen, and with that answer dismissed them.

All this was done by word of mouth; another course was followed, advised, and
concluded of by the Governor, the Senate, and the Counsel of War December. 17
27, and that was by way of retaliation to return Placard for Placard, and
proscription, for proscription; the Governor of Hoy, or Huy, being declared
guilty of treason by the Leigois, the tenor whereof runs thus.

The Senate, and Counsel of War at Huy, who have taken a solemn Oath, to
live and die in the Neutrality, which hitherto they have happily mayntained,
cannot but wonder at the barbarous proceedings of the Senate, and Counsel of
War at Liege, The Senate of Hoy return their answer, and proscribe the
Liegois.
held there December the 7, 17. without authority, or reason, and concluded
merely out of passion against all Humane and Divine Laws, the fundamental
Statutes of the Diocese, and against the peace and power of Caesar, and the
Archbishop Elector of Collen, to whom they owe obedience: not only by
dishonouring the present Governor with the false imputation of treason against
his Country; but also by tyrannizing over the consciences of their Christian
brethren, by continuing their inhumane, and cursed bloud-shedding, and exposing
the life of the now Commander at Hoy, to sale for the prize of 300 Patacons:
And now because, that neither the Law of Nature, nor Nations can give any
security for the proscribed persons: it is resolved to proceed against them by
way of Retorsion. Wherefore after a solemn protestation before the whole World,
of their unwillingnesse to take this course, if any other means for their
safety might happily be devised; they, the Governor, Senate, and Counsel of
War at Hoy, judge likewise all Colonels, Captains, Lievtenants, Ancients, and
others of the Counsel of War, at Liege apprehensible, and guilty of treason;
and promised 200 Patacons for each of those Colonels, 150 for each of those
Captains, and 100 for each of the rest so apprehended, and brought in either
alive or dead: Reserving withal all other Retorsions for our use, if the
Counsel of Liege do prosecute their late Placard, or invent any new one,
pronouncing all those which shall lodge, or receive any of the forementioned,
and condemned men liable to the sentence pronounced against them: and
admonishing all good Patriots, and welwishers to their Native Country; to
continue faithful to their Prince. Subscribed

By order of the Counsel of War at Hoy and a little lower.

Le Recht Secretary.

Thus the Condrusii Agrippinenses or Luicklanders were divided; but the
capital City, which should give the law to all the rest, and the major part of
the Province held out for the Christian King, levied forces for his Majesty,
supplied them with arms, The order taken by the Liegois to defend their Country
against the Spaniards.
and necessaries; and the King again to confirm his amity with them,
understanding the distraction of their state, by his Agent Ian: 30 old style,
and letters signed by himself, offered the forces which were levied there for
him, to their service, promising to assist them with more if need required it,
and to pay them out of his own Exchequer. It was a gracious offer, and worthy
of so Royal a King; but the Liegeois were not so distressed, they provided
sufficiently for their own safety both by a Martial and Politic way; Daniell
de Rive a valiant, and experienced Soldier was made General over 4000 men,
whom they armed against all such as they imagined would offer to infringe their
liberties: and he performed his charge so well, by keeping a careful, and
strong watch in the Country, and Hesbay, that he secured them from the private
practices of the Malcontents, and public injuries, which might otherwise have
been put upon by their professed Enemies: One thing still remained, which was
to take order for the common Magazine of victuals, that the Natives might not
want bread, and that the Chapter of Liege, which pretends a dominion over the
whole Province, provided for, by an Edict, dated January 17, 27, commanding all
the Boors to thresh out their corn, and to bring it to the capital City, where
it should be laid up in the public Granary, and be delivered out at a certain
rate for the use of the people. And this order took so good effect, that the
peasants reserving only so much as was necessary for their own use, brought
the remaynder to the public storehouse; whence, the seller was supplied with
money, and the buyer with bread for his family.

The Cardinal Infant at Bruxels, though not then employed in Acts of war,
was busy in preparing for it against the spring: and because men and money are
principally required for such expeditions, The Cardinal Infantae's preparation
for war.
he sent to his brother the Catholic King for both; the King answered his
desire, and in a Fleet of 32 sails of shipping sent him 45 tuns of gold (if
the figures deceive me not) and 4000 fresh soldiers, all which arrived
successefully at Dunkerke, about the midst of December where the gold is to be
coined, save one Frigate laden with Salt, which straggling from the Fleet, fell
into the hands of Swartk, a Statish man of War, who surprised it, and brought
it into Zeland, December. 7, 17.

Occurrences in the Netherlands.
CHAP. II.
THe new year came in with a new dress. A Tournament intended at the Hage, at
the marriage of the Coun^^^^e of Solmes.
The rough habit of war was put off for a season, and a solemn Tournament more
usual in peace then in War was performed at the Hage, by some noble personages
designed thereunto. The occasion was this Monsieur de Brederode, General of the
States Artillery a man of so noble a house that the old Marquess Spinola
accounted him the only Gentleman in the United Provinces, was to marry with
Madamoselle the Countess of Solmes sister to the Princess of Orange. And to
honor these Nuptials, the gallantry of the Batavian Court to show themselves
not mere Courtiers but Soldiers, also did not content themselves with bare
Revels, but resolved to run at the Ring. And the Bride again to gratify them,
designed a rich jewel for him that could oftenest take it in three courses. To
make the action bear some form with the bravery of old times, they divided
themselves into parties, one whereof stood as challengers, and the rest as
defendants. The Cavalliers divide themselves into parties.
The Challengers were five Batavian Knights, who under the disguised names of
Bator, Classicus, Arminius, Civilis, and Mandrubace, being indeed Monsieur de
Bredode the Bridegroom, the Vicount de Manshaw, Monsieur de Verneul a Major of
Horse, the Baron de Vaustar, and Monsieur de Chart, published first a general
challenge in these words.

The Batavian Knights having for 3 years space given notice by their Heralds,
Five Batavians send out the Challenge.
whom they have sent abroad to that end, to all the Knights of the World that
Feb. 6, 16. 1638, they would keep an open Camp at the Hage in Holland, their
ordinary Randesvouz, where every Knight that would return an answer to their
Challenge might safely enter and try with them at 3 courses with the Lance or
sharp Sword, or what other arms they pleased with assurance that he got the
victory, might safely carry away the prize that the Ladies of the Court had
designed to him which could win it: Now finding that the renown of their
valor known through all the World, has struck a terror into the hearts of
those that would oppose them, to the end that the Ladies might no longer expect
the event they have agreed that 3 courses at the Ring, shall suffice, to give a
testimony of their valor: though if any be so rashly hardy as to adventure
further they will fight to the last, assuring them that they cannot find a more
glorious Tomb. And ten days afterward a more special Challenge in these words.

The valor, wisdom, and admirable discipline of the Prince that commands the
Batavian Knights, having hitherto made them invincible, there being no part of
the earth which the Sun looks upon, which has not felt some effects of their
prowess, protects them from any accusation of presumption or temerity in that
resolution which they have taken to fight hand to hand against all Cavalliers
which dare say that there are any Ladies more worthy to be adored then those
that beautify this Court, and that they can find any more fair and virtuous
then these whom we reverence: And to make this truth the more known, they
attend with more then impatience the coming of those which rather out of
passion then truth dare speak otherwise that by their Arms always just and
victorious, they may make it known that it is as easy for them to vanquish as
to adventure: Given at the Hage, Feb. 6, 16. 1638.

The defendants divided themselves into several parties. First, six
Mauritanian Knights appearing under that title and the feigned names of
Almansor, Tindarache, Abdelmelec, Zelmander, Abindarae, and Algazair, being
indeed the Prince Elector Palatine, his brother Prince Robert Duke of
Deuxsport, the Rhinegrave, Monsieur de Vpdam, Monsieur de Berringham, and Sir
Thomas Billingsley returned this answer.

The Mauritanian Knights to the Batavian, etc. And are answered 1 by 6
Mauritanians.
Know ye that in a Land where your Acts are not known, the news of your
strange adventure is arrived, and your vanity has made you known where your
valor durst never appear. And we are come at the day and place appointed being
ready to punish your temerity. We who are descended from those whose lesser
exploits have gained the title from the blood of the Nation of Rodamot: and in
the same Camp which you have opened, your glory shall find a Tomb and ours a
Crown. But seeing that the Ladies desire no bloody testimony of your fidelity
we will content our selves with the victory of three courses at the Ring, where
our activity shall make them know that there is but one thing wanting for their
perfections, to wit, our valor to maintain them. And because we admire the
courage and merits of your invincible Prince, we shall make it appear to him,
that there is neither force, valor, nor martial skill in the World, more fit
or worthy to expedite his designs then that of Almansor, etc.

The next party of defendants were five presenting Teuton Knights under the
names of Nasva, Cingentorix, Induciomar, Cimber, and Arovistas, which were
Count William of Nassaw brother to the Governor of Freezland, Resoar a Captain
of Horse, Du Mey Hauten, and Marquet who thus replied to the Batavians Cartell.

The Teuton Knights to the Batavians, by the five Tentons.
etc. It being made known by Proclamation to all Nations that in the Court of
Holland in view of the most excellent Prince all Knights desirous of glory are
met to contend for the prize designed by the Ladies to him that shall appear
most valiant and active: we who have bin trained in the bloody feats of War,
and for our worthy Exploits deserve to be registered in the Temple of Memory,
with the merited surname of victorious; present our selves in equipage to
answer the conditions of your Cartell with such valor as the Prince shall
approve to be more temerity for you to contend with us for this prize, then
shame for us to refuse, and that to your confusion the Ladies shall avow that we
so far surpass you in loyalty and activity, that you shall be forced to do
homage to our valor, and shall have only this comfort that you are vanquished
by the best Knights of the Earth.

The next was a party personating Knights of Rome under the names of Servius,
Sabinus, Voranius, and Vitellius, but truly Count Henry of Nassaw, by the
Knights of Rome.
the Count de Waldike, Chevalier de Vaustar, and de Loge, who thus replied.

The Roman Knights to the Batavians. Batavian Knights, The honorable
Tournament which you have proclaimed to mayntain the beauty of the Ladies whom
ye love, shall be the field where we will triumph in the titles of activity and
valor which you usurp unjustly, and claim from all others. The merits of her
whom we adore shall serve to increase our courages, and her graces enforce your
Ladies to submit to her. We are come from the heart of Italy to make it appear
that as there is no valor under Heaven equal to ours, nor beauty comparable
to that of our Goddesses. All those proud Escripts which publish your
presumption cannot divert us from combating with you with our Lance in rest
and sword in hand to the utmost in a listed field as you dare. To this end the
Mars of Princes (having always known us to be victorious Cavalliers) our
Dictator who has prooved us valiant Legionaries, condemns your temerity in
daring to defy us, and pronounces that as the Romans have by their sword got
the universal Monarchy, so there is no activity, prowess, or valor, which
must not give place to that of Servius, etc.

The next was a single man who presented himself under the title of the Knight
of the Tears, by the Knight of the Tears.
and was Monsieur de Maurier a Gentleman serving the Prince of Orange, who in
some sad Stanzaes having expressed his grief to the Knights defendants, his
Highness and the Princess of Orange thus replied.

The Knight of the Tears forsaken of Love and Fortune, despairing to be
regarded by the one who has hood-winked her self from seeing him, and not to
be discovered by the other, because she has turned her back toward him: is
resolved to show his courage where he is persuaded to find most resistance,
either to terminate so miserable a life as his own, or to continue it with
honor: and knowing that there is not a place where prowess and valor are so
common as in this Country where (by the magnanimity of the Prince) the
miracles thereof are ordinary; is transported hither where he believes he shall
find the strongest opposition, and by consequent ought to obtain the more
glory. The Heavens suddenly cleared at his arrival in the presence of such a
grand Hero, and in the view of such glorious Princesses which troubled with
compassion of his miseries will suffer him either to perish gloriously or
triumph bravely upon his destiny, and his ill aboding stars. This is that which
has moved him to oppose these gallants, who vaunt that they will humble the
best Knights of the world, and to be victorious over all the Sun shines on. His
actions shall falsify their words, and make it appear to all whom either
curiosity or valor has drawn hither that the Challengers (unworthy of their
Master and their Ladies) rather deserve for their vanity of the assaylant then
the felicity they now enjoy. He will enter into the List where his enemy has
promised him a crown by bringing him to the place where he may gain it being
resolved to maintain that the beauty of his Lady is beyond compare, and that
the cause of his affliction is more just then that of their joy.

The last party was made up by Monsieur Reverwerd, the Count de Horn, the
Baron de Pontasier, Monomaker de Fosse, and Moir who presented themselves in
the habit of Chimicks or Mountebanks under the names of Faustus, Mondor, Don
Ferrand de Matamorbe a Gentleman of Sivill, Macollo, and Braguets, who to
conceal themselves first put out this Bill.

There are arrived in the City five Doctors, the most experimented in the
World, who thorough all the Country where they passed formerly have chased
Death before them, and fortified the seat of health. The diseases they will
cure are done ordinarily by them, though they be extraordinary in their own
natures. You shall see here a little Catalogue, and as it were a scrowle of all
the miracles they can do: Their medicines are beyond price, and this City is
not able to pay for the effects of their knowledge; nevertheless not regarding
their worth for your love they have set such a price upon them as you may reach
unto, and will ask no money of the sick till they be perfectly recovered. Come
Lords and Ladies to our houses, and lose no occasion. Knowing that health
cannot be recovered without pain.

1 The dropsy of the spirit otherwise called vanity, we will easily cure with
the powder of knowledge, of which we have brought good store, knowing that
this Country is subject to that malady.

2 We cure the Melancholy with a yellow ointment, which is neither of our
composition nor invention, and which is worst, we have but little of it left.

3 We cannot radically cure the malady of love, but we have excellent
Anodynes to assuage the pain thereof.

4 Lunaticks, Mad men, and Hypocondriakes we cure by putting their brains in
our Alembikes, and reposing them afterward in their proper place, with a
little of our Balm, and so they suddenly recover their senses.

5 For the Vertigo or swimming of the head we have no other ceremony than to
open the Cranium, that so those evil vapors may breath out; and after by
sprinkling it with the water of Patience, the malady is easily cured.

6 The women which complain of their husbands disability, must attend us at
home, for though our common remedies should not profit them they not return
from us unsatisfied.

7 Such as desire to have children may easily obtain them, if they will use
our Balm, which is excellent and easy.

8 Against the failing of the heart our water of The word is an aequivocum, and
signifies Cash, Money, or Cossi^.
Casse does miraculously.

9 If the diseases of the eyes proceed from envy (as according to Avicen an
infinite number of them do) we can make an excellent Collyrie of Crocus
martis, which will work readily and rarely.

10 We have an excellent Balm against that pinching evil, which the ancient
Masters of our Art, Theophrastus Paracelsus, Rabbi Elemi, and others call want
of money; but it is very dangerous to practice it, and more dangerous to
produce it, and therefore we conceal it, and that the rather, because we judge
by all appearances, that because this secret or a better is not known in this
Country, the Natives are more hardy and industrious.

11 We have also brought with us a Balm, with which the physicians of Rome
long since would have cured Lucrece, if she would have permitted them: but we
think we shall make little use of it in this country, because it is said
that the Damsels here are so loving and willing, that they have long since
banished all force and violence.

Thus these Gallants alluding to the windy promises of Mountebanks, first
discovered themselves, and afterward sent out this answer to the challenge of
the Batavian Knights.

We are they which call black life, and who by the knowledge of the best
secrets of nature, The Chemists reply to the Bataviant challenge.
renew youth, and restore that strength which age might or has abated. As to
such, the list which in this public festivity is open to all the Knights in
the world, might have been justly kept shut: and truly if we had no other
quality than that of Chemists, the Heralds ought not to admit us in till the
end of the combat, to cure their wounded men. But we are men of a more
glorious condition, the fire of Love, more forcible than that of the Chymicall
furnace, has transformed us into other men, and by the view of the greatest
goddess on the earth we are become Cavalliers. This Metamorphosis has caused
us not to endure that challenge which was penned by vanity, and published by
temerity; the contents whereof are, That there are Suns in the world more
illustrious than that which shines upon us. We therefore demand to have the
list opened, that we may make these Batavians know, that our practice of
keeping others in life, has not deprived us of that skill that may acquire us
the honor and glory of this Tournament. And as the world does already judge of
our rare skill by the events, so our will is also that you Knights may deem of
our valor by our victory intending nothing else then a confession from your
own mouths, that the Ladies whom you reverence equal not her whom we adore:
or if perhaps she be set in that circle of beauties you shall avow that she
alone is worthy of adoration, that your selves are unworthy to love her, and
unfit to serve her both those Offices properly appertayning to us.

All these were the Proscaenia to the ensuing gallantry. The entry of the
challengers
Nor were the Challenge and several Answers written more wittily then the
Action was expressed with bravery. The day came and their entry into the List
was in this manner. First came the Challengers, their Marshall de Camp before
them attended with six Laqueyes in Carnation and Blue, 15 Trumpeters with their
Cassocks and Banderols of the same colors laced over with silver lace: After
them ten footmen in the same Livery with five lead horses, every two leading a
horse between them: Then five Pages on horsbacke and five Esquires, the Pages
carrying the Bucklers and Impresses, and the Esquires the Lances of the
Knights, who followed immediately in a triumphant Chariot drawn by six Lions
(the Arms of the house of Brederode) attended with ten Lacquies more, and
another Chariot (drawn by six white Unicorns, and followed by ten Hawboyes and
Sackbots on foot with long Cassocks of the same Livery with the rest) wherein
were Slaves and Music both Lutes and Violins. Their devices were these. Their
devices.
For Monsieur de Brederode a Cipher of his Mistress name and his own upon a
silver Shield, and the word in Spanish, Antes muerto que mudado. For Monsieur
de Verneul. A Heart wounded by the flames coming from two eyes, and the word in
Spanish Chiero lo che me quema. For Monsieur de Chant, A Heart with a Crescent
in it, and the word in French, Pourtant tou iours le mesme. For Monsieur le
Baron de Vaustar, A Crocodile with a Dart in his mouth, and these words about
it in the learned language, Mahal fyr algit Nabuth. For Monsieur le Viscount de
Manshaw. Two hands joined with sprigs of Laurel and Myrtle in them, and the
word in Latin, Ex fide gloria surgit.

Next to them entered the first party Defendants that personated the Mauritanian
Knights in this equipage, The entry of the Mauritanian Knights.
First, Sir James Sandelane their Field-martiall Colonel of a Scottish
Regiment of Horse, and six footmen with Bows, Arrows, Shields, and Flatcaps,
clad all in a striped Scottish stuff like Highlanders. After him a Moore on
horsback beating the Kettle-drum, then 18 Trumpets, then 12 Hawboys on foot,
then 8 Pages two a piece for the Princes, and one a piece for the others, who
carried the Shields, and six Esquires who carried the Knights Lances. After
these came the six Knights with 3 Lacquies a piece by them, and 12 Lacquies
following leading a horse between every 2, after these a troup of Lanciers all
upon white horses with snaffles and little saddles al' Angloise. The Knights
themselves were all with gold or silver Turbants on their heads, Cassocks of
the same that came down to their knees, and underneath a Pantaloon of black.
At the wrists, neck, and ears great store of pearl, and their Cassocks
fastened before with pearl or diamond buttons, and both they and their train
with their faces painted black. All their train were in black Pantaloones, to
make them seem as naked Moors, with a little apron of cloth of gold or silver
to hide their privities, and all with Cimeters by their sides. The Knights
devises were these. For the Prince Elector a plain sable Shield, with this
Latin Motto in a Scedule appendant: Maculas non contrahit ullas: and in his
Bendroll a Lion in a toil, with this word; Qua potero. For Prince Robert,
Their devices
a Sword and Spear and other Arms, with this French Inscription, Heritage de
Cadets. For the Rhinegrave an Oak with a branch struck off by thunder: with
this Latin Motto, Adhus Iovis Arbor. For Beringham a Sun in a black Shield,
the word in Spanish, Nada Ensusia ni Limpiessa. For Vpdam, a Sun and half
Moon, and a wheel betwixt them, with this Motto; Toll Imples, which was
proper and significant, he suing for the government of Huesdun, and a Whale
being the Arms of that City. For Sir Thomas Billinsley. A plain silver Shield
with only this written cross it, in Latin. Fatum inscribit Eliza.

Next to them entered the second party Defendants that petsonated the Teuton
Knights in this equipage (their Camp-marshall being Armanville; The entry of
the Teuton Knights.
brother to Monsieur de Beringham) They came all clad like one another in green
Velvet coats a la Polonish laid al over with gold lace, with five led horses,
15 Lacquies, 15 Trumpets, five Pages, five Esquires all in green and gold
Liveries accordingly; their Marshall de Camp being Armanville brother to
Monsieur de Beringham. The Knights devises were these. For Count William of
Nassaw, A Cupid with a Ring in one hand, and a Bow in the other. The word in
French, Lue et Lautre. For Monsieur Resoar, a Fortune with a Ring in her hand,
and a hand with a Lance in it taking the Ring. The word in French, En despit
d'elle. For Du Mey, A Heart pierced with six Darts all headed with C the first
letter of his Mistress name. The word in Latin, Sic sic juvat ire sub umbras.
For Monsieur de Hauten, An Eagle in the clouds amongst Thunder and Lightning,
with this Spanish Inscription, Ni matarmi, ni Spantarmi. For Monsieur de
Marquet, A Sun in eclipse, with this in French, I'en sortiray.

The four Roman Knights came in the next file; The entry of the Roman Knights.
their order was thus, Upon their Camp-marshall, Monsieur la Fountain were
attendant four Trumpets, two Drums, a Flute, four Pages, and four Esquires, all
on foot, and four Horses led by four footmen, clothed like the old Roman
Legionaries, then the four Knights, each with a Lacquay by him attired a la
Roman, and a man on horseback with a Standard bearing the Roman Eagles, and
these four letters S. P. Q. R. all which though they made up the smallest
number, and had the least train, were bravest in their assumed habits, no other
shape appearing so gorgeous on horsback as the old Roman dress. Their devises
were thus set forth. For Count Henry of Nassaw a green Palm with a stone upon
it, and this Latin Motto, Premitur non opprimitur. For the Count of Waldeck,
Their devices.
a Torch half extinguished; the word: Reddant suspiria flammas. For the
Chevalier de Vauslar, an Heart with Cupid upon one side, and Mars on the other,
the word Accendor utroque. For Monsieur de Loge: a Shield full of flames, the
word, Sursum movebor, donec extinguor.

Art was not wanting to set out this Gallantry; hitherto the spectatours were
ravished with such pleasure as might delight them; an object of sadness, though
accoutred in the best trim, the wits of that Nation could attire him, came in
next to qualify the excess of delight, The entry of the Knight, de Larmes.
which might arise from the former glorious spectaeles: The Knight de L'armes,
or tears himself, and retinew all in Sable, and black the evidence of a
grieved soul; his two Trumpets clothed in the Robes of sorrow, sounded a
Surdine, his two Pages, Esquire and two Footmen which led his horse, both by
their looks, gesture, and dress, seemed to have a feeling of his misery; and
himself to make the people better acquainted with his sorrows rode in a
Chariot, formed like a Tomb driven by Fortune, attended with six Lacquayes
habited like himself, and the rest of his train in black, with tears of
silver, which like the deaw upon the Marble, hovered in drops upon it. His
devise was: Four great tears in a sable Shield, the word in French, Mon
Soleif ou des Larmes: and in his Bandrolle, a Deaths head, with this
Inscription: Mon pis est Mon Mieux.

The conclusion was more comicall. Those pretended victorious enemies of Death
and his Harbingers, sickness and sorrow, entered the List in this rank. Their
Avantguard consisted of six Lacquies clothed in carnation and silver, and two
Pageants, one presenting Charons boat filled with passengers, among which were
Hippocrates and Galen, the two great Physicians, and the otherlike a Stage with
a Mountebank, and his man acting and selling drugs, and two Buffones
representing Don Quixote, and his Quire Sancho Pancha: the Rear consisting of
the Pages, Squires, Footmen, led horses, and six Knights, whose leader
Beavervard rode upon a Dromedary, all being clothed fantastically like
Mountebanks. Their devises were thus. For Monsieur de Beaverwert a Death with
this in French. Ie la done aux autres. For the Count of Horn. All instruments
of incision in his Shield. The word in Latin, Seco mel us, quam sano. For the
Baron de Pontasier, (who was dressed like a Don of Spain) an Alembick with this
word in Spanish, Alli dame el fuego d'Amor. For Monsieur Major, a hand catching
of Flies. The word in French, Bienheureux quien echappe. For Monsieur
Monomaker. A Fortune presenting a cup. The word in Spanish, Non ti sidur. For
Monsieur de Fosse, A hand holding out a bowl of wine. The word in Latin,
Bacchica pocula praestant.

This was the preparation, their action and fortunes followed thus. The
Challengers and the others repaired to one end of the List, to make their
course successively according to the order which they observed at their entry.
The issue of the Tournament.
All confusion was avoided, every man had his three courses, but the prize of
that day was carried away by de Lege, whose fortune was more assisting to him
then his art: though he was not unskilful in managing his horse and lance. A
Sunshine day never seems long, the inhabitants near the Pole, are said to
express some grief, when their long day of almost three months continuance is
buried in its first short darkness, and that this gallantry so full of delight
might not be too soon finished, the most excellent Princess the Countess
Dowager of the Palatinate of the Rhine, the illustrious and most high-borne
Lady Elizabeth her eldest daughter, and the Princess of Orange give three
other Rings to the honor of such as could win them, and prolonged the sport
for three days, two of which were won by Pontasiere, and the third by Resear.

CHAP. III. A Relation of the late Battle fought between Duke Bernhard Weymar
( General of the Swedish Forces) and John D'VVerth, chief General of the
Imperial Forces, March 1638.
DUke Bernhard of Weymar, who had not unhappily employed his forces about the
Rhine, the last Summer and Autumn, in the extremity of Winter, after he had
victualled Ensisheim, Angelstein, and Pfefsinguen, and left 800 men to guard
the Forts which he had built upon the Rhine, with an intent rather to abandon
them honorably, then maintain them desperately, they being not indefence;
repaired to the Valley of Delspery, or Delmont, in the Bishopric of (...) to
refresh his weary Army; where his active spirit would searce let him rest,
rowsed him again speedily upon the report of the victorious proceedings of his
Enemy, which made an advantageous the of his absence.

Let the Bavarian Baron tell his own story; and let his enemies pardon him if
they imagine, he does it too gloriously; Modesty is not a Soldiers, but a
woman's ornament: and let the Orator spare him if he do it not Rhetorically,
or smoothly; he professed not Arts but Arms; and could manage his sword,
better then handle his pen. Thus he expressed himself in a letter, Dated at
Offenburgh, November. 13, 3. and directed (...) we should rob him (...) part of
his glory; if (since he has undertaken it) we permit him not to be his own
Historian.

Most Revorend Father, and most gracious Elector and Lord, die. I cannot but
withal submission certify your Electorall Highness, that as soon as I had
received certain intelligence that the Duke of Weymar was gone toward
Burgundy, to take up his winter quarter, and my self was able but to sit on
horsbacke, (though the wound I received in the last battle be not yet
prosectly recovered, the bullet still lying in my body) I thought it requisite
to attempt and recover the bridge and sconces which the enemy had made over,
and upon the banks of the Rhine, that so I might get a scour hibernall station
for my forces.

To this end, October. 31 new style, I passed the Rhine at Brisack, with the
Alinger Horsemen, a part of the foot forces, and certain pieces of Ordnance
marching speedily day and night, with an intent to assault them both by water
and land: November. 1, I arrived there, and viewed the out-most Sconces, and
Retrenchments on the Burgundian side, where perceiving that expedition was
required principally for execution, and that the foot forces by reason of the
uncouth way, could not follow so fast, as I desired: I caused my lifeguard to
alight and assault the first bridge and Sconce on foot which they did so
sunously, that they forced the defendants to fly and seek their safety
elsewhere. This was our first enterprise which though it succeeded happily,
cleared not the way to our easy proceeding. The Enemy had thrown off the
bridge, and so stopped the pallage that we had no other way to regaine it then
by demolishing the Sconcs and making use of the timber to repair it. This stay
was no small advantage to the Enemy who made use of his time, and threw off
another long bridge which lay over the second River, and took his Posto there:
yet this loss was recovered by the industry of the horsemen who again assaulted
and took in the two Sconces upon the next River, and forced the Defendants to
run away unarmed into the fourth Sconce, where they threw off a great part of
that bridge too, and gave such fierce fire upon us, that I was compelled to
attend the coming in of my Musketeers and greal Guas, before I could attempt
farther against them. At last they came and I planted them upon the bank of
the River whence by playing continually upon the Island and Scorce, they did
much slaughter, though they did not break down the bridge. Another Engine I
had devised for that service; and used it happily. Some old vessels filled with
powder and fireballs I caused to be bought from Brisack, which being calried
down by the violence or the strcame falling upon the Enemies artificial
bridge; tore it in sunder, and so separated the Island from the Reull Sconce
which lay on the other side. This was a hight-work. The ensuing day presented
me with a new business, The Enemy had in the Island two Sconces, and there I
perceived him fortifying and endrenching himself for his more safety: To
prevent him I commanded the horsemen and Dragoons to pass through an arm of
the Rhine, and the foot forces by boats which I had prepared for that purpose
to make over into the Island and assault the fourth Sconce lying behind the
locond bridge, which they did faithfully obeying my directions, and effectually
not returning without the prize. The fifth Sconce lay before the bridge of
boats near before the Reull loo^ee. It was well manned with 200 men, and to
take it in I caused the Cannon to be carried over the River, and came my self
in person before it. The strong preparation for all (...) being perceived by
the besieged, caused them to send out a Drum, and desire a parley. I heard them
but gave them this short answer; that I would not yield them conditions, nor
accept the ^^^^esse they yielded upon discretion. My actions attended upon thy
words. I presently assaulted and mastered it, forced the defendants to fly, a
part whereof making toward the broken bridge of boats were takon prisoners, an
other part chased into the Rhine, and drowned, and the last which sought for
she lter among the bushes upon the Island became a prey to the soldiers, and
were put to the sword. Thus far having gone fortunately on immediately. I took
out the foot-forces to assault the Real Sconce which was guarded with 600 men,
and defended with four peeoes of Ordnance: and to speed it the sooner I planted
my Cannon against it, and played upon it with that violence, that I made an
assaultable breach in the wall, and prepared to assault it. But he or the
besieged hang out the white Flag, send but a Drum, and desired to treat, and
receiving no other answer, but that they should yield upon discretion, or if
they stood out to the last, they should be all put to the sword, they straight
submitted to mercy, and were thus ordered. The Officers I kept as prisoners,
the common soldiers which were willing, I took into service, and dismissed
with white slaves. Whilst I thus labored about taking in the forecamed Forts,
the Sergeant Major General Enkenfourt, who had the command on the other side
of the River, took in all the outermost Sconces and Retrenchments there, and
the Lieutenant Colonel de Melli the Cappler Sconce, which was above the bridge
in the midst of the Rhine, and was guarded by 50 French soldiers, and put them
so hard to it, that all except 12 which had quarter, were either slain or
drowned. This I have clecred again the River of Rhine, and I thought it my
duty to certify your Electorall Highness thereof punctually. Subscribed.

Your Electorall Highnesses humble and obedient servant

John de Werth.

A victorious Army goes on like a devouring fire, carries all before it, till
it meet with oppositions able to quell it. The Imperial Colonel Mettanich was
commanded by his General to make an Anslaught upon the Sconce at Drusenheim,
he did it, and carried it, and after that took the Fort at Kurtkenhowsen by
composition, and lastly, blocked up Strasburg, an Imperial City upon the
Rhine, the King of Hungary having so ordered it as declining all neutrality.

John de Werth thought himself now sufficiently laden with spoils, and
returned with triumph to the Bavarian Court at Munchin, where for the time he
was entertained graciously, feasted and honored, but was soon recalled back to
the Rhine, a storm arising in the West, which like an Hericano threatened those
parts of Germany, unless that he himself by his presence should dissolve it.
The Duke of Weymar who in the short time of his repose had well victualled both
his Army and the City of Strasburg out of Switzerland, his discipline having
gained the love of those Helvetians, and studied the means to repasse the
Rhine, January 18, 28. arose from his head Quarter at Delmont, and though the
seasoargued against him by his resolute courage answred all the difficulties it
could propound. His attendants were only some Gentlemen and choice men of his
army with whom he marched the same day to Pfeffinguen, and thence to Inglesten,
which are the keys and inlets of Lauffen and Delmont, where was the first
Randesvouz of his horse and Infantry. Here he made some stay but a short one,
the time being only to instruct them for the order of their march, and himself
departing the night following, wandered with this retinue, and furnished with
six wagons laden with scaling ladders, Petards, and other ammunition of War.
The ways were myry and scarce passable, yet with much hardness he reached
the next morning at the point of day, an hours going below L^uffenburgh
point blank, against which lies the town of Seckinguen, the Rhine only parting
them. The Dukes intention was to pass the River speedily, but his soldiers
being wearied by the roughnes of the way, and sharpness of the season, found
themselves unable to handle their Arms, being benumbed with cold, and this
caused him to repose there one day, not so much to rest their wearied bodies as
to recover their limbs, which time was not lost, the Duke himself getting in
the interim two little vessels, by which he could at once transport eight men,
and no more over the River.

These small Bottomes, January 20, 30, were conveyed to the River about three
quarters of an English mile below Seckinguen, a place which the eye of the
inhabitants of that City, could not reach unto by reason of the Woods and
Mountains which hindered their prospect that way. Seckinguen surprised by duke
Bernh.
The Citizens being thus hood-winked from discerning the Dukes practice, by
this small help at diverse times 100 resolved Gentlemen, furnished with ladders,
Petards, and other necessaries, were ferried over to the other bank, with
instructions to assault the Town, and make themselves masters of the boats
belonging to the City, and of one Fery, which the Burgesses suspecting the
Dukes design, had haled to the shore, and placed it neeer the gates of the
Town, as a Flanker to secure them. The enterprise was undertaken courageously,
and sped happily, his highness soldiers became Masters of the Town, and
Boats, but the Ferry-boat being boared in sundry places by the Townsmen, to
make it unserviceable for the Duke in that attempt, detained them an hour and
half, to repair it, that thereby, and by the other vessels which they had
surprised Rosa's Regiment, and some more foot-forces might be brought to their
assistance.

When one knot in a churlish piece of timber is rent, the rest cleave easily
asunder. The Saxon Duke having advanced but thus far prosperously, with a
little wheeling about, Lauffenburg taken by Anslaught.
assaulted and took in Lauffenburg the same night, the terror and distraction
of the citisens as much speeding his design as his own directions, and his
men's resolutions. Though his petards had done their work effectually, the
assaulted might have held out and kept the city, if their fear had not
deprived them of counsel, by burning and demolishing the bridge (a thing
almost as feasible as imaginable, it being built of wood) but their
affrightment extinguished their reason, and in stead of opposition they fell to
submission, cleared the way, and gave him admittance voluntarily.

By this success, though the Baron de Werth had cut off his former, Waldtshut
surrendered to the duke of Weymar.
he regained a new passage over the river, and to take possession of it, he
without delay sent the Count of Nassau with his regiment over the bridge, to
join with Rosa, and with their united forces laid siege to Waldtshut, where
the garrison perceiving an army encamped, and a bank raised against them,
surrendered presently upon fair terms, and so the Duke without blows became
Master of their forest and free towns, but under the protection of the House
of Austria.

Yet here was not the period of his fortunes: two companies of Imperial horse,
which were sent, though too late, to reinforce the Presidiaries in
Lauffenburg, came in unhappily for themselves, to enlarge his victories. They
met him unexpectedly, and were no sooner discovered than vanquished, some being
slain, others captivated, and few escaping death or imprisonment; as were also
a Regiment of foot, which followed them, though with some difficulty, the place
of fight giving the Caesarian Infantery convenience to fight advantagiously,
and opportunity to retire more conveniently, though not securely, in the end
they were discomfited with some slaughter, and pursued almost to Brisack by the
victors, which strewed the way with dead corpses, and returned to the camp
with about sixty prisoners.

It was an ingenious device of the old Romans, to set the temple of Fortitude
in so direct a way to the Temple of Honor, that no man could come to the last
but through the first; Glory is not gained without danger. The Dukes next
design was upon a strong city Rhinfelden. Here he found a strong
erreluctancie, and by the issue added not few grains, but many massy weights
to his former gotten glory. The Christian King had sent him money to pay his
army, and that supply gave his men fresh spirits: but he wanted ammunition, and
so might seem to want ability to go forward with this great design. From
Schaffehousen he expected what he wanted, powder, which was sent him down
the Rhine, but stayed by the Romish Cantons at Coblen: yet he proceeded in his
course daringly, not desperately, being certified that the city was sick of the
same malady, by some intercepted letters which he found in the hand of a
messenger sent from thence to Brisack, whom he apprehended and hung in the
sight of the garrison soldiers. Being also supplied from Benefeldt, Colmar,
and other towns in the Alliance, and under the command of the French King: and
now he raises batteries, imployes his pioners to undermine it, spares no more
pains to subdue it, than the city to defend it self. When having with some
small loss to his army got a good advantage upon the city, his mines and
batteries having broken an assailable gap in the walls, and he preparing to
assault it, his design was thwarted by the report of a known enemy, an army
of old soldiers coming upon his back, under experienced leaders, John de
Werth the Bavarian, the Duke de Savelly, the Austrian General, and the
General Majors Sperrhewther and Enkenfourdt. And this for the time caused him
to raise his siege to attend their arrival.

February the 18 or 28, the Saxon duke began his expedition by that day the
Imperial army was advanced into the Black forest, by the help of the
Peasants, who first informed the General de Werth of the Dukes actions, and
after cut out his way through the brambles and thick under-woods with their
Bills and hatchets, to hasten the march of him and his confederats forces.

Vna cademque manus vulnus opemque tulit: The same tongues which by their
clamor drew the Caesarian army thither, reported their coming and place of
residence in the camp, and moved the Duke with six regiments of horse,
amounting in all to twelve hundred; and three hundred musketeers, and six
field pieces, to meet him in company, and to adventure the fortune of a
battle.

The Imperialists under the command of Savelli, were placed in the right Wing,
and the Bavarians led by John de Werth, in the left of that Army. The Duke of
Rohan, which was casually come to the D, of Weymars Camp, and would make one in
the fight, commanded the left, and Duke Bernhard himself, the right wing of
his forces. And now the battles join, the field-peeces, play awhile at some
distance, but the adversaries in the end come near together, and then the
Muskets and lesser Guns vomited bullets like hall-stones mingled with fire
upon their dischargers Enemies. It had been too violent a fight to have
continued, had not the carelessness of the soldiers in the left wing of the
Dukes army, which gave the first charge, given the Imperialists opportunity to
renew the combat; Wolff the Imperial Colonel which led the Avant-guard; was
mortally wounded and taken prisoner, with some other Officers and eleven
Cornets, by which the common soldiers, judging that the battle was ended,
slackt their hands, and fell on pillaging to the advantage of the Caesareans,
which rallyed again, and joined with the other part of the army, inte^ding tobe
avenged of the Dukes left wing, as in part they were, breaking its Ranks, and
seizing of the D. of Rohan as their prisoner, though he was presently rescued
by a Major of the then Rhinegraves, now the Count of Nassaws Regiment. The
Saxon Duke, whose vigilant eye was over his Army, and took notice of each
loss and gain, perceiving where his Enemies pressed hardest upon him, drew up
his foot-forces, to make head against them; but the Imperialist, repulsed them
too, and got from him four pieces of Cannon, and three Cornets. The Duke as
scorning this check without delay, came in with his Cavallary, and charged the
Caesareans so furiously, that he brok their Ranks, and it came to pell mell, in
an horrid confusion upon both sides. What slaughter might have followed this
tumultuary combat, a soldier can judge by experience, and reason may inform
us by the consequents, three of the Dukes Colonels, Schavelitzhi, Dannenberg,
and Erdman, or Erlach, being thereby made prisoners of War, and carried into
Rhinefelden, and 150 of his men suddenly slain, as were also 300 of the
Enemies. But the night drew on, and both the Generals sounded a Retreat,
unwilling to strike at random, John de Werth taking his way toward
Rhinefelden, into which he thrust 300 fresh men to strengthen the Garrison,
and Duke Bernhard yet keeping the field, whence he dispatched a Messenger to
the other side of the Rhine, with a command to his Camp there to rise, and
meet him near Seckvingen, Feb. 19. March 1, where those 4 Regiments of Horse,
and five of Infantry, which lay on the West side of the River, met him at the
time prescribed.

Some time was spent there by the Counsel of War, but not much, and some few
hours to refresh himself, but not many; for the next day, March 2 new style,
himself marched with his Infantry and Artillery, along the River toward
Rhinfelden, having sent his Cavallary before under the command of Tupadell
through the black Forest, and both of them met again the next morning by
seven a clock near Biken, the place designed for their common Randezvouz.
Counsel and Discipline do more then strength: The Duke used all, he drew his
Army into a close body to conceal its number, and thereby amused the wary
Bavarian, who being misinformed by his Scouts, took the whole number, but for
a party, and as thinking the prey caught, environed them round with all his
forces, presuming that none should escape. His order was thus, He placed some
choice men in a Spinny near Rhinfelden, with three of those pieces which he
had gotten in the former battle, himself encamping with Wahls Regiment, in
the Forest somewhat further off, whiles his Cavallary was ranged in an
adjace^t field, giving order that at the signal, they should all arise
together, and jointly rush in upon the Weymarish; fearing least otherwise they
might attempt to save themselves by flight, upon the view of his whole Army.
The Duke had his desire, by his Enemies preparation against him, suffered him
to come on, not discovering his strength, till one part of the Caesareans which
appeared upon their march, the rest being laid in a ditch, to conceal them,
came within 100 paces of them, when suddenly the Duke unlocking his close body,
appeared in his true proportion, discharged his Cannon crosse-ways thrice,
amongst the thickets where the Caesareans were lurking, he did much hurt
amongst them, and played with his small shot upon the rest. The divine wisdom
can at pleasure, and often does infatuate the best counsels of men. The
Bavarian Baron in all appearance to the eye of Reason had so ordered his
troops, that in probability, he might conclude of a certain victory; but what
he imagined, would make for him, turned to be most against him, an higher
power, to which the conquest must be ascribed, so perverting his designs, that
what was intended for his help, turned to his ruin, and the sword of God in
that battle, might be apparently seen above the sword of Gedeon. Those
Regiments of foot, which were laid in Ambuscado for the Duke of Weymar, were
armed with those 3 pieces of Cannon, which they had gotten two days before
from him, and great store of lesser Artillery. Some troops of Cavallary were
sent from the Bavarian Army toward the Dukes, with order to fain a flight,
as soon as the Dukes forces should come near them, that so they might be
allured to pursue them, into the trap which was laid for them: the project was
hopeful, yet proved harmfull to the Caesareans, for the Weymarish Colonels,
Collembach and Bodendorff pursued the Caesarean horsemen, and made them change
the nature of their flight from a counterfeit to a true one, the Infantery
which lay in Ambuscado not being able to relieve them, or help themselves,
spending their powder vainly from so low a ground to the hills, where the Swedes
abode till they perceived the violence of the storm past, and collected more
then probably that their powder and shot was spent, and then assaulting those
poor unarmed foot men with all their power, rowted them, and regained 3 of the
Cannons lost in the former battle. The Bavarian General had ordered the
Garrison of Rhinfelden, to sally out as soon as the battle was joined, and to
gall the Swedes in Flank, yet this counsel was defeated to by the providence
of the Duke, who placed two troops of horse, and one company of foot behind the
hedges, by which they were to march, who looked to their charge carefully, be
haved themselves manfully, and forced the garrison back into the City. Tupadell
all this while was charging upon the Imperial Horse, who stood the first and
second shock bravely, but fled at the third, as unwilling to encounter with the
Swede again. The Bavarian General, whose great heart knew not how to yield,
still hoped that the fortune of the day might alter, and with 1500 horse
maintained the fight, till 300 of them being slain, the rest fled leaving the
lately victorious General with his Confederates to prove the vicissitude of
fortune, and become either examples of weakness, by a timorous and confused
flight, or the spoils of time by an immature death or sport of Fate, by
imprisonment and vassallage, or patterns of inconstancy by changing their Copy,
and serving under the Colors of their late Enemy.

The total of these two Battails I find thus summed up.

On Duke Bernhards side in the first battle were slain, the Lieutenant
General Rhinegrave John Philip, the Ritmaster Barsletter, and 150 men common
soldiers. The General Commissary Schavelitzky, the Colonel Dannenberg,
Colonel Erdman, or Erlach, and two Standards of Okeims Regiment, were taken
prisoners, and carried into Rhinefelden. The Colonel Keller, Ritmaster, Plech,
and Captain Kein were wounded dangerously. In the second battle, Colonel
Bodendorff, two Ritmasters, Vorbinger and Klepper yielded to fare, with as many
ordinary soldiers, as fell in the first battle.

On the Imperial side in both battails, these became prisoners of War. The
Duke de Savelli, who escaped out of the fight, but was pursued by Rosa, and
taken by Rosa, though he had disguised himself in the habit of a Friar; the
Generalissimo of that Army John de Werth. The Count of Enkenfourt and
Sperrhewter two General Majors of note: Three Lievtenants Colonels the Baron
de Zell, Scharftenzel and Rouger: 4 Colonels, Neinecker, Goldt, Hinderson and
Wollff 4 Majors, Rivarius, Anthony de Werth: The Major of the Generals
Regiment, and John Philip Jonas: 17 Ritmasters, 14 Captains, amongst which is
a Count of Furstenburg, 22 Lievtenants, 32 Cornets: 4 Ensigns, two Aides de
Camp, seven Serjant Majors or Watch-masters, 39 Corporals: one pair of
Kettle-drums, 1800 foot, which took service under the Duke of Weymar: and
twelve hundred horse, all which almost did the like; there were slain upon the
place in the first fight betwixt three and four hundred, and in the last six
hundred, and four hundred upon the pursuit; thus the sword was tincted in
blood that day, yet as if the dye had not been in grain, thirsted after more.
Three hundred Caesarean horse were gotten into Rhinefelden, and so escaped, but
the next day, perceiving the Dukes great preparations to re-besiege it, and not
thinking themselves secure there, would have sought their safety elsewhere, and
attempted to go to Brisack, but were surprised by the Swedes of the Dukes Army,
and in a general defeat, the Colonel Newhans Lamboy the Count Albert Lamboy,
the Count Albert of Furstenberg, the Baron de Ferents, and Newenstein the
Commissary General of that Army were forced to crave quarter which was given
them, and they redeemed their lives, by submitting to a necessitated captivity.

The Duke thus victoriously quit of the Army which had undertaken to stop his
progress, makes preparation for a fresh siege; but before he put it into
execution, would first see his noble prisoners, and dispose of them in their
designed places. To supper he invited them, and entertained them with like fare
generally, but not a like aspect. John de Werth and Sperrheuter found
themselves not so well reputed or nobly welcome as the rest. The falutation
betwixt his Highness and the General Werth was in an ironicall complement,
the Duke often jerking him with some private nippes, by remembering some
disrespective words which the Bavarian had often spoke of his Highness; and in
fine placing him at table below the Duke of Savelli, to his greater grief, who
looked for place above him in this his eclipsed fortune, because he had a
command above him whilst he was in his glory. Hinc surgit orexis, hinc
stomacho bilis. This passage moved the Bavarian to such an indignation, that
his wounds fell fresh a bleeding, and that he might dishonor the duke his fellow
prisoner, translated the loss of the day from himself to the others
cowardice, unskilfulnesse, or carelessness.

It could not be grievous to the Saxon Duke to hear them retort injurious
words, yet as if he had taken no pleasure therein, he advised them to give
place to their fortunes, sent for a Surgeon to dress the Barons wounds, and
supper being done sent them to their lodgings, committing the custody of their
bodies to his entrusted Deputies. Then he betook him to bed, but that gave him
no rest, something remained yet to be done before he undertook a new
expedition: he knew it was not his own arm which got the victory, and to
ascribe the honor to him to whom it was properly due, he ordained a public
thankesgiving to be celebrated the next day at Sauffenburgh, and his prisoners
were not yet in that sphere of restraint to which he meant to confine them.
Order was taken for this too: the General de Werth, Enkenfourd and some others
were to be transmitted to Benfieldt, the duke of Savelli to Lauffenburg, and
Sperrheuter, Goldt and Hinderson to H^henwiel, a strong fort anciently
appertaining to the duke of Wirtemberg, but of late seized on by the king of
Hungary, and newly recovered by Duke Bernhard, where they are under a strict
watch, and more closely restrained, because the duke de Savelli had escaped
from Lauffenburg and evaded their hands.

The manner of his escape is related diversely: the excuse of his Guardians
making way to this fable; That a woman which waited on him to bring him
victuals and dress his chamber, by night let him down by a rope from the
windows of his lodging, and afterward over the city wall. The most probable is
this, The person to whose trust he was committed had formerly served under the
Imperial colors, and now to make his peace with the King of Hungary, offered
his helping hand to the Dukes evasion, upon promise that he should mediate with
his master, procure his pardon, and restore him again to grace; which the Duke
accepted, vowed, and was dismissed secretly.

This report is the more probable, not only in respect of that aphorism of
the Politicians, There is no trust to be given to a reconciled enemy; but in
regard of the juridicall proceedings which ensued it: a criminal process
being sued out against a Major and two Sentinels of Schombecks regiment, and
three or four of the Burgesses, who were all convicted of conspiring or
conniving at the Dukes escape, and executed according to martial law.

The Duke escaped out of prison, by consent of his Keepers, and John de Werth
was in hope to have been rescued before he was brought to prison, by some of
his friends in despite of his Convoy. March 2, 12. Io. de Were sent to Brisack.
the Colonel Cullembach attended with three hundred horse, was commanded by
his Highness, to carry the Bavarian General, and some officers which were
surprised with him in the last battle to Benfieldt. The Garrison of Brisack,
of which the Baron was much honored for the services he had done formerly,
The Briss^kers. attempt to rescue him upon the way.
had notice of each particular concerning that design; the day, way, and
number of his Guardians; (only they knew not how well they were armed, but
supposed them light horsemen which were Equites cataphracti, armed Cap-a pee)
and made out a strong party to encounter with the Convoy, and with hazard of
their lives, to attempt the recovery of the General. The provident Colonel,
who expected such adventurers, no sooner discovered them, but guarded the
Wagons wherein the captives were with 20 Carabins, charging his prisoners not
to stir upon forfeit of their lives, and his Soldiers which attended them,
without respect of persons to kill the first which should offer to moove in
hope of liberty; himself and the rest of his Retinue falling instantly with
all their strength upon the Brissackers, And are utterly defeated by Cullembach.
whom, unable to endure that shock, he rowted totally, slaying some, taking
others to mercy, and suffering a very small number to escape death or
captivity. The way thus cleared, he drove on without any obstacle delivered up
his charge at Benfeldt, and giving this instruction to the late General, to
endure patiently what was beyond his power to amend; visited Ensisheim, Colmar
and Strasburgh, which last City he furnished with many commodities, returning
in liew thereof, with store of powder, bullets, and four great Cannon, to the
Camp at Rhinefelden, which he brought thither, March 9, 19. in 22 Wagons, to
hasten the period of that siege.

Duke Bernhard was now settled in his sphere of activity, but the General de
Werth cooped up, and barred from action. Til this their brains were equally
working for honorable achievements, but now their thoughts are fastened upon
diverse objects, Io. de Werth desires to be exchanged for Horn.
the Bavarian is hammering out the way for his liberty, either by ransom or
exchange, and sent a Trumpet toward Munchen, March 5, 15. with petitionary
letters to the Duke his Master, that he might be redeemed or exchanged for
Gustavus Horn; in which thoughts we must leave him; and the Saxon Duke to
prosecute his victory is again returning to Rhinefelden, whither this Narration
must follow him.

As Soon as he had re-begirt the Town with his Army, it was bruited in the
Camp that the General Goetz, by a speedy march was coming to relieve it; a
report it was which carried some show of truth there, being then a cessation of
Arms, till the first of May new style, concluded of betwixt that Imperial
Commander, and the Hessian Lieutenant General Melander. And this something
delayed the Fate of the Town; the Duke in person with 1500 horse and as many
foot (the rest of his Army being then disposed about Strasburgh and Brisack)
going to visit him. But the journey was soon accomplished, the grand Mountain
brought forth a Mouse, the Enemy was only a crew of ragged Crabats and
undisciplined Boores, which had entrenched themselves in the the
Waldt-schwartz, which before the Duke could reach them were rowted and defeated
by the Ritmaster Benheuraiah, which shortened his Highnesses Expedition, and
caused him to return the next day to Rhinefelden.

The Leaguer was laid on both sides the River, where batteries were raised, and
nothing omitted, which might be any way available to endamage the defendants.
The Commander and Garrison within for five days expressed a brave resolution,
once fallying out, and with loss of 80 of their own men, making some spoil
amongst soldiers, from whom they carried away a Lieutenant and a Serjant as
prisoners of War. But in the end their victuals, Rhinefelden rebesieged and
surrendered.
and Ammunition failing, their hearts fainted, and March 12, 22. after they
perceived that Cullembach was returned, that his Highness had sent to
Hohenwielt, for more and greater Ordnance, and made great preparations for the
assault, they sent out a Trumpet to desire a parlee, wherein first were offered
them the conditions of Nordlingen, and afterward these ensuing, which they
accepted.

Articles granted by Bernhard Duke of Saxon, Gulick, Cleave and Bergue;
Lantgrave of Thuringen, Marquess of Misnia, Count of Mark and Ravensberg, Lord
of Ravenstein, etc. to the Major, and Commander in the Town of Rhinefelden.
1 The Articles.
THe Governor and Garrison of Rhinefelden shall be permitted to depart with
their baggage, Horses, Wagons, Wives, and Servants; high and low arms,
matches burning and Drum beating, with all the Officers and Soldiers, which
are retired thither since the two last battails, except such as have
voluntarily come in to their party, not being pressed thereunto, who shall have
license to depart too, but without their high Arms.

2 It shall be lawful for all Ecclesiastical persons, Noblemen, Boors and as
many Burgesses as shall desire it, to depart with the Garrison, or afterward
with their goods and baggage, and as many as will stay to inhabit there, shall
be protected from injuries, and enjoy their estates.

3 All his Highnesses Officers and Soldiers, which have been taken prisoners,
and shall be found in the Town, shall be set at liberty without Ransom.

4 Those, which have left the Camp, without leave or Pasport, and are found to
be in the Town, shall neither openly, nor privately be conveyed away but left
there or restored.

5 All victuals and ammunition of War shall be left in the Town, except that
which the Soldiers can carry in their Knapsacks and Bandeleers.

6 The wounded and sick men which are unable to march away with the Garrison,
shall be permitted to abide in the Town, till they can conveniently be carried
away, or are able to follow their Colors.

7 As Soon as this accord is sealed on both sides, the Commander shall be bound
to open, and surrender one of the Ports, but none of the Camp shall enter into
the Town thereby, till the Garrison be departed.

8 The Garrison shall depart punctually on the morrow, March 14, 24 at eight in
the morning.

9 The Commander and Garrison shall have a safe Convoy, and be carried near
Brisack, and for assurance of the Convoyes safety, the Commander shall leave
behind him sufficient Hostages, which shall be dismissed peaceably at its
return. And for the better surety and confirmation of this Accord, two
indented Copies shall be drawn and interchangeably signed and sealed, one by the
Lord and Colonel Arsidius Forbush, of the one part, in the name, and by the
command of his Highness; and the other by the present Governor of the Town
on the other part, to each of which persons, there shall be one Copy delivered.

Given at the Camp before, and in the Town of of Rhinefelden, March 13, 23.
1638.
This agreement was more truly observed amongst Enemies in this time of War,
then many civil contracts are amongst neighbors in time of peace, 600
Imperial Soldiers left the Town the next morning, to the Victor, but were not
all conveiged to Brisacke, yet none were detained violently, the Convoy was
ready for as many would make use of it, but two hundred of them presently
offered their service, to the Duke of Weymar, and the most part of the rest, no
sooner understood of the place to which they were designed, but they did the
like, more fearing the famine, which already rages there, then hoping for
relief from these inhabitants and presidiaries. The time spent before the
Town was not lost, it being a place of strength and importance, and honoring
the Dukes achievement, with eleven Ensigns which were saved there in the last
battle and two old Ensigns belonging to Pappenheims Regiment, which escaped
and were kept there, since the battle of Lutzen: besides the gain of two fair
Culverings, many Bullets, yet but one Quintall of powder, and some small store
of provisions.

His work is not yet done. The care of the Town was committed to Forbush, who
employed himself to repair the breaches, supply the Magazine, and to work
about new Fortifications, while the Duke diposeth of his Army (now grown
stronger by 6000 men than it was in the first battle, The Dukes proceedings.
and daily expecting a fresh supply of a thousand, who by that time were come
as far as Monbeliard) one part part whereof was sent against the Castle of
Rotelu, where they forced the garrison to yield upon discretion, retayning the
soldiers in their pay, but detaining their pay, but detaining their Captain
and his Lieutenant prisoners: and found an hundred Muyds of wine, much corn,
cattle, and other provision, which should have bin transported to Brisack:
another under Rosa toward Wirtemberg, who had before taken in Duthlinguen, a
passage upon the Danube, and some other places, himself going with the gross
of his army toward Fryburg, a town in Brisgaw three leagues from Brisack,
which as they write from Basil is already sensible of the inconveniences which
attend them by his neighborhood.

In a part of the third Chapter the titles over the head being Occurrences in
the Netherlands, should be Occurrences in upper Germany.

Further Occurrences in the Netherlands.
The jollity in the Netherlands before spoken of, bore a resemblance of a firm
peace, and their Triumphs might have made a stranger believe, that the States
of the united Provinces were then so secure, as they needed neither fear any
hostility of an open enemy, nor the clandestine practices of a private. But
Novit paucos secura quies, the condition of all sublunary things is subject to
change, and The smiles of Fortune are more to be suspected than her frowns.

The Cardinal Infant a potent adversary, and one which tugged not merely for
honor, but labored as much to reduce that Aristocracie to the obedience of
the Crown of Spain, which claimed a title and dominion over the seventeene
Provinces by marriage with the daughter and heir to the house of Burgundy; as
they to preserve it, made strong preparation against them both by sea and land;
and some secret conspirators (the more dangerous by their privacy; for God
defend me from my friends, says the Italian, and from my foes I will guard my
self) inhabitants and garrison soldiers of Mastricht, had plotted
treacherously to deliver up that city into the hands of the Spaniards: who
attending the time for execution, had drawn together six or seven thousand men,
and lay near the city, well provided of scaling ladders and other military
instruments. The chief conspirators were Veynck a friar, A treason at Mastricht.
Padre Rector of the Minorites, John Lundsman or moon a Brewer, Claudi de la
Cour a Burgundian gentleman and his wife, two Burgundian soldiers of
Hauterives Regiment, and two Brick-layers inhabitants of the city; and their
plot was laid thus, and thus discovered: The Brewers house was sited upon the
small River of Ecker behind the Cloister of the Minorites, and abutted near
the port de nostre Dame, at a place where formerly there had been a Posterne,
but was made up slightly in the time of the last siege. This weakness in the
wall he first discovered to the Burgundian and La Cour, who willing to return
to the Spaniard from whom they had revolted, and hoping there by to get both
gold and honor, first discovered it by private letters to the governor of
Geldres, and being encouraged by him, revealed it to the Brick-layers,
promising them a good sum of money to break down the new building privately.
La Cour whose pregnant brain longed to be delivered of this monstrous
conception, while it was an Embrio, appointed a certain day March the first
new style, for its birth, and to facilitate the work for his midwives the
Brick-layers, often repaired to the place, surveyed it diligently, and observed
the proportion betwixt the thicknes of the old wall and slenderness of the
new; til at last being seen by a Burger, suspected as a Spy because he was an
Alien, and threatened with the Rack (nescit tacere commissorum scelerum
trepidatio) confessed the treason and his accomplices therein. Discovered.
His confession saved him from that torture, but not his fellow Conspirators,
who being detected by him, and seized on by the officers, at first denied the
fact, and stood upon their justification. But it is vain to plead not guilty,
before such as conclude them so: The Padre Rector pleaded his monastic life,
which being piously contemplative, could not entertain any such vile
intentions: the Brewer and Burgundian gentlewoman pretended their
infranchisement in that city (the one being a free Denizen by birth, the other
by purchase) which must or should engage them to loyalty, and arm them against
treachery. The brick-layer (for one fled) pleaded ignorance, confessing the
matter de facto, but excusing his intention by circumstance, saying that he
worked for wages, that he was hired thereunto by the Padre Rector and the
brewer, who claimed an inlet and outlet by that posterne, in and from the city,
and that this was the only end for which they consented to undertake it. But
the magistrate and commander, knew that of old Catiline who was a native Roman,
as well as of late their Barnevelt, that a cloister has sometimes bin a cage
for unclean birds, and that hell-hatched treason does not seldom palliate it
self with the borrowed garb of seeming sanctity; That no man could or ought to
be so ignorant, as not to know, there are any private proprietaries in the walls
of a city, which are Bonum publicum, and not to be broken down for any private
man's use, without license, took not their words for a satisfactory answer, but
try if the material rack would enforce that from them, which their seduced
consciences, though lashed with a dumb beadle, could not make them to reveal.
The first torture wrested out the truth from all, but the Friar, who bore his
first torture with a Stoicke apathie, and though accused by the rest jointly,
as the first moover of this divellish engine, denied all, till the second
tortures being presented him, and overcome with fear, he opened himself
really, begging that mercy humbly, which had he not been false he might have
enjoyed freely, but could not now expect. He was sentenced to be first
degraded, then executed: but the Ordinary proceeding slowly, as not willing to
have such shame fall upon the Clergy, the execution was not done till the end
of May. And the traitors executed.
The others suffered April 20, 30, had their heads cut off, and set upon high
poles (long living witnesses of their perfidiousnesse) behind the Minorites
Cloister, with their faces toward the Sconce. Navagi de la Cour was quartered,
and the four quarters set upon the four gates, those toward Bruxels and the
Bosh, Saint Peter's and the Wyck port, but the bodies of the others were buried.

One day gives a remedy to the troubles of another. The magistrate and
commander in Mastricht had bin much perplexed with this intended treason,
because after the execution of the first revealed conspirators, they found
others both Churchmen and Burgers of note, to have consented thereunto; and
therefore apprehending them and committing them to prison, they intended to take
vengeance of their professed enemies, who had prompted their people to this
prodition. In the Cloister or Abbey of Beff, which stands besides Hanuyt and
Namur, lay five companies of Spanish horse, and two of foot, and thitherward
the Viscount of de Turenne, General of the army newly formed in the Bishopric
of Liege, for the service of the Christian King, The Abbey of Best plundered by
the Vicount Turenne.
marched with his own Cavallery and the horse of Mastricht, four hundred foot
and two pieces of ordnance, April 2, 12. The next day following they appeared
before the Cloister early in the morning; when the Spanish horsemen discovering
them, presently mounted and fled for their own safety, leaving their own
baggage, the foot, and the religious people to be a prey for the assailants,
who took the Abbot, a captain, a Sergeant, and a hundred common men
prisoners, pillaged the Abbey, burnt down a fair house which stood near it; and
the next day met with a party of Imperial horse, whom they defeated, and took
from them sixty horses, which with the spoil of the Abbey, and the prisoners
taken there, they returned into Mastricht.

What the Spaniard lost there by land, he got again with advantage about the
same time by sea: five ships of Amsterdam, the white Swan, the black Lion, and
three other coming from the Streights laden with rich merchandise, fell into
their hands and became their lawful prize. A frigate of Dunkerke chased the
white Swan when it was almost at home and took it. Two other Frigates pursued,
burnt and sunk the black Lion, which alone was valued worth five or six tun
of gold, yet got no other spoil but sixteen men, which alone escaped the fury
of the sea by the mercy of their enemies who took them prisoners and brought
them into Dunkerk. The other three fell into the mouth of the Spanish navy
near the Bay of Biscay, and were forced to yield. This loss came into the
foot of the Hollanders account, who by their own computation, with the loss
of the Nassaw, which coming from Fernambuck laden with four hundred and
thirty chests of sugar, and other rich wares, was cast away upon the coast of
Ireland, had then lost within the space of a few months six and twenty sail
of ships.

Now the Spring was well entered, the Sun had clothed the earth in a green
suit, and exhaling the moisture, which made the highways pulpish and unfit
for man or beast to tread upon, began again to make them passable; when both
the Cardinal Infant and the States prepared against each other for an
offensive and defensive war. Isthoe est sapere non quod ante pedes modo est
videre, sed etiam illa quae futura sunt: Wisdom considers how it should
suffer, as well as what it should do: A wise man looks as well behind him
as before him, both in peace and war.

Before either part went to field, their first care was to secure those places
which were most exposed to danger. To this end the Count John of Nassaw was
sent by the Prince Cardinal, to view and fortify with victuals and ammunition,
the forts and cities upon the Maze, as Genue, Geldri, Venlo and Ruremund: as
the cavallery of the States was dispatched from the Bosch, Huesdon, Emmerick,
Rees, Nimmegen. Wesel, and other places toward the Grave and the Maze, for the
same purpose. The French on the South side, which menaced the Cardinal as ill
as the Hollanders on the North, required contribution of the Brabantiers,
threatening such as should deny it: and the Cardinal Infant published an Edict
at Brussels, April 13, 23. in the name of the Catholic King, wherein he
straightly charged all his subjects not to pay it: adding withal, that he which
could bring in any of the French Agents which came to demand it, should receive
for his guerdon fifty Gilders: and commanding all victuallers and inholders in
cities or villages, not to lodge or entertain any such French guests, though
their near kinsmen or dearest friends, upon the pain of five and twenty
gilders: enjoining also strict watch to be kept upon all towers and steeples,
and the Boores to arm upon the first alarm: and because he was surrounded
with enemies, by advice of his Council of War it was concluded, that Don Andrea
Cautelmo should be General of the foot, and the Marquess Sfondrato, of the
horse in Brabant, Count John of Nassaw in the North of Flanders; and Prince
Thomaso, Balanso, and Isolani, in the Southwest Henault and Artois, who then
began to appear about Saint Aumars and Graveling. Yet that this order should
be changed upon occasion, and doubled all his garrisons upon the frontiers of
Picardy. Whilst the Prince of Orange was mustring up his forces, which by the
12, 22, of May, he had conveyed by shallops to their Rendezvous at Lithoyen.

The Prince Cardinal was rather upon a defensive than offensive war, and stood
looking a while where the storm would fall. The Prince of Orange removed from
his first rendezvous to Berghen up Zoom, where he lay with the maine of his
Army some days together, but about the end of May and beginning of June: Count
William of Nassaw was sent with six thousand men to invade Flanders, and like
a sweeping rain which drives all before it; scarce finding opposition, took
in the sconces of Verbroeck, Count Will. Nassaw at the Blocker-dyke.
Steland, and Callo, and at last assaulted the Mary-sconce, the principal of
all upon the Blockerdike, was master of an half moon, which he held for the
space of twelve hours, yet then was beaten from it by the garrison.

The Cardinal Insant being advertised hereof, and knowing how Antwerpe the
noblest Empery of the West and Marquisate of the Empire was endangered, if
those neighboring sconces should remain in the fingers of the Hollanders and
united States, drew all his forces together to stop his further proceedings.
Some troops he sent before him, to skirmish with the assailants and hinder
them from fortifying, while himself with the gross of his Army might be
ready. The avauntgard of the Spanish marched so fast, that June 7, 17, they had
fought with a party of Hollanders whom they found without their quarters, where
the commander of that Holland party Maurice the only son of Count William de
Nassaw, an hopeful young gentleman wise and valiant, fell by two mortal
wounds, the one by a musket bullet shot into his breast, and the other by a
Rapier run through his belly.

The Count Piccolomini, by this time was come to Antwerpe, to aid the Prince
Cardinal, who calling Groebendoncy to counsel with them, June 10, 20,
resolved to assault the Count William in his Quarters with all their forces,
and the same night prosecuted the course on which they had concluded. The
Spanish Army consisting of eight full Regiments, was divided into three
several parts under these three Generals, and led along the Dike toward
Callo, Beveren and Verbroeck, that they might fall upon the States Army at once
in its three several Quarters, the first of Count William, the second Colonel
Enreutters, and the third the Scots Quarter. The assaults began at twelve in
the night, and continued until 8 the next morning with such fury, that the
reports of the Guns were heard five leagues off, the defendants neither being
terrified by the number of the assaylants, Is assaulted by the Cardinal Infant.
nor the assaylants disheartened by the defendants courage, and well ordered
fight. It was too violent a storm to last longer, for the ground began already
to be dyed with the blood of the slain men, and how long should the sword
devour? The slaughtered corsps must have a sepulture, and both parties gave
free license for burial of the dead. Till then, neither of their losses
appeared but now, the States found some Officers of note slain, as Lieutenant
Colonel Hinderson, the Lieutenant Colonel to the Lord of Beverwerth, Sergeant
Major Levenstein, and four others, Captains and Lieutenants, besides above 400
common men. The Cardinal Infants loss exceeded this, there being above 3000
of his soldiers found dead upon the ground, besides such as were wounded; and
himself being as sensible of the loss of his men, as of his own honor,
presently renewed the assault, and continued it without intermission, And,
forced to Bie.
so furiously, that the Count of Nassaw was forced to fly in a storm, and
return the same way which he came, leaving behind him eight cannons, two
great shallops, and 60 lesser, 2300 of his men prisoners, and almost as many
slain by their Enemies; and stifled in the mire.

How unexpectedly may the designs of men be frustrated? The Provinces under
the Catholic King, seemed till this day to be almost under the command of the
Christian King, and United States; But the fortune of this day (to which Heaven
it self assented, by contrary winds, The consequents of this victory.
hindering three Regiments sent by water, upon the information of the
Lieutenant to the Count of Solms, June, 11, 21 in the morning, of the former
nights work, to the assistance of Count William, from coming unto him)
supported the state of the Spanish Government; the Prince of Orange, who then
lay with his Army at Nord gheest, instead of invading, was fain to lie upon a
defensive ward; the Cardinal Infant, with his own forces was able to deal
alone with his disheartened men; the Forts lately gotten by the States were
yielded up. Enreutter retyring as well as he could from the Verborech Sconce,
the Scots forced to furrender the other, and Piccolomini with 11000 men had
opportunity, to aid the Prince Thomaso, against the French, in the Southwest
of Flanders.

Chastillon the French Marshall, having passed the Summer, May 8, 18 brought
his Army to the Castle of Saint Paul, May 12, 22. The Castles of Saint Paul.
which he presently summoned and had surrendered unto him upon these conditions;
that the Governor and the Garrison both horse and foot should march out with
baggage and arms half an hour after the Capitulation, and safely go to
Bethune; that the inhabitants of the place might have leave to do the same with
like assurance: that they should be conducted by a hundred horse of Cassions
Regiment a league upon the way; and thence by the Trumpet of the same company,
with a Pasport to Bethune, and that the inhabitants religious persons or
others, might have liberty to remain there (if they pleased) taking the Oath of
Alleagiance to the Christian King, which conditions being signed and
subscribed, there marched out 120 men, above 300 women and children in Wagons,
and the Fort was Garrisoned with the Regiment of Navarre.

Half a league from thence stood the Castle of Saint Martin de Fresne a
passage of importance, Saint Martin de Fresne.
and a ready way for the Spanish to Saint Paul. This he summoned the same
night, and having prepared to assault it, the Garrison capitulated upon the
same terms, as the former, and the French Marshall laid into it 50 Musqueties
under the command of a Lieutenant the day following. May 13, 23. the Marshall
encamped near Perne where there was a Fort, Perne.
but abandoned by the people, whose hasty flight caused them to leave behind
them great store of beverage, corn, and cattle. The Country about it, abandoned
with forage, and thither the Marshall sent some of his forces to make
provision for the Horse, who returned at night with a good booty, and 600
prisoners, able to pay their ransomes; besides the Religious persons and women,
whom dismissed freely, yet hanged up some Boutefeue for example sake, and so
abated their number.

May 14, 24, the French Army came to Theronenna a place famoused by Historians,
where the remaining Ruins of the buildings, are still witnesses of its ancient
glory. The inhabitants loath to alter their government retired presently into
the Church, which stands in an Island of the River, and thence made some
unhappy shot against the French; but after three volleys of Cannon bullets,
they yielded, and some being slain, the rest were taken prisoners. Therovenne,
and other Forts and Abbeyes taken by the French.
And now the Army, May 15, 25. took up its Quarters betwixt Ardres and
Blandeck, a quarter of a league from Saint Aamers, upon the River Aa, which
falls down to Graveling.

Before he raised any bank against the City, or would give order for the
Circumvallation thereof, the Marshall dispatched 3000 foot, and 2000 horse with
two Culverings, two pieces of 12 pound Bullet, and other necessary equipage
under Fert Imbaut, to cheer the Spanish Forts, The siege of Saint Omars.
betwixt Ardres and Saint Omar, that he might have a free passage for his
victualers and Convoyes; and himself with the principal Officers went to
scour the causey-wayes, which were filled with armed Peasants, and might
otherwise have much impeached him in his design. Both these parties did their
Offices in the space of two days, the Colonel Ferte Imbaut, having first taken
in three small Forts which stood upon the way, then the Castle, de Maule, which
was defended by a good Garrison, and some pieces of Cannon, and lastly the Fort
d' Esper legue, which after the departure of 36 Walloons, 10 Spaniards, and 150
Paysants, was committed to the care of the Governor of Ardres, who put into it
an Officer with 80 soldiers, which promised to keep it eight days, or till
1000 Cannon shot were made against it, though it should be surrounded with the
Enemies Army. The Marshall himself defeated, the 700 Peasants which guarded
the causey-wayes, took in the Fort de Mewfosse, or Newdike, and the Abbey of
Clermarais; and to leave no rub in the way, Hallier took the Abbey of Watiene,
where the Count de Fountain lay, and had much ado to save himself, whilst for
a conclusion at the last hour, and at the same time, the Marquess de la Ferte
took by assault Saubrevit, and Chastillon Sommeline, by the surprise whereof
Saint Omars was fully blocked up.

A fair house well sited, The descriptiof Saint Omars.
and fitted with competent demesnes, never wants clamours in the propriety: nor
a rich well qualified Virginsuiters: such was the conditions of Saint Omars, a
place of as much pleasure as consequence, yet giving pregnant testimonies of
both, to compass which, the French left no stone unmoved, nor the Cardinal
Infant to preserve it.

This City a part of the Territories, of the ancient Morines subdued by Julius
Caesar was begun by a Bishop of Therovenna, who built there a Monastery called
by his own name, and by his supposed sanctity (devotion in that time of
superstition, commonly causing a confluence of people) made it very populous.
It is at this present reckoned in the second Rank of the Cities of Flanders,
well flankered and fortified, being in the territories of France, of stately
building throughout the Abbey, especially which is the richliest endowed of all the Covents in that country. The French Marshall that he might have more
freedom to settle his Army before it, May 18, 28. gave order to 1000 horse,
The order of the siege.
and 1200 foot, to repair unto his head quarter, the same day by noone, but
his men not meeting at the peremptory hour, he deferred his design till the
day following; his intention being to be master of a Ferry, by which passengers
were transported into the City. It was an attempt of a great spirit, with so
small a number, without defensive coverture, to encounter with almost as many,
who had immured themselves with earthen walls, and were by that means almost
shot-free. Two Regiments of Scots and Walloons, were appointed by the Prince
Thomaso to guard the place, which perceiving the French almost upon them, spent
their powder prodigally, against the assaylants which in fine, forced them to
leave their Trenches, and cast themselves disorderly into a Ferry-boat, and
seven or eight other Bottomes which they had prepared for their use, and so
prevented them of their purpose, which was to entrench themselves there, that
they might keep the way open for importation of men, and victuals into the
City. This Rub thus taken away, and the French Army re-enforced with 27 new
Companies, the lines of circumvallation were drawn out, June 2, new style,
which though they were of so large an extent as five leagues in compass, the
pioners with the help of the common soldiers promised to finish, or at the
least make defensible, in the space of eight days, if they were not disturbed
by the Spanish Army.

Five or six days passed without any action commenced by the Spaniard against
the Assaylants: A French captain of horse; surprised by Forgatz.
and then Forgatzs the Crabat, with his Regiment was advanced to air a place,
two leagues and a half distant from Saint Omars; where having nottice, that a
French Captain of Horse by name Vitenvvall, was scouring the field, accompanied
with twenty men at Arms, he sent out 200 horse against them, who defeated the
French Cavallary, and having first deadly wounded him, took the Captain
prisoner. This achievement prompted the Crabats to an higher attempt, which
was to assault the Quarter of the Marquess of Ferte Imbaut, which they did,
with 200 men, boldly though not happily, these being beaten back to the gross
of the Regiment, which was affrighted, if not endangered upon this occasion.

Chambot a Captain of Horse, and Valliere a Cornet to the Field-marshall, had
been abroad with 200 men of Arms; who upon their return, were within a quarter
of a league of the Marquess his Quarter, Forgatz defeated.
at the time when it was assaulted by the Crabats, when hearing the Alarm,
they spurred up to help their Comrades, and overreaching the Arriere of the
Crabats in their retreat, pursued them to the place, where their companions
expected them, when Forgatz (as fear always presents the worst of dangers to
the imagination) supposing himself caught in a trap, and dreaming of an
Ambuscado, fled confusedly, leaving 30 of his soldiers slain by the French
Cavallters, and himself pursued to the gates of Air his Garrison.

Fortune this day played her own part, and showed apparently her mutability.
The same time June 9, 19 two Regiments that d'Espagny and Fouquesoles, were
commanded by the French Marshall to march to Momclin, or the Feroy-fort, to
secure it from the Spaniards; but the next way not serving for the portage of
their Wagons and Baggage, Saint O murs succored by Prince Thomaso.
they were forced to take a compass of two leagues, and in the way,
re-encountred with Prince Thomaso, attended with 2000 horse, and 4000 foot, who
enclosed them with his troops, and with the losses of above twenty of them,
amongst which was the second son of the Camp-master d'Espagny, who was
wounded, and made a prisoner with his third son, Lievrenant to his brother,
and Fouquesoks forcing them to yield upon composition, thrust in 800 fresh men
into the City, which were carried over in boats, by the channels out out
through the Morasse, sent from the City to that purpose.

One place is sometime fortunate to one party, and fatal to another. By the
same way which the Prince Thomaso re-enforced the Garrison Piccolomini, in the
beginning of July, relieved it with victuals, and Ammunition; the French Army
by June 5, 15. had fortified themselves in their earthen walls. Chastillon had
his Quarter at the head of the Morasse. Hallier had his next to the Marshall,
and so the rest of the Colonels respectively. Three strong Redoubts were built
in the place betwixt the Ferry and Hallier: Two Forts upon the plain of Nieube;
the Marshal la Force, was come to the Camp with his Army; the batteries were
raised, the Ordnance played, the Town was so straight besieged, that there was
neither ingresse nor egresse for any; Famine began to rage within, Saint
Omars relieved by Piccolomini.
the inhabitants and presidiaries were in three weeks brought to a small
allowance of meat, and that none of the best, the powder and Ammunition began
to fail, the French seemed as full of fire and courage, as their stomachs were
of victuals, and before the victory, sang an Epinicion. But July 4, 14. the
Scene altered, Piccolomini projected a way to relieve it, and by the courage of
Serjant Major Norris, who that day commanded an English Regiment, and led the
Avantguard in the Expedition, performed it. It is thus related by Letters from
Antwerpe, and reported to me by an English Gentleman who was in the Action.

Piccolomini directed the General Norris with the English, an Italian and
Walloon Regiment to attend as near the Ferry as they could, without being
discovered, whilst himself with his forces might either amuse Hallier, or with
advantage assault him in his Quarters. The English Commander took the charge
upon him, and while the Italian Count with skirmishes and pretenses of a sharp
battle held the French in play, conveyed (at noon day) 1000 men, 300 barrels
of powder, and as much Bread, Cheese, and Bacon, as loaded 400 Wagons by land,
by Boat into the City; which being afterward made known to the French
Field-marshals, as loath to consume themselves there, they retired orderly
toward Ardres; with the loss of their hopes of gaining Saint Omars, The
siiege is raised,
getting a small victory upon the Prince Thomaso Colleague to Piccolomini in
this action, in his return cutting off 1500 of his men; and seizing of 1200 of
his horse, which they sent the next day to Calis.

Further Occurrences in the upper Germany.
April the first new style, was the day when the Saxon Duke first raised a
bank before Freyburg. Some other pieces stood in his way, and he spent a few
days to take them in, before he pitched his Camp there, though there wanted
no inducements to persuade him to hasten thither as namely the situation of
the place, it being an inlet into Switzerland from Swaben, a false report of a
slender garrison, the weakness of the fortifications, and the Imperial
preparations against him, Goetz being already upon his march with those forces
which he had under him, to meet the General Walh and his troops, and the Duke
of Bavaria, who was forming of an army about the Danuby, and was expected in
person with the Duke de Savelli, to bring it down to Nordlingen; the general
Rendezvous of the Caesareans and Bavarians, which were jointly to oppose him.

The Castle of Roetele or Rotelen, the Key of the Marquisate of Dourlack,
guarded with 70 Presidiaries, was the first place which presented it self to
his eye, March 27, 7. the Duke of Weymar summoned it, and next Sunday being
Palme-sunday carried it, forcing both the Commander and the Soldiers to yield
upon discretion. The Castle was well provided of Ammunition, and that with the
Citadell, though he might justly have reserved it to his own use, he gave to
the Marquess of Dourlach, who was then in the Camp, and by this atchievment
seemed to gain a new possession, and re-investiture into his inheritance which
he had been deprived of, ever since the fatal battle of Nordlinguen.

The day of this conquest seemed to bring as good an Augury to the growing
hopes of the Marquess, as the Palm which grew at the feet of Caesar's Statue
did to him before the battle in Pharsalia, though he was newly possessed of this
fort, he would not make his personal abode there, but committed the keeping of
it to some selected soldiers, and himself accompanied the Army which hitherto
went on prosperously. Rosa was commanded immediately toward the Danuby, where he
encountered and discomfited one Company of Imperial Horse, and a Regiment of
Crabats, and a thousand Horse, and some Foot were sent back toward the Rhine to
make head against Charles Duke of Lorraine, and young Mercy who were coming
with a Convoy of 40 Wagons laden with Corn and Salt to re-victuall Brisack
whom they defeated, and thereupon took in Newenburg a place of good strength
upon the River (but then abandoned by the Imperialists who were fled from
thence for fear of the Dukes forces) and then having laid in a competent
Garrison returned to the Army, which by that time was newly set down before
Freyburg.

The siege here was of more difficulty then was at first imagined: The siege
and taking of Freyburg.
The Town was well fortified with a strong wall and deep ditch, well manned
with 900 resolved soldiers, and inhabitants as resolute for the defense of the
City as were the men of War. The field afforded no convenient place, where the
Duke might plant his Ordnance for battery: The Town was abutted withthree
Suburbs which he first took in, and after employed them to that service:
There he mounted his Cannon, which by often discharging made an assaultable
breach in the wall, and then he gave order for the assault, which was
undertaken by his soldiers cheerfully; but not successefully. The Ditch was
deeper then it was supposed, the scaling Ladders were too short to reach the
lowest part of the broken wall, the besieged of all sorts, Religious persons,
old men, women, and children repaired thither, to make it good against the
assaylants, and with musket shot, stones, Grenadoes, and wild fire beat them
off, having slain the Lieutenant Colonel to whom that service was entrusted,
and forty common men besides our worthy Country man and resolute Gentleman
Master Thomas Cambell, whose story is thus related to me by Captain John Scot
who was a coactor, and had command in the Army at that Expedition. A worthy
adventure of two English Gentlemen, but unfortunate.
A Lieutenant by name Sandelands being upon the top of the Ladder, seeing the
hearts of the ordinary men to fail, looking back, called to Cambell, second
me, let us not lose the Honor which our Nation has purchased with blood,
which he did; these Colleagues in that service, assisted only with two Dutch
Soldiers, and a Scottish Serjant of the Red Regiment, behaving themselves so
bravely, that in despite of the defendants, they scaled the breach, slew some
of those, which mayntained it, and put the Burgers into such a Fear, that as
they confessed afterward, they had then begged quarter, had they not at the
instant perceived the small number of the assaylants. But an Apoplexy is cured
by a Fever, Anger does chase away Fear, and now offended with themselves, for
starting at a shadow, the Soldiers and Townsmen came on furiously, wounded
both Sandelands and Cambell, who for all this went on and sent one soul more to
Charons Ferry, when a Country Gentleman marking how bravely Cambell behaved,
shot, and wounded him mortally, throwing him not yet dead barbarously into the
midst of a burning pile, which was ready for their defense, Sandelands in the
mean time retyring, and though charged by the Enemy returning safely, by the
valor of a Soldier, who with his Pistol kept the sealing ladder, for his
safe Retreat.

Duke Bernherd was not a little moved with this loss, yet as the purest
spirits are most active, in the heat, renews and increases his batteries,
lengtheneth his ladders, and prepares for a fresh assault. The preparations of
a potent Adversary are terrible to a weak one, he was observed by the Garrison,
and without more blows the Town capitulated, and was surrendered Ap. 5, new
style. Thus this City once the Metropolis and Capital of the Brisgow, at this
present more glorious, though not so strong as Brisack, changed her Lord; a
City famous for the Academy, famous for excellent Rock, Crystal, some of it
being of that bigness, that a cup thereof, containing two English quarts
artificially engraven, and two doozen of Spoones were presented to Duke
Bernhard, famous for 20 rich and sumptuous Cloisters, and lastly for the goodly
church and tower of curious stone.

The conditions concluded at the surrendry (which I would not have rehearsed
but upon the occasion following) were these, That all the Priests should march
away with the commander, officers and soldiers. That no Burger of what quality
soever should depart. That those which went away should have a convoy of horse,
etc.

The breach of the second article had like to have exposed all to the
conquerors mercy: A rich merchant was found in the wagons, and thereupon the
convoy pillaged them, and brought both him and the rest back as prisoners to
Fryburg.

Thus captain John Scot relates this accident: but a letter directed to
Rhinacker from duke Bernh. (the copy whereof I have seen both in French and
Dutch) expresses more: take it thus abstracted:

Yours, dated at Brisack, April 6, 16. I have received; wherein you complain
of an abuse done to the garrison of Freyburg at their departure, and desire a
release of the prisoners belonging to your regiment. A copy of the accord I
have sent you here enclosed, by which you may perceive that Colonel Esher the
late Governor there brake it in the beginning; first because in the articles he
had no colors and standards, yet he caused four to be carried away before the
garrison. Secondly, the garrison should not pillage the town, yet he took
away the townsmens horses, plundered the cloisters, and mounted the cavalliers
which wanted horses, upon the Burghers beasts. Thirdly, their desire to carry
away some cattle, was expugned and denied by us, yet they attempted to drive
away many. Fourthly, That such as had run away from our army with their horses
and arms, should abide therein: yet contrary to the accord, they were not
only concealed in the wagons, their clothes being changed, and shuffled away
over the wall, but the Imperiallists got upon their horses and would have
stolen them away, and this caused a broile betwixt the convoy and the
garrison, and the reducement of the Caesarians to captivity.

It was a fair answer, and relished as much of military justice, as his after
act did of grace; he set them at liberty without ransom, meekly blaming the
convoy, and advising Escher to use more sincerity in observing the terms of
capitulation.

The city was won, and now he advises how to keep it: first he laid into
it the red Regiment, with one captain and officer of each company; but having
notice that the enemy with a powerful army was coming to furnish Brisack (at
which he had an emulous eye) with victuals, he removed the Red Regiment, and
appointed Karosky to that province, with a regiment of horse to scour the ways
betwixt Fryburg and Brisack; and another of foot to maintain the city. And now
to omit his several Campings and discampings, which may puzzle, cannot please
the Reader, we will set down his and his Officers actions till his battle
with Goetz the General of the Caesarian and Bavarian forces.

Kanofsky having according to the dukes directions commanded out a party
toward Brisack, regiments of Butlers Infantery defeated by Kanossky.
six of his cavalliers spurring up before the avantgard, fell upon the place
where our Irish Butler, newly come from the French County, lay with his
Infantery, consisting of fifteen hundred men divided into 5 regiments, lay
entrenched near Brisack. The governor Rhinacker for want of provisions being
unwilling to entertain them, they had thought to have amassed them by a sudden
alarm, and unexpectedly to have surprised them; but the project failed, that
place did not give them hope of glory, but ministered cause of fear. Yet their
moderation crowned them with a victory, whose rashness might have brought them
not to loss only but ignominy. The Imperiallists kept a good watch, were upon
their guard, and enforced the adventurers to fly so affrightedly, that their
countenances discovering their hearts, the whole vantgard was possessed with
the same cold passion, and all the other cavalliers. The troops of Kanofskies
horse were then upon a cosse-way, hemmed in on both sides with Moorasse, not
able to turn to the right hand or left: there was only one way for their
safety, which was with their faces about to return as soon as might be. This
course they took, and the Caesarians supposing them to fly cowardly, pursued
them eagerly, till having field room, and being not confined by the Moorasses,
they changed their posture, and assaulting their enemies unexpectedly, they
flew three hundred of them, and took no more than 26 prisoners (amongst which
were two Captains, 3 lievtenants and one ensign) for they would give no
quarter to any but this small number.

General Major Tupadel about the same time had sent out a party after some
Caesarians, 120 Cuirassiers surprised by Tupadel.
but missing them they re-incountred with 30 cuirassiers near Aurach in the
dukedom of Wirtemberg, which presently fled, and were so pursued that the
Saxons forces entered with them into Aurach so suddenly, that they took the
town before the rest of the garrison (being an hundred cuirassiers, whom they
put to the sword) could have notice of their entry, or betake themselves to the
castle.

Roza at the same present was as active and fortunate as either of them: he
sent abroad 300 horse of his own Regiment to descry the enemy, and observe his
posture; who first met with 80 crabats, the major part whereof fell by the
sword (that Nation seldom giving or desiring quarter) and the rest were taken
prisoners, by whom he was informed, that another party followed him,
consisting of 120 cuirassiers: 200 Crabats and 6 Companies of Dragons slain and
taken by Rosa.
the certain place where they lay was showed him, and thither he posted in
speed, slew some and defeated the rest: and being informed by his prisoners,
that eighty of their comrades were at Altkirken, an Imperial town in the
dukedom of Wirtemberg, to conduct six companies of Dragons, with their
standards and baggage to the Barbarian Rendezvous near Nordlingen; he placed an
ambuscado for them, attended their coming four and twenty hours, when seeing
them upon their march they charged them so roundly, they they slew the most of
them, gained all their baggage, amongst which were two carvaches and four
standards. The Major which commanded the regiment (their Colonel Wolf being
slain at the first battle near Rhinfelden) escaped with much ado, being shot
twice acrosse the body. The Lieutenant Colonel and all the officers became
prisoners of war, and Rosa by this happy occasion master of Altkirken, where
he refreshed his Dragons, and reinforced his Regiment with a new accrewt of
400 men, as did also most of his highnesses Colonells about the same time.

These checks the Imperial and Bavarian Armies received before the battle;
Altkirken taken in.
which much abated their number, whilst the Saxon Dukes forces increased, a
new supply both of men and victuals being brought him out of France and Elsas
Savern by the Count de Guebriant.

Many cares attend him which enjoys much. Io. de Werth removed into France.
The Duke had now two things which required his vigilant eye, the safe keeping
of his prisoners, John de Werth and Erkenfourt, and the anticipating of Goetz
for his intended victualling of Brisack. The first the Christian King took
from him, by sending for the prisoners and carrying them to Boys S. Vincents,
distant about three leagues from Paris.

The other burden lay upon the Dukes shoulders, who in the end of May
understanding that Goetz lay encamped near Rothywel and Villinguer, marched
thitherward with four great Cannons, twelve field pieces, nine thousand foot
and four thousand horse, to give him battle. But Goetz, who labored more to
revictual Brisack before the battle, than after, being advertised of his
march, discamped presently, and removed to the Schwartz-Waldt, that he might
more covertly perform his task, lending his provisions through the valley of
Kintzinguen and town of Offemburgh. And at that time he relieved the
Brisackers with corn enough for 4 or five days and no more; only 150 of his
Cavalliers entering into the town, each with a bag of meal behind him. Goetz
himself still delining the battle, and shifting from place to place, one part
of the Imperial army taking its way toward Constance, the other following
their General toward Hailbrunne.

The Saxon duke was busy all June in seeking his enemy, 400 Crabats slain and
routed by D. Serub.
but could not find him, but was in danger to have been found himself by 400
crabats, who being advertised that the Duke was lodged in a small village named
Brombach, with a small retinue, thought to have surprised his person. But the
Duke was not ignorant of their design, and sending incontinently to the gross
of his army, which was not far off, his succors came in so opportunely, that
he surrounded the wood where the crabats lurked, put 200 of them to the sword,
and routed the rest utterly. The enemy not yet appearing, the Swedes made an
inrode into the Black forest, and at one time brought to the camp 1000 oxen,
which the duke caused to be fed in the medows for his use.

But at length the opposite armies met and joined battle, July 9 new style,
wherein the duke was crowned with a glorious victory. The particulars whereof
because they fall not within the prescribed time for this history, I shall
refer to another discovery, wherein our Swedish Fabius Bannier, who has
without blows ruined the great Imperial and Saxon armies, and the rest of
those Heroes, whose worthy acts are not here expressed, shall be remembered at
large, and have their history continued to this present day.

Here I would make a concluding period, but the siege of Fontarabie must have
an abortive birth in the relation, as it had a prodigious end in the action.

CHAP. IV. The siege of Fontarabie.
HOw uncertain the issues of War be, if there were no other Example left, this
story alone, might sufficiently testify: never was Expedition undertaken more
cheerfully, the Nobles and Gentry of Guienne, and the South of France, engaging
themselves therein voluntarily, never was an adventure made more gloriously,
begun more auspiciously, nor continued more fortunately, till the last Act,
and yet there is scarce a Record of any which ended more fearfully.

The Prince of Conde appointed by the Christian King as General, accompanied
with the Dukes d' Espernon, de Valette de S. Simon, the Marquis de la Force and
other men of eminent note, 18000 foot and 7000 horse, was to attend this
business by land, and the Archbishop of Bordeaux with a good Navy by Sea, the
Coast of Provence committed to the sole care of the Earl of Hartcourt, and the
Archbishopric not engaged therein: Two Dunkerks men of War taken at Port du
passage.
Fortune at first attended them both by Sea and land, the Admiral, June 30.
July 10, took two Dunkerkers men of War, transporting of soldiers to the Port
du Passage, kept the Bottomes for the King his Masters service, and sent the
prisoners, to Bayon. The Prince before that day had removed all the Remora's
which might hinder him, taken in Iron, Viarson, Renteria, Loys, the Port du
passage, Diverse places taken by the Prince of Conde.
Charlon the Castle upon the Harbor, where he mounted his Cannon, and began
to play upon the Town, July 3, new style, which struck off a Pinnacle from the
Castle, and beat down some houses, and then having sent a Trumpet to summon
Bechare the principal Town in the Valley of Seringueville, he began his
approches and Earthen Fortifications. The Garrisons and Inhabitants tugged with
death, and danger to hinder their entrenching, but could not: July 10 new
style, they sallyed forth upon the Pioners, and spent four vollyes of Cannon
shot upon the Camp, but were forced to retire. The next day there issued
through the Sally-port, 100 men well armed in battle array, seconded by as
many others with Pick-axes and Spades to raise the Trenches, but were surprised
by a Regiment of French, whose charge was to guard the laborers: who slew
above 120 of them, and wounded many others, constraining as many as could to
fly in a disorderly confusion.

Bechare thus summoned, Bechare summoned, and not yielding.
the inhabitans sent a a Drum to the Prince, July 4, 14. to tell him that they
had order from their Viceroy, to maintain the Town for the Catholic King,
and that they hourly expected the succors which he had promised them, His
Excellency being fully resolved to relieve them. The Prince incensed with this
answer, gave order instantly to the Duke De Saint Simon, to draw 1000 foot, and
six Cornets of horse, out of the body of the Regiments, The Duke de S. Simon
has order to enforce it.
and with those troops, and one piece of Cannon to compel them, giving leave
to the Soldiers to use them with all hostility, that they might be exemplary
to others.

The next day, July 5, 15. the Duke Saint Simon, marched from Iron, with his
designed troops of Horse and Foot, these being commanded by Marin an Aid de
Camp, Mun, Bevidu, Beaupuy, and Merinville Camp-masters, and encamped at Sarra
the last Town of France, where he met with Amon Grand Bayliffe of the Country
de Labor, who presensented him with 300 Basques ready for his service. Here,
by advise of the Counsel of War, he appointed Amon to surveigh the ways,
and make them fit for the portage of his Cannon, furnishing the Basques with
Axes, and other tools for that service, and then himself, with the Army
marched after them.

No Enemy, which could oppose him, was yet expected, Encounters 1200 Spaniards
yet it was suspected, that such an one there might be, and Marine with a 100
foot Perdu's, was sent to see if any such appeared. He had scarce traveled
half a league upon the Spanish ground, but he spied two Battalions of the
Spaniards upon a Mountain Estward from Bechara, prepared to fight, as he
judged, by their orderly march and shouts, like those which are usual when
battles join. Nor did his conjecture fail him; a selected party drawn out of
the Spanish body, which consisted of 1200 men, came up to him roundly, charged
upon him furiously, and were received bravely, and after them followed the
Gross of the Army, which had doubtless surprised him, had not the Duke de S.
Simon come in happily to his Rescue. And here began an hot fight, wherein the
Commanders of both sides showed both courage and dexterity, Defeats them.
yet in the end came off with victory, and though the Infantry was tired, and
some of their Cavallary, as well as of the Spanish slain, they forced the Foe
to fly over the Mountains, where (not knowing the ways) which of themselves
are rough and uncouth, they could not follow them. This brunt being past, 200
of his Basques were sent to burn and pillage Bechara, Burns Bechara.
which they did so expeditiously, that in four hours space the Town was burnt
to ashes, maugre the resistance of the inhabitants, and 300 Castilians, which
labored to preserve it, though these last were martial men drawn out of the
old Bands, and the Nobility of the Frontier Towns. The Duke thus rid of the
Spanish forces, and sufficiently avenged of Bechara, intended to Rally up his
forces, and pursue the late Enemy into the Valley of Saque, but understanding
that the Grand Prior of Navarre was at Saint Estefe, but half a league off with
3000 men, he changed his mind and marched to Challar and Sourgaramourdi,
where he summoned the inhabitants which came in, supplied him with victuals,
promised obedience to the Christian King, and assured him that they of Saques
had burned the Magazin, which the Grand Prior of Navarre, had erected there,
for the mayntenance of his forces, and so returned to Sarra.

The Duke was no sooner disengaged of his charge abroad, but the Prince of
Conde was engaged in another at the Camp before Fontarabie, or Fuente Rabia.
Three thousand Spaniards were brought from Saint Sebastians by Sea in Pinnasses
and Shallops, and landed at the Port du passage, but covered from the Garrisons
eye by a Mountain betwixt the Sea and them, their intention being to regaine
the place, as appeared afterward by an Adviso found about their Commander from
Madrid, wherein he was enjoined to recover it, if it were possible, and to
assault it, 3000 Spaniards defeated near Fontaraby.
in what state soever he found it: It was a desperate attempt, so near an Army
Royal, to adventure with so few men upon a place of such consequence, nor was
the Chieftain insenfible of it, his most familiar friend, confessing after the
French victory, that upon the march, he rounded him in the ear, saying, we
march to our death; yet this task was enjoined him, and he to show his loyalty
to his King and Country undertook. But though the attempt was desperate, it was
not unpossible, he might perhaps have attained his end, if he had not been
discovered by 200 Saylours, which were employed by the Archbishop of Bourdeaux,
to mend the Vessels lately taken from the Dunkerkers, who perceiving them
climb the Hill as they were at work, fled presently, and were pursued to the
Barricadoes of the Camp, which these Spanish troops assaulted in seven places,
till the Prince of Conde who was there in person, drew his forces together
which changing these Adventurers home slew 11 of their Officers, above 600
common men, wounded their Chieftain, and took him prisoner, forced the rest to
use their heels, and pursued them to the Mountains and Cliffs of Saint
Sebastian.

During this fight by land another happened by Sea, where the Seamen sped no
better then their Land-men: six Spanish Pionasses, And two Spanish ships sunk
and 12 Vessels of burden fell upon eight ships, which the French still kept
before Fontaraby; but after a fight of 2 hours, two of the biggest Spanish
Bottoms being sunk, the rest hoysed sail, and with the help of a fair wind
recovered Saint Sebastians.

The Prince by this found no opposition abroad, he had free liberty, and freely
used it, to apply himself to the siege, whereby he brought the Town to extreme
necessity, but how successful the Catastrophe was, though the French will
not, a Spanish Capuchin, by his Relation penned modestly, like an Historian,
though with some interlarded superstition, and printed at Madrid, Sept. 2, 12
will inform you.

The Siege of Fontaraby raised.
A Relation written from the Camp by Father Friar Francis of Tarrazona, Reader
of the Arts in the Convent of Capuchins of Pampelona, unto Father Guardian of
the Capuchnis of the Convent of Zaragosa.
FAther Guardian. Seeing that the receipts of benefits are the pledges of
thankfulness, it could not seem just in me if I should omit to amplify my
thankfulness to your Paternity by not declaring and imparting unto your
knowledge so singular a blessing, and so full of divine mercies, as was our late
Victory whereof I have been an eyewitness and now shall make a plain
narration without complements, addressing my self to truth only, which shall
be sufficient to incite your Paternity to exercise your devotion in a serious
and affectionate thanksgiving. The great strait and difficulty in which the
French held the strong Town of Fontaraby is not unknown to your Paternity,
and how our Council of War had resolved to relieve it so soon as sufficient
forces might be raised to encounter with so great an Enemy though the execution
was most dangerous. Upon Tuesday August 21/31. the Lord Admiral of Castile,
and the Marquis of Veles Generals of the Forces of Navarre, and Guiapuscoa
resolved to releeve it, their Army consisting of 16000 Foot and 600 Horse,
which to that purpose being divided into 3 Squadrons, the Lords Generals with
the gross of the Army marched to the descent of a hill which is situated and
runs from the gate of the passage unto the Fort, and there mounted 8. Pieces
of Artillery in the place where the Marquis of Mirtaca was enquartered with the
third part of the Conde Dukes Army and the Irish forces. By the descent of the
valley the Marquis of Torrecusa marched with a good Squadron of Soldiers, and
Don Piedro Giron with 2000 Foot marched toward Irun where the Enemy was
fortified. In this posture was the Army the 20/^0. of August with purpose to
relieve the besieged the next day following by 4 of the clock in the morning:
But it pleased the Almighty (not without a mystery as it appeared afterward)
to frustrate their resolutions by this occasion. The night following was
tempestuous with Lightning and thunder, and the clouds dissolved into rain
which fell without intermission the space of five days: The valley was bare of
wood and trees, and near the Sea, and the toilsomnesse of that night is
inexpressible, our travel so much increasing that we could not secure our
lodgings nor make Barracadoes, but for want of wood we were forced to discampe,
the Generals compassionating the Soldiers licensing them to retire and refresh
themselves in the places next adjoining.

The Lord Admiral and the Marquis of Veles were in the Sally from Monday to
Friday, when the rain not ceasing and the waters descending to a place called
Tezo they commanded the Artillery to retire, that the Soldiers leaving their
Tents in good order might be refreshed: By which means the valley became so
desolate, that they much feared the Enemy would salley forth upon those which
remained behind thus harazzed and wearied with the rigor and extremity of the
weather.

The foulness of the weather overjoyed the Enemy, which thence concluded, that
God assisted them against the Spaniards, arming the Heavens to cross their
intentions: and to this purpose, the Prince of Conde sent a Cartell to the
Governor of Fontarabie, the sum whereof was, That to show himself a
merciful and Catholic Prince he advised him to render the place, offering
him that honorable Quarter, which could no ways impeach his Honor who had so
long maintained the place, and so valiantly, and that the rather because all
hope of succors was now taken from him, the Generals being already retired:
and that he was not ignorant of his want of Soldiers, ammunition, and
Victuals, by which the besieged should be enforced to yield: which if they
refused to do of their own accord, they would be exposed to the edge of the
Sword, the Commander should be made shorter by the head, and the rest used with
such cruelties as happen in cases of assault, the Officers not being able
(though willing) to restrain the fury of their Soldiers.

Don Doming Leguia a Knight of Biscay then Governor of Fontarabie, answered
well in the courage of a great Soldier, as the Gentilizza of a Courtier,
approving the advice, and returning due thanks for the offered courtesy and
counsel: but in the point of impossibility of succors he was not disharted
there being nonecessity thereof, nor himself being less confident to keep
the place then he was before, being already provided and abundantly furnished
of all things whereof his Excellency supposed him to be destitute, and for the
point of loosing his Head, he was confident no such disaster could befall him,
resolving rather to dye like a valiant Soldier, then to become a Prisoner and
have his head cut off, and what he believed impossible to win he had no
cause to fear, his praesidiarie Soldiers being resolved to oppose the valor
of the Besiegers.

The Prince of Conde being moved with this answer, caused 3 assaults to be
made, in which diverse of the French were slain, and upon Saturday the 4. of
September New style, they advanced so far as within 30 foot of the height of
the wall, but they were all slain two excepted, which infected those which
should have beaten them on and seconded them, with such a contagion of fear,
that they forbear to assault the Garrison.

The Admiral the Archbishop of Bordeaux assisted with 30 other Bishops came
thither also, who hindered the importation of any succors into the City by Sea:
and he seeing the place not surrendered after so many assaults, told the Prince
of Conde that he appeared an unexperienced Soldier, to make so many assaults
from the Baletta with so small reputation, intimating that he would have the
place assaulted upon the Birth of our Lady, by 4 of the clock in the morning,
but the Prince opposed saying, that the Archbishop was General at Sea, and
that it did not concern him to intermeddle with the affairs by Land. Hereupon
ensued more contention occasioned by the Duke, and d' Espernon siding with the
Archbishop: and upon the overture the Prince of Conde hasted to renew the
assault for the respect he gave the Archbishop: but his Highness entering into
a more serious consideration, and judging (not without reason) of the various
events of War, especially our men being courageous, and well fortified,
intending to disingage himself from the obligation wherein he was involved, in
an angry mood replied to the Archbishop, that being general at Sea it did not
concern him to give the assault by Land, and that he would not loose the glory
of the assault which properly belonged to his place. To appease all, his
Highness prepared a mine which he intended to spring upon the Vigill of our
Lady, and placed therein 29. barrels of Gunpowder, by which no doubt a great
part of the wall would have fallen, it being torn by other mines and
batteries: To effect it the Archbishop commanded out the ablest Soldiers in
the Navy, and promised 4000 Doblons should be distributed amongst the
adventurous which should first make the assault the most courageously and
readily. The assault was made in 4 places, the French being confident that the
Town would be rendered when the mine was sprung by reason the defendants were
but few, and they grew weary by toil and unable to hinder their approaches.

Hitherto God was pleased that we should suffer, but upon Sunday at 5. of the
clock the rain ceased and the weather holding up, our Generals placed all
their forces in the same posture wherein they had been formerly ranged a League
from the Enemy. Upon Monday at night the Generals assembled at the place called
Lezo, desirous to succor the Town with all expedition, for the day before
some sallied out of it, to certify them that if they were not relieved within
3 days the French would be Masters thereof: and thereupon they resolved to
assail the Enemies upon Tuesday the Vigill of our Lady.

The time did not then serve to muster the forces, but it is supposed that 3000
were lost by the deluge of rain and waters. Upon Tuesday in the morning the
troops were divided into 3. squadrons. By the descent of the hill which runs
from the passage to the City was the Marquess of Mortara with 2000 of the
Conde Duke, the Irish, and others, 1000 Navarrois, and Provincials, who were so
ordered and quartered, that the right wing of the Vantguard should consist of a
third part of the Conde Duke his Regiment. The Battle and Rear should take
up the other people amounting in all to 4000 with some Companies of Horse.

At the lowest part of the hill to the Southward lay the Lord Admiral of
Castile and the Marquess of Veles with the gross of the Army, with the Master
of the Camp General the Marquess of Torrecusa with 2000 selected and choice
Soldiers of Don Fausto de Ludioso.

The ablest Soldiers were disposed in the most eminent places, that the Enemy
might not be able to cut off our forces. On the other side of Irun marched Don
Pedro Giron with 2000 men, the most of them Castilians with the Campe-master
Sebastian Granero General of the Artillery, and a troop of Horse to possess
the most eminent places about Irun, and to hinder the succors which might come
from any of the French Quarters at Fontarabie. We that were Capuchns divided
our selves into 4 parts distributing our selves with our companies of the
Religious which were then there.

In this posture we advanced toward the Enemy in front the same day by 4 of
the clock in the afternoon, and the Marquess of Mortara immediately gained
the ascent of the hill whereof he had been Master before but had then
willingly abandoned, and now compassing the little hill above, he gained the
eminent places until he approached within Musket shot of the Enemies trenches,
from whence he received some round charges. The Horse and Irish wheeled to the
left hand toward the Sea to secure themselves from the offense of the Enemy
which lay behind the hill.

The Marquis of Torrecusa immediately seated himself in the secure place below
the Hill, after he had gained two Quarters from the Enemy over against a
Redoubt situated at the end of the Trench, which was the greatest
Fortification the Enemy had. His troops immediately assaulted their Enemies,
some with Pikes, others with Sword and Target, and others with Muskets, which
brake into a troop of French Horse, forcing them twice to recoyle: But the
Camp-Master General drawing up the Corslets caused his Companies to renew
their charges, and joining their Musketeers together, they charged the Enemy so
forcibly that he was not able to endure the assault, but gave ground.

In this first encounter four or 6 men entered the Redoubt fighting like Lions,
but the Enemy overmatching them in number enforced them to retire. But we
returned with such fury to the assault of the Redoubt, that having killed many
French we regayned the place at the very point of the Fortification, and
though they were many and well defended with artificial and intricate
trenches, and a ditch of very great depth, yet they abandoned the place.

The Enemies Camp removed it self a Musket shot, the Horse before, and the
Foot behind: where they stood amazed whilst you will repeat the Creed 6
times, determining as far as we could perceive to beat us back, driving
them back out of the Redoubt, and assaulting us by troops. But our men being
Masters of the place grew so couragious-instant, they charged them so roundly,
that they were enforced to turn their backs with much loss at one instant,
none of the French appearing alive in their Trenches, but leaving many dead
therein, and some Canons of a middle size wherewith they had much endamaged us,
Our forces followed the chase. Some of the Enemies that is the Cavallary flying
toward Iran, other toward the Sea, the most whereof were drowned, the Tide
running with great force and more then ordinary because of the Land waters: we
flew many of them when they were up to the middle in water, when they who had
entered the small Boats and could not row against the Tide rendered themselves,
and with folded hands and mournful voices, cried Vive le Roy de Espagne, God
quarter for Gods sake: Our Companies hastened toward the Sea in extreme danger
to the judgment of all beholders to do our Christian duties in relieving the
afflicted, and it was our great good hap, that in so great hazard wherein we
were involved our people having less resistance then the poor French, we
exercised our Charity to the comfort of those that were at the point of death.
Those which fled toward Iran we could not pursue, but if we had but stopped
their way only with 200 Musketeers, without doubt they had been all cut in
pieces or become our Prisoners, which was impossible to foresee, we not
imagining to have obtained so notable a Victory, our counsels only tending to
relieve the Port, not suspecting that so puissant an Enemy, so well fortified
in his Trenches would so soon turn his back, though many of them drowned
themselves in the passage of Bobia.

Those of Fontarabie could not salley forth, being reduced to so small a
number, which nevertheless if they had done, no doubt they had made a very
great slaughter.

Our Generals met together about 5. of the clock in the afternoon, and entered
Fontarabie, where they were received with incredible joy by a people which that
day and before had endured so many broils and toils, and had spent all the
morning in viewing the Hills a far off, to see whether the expected succors
would come; and were almost past hope, because they could descry no part of
them.

The Lords Generals, like most devout Catholic Princes, went instantly to
express their pious acknowledgement of so graat a Victory, and sang Te Deum,
which though it was not attended with the greater Music, was done with
greater Zeal and affection, Drums, Trumpets, and Artillery, being not
necessary for such a Solemnity.

Their devotions ended, the Lords Generals, saluted the inhabitants with most
loving embracements, thanking them in the name of his Catholic Majesty, for
their constant Loyalty, by which they had pleased God, and defended their King,
and Country.

Don Pedro de Giron had order to make no assault upon the French Camp, till 4
of the clock in the morning of our Lady Day, but the Enemy fled that Night,
and concealed his flight by many false fires. They left behind them much
warlike provision, ammunition apparel and riches, not burning the baggage as
they intended, and Don Pedro might without resistance have possessed himself
of Iran in the morning if he had followed it.

He that did best for gayning this victory, was the Marquess De Torrecusa,
with the Navarroyes and Neapolitans. Concerning the Particular Cavallieres I
can say little most of them being unknown to me. Some affirm, that Don
Francisco de Garro was the first, which entered into the Enemies Trenches, other
say the Earl of Xaviers though he was beaten out again by the blow of an
Halbert, which had undoubtedly slain him had not his Gorget saved him.
Captain Pedro de Maravidis Knight of the order of Saint James entered also into
the same Redoubt, whence he brought away a French Colors having slain the
Ensign in sight of the whole Army, others report the ficst that entered to have
been Don Iuan D' Eques a Knight of Navarre, and that a Neapolitane of Valentia
charged very bravely.

There were slain of the French 1200, which were seen floating upon the Son,
most of them men of quality as it seems by their outward Habit; we lost not
many, the general vote is not above thirty, yet the Lord Admiral says more,
nor had we many wounded. The Prisoners taken that day were above 1000. and the
number increases daily, mamy which had hid themselves in Brakes and Thickets,
being compelled abroad by Hunger. It is said, there were 50 of the French
Nobility wanting; but that is scarce credible. A French Trumpet came into our
Army the Friday following, who affirmed, they had lost 6 thousand men: and
being demanded what the French conceived of the Spaniards, he answered; the
Spanish are Courageous, and the French want Government: which he meant perhaps
of those which betrayed the Cause by their fear and flight; for they could not
be ignorant, that their Forces then consisted of two and twenty thousand Foot,
1000 Horse, fifty good Ships well provided, and that a re-enforcement of 6000
men was expected daily from Baiona: the Spanish Army consisting only of 3000
Foot, and five hundred Horse, more or less, and the Enemy being fortified, and
we having no place of strength, how could so shameful a flight, and so
glorious a Victory be expected? The Booty was great, and the pillage was
increased, the Enemy vainly conceiving (according to the relation of a
Capuchin prisoner) to win ground upon Fontarabie, and then to fall upon St.
Sebastian a place of less importance, and so to pass victoriously throughout
all Spain even to Madrill without resistance, which was also believed by them
as a matter of faith.

They came to the Siege very rich in Plate, Gold, costly Lodgings, Pavillions
very curiously wrought, Cabinets, and other precious furniture. We seized the
Wardrobe of the Prince of Conde, wherein we found much and very rich enamelled
Plate, and a most rich Ensign of the Order, which was of such estimation, that
the next day he sent a Trumpeter to the Admiral of Castile, entreating him to
return the Plate and the Golden Fleece and he would allow the true worth
thereof for the same. The Archbishop of Bordeaux wardrobe also they seized,
and part of his own wearing Apparel, and the four thousand Doublous which
he promised to deliver amongst his Soldiers, to encourage them to the assault.

It is thought he was present in the Camp at the time of the skirmish, and it
is not known how he escaped. Because he falls not down toward the Sea, it
is thought he betook himself to the Cittadell of Saint Elmo, from whence the
next day it was observed the French vayled their sails having given fire to
their Cittadell, cloyed it with Artillery. Their Muskets, Harquebuses, and
Pikes were all left in the place being too heavy to bear away and might hinder
their escape. Their cassocks of Skarlet, and other of finest cloth with the
orders of the Holy Ghost were very many. One of our Soldiers had 3 of them,
and sold one for 16. Royals which was then worth 100 Ducats. The hangings were
of unshorne green Velvet broy dered with Gold, embossed with Jewels, and
tufted with green water Grograynes, buttons of gold and rich galownes. The
Jewels, chains, watches, and many other rich ornaments, were found upon the
dead bodies in the Sea. In such Fishings the Irish were very skillful diving
under the waters to find them.

The Ensigns gained from the enemy were about a hundred, though the Admiral
had not so many, many of them were in the hands of particular persons, desirous
to place them in their several countries, as Trophies of their Victory:
notwithstanding the old soldiers made no account of them, saying, they would
only place in their Countries those which were taken and won from the hands
of the enemy. The pieces of Artillery which were left, during the Siege, were
23, and many of them Spanish, with the Arms and Names of the Kings of Spain:
others affirm that there were many more left, they left there also many
barrels of powder, and about three hundred Grenades, which made such spoil
within Fontarabie; It is a divellish invention, an instrument of war, weying
about 150 pounds of Castile Iron, three fingers thick, with a narrow mouth,
fastened with knots, cimented with toe, and this knot lying higher, the powder
is moistened and wet, that it may continue a time in the Air, before the
report, which afterward recoyleth from the mouth, which penetrating an house,
though it has five floores, it will pass through them all, and pierce through
the whole edifice, and has left the Bullet, which is a little Mortar, with a
large mouth, like the Grenades, but narrow on the contrary extremity. It is
reported they cost 70 Ducats a piece.

The morning before the battle arrived to the French, 4 or 5 Pinnaces, laden
with White-meates, Wine, Sweet-meates, daynties, and necessary provision, all
which was left in the Field, and gave our Army good refreshment. In one of the
Pinnaces were 6 pieces of Ordnance, and amongst them one curious piece
belonging to the Cardinal Richeleau. The Fleet was only in want of men, most
of them leaving the Sea, to give the assault by land, and it remaining at sea,
till the day of our Ladies Birth, without a convenient tide, if there we had
had but a small Army by sea, we had gained that also.

The Forts and Walls of Fontaraby, were much ruinated, especially a Curtain
called the Queens, which looked toward the Mountain, which being broken by
twelve Mines, the breach was so large, that there was no difficulty to enter
it, and if we had not erected a rampire or Countermure, fortified and
supported with timber, which the demolished houses afforded, we could not well
have held it.

The Artillery did no great damage to the wall, but rather to the Parapelts, on
which the Battery was made in four places, by innumerable Cannon shot, for
there passed not a day natural (which consists of 24 hours) wherein there
were not accounted 1200, and the quantity of the great shot was such, that (as
the French observed) our Artillery was cloyed thereby, and could not be of any
use to us, without new carriages.

We had not been so well assured of the place, had we not been assisted by
the Women, who were very cheerful, some helping to dig in our trenches,
others charging our Muskets with great expedition, and bringing powder and
shot in their lapps, that we might discharge the oftener, others apparrelling
themselves in the habits of men, having the courage to skirmish with the enemy,
wheresoever they should give the assault, with greatest fury, which we daily
expected.

It is affirmed that the Marquess of Veles encountered a noble Lady in that
posture with her Musket, rest, and white safeguard: who seeing him said, let
not your excellency marvel, for every day since the siege, I have discharged
two Muskets, but this day more: And immediately she discharged very
gracefully, his excellency showing a respective remonstrance of Honor to her
feminine valor.

The Inhabitants of Fonteraby were so feeble, that it was an extraordinary
grief to behold: for their houses for the most part were battered, and
unserviceable for use or shelter: and they had not above two Quintals of
powder, having wasted 800. The French gained many places in Reutoria, where
only were remaining, but 15 houses.

The Covent of Monks were half burnt, ours scarce received any loss at all,
before some of the Fathers of Bayona came thither: and when we thought we had
lost all, God was pleased to offer us a means of restitution, and by the great
piety and affectionate devotion, wherewith the Lord Admiral was pleased to
honor us, having vowed to reedifie and repair all the damages of the
Monastery caused by destruction of the Buildings; I presented my self to give
thanks to his Excellency, who assured me that he had acquainted his Catholic
Majesty (whom God preserve) therewith, and has wrote earnestly to the Conde
Duke, praying that it might be put to his account, to repair the damage which
the Capuchins had received; whereof his Majesty took notice, and over and
besides, undertook to provide some accommodations, which were wanting to the
said Fathers, and we owe this noble Prince an extraordinary measure of respect,
for his favor toward a prisoner of our habit, which was amongst the French:
for whom the Prince sent his Trumpetter to Bayon, accompanied with two Fathers
of our order: The father Francis Barnard of Pompelona, the Father Iuan of
Loarra.

Thus far this Capuchin, who de facto relates a truth, though he may err
perhaps in the circumstances, imputing that to fear, which was in probability
occasioned by faction, as may be gathered by the Consequents, which are to be
remembered in our next Relation.

FINIS.
London Printed for Na. Butter, and N. Bourne. Feb. 6. 1639.

With Privilege.


