A Brief and necessary Catechism, concerning the principal points of our
Christian Religion.

Written for the good of all such as seek after consolation in Christ.

By R. C.

1. Pet. 3. 15. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you.

AT LONDON, Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at the little North
door of Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun. 1602.

A brief and necessary Catechism, concerning the principal points of our
Christian Religion.
Question. WHereas all men desire to be blessed, and most men are deceived in
seeking that blessedness, tell me, which is the true way thereto?
Answer. To know God to be my Father in Jesus Christ, and therefore to serve
him according to his will, and to set forth his glory, believing that I shall
want nothing, that is good for me in this life, and that I shall enjoy
everlasting blessedness in the world to come.

How know you this?
By the working of the holy ghost, and by the means of his word.

What call you his Word?
The revealed will of GOD, set forth unto us in the holy Scriptures.

Which do you call the holy scriptures?
The books of the old and new Testament, commonly called Canonical.

Are all things that are necessary for us to know, contained in them?
Yea: for GOD being full of all wisdom, and goodness, would leave out nothing,
that was requisite for us to know.

Is it lawful to add to, or take any thing therefrom?
No: for GOD has flatly forbidden it, and has pronounced grievous curses
upon those that do so.

Why is it so grievous a sin?
Because it is a great sin to alter the last will of a mortal man, therefore
much more to change the last Testament of eternal God.

Why is it requisite that the will of God should be set forth unto us?
That we might have pure rules of his worship, and sure grounds of our
salvation.

Is it not lawful to repose any part of Gods worship, or our salvation, in the
doctrines and doings of men?
No: for all men by nature are liars, and defiled with sin: whereof it
follows, that all men's doctrines and doings, are mingled with lies and
corruptions.

How far are we bound to their doctrine and doings.
So far forth as they are agreeable to Gods word.

May all read the Scriptures?
Yea: all that be of age, able to discern between good and evil, ought to
increase in knowledge, for their furtherance in salvation, as they do in
years.

Why must all such read the Scriptures?
1. Because every one must be able to prove and try himself, whether he be in
the faith or no.

2. Because every one must be able to prove and examine men's doctrines and
doings by the Scriptures, that they be not thereby in their salvation deceived.

3. Because every one must be able, as his calling requires, to teach,
admonish, exhort, and comfort one another.

4. Because every one must be able to make an account of the faith and hope
that is in him.

But what if men cannot read?
Then they must use the help of others that can.

Is it enough to read the Scriptures privately, or with others?
No: for God has also commanded to hear the^ read publicly in the Church.

And is that enough?
No: for he also has ordained preaching.

Why must preaching be joined with reading?
Because it is the most principal and proper means to beget faith in us.

Why must faith be mixed with the word read and preached?
Because otherwise the Word profits us nothing.

How many things are requisite to be in every one that will come to hear the
word read and preached?
Amongst other, four are necessary: 1. A trembling fear of the Majesty of
God. 2. An assured faith in Christ. 3. An earnest endeavor to frame our lives
thereafter. 4. To pray for the holy Ghost to be given us, to enlighten our
minds, and write all these things in our hearts.

Which be the principal parts of Gods word?
The Law and the Gospel.

What call you the Law?
It is that part of the word, that commands all good, and forbids all
evil.

What if we could keep the Law?
Then we should be blessed.

What if we break the Law?
Then are we subject to the curse of God, and so to death and damnation.

What call you the Gospel?
It is that part of the word, which contains the free promises of God, made
unto us in Jesus Christ, without any respect of our deseruings.

What does it work in us?
A true and lively faith in Jesus Christ, whereby we lay hold of the free
remission of our sins in him, and come by true repentance of them.

What must we learn by the whole word of God.
Two things: First, to make a right and sound entrance into our salvation.
Secondly, how to increase and continue the same unto the end.

What is required for our right and sound entrance to our salvation.
Three things: First, to know and be persuaded of the greatness of my sins,
and the misery due to the same.

Secondly, to know how we may be delivered from them.

Thirdly, to know what thanks we owe to the Lord, for our deliverance.

How shall we come to aright fight of our sins, and a sound persuasion of
them.
By the Spirit of GOD, leading us to the true understanding of the Law, and a
due examination of our selves thereby.

Where is the Law set down?
It is written in many places of the scripture, but the sum thereof is
contained in the ten commandments.

Rehearse them.
I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other Gods but me. etc.

How are they divided?
Into two principal heads or Tables.

What does the first Table teach us?
Our duty toward GOD, and is contained in the four first Commandments.

What learn we by the second Table?
Our duty toward our neighbor, and is contained in the latter six
Commandments.

Why are the duties toward GOD set down, before our duties toward our
neighbor?
Because the love of GOD, is the ground of the love of our neighbor, whereof it
follows, that none can rightly love his neighbor, except he first love GOD.

Why are the duties toward our neighbor, joined to our duty toward God?
Because the love of our neighbor, is the proof and trial of our love
toward God. Whence it follows again, that none can love God aright, except
he also love his neighbor.

Why are the Commandments set down in ten parts, and not in general.
Because God is not pleased with doing our duties in general, or in some
part, but he will be wholly served in all and every one of his Commandments.

Why are they set down singulerly, or to every one?
Because every one must do his own duty, though none go before him:
whence it follows, That every one must bear his own burden, and none shall
have excuse by others example.

Are there not some rules, which serve for the better understanding of every
one of the Commandments.
Yes: there are four which have especial uses.

1. In every commandment where evil is forbidden, the contrary good is
commanded: and where any good is commanded, the contrary evil is forbidden.

2. In every commandment, many more evils are forbidden, and many more good
things commanded, then in word are expressed.

3. God is a Spirit, and therefore his commandments, require a spiritual
obedience.

4. In every Commandment where evil is forbidden, there the occasions of
evil are also forbidden, and where good is commanded, there also the
occasions of good are commanded.

What is the first Commandment?
Thou shall have no other Gods but me. Com. 1.


What evil is here generally forbidden?
Even that which the words do import.

What good is commanded.
To have God my only God, and to be always in his presence.

What is it to have God to be our only God.
To give him all those things which be proper and peculiar to his majesty.

Which be those, that properly concern God, and therefore be the especial
things commanded.
The sum of them are these: I am bound by this Commandment to bel^^ue in
God, to love, fear, and obey him, to praise him, and pray unto him.

After what sort must you perform these duties.
With my whole mind, and understanding, with my whole heart and strength.

Which be the peculiar things forbidden.
To fail, in giving to God any of these or the like good things in any part or
respect.

What else is particularly forbidden.
To give any of these forenamed things, to any creature or any other thing
whatsoever, whereby our heart may be in any sort withdrawn from God.

What be the occasions of breaking this Commandment.
1. The vain desire of pleasures, riches, and glory of this world.

2 A negligent and careless use of the means to serve God.

Are not the contrary good things to these Commanded.
1 Yes: As first a heart contented with any estate, and using the things of this
world, as if it used them not.

2 A reverent and diligent use of the means to serve God his providence.

Rehearse the second Commandment.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Com. 2.
Image. etc.

What evil is expressly forbidden here.
I am forbidden to make any Image either to represent God or worship him by.

What evil is generally forbidden.
I must avoid all inventions and devises of man in the outward worship of God,
which be contrary or beside the word.

What be the especial evils forbidden.
Chiefly all the corruptions, in the substance of doctrine, Prayer,
Sacraments, and discipline of the Church.

What occasions of evils be forbidden.
There be some which we must necessarily avoid, unless we will fall into
superstition and idolatry: as:

1 To join the false parts of worship, with the true worship of God. 2 To be
present at idolatreas and superstitious service. 3 The reservation of some
especial monument of superstition and idolatry.
Which be the lesser occasions forbidden, and yet so that we have the especial
grounds of Gods worship, which must and may tolerate, when we cannot help
them.
1 All vain, idle, and superstitious ceremonies.

2 All keeping company with false worshippers.

Is not the evil in heart also forbidden.
Yes: so far forth as I trust in my heart to have any of them prevail or be
established.

What good is commanded.
1 Generally, all the outward means of God his worship, which be agreeable to
his written word.

2 Specially, doctrine, prayer, sacraments, and discipline of the Church, as
agree with Gods word in the substance thereof.

What occasions of good be commanded.
1 To have and use good books, of the doctrine and histories of the Church,
written according to Gods word.

2 Erecting and maintaining of schools of learning as nurseries of the
ministry.

3 Sufficient provision to be made for the ministers.

4 Building and maintayning Churches, with all things belonging thereto.

5 All good ceremonies and orders agreeable to Gods word.

6 All familiar company with the true worshippers of God.

What good in heart is here commanded.
To use the means of Gods worship not only outwardly, but also in spirit and
truth.

What mean these words, For I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God. etc.
That God will punish false worship in the false worshipper, and unto the third
and fourth generation in their posterity.

What is meant by that, And will show mercy unto thousands, etc.
That God will bless his true worship in the true worshippers, and their
posterity into the fourth descent.

What is the use of these.
To make false worship more vile, and his true worship more precious in our
eyes.

Rehearse the third Commandment.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy Com. 3.
God in vain. etc.

What is here forbidden.
1 All perjury or false swearing, banning or cursing, enchanting or coniuring.

2 All swearing by false Gods, or naming them with reverence.

3 All customable speaking of God, or swearing without reverence.

4 Causing Gods Name to be dishonored by false doctrine, or an ungodly life, in
my self, or other.

What good is commanded.
1 In matters concerning Gods glory, I must swear by God only in justice,
judgment, and truth.

2 I must endeavor from my heart to grow up in the true knowledge of God, and a
godly life, that God may be glorified therein.

What mean those words, For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that
takes. etc.
That God will certainly punish the dishonouring of his name in any sort.

What is the use hereof.
To make us more fearful to dishonor God, and more careful to honor him.

Rehearse the fourth Commandment.
Remember the saboth day to keep it holy. etc. Com. 4.


What is here commanded.
Generally, to make it my whole delight to sanctify the holy Saboth of the
Lord, from morning to night.

1 Particularly, to use all the public means of Gods worship in the
congregation of Gods people.

2 To rejoice to use all such private exercises as may make the public means
profitable to my self and to other.

What be those private exercises.
1 The examining of my sinful wants, private prayer, reading the scripture,
singing of Psalms, conferring with other, and applying all things to my self,
with a care to profit other.

2 Releeuing the needy, visiting the sick, and them that be in prison,
comforting them that are in misery, reconciling them that be at variance,
admonishing the unruly, etc.

3 The considering the creatures of God, thereby to provoke my self and other
to praise him.

What else is generally commanded.
A diligent searching with my heart, with the like care to find out, and to
reap some profit of the forenamed means, so that I may be better for, and
through them.

What is forbidden.
Generally, the using of those either private or public means, in ceremonies,
without some good fruit in my self, or care of fruit in other.

1 Particularly. All such labors and pleasures in thought, word or deed, as
may hinder me or other fron using or profiting by the forenamed means.

2 The leaving unused any of those public or private exercises.

Rehearse the fifth Commandment?
Honor thy father and thy mother. etc.

Whom do you understand by Father and Mother.
Not only my natural parents, but also all those whom God has set over me,
for my good, as Magistrates, Ministers, Masters, etc.

What duties do Children owe to their Parents?
Reverently and obediently to receive their instructions, commandments and
corrections, to succor and pray for them.

what are they forbidden to do.
To refuse or murmr their instructions, commandments, and corrections, or
to neglect any duty belonging to them.

what duties do servants owe to their masters.
In fear and trembling to submit themselves to their instructions,
commandments, and corrections, and to pray for them.

what are they forbidden.
To refuse or repine their instructions, corrections, and commandments, and
to do no eye service to them.

what if parents and masters do not their duties.
Yet they must obey for conscience to Gods ordinance.

what if they command unjust things.
They must obey God rather then man, and submit themselves to their corrections.

why are those things added, That thy days may be long in the land.
To allure us more carefully to keep, and willingly to obey his
commandments: whereas disobedience shall be punished with a short and
miserable life.

Rehearse the sixth Commandment.
Thou shall do no murder. Com. 6.


what is here forbidden.
1 Four things especially. First, by weapen or poison to kill our brother.

2 By wound, or blow, or any such means to shorten the life, or impair the
heath of any man.

3 By word, countenance, or gesture, to mock, grieve, or contemn any man.

4 To be moved with anger, hatred, or envy, whereby we may be brought to
revenge our selves on our brother.

what is commanded.
1 To have peace with all men, as much as possible is in us.

2 In thought, word, or deed, to seek the preservation of all.

Rehearse the seventh Commandment.
Thou shall not commit adultery. Com. 7.


How many things are here forbidden?
1 Three. 1 All those outward acts, whereby the body is defiled, as adultery,
fornication, and uncleanness, and this is committed two ways.

1 Either against our own bodies, which is unnatural, or against the bodies of
other creatures, which is monstrous. 2 By marrying one either of a false
religion, or no religion, or within the degrees forbidden, or by the
intemperate use of the marriage bed.

2 All those instruments and occasions are forbidden, whereby this sin is
stirred up, or strengthened in us, and they be all contained in this word,
wantones. Which is, 1 When either the whole body is abused in idleness, or vain
sports, or else when any part of the body, as the eye, the ear, the tongue,
the nose, the head, or the foot, are abused to evil.

2 When we use intemperately, meat, drink, sleep, or apparel, or any
inconvenient company, time or place.

3 All that inward settled lust is forbidden, whereunto the heart does give
consent.

What good is commanded.
1 To keep my self pure and chaste in mind and body.

2 To use those means carefully which may keep us chaste.

What means be those.
Continual temperance in meat, drink, sleep, and apparel, continual
painfulness in our calling, fasting and watching so long as need requires.

What if by these means we cannot be kept chaste.
Then may we marry, and in marriage to use those means carefully, whereby the
marriage bed may be kept pure and undefiled.

Rehearse the eight Commandment.
Thou shall not steal. Com. 8.


How many evils are here forbidden.
1 Three. 1. All those outward acts, whereby stealth is committed, and that
is, by our selves, or by other. By other, when we command or counsel others
to steal, either by keeping counsel, or any way consenting to them. By
others. 1. All secret filching and open robbery, of never so small a thing for
never so great a need. 2. All extortion, or violent wrong, all oppression and
unmerciful dealing. 3. All deceit in buying or selling, or exchaunging and not
restoring things borrowed, found, given to be kept, and such like.

2 All the outward occasions of stealth* 1 As false waights, measures, coin,
etc. 2 Living in an unlawful calling, idleness, wastfull spending of our goods.

3 All inward stealth of the heart is forbidden: that is, the settled will or
desire of our neighbors goods, although we cannot get them, either for fear,
shame or etc. we do not take them.

What is here commanded?
1 To restore goods evil gotten, or wrongfully kept.

2 To labor faithfully in a lawful calling, to be sparing of that we get, and
to help others as need requires.

Rehearse the ninth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness, etc. Com. 9.


What is here forbidden.
Not only to bear false witness our selves, but also to be partakers with
false witness bearers.

How may ways is false witness borne.
Two: Outwardly and inwardly.

Against whom do men bear false witness outwardly?
Against others, or themselves, against others, two ways. 1 In judgment, when
they give or receive false information, pronounce or write false sentence.

2 Out of judgment, and that is also two ways. 1 When any raise up, spread
abroad, or listen after false reports. 2 When any report the falts of others,
without care of their credit, or when with flattering hearts they commend any
man.

How do men bear false witness against themselves.
Either when they deny that to be in them, which is indeed, or take that upon
them which is not, good or evil.

What be the occasions of false witness.
The fleshly hatred of our enemies, or carnal love of our selves, or our
friends, to get the things we love, and avoid that we hate.

How do me^ bear false witness inwardly.
Either in suspicion without a just cause, or in judging falsely or hardly of
any man.

How are we partakers with false witness bearers?
If we either command or counsel it to be done, or if we mislike it not,
staying it if we can.

What is here commanded.
1 In judgment to further righteous causes, so far forth as my calling requires

2 To speak the truth from my heart to every man, so much as is requisite for
him to know.

3 To be as careful of the credit of my neighbor, as the nature of his
offenses will permit.

Rehearse the tenth Commandment.
Thou shall not covet. etc. Com. 10.


Are all motions and desires evil.
No: For the desire and appetite of meat, drink, and sleep, are natural, and
in their own nature good, unless through our corruption they become sinful.

What motions then be evil.
Those which are either against God, or our neighbors.

Are all such forbidden in this Command.
No: For those which are against God are forbidden in the first commandment,
those therefore are forbidden here which are against our neighbor.

Seeing in the former commandment, we are forbidden to hurt our neighbor in
heart, how does this differ from the former.
There, the settled desires of the heart are forbidden, but here are forbidden
those only, whereto the heart does not consent.

Whence do these motions arise.
Either of our own corruption, or else are offered by Satan, or else by men.

Are all these sins in us.
All that arise of our own corruption, are, but those which the devil or men
offer unto us, are not, unless we be infected with them.

How are we infected by them.
When we take pleasure in them, when we be entangled by them, or when we
suffer the^ to tarry in our minds, although our hearts do not give consent.

How is this commandment broken.
1 When evil motions arise of corruption, moving us to hurt our neighbor.

2 When we be infected with those evil motions, which satan or evil men put
into our minds.

3 When we do not with like affection desire the good of our neighbor as we
do our own.

What is commanded.
To love my neighbor as my self.

Who is your neighbor.
Every one that is near me, and stands in need of my help, and it lies me
t^ ^elpe him, though he be a stranger, or my foe.

Why judge you so.
Because of the image of God in him, and that he is mine own flesh in respect
of our first parents.

Does the law of God prescribe the perfect rule of righteousness?
Yea: For there is no good thing in deed, word, or thought, but it is here
commanded and likewise no evil but heer^it is forbidden.

Can every one keep the Law perfectly.
They that are not borne again of God, cannot keep it at all in any point, as
pleasing God thereby in respect of themselves. For except he be borne again of
God, he cannot see the kingdom of God, nor enter therein: much less keep the
commandments of God: Moreover all men by nature, being borne and conceived in
sin, are not only utterly insufficient to any good thing, but also disposed
and ready to all sin and wickedness.

What punishment is due to the breakers of Gods law.
In this life the curse of God and death, with manifold miseries of body and
soul, or both. And where this curse is not taken away, everlasting death and
damnation of body and soul in hell.

But God is merciful.
Yea and God is just and righteous, which righteousness must fully be
discharged, or else we cannot be pertakers of his mercy.

And cannot we by ourselves make satisfaction for our sins?
No: But rather from day to day increase our debt.

But does not God wrong to man, to require of him that which he is not able to
perform.
No: For God made man so yt he might have performed it, but he by his sin,
spoiled himself and his posterity of those godly gifts.

Can any creature in heaven or earth, which is only a creature, satisfy his
righteousness.
None at all, for 1 God will not punish that in another creature, which is due
to be paid by man. 2 None that is only a creature can abide the wrath of God
against sin, and deliver other from the same.

What manner of man is to be sought out to be our Mediator and deliverer.
He which is indeed a very right man, and perfectly righteous, and more
mighty then all creatures beside: that is, he which also is God.

Why must he be man, and perfectly righteous.
Because the righteousness of God requires, that the same nature which had
sinned, should pray and make amends for sin.

Why must he be God withal.
That by his godly power, he may abide the burden of Gods wrath in his flesh,
and may get again, and restore to us the righteousness and life which we in
Adam lost.

Who is that Mediator which is very God, and very man, and perfectly
righteous withal.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, who is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption.

What is the use of all which has hitherto been taught.
To bring us to a sound persuasion and feeling of our sins, because they have
deserved so grievous punishment, as either the death of the Son of God, or
hell fire.

Are they delivered from the curse of the Law, and made partakers of Christ's
merits, that are truly humbled.
Yea: For heaven and earth shall pass, but one tote or tittle of Gods law
shall not fail, till all be fulfilled.

How is the truth of Gods law fulfilled.
Both in Gods children and in the wicked. In them, because it brings them to
be truly humbled in themselves for their sins, and then sends them to
Christ, who does quite fulfill it. In these, because it declares to them their
just confusion, when to the end they either persevere, or despair.

Is sorrow for sin sufficient to bring us to salvation.
No: But we must also have a true faith, which is a true persuasion of the
mereies of God, merited by our Savior Jesus Christ.

How shall we attain to this true faith.
By the spirit of God, giving us the true understanding and persuasion of the
Gopell.

Where is the Gospel declared unto us.
It is generally declared unto us in the holy Scriptures, but the Church of God
has gathered out of them a certain sum thereof, which is the articles of our
Christian faith, commonly called the Creed.

Rehearse those articles.
The Belief.
I believe in God the Father, almighty, etc.

How many parts are there in these articles.
There are two. 1 Touching our faith in God. 2 Of our faith concerning the
Church.

What believe you in the first part.
I declare, that I believe in God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

Why say you I believe in God, and not in Gods?
For that there is but one only true God, upon whom my faith is wholly stayed.

If there be but one God, why name you three, the father, the son, and the holy
ghost.
Because God has so opened himself in his word, that these three sundry
persons, are but one true and everlasting God.

Why say you I believe in God, and not rather, that there is a God.
By saying I believe in God, I declare that I put my whole trust and assurance
in God, whereas the devils and wicked men, believing that there is a God, yet
cannot put their whole trust and confidence in him.

why say you I believe, and not we believe
Because I must be saved by my own faith, and not by the faith of another.

Why call you God Father?
Because he is the Creator of heaven, and earth, and so the father of all
creatures.

Why say you Creator, and not Maker of heaven, etc.
Because he created all things of nothing, but to make, is to make something of
that, which was before.

Why call you him Almighty.
Because as he created all things of nothing, so he does preserve and guide the^
by his mighty power, wisdom, justice, and mercy.

What comfort hence do we receive.
1 That al ye good angels of god shall watch over me, and pitch their tents
about me.

2 That neither the devil nor men, shall have any power to hurt me: but when,
and so far as God will permit them.

3 That I shall have a profitable and convenient use of all Gods creatures.

4 Though I suffer hurt by satan, or want of his creatures, yet all this shall
turn to my good in the end.

How can this be.
Because God can do it as an almighty God, and will do it, as a most
merciful and loving father.

True it is, that by creation we had this benefit, but we have lost it, and are
become the children of wrath, how then can God become our father, and show us,
this mercy.
He is become my father by faith in Christ, the son of God,

What believe you of GOD the Son.
First, that he is able to work my salvation. 2. That he has wrought it
indeed after the manner that is here set down.

How can you believe that he is able to work your salvation.
I believe it, because he is both God and man, and has received an office from
God the Father to work my salvation.

By what words in the Creed do you believe that Christ is God.
By these: ( His only son,) I declare that I believe in Christ the only
begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds: God of God:
light of light: very God of very God: begotten nor made: being of one
substance of the father, by whom all things were made.

Why call you him the only begotten Son of God.
Because he is the alone Son of God by nature.

How can this be, seeing the Angels, Adam, and we also, be the Sons of God.
Adam was the son of God by creation, which state we have lost, but now we be
the sons of GOD by regeneration.

Why was it requisite he should be God.
Because nothing but God was able to abide, and overcome the wrath of God, and
the punishment due unto sin.

What comfort have you by this, that Christ is God.
Hereby I am assured that he is able to save me, by reconciling me to the
Father, that he may make me the child of God.

By what words in the Creed do you show, that you believe that Christ is man.
By these words ( Borne of the Virgin Mary) where I show that he was borne, as
other men be, and subject to all infirmities of man, sin only excepted.

Why are these words added? Conceived by the holy Ghost?
To show that Christ by the holy Ghost was conceived in the womb of the virgin
Mary, she continuing still a pure virgin, and that he was borne holy and
without sin, whereto all other by nature are subject.

Was it needful that Christ should be without sin.
Yea: For otherwise the Godhead and manhood could not have him joined together:
besides if he had been a sinner he could not have satisfied for others sins.

Why was it requisite that he should be man?
Because the righteousness of God requires that the same nature which had
sinned, should also pay and make amends for sin.

What comfort is in this, that Christ is man?
I am thereby assured that Christ is fit to suffer the punishment of my sin,
and being man himself, will be more pitiful and merciful to me.

what fruit have you by his holy conception?
I am assured, that his holy conception has covered the corruption of my
nature, and that his pure conception shall be imputed unto me.

what comfort have you by this, that he is both God and man?
That he is able to finish most fully my salvation, seeing as he is man, he
is fit to suffer for sins: as he is GOD, he is able to bear the punishment
of sin, and to overcome in suffering, and therefore to be called Jesus.

what does Jesus signify?
It signifies a Savior: which name agrees to Christ, because he saves me
from all my sins, and because there is no other means, whereby I may in part
or whole, be delivered from them.

what comfort have you by this?
Even the same which I said, and the rather, because GOD from heaven gave him
this name, and the Church on earth has subscribed thereunto,

What signifies Christ.
Anointed, for he was anointed to be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, for all
his people, and so for me.

How gather you this?
By the annoynting Prophets, Priests, and Kings, which were figures of him.

Was Christ anointed with material oil as they were.
No: But with all gifts of the Spirit, without measure.

Why call you him Prophet?
Because he was, is, and ever shall be the only teacher of the Church.

What were then the Prophets and Apostles.
They were his disciples and servants, speaking only by his spirit.

What comfort have we by this.
Hereby I am assured that he will lead me into all truth, needful for Gods
glory and my salvation.

Why call you him Priest.
Because offering up himself a sacrifice once for all, he has satisfied for
all my sins, and makes continual intercession to the father for me.

What comfort do we reap by his Priesthood.
That, I am sure, that he is my Mediator, and that I am made a Priest.

How is that.
By him I have freedom and boldness to draw near, and offer up my self, and
all that I have to God the Father.

Why call you him King.
Because he does guide and govern me to everlasting life by his word and
spirit.

What comfort have you by this.
Hereby I am assured, that by his kingly power, I shall finally overcome the
flesh, the World, Death, and Hell.

Why call you him Lord.
For that, not with gold or silver, but with his precious blood, he has
purchased* us to be a peculier people to himself.

What comfort have you thereby*
Seeing he has paid so precious a price for me; that he will not* suffer me
to perish.

What is the second thing wherein thy faith in Christ consists.
I believe, that he has wrought my salvation in deed, after that manner that
is set down in the Creed*

How is that?
1 First by his most painful sufferings for sin.

2 By his most glorious victory and triumph over sin.

In what words are his paineful sufferings expressed.
In these. Suffered under Pontius* Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, etc.

what is the general meaning of these words?
Therein I show my self to believe that Christ endured most grieuo^s torments
both of body and soul.

what comfort have you ny this?
I am freed from all those punishments of body and soul which my sins have*
deserved.

How then comes it to pass that we are so often afflicted with grievous
torments of body and soul.
Our sufferings are not by desert any satisfaction for our sins in any part,
but being sanctified in the most holy sufferings of Christ, they are medicines
against sin.

why are those words set down, Suffered under Pontius Pilate.
Not only for the truth of the story, but also to teach, that he appeared
willingly, and of his own accord, before an earthly Judge, of who^ he was
pronounced innocent, and yet by the same man condemned.

what comfort have you hereof?
That my Savior thus suffering not for his own sins, but wholly for mine and
other men's, under an earthly Judge, I shall be discharged by the heavenly Judge.

what is meant by this that he was crucified.
That he died not only a common death, but such an one as was accursed both of
God and man.

what comfort have you by this?
This: That I am delivered from the curse which I have deserved by the breath
of the law, and shall obtain the blessing* due unto him* for keeping the same*

what means this, that he died?
That his soul was separated from his body, so that he died a corporal death.

Why was it requisite that he should die?
Because by sin came death into the world, so that the justice of God could
not be satisfied for our sins, unless death had been joined with his
sufferings.

Why is it further said, that He was buried.
To assure us more truly that he was surely dead.

What comfort have you by his death and burial.
1 This is my first comfort, that my sins are freely discharged in his death,
and so buried, that they shall never come in remembrance.

2 Besides, my comfort is the more, because by the virtue of his death and
burial, sin shall be killed in me, and buried, so that henceforth it shall
have no power to reign in me.

3 I need not fear death, seeing that sin, which is the sting of death, is
taken away by the death of Christ, and that death is now made to me an entrance
into life.

What means this, He descended into hell.
That my Savior Christ did not only suffer in body, but also in soul did
abide most miserable vexations, griefs, and painful troubles, and fear of
mind, into which, both before, and most of all when he hanged upon the cross,
he was cast.

What comfort have you hereby.
That in all my grievous temptations and assaults, I may stay and make sure my
self by this, that Christ has delivered me from the sorrowful pains and
griefs of hell.

What beleeuest thou in this article, He rose again.
I believe, that Christ which in his 1. Cor. 15, 20.
manhood had suffered for me, did on the third day rise by his own power from
the dead.

Wherein does this article minister comfort unto thee.
1 In three things. 1 His resurrection assures me, that his righteousness shall
be imputed to me for my perfect justification.

2 Because it rayseth me up from day to day to righteousness, and newnes of life
in this world.

3 It ministers unto me a comfortable hope, that I shall rise again in the
last day from bodily death.

What beleeuest thou in this article, He ascended into heaven?
I believe that Christ in man's nature, Act. 1. 2. 9.
the Apostles looking on ascended into heaven.

What comfort have you thereby?
1 I am comforted in this, that Christ Heb. 9. 15.
has prepared a place for me in the heavens, which now I feel by faith, and
hereafter I shall fully enjoy.

2 I am comforted by his intercession to the father for me.

What fruit have you thereby?
1 It does reconcile me to the Father, for those sins which I daily commit.

2 Being reconciled to him, I can pray to God with boldness, and call him father.

What means that, He sits at the right hand of God, etc.
That Christ in his man's nature was 1. Pet. 3. 22.
advanced by the father unto that hie authority, whereby he rules all things
in heaven and earth.

What comfort reap you hereby?
1 Because I shall receive from him Math. 6. 26. etc.
all things needful for me under his gracious government.

2 By his power all mine enemies shall be subdued and trodden under my feet.

What believe you in this article, From thence he shall come to judge the
quick and the dead.
That Christ shall come in his majesty, 1. Cor. 15. 51. 52.
to pronounce sentence upon all those that were dead before, and that shall be
found alive.

What comfort have you by this?
1 I am comforted in my greatest misery, Reave. 22. 20
knowing that Christ will come one day to rid me out of all.

2 I am sure he will give sentence on Romans 8. 1.
my side, and take me to glory with him.

Why say you, I believe in the holy Ghost.
Because he is God, equal with the Father and the Son.

Why call you him holy.
Because he is the author and worker of all holiness.

What fruit have you by this?
1 He does assure me, that I am yt child of god, by making me call him Abba,
Father.

2 He assures me, that by the death and resurrection of Christ, sin dies in
me, and I am raised up to holiness of life.

3 He leads me into all truth, needful to Gods glory and my salvation.

4 He comfort me in all troubles, and in death assures me of a better life
in this same body and soul.

What means this article, I believe the holy Catholic Church.
That there is a Church of God, though it cannot always be seen with the eyes
of men.

Why call you the Church holy.
For that, although in this life in it self it is sinful, yet in Christ the
head it is holy, and in the life to come, shall be brought to the true
perfection of holiness.

Why do you call it Catholic.
Because God at all times, and in all places, and of all sorts of men, has an
holy Church.

What means this article, The communion of Saints.
That the whole Church communicate with Christ, and every member one with
another.

What comfort have you by this.
1 I am comforted, for that I am justified by that faith, whereby Adam and
Abraham were justified: which is tied to no time nor place, and excludes no
person.

2 Because I am made pertaker of Christ, and all his merits by faith, and all
the blessings of the Church by love.

What beleeuest thou by this article, I believe the forgiveness of sins.
That God for Christ's sake, does freely forgive not only my sins, but also
the punishment which I have thereby deserved.

why say you, I believe the forgiveness of sins.
Because no reason can persuade me, but the holy Ghost must work the
assurance thereof in my heart only.

what comfort have you thereby.
1 Because all the sins I daily commit shall never be laid to my charge.

2 Because the weakness and wants of all my duties are covered and supplied in
Christ.

3 For that God will hear me praying for other, that they may have faith to
feel the forgiveness of sins.

what mean you by this article, The resurrection of the body into life
everlasting.
That this body after it shall be dissolved into dust, shall be raised up
again at the last day, and my soul shall live in everlasting glory.

What comfort reap you thereby?
1 I am made cheerful in well doing, seeing my labor is not in vain.

2 I am made to despise the pleasures and glory of this word, and with patience
to suffer all the troubles of this life.

3 It comfort me over the death of my friends, and makes me to be
cheerful in death, knowing I shall have a part in the resurrection of the just.

What fruit have you by believing all these articles.
The drift of all this, that being justified by faith, I am made righteous
before God.

Which be the several fruits?
1 I am at peace with God, although in my self, for my outward sins, which I
daily commit, and my inward conception which remains, I am accused.

2 I get strength to fight against my outward sins, to subdue my outward
corruption, to do outward good works, and to delight in the law of God, in my
inner man.

3 I have an interest in all Gods creatures, so that the use and want of them
shall turn to ye furtherance of my salvation.

4 I am assured of the glorification of my soul and body in the heavens,
because I am made an heir of everlasting life.

Why is this given wholly and only to faith.
Not because faith does deserve it, but because the merits of Christ can be
laid hold on, and applied to my self by no other means, but by faith alone.

Cannot good works in some part iustisie us.
No: For righteousness which is able to stand before God, must be perfect.

Are not our works so.
No: For many ways we sin all, besides, the best works we do are defiled
with sin, and therefore can deserve nothing at the hand of God.

why then does God promise a reward to them.
That is not for the desert of works, but of Gods grace and mercy.

Then this doctrine will make men careless for well doing.
No: For they that be ingrafied into Christ, must needs bring forth good works

why is it needful they should do good works.
1 That we may by them show our selves thankful to God for all his benefits.

2 That we be assured of faith and election by good works.

3 That by them we may ediffe others, and that will be. 1. By encouraging and
strengthening those that are good. 2 By winning those that are not yet come to
God. 3 By stopping the mouths of the wicked.

4 That God may be glorified thereby.

Are good works so needful that we cannot be saved without them.
Yea: For although they work not our salvation, in any part, yet for that,
they that are justified are also sanctified, they that do no good works
declare they are neither justified nor sanctified, and therefore cannot be
saved.

Then they must much more be condemned which commit sin and lie in it.
Yea: For such are not only pronounced accursed by the law, but also the
Gospel has denounced that they shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Can every one do good works.
No: None but such as are borne again, that is, that they have received
Christ, as he is offered to us of God ye Father, to be our wisdom, holiness,
righteousness and redemption.

who then do good works.
They that are thus borne again, and carry in them the image of God, have
repentance wrought in them, from whence good works do proceed.

What is repentance?
It is a turning of our selves to God, whereby we crucify and kill the
corruption of our nature, and reform our selves in the inner man according to
Gods will.

What is it to crucify the corruption of nature.
It is truly and with all my heart to be sorry, that I have offended God with it,
and my other sins, and every day, more and more to hate it, and them, and
fly from them.

How is this sorrow wrought.
Partly by the threatenings of the law, and the fear of Gods judgments, but
especially increased by seeing Christ's death, whereby I have power to hate sin
and ll^aue it.

How is this reformation of our selves wrought in us.
Only by the promises of the Gospel, whereby we feel the fruit of the rising
again of Christ.

What insueth hereof.
Heerby we are raised up into a new life, having the Law written in our hearts,
and so reform our selves.

Hereby it appears that none can repent of themselves, or when they will.
True: For it was said before, that it is the gift of God, given unto them that
are borne again.

By this also it is evident that Gods children stand in need of repentance so
long as they live.
Yea: For there is none of the Saints of God, but carrying always this
corruption about them, sometime fall, and are far from that perfection of
godliness which the Lord requires.

Why then says our Savior Christ, that the Angels of God rejoice more over
one sinner that repents, then over 99. who need no repentance.
Our Savior speaks of repentance from dead works, and gross sins, whereof
the righteous do not stand in need, and yet they are daily to repent of their
errors and infirmities.

Seeing it was said before, that good works proceed from repentance, what
properties are required of works.
1 That they be such as God has commanded in his law.

2 That they which do them, be ingrafted into Christ, and do continue in him.

What say you then of their good works which are not in Christ.
They do no good works, because they neither are as yet members of Christ,
neither do they offer them in his name.

3 That they be done to glorify God, and assure us of salvation.

Is it not lawful to seek our own praise or merit by our good works.
No: For all our good works are imperfect, and salvation is only merited by
the death of Christ.

We have heard that the Law works knowledge of our sins and feeling of our
misery, what means has God ordained to work faith in us.
These five: The Gospel, Prayer, Sacraments, discipline, and affliction.

How many kinds of faith be there.
1 Two: General, whereby I believe God to be true in all his words.

2 Special, whereby either I believe God to be just in his threatenings, and so
am made penitent, or else whereby I believe that he is merciful in his
promises, and so come to repentance.

what difference is there between penitence and repentance.
Penitence is a sorrow for sin, wrought by the Law.

Repentance is a remoouing our selves from sin, wrought by the Gospel.

Is there such difference between the Law and the Gospel.
Yea: They differ in four things.

1 The Law reueileth sin, rebukes us for it, and leaves us in it. The
Gospel reueileth unto us the remission of sins, and freeth from the
punishments belonging thereunto.

2 The Law commands to do good, and gives no strength, but the Gospel
inableth us to do good, the holy Ghost writing the Law in our hearts, and
assuring us of the promise.

3 The Law is the ministry of wrath, death and condemnation, but the Gospel
is the ministry of grace, justification and life.

4 In many points the Law may be conceived by reason, but the Gospel cannot,
being far above man's reason.

wherein do they agree.
In this, that they be both of God, and declare one kind of righteousness,
though they differ in offering it unto us.

What is that one kind of righteousness.
The perfect love of God, and of our neighbor.

What insueth hereof?
That the severe Law, pronounces all the faithful righteous, because they
have in Christ all that the Law requires.

But yet they remain transgressors of the Law.
They are transgressors in themselves, and yet righteous in Christ, and in
their inner man they love righteousness, and hate sin.

What then is the state of the faithful in this life.
They are sure in Christ, and yet fight against sin.

What fight have they.
1 Within, they have the battle of the flesh against the spirit.

2 Without, the temptations of satan and of the world.

How shall they overcome.
By a lively faith in Jesus Christ.

What call you the flesh.
The corruption of our nature wherein we were borne and conceived.

Does that remain after regeneration.
Yea it dwells in us, and cleaves fast unto us, so long as we carry the
outward flesh about us.

How does the flesh fight against the spirit.
By continual lusting against it, and that is two ways.

1 By hindering or corrupting us in the good motions, works and deeds of the
spirit.

2 By continual moving us to evil motions, words and deeds.

What call you the spirit.
The holy spirit which God in Christ has given us, whereby we are begotten
again.

Do we not receive the spirit in full measure, and in perfection at the first.
No: But first we receive the first fruits, and afterward daily increases of
the same unto the end, if yt fault be not in us.

How does the spirit fight in us.
By lusting against the flesh, and that is also two ways.

1 Partly by rebuking, and partly by restrayning in us the evil motions and
deeds of the flesh.

2 By continual inlightening us, and affecting us with thoughts, words, and
deeds agreeable to Gods will.

What call you the world.
The corrupt state and condition of men, and the rest of the creatures.

How does the world fight against us.
By alluring and drawing us to the corruptions thereof, and the means it uses
herein are two.

1 Often times by false pleasures, profit, and glory of this world, from our
obedience to God.

2 Often times it draws us by pains and losses, and reproaches, to distrust
Gods promises.

How shall we overcome the pleasures, profit, and glory of this world.
1 By a true faith in Jesus Christ, who desposed all these things to work our
salvation, and to make us able to overcome them.

2 By a faith in Gods word, that fears us from doing any thing that is
against his will.

How shall we overcome the pains, losses and reproaches of this world.
1 By a lively faith in Jesus Christ, who suffered all these things to work
our salvation, and inableth us to suffer them.

2 By a steadfast faith in Gods providence, that we shall want no good thing:
and that all things soeming hurtful, shall be turned to the furtherance of our
salvation.

What call you satan?
The adversary and enemy of God and his people.

How does he fight against us?
1 By subtilty, alluring us to sin, and therefore he is called a tempter, and
a Serpent.

2 By laying fearfully to our charge our sins committed, and therefore he is
called the devil, that is, an accuser.

3 By seeking by manifold inward terrors, and outward troubles, to swallow us
up, and therefore he is called, a roaring Lion.

How shall we fight against him and his temptations.
1 By faith in Jesus Christ who overcame all his temptations in his own
person, to the end we might overthrow him.

2 By resisting the inward motiens, and outward occasions of sin.

How shall we do that?
By believing that we are baptized into the death and resurrection of Christ.

How shall we overcome satan and his accusations.
1 By faith in Jesus Christ, who has justified us for all the sin, for the
which he can accuse us.

2 By all those comfortable promises of the forgiveness of sins, which in
Christ's name is made unto us.

How shall we overcome him in our terrors and troubles.
1 By faith in Jesus Christ, who was heard in all his terrors and troubles, to
give us an assurance that we shall not be overcome by them.

2 By faith in Gods providence, whereby we know that he can do no more unto
us, then the Lord does direct for our good.

We have hard that the word is the first and chief means, not only to beget,
but also to strengthen and increase faith in us, what is the next principal
means.
That is Prayer, chiefly serving for the strengthening and increasing of faith.

what is Prayer.
Prayer is a lifting up of the mind, and a pouring out of the heart before God.

Is there any prescript rule of Prayer left us in the Scriptures.
Yea, even that which our Savior Christ taught his disciples, called the Lords
Prayer.

Is it lawful to use no other manner of words.
Yea, we may use an other form, but we must pray for the same things, and with
like affection as are prescribed there.

How is that Prayer divided.
Into three parts: 1 The preface, or entrance thereto: 2 The prayer it self:
3 The conclusion or shutting up of yt same.

which is the Preface.
Our Father which art in heaven.

what does this put us in mind of.
1 Of him to whom we pray: 2 Of our own estate in prayer.

To whom do we pray.
To God the Father, the Son, and the the holy Ghost.

why do you hear name the father.
Because discerning the persons, we pray unto the father, secretly
understanding that we do so in the mediation of his son, by the working of
the holy Ghost.

why must we pray to the father in the mediation of Christ his Son.
Because God being displeased for sin, we can have no dealing with him, but
only by the means of his son, in whom he is well pleased.

why must we pray by the working of the holy Ghost.
Because the holy ghost assures us, that God is our Father, and whereas we
know not what to pray, nor how, he teaches us.

what must we be persuaded of our own estate in prayer.
Partly concerning our selves, and partly concerning others.

What persuasion must we have touching our selves.
We must be truly humbled, and withal, have a certain confidence that we
shall be hard.

How shall we be truly humbled.
1 With a persuasion of our sinful misery and unworthiness to be helped.

2 With a most certain persuasion of the most glorious Majesty of God in
heaven, that must help us.

How shall we be assured that we shall be heard.
1 By being persuaded that God loves us as his own children, in our Lord Jesus
Christ.

2 By faith, being persuaded that God our Father is able to do whatsoever he
will in heaven and earth.

What must we be persuaded concerning other.
1 That all Gods people pray for us.

2 We must be persuaded that it is our bounded duty to pray for other, as well
as for our selves.

How are the petitions duided.
1 We make our requests for those things which concern Gods Majesty.

2 For those things which concern our own welfare.

Which be those that concern Gods Majesty.
The three first: 1 Hallowed be thy name, 2 Thy kingdom come. 3 Thy will be
done in earth as it is in heaven.

What is meant by the name of God.
1 The names and titles of God, as Iehoua, the Lord of Lords, etc.

2 The wisdom, power, mercy, goodness, truth, righteousness, and the eternity
of God.

Why be these called the names of God.
Because as names serve to discern things by, so by these things GOD is known
to be God.

What is meant by this word sanctified.
We pray that God as he is glorious in himself, so he may be declared and made
known to men.

How shall Gods name be declared to be holy and glorious.
1 We pray that his wisdom, power, mercy, etc. may more and more be imparted
into us, and other of Gods people.

2 We pray, that according as we know these things, so the fruits of them may
appear in ours and all Gods peoples lives, that so Gods name may be honored
and praised.

What do we pray against in his petion.
1 Against all ignorance of the holy things we should know, and want of good
works, whereby God wants of his glory.

2 Against all false religion, wickedness, and ungodliness, by which Gods name is
dishonored.

FINIS.

